THE AVTVMNE PART FROM THE TWELFTH Sundy after Trinity, to the last in the
whole year.

DEDICATED Unto the much honored and most worthy Doctor JOHN OVERAL Deane of
PAVLS.

August. ser. 22. de verbis Apostoli. Sic vigilet tolerantia, vt non dormiat
disciplina.



LONDON Printed by M^LCHISEDECH BRADVVOOD for WILLIAM ASPLEY. 1613.

COLENDISSIMO PATRI, NEC NON ILLVMINATISSIMO DOCTORI, DOMINO IOHANNI OVERALLIO,
QVONDAM IN ACADEMIA CANTABRIGIENSI CELEBERRIMO SACRAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSORI
REGIO: NVNC AVTEM AEDIS PAVLINAE LONDON. INTEGERRIMO VIGILANTISSIMO QVE DECANO:
JOHANNES BO^TIVS ALIQVANDO DISCIPVLVS ET SEMPER AMICVS HONORIS ^RGO, DO DICO
DEDICO.

THE TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.
The Epistle.
2. COR. 3. 4. Such trust have we through Christ to Godward; not that we are
sufficient of our selves, etc.
ALL holy Scripture jointly considered is called not unfitly Gods Optatus lib
5. aduers. Parmeman. Idem August. in Psam. 21. exposit. 2.
Testament: as being his revealed Matthew. 6. 10.
will, and as it were Ardens in loc.
written Indenture, containing his covenants and conueiance concerning our Heb.
9. 15.
eternal inheritance which is above. But the Gospel apart considered, is
termed in this Text, a new Testament: as never waxing old, Deering Lect. 1.
Hebr.
but always continuing new, though it were from the beginning: Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, the same also for ever, Heb. 13. 8. And new, for that it
is imprinted after a new manner, otherwise than the letter of the Law: written
not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone,
but in the fleshly tables of the heart. And new, for that it makes us new
creatures in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 17. According to that of D^ spirit. and lit.
cap. 20. Id em contra duas, epist. Pelagian. lib. 3. cap. 4. and in. Psalm. 83*
Vide rations alias ap^d* ^retium. Pro^egom in Matthew.
Augustine: Dicitur nouum propter nouitatem spiritus, quae hominem nouum ^anat
a vitio vetustatis: It is new for that it teaches us how to cast off the old
man, and to put one the new man, Ephesians. 4. 22. 24. S. Paul therefore commends
here the worthy function of such as are made able to minister the new
Testament two ways:

1. Positiuely, Such trust have we through Christ to Godward, etc. 2.
Comparatively, preferring the preaching of the Gospel before the ministry of
the Law, In respect of Grace: For the letter kills, but the spirit gives
life; the Law being the ministration of condemnation, but the Gospel the
ministration of righteousness. In respect of Glory: If the ministration of
death thorough the letters figured in stones was glorious, etc. how shall not
the ministration of the spirit be much more glorious?

Such trust] Our Apostle did esteem the Corinthians his 2. Cor. 1. 14.
glory, the 1. Cor. 9. 2.
seal of his Apostleship, and as it were the very letters testimonial of his
sincerity. For thus he speaks in this present chapter at the second verse, Ye
are our epistle. Erasm. Paraphras.
Such as are false teachers, need epistles of recommendation unto you, and
letters of recommendation from you: but ^, Calvin.
Silvanus and Timothy desire not the like, for that the Church of Corinth is
our certificat, your selves are our walking pasport: Hieron. epist. ad Furiam.
Detrimentum pecoris ignominia pastoris: It is the Pastors infamy when the
people grow worse, but his Oecumen. in l^c.
honor when they be rich in the graces of Christ, and in all kind of
knowledge, 1. Cor. 1. 5. Whereas therefore your faith and holy conversation is
renowned in all the world, ye be to us Theophylact. Anselm. Aquin.
instead of an Epistle: yea better then any letters commendatory; for they
run in and out of our eyes, and ears, here and there: but ye are Written in
our heart, that is, in our Hieron. and Primasius.
consciences, having this testimony, not as other about us only, but in us
also, residing ever in our bosoms. And whereas Caietan.
other Epistles in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, are read of none but such as
understand their several Idiome; this Epistle is understood and read of all
men. It is so plain, that (as the Prophet Cap. 2. ver. 2.
Abacuck speaks) he may run that reads it: in that ye are manifest to be
the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, English Gloss.
as Gods pen, and written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God,
not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. Ye are Christ's
epistle primarily, Aquin.
principalit^ and authoritatiue, for Matthew 23. 8.
one is your Doctor, and that Doctor is Christ: but our epistle, and 1. Cor. 9.
1.
work secondarily, being instructed by us 1. Cor. 4. 1.
as the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. He Heb. 8. 10.
writes in you, but it is through our 1. Cor. 3. 5.
ministry, not as the false apostles imperfitly with ink, but with the spirit
of the living God, whereby you that are his epistle are Ephesians 4 30.
sealed unto the day of redemption. He writes his grace, not as the law was
written in tables of Exodus 31. 18.
stone: but in fleshly tables of the heart. According to his word uttered of
the mouth of Cap. 36. 26.
Ezechiel: I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give
you an heart of flesh. That is, (as Anselmu^ upon this place notes) a good
understanding to know, and a ready will to keep my commandments. Theophilact.
As far then as Gods spirit does excel ink, and man's heart a stone; so
far the Gospel excels the Law.

Now lest our Apostle should seem to commend his ministry too much, he
Marlorat.
corrects himself thus in my text: such trust have we through Christ to
Godward, etc. Anselm.
As if he should say, we speak confidently that ye are Christ's epistle, and
our epistle, not arrogating this excellency to our selves, as if we were
sufficient of our selves: but ascribing all the glory to God, from who^ as the
fountain, through Christ, as the conduit pipe, comes every good and perfect
gift. If we be able unto any thing, the same comes of God, which has made
us able to minister the new Testament. And therefore we trust not in the Ephesians.
6. 12.
princes of darkness, Psalm. 146. 2.
nor in any child of man: but our hope, yea help stands in the name of the
Lord, which has made heaven and earth: Psalm. 121. 2. all our trust is in God
through Christ.

The Papists attribute too much unto the Priests office; carnal Gospellers and
worldly politicians ascribe too little. The Pope forsooth is esteemed of his
parasites a See Tortura Torti. page 361.
vice god, 2. Cor. 11. 4. Matthew. 24. 24.
another Christ, assuredly they might say better an Antichrist Nay the Papists
hold their under ling Mass Priest such an omnipotent creature, that whereas in
the sacrament of Order (as they call it) almighty God makes the Priest; in the
sacrament of their Altar, horr^sco referens, the priest (say they) makes
almighty God, as it were by magical art translating Coelum in coenam,
pulling heaven out of heaven, and imprisoning Christ's body with all his
dimensions in a little box.

Statising wordlings on the contrary think that Preachers of the Word are
nothing else but as a post, on which Injunctions of the King, and Mandates of
the Court Christian are fixed: Ornaments and ministers of State, not
instruments and messengers of God; and so B. of Lin. answer to a name-lesse
Cat page vlt.
Religion turned into Statisme p^oues Athoisme. We must therefore go between
both, Atheists on the left hand, and Papists on the right, medium tenuere
beati. We must acknowledge the Gospels ministry to be Romans 1. 16.
the power of God unto salvation. He could otherwise regenerate men, as being
able out of stones to raise up children unto himself, Matthew. 3. 19. but it
pleases him (as our Apostle teaches 1. Cor. 1. 21.
elsewhere) by the foolishness of preachi^g to save them that believe. God
has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has committed unto his
Apostles, and their successors his faithful Pastors, the Word and ministry
of reconciliation, and they being appointed ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you through them entreat you in Christ's stead that you be
reconciled to God: 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. 20.

If this one lesson only were well understood and learned in England, namely,
that the Psalm. 45. 2.
tongue of the Preacher is the pen of a ready writer, whereby men are made
Christ's epistle, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God,
and so sealed up unto the day of redemption; we should not need to give
thanks at our meals, as that odd priest in old time:

Casparus. Fuckins, Orat. Paneg. 2. page 19.
Deo gratias,
quod nos satias,
bonis rusticorum
contra voluntatem eorum. Amen.
For all suits of unkindness against our persons, and all quarrels about
tithes and other duties incident to our place, would instantly surcease. Then
the Romans 10. 15.
feet of such as bring glad tidings of peace would be reputed beautiful and
all good people in unfeigned zeal turn Galat. 4. 15.
Galathians, if it were possible, willing to pull out their eyes, and to give
them for their Pastors good.

This also may teach all Clergy men to be faithful and painful in their
calling, that they likewise may find such confidence toward God, as Paul had,
even letters testimonial of their indefatigable diligence written in their
own consciences. It is an easy matter in a corrupt age to be well beneficed,
aut errore hominis, aut aere Simonis; as one wittily: but to play the part of a
good Pastor, (as Pastoral. part. 1. cap. 2.
Gregory the great said) is ars artium, and scientia scientiarum. A Prelate
therefore must not lay a Bishopric under his feet, making one dignity a step
unto another: but he must lay it upon his shoulders, and remember that as
Bishops enjoy honor by their place, so they sustain a burden in their office.

Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves: but if we be able to any thing, the same comes of God.] A pregnant
text against the Aquin. Anselm. Rhem. in loc.
Pelagians, Aug. H^res. 88. and retract. lib. 1. cap. 9.
affirming that our good actions and cogitations proceed only from free will,
and not from Gods special grace. Secondly, this makes against the
Semipelagians, I mean the Papists, Pelican. apud Marlorat. Dr. Fulk. Kilius in
loc.
holding that man has a power of free will in his own nature, which being
stirred and helped, can and does of it self cooperate with grace. So writes
Orthodox. explicat. lib. 4.
Andradius plainly: The motion of free will, and applying of it self to
righteousnesses, does no more depend upon the graces of God, then the fires
burning of the wood does depend upon the power of God: intimating that our will
adioyneth it self unto Gods grace, not by grace, but as carried thereunto by
the force of nature. We teach on the contrary, that freedom of the will to
turn to God, and to work with him, is no power of nature, but the work of
grace. For our selves are not sufficient as of our selves to think, Primisius.
much less to speak, least of all to do that which is good. August. de bono
perse. c. 13.
Indeed we will, but it is God that works in us to will; we work, but it is
God that works in us to work, according to his good pleasure. Thus it
behooves us to believe, thus also to speak, that God in our humble confession
and submission may have the whole. Idem ^bisup. cap. 6.
For we live in more safety if we give all unto God, rather then if we commit
our selves partly to our selves, and partly to God. Our selves are not
sufficient to think any good, A^densin loc.
either in part or in whole. We cannot say that it is Chrysostom. in 2. Cor.
Hom. 6.
ours in part, and Gods in part, seeing of him, and through him, and for him
are all things: Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Et magna and media and minima. See S. Augustine de bono perseuerant. cap. 13.
and contra duas epist. Pelagian. lib. 4. cap. 6. epist. 46. and 47. de gratia
and libero arbitrio ad Ualentin. and ad eundem de corrept. and gratia, cap. 1.
2. 3. 8. 14. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 3. 4. 5. B. Jewel Defens. Apolog.
part. 1. c. 2. diuis. 3. Dr. Mortonappeale. l. 1. c. 2.. 10. Perkins reformed
Cath. tit. Freewill: and Dr. Abbot ibidem page- 100. 101.

Thirdly, this may serve to confute the T. ^. lib. 1. page 136.
Nouelists inueighing against our Communion book, for that in the Collect
appointed to be red this day we pray thus: Almighty and everlasting God, which
art wont to give more then we desire, or deserve: power down upon us the
abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our conscience is
afraid, and giving unto us that, that our prayer dare not presume to ask,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And in another Collect after the Offertory:
Those things which for our unworthiness we dare not ask, vouchsafe to give us
for the worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. These passages (as they
say, who dare say any thing) carry with them a note of the Popish servile
fear, and savor not of that confidence and reverent familiarity, that the
children of God have through Christ with their heavenly Father. Dr. Whitgift
defen. of his answer to the admonit. page 493.
Answer is made, that acknowledging of our unworthiness is the ground of
humility, and that humility is a principal ornament of Prayer, and in a suitor
such a commendable virtue, Hooker. ecc^e polit. l. 5.. 47.
that the testification thereof argues a sound apprehension of his supereminent
glory before whom we stand, and puts also into his hands a kind of bond or
pledge for security against our unthankfulness: the very natural root
whereof is always either ignorance, dissimulation, or pride. Ignorance, when
we know not the Author from whom our good comes: dissimulation, when our hands
are more open then our eyes upon that we receive: pride, when we think our
selves worthy of that which undeserved favor and mere grace bestows. And
therefore to abate such vain imaginations in our prayer with the true conceit
of unworthiness, is rather to prevent, then commit a fault: and it sauoureth
not of any baseness or servile fear; but rather of great trust in Gods
mercy: for those things which we for our unworthiness dare not ask, we
desire that God for the worthiness of his Son would notwithstanding
vouchsafe to grant. The knowledge of our unworthiness is not without faith in
the merits of Christ; with that true fear caused by the one, there is coupled
true boldness and encouragement arising from the other. Even our very silence,
which our unworthiness puts us unto, does it self make request for us, and
that in great confidence: for albeit looking inward we are stricken dumb, yet
looking upward we speak and prevail. So the Luke 18. 13.
Publicane praying in the Temple, would not come nigh, nor lift up his eyes;
and yet you know what Christ pronounced of him, and what a general rule he
grounded upon that particular example, to wit, Every man that exalts himself
shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. So the
Luke 15. 21.
prodigal child said to his own father, and that after he was received into
favor, even after his father had embraced and kissed him, I am no more worthy
to be called thy son. So S. Paul writes here, We are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves: and yet he says, our trust is in
God through Christ.

For the Letter kills, but the spirit gives life.] Origin. peri archon, lib.
4. cap. 2.
As a man, so the Scripture consists of a body and a soul. The August. Ser.
70. de temp.
superficial sound of the Letter is the body, but the true sense is the soul.
The Letter then of the Bible not understood often kills Idem Ser. 100 de temp.
Heretics, and Jews, and carnal Gospellers: it is the Spirit only that
gives light and life to such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. It
is a notable saying of Exposit. pri^r. in epist. Gal. cap. 1.
Hierome: Non in verbis est euangelium, sed in sensu; non in superficie, sed in
medulla; non in verborum folijs, sed in radice rationis. And therefore we must
in reading holy writ apply our selves adsensumrei, more then adsonum vocabuli,
says Lib. contra Prax. cap. 3.
Tertullian. According to this exposition ^ (...) in loc.
ignorant Clergymen are most unable to minister the new Testament,
understanding neither the spirit, nor yet so much as the Letter. As T^omas ^rus
epigram.
one sharply taxed an illiterate Bishop in his age:

Magne pater cl^mas, occidit litera; in ore
Hoc vnum, occidit litera semper habes.
Cauisti been tu, ne te vlla occidere possit
Littera, non vlla est litera nota tibi.
Nec Frustra metuis ne occidat litera, scis non
Uiuificet qui te spiritus esse tibi.
But Lib. de Spirit. and (...). cap. 5. 6. and sequent.
S. Augustine and Ambros. Hieron. Anselm.
other Interpretors have more fitly construed this according to Paul's intent of
the Gospel and the Law, showing that the Law is the Letter as being figured in
stones, and written with ink by the ministry of Moses; and that the Gospel
is the spirit, as being first published unto the world by the coming down of
the holy Ghost, and imprinted in our hearts by the spirit of the living God.

There is a spirit in the Law; for Romans 7. 12.
the commandment is holy, just, and good: and there is a letter in the
Gospel, and that a killing letter, even the 2. Cor. 2. 16.
savor of death unto death in all reprobate: but in Calvin.
this text we must exactly consider the Law and the Gospel as they stand in
opposition each one with other, and so the Sea Luther loc. com. tit* de legis
vs^ theologico and spirituali.
proper office of the law is to threaten, accuse, terrify, condemn, kill. As
Luther peremptorily, lex non damnans est ficta and picta lex. On the contrary,
the proper office of the Gospel, is to preach Esaias. 6^. 1.
glad tidings unto the poor, to comfort all that mourn, to bind up the broken
hearted: In a word, to convert souls, and to give life. So Saint Cap. 1. verse.
17
John in his Gospel expressly, the law was given by Moses, but grace came by
Jesus Christ. And thus accurately to distinguish between the Law and the
Gospel is sapientiarum sapientia, the wisdom of all wisdom, quoth Loc. com.
tit. de necessitate discrim. inter Legem and Euangel.
Martine Luther. It is observed pretily, that the ceremonies of the Law were
first in their prime, mortales; after in Christ's age, mortuae; last of all in
our time, mortiferae. But it may be said as truly that every letter of the
moral Law, yea jot or title thereof, is able to kill all mankind; for it is,
says our Apostle, the ministration of death, and that in four respects, as

1. Aquin.
Revealing our sin. Romans 3. 20. 2. Caietan. Nitimur in vetitum.
Increasing our sin* Romans 7. 8. 3. Accusing us of sin. Ioh. 5. 45. 4.
Condemning us for sin. Romans 6, 23.
But the Gospel is the ministration of righteousness, like John the Baptist,
pointing out the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world; assuring
our conscience that Romans 8. 1.
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. As De spirit. and li^.
cap. 13.
Augustine most divinely: Quod lex operum minando imperat, hoc fidei lex
credendo impe^at. Luther loc. com. tit. de dis^ crim. Just. legal. and Euangel.
When the law calls upon thee for thy debt; crying, pay that thou do owe:
the Gospel acquits thy bonds, and says unto thy soul, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has
freed thee from the law of sin and death: Romans 8. 2. See Epistle Sunday
following.

If the ministration of death] As the Gospel is more gracious then the Law;
so likewise more glorious, and that

In respect of Countenance: Aquin.
For it is more honorable to be the Minister of Mercy, then an Executioner
of Judgment. A deaths man is accounted base, but the very feet of such as
bring glad tidings are beautiful. In respect of Continuance: For Moses glory
is abolished and done away, but the Gospels ministry remains. All Moses
glory was but a Ambros. Anselm. Marlorat. in loc.
type of Christ's glory: now the substance being come, the shadow vanishes.
Man. 11. 13.
All the Prophets and the Law prophesied unto John: but truth and grace came
by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17. Theoderet. apud Occumen. and Primasius in loc.
Look then how far the Sun does obscure the lesser lights; even so far
the Gospel exceeds in glory the Law. For when that which is perfect is come,
that which is imperfect is abolished: 1. Cor. 13. 10.
The Gospel,
MARK 7. 31. Jesus departed from the Coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came unto
the sea of Galile, through the midst of the ten Cities, and they brought unto
him one that was deaf, etc.
AMong many, there be Scot^ prolog. 1. sent.
two maine demonstrations of Christ's divinity: the words of his Prophets, and
the works of himself. Both are met together in Vega in lod.
this place; for it is showed here by S. Mark, that he wrought at Ferus ser.
5. in loc.
one time, with one word, and that a Verbulo minimo: Coster. in loc.
little word too, great wonders; and that according to the prediction of his
Prophet Cap. 35. verse. 5.
Esaias, then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf
be opened. If any then want evidence to prove that Christ is God, let me say
to him, as it was once said unto Peter and Andrew, John 1. 39.
come and see.

The whole may be divided into three principal parts, answerable to three
principal parties expressed in the text, namely,

The party
Cured: One that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech. Curing:
Christ, And when he had taken him aside, etc. Procuring: Who brought the
patient unto Christ, and prayed to put his hands upon him.
Jesus departed from the Coasts of Tire and Sidon, and came unto the sea of
Galile] Christ was not a perpetual resident in one benefice; but he Act. 10.
38.
went about from Coast to Coast, doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the devil. By which example we may learn to be Kilius in loc.
diligent and industrious in our several callings, and that Ardens.
we should not expect until other vpseeke us, but that we should seek, yea
Galat. 5. 13.
serve them in love, doing good unto all men, especially to them which are of
the household of faith. Galat. 6. 10.

And they brought unto him] In these neighbors of the deaf man, Luther.
Heming. Culman.
interpreters have noted a lively pattern both of faith and of love. First of
faith, in that hearing of Christ they believed, and in believing they came to
him, entreating favor, not for themselves only, but for their sick friend
also: being assured that the worlds Savior could with a touch easily cure him.
Sarcerius.
Here then are four degrees of a justifying faith, according to that, Romans 10.
13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved? but how shall
they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
and how shall they preach, except they be sent? The first step is to hear
Christ's word; the second, so to hear, that we believe; the third, so to
believe, that we dare Heb. 4. 16.
go boldly to the throne of grace; calling on him in whom we believe: the
fourth is, so to call and ask, that our request may be granted, and our
selves saved. Again, their action was full of love; first, in that they
brought him unto Christ. Ferus sermon. 3. in loc.
Secondly, for that they deferred not this good work, but instantly brought
him, as soon as Christ was in the midst of their Coast. Thirdly, for that they
were not cold suitors in his behalf, but earnest petitioners unto Christ, that
he would put his hands upon him. Hereby Zopper. con. 1. in loc.
teaching us how to demean our selves toward our sick neighbors, and
distressed friends: insinuating that it is not enough to wish well, or speak
well, except we do well unto them: and that we must not only labor to
help them our selves, but also when need shall require, to procure other of
greater skill and ability to give them further contentment and ease. There be
many motives unto this good office; but especially two; namely, Gods precept,
and promise. Precept, Luke 6. 36.
be ye merciful, as your Father is merciful. Promise, Psalm. 41. 1.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble. See Gospel Sund. 4. and Epist. Sund. 2. after
Trinity.

One that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech] As dumb he could
not ask, as dease he could not hear counsel and comfort for his good.
Ardens. Coster.
In which respect he was in a more miserable case then either the blind, or
the leper, or the lame: for they made their grief known to Christ in crying,
O Jesus the son of David have mercy on me; and heard also what he said unto
them; O son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. Whether we
construe this of spiritual or bodily deafness, it was occasioned by
Theophylact.
Satan, and bred by sin. The devil as a murdering thief, coming to steal
from us our soul, the most precious jewel in all our house, labors
especially to stop our ears, lest we should hear that which is for our good,
and to close our mouths, lest we should call for that which is for our good.
In which regard Satan is termed in Luk 11. 14
another text a dumb and a deaf devil. Not Ludol. de vit Christ. part. 1.
cap. 73.
formaliter (as the School does speak) for he is a roaring Lion: but Caietan.
in Luc. 11.
causaliter, as making other dumb. See Gospel 3. Sunday in Lent.

Satan then is impellens causa, but Adam our first parent Vide Hieron. and
Pauigarol. in loc.
contrahens. He was deaf when he did not obey Gods express commandment; and
dumb, when he did not reprehend his seduced and seducing wife. Deaf, when he
did not hear the voice of God, Adam, where art thou? Dumb, when he did not
upon that summons ingenuously confess his sin. Now the Romans 5. 12. and 1.
Cor. 15. 22
Scripture tells us plainly, that in Adam all men have sinned, and therefore
all of us are by nature Melanct. and Kilius in loc.
borne deaf, and dumb, not able to hear; much less to speak what we
should, as we should, until Christ open our dull ears, and unloose our
stammering tongue with his Ephata from above.

Pontan. Diez.
Some Postillers observe Saint Marks order and method; first mentioning a
lesser evil, one that was deaf: then a greater, and had an impediment in his
speech: according to that of the Ecclesiast. 19. 1.
Wiseman; he that contemns small things, shall fall by little and little.
The Eusebius. E^is. Hom. in loc.
Preachers of the word are they who bring this deaf and dumb man unto Christ;
he therefore that has ears to hear, let him hear. For Arboreus in loc.
that man is deaf who stops his ears at the Gospel; and mute, who will not
open his lips that his mouth may show forth Gods praise. Concerning their
estate which are corporally deaf and dumb: men ought to judge charitably,
knowing that the Romans 11. 33.
ways of God are past finding out; who being infinitely rich in mercy does
exact but little where he gives a little. The 1. Ioh. 2. 27. Apocalyp. 27.
spirit of the Lord happily speaks unto them, and Galat. 4. 6.
cries in them Abba father; Romans 8. 26.
helping their infirmities, and Ibidem. verse. 16.
witnessing with their spirit that they be the sons of God. See Hierom.
exposit. prior. in Galat. cap. 3. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 76. Zepper. con. 3.
in loc.

They prayed him] A Kilius in loc.
pattern of the precept, Iam. 5. 16.
pray one for another. It is Chrysoft. Hom^l. 14. ex Mat. ca^. 6.
necessity makes a man pray for himself; but it is charity moves a man to pray
for another. Thom. 22. quaest. 82. art. 7
Now that devotion is most acceptable which is not forged by dissimulation, nor
forced by constraint; but arises out of pure zeal to God, and mere love to
men. It is our duty therefote to pray, not for our selves only, but for others
also; for 1. Tim 2. 1.
all men, even our Mat. 5. 44.
enemies, earnestly beseeching Christ to put his blessed hands upon them,
albeit they desire to lay their violent cursed hands upon us.

To put his hands upon him] There is a twofold (...), mentioned in holy
Scripture; B. Barl^w: sermon at Hampton Court: Sept. 21. 1606. in Act. 20. 28.
confirmatoria, and curatoria: the first used in ordaining Presbyters, as 1.
Tim. 4. 14. and 1. Tim. 5. 22. The second in blessing and healing the people,
Mat. 9. 18. and 19. 13. Now the friends of this patient entreated Christ to put
his hand upon him; Maldonat.
either knowing that he cured other impositione manuum, as the blind man, Mark.
8. 23* 25. and the crooked woman, Luke 13. 13. or else for that the Prophets
and holy men of God used in helping and healing the sick, to lay their hands
upon them. A ceremony not unknown unto the Gentiles, as it is apparent by the
speech of 2. King. 5 11.
Naaman the Syrian; I thought with my self, the Prophet will surely come out,
and stand, and call on the name of the Lord his God, and put his hand on the
place, and heal the leprosy.

And when he had taken him aside from the people] Sundry Divines have sundry
devices in expounding this clause. Literally, Sarcerius.
some think that he carried him aside from the prease, that he might the
better attend the business out of the throng. Euthyniu^.
Other, for that among so many, some would be regardlesse and irreuerent
spectators. Calvin. apud Marlorat.
Other, that he might pray more devoutly, while he did the cure. Chrysostom. apud
Thom. Theophyiact. Ardens. Iansen.
Most are of opinion that he did so to shun all ostentation and vain glory.
Hieron. Eu^h. Emis. Culman. Vega.
Mystically, none are cured by Christ, but such as he puts apart, drawing them
out of Babylon, Apocalyp. 18. 4. out of Sodom, Genesis 19. 6. from out of the
broad way, Matthew 7. 13. to his little flock, Luke 12. 32. that they may be men
in the world, not of the world, Ioh. 15. 19. and 17. 16.

He put his fingers into his ears, and did spit, and touched his tongue]
Christ could have cured this man, as he did many, with his bare word; according
to that of the Matthew. 8 8.
Centurion, speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed: but he did
use feet, finger, spettle, tongue; Theophylact. Euthym. Arboreus.
to show that all the parts of his humane nature being united unto the Divine,
were Salutiferous, even the true mean whereby men ate helped in all their
sickness. He Esaias. 53. 4. 5.
carried all our sorrows, and cured all our sores. Or happily Christ used
these things, at this time, Sarcerius.
lest we should tempt God in neglecting ordinary means. Or to Vega.
show that it was the finger of God, as Luke 11. 20. If I by the finger of God
cast out devils. And so this man was healed even by the same hand that made him
Or insinuating that he wrought this cure by his Panigarol.
power and wisdom: the first signified by his finger, the second by spettle.
Mystically, the finger of God is the spirit of God: for whereas S. Cap. 11. 10.
Luke says, If I by the finger of God cast out devils, S. Cap. 12. 28.
Matthew has, If I cast out devils by the spirit of God. Our blessed Savior
therefore did put his fingers into the deaf man's ear, to Ferus ser. 4.
Zepper. ser. 1. in loc.
signify that the preaching of the word to men's outward ears only, without
the secret operation of the spirit speaking inwardly to their hearts, is not
auailable to salvation. Albeit Paul plant, and Apollos water, only God gives
increase, 1. Cor. 3. 6. Here some Friars are so conceited, as to tell all the
fingers on Christ's hand, and every joint of the same: but I cannot finger this
lesson, I refer you therefore to Jacob de Vorag. ser. 1. in loc. Pontan.
Bibliothec. Concion. tom. 4. fol. 199.

And looked up to heauen] Eusebius Emis. and Vega, in loc.
To show that he was our mediator and advocate with God our Father in Heaven.
Or Beda. Iansen. Pontan.
intimating that every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from
the Father of lights: and therefore we must in all our sickness expect health
and ease from heaven, saying with David, Psalm. 121. 1.
I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help: my help
comes even from the Lord, which has made heaven and earth. Or he looked up
to heaven; Ludolphus. Jacob. de Vorag.
hereby teaching us to set our affections on things which are above, Coloss. 3.
2. In this Psalm. 84. 6.
vale of misery we are subject to deafnes, and dumbnes, and infinite other
infirmities of mind and body: but in Jerusalem above, there Apocal. 21. 4
is no more dying, nor crying, but all tears shall be wiped away from our
eyes, and sorrow from our hearts. And therefore let our conversation be in
heaven, as having in it our best friend, or best treasure, best help, best
home.

Happily some will object, that lifting up of the eyes, and sighing, are
gestures of one that prays, and makes a suit: but Christ could have wrought
this miracle without prayer, or help from other. It is true Christ could, and
often did cure without prayer: yet in some cases, and at some times he did use
to pray for two reasons especially. First, that all the world might know that
he was sent from God, even from the bosom of his Father in heaven. And this
reason is rendered by himself, Ioh. 11. 41. 42. Jesus lift up his eyes, and
said, Father, I thank thee, because thou have heard me. I know that thou
hear me always; but because of the people that stand by, I said it, that
they may believe that thou have sent me. Secondly, for our Beda. Theophylact.
in loc. Idem Greg. Hom. 10 in Ez^chiel.
example, teaching us how we should desire God to loose our stammering tongues,
and open our dull ears: Euthym. in l^c.
instructing Physicians also to pray while patients are under their cure, that
the God of heaven would bless their handy work.

And sighed] He did not this as doubting of his cure, but to show first, that
he was very Beda: Quasi Deus curauit: quasi homo ingemuit.
man, subject to weeping and passion as we are, yet without sin: Hebr. 4. verse.
15. Secondly, to manifest his Ferus, ser. 4. in loc. Idem Beza.
compassion and pity toward distressed men; he that said, Matthew. 5. 7.
Blessed are the pitiful, is such an high Priest Heb. 4. 15.
as is touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And by this example
teaching Ludolphus. Iansen.
us also to weep for the weakness and wickedness of our brethren. Thirdly,
to demonstrate the Jacob de Vorag. sermon. 1.
greatness and grieuousnesse of sin, which is not cured but by the sighing
and suffering of the son of God. In more particular, Vega.
some note that Christ did not sigh until he touched the patients tongue,
which is an unruly evil, an Psalm. 14. 5.
open sepulcher, James 3. 8. 6.
full of deadly poison, a world of wickedness.

And said unto him Ephata, that is to say, be opened] He did sigh as a man, but
Postil. cum Glossis and figuris. Idem Beda, Ferus, and alij.
command as God: using neither the subiunctiue, nor optatiue, but Z^inglius.
Iansen. Maldonat.
imperative mood: Be opened. The word Ephata was vulgar in that country;
Bullinger. apud Marlorrt.
by which it does appear that he did not use it as a charm, placing
extraordinary power or confidence therein: but that it was his own will, and
proper virtue that wrought the miracle. This (as Com. in loc.
Maldonate the Jesuit censureth) is a mad gloss. Yet his old friend Concord.
euangel cap. 62.
Iansenius is so well in his wits as to receive it, and so would he too, but
that it makes against their superstitious using of the word Ephata in their
popish exorcisme before Baptism. The Papists, as being masters of ceremonies,
or rather indeed slaves, observe 22. ceremonies in their administration of holy
Baptism: namely, twelve going before Baptism, sieve in the action, and other
sieve following after, as Bellarmine does marshall them in his book De
Baptismo, cap. 25. 26. 27. Now the ninth ceremony before Baptism is applying
of spettle to the nostrels and ears of the Infant, and saying Ephata be
opened. And for the lawfulnes of this ceremony B^llarm. de baptismo, cap. 25.
and Rhem. in loc.
they cite Christ's example, and S. Ambroses authority. To the first our men
answer, that it is an apish trick, rather inscorne, then imitation of Christ.
And therefore the noble mother of our gracious Sovereign K. James enjoined the
popish Archbishop at his baptism to forbear this idle ceremony; saying, that
Thus his Majesty reports: premon^tion, p. 33.
she would not have a pockie Priest to spit in her child's mouth. Our blessed
Savior here did not administer the sacrament of baptism; why then I pray,
should they not anoint the eyes of the baptized infant with clay, so well as
his nostrels with spettle? for Christ in the Ioh. 9.
Gospel opened the eyes of a blind man with clay; the which is so significant,
and happily more sweet then unsavory slauer of an unwholesome shaueling.
Again, suppose this action of Christ were sacramental, (a thing which neither
they can ask modestly, nor we grant iudiciously) yet herein Epise. E^i.
respon. ad Card. Bellarm. Apolog. page 154.
they do not imitate Christ; for he did apply spettle to the mouth of this
patient, but they do this unto the nostrels of the child to be baptized. As
for S. Ambroses authority, there be two places in his works urged in this
argument. The first is cited by Lib. de Baptismo, cap. 25.
Bellarmine, and that is in Tom. 4. Ambros. lib. De ijs qui mysterijs
initiantur, cap. 1. Where by way of preface only the learned Father Exhortatio
auditorum: vt aures aperia^t. vt est in argu meant. ejusde^ (...).
exhorts his auditors that they would open their ears unto his speech, as
the deaf man had his ears opened in the Gospel. The second is quoted by the
Rhemists in their Annotations upon this text, and that is lib. 1. de
sacramentis, cap. 1. Where S. Ambrose mentions indeed a needless ceremony
used in his age, namely, that the Priest touched the nostrels and ears of him
that was baptized; and the truth is D^. Fulke in Mark 7. 34.
even at that time, there were many superfluous and burthenous rites in the
Church; of which Augustine complained in his 118. and 119. epistle to
Ianuarius. But S. Ambrose speaks not in that chapter of exorcismes used in the
ministration of Baptime, nor of spettle, nor of the word Ephata: which as
Calvin. Ins^it. lib. 4. cap. 15.. 19.
one speaks, are nugae palam in baptismi probrum effraeni licentia inuectae.

And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed, and he spoke plaine] Maldonat. in loc.
Two things illustrate Christ's omnipotent power in acting this miracle:
Celerity, for that he did it so suddenly: Perfection, for that he did it so
soundly. For the first, it is said in the Text, Straightway. Otherwise it
might have been thought that his disease went away of it self, or that it was
cured by some other. And for demonstration of the second, his thick ears were
opened, and the strings of his stammering tongue loosed in such sort, that he
did not only speak, but speak plainly, that is, rightly and readily. For he
that said in the beginning: Let there be lights in the Firmament, and it was
so: let the waters be gathered together, and it was so: Let the Earth bud* and
it was so: said here, Be opened, and immediately the deaf did hear, and the
dumb speak. Heming.
Mystically, men are loosed from the shackels of Satan and sin by the
commandment of Christ, and preaching of his word And therefore Christ in
healing this patient, first opened his ears and then untied the string of his
tongue: Pontan.
because we must hear well, before we can speak well. He that will open his
lips that his mouth may show forth Gods praise, must be swift to hear, slow to
speak: Iam. 1. 19.

And he commanded them that they should tell no man] Hereby showing the
difference between the giver of a benefit, and the receiver. He that does a
good turn must instantly forget it: he that receives, always remember it.
According to that of De ben. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Seneca: Beneficium qui dedit taceat, narret qui accepit. E^sdem lib. cap. 10.
Haec scilicet inter duos beneficij lex est, alter statim obliuis^id* bet dati,
alter accepti nunquam. Again, there is a time for all things, a time wherein
Christ would have his miracles known, and a time wherein he would have them
unknown.

But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great deal they published.]
The particular publishing of this miracle, contrary to Christ's express
commandment, was rather immoderate Calnin. Heming. Zepper.
zeal, then an imitable virtue. See Gospel, 3. Sunday after Epipha. But their
general praising of God, in saying he has done all things well, is very
commendable. For

God is good
In himself: Matthew. 19. 17. None good but God. Toward other, in his Pontan.
works of Creation. Preservation. Redemption. Glorification.

In his Creation all well, making of nothing all things, and those good, yea
Gen 1. ^1.
very good. In consideration whereof Contra Faust. Man. li. 21. c. 5.
Augustine said sweetly: Cum opera dei considero, moueor ineffabiliter land
creatoris illorum, qui prorsus ita magnus est in operibus magnis, vt minor non
^it in minimis. In his preservation all well, Wisdom 8. 1.
ordering all things comely, disposing not only that which is good, but also
that which is evil, yea the very devil, unto good ends. August. ad Simplic.
lib. 2. quaest. 1.
Etiam spiritibus malis benevtitur Dominus, ad vindictam malorum, vel ad
bonorum probationem. In his redemption all things well, and far better then in
his Creation. Granat. in euangel. Dom. 1. Aduent.
Illic sua nobis dedit, hic vere seipsumcontulit, non tam in dominum quam in
pretium and sacrificium. All things well, yea best of all in his glorification,
giving us a Matt. 5. 12.
great reward, yea so great as 1. Cor. 2. 9.
man's eye never saw, neither ear heard, neither heart conceived.

The Gospel and Epistle well agree: The spirit gives life, says Paul: the
deaf man had his ears opened by the finger of Christ, says Luke. By the
Gospels ministry men are made Gods Epistle, says Paul: by the word of Christ
the deaf did hear, and the dumb speak, says Luke If we be able unto any
thing, the same comes of God, says Paul. He has done all things well, says
Luke. Let us therefore pray with the Church:

Almighty and everlasting God, which art always more ready to hear, then we
to pray, and art wont to give more then either we desire or deserve; power
down upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our
conscience is afraid, and giving unto us that, that our prayer dare not presume
to ask through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.
The Epistle,
GALAT. 3. 16. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, etc.
THis Epistle consistes of three parts: a

Proposition, To Abraham and his seed were made the promises, etc. Exposition,
This I say, etc. Opposition, Wherefore then serves the Law, etc.
The maine drift of all this Epistle to the Galathians, is, to show Cap. 2. v.
16.
that a man is not justified by the works of the law; but by faith in Jesus
Christ. Which our Apostle proves accurately: 1. by reasons of Ibid. ver. 20.
experience: 2. from Cap. 3 6.
Abraham's example: 3. by manifest text of Ibid. verse. 11. 12.
holy writ: lastly, by manifold apt similitudes and testimonies humane; Fers.
15.
Brethren I speak as men do. The first whereof is the comparison of a man's
will; and his argument is from the Sarcerius. Calvin. Aretius.
lesser unto the greater, (as Logicians speak.) The testament of a man after
it is confirmed, may not be broken or abrogated; Ergo much less the testament
of God. He does argue therefore thus:

The Testament of God confirmed, cannot be disanulled: The promises made to
Abraham and his seed, which is Christ, are his Testament confirmed: Ergo, they
cannot be disanulled.
Luther and Perkinsin loc.
Hencewe may learn, that it is lawful to speak in Sermons as men do, citing
testimonies of humanity for illustration of points in Divinity, reasoning from
things earthly to things heavenly. So Christ in the Mat. 7. 11.
Gospel, If ye which are evil can give to your children good gifts, how much
more shall your father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask
him? So Peter, Acts 5. 29. we must obey men; Ergo much more God. So the
Prophet Cap. 35.
Jeremy speaking in the Lords name, the Recabites obeyed their father; how much
more ought ye to have obeyed me? Tertulli. in aduersus Hermogen.
Philosophers are the patriarchs of heretics, enemies of the Gospel, as 1.
Cor. 2. 14.
not understanding the things of the spirit of God: and therefore to convince
their conscience by natural reason, is to cut off Goliahs head with his own
sword, says Saint Epist. ad Magnumorat. Roman.
Hierome. Deuteronomy. 21. ver. 11. 12. etc.
When thou shall go to war against thine enemies, and the lord thy God shall
deliver them into thine hands, and thou shall take them captives, and shall see
among the captives a beautiful woman, and have a desire to take her for thy
wife, then shall thou bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails. Humane learning is the Grecians Helena, full of
admirable beauty; Aeneas Siluius Epist. Sigismund. Duc. Austriae.
Cuius facies si videri possit, pulchrior est quam lucifer aut hesperus. And
therefore we may not admit her into the Divinity schools Hieron. vbi sup. and
Aquin. lect. 6. in Gal. 3.
until her hair be shaued, and her nails pared; until her superfluous idle
conceits, and unprofitable tricks of ornament are taken away. Hieron. consolat
ad Pam tom. 1. fol. 165.
But when of a Moabite thou have made her an Israelite, accompany with her and
say; Cant. 2. 6.
her left hand is under my head, and her right hand does embrace me. Let us
ascribe to Philosophy, summa, sed sua. For the wisdom of man, to speak the
best of it, is but a learned kind of ignorance, which yet being bridled and
guided by the spirit of God, may be wrought (as D. Edes ser. duty of a king.
one well observed) to speak like Balaams Ass to good purpose. To quote then
in the Pulpit authorities of Poets, and Philosophers; or as here Saint Paul,
the positions of Lawyers and politicians, is not so common as commendable, when
it is done reverently without ostentation, and iudiciously for the better
understanding of the text, and Mr. Deering lect. 20. Heb.
more clear declaration of the truth.

To Abraham and his seed] We read of Illyric. Cl^u. script. verb. testament.
three testaments in holy Bible; to wit, Abrahamicall, Genes. 12. Mosaicall,
Exodus 24. and the new Testament, Ier. 31. Heb. 8. Now the first and last
howsoever they differ in Ten poris distantia, patefactionis perspicuitate,
promissi benedicti s^minis exhibitione. Illyric. vbi sup.
circumstance, yet they be the same for substance. So Zacharias in his hymn,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets ever since the world
began; to perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, and to remember his
holy covenant, to perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham,
etc. And the blessed Virgin in her magnificat; He remembering his mercy has
helped his servant Israel, as he promised to our forefathers, Abraham, and his
seed for ever. Christ is the Paschall Lamb, 1. Cor. 5. 7. slain from the
beginning of the world, Apocalip. 13. 8. And so the Patriarchs and old Fathers
were saved by faith, Kilius in loc.
in Christum promissum: as we now by faith in Christum missum.

Were the promises made.] Saint Paul speaks plurally, Perkins in loc.
because they were made sometime to Abraham, and sometime to his seed, and
sometime to both: or because they wereu repeated often to Abraham, as Genesis 12.
4. Gen 15. 5. Genesis 22. 18. And therefore called promises in the plural,
although in substance they were but one promise.

He says not in his seeds, as many; but in thy seed, as of one, which is
Christ.] The Jews except against this interpretation of Paul, and say, that
the singular number is here put for the plural, one for many. So Saint
Exposit. pri^r. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 3.
Hierome does auow, that he could never find this word in the plural number;
and therefore Panl in this argument may seem to speak more subtly then
soundly. Yea, that which is worse, the Jesuit Notat. in loc.
Em. Sa. thinks him (as he speaks of himself, 2. Cor. 11. 6.) rude in
speaking. Luther in loc.
Answer is made, that our Apostle wrote Apostolically, construing the
Scripture by the Caietan. in loc.
same spirit by which it was originally penned. And whereas it is objected that
the word seed is a noune collectiue, signifying all Abraham's posterity;
Illyric. vbi su^. in verb. semen.
Divines answer, that it is used often only for one, so well as for all, or
many. For Eve said of Seth, God has given me another seed, Genesis 4. 25. that is
another son. Secondly, the Genesis 21. 10. and Gala^. 4. 30.
Scripture reports expressly, that Ismael, Abraham's son, was cast out, and not
made heir with the blessed seed. See Galatin. de arcan. cat. verit. lib. 5.
cap. 13. and Marlorat in loc. Or as Aretius in loc.
other acutely, there is semen redimendum, and that is collect^uum; and semen
redimens, and that is vnicum.

We receive therefore this exposition of Paul, acknowledging Christ to be
this one particular seed and son of Abraham, in whom, and by whom the nations
of the world are blessed: eternal inheritance being first granted unto him,
and so conveyed unto such as Ol^uian. de substantia ^oei. part. 1. art. 1.
E^asm. paraphra. in loc. Seminis enim nomine non Christus per se. sed cum suo
corpore coniunctus est intelligendus. Beza.
believe in him. As our Apostle concludes in this Verse. 9. and 29.
Epistle; If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise.
See Benedictus.

This I say] Paul in the former verses has laid down two propositions; one,
that testaments of men confirmed may not be broken: another, that the promises
were made to Abraham and his seed, which is Christ. Now what of all this, may
some say? He does expound himself therefore, this I say; that is, the drift
and intent of all my speech is to show that the covenant or testament ratified
by God can not be frustrated. And secondly, though it might so be, yet that
the Law could not abrogate the same: Which he proves by two reasons especially.

First, from the circumstance of time: the law which began four hundred and
thirty years after does not disanull, etc.

Secondly, from the nature of a testament, donation or legacy: for if
inheritance come of the Law, it comes not of promise; but God gave it to
Abraham by promise.

The Law which began afterward] The Jews object and say, that God mistrusting
his own promises as insufficient to justify, further added a better thing;
that is to say, the law, whereby men might be made righteous. Our Apostle does
answer by demonstration. Abraham obtained not righteousness before God
through the Law, because there was no Law when he lived; and if no Law, then
assuredly no merit. What then? Nothing else but the mere promise, which
Abraham Galat. 3. 6.
believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Luther in loc.
If a rich man not constrained thereunto, but of his own good will, should
adopt one to be his son, whom he knows not, and to whom he does owe
nothing, and should appoint him heir of all his lands and goods; and then
after certain years should lay upon him a law to do this or that; he cannot
now say that he deserved this benefit through his own works, seeing he
received it of mere favor many years asore: so God could not respect our
deserts going before righteousness, for as much as the promise was made 430
years before the Law. Wherefore, says Vbi sup.
Luther, if thou will rightly divide the word of truth, accustom thy self to
separate the promises and the law so sarre asunder as heaven and earth, as the
beginning of the world and the latter end; that when the Law comes and
accuses thy conscience, thou may answer; Lady law, thou come not in
season, for thou come too soon; tar^e yet until 430 years be full
expired, and when they are past, then come and spare not. But if thou come
then, it will be too late, for then has the promise prevented thee 430* years;
to which I assent, and sweetly repose my self in the same. Therefore I have
nothing to do with thee, for I live now with the believing Abraham; or rather
fince Christ his seed is revealed and given unto me, I Galat. 2. 20.
live in him, who is my 1. Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Inheritance comes on Gods
part by promise, not on our part by performance.

It is objected against this accurate computation of time, Genesis 15. 13. Know
for a suertie that thy seed shall be a stranger in a la^d that is not theirs
four hundred years, and shall serve them. Answer is made by S. Deciuit. Dei
lib. 16. cap. 24.
Augustine, and Oecumen. Aquin. Ca. etan. in loc.
other, that Moses in that text speaks of the time that was from the beginning
of Abraham's seed, or birth of Isaac, to the beginning of the Law: but Paul in
this text, of all the time that was between the giving of the promise, and the
giving of the law. Now the promise was made to Abraham when he was seventy
and five years old, Genesis 12. 4. And Isaac was borne when Abraham was a hundred
years old, Genesis 21. 5. that is, 25 years after the first promise. And from
the birth of Isaac, until the children of Israel were delivered out of Egypt,
at which time the Law was given (as Oecumenius, Aquinas, Aretius exactly reckon
according to Gods own records) were 405. years, in all 430. as Moses, Exodus
12. 40.

For if the inheritance come of the law, it comes not now of promise, but God
gave it, etc.] This argument is plain: for natural reason, although it be
never so blind, compels us to confess, that it is one thing to promise, and
another thing to require; one thing to give, and another thing to take. The
Luther.
law requires and exacteth of us our works; on the contrary, the promise
does offer unto us the spiritual and everlasting benefits of God, offert and
adfert, and that freely for Christ's sake. Therefore we cannot obtain
inheritance by the law, Galat. 3. 10
for as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse: but by the
promise; for it says, Genesis 22. 18.
in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Romans 4. 14.
If they which are of the law be heirs, our faith is made vain, and the
promise void, and God a liar. Eternal life is the Romans 6. 23.
gift of God, conveied by testament as a Perkins.
legacy, which is not an exaction, but a donation. Heirs look not for laws
or any burdens to be laid upon them by their fa there is will, but for an
inheritance confirmed thereby. Now that we may receive this legacy, we must
bring unto God nothing but hunger and thirst after it, making suit for ^t by
asking, seeking, knocking. For albeit in our selves all of us are most
unworthy: yet shall it suffice for the having of this blessing, if our names
be found in the testament of God.

God gave it to Abraham by promise.] That is, as before, to Abraham and his
seed. For this gift is not private, but a public donation, and Abraham here
must be considered as a public person, and that which was given unto him, was
in him given to all that should believe as he did. If then thou be endued
with faith Luke 17. 6.
as much as is a grain of Mustard seed, thou art Galat. 3. 9.
blessed with faithful Abraham. Inheritance of eternal happiness is as
surely thine, as it was his when he believed: and if thou continue faithful
unto the end, thou shall Matthew. 8. 11
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, and after
this life rest in the Luke 16. 22.
bosom of Abraham evermore. For whatsoever was done to him as the Romans 4. 11.
12
Father of the faithful, is done to them also that walk in the steps of his
faith.

Wherefore then serves the Law?] You have heard of the proposition, and
exposition of our Apostle. Now there follows an Aquin. Aretius. Kilius.
opposition against his doctrine, containing a twofold objection. The first in
the 19. verse: Wherefore then serves the Law: The second, verse 21. Is the Law
then against the promise of God? To the first, answer is made, that the Law was
added because of transgressions. Primasius in loc.
Not for justification, but for transgression, namely to suppress, and
express sin. The civil use of the Law is to punish transgression, and to
restrain villainy. Good-men are a Romans 2. 14.
Law to themselves, and so the Law is not given unto the 1. Tim. 1. 9.
righteous man. But almighty God has ordained Magistrates, Parents, Ministers,
Laws, bonds, to bridle the wicked, at the least to bind Satan that he rage
not in his bond slaves after his own lust. And therefore Politicians and
Statesmen have much esteemed and honored the very senseless instruments of
justice. Baldwin the great Lawyer called the Gibbet, lignum benedictum; and the
good Emperor Max. 1. Sa^ue sancta Iustitia.
Maximilian when-so-euer he passed by the Gallows, usually putting off his
hat saluted it thus: All hail holy Justice.

The spiritual use of the Law is to reveal sin, that a man as in a glass
may behold his ignorance, misery, blindness, infirmity, judgment, death,
hell: As a Tyndal. prol. in Exodus
corosie laid unto an old sore, not to heal it, but to stir it up, and make
the disease alive, that a man may feel in what peril he stands, and how nigh
to deaths door. Kilius.
For our natures are so corrupt, that we could not know them to be corrupt
without the Law. Romans 7. 7. I knew not sin (says our Apostle) but by the
Law; for I had not known lust, except the Law had said, thou shall not lust.
Iere. 23. 29.
Is not my word even as fire, says the Lord? and like an hammer breaking
stones? It is that 1. King. 19. ver. 11. 12. 13.
mighty strong wind, and that terrible earthquake, renting the Mountains,
and cleaning the Rocks asunder, that is, the proud and obstinate hypocrites.
Eliah as being not able to abide these terrors of the Law, which by these
things are signified, covered his face with a mantle. Thus as you see, the Law
was added because of transgressions, that is, to restrain them ciuilly, Luther.
but especially to reveal them spiritually, that men might understand the
greatness of their sins, and the just wrath of God for the same.

Until the seed came to whom the promise was made] If the days of the Law
should not be shortened, no man should be saved: and therefore certain bounds
are limited to this Tyrant, beyond the which he cannot reign, namely, the Law
was added because of transgressions, until the seed came. Oecumen. Aquin.
Ardens.
That is, until the time of grace, till Christ in the fullness of time was
borne. This may be construed literally: for albeit the law serves to reveal
sin till the worlds end; Perkins.
yet in respect of the Mosaicall manner of revealing transgressions, it is
added but until Christ. For the law before Christ did convince men of sin
not only by precepts and threatenings, but also by Rites and Ceremonies as by
washings and sacrifices; all which assuredly were real confessions of sin,
and as Coless. 2. 14.
Paul speaks, an handwriting against us, until Christ took them away, and
fastened them upon his Cross. Matt. 11. 12
The Prophets and the Law did endure till John, and from the time of John the
Baptist until this day the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. Spiritually the blessed seed is Kill us.
come when once Christ Ephesians. 3. 17.
dwells in our hearts by faith. Here we must begin to say, Luther.
Now leave off Law, thou have terrified and tormented our consciences enough:
Psalm. 42. 9. and 69. 2.
All thy waves and storms are gone over us. Lord turn not away thy face from
thy servant. Psalm. 6. 1.
Rebuke me not I beseech thee in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy
displeasure. When these terrors and troubles come, let the law then be packing
out of the conscience, which indeed is added to discover and increase sin,
yet no longer but until the seed come to which the promise was made. Now must
he deliver up his kingdom to another, even to Christ, whose lips are
gracious, speaking of far better things then does the Law, Esa. 61. 1. 2. 4.
bringing glad tidings of salvation unto the Poor, binding up the broken
hearted, preaching liberty to the Captive, comforting all that mourn, giving
beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

Is the Law then against the promise of God?] If the Law convince men of sin,
then it serves not to give life, but to kill: and so by consequent is against
the promise giving life. To this objection our Apostle does answer negatiuely,

With

Detestation, God forbid. Attestation, producing out of Gods own book
sufficient witness against these cauillers. If there had been a Law given
which could have given life, then no doubt righteousness should have come by
the Law: but the Scripture concludes all under sin, etc.
God forbid] In that Paul auoides an heriticall and blasphemous objection with
an absit, (which is Aretius in R^m 6* 2.
abominantis oration) we may learn to Perkins.
reject things said or done to the dishonor of God, with loathing and
detestation. Matt. 26 65.
Caiphas supposing that Christ had blasphemed, rent his garments: and Job
suspecting his children had done the like fault, sanctified them, Job. 1. 5.
Magdeburg. epist. praefix. cent. 7.
What reason is it to spare great ones, iniuring Christ the greatest one? For
as wise men we must discover, and as learned men leave, but as good men abhor
such as are heretical. And therefore we must hate the Luther.
detestable dreams of Jews, affirming that the Messiah is not yet come,
because our sins hinder his coming. As if God should become unrighteous,
because of our unrighteousness; or made a liar, because men are liars. It is
said here that God is one, Marlorat.
that is, ever the same, being always just and true. God forbid then a man
should think that the Law should be against his promise; for he does not
slack his promise because of our sins, or hasten the same for our
righteousness and merits, he regards in it neither the one nor the other.

For if there had been a Law given which could have given life, then no doubt
righteousness should have come by the Law.] Aretius.
If the Law were contrary to the promise, then it should execute the promises
office: but that it cannot do* for it is the promises office to give life, but
the laws office to kill. And therefore the Law is not against the promise, but
rather a Caietan.
preparation to receive the promise. This argument is an hammer to beat down
Popish opinion of merit: That which does give righteousness, does first give
life; the works of the Law cannot give life: Ergo, they cannot give
righteousness or justify. See Luther and Perkins in loc.

But the Scripture concludes all things under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that beleeue] Things
subordinate, whereof one serves for another, are not one against another: but
the Law is subordinate to the promise, concluding all under sin, that we
might have recourse to Christ the Ioh. 2. 2.
propitiation for our sins. Leo sermon. 11. de quadrage sima.
Ideo enim datur praeceptum vt praecipientis quaeratur auxilium. It humbles a
man, and in humbling him it makes him to sigh, and to seek the helping hand
of the Mediator, Psalm. 109. 20. Sweet is thy mercy.
sweetning his mercies, and making his grace gracious and inestimable. The
proverb is true, that hunger is the best cook. Luther.
Like then as the dry ground does covet rain: even so the Law makes troubled
and afflicted souls to thirst after Christ, and in this respect it is our
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Aretius in Galat. 3. 24.
A schoolmaster has two special offices; one to correct, another to direct.
It corrects in shutting us up in the prison of sin; and it Photius apud
Oecumen. in loc.
directs also, for that it occasioneth us hereby to hunger and thirst after
the righteousness of Christ.

The Scripture] (...). That Scripture, Perkins.
namely the Scripture mentioned before, meaning C^luin. apud Marlorat. in loc.
especially the written law of Moses, including all under sin: Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. Every man is bound to keep the whole Law:
Caietan.
Claudit ergo sub peccato subditos sibi, praecipiendo siquidem, and non
adiuuando. But this may be construed of Luther.
Evangelical Scripture so well as of the law; for if all men had not bin
subject unto the curse by sin, for what end should the blessing by Christ
have been promised, because Matthew. 9. 12.
the whole need not a Physician? And so both Gospel and Law shut up all under
sin, Romans 11. 32.
that God might have mercy on all.

Concludeth] Ergo, the Scripture must be Judge for the determining of
controversies in religion For (as Lib. 5. contra Parmeman.
Optatus and Iu Psalm. 21. exposit. 2.
Augustine note) God has dealt with us as an earthly father is wont with his
children, who fearing lest they should fall out after his decease, does set
down his will in writing under witnesses; and if there arise debate among the
brethren, instantly they go to the testament. All of us are brethren, and Genesis
13. 8.
therefore we should not contend: but if any question be made concerning our
Fathers inheritance, we must examine the words of his testament, and Esaias 8.
20.
testimony, for that as a Judge concludes all things.

All things] Marlorat.
As if he should say, not all men only, but all things also, which all men can
do toward their salvation, even Romans 3. 19.
all the world culpable before God under sin.

That the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that
beleeue] There is Beza in loc.
never a word in this clause but is a sufficient argument against our merit:
promise, faith, Jesus Christ, given, believe. Saving faith is called here the
faith of Jesus Christ, because Christ is both author and object thereof.
Perkins.
Every man therefore shall not be saved in his own faith and religion, but
only such as are of the faith of Christ.

Almighty and merciful God, of whose only gift it comes that thy faithful
people do unto thee true and laudable service: grant we beseech thee, that we
may so run to thy heavenly promises, that we fail not finally to attain
the same through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.
The Gospel.
LVKE 10. 23. Happy are the eyes which see the things that ye see, etc.
THis Text has two parts:

One concerning the Gospel: containing a Proposition: Happy are the eyes,
etc. Reason: For I tell you, etc.
Another touching the Law: wherein four points are remarkable: 1. A
supplication: Master what shall I do? etc. 2. A replication: What is written in
the law? how read thou? etc. 3. An explication: A certain man descended,
etc. 4. An application: Go and do thou likewise.

Happy are the eyes which see the things that ye see] Christ in the words
immediately going before delivered this doctrine: No man knows who the Son
is, but the Father: neither who the Father is, save the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reveal him. And then turning about to his Disciples he said
secretly, Blessed are the eyes which see the things, Theophylact. Idem Cyril. a
apud Veg. in loc.
that is, these things hidden from the wise and learned, but opened unto you:
for this is Ioh. 17. 3.
eternal life, to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. Ardens.
Granaten. Zepper.
Some did see Christ only with corporal eyes of the flesh, as Judas and the
Jews who persecuted him. Other only with spiritual eyes of faith, as the
Patriarchs in old time: John 8. 56. Abraham rejoiced to see my day* etc. and
all true believers in our time, faith being an evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11. 1. But the Disciples here saw Christ with both, and therefore blessed
were their eyes, etc. Such as beheld Christ only with their carnal eye, were
(...).
not happy therefore, but the worse: for, says our Savior in the (...). 15.
22.
Gospel, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had
sin, but now have they no cloak for their sin, Such as see Christ only
with the spiritual eye be more happy; for John 20 29.
Blessed are they that have not scene, and yet have believed. Such as looked
upon Christ spiritually and corporally too were most happy. The first sort saw
Christ, but they did not believe: Aretius in loc.
they considered him as a mere man, but they did not conceive that he was the
only begotten son of God John 1. 14. they reputed Christ on the Cross to
be Ambro. ser. 45
(...) us, not Deus, a sinner, not a Savior. The second sort believe, but not
see: they believe that which was from the beginning, but they cannot say with
Saint 1* Epist. 1. 1.
John which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. The third sort did
see more then the first, and believed so much at the least as the second: and
therefore Christ might say well, Happy are the eyes, etc.

For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things
which ye see] That ought to be respected highly, which great men and good men
affect: but I tell you, that many Princes and Prophets have desired to see
those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them. For the Messiah is called in holy
Scripture, The Vide R^ber. in Hag. 2. number. 29 Gal. de arcanis lib. ^. cap. 9.
L^rin i^ 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11.
desire of all Nations: Haggai 2. 8. Of whom the Prophets inquired, searching
when or what time the spirit which was in them should declare the sufferings
that should come to Christ, and the glory that should follow: 1. Pet. 1. 10.
11. When Balaam had prophesied of Christ, Numb 24. 17.
There shall come a Star of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise of Israel, etc.
he brake forth into this passion; Alas, who shall live when God does this? As
if he should have said; Happy men are they, who shall see that glorious Star
and Sun of righteousness, coming out of his chamber as a Bridegroom,
giving light to such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Oh that
thou would break the heavens and come down, said the Prophet Cap. 64. 1.
Esaias. Good old L^ke 2. 25.
Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel. Pontan. in euang. Dom. 13. p^st
Trin.
Augustine wished he might have seen three things especially, Rome in her
glory, Paul in the pulpit, and Christ in the flesh. If the 1. King. 10. 8.
Queen of Sheba reputed the servants of Solomon happy, for that attending
about his throne they heard his wisdom, discoursing of trees 1. King. 4. 33.
from the Cedar that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop that springs out of
the wall: how blessed and happy were the disciples in hearing a Matthew. 12. 42.
greater then Solomon, and in seeing him who was Psalm. 45. 3.
fairer then the sons of men, in whom are hid all treasures of wisdom and
knowledge? Coloss. 2. 3.

Here the Gospel and Epistle meet: Happy are the eyes which see those
things which ye see; for Christ is the promised seed of Abraham, in whom all
the nations of the world are blessed. And for application it fits our text, and
time, to say, Blessed are our eyes, and blessed our ears, in this great light
of the Gospel. For we now Vide Chrysostom. Homil. 24. in 1. Cor.
see Christ in his Sacraments, and hear Christ in his word. He lives at this
hour, Coster in loc.
non solum inter nos, sed etiam intra nos: not among us only, but in us also,
dwelling in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. Galat. 2. 20. The Scriptures are
as a prospectiue glass, wherein he that has eyes of belief is able to
behold Christ crying in his cradle, dying on his cross, buried in his grave,
raised from the dead, transfigured on the mount, ascended far above all
heavens, and there sitting as our Advocate with God the Father. O that men
would therefore declare the goodness of God, in Psalm. 67. 1.
showing us the light of his countenance, revealing the 1. Tim. 3. 16.
great mysteries of godliness, which in Ephesians. 35.
other ages was not opened unto the sons of men after such a manner as it is
now. For I tell you many good Clerks, and great Kings of England have desired
in old time to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. And at this day
there be many learned men among the Jews, and mighty men among the Turks,
and gooly men among the barbarous and superstitious nations of the world, which
understand not as yet those things which appertain to their peace.

And behold a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him saying: Master what
shall I do to inherit eternal life?] A P. Fagius capitul. pat. page 81.
witty Rabbine was wont to say, that he learned much of his master, more of
his fellows, but most of his scholars. And so surely this ambitious Doctor
might have got somewhat by questioning, albeit he took Christ happily for his
inferior. But his intent was not to be taught, but to tempt, (...), Aretius.
using all possible means, and all plausible cunning to snare Christ in his
conference. For as Math. 2. 4. 7.
Herod the fox asked the Priests, and inquired of the Magi diligently when and
where Christ was borne; not to worship, but to worrie that innocent lamb: so
many men hear the word, and in reading the Bible move many doubts upon the
text, not to consult, but insult. As Ponta^.
one notes upon this place, non vt sciant, sed vt* sciantur. The Lawyers
preamble was courteous, Master, and his quaere not idle, like the contentions
of many Lawyers in our time, De lana caprina, touching the tithing of mint and
rue: but concerning our eternal inheritance, what shall I do to inherit
everlasting life? but his spirit was proud, and his heart false, standing up to
tempt, having Master in his mouth, hatching mischief in his mind. I will
therefore turn that old ryme upon him:

M^lin ore, verbalactis.
Felin cord, fra^s in factis.
What is written in the Law? how read thou?] Con* in Euangel. Dom. 12. post
Pentecost.
Didacus de la Uega, who was a Spanish Friar of Toledo, notes here that the
Bible teaches all things exactly, which are necessary to salvation, in his
own Text. Sacrapagina docet nos perfectissime quae sunt ad salutem necessaria.
The I^suit Costerus in his sermon preached upon this Gospel, affoords also the
Scripture this praise, that it is speculum and regula vitae. Christ therefore
sent the Lawyer unto the Law for the resolution of his doubt; What is written?
how read thou? So Luke 16. 29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them. And Esaias 8. 20. To the Law, to the testimony. De rebus fidei
persuadere debemus ex literis fidei, says Lib de praescript. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian. It is an old proverb, that the letters of Princes are to be read
thrice, but the Scripture (which is Gregor. epist. lib. 4. Epist. 84.
Gods Epistle) must be read Luther. loc. com. tit. de sa^. script.
seven times thrice, yea seventy times seven times. Infinities, as Luther
speaks in the words of a Horat.
Poet, Nocturna versate man^, versate diurna. That delighting in the Law of the
Lord, we may meditate thereon day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. For it is not
sufficient to read cursorily, Coster in loc.
sine delectn, and intilectu: we must Acts 17. 11.
examine the Text, and John 5. 39.
search the Scriptures. And therefore Christ here said not only, what is
written in the law? but, how read thou? That is, how do thou understand
and construe Gods holy word?

Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy minde] This commandment is the Matt. 22. 38.
first and the greatest of all the Law: wherein

Two points are regardable:

The cause why God is to be loved, and that is Heming.
because Dominus Deus, the Lord. T^us, thy Lord.
The manner how, with all thy Heart. Soul. Strength. Mind.

The saying of Tract. d^ diligendo de^m prin,
Bernard is true: Causa diligendi deum deus est: as being most loving, and
lovely. Loving, in that he loved 1. I^h. 4 19.
us first, even in our election and creation, when we could not; in our
redemption, when we would not, love him. Bernard vbi sup a.
Ipse dilexit nos and tantus and tautum, and gratis tantillos and tales.
Lovely, being indeed the Vega.
center of all our love; for we must love nothing but good, and every good is
from oboue, coming down from the Father oflights. As then 1. Kin. 18. 21.
Eliah said, If the Lord be God, follow him: in like manner if the Lord be
God, love him. Again, thou must love the Lord, because thy God: for every man
loves his own; his own children, his own friends, his own goods, his own
conceit. Non quia vera, (quoth Confess l. 12. cap. 25.
Augustine) sed qui^ sua. Now nothing is so properly thine own as God, being
Psalm. 73. 25.
thy portion for ever. It is observed by V^ Diez. con. 2. Dom 12. post.
Pentecost.
Picus Mirandula subtly, that in the creation of the World, God gave the
Water unto the Fish, Earth unto the Beasts, Air unto the Fowls, Heaven unto
the glorious Angels: and then after all these goodly seats were bestowed,
almighty God made man according to his own likeness and Image, that he might
say with the Prophet, Psalm 73 24. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there
is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee. Thou Lord art my lot,
and inheritance, the strength of my heart, and salvation of my soul. August
tract. 13. in Joan.
Si ^suris, panis tibi est; si sitieris, aqua tibi est; si in tenebris es,
lumen tibi est, etc.

The manner how to love God, is, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with
all thy mind. That is, as De doctrina Christ. lib. ^. cap. 22. and de spirit.
and anima cap. 35. Idem ^ombard. 3. sent. did. 27.
Augustine, with all thy understanding, Michael, di Hang. F^r. 9.
never speaking or thinking of him erroneously: with all thy will, never
contradicting him obstinately: with all thy memory, never forgetting him
obliuiously: loving him Heming.
perfectly, purely, perpetually. Or as Ser. de diligendo deo. Idem Ludol. de
^ita Christi, part. 2. cap. 36.
Bernard, with all ^hy heart wisely, resisting the subtle suggestions of the
devil: with all thy soul sweetly, mortifying all carnal lusts of the flesh:
with all thy mind constantly, ouercomming all crosses and troubles of the
world. Or as Lib. de hominis op^f. cap. 8.
Gregory Nyssen, with all the faculties of thy soul, vegetative, sensitive,
ratiocinatiue, for in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. 28.
He gave all, and therefore good reason he should have all. Or as Psalm. 103. 1.
David jointly, with all that is within thee. Theophylact. Gregor. Are^ius.
For the multiplying of so many terms, heart, soul, strength, mind, is only
to show that we must perfectly love God above all, even with all the
Bernardinus de bustis Rosar. part. 2. sermon. 5.
strength of all our heart, soul mind. Modo sine modo, says B^rnard, tract*
de di^igendo Deo.

Happily some will object, if we must love God with all our heart, soul,
mind, mig^t, it is not lawful to love any thing else beside him. Answer is
made, that we may love something, praeter Deum, sed omnia propter Deum: Luther.
post mayor in loc. Idem Thom. 22 q aest 44. art. 4 and ^ra in 3. sent. did 27.
Other things beside God, if we love them in God and for God. As the words
following intimate, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

In which observe Heming.
the

Causes, of our love toward our neighbor. Measure, of our love toward our
neighbor. Order, of our love toward our neighbor.
The causes are two:

Commandment in Scripture: Ioh. 13. 34. and 15. 12. This is my commandment,
that you love one another. Bond of nature, because man is neighbor to man, in
respect of creation and conversation. Angels fight not against Angels, but
against the fell Apoc. 12. 7.
Dragon. Birds of a feather fly together. One beast is not cruel unto another
of the same kind. For Cocks (as many conjecture) fight not out of malice, but
magnanimity*, rather out of jealousy then antipathie. Most unnatural then is
it for one man to wrong another of his own kind, yea kin. For whereas
almighty God made not all Angels of one Angel, nor all beasts of the great
Elephant, nor all fish of the huge Whale, nor all birds of the maiesticall
Eagle; he made all mankind of one Adam, Aug. de bono Coniuga^ ^p 1. and
^ombard. 2. sent. did. 18.
hereby teaching us to love as brethren, and to be all as one, because we did
proceed all from one.
For the measure of thy love the text says here, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Now the Thom. ab A^gentin. and R^. de m^dia (...) in 3.
sent. did. 29. Idem Thom. 22. quaest. 6. art. 4.
school Divines observe, that as is a note of similitude, not equality. The
Law does require that thou love thy neighbor as thy self for the manner of
thy love: Ia^sen. con. cap 81.
but not as much as thy self, for the measure of thy love: because charity
begins with it self, making a man to love first himself, then his neighbor
as himself, that is, Jacob. de Vorag. sermon. 2. in loc. Idem Lombard. 3. sent.
did. 27.
in quo seipsum and ad quod seipsum, in that, and for that he loves himself,
namely loving him in God, and wishing him all good. Other Calvin. ap^d
Marlorat. in Matthew 22. 39.
Interpreters have gone further, affirming, that according to the rigor of law
thou must love thy neighbor as thy self, not only with the same love, but
also with the same degrees of love. Now then how thou love thy self, thou
do know best thy self. But howsoever some learned Authors have denied
degrees of intention, all acknowledge that there be degrees of extention in
our charity. For, as God is the God of love; so likewise the God of order: And
therefore whereas all men in the world can not be partakers of our temporal
goods and spiritual graces alike, Aug. de doc. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 28.
such as are nearest ought to be dearest unto us. I say nearest, in Heming.
spiritual or carnal alliance: For the first, it is said expressly, Galat. 10.
6.
do good to all, especially to those which are of the household of faith, of
Gods own family the Caictan.
Church, among whom the Ministers of the word are the ^t
chiefest. According to this rule Christ in the Gospel honored his spiritual
allies before his natural brethren and kindred; for when one told him, behold
thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee, Christ
stretched forth his hand toward his Disciples and said, Mat. ^2. 49.
behold my mother and my brethren: for whosoever shall do my fathers will
which in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. Lombard. 3.
sent. did. 29.
Est enim sanctior copula cordium, quam corporum.

Yet Altissiodor. aur. sum. s^l. 141. ex Amb.
(all other things being alike) we must affect and respect our own wife
before our own children, our children before kinsmen, our kinsmen before such
neighbors as are not of our blood, our neighbors before strangers, and
strangers of our own country before forreiners of another nation. Of this
order in our love we find a precept in 1. Tim. 5. 8.
Paul, He that provides not for his own, namely for them of his household, is
worse then an Infidel: An example in Joseph, who preferred Benjamin his own
brother by father and mother too, before the rest of his unkind brethren: in
his seast, Beniamins mess was Genesis ^3 34.
five times so much as any of theirs: at his farewell, other had change of
raiment and money, but unto Benjamin Genesis 45. 22.
he gave three hundred pieces of silver and five suites of apparel. Our
blessed Savior himself being the true Joseph, even the truth and the way,
loved his own disciples more then other men, and S. John more then other of
his disciples, termed in the Ioh. 19 16. 20 2 21. 7. 20.
Gospels history, the disciple whom Jesus loved. I conclude in the words of
Vbi s^p.
Lombard, Omnes homines diligendi sunt pari affectu, sed non pari effectu. See
Thom. 2. 2^, quaest. 26. art. 6. 7. 8. Caietan. and Dominic. Ban. ibidem.
Altissiodor. Thom. ab Argentina. Ric. de media villa, reliquosque sententiarios
in 3. sent, did. 29.

Thou have answered right, do this and thou shall liue] For the better
understanding of this clause [ do this and thou shall liue] consider I pray,
to what, and to whom Christ made this reply. First, to what. D^. Fulke, and
Sarcer. in loc.
It is not demanded here by what means a man might obtain life everlasting,
but by what doing, or by what kind of works; and therefore Christ answered
accordingly; what is written in the Law? do this, and thou shall live.
Secondly, to whom, he did now deal with a Doctor of the Law, with a Pharisee,
with one who was willing to justify himself: he did therefore send him unto
the Law, not unto the promise. Heming.
But speaking of eternal life to penitent sinners, he says, John 14. 6.
I am the way: promising in general, Mat. 11. 28.
Come to me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you: performing
his word in particular; O woman, thy faith has saved thee, Luke 7. 50. Christ
then in saying, Do this and thou shall live, shows the Lawyers Melanct.
Sarceriu^, Zepper.
hypocrisy, who thought he could do this: and not a possibility to do
this: Luther.
as if he should say, thou did never in all thy life fulfill the whole
law, nor yet one letter thereof as thou should perfectly: thou must
therefore think of Aretius.
another way to the kingdom of Heaven. Here the Gospel and Epistle meet
again. The Law cannot give life (says Paul.) the Leuit and Priest of the Law,
did not help the wounded man half dead (says Christ.) The Scripture
concludes all things under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus
Christ, should be giden to them that believe, says our Epistle. Christ sends
a Iustitiarie to the law, that seeing his own wretchedness and wickedness in
it, he might come to Christ the loving Samaritane, to bind up his wounds and
to power wine and oil into them, as it is in our Gospel. If Papists in old
time were not impotent in conioyning these two Scriptures as parallel,
assuredly the Rhem. and Po^tan. in loc. Non quid credendo, sed quid faciend^.
Papists in our time are somewhat impudent in making the doctrines of these two
so contrary: that which God and the Church have coupled together, let no man
put asunder.

A certain man] The Doctors of the law construed the Commandment, love thy
neighbor, thus: Mat. 5. 43.
love thy friend, and hate thine enemy. Christ therefore shows by this parable
that every man is our neighbor, of what condition or country soever, even our
greatest enemy For the Job. 4. 9 vide Joseph antiquit. lib: 1^. cap 7. and 8.
Jew did hate the Samaritane, accounting him as a dog, and yet the Samaritan
performed all neighbourly duties unto the Jew, for that he did not commit any
work of cruelty, nor omit any work of mercy toward him.

In an Ambros. Euthym. Luther. Melanct. Aretius and alij.
allegory, this man is every man, who sinning in Adam, descended from Jerusalem
to Jericho: that is, from Gods City to the dominions of Satan. And fell among
thieves: into manifold tentations and noisome lusts. Which robbed him of his
raiment: of his Ephesians. 4. 24.
righteousness and holiness, wherewith Almighty God in his creation adorned
him. And they wounded him and departed. For sin wounding the conscience
leaves a man in a desperate case. The Priest and the Leuite looking one him
passed by. For the Law being the ministration of 2. Cor. 3. 7.
death, is rather a corasie then an healing medicine, procuring rather sorrow
then solace to the distressed soul. But a certain Samaritan took compassion,
etc. Christ Heb. 4. 15.
touched with the feeling of our infi^mities, out of his pity Esaias 61. 1.
Ezech. 34. 16.
bound up his wounds, and powered in Oil and Wine: preaching repentance, which
as wine does search; and grace, which as Oil does supple our soars. He set
him on his own beast: Philip. 2. 7.
he took on him our own nature, 1. Pe^. 2. 24.
bearing our own sins, in his body, suffering for us in the flesh. And
brought him to a common Inn. That is, the Church, as a common Inn receiving
all sorts of men, being travelers and 1. Pet. 2. 11.
Pilgrims on earth, albeit their Philip. 3. 20.
Burgeship be in heaven. And made provision for him. As long as he lived among
us, he did good, and Act. 10. 38.
healed all that were oppressed of the d^uell. On the morrow when he departed:
leaving the world and ascending up on high, he committed the wounded man unto
the Host; namely, to the Preachers of his word, Ephesians. 4. 11.
appointing Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors and Teachers. Unto
which he gave two pence, that is, the two testaments, as In loc. Idem Ambros.
Th^ophylact. Emis.
Euthymuis; or as Aretius.
other, the two Sacraments: or as August. ap^d Them in (...).
other, the two great Commandments: or as Pangarol. him. in Euang. d^m. 12.
post Pen. part. 2.
other, wholesome doctrine and holy conversation: or Iaem ibid.
jurisdiction and order: Idem ibid.
or the word and the Sacraments: all which are Gods ordinary means unto
salvation. And said, take care of him. He does not inioyne the Minister to
cure, but only to take care for the wounded man. As Lib. 4. de considerat.
Bernard excellently, Petitur a te cura, non curatio. For if the wounded man,
as Ier. 51. 9.
Babylon, will not be cured, Ez^ch. 33. 9.
he shall die for his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Thou have
done thy part, and thou shall assuredly receive thy reward. As Christ himself
promises here, When I come again I will recompense thee; Then he will say to
the good Steward, Mat. 25. 23.
It is well done trusty servant, thou have been faithful in little, I will
make the Ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy.

Go and do likewise] For if thou know this, and do not this accordingly,
Euthym.
thou do not love thy neighbor as thy self, and he that loves not his
neighbor as himself, cannot love God with all his heart, with all his soul,
etc. Let us therefore be followers of Christ Ephesians. 5. 1.
as dear children, loving his as he loved us: opening our bowels of compassion
toward all such as mourn in Sion, binding up the wounds of his distressed
members under the cross, 1. Cor. 10. 24.
seeking not our own, but one another good, that when he comes to judgment
we may hear and have that happy doom: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
ye the Kingdom prepared for you. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I
thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I was
naked, and ye clothed me, etc. For in as much as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

The Epistle.
GALAT. 5. 16. I say, walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the
flesh, etc.
THis Epistle may be divided into two parts: a

General exhortation, to walk in the spirit; and that in respect of a double
benefit: namely, because the spirit delivers us from the Lusts of the flesh,
verse. 16. Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. And ver. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucrucified the flesh, etc.
Lists of the Law, verse. 18. If ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under
the law.
Particular enumeration of the works of the flesh, and fruits of the spirit.
In the be droll of vices observe their Condition: The deeds of the flesh are
manifest. Kinds: as being against Faith, Idolatry. Witchcraft. Hercsie.
good manners, especially Chastity. Adultery. Fornication. Uncleanness,
Wantonness, as the daughters of luxury. Gluttony, Drunkenness, as the mother.
Charity. Hatred. Uariance. Zeal: or wicked emulation. Wrath. Strife.
Seditions. Envying. Murder.


Punishment: They which commit such things, shall not be inheritors of the
kingdom of God.
In the catalogue of virtues observe likewise their Property: Fruits of the
spirit. Kinds: quantum ad intra: for the doing of good: love, joy, peace.
enduring of evil: long suffering, gentleness.
extra: respecting God, faith. our neighbors, goodness. our selves, temperance.

Benefit: Against such there is no Law.

Concerning our Apostles exhortation: I have showed Epist. Sund. 8. (...) T^n
else*where what it is to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, as also what it is to
walk in the spirit: and Epist. Sund. after Christmas and Epist. 4. ^un. (...)
Let
that all such as are led of the spirit, are not under the Law. Pardon ^ee then
in passing sicco calamo, from the first unto the second part.

The d^edes of the flesh are manifest] As being known to God: unto whom all
things are H^b. c. 13.
naked, even the secrets of our ^al. 7. 10.
hearts and rei^es. And notorious in the sight of men: hatred appearing in open
court; gluttony sitting in open Hall; drunkenness reeling in open street;
murder swaggering open high-wey; seduions in open fi^lde; ^mulation in open
School; worshipping of Images in open Temple; sects in open Pulpit. Adultery,
fornication and other secret sins of the Chamber, albeit the night be never
so dark, the curtain never so close, the door never so fast, are
notwithstanding usually brought to light also. Whereupon the Poets in old time
painted Uenus the mother of wantonness, naked; Fulgentius (...). l. 2. in
f^bula Veneris.
insinuating that this iniquity cannot be long covered. And manifest, Aretius
in l^c.
as being committed against conscience: for as an Tit. 3. 11.
heretic; so the drunkard, witch, adulterer is damned of his own self* Yea
the very Gentiles having not the Law, were notwithstanding in this respect a
Romans 2. 14.
Law to themselves. Perkins in loc.
Hence we may learn not to conceal, but freely to confess our sins before
God, and before men also when need shall require. Whether a man acknowledge
them or no, they be manifest, and the ingenuous uncovering of them is the way
to cover them. Agnosce (...), says Ser. 88. de Temp.
Augustine, and Deus ignoscit. I said I will confess my wickedness unto the
Lord, and so thou forgauest the punishment of my sin: Psalm 32. 6.

Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonnesse] These sins are named
first, Marlorat.
because the flesh is most p^one to commit them. Old A binuiqu^st. in G^n.
Lot did burn with (...) of lust, whom all the fire that consumed Sodom could
not once touch. Apolog. Da^id. cap. 4.
Ambrose said of Sampson: Qui (...) etiam suis manibus strangulauit, amorem
suum suffocare non potuit, etc. And a O win Epigram.
modern Poet of Hercules:

Lenam non potuit, potuit superare leaenam:
Quem fera non valuit vincere, vicit hera.
Adultery, when both or one of the parties delinquent are married, as the
notation of the word intimates, Isiodor. Etym. lib. 5. cap. 26. Idem
A^teinstaig. and alij
adulterium, quasi ad alterius torum. Fornication, is between such as are
single, so called a Isiodor. Etym. lib. 10. and Ans^lm. in lo.
fornicibus, of the place wherein common harlots used to prostitute their
bodies. Uncleanness, is incontinency against Aquin. Ca^etan.
nature: Perkins.
where these sins were known, there they were named particularly by Paul: as
among the Romans, Romans 1. 37. and to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. 9. but in
Galatia where they were not known, they be mentioned in general only, lest by
naming of them he should after a sort teach them. Wontonnesse in Aretius.
lascivious attire, unchaste talk, petulant behavior, is an Calvin.
instrument, and as it were the bellows to blow the coals of lust in all.

Idolatry, witchcraft Luther.
It is plain that Paul calls here flesh whatsoever is in all the powers of
an unregenerate man's soul. The works of the will that lusts, are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, and such like: the works of the will inclined to
wrath, are hatred, variance, seditions, envying, etc. The works of
understanding or reason, are Idolatry, witchcraft, heresy. The which are
distinguished Aduanc. of learning, lib. 2. page pen^lt.
thus: Heresy, when we serve the true God with a false worship. Idolatry, when
we worship false gods, supposing them to be true. Witchcraft, when we adore
false gods, knowing them to be wicked and false. For the ground of that black
art is either an open or secret Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 20. V^de
Altenstag. ex. verb. ar^ magica.
league with Satan the prince of darkness, and so witchcraft (as our
judicious Luther.
Sovereign well observed) is the height of Idolatry.

Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, gluttony, drunkenness are manifestly
known to be works of the flesh, Hieron. in loc.
even to such as commit them: but Idolatry does appear so spiritual,
D^monalog. lib. 3. c. 6.
as that it is manifest unto the faithful only to be a deed of the flesh. A
Turk believes nothing less then that his Alcaron, his washings and other
ceremonies are works of the flesh. A popish Monk when he leads a single
life, says Mass, prays on his beads, is so far from holding himself an
Idolater, or that he fulfilleth any work of the flesh; as he that calls
himself a spiritual man, and is assuredly persuaded that these things are
spiritual means of his salvation. He talks of the spirit, and thinks he
walks in the spirit. Nay the sin of Idolatry, though it be more
reprehended in Gods word, and more punished in his works, then other vices:
yet it cleaves so fast unto flesh, See Arrow against Idolatry, chap. 2.
as that the best men in the world easily fall into it, and having once
delighted therein, are most hardly drawn from it. Idols are called by the
Prophet Chap. 44. 9
Esaias, Quae maxin. e aman^ Idololatr^. Vatabius ibid.
del^ctable things. Ezechiel in the 23. chapter of his Prophecy compares
Idolaters unto a woman i^flamed with love toward some goodly young man, on whom
she has cast her eyes, and fixed her affection, and forgetting all mod^stie,
sends messengers for him, and brings him into the bed of love. Saint John
in his Chap. 17.
Apocalypse accurately describes the superstitious and Idolatrous Church of
Antichrist by a whore, whose doctrines, as the wine of her fornication, has
intoxicated the Kings and inhabitants of the earth; her cup is of gold, her
self is araied with purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious
stones and pearls. Hereby counterfeiting the glorious ornaments of Christ's
own spouse, the true Church: whose Reuelat. 21. 11. 13.
shining is like to gold, and stones most clear and precious, her lips like
C^nt. 3. 10.
skarlet, and her love much better then wine.

Let us then above all other works of carnalitie, take heed of Idolatry, which
is so secret a vice, that it is discovered of none but such as have crucified
the flesh, and are led of the spirit. And for this cause let us have the
commandment always in our eye, thou shall have none other gods but me.
Forbidding four things especially: first, the having of strange gods, and not
the true: as had the Acts 14. 11. 12. 15.
Gentiles. Secondly, the having of strange gods with the true: as the 2. King.
17. ^3
Samaritans had. Thirdly, the having of no gods at all, as the Psalm. 14. 1.
foolish Atheists. Fourthly, the not having of the true God aright, according
to his own word and will, as the congregations of Heretics and Antichrists.

Hatred, variance] In this enumeration of sins against charity, the first is,
hatred, and the last, murder. Aquin.
Quia ab hoc pervenitur ad illud. If we stop not hatred in the beginning, it
will break forth into contentious words, and brawling speeches, happily misled
by distempered zeal, will grow to seditious and schismatic actions, and
these breed envying, and envy begets murder, according to that of Ser. de
liuore and zelo.
Cyprian: Inuidia fons cladium, after (...) there follow (...). For this one
fault is Holcot.
toxicum charitatis, and ostium iniquitatis. As it were the death of amity,
and door of enimitie, the very Materia cul^arum vti Cyp. vbi sup.
matter of all mischief, and A^amts.
hell of the soul. Concerning gluttony, see before Epist. 1. Sund. in Aduent:
and of drunkenness hereafter Epist. 20. Sund. after Trinity.

And such like] Paul added this clause, Caieta^.
lest any should imagine that there be no more deeds of the flesh: as if he
should say, by Primasius.
these ye may conceive what the rest are, for it is Luther.
impossible to reckon up all. If Paul numbering the sins of his time, was
constrained to break off his catalogue with an and caetera, how shall the
Preachers at this day deliver up a true inventory? For, as now and then all
humors of the whole body fall down into the legs, and there make an issue:
so the corruption of all ages past, have slid down into the present, to the
choking and annoyance of all that is good. The worlds end does afford the
same faults and the like to them in the beginning, yea doubtless many monsters
of sin, which our forefathers of old could never parallel.

Of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in times past] Cal^in.
Hence Ministers are taught often to fore warn the people of the future
judgments of God for their sins: Pelican apud Marlorat.
if present, by word: if absent, by writing: Esaias 58. 1. Mich. 3. 8. When a man
otherwise cannot hit the mark, he must draw the bow to the ear and shoot
home: little chiding and once rebuking will do no good with such as have stony
hearts and brazen faces, it is our duty therefore to threaten, yea thunder
again and again, saying with Paul, as I told you before, so still I forewarne
you Anselme.
while ye may take heed, repent and return from your wicked course, That they
which commit such things, shall not be inheritors of the Kingdom of God. Not
all they which have such impure motions arising in their mind: but they which
commit such actions in their life, (...), such as do. Not all such as have
done those things once, twice, thrice: for James 3. 2.
in many things we sin all, and every age even in the Luther.
faithful has his peculiar fault and folly. Lust assaults a man most in his
youth, ambition in his middle age, and covetousness in his old age. Bullinger.
Such then as have done these things and after have heartily repented, are not
excluded from the Kingdom of God: but only such as do, Perkins.
noting a present and a continued act of doing amiss. The Marlorat.
godly man often falls into the works of the flesh, and being admonished
thereof recouers himself, he does not Psalm. 1. 1.
stand in the way of sinners, although he sometimes enter into it. On the
contrary, sinners irrepentant and obstinate when they fall, lie still in the
filthiness of the flesh hating reformation, and heaping to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. All they which do this, and die thus
without a lively faith and unfeigned repentance, shall not be inheritors of the
kingdom of God.

The fruit of the spirit is] O^cumen. Anselme. Aquin. Aretius.
Interpretors observe generally Paul's altering of his phrase; for whereas he
called acts of sin works of the flesh, he terms virtue the fruit of the
spirit. He speaks of the one plurally, The works of the flesh are: but of the
other singularly, The fruit of the spirit is. Caietan.
Ad significandum quod malum contingit ex singularibus defectibus, bonum autem
ex integra causa. To signify that good is the effect of an entire cause,
whereas evil comes of defects in many particulars. Or happily to show that our
vices exceed in number our virtues.

Christian virtues are fruits, Luther. Ardens.
as bringing with them excellent commodities, enriching such as have them, and
alluring other also by their example to receive the Gospel and faith of
Christ. And fruits of the spirit, as begun, continued, ended according to the
motions and admonitions of the spirit: begun in faith, acted in obedience,
ending in Gods honor. A good man is Psalm. 1. 3.
like a Tree planted by the water side, that will bring forth his fruit in due
time. The Church is the Cantic. 4. 12.
Garden of God* Preachers are the planters, 1. Cor. 3. 6. 9 believers are Esaias
61* 3.
Trees of righteousness, the spirit of God is the sap and Galat. 2. 20.
life of them, and good works are the fruits which they bear. From Perkins.
hence we may learn to distinguish aptly between Christian virtues in
professors of the Gospel, and civil virtues in heathen men. Joseph is chaste,
and so was Xenocrates. In Joseph it was an especial fruit of the regenerating
spirit, but in Xenocrates i^ was a work proceeding only from Gods general
providence. For there is a gift of regeneration able to mortify corruption,
and a gift of restraint which serves only to keep in corruption.

Love, joy, peace, etc.] It had been sufficient to have named only love and
no more: for as it is showed, Epist. quinquages. Sund. charity does extend it
self unto all the fruits of the spirit, Luther.
notwithstanding our Apostle sets it here by it self among other virtues, and
in the first place, to signify that it is the very Ardens. Anselm. Aretius.
fountain from which all the rest are derived. And therefore that Christians
ought before other things affectionatly tender the good of their brethren, Romans
12. 10.
Giving honor one to another, every man esteeming better of another then of
himself, and so Galat. 5. 13.
serving one another in love. The world in this age wants exceedingly this one
virtue: for among the roaring Gentlemen it is but a word and a wound; among
civil men, it is but a word and a writ. Yea that which is worst of all, among
such as seem saints of the greatest purity, there be so many sects and
schisms even about matters of Gods holy service; that if our Apostle were now
living, he would censure them as he did the Corinthians in his time, 1. Cor. 3.
4.
when one says I am Paul's: and another, I am Apollos, are ye not carnal?

Against such there is no law] Against such virtues, and against persons endued
with such virtues, there is no law: that is, no law to Romans 8. 1.
condemn, no law to 1. Tim. 1. 9. V^i Melanct. ibid.
compel them. As if he should say, Such as are led by the spirit are a free
people, serving the Lord without constraint. If there were no punishment in
this life, nor hell in the next for adultery, drunkenness, murder, gluttony,
yet they would abstain from these works of the flesh out of mere love to God
and goodness. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh. In this
crucifying four points are to be considered:

1. Attachment. 2. Arraignement. 3. Judgment. 4. Execution.
First, we must attach and bring our selves into Gods presence, saying with
the Luke 15. 18.
prodigal son, I will go to my father. Secondly, we must indite our selves
of our sins at the bar of Gods judgment: I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee. Thirdly, we must 1. Cor. 11. 31.
judge our selves, that we be not judged of the Lod: I am no more worthy to be
called thy son. Fourthly, we proceed to the lawful execution of the flesh,
using the means for the crucifying of it, and they be principally Perkins.
three: The first is applying of Christ crucified, and that is to believe not
only that Christ was crucified for us: but that we likewise were crucified
with him.

The second is to beat down the flesh by the sword of the spirit, propounding
in our daily repentance the several Commandments and threatenings of God
against our several affections and lusts. As it were slaying murder with
commandment, Thou shall not kill: and robbing the thief with another arrow
taken out of Gods quiver, Thou shall not steal.

The third is to cut off the first beginnings of evil, and to fly the present
occasions of every sin. With these spiritual nails (as In lot.
Luther speaks) a Christian may fasten all carnal desires unto the Cross; so
that although the flesh be yet alive, yet can it not perform that which it
would do, for as much as it is bound hand and foot, and made subject to the
spirit.

Almighty and everlasting God, give unto us increase of faith, hope, and
charity: and that we may obtain that which thou do promise, make us to
love that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord. The Gospel.
LVKE 17. 11. And it chanced as Jesus went to Jerusalem, that he passed through
Samaria and Galile: and as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten
men that were lepers, etc.
COncerning Christ's diligence, going about to do good: obedience, sending the
lepers unto the Priests of the Law: power and pity curing such an incurable
disease. Concerning also the faith and fact of the lepers in confessing and
adoring Christ, I have spoken enough in mine exposition of the Gospel,
allotted for the third Sunday after Epiphanie. There remains in all this
history, but one point only to be further examined, and that is the gratitude,
rather ingratitude of these lepers, in which observe

The Number of the thanksgiuers: one among ten, and that one not a Jew, but a
Samaritane. The Nature of the thanksgiving: adorned with many commendable
virtues, as Obedience. Desire to be with Christ. Praising of God. Humility.
Love. Faith.

One of them when he saw that he was cleansed] Culman. Sarcerius. Aretius.
Hence we may learn that the number of true believers is but a Luke 12 32.
small flock, and that among much Matthew. 13.
stony, more thornie, there is but a little good ground. Many men in the world
Diez. Co^er.
resemble Dan. 2.
Nabuchadnezzars Image, whose head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms
of silver, his thighs of brass, his legs of iron, and his feet part of
iron, and part of clay: the beginning of all these lepers was golden, and their
proceedings as purified silver; all believed, all prayed, all obeyed Christ:
but their end was dirtie, forsaking the word, and embracing the world.
Hypocrites are like the Plaice, which has a black side so well as the white:
when once their turns are served by the white, they can and will instantly
show the black. While these men had their grievous disease, they came to
Christ, and cry to Christ, Jesus Master, have mercy on us. But feeling
themselves healed, they forget him, and that which is worse, they side with the
Priests against him. Among ten one man only was thankful, and continued
faithful unto the end. And this one was a stranger and a Samaritane. Wherein
our Evangelist does tax their ingratitude, by Calvin. Ia^sen.
comparing one with nine, and a Samaritane with a Jew. Theophylact.
Teaching us also not to boast of our progeny though never so godly, nor to
despair though never so wicked. In the business of our salvation often it comes
to pass Luke 13. 30.
that the first are the last, and the last are the first. In Galat. 3. 28
Christ there is neither Jew nor Grecian, but in Acts 10. 35
every nation he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with
him.

The thankfulness of the Samaritane is accompanied with many notable virtues,
as first obedience; for although he knew that he was, as he went cleansed of
his leprosy: yet according to Christ's express commandment he showed
himself to the Priests. And when he was with them, he was not seduced of them
as the rest of his company. For whereas the Priests (as Lyra. Culman. Aretius.
it is thought) had corrupted and persuaded those other nine that they were
cured by the Laws observation, and not by Christ's either might or mercy: the
Samaritane believed unfeignedly that Christ was a Priest for ever after the
order of Heb. 7. 17.
Melchisedec, even an high Priest which is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Hebr. 4. 15. and therefore leaving the legal Priests, he was
desirous to be with Jesus his Savior. Every man goes astray, but the good
man is Bertrandu^ in loc.
regredient, returning again to Christ, which is the way. Being now come to
Christ, he performs his duty to God, and man. To God, in praising him with a
loud voice, which argues his Ludolph.
devotion, and in falling on his face at Christ's feet, which argues his
Panigarol.
humility. To man, for whereas Christ said unto him, Are there not ten
cleansed? but where are those nine? he made no reply, but held his peace;
Iansen. C^ster. Pon^an.
signifying hereby that he came back again to remember his own thanks, and
not to tell tales of others ingratitude. These good things arising from a
lively faith, are well*pleasing to God: and therefore Christ dismissed him
accordingly, Go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole.

Let us imitate the Samaritane in his Melancthon.
perseverance, being never Galat. 6. 9.
weary of well doing. The which one point (as Ser. de orat. Dom.
Cyprian and De b^no perseu^rantiae, cap. 2.
Augustine have noted) is almost all the contents of our Lords prayer. For in
saying, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done, etc. what
do we desire, but that Gods name may be sanctified of us always, his
kingdom propagated always, his will fulfilled always. If at any time we fall
into sin, we must return again by faith and repentance to Christ, humbling
our selves at his feet, and serving him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life.

The Gospel and Epistle parallel, for sin is a spiritual u See postil. cum
gl^ssis: and ^erus ser. 5. Dom. 15. post Pen^ecost.
leprosy, the spots whereof are adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
Idolatry, etc. Christ is the Physician of our soul, who came into the world
to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1. 15. I, even I (says the Lord) am he that puts
away thine iniquities, Esa. 42. 25. The Preachers of his word are his mouth, as
it were, to Zepper. con. 1. in loc.
pronounce, that all such as truly repent and unfeignedly believe his holy
Gospel, are cured of their leprosy: but himself alone 1. John 1. 7.
cleanses us from all sin. Giving us his sanctified spirit also whereby we
put off the old man, and walk in newness of life. For as leprous 2. King 5.
14.
Naaman after he washed in Jorden, had new clean flesh in stead of his old
rotten flesh; even so such as are Christ's, and are led of his spirit, in the
places of their ancient vices hatred, variance, sedition, envying, murder,
etc. have contrary virtues, as love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
etc. If Job blessed God for a wound given; what thanks owe we to God for our
wounds healed, and our sin forgiven? August. medit. cap. 7.
O ineffabilis mysterij dispositio, peccat iniquus and punitur iustus,
delinquit reus, and vapulat innocens, offendit impius and damnatur pius, quod
meretur malus patitur bonus, quod committit homo sustinet Deus.

Pro seruis Dominus moritur, pro sontibus insons. Proaegrotomedicus, pro grege
pastor obit.
Pro populo rex mactatur, pro milite ductor; Pro opere ipse opifex, pro homine
ipse Deus.
Quid seruus, sons, aegrotus, quid grex populusque, Quid miles, quid opus, quid
homo soluet? amet.
The Epistle.
GALAT. 6. 11. Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine
own hand, etc.
THis epistle to the Galathians has three principal parts: a

Preface; setting down the Saluters: Paul and the brethren, etc. Saluted: The
Churches of Galatia. Salutation: Grace be with you, etc.
Treatise: concerning Doctrines of holy faith: from verse. 6. of the first
chapter, unto verse. 13. of the fifth chapter. Rules of good life: from ver. 13.
of the fifth chapter, unto verse. 11. of the sixth.
Conclusion: in the textread, wherein three points are to be considered: a
Insinuation: You see how large a letter I have written, etc. Recapitulation: As
many as desire, etc. Validiction: The grace of our Lord, etc.

Ye see how large] Saint Paul insinuates himself into the minds of the
Galathians by a twofold argument. First, from the largeness of his Epistle.
Secondly, for that he wrote it with his own hand. Interpreters have construed
the word large diversely; Apud Hier^n. exposit. prior. in loc.
some referring it to the greatness of the character. Hyperius to the depth of
his matter. In Psalm. 118.
Hilarie to the loftiness of his style. In loc. Idem. O^cumen.
Theophylact to the badnesse of his hand. Been. formatis literis
Anselmus on the contrary to the fairness of his writing. But the word
signifies Erasmus, An. in loc.
quantity so well as quality: Hebrews 7. 4. James. 3. 5. Whereupon Beza
translates here, videtis quam longis literis: and Uatablus, Quanta vobis
epistola scripserim. Our English Bibles accordingly so large, that is, as
Erasmus in his paraphrase, so prolix. The plain meaning then is, that he never
wrote so Luther in loc.
long an Epistle with his own hand unto any Church as unto them. He writ
indeed to Philemon with his Philemon. verse. 19.
own hand, but that Epistle was exceeding short in comparison of this: and he
writ larger Epistles unto the Churches of Corinth and Rome; but by his Scribes,
and not with his own hand. Wherefore seeing this letter is the most long and
large that ever himself penned, it ought to be more regarded and better
accepted; Calvin.
as his pains were greater in writing, our diligence should be greater in
reading and observing the same.

With mine own hand] Haimo says it is the Doctors opinion that Paul wrote not
all this Epistle with his own hand, but only from hence to the end; which
assertion is contrary to the Text, and truth. It is evidently confuted in the
Text, for that our Apostle speaks of the whole letter in the time past, I have
written. Or if of any part more then of another, it is of the former part
rather then of the latter. Again, the most ancient Doctors affirm that
himself penned it from the very beginning to the end with his own hand. Saint
In loc.
Ambrose says, Ubi holographa manus est, etc: Where the whole writing is his
own hand there can be no falsehood. In loc.
Primasius uses the word pers^ripsi. In loc.
Theophylact brings in Paul speaking thus; I am enforced even with mine own
hand to write this Epistle to you. In loc.
O^cumenius calls it (...), In loc.
Anselme, non notaris manu sed mea. This then is Theophylact. Anselm. Aretius.
a testification of his exceeding great love and care toward them, and it is a
president for Pastors how they should be diligent in their ministry both
absent and present; if resident upon their charge, they must be faithful in
winning Gods people to the Gospel: if non-resident upon lawful occasions (as
Paul here) fearful lest their minds should be carried from the truth unto
contrary doctrine, that being absent in body, yet they may be 1. Cor. 5. 3.
present in spirit, and present by letters, having a greater care of the flock
then of the fleece.

As many as desire with outward appearance] Here begins the recapitulation, in
which our Apostle like a good Orator artificially repeates all those things he
would have especially remembered in the whole discourse; now the maine
proposition of all this large letter unto the Galathians is, Cap. 2. v. 16.
that a man is not justified by circumcision, or any works of the Law: but by
the faith of Jesus Christ. The which is all one with his assertion here, that
Christ crucified is the sole means of our salvation, and only ground of our
spiritual rejoicing. Neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any
thing at all, but a creature renewed, that is, endued with Cap. 5. 6.
faith working through love. He does accuse therefore such as obtruded Cap. 1.
6.
another Gospel, an opposite doctrine, but bless Gods Israel, even as many as
walk according unto this rule.

The false teachers are described by See supplement of Mr. Perkins Co^. Galat.
in loc.
five properties, as first, They desire with outward appearance to please
carnally. Secondly, they constrain men to the strict observing of their own
devised religion. Thirdly, the mark they shoot at is to shun storms and
persecution for the Cross of Christ. Fourthly, they compel men to keep that
law which they will not observe themselves. Fifthly, they pretend Gods honor
but intend only their own vain glory, that they might rejoice in your flesh.
Aretius in loc.
Other reduce these five to four: Flattery, Cowardice, Dissimulation,
Boasting. Luther in loc.
Other to three: first, shunning of the cross: secondly, seeking of their own
glory: thirdly, teaching of that themselves understand not. All happily may be
referred unto their hypocrisy; for notwithstanding their fair shows and
outward appearance they seek not herein their brethrens good, and Gods glory;
but their own honor and ease, that they might have Cum dignitate otium, a
Lordly living and a lasie life. Sike Churchmen are like the Church pinnacle
pointing upward, poysing downward.

In this description of false Doctors, if thy sight be quick, thou may
apprehend the lively picture both of a Schismaticke and heretic, who though
outwardly they seem never so great, yet are they the least in the Church of
God. According to that of Christ, Mat. 5. 19.
Whosoever shall break one of the least Commandments and teach men so, shall
be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. As Contra. lib. Petil. lib. 2.
cap. 61.
Augustine paraphrastically, Qui soluerit and doeuerit, id est, docuerit verbis
quod soluerit factis minimus erit.

If any shall demand how the false brethren in urging Circumcision had the
world at will, and were made free from persecution? Hieron. Primalius, Aquin.
in loc.
Answer is made, that the Roman Emperors, Caius, Octauian, Tyberius, had given
liberty to the Jews to live according to their own law, without molestation
or disturbance thorowout all the Roman Empire. So that if a Jew turned
Christian, he had the privileges of a Jew so long as he kept the ceremonial
rites of Moses: whereas they who taught that ceremonies were abrogated, and
that men were justified only by faith in Christ, wanted those privileges and
so were persecuted of the Jews, and of the Gentiles too, 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Christ crucified being a stumbling block unto the Jews, and unto the
Grecians foolishness. Now the Ansel. in loc.
pseudo-Apostle here, lest they should suffer affliction for the cross of
Christ, invented a new gospel, and made an hotch-potch of religion. For as the
Christians in the countries of Mat. Dressorus, vti Io. Pory descript. of
Africa. page 400.
Prester John, and in Augustines age the Augustine. contra Cres. lib. 1. cap 31.
Symmachiani received both Circumcision and Baptism: so they conjoined in the
matter of salvation Messiah and Moses, justification by faith, and
justification by works, hereby seeking carnally to please both the Christian
and the Jew: the Christian in preaching Christ's cross: the Jew by pressing
circumcision of the Law. Desiring to serve two contrary masters at one time,
God and Mammon, as it is in the Gospel appointed to be read this day. The
Papist then in being a ^. Latimer.
mingle mangler, is branded with this infallible character of a corrupt
teacher, and so is the mungrill in religion according fire and water,
Antichristians and Christians in the chief Oracles and Articles of holy faith,
and so are carnal Gospellers who desire to have Christ, but they will none of
his Cross: They would be with him upon Mount Tabor, but not upon Mount
Caluarie.

God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ]
The sufferings of the faithful for Christ, are termed often the sufferings of
Christ: 2. Cor. 1. 5. as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, etc. And
Colossians 1. 24. I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh
for his bodies sake, which is the Church. And so Christ himself witnesses in
saying Act. 9. 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Saul did no violence to Christ, it was
all done to his Church: but he that touches it, touches the Zach. 2. 8.
apple of his eye. There is a more lively feeling in the head then in other
members of the body; for the little toe being hurt, instantly the head shows
it self by the countenance to grieve thereat: so Christ our head is touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, ever suffering, while we suffer which are
his body. Luther. Ar^tius.
Some Divines therefore by the Cross of Christ, understand Paul's affliction
for preaching Christ crucified. As if he should say, let other boast as they
list in avoiding persecution for the Gospel, herein I will rejoice, that I am
esteemed Act. 5. 41.
worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ, 2. Cor. 12. 10.
I take delight in reproaches, in necessities, in tribulations, in anguish for
Christ's sake. But because the words ((...)) are both exceptiue, making the
sense thus, I will glory in nothing but in the cross of Christ: and
exclusive, only in the cross of Christ, and in nothing else: I subscribe to
Tract, 43. in Joan.
Augustine, In loc.
Chrysostom* Com. posterior. in loc.
Hierome, and See B. Bilson tract upon this text in the beginning of his
conclusion to the reader.
other who construe this of Christ's all-sufficient sacrifice for our sins on
the cross, whereby the world is crucified in us, and we to the world, Christ
himself being our 1. Cor. 3. 31.
redemption, wisdom, righteousness: that, as it is Jeremy 9. 24.
written, he that glories should glory in the Lord, and make boast of him all
the day long, as it is Psalm. 35. 28.

As this exposition is most agreeable to the letter, so most answerable to
Paul's intent: as if he should have written thus, Although other make their
rejoicing in circumcision, I will rejoice in nothing else but in the cross of
Christ, which Theophylact. in loc.
abrogates circumcision. And well might he speak so, for that in Christ
crucified are hid not only the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2.
3. but of fullness and grace, John 1. 16. and of every spiritual blessing,
Ephesians. 1. 3. In a word, all Aquin. in loc.
things of which usually men boast, are in Christ's cross. Does any man glory
in wisdom? 1. Cor. 2. 2.
Paul desired to know nothing but Christ crucified, as being assured, that this
knowledge is eternal life, Ioh. 17. 3. Does any boast of riches and honor? by
Christ all true believers are made Kings and Priests, Apocal. 1. 6. Does any
rejoice in liberty? by Christ we are delivered from the bonds and hands of
our enemies: Luke 1. 74. Does any delight in the Princes favor? behold the
King of Kings Ephesians. 1. 6.
accepts of us in Christ. All men desire comfort and content, and therefore
let us (as Paul here) rejoice in Christ crucified, in whom only we are Coloss.
2. 10.
complet, and by whom also we have right to those things which eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, neither can the heart of man conceive.

Gods Israel walking according to this rule, though they bear the marks of
affliction in their body: yet have they peace of conscience in their soul.
For being new creatures in Christ, the world cannot crucify them any way more
then they crucify the world. As the world accounts them the 1. Cor. 4. 13.
filth and of-scouring of all things: even so they repute all things of the
world as Philip. 3. 8.
dung, to win Christ, and to glory in his cross.

Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit] In this
adieu our Apostle concludes his epistle with a great Emphasis, every word being
a strong reason to confound his adversaries, opposing first our Lord Jesus
Christ the master of the house, to Moses who was but a Heb. 3. 5.
servant in the house. Secondly, the grace of Christ to the merit of inherent
righteousness, Theophylact. Anselm. Caietan.
infinuating that we are saved by grace, freeing us from circumcision and other
works of the Law. Thirdly, the Primasius.
spirit, which is the object of grace, to the flesh, in which the enemies of
Christ's cross gloried so much. And lastly, noting in the word brethren, his
lowly, but their lordly carriage toward the Churches of Galatia. The brief of
all is, Luther.
I have taught you Christ purely, delivering unto you wholesome doctrine
touching faith and good manners, I have entreated you, chidden you, threatened
you, letting pass nothing which I thought profitable for you. I can say no
more, but that I heartily pray, that our Lord Jesus Christ would bless my
labors, and govern you with his holy Spirit for ever. See the peace of God in
the Liturgy.

The Epistle,
MATTHEW. 6. 24. No man can serve two masters.
THis Gospel is Euthym. and R^rt. in loc. Idem Iansen. con. cap. 42.
parted into a

General rule: No man can serve two masters. Particular instance: Ye cannot
serve God and mammon. Whereupon is inferred that we may not be careful what
we shall eat or drink, but that we should rather seek first the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then all these things shall be
ministered unto us.
No man can serve two masters] There is no rule so general but has
exceptions, and so this common proverb is confined within his lists and
limits, as Interpreters observe. For one man may serve two well agreeing
masters inioyning the same thing, as the men of Tyrus 1 Kings 5. and 2. Chron.
2.
hewing Cedar trees out of Lebanon for the Temple, served both Hiram and
Solomon. Again, this axiom must be construed Pontan. in loc.
in sens^ composito, not diuiso: for otherwise we may serve diverse masters at
diverse times, as Luke 19.
Zaccheus at the first served the world, yet afterward he followed Christ. The
meaning of this adage then is, that no man at one time, can serve two masters
inioyning Theophylact. Euthym. Anselm.
contrary duties. As for example, God and the flesh are two such masters, I
see (says Romans 7. 23.
Paul) another law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind: for the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
two are contrary one to the other: Galat. 5. 17. We cannot serve these two,
but we must love the one and hate the other, or else lean to the one and
despise the other: we must be servants unto God, and not vassals unto lust.

Concupiscence is like to a fire, and our body like to a seething pot. Now the
pot is cooled four ways especially: first, by taking away some of the fuel
under the pot: even so the less we drink or eat, the lesser is the heat of
our lust. It is fasting spettle that kills this serpent, Cassianus. Collat. 5.
incrementum gastrimargiae initium luxuriae: howsoever See Them. 22 quaest.
153. art. 4 and C^tan. ibid.
delectatio venereorum be the end, yet gulling is the matter and beginning of
incontinence. The Poets feigned venerem natam ex exectis Saturni virilibus, to
^signifie that saturitie is the father of wantonness, and uncleanness P
Fulgent. Mytholog. lib. 2. ^ab. de venere.
the Greg. Moral. lib. 31. cap. 31.
daughter of surfeiting. Terent. in Eunucho.
Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Uenus: Lady Uenus dwells at the sign of the Iuie
bush; where there is cleanness of teeth, usually there is no filthiness of
body: but if we stuff our corpse like cloake-bags, making our mouths as
tunnels, our throats as wine-pipes, our bellies as barrels; if we fill them
full of strong drink and new wine, there must follow some vent, according to
that of Epist. Amando, tom. 3. fol. 135.
Hierome: Uentrem distentum cibo and vini potionibus irrigatum voluptas
genitalium sequitur, nam pro ordine membrorum ordo vitiorum.

Secondly, the pot is cooled by stirring of it; so the furious heat of lust is
much abated by the stirring of our bodies, and exercising of our minds.
Unchaste folly for the most part is begot of an idle brain, hatched in a lasie
body.

Ovid.
Quaeritur Aegistus qua re sit factus adulter? In promptu causa est, desidiosus
erat. The Crab-fish when as the Oyster does open, flings into her a little
stone, so that she cannot shut her self again, and so the Crab deuoureth the
Oyster: Hierome.
Our adversary the Devil is like the Crab, and we like the Oyster, if he
find us idle and gaping, he takes his opportunity to confound us. Otia
puluinar Satanae, Cupid shootes in a slugge, and hits none but the sluggish.
Albeit Rome was so well occupied as to make Idleness a divine sovereignty:
yet there was never a Temple within the City dedicated quieti and otio, sed
extra collinam portam illi ignauo numini templum dedicarunt. To signify this
much (as our reverend Dr. Humfred. in vita. Iu^lli. page 47.
Jewel observes) that no man borne in Rome, or Gentleman well brought up,
should vouchsafe Idleness any honor. Bez^ in vita. Caluini.
Calvin was wont to say, that a lasie life was of all other most tedious unto
him. And every generous spirit resolves as Reusner. in symbolis.
Maximinus: Quo mayor sum, eo magis laboro, and quo magis laboro, eo mayor sum.
In holy Genesis 27.
Bible we read that Jacob under the name of Esau, which signifies Ambros de
Ca^ and Abel, lib. 1. cap. 4.
working, obtained his fathers blessing, and that none shall receive reward at
the last day, but such as have been laborers in the Lords Vineyard: Matthew.
20. 8.

Thirdly, we may cool the Pot by casting cold water into it: in like manner
abundance of tears is a good means to quench outrageous flames of this unruly
fire. The Amalekites, as we find in 1. Sam. 30.
sacred History, burned Ziklag, and took their wives and children prisoners:
then David and the people lift up their voices, and wept until they could
weep no more. After that David asked counsel of God, and followed after them,
and smote them (as it is in the Text) even from the twilight unto the evening
of the next morrow, so there escaped not a man of them save four hundred young
men which rode upon camels and fled. Lust is an Amalekite, it burns our
Ziklag, and sets on fire this little City, captiuating our senses, and making
them prisoners unto it: but if we with David shall weep, so that we can weep
no more; if we cast cold water into the Pot, if our eyes be a fountain of
tears, if we lament day and night the slain of the daughter: assuredly we
shall pursue the brutish Amalekits, and overcome our untamed affections, we
shall smite them from the twilight of our youth, until the evening of our old
age. Some young men may escape, that is, some vain words and unclean thoughts
as yet may remain in us: but as for the old Amelekits, I mean gross faults
and foul transgressions, God will grant us power and grace to kill all them,
and so we shall recover all that the Amelekits had taken, we shall rescue our
wives and daughters, our affections most dear to us heretofore captiuated unto
lust, shall now do good service to God, acknowledging this infallible rule
that no man can serve two masters. God and the lust of the flesh.

Fourthly, the Pot is cooled by taking it altogether from the fire; so we may
the sooner cool this hot lust which so boyleth in us, if we shun
opportunities and occasions of sin. Saint Paul wills us to resist and fight
against other vices, Io sares. policrat. l. 8. c. 6. Idem Aqain. A^selm.
Caietan. in 1. Cor. 6.
but as for fornication he says, flee fornication, 1. Corinthians. 6. 18. Cupid is
a boy, therefore his shoot cannot be good; and blind, therefore his aim must
needs be bad: he can hit none but such as stand right before him, and make
themselves a Butt for his arrows. It is a strange, yet a true rule:

Tu fugiendo fuga, nam fuga sola fuga est. And as good Council,

Ne sedeas, sedeas: ne pereas, pereas. Luther. tom. 4. in Genesis
It was as great a miracle that Joseph in his Mistrisse arms should not burn
with lust, as it was for the three children to walk in the Firie-fornace
without any scorching. Young men of a little flame make a great fire; whereas
the fault is not so much in our years as in our selves. For Daniel a young man
reproved the lascivious Elders; Joseph a young man resisted the temptations of
his own Mistrisse; John the blessed Evangelist a young man, Hieron. aduers.
Iouin. l. 1.
admodum adolescens and poene puer, and yet as the John 19. 26. 20. 2.
Scripture witnesses, he was the best beloved Disciciple. But young men in
our time run and ride to the Wood for fuel to make the fire greater, using
strange cates and delicates, meats and medicines, rather poisons to increase
the flames of concupiscence, bragging of much villainy done, yea boasting of
more then was done. Such a Gallant See coufes. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Augustine was in his unruly youth, until almighty God effectually called him
home by a voice from heaven, crying Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.
Toll and lege, toll and lege: Take the book and read: and taking up the
Bible, the first Text he lighted on was that of Paul, Romans 13. 13. Walk
honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering
and wantonness: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for
the flesh to fulfill the lust of it. After this Augustine was no more servile
to sin, but a true servant unto Christ; he now well understood my text that
he could not serve two masters, God, and the lust of his flesh.

I know S. Augustine had afterward his infirmities, as himself confesses
ingenuously: but he was not Ephe. 4. 19.
given over unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness even with greediness.
It is true, that concupiscence so long as we are clothed and clogged with
flesh, is not extinguished thoroughly. Joshua 15. 63
The children of Judah could not cast out the Iebusites, but they dwelled at
Jerusalem until this day: lust is a very Iebusite, it will dwell with us so
long as we dwell in houses of Clay. The best man living may confess with Rom
7. 19.
Paul, I do not the good things, which I would, but the evil which I would
not, that do I. Which I would not I do, because, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
whosoever is borne of God sins not, absolutely with plenary consent: his
will in sinning is not voluntas, but velleitas, as the Thom. part. 3. quaest.
21. ar^. 4.
School distinguishes. A mariner in a tempest does cast his goods into the
water; a true man assaulted on the highway gives his purse to the thief, yet
not with full consent: even so the children of God in the sin of incontinence
transgress wittingly, yet with reluctation before and repentance after: whereas
other men in a reprobate sense, both approve their filthiness before, and boast
of it after. Lucrecia the fair Lady of Rome was assaulted violently by
Tarquinius: De ciuit. Dei, lib. cap. 19. 1.
Augustine writing of this rape says excellently, Duo fuerunt, and vnus
adulterium admisit. There were two actors, but one adulterer, there was a
conjunction of bodies, but a distraction of minds. A regenerate man's cause is
like to that of Lucrece, sin is rather done de illo quam ab illo.

I speak not this to encourage any in their uncleanness, God forbid. Let
every man in the fear of God use the means before prescribed for the cooling
of intemperate lust boiling in his flesh, and then if he cannot expel, this
Iebusite, if he cannot cast out this diuellby fasting and prayer, if he
cannot extinguish this outrageous fire with watery tears; let this be his
comfort, that God requires only that lust be not our Master, that it reign
not in our mortal bodies, Romans 6. 12. The Theodoret apud Oecumen. Theophy^act.
and alij.
Greek Fathers observe well upon that place, that Paul said not, let not sin
tyrannize, but let not sin reign. Be not sins voluntary soldiers, in Romans
6. 13.
giving your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: but if ye be
sins pressed soldiers against your will, it is not you that offend, Romans 7. 20
but the sin that dwells in you. Lust may command as a tyrant, and yet we
may perform good service to God: but if we submit our selves unto it as our
king, if we suffer it to reign, making our members servants to uncleanness
and iniquity, then assuredly lust is our Lord and love: for my Text must be
true, No man can serve two masters.

As God and the flesh, August. l. 2. de ser. Dom. in m^nt. Idem Anse^m. Vega.
Culman. in loc.
so God and the devil are two contrary masters: for the one is truth it self,
I am the way, and the truth, Ioh. 14. 6. the other is a liar, and the father
thereof, Ioh. 8. 44. so that all such as speak the truth from their heart
dwell in Gods tabernacle, Psalm. 15. but such as delight in lying, are fit for
the devils service. Now there is Thom. 22. quaest. 110. art. 1.
materiale mendacium and formale: the which distinction is more plainly
delivered by the grammarians, who make a difference between the reporting of
an untruth, and the forging of a lie. For, as Nigidius in Noct At. l. 11. cap.
11.
A. Gellius, he that does lie deceives other; he that reports an untruth is
deceived himself: and as Sent. lib. 3. did. 38.
Lombard, a man may be true that relates a thing untrue: for as Philosophers
and Divines have determined mentiri est contra mentemire, August. encherid. ca.
22.
to speak that with our mouth which we think not in our mind. Enunciatio
falsa cum August. contra mendat. ad Consen. cap. 12.
intention fallendi. The servant of God often vtters that which is false, and
yet he is verax, for that he thought it had been true; and the devils servant
sometime speaks the truth, and yet he is mendax, for that he thought it to
be false, as Augustine and Lombard have well observed.

Thou may easily discern by this cognizance, to what master the servant of
servants and his retinue belong, namely to Don Beel-zebub, the mint-master of
equivocation and forgerie. Not to meddle with their old Legend, and new
Calendar of Saints, in which are more lies than leaves. To pass by their
Pasquils and inuectiue libels, as their Per. Ric Verstegan. Antuerp
Theatrum erudelitatum, the relations of Caietan annexed to Genebrards
Chronology, Stapletons tres Thomae, Mer. gallo bell. mundus furiosus, Gifforas
Caluino-turcismus, together with the seditious pamphlets of Allen, Sanders,
Campian, Bristo, Rob. Parsons; all which are not only hyperbolici, but as Dr.
Sutlif.
one wittily, hyperdiabolici. Not to mention here their insufferable
correcting, yea corrupting of all authors, only give me leave to remember how
the Jesuits impudently delivered in pulpit and Viuarius epist.
print that old Beza was dead, and that forsooth he died a Roman Catholic.
Marianus Scotus, lib. 3. Chron. adan. 854. Chron. ad anno 854.
Sigesbertus gemblacensis, Supp^tat ad anno 855.
Martianus polonus, the penner of the Chronicle called Fasciculus temporum in
fol. 66. Uolateran, Com. Col. 657. Lugdun.
lib. 22. Iacobus Bergomensis de Claris mulieribus, cap. 143, En. 9. lib. 1.
Sabellicus, Ioannes lucidus de emendatione temporum, lib. 8. Polychron. lib.
5. cap. 32.
Ranulphus, Lib. de Claris. foens.
Boccace, In vita Joan. 8
Platina, Nauclerus, and See Dr. Morton. apolog. cat. lib. 1. cap. 19. and
Alex. Cook: Po^e Ioane, p. 3
other arrant Romanists affirm directly, that there was a Pope Ioane: who
being an Nam papa pa ter patri^ peperit paruulum puerulum.
harlot, well became the seat of the Babylonian whore. Yet Auentius annal.
Boior. lib. 4. Onuphrius annot. in Platin. Genebrard. in Chron. adan. 854.
Bellarm. de Rom pont. lib. 3. cap. 24. and all our modern Iesuited Papists
obstinately contradict this history, seeking against their own knowledge, to
persuade the world, that it is a mere fable. By which it is apparent that they
gain more by this one illiterall art of lying, then they do by the seven
liberal Sciences.

As God and the flesh, and God and the Devil, so to give Christ's instance, God
and the world are two Iam. 4. 4.
contrary masters. And therefore whereas Ardens in ^oc.
some desire to serve God only, some the world only, some both: in their
devotion as it were Psalm. 207. 26.
carried up to the heaven, in their avarice down again to the deep: our
blessed Savior says peremptorily, Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Chrysostom.
H^ron. Aret. in loc.
He does not say, ye cannot have God and mammon; for Mary and Martha may dwell
together, righteousness and riches may stand together: but ye cannot serve
God and mammon; for he that is the servant of God must be the master of his
money.

The children of Israel, as it is recorded Exodus 14. walked upon dry ground
through the red sea, because, says the text, the waters were divided: but the
cruel Egyptians pursuing after Gods people were drowned because the sea
returned again to his course. Anton. de Rampen. in fig. Eiblieu.
Mystically, such as divide their worldly substance, distributing to the poor,
lending to the needy, pass through the maine stream of the worlds current
safely, their riches and honor being unto them as the waters unto the children
of Israel, a wall on the right hand, and a wall on the left: but hold-fast
Egyptians, auarous oppressors being more cunning in substraction then in
division, are drowned in the puddle. When S. Peter casts his net over them,
alas they run themselves so deep into the mud, as that it cannot get under
them to dragge them out.

Mammon is a Lord in opinion only, Iuuenal.
Nos facimus ^ Lib. 2. cap. 7.
te fortunadeam, etc. and as Pliny speaks, Omnibus locis, omnibus horis,
omnium vocibus fortuna solainvocatur, etc. Aret. in loc.
But almighty God is by right and indeed a Lord of all things, of all men
especially. For (as Tertul. cont. Hermogen. Idem Vega. in loc.
Divines observe) God is not called Lord in the Scripture till he created man.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, and God said, Let there
be light, etc. Again God said, Let there be a firmament, etc. but after man
once was made, the Genesis 2.
text often calls him Lord: The Lord God made the man of the dust of the
ground, and the Lord God planted a garden eastward, and the Lord took the man
and put him in the garden of Eden, commanding him, and saying, Thou shall eat
freely, etc. We must therefore serve none but this Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Lord, first seeking his kingdom, making him our master, and Mammon our
servant: for if we serve God most, and seek his kingdom first, August. de ser
D^m in monte lib. 2. Idem Euthym. Anselm. Marlorat. in loc.
respecting his glory and honor before all other things, above all other things:
then all other things, as Christ promises here, which are necessary for us,
shall be ministered unto us. See Epist. 3. Sund* after Trinity.

Thus I have showed how no man can serve two masters, as two, but Caietan. in
loc*
as one. For Gloss. and Iansen. con. cap. 42.
every man is either a willing or unwilling servant: if willing, he shall hate
the one, and love the other: if unwilling, he will Pati^tur, (...) August.
sustine. bit: vti vulgar.
endure the one, and despise the other* And yet, as I said in the beginning,
one man may serve diverse masters at diverse times, albeit they require diverse,
yea contrary service. Matthew sometimes an instrument of Satan, afterward
Christ's Apostle. Solomon sometime serving God, sometime serving his lusts. The
blessed thief servant to the world in his life, was the child of God at his
death. All sin is Augustine.
either a thought, a word, or a deed against the divine law. Who did ever
offend in thought more then Paul? Acts 9. 1.
breathing out threatenings against the Disciples of the Lord. Who did ever
offend in word more than Peter? Mat. 26 72. 74.
forswearing his own master. Who did ever offend more in deed than David? who
bound two great sins together, adultery and murder: And yet the God of i 2.
Sam. 11.
compassion and father of mercy retained all these sinners again in his
service. The which examples are recorded in holy Bible, partly for instruction
of such as stand, and partly for the consolation of such as have fallen.
Ambrose de Abraham, lib. 1 cap. 6.
Instruunt patriarchae non solum docentes sed etiam errantes. If N^e was
drowned himself with wine, who foretold the drowning of the world with water;
if Sampson the strongest was overcome by the weaker vessel; if Solomon the
most wise committed folly, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Again, these
things are registered in Scripture for the comfort of such as have fallen
already. Did God forgive Lots incest, Paul's butchering of the Saints, Aarons
idolatry? then a weak conscience from these premises, and upon Gods gracious
promises may conclude, my sins are no greater, and Gods mercy can be no less.

When Theodosius excused a foul fact, because David has done the like: Saint
Ambrose made this answer: Qui secutus es errantem, sequere poenitentem. Has
thy mouth blasphemed with Peter? let thine eyes then weep with Peter. Aug. de
Ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 24.
Either thou must be a Sodomite, or a Nineuite; a Sodomite suffering for sin,
or a Nineuite repenting for sin. Yet forty days and Nineue shall be
destroyed, Jonas 3. 4. Nineue was overthrown, and yet not overthrown, as
Saint Epist* ad Damasum. tom. 2. fol. 132.
Hierome sweetly, Quae peccatis perit, fletibus stetit. It was overthrown by
sin, but builded up again by repentance. Euersa est Niniue quae mala erat,
and aedificata bo^a quae non erat, says Vbi sup.
Augustine. Let us not look to Sodom, but set our eyes on Niniue; for if we
will resist our spiritual enemy, we must arm our selves with sackcloth, and
put on headpeeces of ashes: if we mean to serve but one master only, let us,
renouncing all other services, instantly with all haste and with all our heart
turn to the Lord our God. 1. Pet. 4. 3.
It is sufficient that we have spent the time past after the lust of the
Gentiles, in wantonness, gluttony, drunkenness, etc. let us now spend as
much time as remains in the flesh, after the will of God. It is a monstrous
absurdity, that serving but two masters all our life, we should sacrifice the
best of our days unto the worst, and then offer up the worst of our days unto
the best. Again, let us, I beseech you, repent with all our heart thoroughly,
Lament. 2. 19.
power out thy soul like water before the face of the Lord* If thou power out
milk, the color remains in the pan: if Wine, the sent remains in the
vessel: if Honey, some taste remains in the Pot. He therefore that will not
Saluian. lib. 5. de gubernat. De^.
ipsius poenitentiae poenitere, Ronauent. Diaet. cap. 11.
must not power out his heart like milk, lest he be known still by his
color: nor like wine, lest he smell of wicked imaginations: nor like honey,
lest he keep a smacke of his old tricks: but like clean water, that no
taste, or smell, or color may remain. If Mammon be thy master, observe him;
if God be thy Lord, follow him: 1. Kin. 18. 21
halt not between two opinions, sit not upon two stools, lie not down
between Genesis ^9. 14.
two burdens, serve not two masters, either you must hate the one, and love
the other, or else lean to the one, and despise the other.

Preached at Paul's Cross, Febr. 8. ann. 1600. the very same hour that Robert
Earl of Essex entering the City with his unfortunate troop, found by woeful
experience the words of my Text to be true, that no man can serve two masters.
The Epistle.
EPHESIANS. 3. 13. I desire that ye faint not, because of my tribulations, etc.
THis Epistle contains a double request of Paul:

One to men: I desire that ye faint not, because of my tribulations. And that
Inrespect of the Cause: for that I suffer for your sakes. Consequent: for that
it is your praise.
Another to God: For this cause, etc. consisting of A Petition: I bow my knees
unto the Father, etc. Thanksgiving: Unto him that is able, etc.

I desire] The Vide Zanchium in ^oc.
Syriac has it thus: I desire that my spirit faint not in my tribulations. And
the bare words of the Greek in Exposit. prior. in loc.
Hieromes opinion, afford the same sense. But if we shall examine the
precedent part of this Chapter, I Paulam the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
Gentiles, etc. and the subsequent, I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. That ye may be strengthened with might by his spirit in the
inner man; it will appear most evidently, that this Text ought to be construed
as our English translation here reads, I desire you that ye faint not; it
being one, yea the only Aretius in loc. Idem Aquin. and Marlorat. argument.
hu^us. epist.
maine point of all this Epistle, which is nothing else but an exhortation unto
perseverance.

That I suffer for your sakes] An argument from the causes of his affliction:
as if he should say, Ye men and brethren of Ephesus are Zanchius.
both efficient and final cause that I suffer, and therefore no reason that ye
should faint because of my tribulations. Efficient, being a prisoner in Rome
for the Caietan.
Gospel, even for that doctrine which I taught you. Final, enduring this
imprisonment for your Aquin. Kilius.
good, and Anselm. Sarcerius.
example, that ye likewise may continue constant in the sincere profession of
Christianity. Paul then suffered not for his own fault, nor yet for their
faction: it was only for defending the truth, even for preaching 1 Cor. 1. 23.
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Grecians
foolishness. And therefore such as subscribe to the Confession of our Church,
acknowledging all our articles of religion orthodoxall and pure; cannot in
suffering a little cross for certain questions about matters of indifferency,
gain to themselves or their followers any true glory. For they know that
Master Fox in the martyrdom of Bishop Ridley and Latymer.
B. Ridley went to the stake cheerfully, wearing a Tippet of Velvet, and a
corner cap: and yet as that good old man Father Latymer prophesied, at his
burning there was such a candle lighted in England, as shall never be put out.
John Philpot was an Archdeacon, and Doctor Master Fox in the Martyrdom of
Doctor Rowland Tailor of Hadley.
Rowland Tailor used the Service book to his comfort all the time of his
imprisonment, and commended it at his death as the last token of his love to
his dear wife: Yet these men (let envy be judge) were the Diamonds of the
Churches ring in that age. Whereas if the daily martyred B. Farrar, or that
vigilant Pastor B. Hooper had sacrificed their lives in the quarrel against
Clericall habits, and other comely Ceremonies, enjoined by their religious
Sovereign King Edward the sixth: Judicious Fox would never have numbered them
among the glorious Martyrs of Christ. I say then unto such as boast of their
persecution in this kind, not for the body, but only for the swaddling cloutes
of holy religion: as 1. Cor. 5 6.
Paul once to the Corinthians in another case, your rejoicing is not good. See
Epist. 2. Sund: after Easter.

Which is your praise] This clause may be referred (as Caietan. Zanchius.
Interpretors observe) both to Paul's affliction, and their perseverance. To
Paul's affliction, it is your glory that ye have such a Pastor as is the Ephesians.
3. 1.
prisoner of Jesus Christ, in bonds not for any scandalous crime, but for 1.
Pet. 2. 19.
conscience toward God, even for preaching among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ, as it is verse. 8. of this present Chapter. If ye rightly
consider my tribulation, it is to make you Sarcerius.
glorious, and it cannot dismay Aretius.
but rather encourage you, knowing that God will Primasius.
reward our light affliction which is but for a moment, with a far most
excellent and eternal weight of glory: 2. Cor. 4. 17. And if my trouble for
the truth occasion unto you such praise; Theophylact.
how much more glory shall your own constancy procure before God and men, If
ye faint not under the Cross, but continue faithful unto the end. The church
is like Abraham's Ram tied in a bush of thorns, Genesis 22. 13. Tribulation for
the Gospel are the Galat. 6. 17.
marks of the Lord Jesus, in which 2. Cor. 12. 10
our Apostle took great pleasure, being more proud of his iron fetters, then a
bragging Courtier of his golden chain. If they be blessed who die in the
Lord, how blessed are they who die for the Lord? Their deaths are not mortes,
but Clerus Romans apud Cyp. epist. 2^.
immortalitates, as Ammian. Mar^el. hist. lib 20.
Julian honored all those who were slain in his war: so Christ and his
Church honor such as are martyred in the Lords battle, Celebri potius laud
quam luctu: right dear in the sight of the Lord is the Psalm. 116. 13.
death of his Saints, undergoing in Christ's cause Christ's Cross.

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] As if
he should say, Anselm. Sarcer.
Because you cannot do this of your selves, I pray for it, and that not coldly
but Theophylact.
earnestly, bowing my knees of the body with Acts 7. 60.
Stephen, and of the heart with In his prayer
Manasses, not unto any Saints in heaven, much less to their senseless Images
on earth, Psalm. 115. 5.
having mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear not: but unto
him only that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask
or think, to the Father of 2. Cor. 1. 3.
mercies, and God of 1. Pet. 5 10.
all grace, from whom comes Iam. 1. 17.
every good and perfect gift. Royard. in l^c.
Infirmitatis nostrae est deficere, sed Deireficere: To God then I bow my
knees, and yet not to God simply, Zanchius.
but to God, as the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 3. 17.
in whom he is well pleased. To him I make my request, able, because God,
willing, because the Father of Christ, to hear me and help you.

Which is father of all that is called father in heaven and in earth] According
to the present text of our Communion book, the meaning of Paul is, that God is
the Father of all fathers in earth. As of the Prince which is our civil
Father, because Prou. 8. 15.
by him Kings reign: of the Pastor which is our Ecclesiastical 1. Cor. 4. 15.
Father, because Preachers and Teachers are his Ephesians. 4. 11.
ordinance: of the Parent which is our natural Father, because Psalm. 127. 4.
children are the gift of the Lord. And father of all our Zanchius.
fathers and progenitors in heaven, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. and father of
the glorious Angels also, which are fathers, as is Sedulius. Aquin.
supposed one to another, and all of them unto Anselm. Royard.
v^ in respect of there tuition and illumination, as being the ministers of God
for our bodily Psalm. 91. 11.
preservation and spiritual Galat. 3. 19.
erudition. And so God being (...), may be termed, and that not unfitly, the
father of all that is called father in heaven and in earth, Theophylact.
Primasius. Sarcerius.
hac ratione est omnium pater, and ab eo patres caeteri nominantur. Our
translation here then is not so senseless, as Defens. for not sub scrib. part.
1 cap. 18.
they who did except against it.

Our latter English Bibles I confess read better, of whom is named the whole
family that is in heaven and in earth. And of whom (as Marlorat. Zanchius.
Interpreters observe) may be referred unto God the Father, and unto Christ
his Son. To the Father, Beza.
who did adopt the whole family, that is, all the Church in Christ. To Christ
Jesus our Lord: Calvin.
for the Catholic Church as well triumphant in heaven, as militant on earth,
consisting of all nations, peoples, tribes, has her name from him. Caietan.
As all of Caesar's family were called Caesarians, and all of the tribe of
Israel, Israelites: even so such as are of Gods house professing Christ, are
named Christians. In Christ all men and Angels are contributes of one kindred,
Galat. 3. 28.
there is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Aretius.
Here then is an other argument enforcing our Apostles exhortation. If all of
us have received this honorable style to be called Christians of Christ, in
that we profess Christianity; let us not be faint but fervent, not wavering
but constantin our faith unto the end, and in the end. For if we profess
Christ in words, and Tit. 1. 16.
deny him in our works, assuredly we shall have nothing but a name,
nomeninane crimen immane: but if any turn Turk or Jew, 1 Cor. 12. 3.
defying Jesus, he shall not have so much as a name.

That he would grant you according to the riches of his glorie] The
Theophylact. Occumen.
Greek fathers conioyne this and the subsequent verse, making both one
request: I desire the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant you,
according to the riches of his glory, that ye may be so strenghned with might
by his spirit in the inner man, as that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith. Zanchius.
Other have distinguished these petitions, in the first whereof observe these
five circumstances especially:

1. Who does give? The father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. What? That ye may
be strengthened with might. 3. Out of what coffer? Out of the riches of his
glory. 4. By what instrument? By his spirit. 5. In what part? In the inner man.
The word grant or give does exclude Marlorat.
humane merit, and show that our perseverance proceeds only from the riches of
Gods glory, which our Apostle calls in the second chapter of this Epistle,
verse 7, exceeding riches of his grace. But he terms it here glory
Sarcerius. Aretius.
because the constant resolution of the faithful is Gods glory, for as much
as his power is made perfect through their weakness, 2. Cor. 12. 9. Or it may
be Royard. in loc.
thus expounded according to the precise letter; It is not for a great man of
an opulent fortune to give sparingly, wherefore God out of the riches of his
glory gives unto all men Iam. 1. 5.
liberally, Rom 8. 32.
for if he spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death, how
shall he not with him give us all things also? The King of glory cannot Bez a
mayor annot. inloc.
ex opulentia gloriosa give but exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think. Paul's addition is very remarkable, the riches of his glory: For as he
shows else where, the goodness of God toward us, it is not a bare, but a
Ephesians. 2. 4.
rich mercy: not a little, but a Ibid.
great love: not a naked or a single, but a 2. Cor. 12 9.
sufficient, yea Romans 5 20.
superabundant grace. So long then as God is rich in mercy, says Sermon. 61. in
Cant.
Bernard, I cannot be poor in merit.

That ye may be strengthened] Calvin. Marlorat.
Here we may learn that the Church of God militant on earth is not in her
full strength, it is always growing and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.
increasing more and more, we may profit* but we cannot be perfect till this
corruption has put on incorruption, the most resolute Soldier in the
spiritual war has every day need to be strengthened, and that with might;
because we fight not against weaklings but against powers and spiritual
potentates in high places, Ephesians. 6. 12. Our adversaries are so mighty that we
cannot overcome them, except the spirit of God which is Esaias 11. 2.
the spirit of fortitude, strengthen us in the inner man, that is, in the
Anselm. Calvin. ^ Zanchius.
soul, 2. Cor. 4. 16.
that albeit our body which is our outward man, perish: yet our spirit which is
the inward man may be renewed daily. He does not pray for the wealth of the
world, or health of the body which afford comfort outwardly: Caietan.
but he desires upon his bowed knees the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that his Ephesians may have sound inner parts, as it is in the Psalm. 45. 14
Psalm, all glorious within, it is then an idle conceit to think that a
Pastor benefits his people more by a little skill in Physic and Law, then by
a great deal of Divinity: for having charge of their souls, and not of their
bodies or goods, he must especially labor that the inner man may be
strengthened with might against our adersarie the Devil.

That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and
grounded in loue] These three Metaphors of our Apostle dwell, rooted, grounded:
are most emphaticall, and pertinent to his purpose; the faithful are Gods
house, Christ therefore does not only Apocalip. 3. 20.
sup with b Heb. 3. 6.
them as a gest: but John 14. 23.
dwell with them as head of the family, Beza mayor annot. in loc. and in
Matthew. 2. 23.
not only (...), but (...), Caietan.
non hospitarimodo sed habitare.

An Matthew. 7. 24.
house surely founded is able to withstand the winds blowing, and waves
bellowing. A Tree deeply rooted is not overthrown with a tempest: even so,
such as are grounded in faith, and rooted in love, continue steadfast in their
profession in the midst of all afflictions and persecutions for the word; but
such as have Matthew. 13 21
no root, believe but for a season, and so Christ is in their hearts only for
a season. If for the Gospel any storms arise, they be suddenly cast down,
yea carried away, with every blast of contrary doctrine. The Gal. 3. 3.
Galathians had begun in the spirit, and yet afterward they were betwitched and
Gal. 1. 6.
removed away to another Gospel. In Deering. lect 4. Hebr.
Solomon the spirit was quenched, and iniquity for a time got the upper hand:
and Bishop Sermon* 7. before King Ed.
Latymer is bold to term such new spirits, who say that we cannot loose the
spirit: and therefore let us upon bowed knees humbly beseech almighty God, out
of the riches of his mercy, so strengthen our inner man by his spirit. Christ
dwells in our heart by faith, Bernard. ser. 2. de resur. dom.
as long then as faith is alive, Christ Gal. 2. 20.
lives in us, and we in him: if our faith once be dead, then Christ which is
our Collos. 3. 4.
life departs out of our heart. Now faith without good works is Iam. 2. 17.
dead, it must therefore Gal. 5. 6.
work thorough love, we must be grounded and rooted in charity.

Might be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, lenth,
depth, and height] Apud primas and Hieron. ^x posit. post. in
Some by breadth, understand the broad way, Matthew. 7. 13. by length, eternal
life: by depth hell: and by height heaven: as if he should have said, if ye
be grounded in faith, and rooted in charity, then ye may soon know which of
these to love or leave. But it is better expounded Zanchius.
either of our love toward other, or of Gods love in Christ toward us. Of our
love, Aquin. Royard.
which has a breadth, in loving all men, even our enemies. A length, in that
love never falls away, 1. Cor. 13. 8. An height, in loving our superiors. A
depth, in loving our inferiors: or an height in loving God above all, and a
depth in reuerencing the deepnesle of his riches, Romans 11. 33. The love of God
toward us Caietan. Aquin.
has a length, in respect of his eternity, Psalm. 102. 12. A breadth, in
respect of his infinite goodness showed upon all his works, Ecclesiasticus 1.
10. An height, in respect of his excellent nature, being high above all people,
Psalm. 99. 2. A depth, in respect of his unsearchable wisdom which is a
profound deepenesse, Ecclesiastes 7. 26. herein alluding as it may seem to
that of Job. 11. 7. 8.
Job. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty
to his perfection? The heavens are high, what can thou do? It is deeper then
hell: how can thou know it? Or as Photius apud Oecum. and Hieron romans prior
in loc.
other, Christ's love toward us has a length, in that his mercy does endure
for ever and ever, even from everlasting predestination, until everlasting
glorification. A breadth, in that he would 1. Tim. 24.
all men should be saved. Jews, Gentiles, Grecians, Barbarians, before the
law, under the law, after the law, from the beginning unto the worlds end. A
depth, in that he descended into hell, openly triumphing over Satan in his own
kingdom. An height, in that he did ascend Ephesians. 4. 10.
far above all heavens, and there sits at the right hand of God as our
Mediator and Advocate. Anselm. Aquin.
Other have discoursed of the four woods, and dimensions in the material
Cross of Christ more subtilely then soundly. For the plain meaning of these
words is, that our redemption is a 1. Tim. 2. 16.
great mystery. To know Christ crucified is Marlorat.
the breadth, length, height, depth of all our knowledge, in comparison whereof
all other things are to be reputed as Philip. 3. 8.
dung and dross. Some trouble themselves and other about round and square,
long and short, black and white, spending the strength of their wits in
examining the lawfulness or unlawfulness of certain ceremonies used in the
Church of England: whereas if they were grounded in faith and rooted in love,
they would endeavor rather to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth,
length, depth, height of Christ's love toward us, and in fine to be fulfilled
with all fullness which comes of God.

Aretius.
Some think that the Church is this fullness, increasing daily till the number
of Gods elect is accomplished. Apud Theophilact. in loc.
Other, construe this of the blessed Trinity: but because Coloss. 2. 9. 10.
the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ, and the Saints are complete in
him: I take the clause (that ye may be fulfilled with all fullness of God) to
be nothing else but an Calvin.
explanation of the former words, as if he should say, this I mean by breadth,
length, depth and height; that he which has Christ, has all things
absolutely complete to perfection: I pray therefore Anselm.
not that ye may be fully God, but that ye may be full of God, full of his
Eng. Gloss. Hieron. Sarcer.
grace with all the living Saints in Aquin.
this world, and full of his glory with all the Saints departed in the world to
come, that ye may so faithfully serve God here, as that ye may fully see God
hereafter, even face to face.

Unto him that is able] In this thanksgiving of our Apostle three points are
considerable, namely,

The

Aretius.
Motive: Gods abundant liberality, being able and willing to give more things,
and more plentifully then either we do ask or think. Aquin.
Matter: Be praise, or glory: man's body within the elements is closed, the
blood within the body, the spirits within the blood, the soul with in the
spirits, the mind within the soul, and God rests in the mind: so that this
world was made for man, man for the soul, soul for the mind, and the mind for
God: that as of him and through him and for him are all things: even so to him
might be praise for evermore. Manner in respect of Place: In the congregation,
Sarcerius.
as being Gods Tabernacle dedicated to prayer and praise, Zanchius.
knowing and participating Gods unsearchable riches in Christ. Other assemblies
have their beginning and end, but the Church is the 1. Tim. 3. 15.
pillar of truth, against which Matthew. 16. 18
hell gates are not able to prevail. Theophylact.
The Church then enduring for ever and ever, only can and will honor God ever
and ever. Person: by whom our thanks are conveyed unto God, by Jesus Christ,
as being the Mediator between God and man, by whom alone the graces of God
descend down to us, and our prayers ascend up unto God. Time: Throughout all
generations, etc.

For as the mercies of God toward us are for ever and ever: in like manner our
praises to him ought to be for ever and ever: Primasius.
Immensa beneficia laudibus immensis celebranda, see the conclusion of the
Pater Noster in the Liturgy.

The Gospel.
LVKE 7. 11. And it fortuned that Jesus went into a City called Naim, etc.
THis Gospel is an Emblem of the

Heming.
Miseries of man: In this afflicted woman accompanying her child, and that a
son, and that her only son to his grave, dying in The Spring of his youth, even
at that age when he was most able to comfort her. Winter of her widowhood,
when she did most want him.
Melanct. Culman.
Mercies of God: In Christ who did pity the distressed In Iansen. Concor. cap.
46.
In Thought, (...), He had compassion on her. Word, Weep not. Deed, He raised
the dead, and delivered him to his mother.


The Sea Ferus ser. 3. in Euangel. Dom. 17. past. Pent.
mourning troop in Naim is a lively representation of our estate by nature;
subject to sickness, infirmity, death, damnation, horror, hell: our whole life
being as it were nothing else but widow weeping, and a son dying. Job 3. 3.
One does cry, Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night when it
was said, there is a man child conceived; why died I not in the birth? and why
did I suck the breasts? for so should I now have lien and been quiet, I
should have slept then and been at rest. Psalm. 110. 4.
Another does cry, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mes^ch, and
to have mine habitation among the tents of Kedar. Romans 7. 24.
A third cries, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death. All, as it were with one voice cry, Job. 14. 1.
Man that is borne of a woman is of short continua^ and full of trouble. But
Christ and his followers on the contrary resemble our estate by grace, wherein
is joy, peace, life, health, happiness, heaven. In this troop 1. Cor. 15. 55.
one says, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the
sting of death is siane, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be
unto God which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1.
^.
Another does say, Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance immort all
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven. A 1. John 3. 14.
third does say, We know that we are translated from death unto life. All sing
and say with Zachary, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited
and redeemed his people.

Behold there was a dead man carried out] The word Vega in loc.
behold in the Scriptures is like an hand in the margent of a book, pointing
out always some remarkable thing, and it is here like that hand Dan. 5.
Balthazar saw writing upon the walls of his Palace, for as that forewarned
him of his utter ruin; so this admonishes us of our last end: Behold a dead
man carried out. This dead man was a young man, as it is expressed in the text, I
say to thee young man arise, and a rich or honorable man as Maldonat. Coster.
some gather out of the text, in that much people were with his mother. And it
is worth our observing, that Christ in the Gospel is said to raise none from
the dead, but only such as were rich and young, as the daughter of Luke 8. 41.
Iairus a Ruler of the Synagogue, being about twelve years of age: John 11.
Lazarus a man honored in his nation, and as Haeres. 66. cap. Cat. Manichaei
Dogmat.
Epiphanius reports about the years of 30. and in my text, a young son of a
widow well affected in the place where she dwelt. Hereby teaching us, that such
often die who least expect death, and are most embraced of the world. Poor men
and old men have their pasport, as they begin to leave the world, so the world
is content to part with them. At their carrying out to be buried usually there
is less weeping, because their friends are comforted, in that departing in
peace they be now delivered from the burden of the flesh, and infinite misery*
of this life. But death is the Joshua 22. 14.
way of all flesh, and Esaias 40. 6.
all flesh is grass, and all the grace thereof as the flower of the field. Per
natiuitatem viret in carne, Greg. in Psalm. 5. poenitent.
per iuuentutem candescit in flore, per mortem aret in puluere. By birth a man
is green in his flesh, by youth he is white in his blossom, by death he is
withered in the dust. For death as a fisherman encloseth all kind of fish in
his net, great, small, good, bad, old, young: which the Poets insinuate in the
fable of Death and Cupid, who lodging at a time both in one Inn, interchanged
each others arrows: and so from that day to this, it comes to pass that
sometimes old men doat, and young men dye:

Ioachim Belleiu^
Sic moritur Iuuenis, sic moribundus amat. Which was the only son of his
mother, and she was a widow] Children are walking Images of their parents, even
flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, the wealth of the poor man, and
honor of the rich. It was then one step unto weeping Cross, that this woman
had lost a child, for nature by grace is not abolished but perfected, not
murdered but manured, her impressions are not quite razed, but suited to the
colors of faith and virtue. David a man according to Gods own heart did weep
for his 2. Sam. 12.
sick child, cry out for his dead son, 2. Sam. 18. 33.
O Absolon, my son, my son Absolon: would to God I had died for thee, O
Absolon, my son, my son. S. Lib. de Nabuth cap. 5.
Ambrose reports a tragical accident, how that in his time there was a poor
man in extreme necessity constrained to sell one of his sons into
perpetual bondage, that he might hereby save the rest from a present famine.
Who calling all his dear children unto him, and beholding them as olive
branches round about his table, could not resolve which he might best spare.
His eldest son was the strength of his youth, even he that called him first
father, and therefore not willing to part with him. His youngest boy was the
nest chicke, the dearly beloved of his mother, and therefore not willing to
part with him. A third most resembled his progenitors, having his fathers bill,
and his mothers eye, therefore not willing to part with him. One was more
loving, another more diligent then the rest, and so the good father in
conclusion among so many could not afford to part with any.

It was another step unto grief in this widow, that her dead child was
Pontan. in loc.
a son. For daughters in respect of their sex being weaker vessels, are not
so fit for business and employment: whereas a good son, albeit in obedience
a child, yet in counsel often proves a father, and is in stead of an husband
to his widow mother. But it was an higher step unto grief that this one son,
was her only son (...), first begotten, and Iansen.
only begotten* and her self not a young wife: but an old widow without hope
of issue. Now what kind of sorrow this was is expressed in holy Scripture:
Jeremy 6. 26.
Make lament atton and bitter mourning as for thine only son. And Zachar.
12. 10. They shall lament for him as one mourns for his only son, and be
sorry for him as one is sorry for his first borne. Syrophanes having buried
his only son, caused his statua to be set in his house, Fulgent. mytholog.
lib. 1.
Seddum tristitiae remedium quaerit, seminarium potius doloris invenit.

This in brief was the widows misery, now ye shall hear of Christ's mercy.
When she was hapless and hopeless, he had compassion on her, and did
exceeding abundantly above all that she did ask or could think, as it is in
the select Epistle for this Sunday. Esaias 65. 24.
Before she did call, he did answer, granting her desire before she moved her
suit. Culman.
Teaching us hereby that every good gift is from above, not pulled down of
merit: but powered down by preventing grace.

God is a father of the fatherless, and defends the causes of Psalm. 68. 5.
and 146. 9.
widows: Eliah in a great famine by Gods appointment relieved the widow of 1.
Kings 17.
Zarephath, and Elizeus even by the same divine goodness, increased another
distressed widows oil, 2. Kings 4. Peter, Acts 9. comforted a whole
congregation of weeping widows, in raising Dorcas again from the dead: and
Christ here took pity on the deep sighing of a widow. Ferus sermon. 1. in loc.
By which all men may learn, Magistrates especially, to Esaias 1. 17.
judge the fatherless, and defend the widow; not only when the widow does
importunately call and cry, Do me justice, Luke 18. 3. but even while she does
hold her peace, Maldonat. in loc.
magis enim petit qui petere non audet, and plus dat qui dat non rogatus.

Weep not] Genesis 23. 2.
Abraham the father of the faithful bewailed his dead wife Sara, Genesis 50.
Joseph an holy man of God mourned many days for his father Jacob, all the
people for Deuteronomy. 34. 8.
Moses, and Christ himself for John 11. 35.
Lazarus. His ne ste to then, is not a prohibition forbidding at funerals all
weeping: but an inhibition only forbidding too much weeping, that she should
not be sorry for the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
as they which have no hope. As if he should have said unto her, as he did in
the like case to Martha, John 11. 25. I am the resurrection and the life,
whosoever believes in me though he were dead, yet shall he live. Deuteronomy. 32.
39.
I wound and make whole, 1. Sam. 2. 6.
bring down to the grave and raise up again. And his works are correspondent
to his words, he came nigh, and touched the coffin, and said, Young man, I say
unto thee, arise, and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak, and he
delivered him unto his mother. In which he showed himself to be very God and
man, in walking with his Disciples, in talking with this widow, coming nigh to
the gate of the city, touching the coffin, a very man: in raising the dead,
and making him to sit up, and speak, Eu^hym. Brentius. Caietan.
(not as the Prophets and Apostles in another name, but by his own power in a
commanding fashion, I say to thee young man El^ctulo mortis, in qu, mollius ille
dormit, qui durius in vita se gesserit* Ambr. sermon. 28.
arise) to be God, even the Lord of life, Acts 3. 15.

About the fall of the leaf men ordinarily be more subject to sickness and
mortality then at other times of the year, wherefore the Zepper. Con. 2. in
loc.
Church has allotted fitly this Scripture for this season, as a sick man's
salve to comfort us against diseases and death. Intimating that Christ is the
only health of all the living, and everlasting life of all such as die in him.

And there came fear on them all, and they gave the glory to God] Our
Evangelist here describes a Hem^ing.
double fruit of the miracle: the one befalling such as were present, the other
extended unto many men absent, in that the rumor of it went forth throughout
all Jury, and throughout all the regions which lie round about. The miracle
wrought in the present beholders a twofold effect, Intus timor, z Caietan.
foris glorificatio: Reverence within, and glorifying of God without, for they
conceived hereby faith in the Messiah, and so feared God, glorifying him with
true worship, and acknowledging his mercies in visiting his people. Here the
Gospel and Epistle meet again, Paul would have him ascribe praise to God in
the congregation from time to time: these spectators accordingly, beholding the
riches of Christ's grace who did exceeding abundantly above all that the poor
Widow did ask or think, gave the glory to God, saying, A great Prophets is
risen up among us, and God has visited his people.

Hitherto concerning the letter of this History: Now let us (as the August.
tract. 49. in Joan. and de verbis dom. sermon. 44. Ambros. Beda in loc.
Fathers and Luther. Arboreus. Heming.
other Interpretors) examine the mystical exposition or allegory, considering
these five points in order:

1. Who is dead, and carried out to be buried. 2. What is the Coffin and Tomb
wherein he is enclosed. 3. What they be that carry him to the grave. 4. What
is that gate out of which he was carried. 5. What is that widow lamenting his
death.
He that is dead and carried out to be buried is an obstinate sinner, for the
Romans 6. 23.
wages of sin is death, and every man irrepentant without faith and feeling
of his sins is dead (as the 1. Tim. 5. 6.
Scripture) descended into Hell (as

De bono mortu, cap. 12.
Ambrose speaks) even while he lives. In See Jacob. d^ Vorag. se^m 1. in loc.
three things especially resembling a Corse being

Cold, Heavy, Stinking.
Cold, as being infected with the venom of the Apocal. 12. 9.
Serpent, and wanting the powerful heat of Gods holy Spirit which is 1 Thessalonians.
5. 19
quenched in them. Heavy, because sin is a burdensome load, Mat. 11. 28.
pressing down, Heb. 12. 1. hindering our ascending and seeking the things
above, Coloss. 3. 1. For howsoever it be true, that if all the mountains in
the world should fall together upon one just man he would notwithstanding be
steadfast and keep his ground: according to that of the i Poet, Horat. Car.
lib. 3. ad. 3.


Si fractus illibatur orbis,
Impauiaum ferient ruinae.
Yet sin is so heavy, that it cast down Dathan from earth, and Lucifer out
of heaven into the bottomless pit of hell. Stinking, because the slanderer
has an unsavory breath, his Psalm 14. 5.
throat being an open sepulcher. The wickedness of adulterers is Ephe 5. 4.
and Galat. 5. 19.
filthiness. The goods of the covetous hoorded up, and not laid out, are a
very Bonauent. diet. salut. c. 6.
dunghill, and every sin is an 1 Thessalonians 4. 7.
uncleanness, stinking in the nostrels of the Lord.

Now for the Coffin and Tomb wherein this cold, heavy, stinking Corse lies:
as there be three kinds of death, one of the body, which is the natural death,
another of soul, which is spiritual death, a third both of body and soul,
which is eternal death: even so there be three kinds of Tombs accordingly:
the Tomb of the body is the Grave, the Tomb of the soul is the body,
Theophylact. in loc. Idem Plato in Crat.
(...) qua^i (...), or as In locum.
Ambrose, tumulus iste mores mali, the Tomb both of body and soul dying in
sin is Hell, Luke 16. 22. The rich man died and was buried in Hell. And the
sinner is borne to Hell by Heming.
four Porters especially, detaining him in irrepentance, namely,

1 Hope of longer life. 2 Looking upon the faults of other men. 3. Presumption
upon Gods mercy. 4. Flattery of leaud company.
These four carry the sinner out of the gate toward hell, as for example, when
he does lust with his eye, the dead man is carried out by the r gate of his
sight, per oculorum t August. ser. 31. ad fratres in eremo.
beneficium infert animae veneficium. If he delight in backbiting and
slandering, the dead man is carried out by the gate of his mouth. If he take
pleasure in hearing tales and ill reports of his neighbor, the dead man is
carried out by the gate of his ears. And the widow lamenting his death (as
Theophylact thinks) is the soul, but as Ambros. Beda* Panigarol.
other s In locum.
generally the Church of God, for as there is joy in heaven for one sinner that
conuerteth: even so grief to such as have their conversation in heaven, when a
sinner will not return from his wicked way, but is given over in a reprobate
sense, to work all uncleanness even with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. The three
sorts of dead raised by Christ aptly resemble, says Ser. 44. de verbis Dom.
Augustine, three sorts of sinners. A sinner is dead in the house like Iairus
daughter, when he does imagine mischief in his mind: carried out of the gate
like this young man here, when he Psalm. 7. 15.
brings forth ungodliness in word or deed: stinking in the grave like Lazarus,
if he sin habitually without any remorse, Esaias 5. 18.
drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, speaking good of evil and evil of
good, Romans 2. 5.
heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God. Now then as there was weeping for the dead Damsel in the
house, more weeping for this man carried out of the gate, but most weeping at
Lazarus grave, Martha wept, and Mary wept, and the Jews wept, and Christ
himself wept and groaned in the Spirit: so we must be sorry for the beginnings
of sin, more sorry for the proceedings and increase, most sorry when a man Psalm
1. 1.
stands in the ways of the wicked and sits in the sent of the scornful. It
may be well applied unto Christ's Academie, which Guenara epist.
Demosthenes once said of Athens, in our Divinity school we weep more for
the leaud lives of the bad, then for the deaths of the good.

As the Church of God has three kinds of Planctus over the dead: so the
devil and his company three kinds of Jacob. de V^rag. sermon. 1. in loc.
Plausus. Our adversary rejoices a little when we sin in the house,
conceiving an evil thought: but more glad if that a man be carried out of the
house, breaking out into scandalous actions: and yet most merry when a sinner
continues in his filthiness, as Lazare stinking in his grave. Let us then
Ephesians. 5. 14.
awake from sleep, and stand up from the dead; Christ in his word, in his
Sacraments, in his judgments, in his Preachers instantly calls unto you daily,
Young man arise, Damsel arise, Lazarus arise. Wherefore let us I beseech you
sit up, and speak: that we may comfort the Church our afflicted mother on
earth, and be well accepted of God our father in heaven.

Amen.
The Epistle,
EPHESIANS. 4. 1. I (which am a prisoner of the Lord) exhort you, that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, etc.
AFter sundry dogmaticall conclusions touching matters of holy faith in the
three former chapters: our Apostle comes now to patheticall Sar^er. Caietan.
Aret.
exhortations concerning good manners in this present, beseeching his Ephesians
in general to walk worthy of the vocation whereunto they were called, in more
particular to support one another through love, keeping the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace. Pressing this one point with seven arguments in
our text:

1. There is but one body. 2. But one spirit. 3. But one hope. 4. But one
Lord. 5. But one faith. 6. But one baptism. 7. But one God, and father of all
which is above all, and through all, and in you all. As if he should argue
thus: If the Church your mother be but one, God your father but one, Christ
your Lord but one, the holy Spirit your Comforter but one, if your hope but
one, faith one, Baptism one: I see no cause why you should not live together
and love to gether all as one, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
through the bond of peace.
First, there is but one body, that is, one Church: for albeit there be
threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and the number of Damsels be
without number, yet as Cant. 6. 8.
Solomon speaks in the person of Christ, my love, my dove is alone. As then in
the natural body there is a perpetual sympathy between all the parts: 1.
Cor. 12. 26.
If one member suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in honor, all
rejoice with it: even so in Christ's mystical body, The eye must not say to
the hand, I have no need of thee: nor the head again to the feet, I have no
need of you: for if the Magistrates should bend themselves against the
Ministes, and the Ministers against the Magistrates, and the Commons against
both: assuredly God would be against all. And therefore we must always
remember our Apostles saying, 1. Cor. 12. 20. that there is but one body.
though there be many members. One not as tied unto any one place, much less to
any one person. The Donatists in the days of Epist. 48.
Augustine would have tied the Church to Cartenna in Africa. The Papists in our
time tie the Church to Rome in Italy. Contradicting herein the Creed, in
which the Church is styled Catholic: that is, universal, extended (as
Chrysostom notes upon my Text) to all places, and all times, and as Ca^c. cap.
3. in exposit. Credo eccles. Cat.
Bellarmine more fully, to all faithful persons not only those which are now
living, but also those which have been from the beginning and shall be to the
worlds end. And so the Popish antichristian ^rue which have nothing so much in
their mouths as the Church, the Church, infringe the liberties of the Church
exceedingly. For all of them have made the Catholic Church to be nothing
else but the Roman church, and some of them have made the Roman church to be
nothing else but the Pope. Papa virtualiter est tota ecclesia, says De potest
papae cap. 2^.
Haruaeus. As Anabaptists imagined a church like the Spider, or Not. hist. lib.
7. cap. 2.
Plinies acephali, all body and no head: so Papists have framed a Church like
the Toad-stoole, all head and no body. To borrow a phrase from Charmides in
Trinum. act. ^. scen. 2.
Plautus: Hic quidem fungino genere est, capitesetotum tegit. I^ Cardinals and
Jesuits be reputed monsters, as being men of Vignier answer to Baron.
all professions, order, degrees, offices, benefices; then what a monster of
monsters is the Pope, which is all of these, and none of these, both head and
body too.

One spirit] S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 12. that there are diversities of gifts,
but one spirit: to one is given by the spirit the word of Wisdom: to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit: to another is given faith by the same
spirit: to another the gift of healing by the same spirit: to another prophecy,
to another discerning of spirits, to anointerpretations of tongues: all these
works one and the same spirit, dividing to every man as he will severally.
Now the spirit which is the John 15. 26.
Comforter of the Church in her widdow-hood ever since Christ's ascension, and
as it were tutor to lead her into John 16. 13.
all truth, on Whitsunday descended in visible shapes upon the blessed Apostles
assembled, as the Acts 2. 1.
Text speaks (...) altogether in one place with one accord. Where there is
unity of spirit, there does rest the spirit of unity: but where there is
babbling, there follows instantly Babel, upon Division always Confusion.

One hope] As the Decalogue teaches how to love, and the Creed how to
believe: so the Pater Noster how to pray. Showing us exactly what we must hope
and desire: namely, first Gods glory, then our own good. Gods glory, for that
is Alpha and Omega, the first thing we must ask, Hallowed be thy name: and
the last thing we must perform, for thine is the kingdom, the power, and the
glory. Now concerning our own good: we desire and hope for especially the
kingdom of heaven, Thy kingdom come. On which all other petitions depend, for
we pray thy will be done, for this end only, that we may be subjects in his
kingdom of grace, and saints in his kingdom of glory. And his will is done by
depending on his might and mercy for things temporal and spiritual; in
regard of the one, we pray, give us this day our daily bread; and for the
other, for give us our trespasses, lead us not into tentation, deliver us from
evil. And by consequence Gods kingdom is the center of all our wishes, and
total sum of all our hopes. And because the wise man ever begins at the end,
our great Doctor has enjoined in things concerning our selves to beg the
first of all, which is indeed the end of all. Seeing then all of us walk in
one way, all of us have one guide in the way, all of us when we come to our
iourneyes end expect one and the same reward: it is very meet all of us should
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

One Lord] It is reported by In vita Caligul^.
Suetonius that the Emperor Caligula took off the head of his great god
Jupiter, and set on another of his own. The Papists in their interpretations
and glosses have smitten off Christ Jesus the only head of the Church, and
have set on the Pope. Suppose (for thought is free, and impossibilities may be
supposed) I say suppose, S. Peter was Pope, and the other eleven Apostles his
Cardinals, as Sum. lib. 1. cap. 80.
Johannes de Turre Cremata does a^ow. Suppose he was at Rome, suppose he was
bishop of Rome, suppose the Pope succeeds him more lawfully then the Patriarch
of Antioch, (all which a Protestant will not grant, and they cannot prove) yet
I would feign learn of a schoole-Papist, who was this one Lord, and one head
of the Church after the death of S. Peter immediately. Whether Linus, or
Cletus, or Anacletus, or Clemens: these are four good men and true, let them
choose whom they will.

Clemens Romanus an old new Father, whom the learned conceive to be the Popes
own child, writes in his Lib. 7. cap 47.
Apostolical constitutions evidently, that Linus was the first Bishop of Rome
made by Saint Paul, and that Clemens after the death of Linus was the second,
ordained by Peter, if this relation be true, the Pope sits not in the chair
of Peter, but in the seat of Paul, for he created the first Pope. Franciscus
Turrianus in his (...). an 1578.
apologeticall annotations upon the text of Clemens, answers that Linus was
not bishop of Rome, but only Lord Suffragan or Vicar-generall, executing
Episcopal jurisdiction in Saint Peter's non-residence. The like is recorded of
Cletus by Ex epist. D^cretal. Leon. 2.
Marianus Scotus in the life of Peter. But by their good leave, the Roman
Martyrologie makes both Linus and Cletus Bishops of Rome: and Cardinal
Baronius in his annotations upon their several martyrdomes, and in his
Ecclesiastical Annals, A^an. 6^ I^a numerat Optatus. In lib. 2. contra
Parmen^an. Linus Cle men's, Anacletus.
tome 1. maintains against all comers, that Linus was the first, Cletus the
second, and Clemens the third Bishop of Rome after Saint Peter. Caesar Baronius
in the same place thinks that Cletus and Anacletus were all one: but Cardinal
De R^m. pont. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Bellarmine contradicts him, and shows by diverse reasons accurately, that they
were two. And indeed the Roman Calendar allotteth Anacletus a festival upon
the 13. of July, and Cletus another upon the 26. of April. Whereupon In vita
Clementis.
Tritenhemius and other Popish Historiographers hold, that Clemens was the
fourth Pope after Saint Peter. So then as you see, some write that he was the
first, other that he was the second, other that he was the third, other that he
was the fourth.

Bellarmine who shufled the cards last, and is the best gamester at the Popes
primero, takes upon him to compose the difference. But as Contra lit. petil.
lib. ^. cap. 50
Augustine said of Petilian, vbirespondere conat ^s est, magis ostendit quod
non poterit respondere: in deed says Vbi supra. caterum pet. mort^ and
s^quenti.
he, Clemens by right was the first Pope, but he suffered out of his humility
Linus and Cletus, to execute his office so long as they lived. But Apud Bellar.
ibidem. neque multum me monet.
Damasus and Sophronius, and Simeon Metaphrastes affirm that Linus died before
Peter. Here Bellarmine answers not a word, but contemnes these writers which
he magnifieth elsewhere, placing them among learned and Catholic Authors in
his 2. In Cat alog. Theolog. anne^. t^m. 2. Contr^.
Tome, but for avoiding of tediousness, let it be granted that Clemens being
an honester man then Popelings in our time, poisoned not his predecessors, but
suffered them to live and die in peace. Yet if there were three Popes alive at
once, who was this one head, and one Lord? then there were three Lords, not one
Lord, the Lord Cletus, the Lord Linus, the Lord Clemens, and happily this may
be one reason why the Pope has three crowns, one for Cletus, one for Linus,
and the third for Clemens.

Thus (as Mr. Philp^t vti Fox in his Martyr.
one said) the Papists in the points of their religion are untrussed, and lie
open to the whip. They boast of their succession of Bishops, and yet they
cannot agree among themselves and tell their own tale who was the first,
second, third, or fourth Pope of Rome. Here the words of the Lord are
verified, Esaias 19. 2. Concurrere faciam Aegyptios aduersus Aegyptios, I will
set Epgyptians against Egyptians, every one shall fight against his neighbor,
city against city, and kingdom against kingdom, popish Councels against
Councels, Universities against Universities, Schoolmen against Schoolmen, the
Jesuits against the Priests, and the Priests against the Jesuit, Baronius
against Bellarmine, and Bellarmine against Baro^ius, one against another, God
and the truth against all.

It is wittily noted by S. Tract. 13. in Joan.
Augustine, Petrus erat oculus in corpore, Peter was not head of the church,
but an eye in the head. God grant the Pope so much grace as to become an eye,
or to stand in stead of an hand, yea of a finger, to further the building of
Gods house. Head he is not, head he was not so much as in opinion for the space
of five hundred year after Christ, head he cannot be, for there is but one
Lord, one head, one sheepfold, one shepherd, Ioh. 10. 16.

Let us examine therefore what this one Lord is, our Apostle says 1. Cor. 8. 5.
elsewhere that there be many Gods and many Lords. Many gods in title, many
gods in opinion, in title, either authoritatiue or vsurpatiue, by right, and so
Kings are styled gods in the 82 2.
Psalm. By usurpation, and so the Pope is called god, Extrauagant. great. Ioh.
22.
Dominus Deus noster Papa, as the Canonists impiously blaspheme. Many gods in
opinion, and so the Scripture tells us, that gold is the Coloss. 3. 5.
covetous man's god, and the Philip. 3. 19.
belly the gluttons god, and so there be many gods in heaven, and in earth, and
in hell too. For it is written that the people of Calicute worship the devil.
The Gentiles were so vain in their Romans 1. 21.
imaginations, De ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.
amentes mentes, having their understanding so blinded, that as Lib. 1. Aduer.
Sym.
Prudentius writes unto Symachus, every thing that was good was esteemed a god:
in so much that (...) was (...), they had so many gods; as that indeed they
had no God. Thus you see there be many gods, and many lords, yet unto us but
one Lord. Unto us who know the truth (as it is here said) there is but only
one Lord in truth. Other lords are dominititulares: our Lord is Dominus
tutelaris, a Lord protector indeed. Other by men are made gods: but our Lord is
the God who made all men, an absolute Lord of himself, and in himself 1. Tim.
6. 15.
Dominus dominantium, the Lord of all other lords, and God of all other gods.
And in this acceptance Lord is used in the holy Bible sometimes essentially,
signifying the whole Deity: as in the first Commandment, I am the Lord thy
God, and Psalm. 50. 1. The Lord even the most mighty God: and sometime
personally, for Christ the second person in the blessed Trinity, Luke 17. 5.
The Apostles said to the Lord: and 2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and so I take it to be taken here, there is one Lord, that is, one
Christ, Master of us all, and head of his whole Church.

Now Christ is one in himself, and one to us: in himself one, for albeit he
be God and man: yet he is not two but one Christ. ^sen. hom. 2. de ^at. Dom.
Non alter ex patre, alter ex matre: sed aliter ex patre, aliter ex matre. One
(as orthodoxall Athanasius in his Creed) not by conversion of the God head into
flesh: but by taking of the manhood into God: one not by confusion of
substance, but by unity of person: for as the reasonable soul and flesh is
one man, so God and man one Christ. Again, Christ is one to us, as being Hebr.
13. 8.
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever.

Idem,
Obiectiue, Subiectiue, Effectiue,
Obiectiue, the same in his word, for he that yesterday was shadowed in the
Law, is to day showed in the Gospel: as Super Exodus quaest. 73.
Augustine said, the new Testament is clasped in the old, and the old is opened
in the new. One Christ crucified being the center of all the Bibles
circumference. Idem subiectiue, the same in his attributes, in his power, in
his authority, being always the Lord of his people, the shepherd of his
flock, the head of his Church. Idem effectiue, the same in his goodness and
grace, for he who was yesterday the God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, is to day and
shall be for ever Jesus, Matthew. 1. 21.
that is a Savior of his people: he is as well now the light of the Gentiles,
as he was before the glory of his people Israel: he that was present and
president among the blessed Apostles, has promised also to come unto us, to
comfort us, to be in the midst of us, as over all, and through all: so
likewise in us all, as it follows in the text.

If then this one Lord be present with us in his word, present in his Spirit,
present in his power, in all the same yesterday and to day, and for ever. I see
no cause, why he should need another Lord, deputy Lieutenant, or Vicar
general to execute his office: for Christ may be considered of us as a Lord
See Perkins Reformed Catholic tit. supre^asie.
two ways:

1 As God. 2 As God and man.
As God, by right of creation, he is an absolute Lord over all men, and all
things in heaven and earth. As God and man, or as the redeemer of man he is
sovereign Lord of the whole Church in more special manner.

Now then, as Christ is God with the Father and holy Ghost, he has his
Deputies on earth to govern the world: namely, Kings and Princes, therefore
called Gods. But as he is a Mediator and Lord of his redeemed ones, he has
neither fellow, nor deputy. No fellow, for then he should have been an
imperfect Mediator: no Deputy, because no creature is capable of this office:
the performance whereof arises of the effects of two natures concurring in one
action, namely the God head and the Manhood. And therefore howsoever Preachers
are his active instruments, his messengers, his Ministers, (if you will) his
under Vshers to teach his scholars in this great University: yet none can
properly be called his Vicars, or Deputies to do that in his stead which
personally belongs to him. In this sense there is but one Lord, and this one
Lord is the Lord, even the Lord of Lords, Christ Jesus God and man.

Wherefore seeing all of us march under the colors of one Captain, all follow
one Master, all serve one Lord, whose title is 1. John 4. 8.
love, whose John 13. 35.
livery is love, whose chief commandment is love, whose doctrine is the
doctrine of Ephesians. 2. 17.
peace, whose Ministers are the Romans 10. 15.
messengers of peace, whose followers are the L^e 10. 6.
children of peace: it behooves us (if it be possible) to have peace with all
men, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

One faith] The Turk has his faith, the Jew his faith, the Gentile his faith,
Heretics have their faith, and Sc^ismatikes their faith. In some countries (as
it is reported) there are almost as many Creedes as heads, at the least as many
sects as Cities. It is Relation of religion in the West parts of the World,
sect. 43.
written of Poland, that if any man have lost his religion he shall be sure to
find it there, or else he may give it gone for ever. How then is it true that
there is but one faith?

Answer is made, that to speak properly these are not faiths, but factions;
all of them being either vnbeliefes, or misbeliefes. And therefore when the
Disciples asked the Lord to Luke 17. 5.
increase their faith, it must be construed of increase in measure, that we may
grow from virtue to virtue, from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to says,
until we be full of growth in Christ Jesus: not of increase in number, for in
regard of the manifold rents and divisions in the Church, it is our duty
contrariwise to pray the Lord, that he will decrease, not increase our faith in
number, which is and must be but one.

For the further handling whereof, observe with Auguistine and S^nt. lib 3.
did. 23.
Lombard, that among manifold acceptions of faith in holy Scriptures, it is
taken especially vel pro eo quod ^reditur, vel pro eo quo creditur: either for
the doctrine of faith, or else for the grace whereby we believe this doctrine.
For the doctrine of faith, as Tit. 1. 13. Rebuke them sharply that they may be
sound in the faith, And Galat. 1. 22. He that persecuted in time past, now
preaches the faith, that is the Gospel. And in this sense there is but one
only true Catholic and Apostolic faith: if any man on earth, or Angel
from heaven shall go about to deliver another Gospel, let him be accursed,
Galathians 1. 8.

Secondly, faith signifies the gift and grace whereby we believe and apply
this doctrine, fi^ly termed by Divines glossa euangelij. For as love is the
best exposition of the Law: so faith is the best interpretor of the Gospel:
not glossa ordinaria, but as it were catena aurea, containing all that must and
may be believed. In which respect it is truly called saving and justifying
faith. And this (as the Thom. 22 ^. qu^st. 4. art. 6.
School distinguishes) is diuersa, ratione subiecti: sed vna, ratione
obiecti. Faith is, and must be diverse in regard of diverse believers, for every
man must live by his Habac^. 2. 4.
own faith. Paul cannot be saved by the faith of Peter, nor Peter justified by
the faith of John. As every one must have Matthew. 25. 9.
Oil of his own in his own lamp: so every one must have faith of his own
in his own heart. Yet faith in regard of her object is but one, for there is
but one only divine truth, which is the general object of faith, and but one
only Christ Jesus crucified, who is the special object of justifying and
saving faith. One only faith, because one only Lord, her own only object.
Albeit faith be diverse in diverse men, and has diverse degrees in one man: yet
it is but of one kind in all. And here we may learn how faith is said to
justify, non vt mediator, sed vt medium; not as a meritorious or efficient
cause, for that were to make our faith our Christ: but as an isntrumental or
spiritual hand apprehending Christ who does justify. For as our 2. part.
homof salvation.
Church aptly, faith is like John the Baptist, it points out Christ and says
unto us, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Nay
faith is like S Thomas, first handling, and then applying the wounds of Christ
in particular, Thou art my Lord, and my God. This in number is but one virtue,
yet in a Christians account upon the point, it is the only virtue: for lose
faith and lose all, hold faith and hold Christ who is all in all.

The Papists have martyred the text in magnifying the wooden Crucifix; but a
man by faith may behold Christ crucified almost in all the works of God,
either in us or upon us. Do thou read the Bible? there is a Crucifix, and as
it were a speaking picture of Christ. So himself said in the John 5. 39.
Gospel, Search the Scriptures, for they witness of me. Do thou behold a
brother in distress? there is another Crucifix, in him Christ is naked,
hungry, sick, harbourlesse. Do thou come to the Lords table? there is
another Crucifix, the consecrated bread and wine are dumb sermons of Christ's
passion. Art thou tempted and afflicted? then thou may behold Christ
crucified as thy partner and thy pattern. Thy partner, who pitieth thy cause,
and has Heb. 4. 15.
compassion on thee. As thy pattern, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, who when he was
reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, threatened not: but committed the
vengeance to him that judges righteously. So that it may be said of faith as
well as of original sin, vna est essentia, sed multiplex efficientia* In
essence but one, but in effi cience, love, patience, hope, and many virtues:
even 1. John 5. ^.
the victory that overcomes the world, the shield whereby we may quench all
the fiery darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. the very spear which kills our
last enemy, for a true believer in his deaths-bed is ready to sing with old
Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart inpeac, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation: and to say with 1. Cor. 15. 55.
Paul, O death where is thy sting? O h^ll where is thy victory? the sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks be given to
God, which has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

1. Kings. 3. 9.
Solomon because he was a King, desired wisdom above all things; Psalm. 27. 4.
David being a little restrained from the temple, desired above all things to
behold the beauty of the Lords house; Mydas above all things desired gold;
Alexander above all things desired honor; Epicurus above all things desired
pleasure: but if we will make but one wish unto God, let us beg and pray for
a lively faith, O Lord increase our faith. He that has this one gift is
learned enough, religious enough, rich enough, honorable enough, eased enough,
pleased enough, against which no evil on earth, no devil in hell shall
finally prevail.

For as Thu^ydides.
one called Athens Greece of Greece: so faith is the grace of all grace.
Without which (as our Apostle teaches) even our good works are sins: Romans
14. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing a lively faith is the key of heaven,
and as it were the spiritual hand to take out of the coffers of God all his
rich treasure; without which one virtue all other are no virtues; without the
which the Gospel is no Gospel, God is no God, Christ is no Christ unto us: it
behooves every man above all things in this life, to labor for increase of
this one gift, without which all other are rather curses then blessings unto
us. And because there is but one doctrine of faith, and one kind of justifying
faith, it is the duty of all such as profess the one, and have comfort by the
other, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

One Baptisme] Here with accurat In Epitaphi^. Nepotian.
Hierom praising Nepotian, I must entreat you to behold in a little Map, that
world of matter which might have been showed at large.

Baptism then is either

Proper: as bare clensing and washing. Heb. 9. 10. Figurative: Metaphorical, as
affliction, Mat. 20. 22. Allegorical, as repentant tears, Luke 7. 38.
Synecdochical, and so it is put for the whole doctrine of John, Matthew. 21. 25.
Catexochen, and so it is taken for that we call usually Christening, and this
as the Tom. par. 3. quaest. 66. art. 9.
School teaches is of three sorts: Baptisma
Flaminis. Fluminis. Sanguinis.


But of all these there is but one only Sacrament of Baptism, the which is one
in three regards;

Unum quia
Ad vnum. In vnum. Per vnum.
First, vnum advnum, one in one man, once truly received, never to be Aquin.
Caietan.
reiterated; as we teach against the Hieron. exposit. prior in loc.
Ualentinians in old time, and Anabaptists in our age. Here might I show that
Bishopping is not a new Baptism, but as the word imports, a confirmation
only: wherein a Christian in his own person does perform that which
heretofore by other he did promise.

Secondly, vnum in vnum, one Baptism, Marlorat. in Aquin.
for that all of us are baptized into one faith of one Lord, for John's and
Christ's Baptism differ not in substance, but in circumstance: John baptized
Melancthon. in Matthew. 3. Idem Calvin. Chemnitius, and caeteri protestant. apud
Bellarm. de sac. bap. lib. 1. c. 20.
in Christum passurum, Christ's Apostles in Christum passum.

Thirdly, vnum quia per vnum, one a in regard of the water and words wherewith
we baptize, we may not use any other element but water, nor any other words,
but I baptize thee in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: b one matter, one form essential in holy Baptism. Vide Lombard. sent.
4. did. 3.


One God, and Father of all, which is above all and through all, and in you
all] The map whereof in brief is, God as Dionysiu^ Carthus. Caietan.
Father of John 3. 16
Christ by nature, of Christians by Romans 8. 15.
adoption, of all men and all things by Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
creation; Over all, and through all, and in you all, may be Gerran. in loc.
construed either with appropriation to the several Persons in the blessed
Trinity: and so God the Father is the Person over all, God the Son the
Person through all, God the holy Ghost the Person in us all. Or else of the
whole Deity without appropriation, and so God is over all excellentiae
dignitatis, through all praesentia maiestatis, in all gratia inhabitationis.

For final conclusion of this and all the rest: seeing all of us have been
borne and now live in one and the same Church, all of us have been comforted
often by one and the same Spirit, all of us expect one and the same crown, all
of us acknowledge one and the same Lord, all of us hold one and the same faith,
all of us are sanctified with one and the same baptism, all of us adore one
and the same God, who is the Father of all, over all, through all, in us all. I
beseech you men, brethren and fathers, let me speak to you in the words of g
Paul, Mark them diligently Romans 16. 17.
which cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies, and with ^aire speech and flattering deceive
the hearts of the simple.

As Christ, so the Tertullian.
Church is crucified between two male factors: on the right hand Schismatikes,
on the left Papists: the one do Aug^st. a^ud Calvin. Inst^. lib. 4. cap. 2.. 5.
disrumpere charitatis vincula, untie the bonds of peace, the other do
corrumpere fidei dogmata, undo the unity of the Spirit. The first are
different in things indifferent, the second almost indifferent in matters
different, concerning the public exercises of our religion, and yet each of
them spurn at the poor Church as at a common football, being herein Oxford
An. to the Puritans Petition.
like Judges 15. 4
Sampsons foxes, severed in their head, but tied together by the tail with
firebrarnds between them, able to set the whole land in combustion and
vproare. The Schismatikes understand that the bonds of peace are not one
policy, one discipline, one ceremony: but as it is here said, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism. Wherefore seeing both of us agree in the maine matters, it
is a very fruitless contention to quarrel about by points.

Again, the Papists acknowledged heretofore that our Bible and book of
divine service do contain doctrine sufficiently necessary to salvation, and
so much (as I have Judge C^oke charg at N^rwich, ^n. 1606
read) Pope P^us quintus (who could not err) signified in a letter to our late
Sovereign of famous memory Queen Elizabeth. Upon what credit I speak this I
suppose most know. If any mistrust that great reporter, I can easily show him a
parallel in Bristoes Mot. 34. ^ag. 144.
motives. The Protestants are apes of the Papists, the very Communion book is
made altogether out of the Mass book, and so are other Church-bookes also
taken out of ours, as it is well known to all who know both. If this be true,
then his Collection is not false, who censured their not communicating with us,
to be a point not of devotion: but of state, namely, to maintain the Popes
supremacy. To speak plainly, which I think sincerely, the people of the
Puritans, and the priests of the Papists, are the true let why both endeavor
not to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. For the first,
schismatickes are like the vain Philosophers in old time, Hierom. epi. ad
(...).
Popularis aurae mancipia vaen^lia, certain creatures bred of the peoples
breath; hoc ipso placere cupiunt quod placere contemnunt, they reake not to p
Hierom. epist. ad Eustoc.
be condemned of the learned for ignorant: so they may be commended of the
ignorant for learned. And therefore when Plato saw the people pitying Diogenes
for ducking himself in cold water on a frostie morning, he said unto them, if
ye depart to your lodgings and leave gazing on him, he will I warrant you
presently come out of the River and keep himself warm. Yea, but shall we
carry away the people from looking on Diogenes? as Piutarch in vita Alcibiadis.
Socrates did Alcibiades, make them pitchers and so carry them away by the
ears, instruct them in season, out of season. Because some of their pastors
have put out their own light, I beseech you let us that are conformable,
supply their silence by our diligence. For albeit some of that humor be
malicious, and incorrigible, yet other (as De guber. Dei lib. 5.
Saluian^s writes) errant, sed bono animo errant: impij sunt, sed hoc putant
veram esse pietatem. And as In Luc. 14.
Euthymius, quidam Pharisaei semimali. So that if we cast our Net on the right
side of the ship dexterously, we may peraduencatch them, and draw them to
fruitful knowledge and dutiful obedience.

It was an excellent speech of our late Archbishop Whitgift.
diocesan (whose memory I assure my self is so sweet as Eccles. 49. 1.
Honey in your mouths, and music in your ears) he is not worthy to hold
two Benefices, who does not preach one sermon at the least every Sunday. As
there be many wholesome injunctions touching Cap and Cope: so likewise many
good orders for the reverent administering of the Sacraments, and diligent
preaching of the word. God forbid, the one should be Canons, and the other made
Pot-guns only. I confess that Divines which are Counselors or Prelates, or
attendants in Court, or Students in Universities, or necessary residentiaries
in Cathedral Churches, or employed in writing, or ambassages, may profitably
spend their time otherwise: but the Country Pastors occupation is to feed his
flock, by preaching to Christ's sheep and catechizing his limbs* If it be said
of him who will, but can not preach, that he is a dumb dog: I think it may
be said of him who can and will not, that he is a dumb devil. It is a
beastiall rudeness ^aith reverend Eccles. polit.. 81. page 262.
Hooker alluding to the first of Job, ver. 14. that Oxen only should labor,
and Asses feed: that good scholars should preach, and dunses be preferred.
But it is a greater inconvenience for the Church, that Oxen should only feed,
and Asses take all the pain: who though happily they be resident at their
Cure, yet for the most part non-resident from their Text, or if they come near
it (as Luther was wont to say) they make a martyr of it.

Will you have the factious Nouelists cut off with little grief to the
Prelates, and no hurt to the people? then let us that are conformable live in
our studies, and die in the Pulpit: that when our great Lord shall come to
reckon with us for our stewardship, he may not take us (as Melanct. in Romans 12.
Tom. 3. fol. 1025.
Aristophanes said of Cleon) with one foot in the Court, another in the City,
none in our Cure: but (as those two great Divines Jewel and Calvin were wont
to wish) he may find us in his own house doing his own business.

Concerning the Papists: I hold the Priests among them most inexcusable. The
people are like the sea, and the Priests are like the wind, the sea of it
self would be calm, if the wind did not set it in agitation: but so long as
Priests and Arch-priests, Jesuits and Seminaries reign over this our goodly
Forest, seeking for their pray: well may the Courtiers have their goods, and
the Country their Persons, but I fear the Pope will have their hearts, and the
devil in conclusion their souls. It is great pity that many piercing wits of
England can see nothing but through the spectacles of Statising Jesuits, and so
having but two pair of eyes, one of their Confessors which is nequam: and
another of their own, which is ne quicquam: the wilful blind leading the
woeful blind, they fall both into the ditch. If they could put on eyes either
of religion or reason, they should easily see that their Priests doctrine is
prejudicial to Christ, and their lives hateful to all Christendom. For this
saying is ingros^ed in their own books, Relat of religion in the West parts
of the world. 36.
That of all Christians, Italians are the worst: of all Italians, the Romans:
of all Romans, the Priests: of all Priests, the Cardinals: and commonly the
most leaud Cardinal is elected Pope. Nay some maintain this opinion, The
sparing Discourse. page 41.
Hominem non Christianum posse esse Romanum pontificem, That a man which is not
a member of Christ, may notwithstanding be head of the Church. As for our
homebred, but far taught Gunpowder men, ask the Secular Priests what the
Jesuits are, and they will, and that in Ibid. page 7.
print, tell you, that they be Statists, Important con. page 3.
Machiuellians, Quod libet 3. art. 3.
Atheists, Jesuit. Cat. lib. 1. cap 1.
so many Jesuits, so many Iudasses. Ask the Jesuits what the Secular Priests
are, and they will tell you, that they are Drunkards, Dunses, Fools, the very
Quod libet 1. art. 2.
refuse of the Church. If these things be true, then they be both monsters of
men: if false, most malicious devils.

God of his infinite goodness grant, that we and they and all may seriously
labor for a perfect union, not only of law, but of love, for an unity of the
spirit, knit with the bond of peace: that all of us following the truth, in
love, we may maintain one and the same faith, and hereafter attain one and
the same kingdom of glory.

Preached at Ashford in Kent, at the Lord Archbishops Metropoliticall
visitation, Anno 1607 September 11. Amen.
The Gospel.
LVKE 14. 1. It chanced that Jesus went into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees, etc.
IN this Gospel observe the

Mercy of Christ, to ward the Master of the feast in coming to his house, for
his good, albeit a Pharisie, yea a chief Pharisie. Guests, Impotent, in
healing a man which had the dropsy. Impudent, instructing such as contended
for place, verse. 7. 8. etc.

Malice of the Pharisees, infolded in one word, They watched him, against all
rules of entertainment and hospitality, making their table a snare to catch
him.
It chanced] Saint Apud Call Instit. lib. 1. cap. 16. 8.
Basil is of opinion, that chance and fortune are words of Heathens, and not of
Christians. Ignoratio causarum nomen fortunae confinxit. Ignorance made Fortune
a Goddess. The Gentiles as Ephesians. 4. 18.
blinded in their understanding admit and admire this uncertain Lady, Plin.
hist. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Huic omnia expensa, huic omnia feruntur accepta, and in tota ratione mortalium
sola vtramque paginam facit: but such as are taught in Christ's university,
know, that all things come to pass by divine providence, without our heavenly
Father a sparrow does not fall from an house, nor an hair from our head,
Matthew. 10 29. and therefore Saint Augustine was exceedingly displeased with
himself for often using in his writings the word fortuna, and happily some
will except against our translating, (...) it chanced, and in the Gospel
appointed for the last Sunday, Luke 7. 11. It fortuned, as also cavil at those
words in the Collect, among all the changes and chances of this mortal life.
For answer then unto this objection, and for clearing of our text; you must
understand, that albeit nothing be casual in respect of Gods knowledge:
Calvin. vbi sup.. 9.
yet many things are casual in respect of our ignorance. Which Part. 1.
quaest. 116. art. 1.
Aquine does exemplify thus: A master sends about one errand two servants,
one being ignorant of the others journey: this concourse of the two servants in
respect of themselves is casual, and the one may wonder to see the other
employed about his business in the same place: but yet in regard of the master
who did preordaine this, it is not casual. Almighty God sees and foreseeth
all things vno actu, yea vno ictu semel and simul: and therefore to him as
being all eye, nothing is old, nothing is new: but unto men it may be said
truly, that there be so many chances as there be changes inuoluntary. Herein
we do not ascribe any thing unto blind Fortune, but all unto Gods all-seeing
providence; yet so, that the divine providence take not away freewill and
contingence, for this good act of Christ as it happened not by fortune; so
likewise it came not to pass by fate, not, I say, by Si quis Dei voluntatem
appellat nomine fati, sententiam teneat linguam corrigat. Aug. de Ciuit. lib.
5. cap. 1.
fatal destiny, for God according to the common axiom of the School, non
necessitat sed facilitat, he does induce the good to do good with alacrity,
not enforce them against their will. Prudent. in Hamartig^ma.
Quoniam probitate coacta gloria nulla venit. As then in regard of God, (...)
is well translated, it came to pass: so in regard of us, as well, it chanced.
As it was providence in God, it came to pass, as contingence in Christ being
man, it chanced. For he might have visited a Publican so well as a Pharisie,
but it fell out so, that Jesus went into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees.

Christ conuersed with men of all sorts, and all sex, sometime blessing Mark.
10. 16
little children, sometime conferring with silly John 4.
women, sometimes eating with the Matt. 9. 10. Luke 19. 9.
Publicans esteemed the greatest sinners, and here dining with the Pharisees
accounted the greatest saints, he despised none who came to save all. He Pr^.
1. 21.
cried in the streets among the prease, pouring out his mind and saying, Matt.
11. 28.
Come to me all ye that are weary and laden and I will ease you. And at his
death his hands on the Cross were stretched out, his head bowed down, his
breast open, as ready to redeem and receive such as would believe in him.
Fulgent. sermon. de duplici na^. Christ.
Homo Deum contemnens a Deo discessit, Deus hominem diligens ad homines venit,
dilexit impium vt faceret iustum, dilexit infirmum vt faceret sanum, dilexit
mor^uum vt faceret viuum.

One of the chief Pharisies] It is apparent in the Gospels history, that the
Pharisees were the greatest enemies unto Christ, and therefore this being a
chief Pharisie, was happily one of Christ's chief enemies. And Cyril apud
Aquin in loc.
yet Christ being invited, as it should seem, to his house formally, comes
friendly, without any further examination of his intent, and being come,
benefits him and his in uttering a parable and acting a miracle, seeking to
Marlorat.
win them all unto the truth. Ardens.
Hereby teaching to bless such as hate us, embracing all occasions of love
whereby we may be reconciled unto our mortal enemies. In malice there is
nothing else but misery, whereas a common union begets a communion of all good
things. Augustine hom. 15.
Habet proximus aliquam gratiam? ama illum and tua est: habestu aliam? amet^te
and su^ est. Has thy neighbor any rare grace? love him and it is thine: have
thou any notable gift? if he love thee, then it is his. And therefore Christ,
albeit he did hate the pride, yet loving the person of this Pharisie, said and
did also good to him and all his company.

Again, in that this Pharisie was a Chief, we note that there was among them,
as in every settled society distinction of offices and orders. In the great
book of Nature we find that the Bees have their Master, Cranes their
Captain, Sheep their Belweather. In holy writ also we read of Luke 19* 2.
chief Publicanes, chief John 12. 42.
Rulers, chief Matthew. 2. 4.
Priests. Hell it self though it be the kingdom of confusion admits of some
degrees and order, otherwise Beelzebub could not be John 12. 31.
prince of the wicked, and Matthew. 12. 24
chief of the Devils. And therefore tumultuous Anabaptists, and all such as
would have no differences and degrees among men in Church and commonweal,
seem to have less reason then beasts, and less religion then either the most
wicked men, or the most wretched Devils. Order is the beauty of nature,
ornament of Art, harmony of the world. Now, shall every thing be in order,
and the Church of God only without order? It is a Cant. 4. 12.
garden enclosed, and a garden must be kept in order. It is an Cant. 6. 9.
army with banners, and an army must be marshalled in order. It is the 1.
Tim. 3. 15.
house of God, and Gods house must be governed in order. A popular equality
was so burdensome to the seditious Anabaptists in their rebellion, as that
contrary to their own doctrine they did admit Lanquet. ad a^. 1534.
John Matthew for their Captain, and John Aleyd for their King. And so there
was a kind of order in their hurly-burly disorder, as there were some chief
Pharisees: even so some chief Anabaptists.

To eat bread] Ludolphus de vita Christ. part. 1. cap. 37.
Three sorts of bread are mentioned in the Bible. Sacramental, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, etc. Doctrinall,
Ioh. 6. Verse. 26. 27. 32. 34.
Labor not, says our Savior, for the loaves and for the meat which perish,
but for the meat and bread that endure to life everlasting. Corporal, Mat. 4.
4. Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God. Now the bread here spoken of, is neither mental nor
sacramental, but corporal. And this kind in a strict acception is the loaf
made of wheat, or some like grain, Genesis 14. 18. Melchisedek King of Salem
brought forth bread and wine: but in a more general and large signification,
it is used in holy Scripture Cyril. apud Pa^ig. in loc.
pro omni comestibili, for all kind of food. As Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat Nomine panis intelligit^r omne necessarium ad alimentum
Aquin. and Carthusian. ibid.
bread: and in the Lords prayer, Give us this day our daily bread: where panis
is pan, every thing necessary for this our life. See 1. Sam. 14. 24. 2. Sam.
9. 10. Prou. 31. 14. Ierem. 11. 19. It is then a weak conceit of Ardens, and
the counterfeit Eusebius Emisenus, to note from hence the moderate diet of
Christ on the Sabbath day, whereas Cal^in. Are^. Vega.
eating of bread is as much as feasting or dining with the Pharisie. For if
there had been nothing but dry bread on the board, happily there would have
been less contending for place.

On the Sabbath day] The Pharisees inviting and our Saviors coming on this
day, to this dinner, evidently demonstrate that it is not unlawful to feast on
the Lords day. For if the Jews might entertain neighbors and friends on
their Sabbath: how much more Christians on our Sunday, being assured, that God
is worshipped even on this day Culman. in lot.
rather with works of hospitality and charity, then by fond macerating of
our bodies. I write not this against godly fasting, nor yet for ungodly
feasting. Moderation is the best dish at the table, for immoderate fasts
exceedingly dull us: and on the contrary, sanctified feasts in good company,
make us more fit for devotion and other duties of the Sabbath, especially when
Christ is in presence, when a good man is moderator at the board, whose speech
is Coloss. 4. 6.
powdered with salt Ephesians. 4. 29.
that it may minister grace to the bearers, edifying his host and all his
house. Christ herein showed himself thankful and faithful, he did not
bite his host in present, nor backbite him absent, but in requital of his good
cheer gave good words, and better advice. Christ was faithful also, for
whereas it is the fashion of parasites and trencher-Chaplaines to flatter, or at
the least, humor great men at their table: he did not devour the faults of
the chief Pharisie with his fowls, and his sin with his sauce, but correct
him and his, Ians^n. in lot.
instructing their souls while they feed his body. This ought to be the
center of all our conversation and conference, to make those which are bad,
good; and those which are good, better. So did Noe converse with them of the
old world; so Lot with them of Sodom; so Job with them of the land of Vz, and
so 1. Cor. 9. 22.
Paul with all men, using all means to save some.

The Pharisees had Pontan.
two faults especially, misconstruing of the Scriptures, and pride. Christ here
does rectify their error in both, in healing a sick man on the Sabbath, he
does instruct them in the true meaning of the fourth Commandment according to
the present occasion offered, and in his parable to the guests, he delivers
an excellent document concerning their ambition. He could have cured this man,
as he did many, with his bare word only; Ardent. Iansen.
but to show that all handy works, as these of charity, and other of
necessity, as to pull a beast out of a ditch, are not unlawful on the
Sabbath, he touched him, and by touching healed him.

Two circumstances amplify Christ's exceeding rich mercies in acting this
miracle: first, for that he did it unasked freely: secondly, for that he did
it with hazard of his credit stoutly. He did help the Luke 7.
Centurions servant, but upon entreatie: the Matthew. 15.
woman's daughter of Cana, but after a long and earnest suit: the blind Mark. 10.
Bartimeus, but after much crying, O son of David have mercy on me: the
Matthew. 17.
lunatike, but his father upon bowed knees asked this boon, Master have pity
on my son: whereas this man is cured instantly, without any request of his
friends, or prayer of himself. Again, Christ undertook this cure with hazard
of his honor, whereas other miracles usually wrought his glory. When he raised
from dead the widows son in Naim, all that were present praised God and
said, Luke 7. 16.
A great Prophet is risen up among us, and God has visited his people: when
he cured two blind men, Matthew. 9. They spread abroad his fame throughout all
that land: when he fed about five thousand with five barley loaves and two
fishes, all that saw the miracle, said, John 6. 14.
This of a truth is the same Prophet that should come into the world: when he
made the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, such as were spectators even
with open mouth as it were cried, Mark. 7. 37.
He has done all things well; but in helping this man after this manner on the
Sabbath, he knew that the Pharisees on the contrary would object that he had
done ill: and yet he first acted the miracle, then makes an apology for it,
answering their secret malice, which of you shall have an ox or an ass, etc.
Heming.
Teaching us hereby that we should not cease to proceed in well doing, though
an infinite number of potent enemies on every side combine themselves against
us.

Panigarol. part. 1. hom. in locum.
Some for the further amplifying of Christ's abundant goodness, imagine that
the sick man here was a parasite to the Pharisees, and that he came to this
feast of his own accord as a bait to catch Christ, and not with an intent to
be cured of his Savior. Maldonat.
Other hold this improbable, conceiving that he made no suite but held his
peace, rather out of Cyril.
fear then out of love to the Pharisees: he did happily believe in heart, but
lest the Pharisees should excommunicate him, he durst not openly confess with
his mouth that Jesus is the Lord. As Psalm. 39. 3.
David in another case, I held my tongue, and spoke nothing, I kept silence,
yea even from good words, but it was pain and grief to me. Howsoever it was,
here we may behold the riches of our Saviors exceeding great love, curing the
dropsiemans body Beda. Gregor.
together with the Pharisees soul. Heming.
Doubtless the diseased of the dropsy fell into it by disordered surfeiting
and drunkenness. Hence then observe, that Christ despises not those which
have cast themselves into sickness through their own fault, if they follow
this man's example: to wit, if they come where Christ is, and suffer themselves
to be touched and healed of him, if they come to Church, hear the Word, fall
to repentance, confessing their sins, and heartily craving pardon for the same.

The second chief part of this Gospel is the Pharisees malice, consisting of
three degrees. It was in the Pharisie great injustice to return evil for
good, but greater to do this under the pretense of love, yet greatest of all
under color of love at a feast. For Perkins Government of the tongue. chap. 7.
the time of mirth is at meals, at the table men have license to talk Odi
memorem compotorem: and ^itat and probat Marloras in loc.
freely, not only by the rules of humanity, because Gellius l. 13. cap. 11.
b^llaria maxim mellita quae non sunt mellita: but also by the grounds of
Divinity; for Judges 14. 12
Sampson at his marriage feast propounded a riddle to his friends, and the
faithful at Jerusalem did eat their meat together with gladness, Act. 2. 46.
Such then as observe the merry gestures, and catch at the pleasant words of
their guests at table, make their wine like Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
the poison of Dragons and the cruel gall of Aspes, heating their neighbors
and making them drunken ^abac. 2. 15.
that they may see their priuities.

The Epistle.
1. COR. 1. 4. I thank my God always on your behalf, etc.
THis Text is a cunning Aretius, Martyr. Piscat. and alij.
insinuation of our Apostle, for intending to chide the Corinthians, he begins
his Epistle with a commemoration of their virtues, that afterward he might more
freely without any suspicion of malice reprehend their vices: it consists

Aquin.
In

Commending them for the present: Calvin.
Generally, For the grace of God which is given you, etc. Particularly, rich in
all utterance and in all knowledge.
Comforting them against the time to come, which also shall strengthen you to
the end, etc.
An example worthy to be Gualter.
followed of every Preacher, lest by concealing the commendable gifts of his
auditors, and inculcating only their faults and follies, he breed hate to
himself and despair to them.

I thanke] By this all men, in more particular all Saercerius.
Ministers are taught not to repine, but to rejoice for the good things in
other, especially for the success of the Heming.
Gospel, out of a fellow feeling not only to weep with such as weep, but
also to be Romans 12. 15.
glad with such as are glad. The Sectaries of our days herein are very
defective, for whereas our 2. Cor. 11. 29.
Apostle said, Who is weak and I am not weak? They like busy Flies are
buzzing always on the soars and gaulds of the Church, and as for the manifold
gifts of God by which our Pastors are made rich in all utterance and in all
knowledge: what do their inuectiue Libels against our Clergy, but unworthily
disgrace these graces, in stead of giving thanks unto God always in our
behalf. For as some Hostus lib. 3. contra Brent. prologomen.
Papists affirm that Scripture cited by us is no Scripture: so some
Schismatikes have given out, that our preaching is no preaching, that our
learning is not sanctified, and that our utterance does not edify.

My God] Hereby Musculus, Heming.
not denying that he was God to them and all other, for Romans 10. 12.
he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call on him: Theophylact.
Martyr.
but out of a singular faith in God, and unfeigned love to them, esteeming that
his own good which happened well unto the Church: I thank my God on your
behalf: as the God of all is my God, so the good of all is my good; and I
thank the giver of all grace for it, and that not coldly, but with such an
earnest devotion Aretius in loc.
as if he were my God only; nor seldom, but always. A little love will be
mindful at sometime, but mine affection is so great unto you, that I thank
God always on your behalf. Paul surely did somewhat else then praise God for
his Corinthians: always therefore must not be construed Idem. Ibidem.
absolutely, but restrained and referred unto the present occasion of his
speech, as if he should have said, as often as I think of you, I thank God
for you, always in all my prayers, as it is Philip. 1. 4.

For the grace of God which is given you] Calvin. Gualter.
Lest he might here seem to flatter them in his commendation of their gifts,
he puts them in mind who gave them, and for what end. God is the giver of
every grace; Oecumen Pomeran. Aret
why then do you boast of your gifts, as if you received them not? 1. Cor. 4.
7. And he gave them unto you, not to make 1. Cor. 1. 10.
dissension in the Church and Schism, that some may 1. Cor. 3. 4.
side with Paul and other with Apollos: but for Piscator.
this end, that the testimony of Jesus Christ may be confirmed in you.

By Jesus Christ] Or as other translate according to the Greek, in Jesus
Christ: hereby signifying Sarcerius.
that the graces of God are given in Christ, and for Christ only, such as are
Christ's are made rich by him in all things, according to that of our Apostle,
1. Cor. 3. 22. All are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. Calvin.
Marlorat. Aret.
Interpreters observe that Paul speaking here metonimically, does understand
by this one word grace, not only the gifts of utterance and knowledge mentioned
in this Scripture, but all the benefits of Christ revealed in the whole
Gospel. And therefore Saint Com. in loc.
Ambrose and E^arrat. in loc.
Anselme excellently gloss the Text, Hoc constitutum est a Deo, vt qui credit
in Christum, saluus sit sine opere, sola fide gratis accipiens remissionem
peccatorum: It is ordained by God himself, that whosoever believes in Christ,
should be saved not by any work, but by faith alone, receiving freely pardon
of all his sins.

In all utterance, and in all knowledge] Sarcerius.
That is, in all doctrine, and in all understanding, whereby men are able to
discern between sound and false doctrine, Aretius.
the one concerning teachers, and the other hearers. Or by speech is meant the
gift of Aquin.
tongues, or the gift of Beza.
elocution, or the gift of preaching in Anselme.
every kind, giving Hebr* 5.
milk to babes, and strong meat to them of age; and by knowledge, a right
exposition of the Scripture. Now these two must go Aquin.
together, in as much as neither utterance without knowledge, nor knowledge
without utterance can edify: for he that abounds in his study with
understanding but wants a Coloss. 4* 3.
door of utterance to vent it, is like the man that had the rheum and could
not spet: on the contrary, he that has a world of words void of matter (as
Lib. 1. de Orat.
Tully speaks, Nulla subiecta sententia and scientia) is like the child who
blows in a little shell a great buble, which is so vain that it is marde as
soon as made.

These gifts of speech and understanding are named only, Martyr.
because the Corinthians abused them in their dissentions especially,
profaning the graces of God given (as our Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 12. 7.
elsewhere) to edify withal, unto the destruction and utter undoing of the
Church. If any shall object that all the faithful in Corinth had not these
gifts? Marlorat.
Answer is made that there was among them, as among us, and ever shall be such
a communion of saints; as that the praise which is indeed proper to some
particular men and members, is ascribed to the whole body of the Church in
general. And therefore Com. in loc.
Caietane notes accurately, that as (...) may be construed adiectiuely, ye are
made rich in all things: so likewise substantiuely, ye are made rich in all.
Applying Gods grace rather to the whole congregation in gross, then to
singular persons in several.

By the which things the testimony of Jesus Christ was confirmed in you]
Piscator.
The witness of Christ is nothing else but the witness of the blessed Apostles
concerning Christ Act. 1. 8. even the Musculus. Calutn. Gualter.
preaching of the Gospel, the sum whereof is to reveal Christ, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2. 3. So that the
meaning of Paul is plain, by these manifold graces as Martyr.
effects and fruits of the spirit, you may know that you have received the
true Gospel: or by these two gifts, utterance and knowledge, as isntrumental
causes the testimony of Christ is confirmed in you. Learn from hence to
reverence those men which are endued with these means of thy salvation,
evermore thank thy God in the behalf of Schools and Universities, as the
common nurseries of all utterance and knowleege. Dr. Couel pref. before des. of
M. Hooker
It is said of reverend Hooker, truly, that he was borne for the good of
many; but few borne for the good of him. In this unthankful age some rich in
the graces of God are neglected, and other rich in the gifts of the world are
preferred. But Psalm. 37. 1.
fret not thy self because of the ungodly, for learned men forgotten in States
and not living in eminent places, are Advancement of learning, lib. 1. page 13.
like the Images of Cassius and Brutus in the Funeral of Iunia: of which not
being represented as other were, Tacitus says, eo ipso praefulgebant quod non
visebantur. If thou well employ Gods talent of utterance and knowledge, that the
testimony of Christ may be confirmed in other, assuredly (noble yoke fellow)
thy credit is honor enough, and thy work it self a sufficient reward unto
thy self. Remember that the profitable servant said not in the Matthew. 25.
Gospel, Ecce mihi lucrifeci: sed ecce tibi lucrifeci domine.

So that ye are behind in no gift] Calvin. Heming. Gualter.
That is, in no necessary gift whereby ye might attain saving knowledge,
wanting no grace competent unto such as Ardens.
are in via, 1. Pet. 2. 11.
strangers and pilgrims on earth. Or as Paul expounds himself, behind in no
gift incident to such as wait for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. It
is true that now we know but in 1. Cor. 13. 9.
part, and prophecy but in part: our greatest perfections have their
imperfections, our gifts are given by measure, though happily Luke 6. 38.
shaken together and pressed down, yet not running over as long as we wait
for Christ: but when he shall appear, when that which is perfect is come, then
that which is imperfect shall be abolished.

Appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ] The second coming of Christ is called a
revelation, or an appearing in respect of us, and inrespect of himself. In
respect of us, for at his coming 1. Cor. 4. 5.
he will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of
our hearts manifest. At that time it shall be known who be Gods ele^t, and
who reprobrate; then our Lord shall unfold the Dan. 7. 10. Apoc. 20. 12.
Cunctaque cunctorum cunctis arcana patebun^.
books of conscience, which all the time of this life were shut up closely,
that all the world may read what is written in the consciences of all men, and
according to the contents of these records judgment shall be made. Many
puissant Princes and sage Philosophers have their honorable memory magnified
in this world, whose souls in hell are terribly tortured, in which respect one
said of Aristotle; Woe to thee Aristotle that art praised where thou art not,
and art tormented where thou art. On the contrary, blessed art thou Queen
Elizabeth, O thrice happy, for albeit treacherous Papists, enemies of Gods
grace, dishonor thee where thou art not, assuredly thou art comforted where
thou art. 1 John. 3. 2.
Now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we shall be: for
Coloss. 3. 4.
whenever Christ (which is our life) shall show himself, we shall appear
with him in glory.

Secondly, the coming of Christ is a revelation in respect of himself: for
whereas he came first in humility, being John 1. 10.
in the world, but not known of the world, he shall now come with clouds in
such a majesty, Apoc. 1. 7.
that every eye shall see him. Matthew. 24. 27.
As the lightning comes out of the East, and shines into the West: so shall
also the coming of the son of man be, that he may not only discover
himself in heaven to the good; but also that on earth where his ignominy was
most apparent he may manifest himself to the wicked. And for this cause the
place of judgment (as Vide Riber. in Joel, cap. 3. Number. 2. Lorin. in Act. 1.
11. Lombar. 4. sent. distinct. 48. Aquin. and Altissiodor. ibid.
some conjecture) shall be the valley of Iosaphat, near to Jerusalem and the
Mount of Olives, that in the very same place where he was judged, condemned,
crucified; all may see him with great honor to be the Judge both of the
quick and of the dead, Acts 10. 42. and that he who did ascend to heaven in
the sight of a few Disciples, shall descend (as it is foretold by the glorious
Acts 1. 11.
Angels) in the sight of the whole world to judge them all in righteousness.
All which is exceeding necessary for the credit of his government in this
life, that all may see that he was both wise and holy in all whatsoever he
permitted or ordained, and that neither the Psalm 83. Jeremy 32. 1.
good may complain any more that virtue was oppressed, nor the Habac. 1. 6.
wicked glory that vice was exalted. He shall in that day separate the Matthew.
3. 12. and 13. 30.
wheat from the cockle, the grain from the chafe, the Matthew 13. 48
good fish from the bad, and the Matthew. 25. 32
sheep from the goats: and the good he shall place at the right hand, taken
up (as 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
Paul says) into the air that all the world may know them, and honor them as
Saints: and the wicked he shall place at his left hand, leaving them upon the
earth that all may behold and despise them as sinners.

Which also shall strengthen you to the end] Heming.
We are not so perfect, but that we may be more perfect until Christ appear.
Ye must ask therefore this confirmation of God, that ye may be strengthened
every day more and more to the end. Philip 1. 6.
He that has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ. 1 Th^ss 5 23
He will sanctify you throughout in soul and body, Phi^ip 2. 1^.
working in you both the will and the deed, even of his own good pleasure. 1.
Cor 1. 9.
God is faithful, ever dealing with his servants according to his word. As
then he Matthew. 28. 20
promised, even so will he be with us until the worlds end, that we may be
blameless at the day of his coming, not absolutely without sin: for 1. John
1. 8.
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.
But he shall so prevent us in all our doings with his holy grace, that we may
li^ Anselm.
sine criminali crimine, Ardens.
that we fall not into such heinous sins as may shu^ us out of his favor;
Caietan.
or if at any time we fall into those sins, he shall so Ephesians. 3. 16.
strengthen us with power by his spirit in the inner man, as that we shall
again recover our selves, and so be blameless at the day of his coming: or
Eng. Gloss. Martyr. Marlorat.
blameless, because there is no condemnation unto such as are in Christ, Romans
8. 1. He is our righteousness, and sanctification, ^. Cor. 1. ^0. even the
propiti^tion for our sins, 1. John 2. 2. covering our iniquities and
forgiving our unrighteousness, Psalm. 32. 1. and therefore we shall be
blameless in the day of the Lord, because nothing shall be laid unto the
charge of Gods elect, Romans 8. 33. In that hour we shall hear this happy doom
delivered by Christ our Savior, Come ye blessed of my father, etc. He says
not, Come ye blessed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; nor ye blessed of Moses, or
of the Patriarchs and Prophets, or ye blessed of God: but ye blessed of my
father. Insinuating that all these blessings proceeded only from the fatherly
love that God bears us in respect of his son. Come ye blessed therefore,
possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: as
for the wicked, earth shall open under their feet, and the devil laying hold
on them they shall all together go down Psalm. 55. 16.
quick into ^ell, and there being covered with huge mountains of earth, shall
be bolted up with eternal bolts, and bound hand and foot with chains of
perpetual damnation. O Father of mercy, which have placed us in this world as
in the middle between heaven and hell, Bernard. ser. 31. ex paruu.
even as Nouices are in a house of probation: assist and strengthen us with thy
Spirit to the end, that we may be found blameless in the end. Lord make us
here thy subjects in the kingdom of grace, that hereafter we may be thy
Saints in the kingdom of glory.

Amen.
The Gospel.
MATH 22. 34. When the Pharisees had heard that Jesus had put the Sadduces to
silence, etc.
THis text is an H^ing. Ferus. Ponta^. in locu^.
abridgement of the whole Scripture, to wit, of all the doctrine contained in
the Gospel and in the Law: for the pi^h of all the Gospel is to believe that
Christ is God and man, as it is said here, the Lord of David, and the son of
David: and the 1. Tim. 1. 5.
end of all the Law is to love God with all thine heart, and thy neighbor as
thy self: for on these two Commandments (as our text tells) hung all the
Law and the Prophets, Piscator.
Interpreters of the Law.

When the Pharisees had heard that Jesus had put the Sadduces to silence] The
Sadduces, Herodians and Pharisees were sectaries of diverse and Joseph.
antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 2.
adverse factions, all differing one from other, and yet (as we read in this
present Chapter) all these join together in confuting Christ: yea Luke 23. 12.
Pilat and Herod mortal enemies are made friends, and agree together in
confounding Christ: according to that of the Prophet in the second Psalm, The
Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Rulers take counsel together against the
Lord and against his anointed. And therefore when as we shall see Turk against
Jew, Jew against Turk, Pope against both, and all of them against Gods Israel:
or when we behold the Seminary Priest against the Jesuit, and the Jesuit
against the Seminary Priest, and both against the Protestant: or when as
happily we feel the brethren of division against the brethren of separation,
and the brethren of separation against the brethren of division, and both
against Englands conformable Clergy: let us remember our Saviors lot here,
and lesson Matt. 10. 24.
elsewhere, The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master is, and the servant as
his Lord is. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more them of the household? And let all true Christians Ephesians. 4. 3.
endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Tha^ as there
is a combination of Pharisees, a society of Jesuits, a congregation of
Separists, a brotherhood of Schismatikes; even so to confront all these, let
there be a communion of Saints and a perpetual holy league in truth of
orthodoxall Catholics.

They came together] It is a true saying, B. Latimer.
bonum est Concilium, sed bonorum, a Council is good, if it consist of such
men as are good: otherwise the council of the wicked Psalm. 22. 16.
lay siege against the godly, when Pharisees are met in a convocation they
Psalm. 7. 15.
travel with mischief, and bring forth ungodliness. Truth, and many good men
for the truth has been condemned in Councels, as See Doctor Fulke in Tit. 3.
Chrysostom, in a Council holden at Chalcedon, Athanasius in a Council holden
at Antioche, John Husse in a Council holden at Constance. The Councels of
Ariminium and Nicomedia decreed for the Arrians against Christ's Divinity: the
second Council of Ephesus for Eutyches and Dioscorus against the truth of
Christ's humanity: the Council of Trent against many sound doctrines of Gods
holy word, in so much as the Papists of France protested against it in the
days of Francis the first, openly delivering in print, Jesuits Cat. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
that it is to be refused touching discipline as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.

And one of them] Calvin.
Elected of the rest as the mouth of the company, being of a more ready wit and
accurate judgment, asked him a question, tempting him: Ardens.
not as God tempted Abraham for his trial, or as a Schoolmaster does his
scholar for instruction, but as Satan a Christian to delude him. Our blessed
Savior therefore being Wisdom it self, does answer the Doctor of the Law out
of the Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
books and bowels of the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, etc. As if he should say, though other gods are contented with Pontan.
outward and eye-seruice; the Lord thy God is a Ioh. 4. 24.
Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit: Pr^. 23. 2^.
son give me thine heart: not a piece nor a part, but all thine heart, all
thy soul, all thy mind. See the further exposition of this and that other
Commandment touching love toward our neighbors, Gospel on the 13. Sunday
after Trinity.

This is the first, and the greatest Commandement] Anse^me. Ardens. Aretius.
First in order, and greatest in honor. First in respect of the Granat. Con 1.
in loc.
Law giuers intention, who wrote all Scriptures and made all creatures
especially for this end, that he might be loved above all things. And first in
the Law-writers pen, as being Heming.
first set down: and first in it own nature, for as much as the true fear and
love of God is the Psalm. 111. 10 Ecclesiasticus 25. 13.
beginning of all wisdom, without which it is impossible to love what we
should, as we should, for we cannot love our neighbors as our selves, except
first we love God more then our selves. And the first as Marlorat. Idem Rabanus
apud Aquin. in loc.
comprehending in it all the Commandments of the first table, virtualiter
continens reliqua, for he that loves God with all his heart, soul, mind: will
neither commit idolatry, nor blaspheme his name, nor d Caietan.
profane his Sabbath.

And this Commandment is greatest, as having the greatest Heming.
Object: for Ecclesiastes 5. 7.
God is higher then the highest, a great King Psalm. 95. 3.
above all gods: and greatest, as requiring the greatest Aretius.
perfection of love, to wit, all our heart, all our soul, all our mind: and
greatest, in that Granat.
all other great Commandments are subordinate to it: and greatest, as Coster.
endurig the greatest time, for though that prophesying be abolished, or
knowledge vanish, or the tongues cease, 1. Cor. 13. 8.
yet love never falls away. To conclude with Aretius in one line, Maximum est
obiecto, Iure, dignitate, difficultate, perpetuitate, fine. From hence we may
know which are our greatest iniquities, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Heresy,
profaning of the Sabbath, outrageous swearing, in a word, every trespass
against the first Table, being committed in the same measure of malice, is a
greater sin then any transgression of the second Table: because to love God
with all our heart, soul, mind, is the first and greatest Commandment, and
so by consequent, optimi corruption pessima, the breach of the greatest
ordinance is the greatest offense.

And the second is like unto it] Heming.
Not like in object, but in subject, Iansen. Con. cap. 118.
as being both precepts of love: or like in respect of their Coster.
bond, as tying all alike: or like Euthym.
because these two mutually depend each on other, for he that loves God with
all his heart, will also love his neighbor as himself; and whosoever loves
his neighbor as himself, loves him assuredly for Gods sake, August. Confess.
lib. 4. c. 9.
amicum in Domino, inimicum propter Dominum. Or like, Aretius. Heming.
because we must love both God and our neighbor unfeignedly, 1 John 3. 18.
not in word and in tongue only, but in truth and in deed. Ordinarily men use
their lovers as Diez. Con. 2. in loc.
ladders, only to climb by, the ladder is laid on our shoulders, and embraced
with both hands in our bosom so long as we stand in any need of it, but
afterward it is cast into some corner, or hanged up by the walls: even so when
neighbors have served once the turns of ambitious and covetous wretches
either for their profit or preferment, instantly they be forgotten: for it is
an infallible position (as See Cominaeus hist. l. 3. c. 12.
Cominaeus observes) among statesmen in eminent place, to love those least
unto whom heretofore they were bound most. Or like, Marlorat.
for that as the first is the fountain of all duty required in the first
Table: so this second Commandment of all offices enjoined in the second Table;
for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law, Romans 13. 8.

On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets] As being their
principal argument and a^me, Euthym. in Matthew. 7. Iansen Pontan. Coster. in
loc.
for whatsoever is recorded in Moses, or in the Prophets, or in the Psalms, or
in any Scripture else, may be reduced unto them: and is written especially for
this end, that we may love God above all things, and our neighbors as our
selves. And therefore let not poor men object that they cannot purchase Gods
book, nor ignorant people complain that they cannot understand and remember
the contents of holy Scripture: for behold, Christ has here provided a little
Bible for thee, which thou may easily get, and ever keep in memory; Love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and thy neighbor as thy self.

While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them] One Pharisie did
assault Christ, that if he were conquered, his shame might seem the less; if
conqueror, his victory might appear the greater: but Christ opposes a whole
Council of Pharisees, and so confounds them all in asking one question
only, that no man afterward durst ask him any more questions. Why this
question was asked, and how it may be well answered: see Galatin: de Arcanis
lib: 8. cap: 24. Iansen: con: cap: 119. Maldonat, Calvin, Genebrard in Psalm.
dixit Dominus domino. Marlorat. Aretius, Panigarol, in loc. I conclude with I^
Psa. 109.
Augustines gloss, Quomod^ nos diceremus, nisi a te disceremus? nunc ergo quia
didicimus, dicimus. In principio eras verbum, and verbum eras apud Deum, and
Deus eras verbum, omnia per te facta sunt, ecce Dominus David, sed nos propter
infirmitatem nostram, quia caro desperata iacebamus, verbum caro factus es, vt
habitares in nobis, ecce filius David. Certe tu in forma Dei cum esses, non
rapinam arbitratus es esse aequalis Deo: Ideo Dominus David. Sed teipsum
exinanisti formam serui accipiens, inde filius David. Denique and in ipsa
interrogatione tua dicens, quomodo filius eius est, non te filium eius negasti,
sed modum in quo id fieret inquisisti.

The Epistle.
EPHESIANS. 4. 17. This I say, and testify through the Lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other Gentiles walk, etc.
THis text consists of a

Soul, giving not only light, but also Habet vim ob^estationis and
asseuerationis magnae. Aretius in loc.
life to the present exhortation of Paul: I say this, and testify through the
Lord, Primasius. Lombard. Anse me.
that is, I do not only desire, but (as he speaks elsewhere) 2. Tim. 4. 1
I charge you before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead. I call God to Oecumen.
witness that I have taught you the truth, I testify this as Christ's 2. Cor.
5. 20.
Ambassador, Marlorat.
it is not my word, but his will. And therefore Heb. 13. 22.
suffer the words of exhortation, because whosoever hears his, hears him,
Luke 10. 16. and he that despises, despises not man, but God: 1. These. 4. 8.
Body, that we should walk Not as Gentiles in their Understanding, blind and
ignorant. Will, obstinate and alienated far from a godly life, Aquin.
Sinning
Wilfully, giving themselves over unto wantonness. Actually, to work all manner
of uncleanness. Insatiably, with greediness.
But as Christians in Putting off their old man, that is, their old
conversation in time past as being corrupt. Thought, unadvised anger, with all
bitterness of spirit. Ardens.
In Word, lying and filthy communication. Deed, unjust deling and stealing.
Putting on the new man according to Gods image, renewed Caietan. Aquin.
in all the powers of the Mind Rational, in putting away lying and speaking
the truth. Irascible, in being angry without sin. Co^cupiscible, in stealing
no more, but laboring etc.



That ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walke] The most obseruable
point in all this exhortation is Paul's Antithesis or checker-worke, as it were
the black of the Gentiles, and white of the Christians. The Gentiles are
blinded in their understanding and ignorant: but Christians have learned him in
whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2. 3. hearing him
in his Aretius
word, and taught of him also by his Lombard. Auselm. Marlorat.
spirit, leading them into all truth, John 16. 13. The Gentiles by the means
of their blindness and ignorance walk in vanity of their mind, far from a
godly life, committing sin, not out of passion and infirmity, but out of
election and iniquity, giving themselves over unto wantonness, and that not
in thought only, but in act also, working and that all manner of vncleannsse,
and that even with greediness insatiably, Philip. 3. 19.
glorying in their shame, and, as Calvin. Aretius.
some Divines aptly construe the word (...), contending for the victory in
villainy. But Christians having learned Christ, whose doctrine Tit. ^. 12.
forbids all ungodliness, ought to put on the new man, that is, new manners,
all the days of their life serving God in righteousness and true holiness.
The Gentiles unregenerate are given to lying and forgerie: but every Christian
regenerate will speak the truth unto his neighbor, as being members one of
another. Unregenerate men in their anger offend God, and give place to the
devil: but men regenerate, will not let the sun go down upon their wrath:
in a Ardens. Caietane. Marlorat.
literal exposition, Horat.
ira furor breuis est, all their unadvised anger is not a day long: or in a
mystical sense, they be so moderate as that neither Hierome. Aquin.
reason the Ecclesiast. 12 2
light of the mind, nor Lombard. Anselme.
Christ the sun of righteousness shall at any time forsake them in their
fury. Men unregenerate make 1. Tim 6. 5.
gain their godliness, robbing openly, stealing secretly: but a regenerate
man is content to labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he may
give to him that needs. He labors, as knowing that the end of lasinesse
is the beginning of lewdness, Laurent. Pisanus euangei^e. paradox.
finis otij resurgere ad prauum negotium. And he labors Occumen.
not as a thief to do mischief, but the thing which is good; Ardens.
Aretius. Marlorat.
exercising himself in some vocation or trade that is good, and that for good,
that he may rather give then take from other; acknowledging that axiom to be
true, Laurent. Pisan. vbi s^pra.
Magis delinquit dives non largiendo superflua, quam pauper rapiendo
n^cessaria. Unregenerate men have filthy communication and unsavory: but the
speech of a regenerat^ man is so Colos. 4. 6.
powdered with salt, that as often as need is it may (...) grace to the hearers.
In a word, unregenerate men are full of bitterness, and fierceness, and
wrath, and roaring, and cursed speaking, and all maliciousness: but regenerate
men are courteous one to another, merciful, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake forgave them.

These particulars have bin discussed often elsewhere, but in the whole you may
note Sarcerius and Piscator in loc.
two maine parts of repentance, namely contrition or mortification in putting
off the old man: renouation or vivification in putting on the new man. And this
newness of life must be both outward, and inward: outward, in righteousness
toward men, and holiness toward God, opening our lips to speak that which is
good, and laboring with our hands to do that which is good. If idolatrous
Gentiles and superstitious Papists in old time did more then they knew: what a
shame lies upon us if we know more then we do? This renouation also must be
spiritual and inward, as it is in the text, renewed in the spirit of your mind,
Anselme.
that is, in the spirit which is the mind, Hierome. Ardens.
or in the spirit and mind. In the Calvin. Caietan.
supreme part of the mind, as well as in the will and affections: or in the
mind made Lombard. Aquin.
spiritual after God in righteousness and true holiness. He who first made
this Image restores it again being lost, ipse qui fecit reficit: Ardens.
albeit this newness be found in us, it is not of us, it proceeds only from
the Lord who says, Apoc. 21. 5.
Ecce noua facio omnia; Behold I make all things new. We are his workmanship
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. and therefore we must
pray with David, O God renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. and
embrace the Gospel of Christ as the Romans 1. 16.
power of God unto salvation, instructing us how to live soberly, righteously,
and holily Tit. 2. 12.

Whosoever is a scorner and a despiser of this soulesauing grace, grieves the
spirit of God, and gives place to the devil. It is true that the Spirit cannot
properly Thom. part. 1 quaest. 21. ^rt. 3.
grieve, because the mercies of God are not passive but active, succouring not
suffering in our misery. Primafius. Lombard.
Yet a man that is given over unto wickedness, does occasion other in whom the
Spirit dwells, exceedingly to lament and grieve for his faults and follies: or
he may be said to grieve the Spirit, Anse^me.
because filthy communication is displeasing to the Spirit: or for that as
Augustine. epist. 23.
much as in him is, he does extinguish the Spirit, and drive him out of his
mansion, and so gives place to Satan, entering in at two doors especially
says In Psalm. 14^ idem Lombard. in loc.
Augustine, Per ostium cupiditatis and timoris, aut cupis aliquid terrenum and
kac intrat, aut times aliquid terrenum and hac intrat.

On the contrary, whosoever is renewed in the spirit of his mind, opens a
door to Christ, Apocal. 3. 20. and Christ dwells in him, Ephesians. 3. 17. and he
lives in Christ Galath. 2. 20. nay the good man Romans 13. 14.
puts on Christ, and is as it were a walking Casaubon. not. in epist. Nys. ad
Eustat.
picture of Christ, so the text expressly, Galath. 4. 19. my little children,
of whom I travel in birth; again, until Christ be formed in you: which Com.
post. in Galath.
Hierome glosseth aptly thus, In illo vere Christus formatur, qui virtutem
fid^i eius intelligit, and in quo omnis conuersatio eius exprimitur atque
depingitur. Dr. Fulke in loc.
In this life this renouation is only begun, and not perfect until this mortal
put on immortality. S. Lib. de Not. and Great. cap. vlt.
Augustine notably to this purpose, Charity begun, is righteousness begun:
charity increased is righteousness increased: great charity is great
righteousness: perfect charity, perfect righteousness. Idem epi. 29.
Charitas in alijs mayor, in alijs minor, in alijs nulla: There be many degrees
of charity, some have less, other have more: sed plenissima, quae iam non
possit augeri, qua^ diu homohic viuit, est in nemine: but full and perfect
charity cannot be found in any man so long as he lives here. To conclude this
argument in three words only, justifying righteousness is perfect, but not
inherent: sanctifying righteousness is inherent, but not perfect: glorifying
righteousness is both inherent and perfect.

The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 9. 1. Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his
own City, etc.
THis History co^mends unto your consideration

Actors, Agent, Porters of the Palsie-man as Procters helping: Behold they
brought, etc. Christ, as the chief Doctor healing: infirmities of Soul, Thy
sins be forgiven thee. Body, Arise, take up thy bed etc.

Patient: a man, a sicke-man, a man sick of the palsy, so sick that he could
neither go, nor stand, nor sit, but lie in his bed.
Auditors, The Scribes, murmuring at the matter and blaspheming Christ, verse.
3. The people, maruelli^g at the miracle and glorifying God, ver. 8.

Jesus entered into a ship and passed ouer] It is written of Erasmus in eius
ritapraefix. tom. 1. Hieron.
Hierome that he spent four years in a Desert of Syria so studiously, that
he did allow himself but a little time for sleep, less for meat, none for
idleness. But our blessed Savior neither immured in a wall, nor Cloystered in
an Abbey, nor hidden in a Wilderness, Act. 10. 38.
went about doing good from Coast to Coast, and from Country to Country, from
the Gadarens unto Galil^: whose Heming.
diligence you must according to your several occupations and occasions
imitate so fast as you can, and so far as you may; knowing that it is
impossible not to find ill in idle: Lament. Pisanus Euangel. paradox.
Hominem ot iosum non esse malum impossible, quia nihil agendo dis^u male
agere. From hence likewise we may note Christ's unspeakable goodness, who came
to the Gergese^s ^ F^rus c^. 1. in loc.
before they desired him, and stayed in their country till they rejected him as
being prior in amore, posterior in odi^: loning us 1. John 4. 19.
first before we loved him, and never forsaking us until we forsake him: as he
speaks by the mouth of his holy Hosea 13. 9.
Prophet, O Israel hurt is from thy self; but help is in me.

Into his own citis] The man sick of the palsy was cured in Capernaum, as
Saint Mark reports in his second Chapter at the first verse: but Christ as we
find in the Gospel of Saint Matthew was borne at Matthew. 2. 1.
Bethlehem, and brought up at Matthew. 2 23.
Nazaret: how then accord you these places? De consensu Euangel l. 2. cap. 25
Idem Anselm. in loc.
Augustine does answer, that Capernaum was the chief, and as it were
Metropolitan City of all the Galileans, and therefore in what place soever of
Galile Christ was, he might be said to be in Capernaum, as the whole Roman
Empire spread far and wide was termed Rome, and all the parts of
Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, take their denomination from
Huntingdon, Cambridge, Bedford, the principal head towns of those countries.
And this exposition is received by the In loc.
Penner of the Ordinary Gloss, Beda, Hugo, Strabus and other, apud Maldonat.
in loc. But Idem Theophi. lact. Euthym. Beza in loc.
Chrysostom gives a more probable satisfaction unto the present objection,
affirming that Christ was borne in Bethlehem, and bred in Nazaret; but
afterward dwelt in Capernaum especially, showing his greatest miracles (as
Matt. 11. 23.
himself witnesses) in that City; Thou Capernaum, which art lifted up unto
heaven, shall be brought down to hell: for if the great works, which have
been done in thee, had been done among them of Sodom, they had remained to this
day. So that Capernaum is called here Christ's own City, because Matthew. 4. 13.
leaving Nazareth, he went and dwelt in Capernaum. Kilius in l^.
Hence we may learn that every town which is adorned with the Gospel is
Christ's own City, there jesus is present in his Sermons, in his Sacraments,
in his gifts, in his grace. Diez Con. 1. in loc.
So long as the children of Israel obeyed God, and walked in his ways
according to his word, so long they were called his people. Come says the
Exodus 3. 10.
Lord to Moses, I will send the to Pharaoh, that thou may est bring my people
the children of Israel out of Egypt: but when once they were Psalm. 106. 38.
stained with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions,
in so much as they Ibid. ver. 20.
turned their glory into the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay: the Lord
speaking unto Moses his servant, calls them not as before my people, but Exodus
33. 1.
the people, or according to the vulgar, Thy people. So Jerusalem once Psalm.
87. 2.
Gods city, was afterward by Matthew. 23. 37.
killing the Prophets, and rejecting the Lord of the Prophets, a den of
thieves, Matthew. 21. 13. So Rome was in Paul's age the Romans 1. 7.
beloved Church of Christ, but since her erroneous doctrine, as the wine of her
fornication, has intoxicated the Kings and inhabitants of the earth, Apocal.
17. 2. what is she but the Apocal. 17. 5.
mother of abomiuations, a synagogue of Sa^han, a seat of Antichrist.

It may be further objected here, that the Matthew. 8. 20.
Son of man had not so much as an hole wherein to rest his head, and therefore
no City of his own. To which, answer may be, Musculus in loc.
that the holy Ghost (in these two contrary texts as they seem) does insinuate
that lesson secretly, which Paul elsewhere delivers openly, to wit, that we
should 1. Cor. 7. 31.
use the world as if we used it not, 2. Cor. 6. 10.
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

They brought to him a man sick of the palsy lying in a bed] In these Porters
and Procters observe with Postil. in loc.
Hemingius and Soarez Culman.
other, unfeigned love to their friend, and a lively faith in Christ: in being
Job 29. 15.
feet to the lame, great love. But in bringing him unto Christ, and that after
such a strange manner as Saint Cap. 2. 4.
Mark reports it, uncovering the roof of the house where Christ was, and
letting down their sick neighbor in a bed, and when he was so brought unto
Christ holding it sufficient to present Deauxamis in loc.
miserum ante misericordem, an object of misery to the father of mercy,
greater faith. Other happily would have powered out a long prayer unto Christ in
word, or have given up a large petition in the behalf of their friend in
writing: but they were well assured, as Paraph. in 5. Luke.
Erasmus elegantly, that the distressed in his couch, eo magis loquebatur
misericordi medico, quia loqui non poterat. And therefore the text says in the
next clause, that Jesus saw the faith of them. Zepper. con. 1. in loc.
As God, he saw their faith, as he saw the thoughts of the Scribes: and as man,
he saw their faith by their works. He saw the faith of the porters in
bringing, and of the palsy man in suffering himself to be brought in such a
manner: and therefore Christ, the Luke 2. 25.
consolation of Israel, affoords him instantly comfort both in word, and deed.
In word, Son be of good cheer, whosoever believes in Christ, John 1. 12.
has power to be the son of God: and if thou be Gods son, thou may be
very well of good cheer; for your Matthew. 6. 8. 33.
father in heaven knows your wants, and provides all things necessary for
you. Indeed, healing first his sins, and then his sores.

Thy sins are forgiven thee] Where first observe, that Christ is so good as
his word, yea better then his promise: for whereas he says, Matthew. 7. 7.
ask and ye shall have, he granted here to the palsy man before he did
ask, and more then he did ask. Musculus in loc.
We read not that the patient himself, or his agents exhibited any petition
unto Christ in his behalf, yet the Lord heard the Psalm. 10. 19.
desire of the poor, yea the very groans of his servants 1. Sam. 1. 13.
not expressed, Hilarious apud Lilium in loc. So God unto Moses, Exodus 14. 15.
oration licet tacens est Deo clamor. His palsy was prayer enough, and his
faith a sufficient friend for his way to the God of all comfort. Again, this
patient came to Christ especially, if not only, to be cured of his corporal
infirmity: but behold his spiritual iniquities are healed also. Son be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. 1. Kings 3.
King Solomon desired of God only, that he would give him an understanding
heart to judge his people: but the Lord granted him not only wisdom in such
a plentiful manner, as that none were like him in understanding either before
or after his time: but also bestowed on him other blessings of riches, honor,
and prosperity which he did not ask. 1. Sam. 9.
Saul seeking for Asses only, found a kingdom. Augustine. Confess. lib. 9.
cap. 10.
Monica begged of God that her son Augustine might one day turn Christian
and Catholic: but he proved also the most illuminate Doctor of all the
Fathers. As when Judges 5.
Sisera asked water, Iael gave him milk: and as when Gehezi begged of Naaman
one talent, he presently said unto him, 2 Kings 5. 23.
Yea take two talents, and he compelled him, and bound two talents of silver
in two bags: even so God deals exceeding abundantly with us above all that
we ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 30.

Secondly, in that Christ here said to the patient, Thy sins are forgiven
thee, before he said, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk; Fe^us and Mald^nat.
in loc.
he does insinuate that first he should have craved pardon for his sins,
and then afterward have desired help for his sickness; that Matthew. 6. 33.
first he should have sought the kingdom of God, and then all other things
should have been cast upon him. Ordinarily men are too careful for their
bodies, and too negligent in doing right to their souls; in so much as Sir
William Co. newallis essay. 12.
one said, Our bodies are made gentlemen, but our minds are used as slaves.
Every man in his right wits affects a good servant, a good son, a good
friend, a good sield. Nay every man is desirous his house, his horse, his hose
should be good, he will have every thing good about him, only not caring if
his soul be bad in him. O wretched wight, says Sermon. 145. de tempore.
Augustine, quid de te tu ipse male meruisti? inter bonarua non vis esse malum
nisi teipsum: How did thou deserve so much ill of thy self, as that among
all thy goods only thy self art bad.

I observe that Christ like a good Physician did first purge his patient, and
take away the Hierom^. The^hylact. Euthym.
matter of (...) disease, that he might the better work his cure. 1. Cor. 11.
30. John 5. 14.
Sin is the cause of all diseases, and therefore Christ who was without
sin, was also without sickness, he took upon him (as the Thom. 3. part.
quaest. 14. art. 4. Suarez in 3. Thom. disputat. 32. and Senten. in 3. sent.
distinct. 15.
schoolmen in this very well) infirmitates speciei, sed non indiuidui. Common
infirmities unto the whole nature of mankind, as to be weary, to thirst,
hunger, mourn: but not the particular infirmities of every singular person, as
the blindness of Bartimeus, the fever of the Rulers son, the palsy of this
patient lying in his bed. Indeed it is said, Esaias 53. 4. that he took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. But S. 1. Epist. 2. 24.
Peter interprets it of our Saviors passion, ( his own self bare our sins
in his body on the tree. Saint Chap. 8. 17.
Matthew construeth it of his healing all kind of diseases. See ^. Bilson sermon.
of Christ's suffering, page 261.
Other expound it thus, he took upon him our pain, that is, whatsoever
infirmity was in him, it was only for our sake, not for his own sin: for
so the Prophet explanes himself in the words immediately following, he was
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and with his
stripes we are healed. If any then be sick, let them humbly confess their
sins, and heartily crave forgiveness of the same, Perkius treat. of dying
well: and Coster. con. in euang. Dom. 18. post Pentecost.
first consulting with a Physician for the soul, then entertaining a Physician
for the body.

4. Hence learn Heming.
that Christ has not an eye so much to the greatness of our sins, as to our
faith. If he see thy faith, he will wink at thy fault. When the blessed
thief had confessed him on the cross, Luk 23. 42. 33
O Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: Christ instantly
forgetting all his former sins, especially respects his present confession,
answering him exceeding graciously, to day shall thou be with me in paradise.
When Mark. 10. 52.
Bartimeus had cried, Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me; Christ
answered forthwith unto the comfort of his soul, Go thy way, thy faith has
saved thee. This palsie-man had sins in the plural number: original, as
being universal: and actual, as being the special causes of his disease;
which not unlikely was occasioned either by some disquiet of mind, or else by
some disdier of body: yet (as you see) so soon as Christ perceived the faith
of himself and his friends, he said (as not respecting their Culman.
other virtues, or his other vices) O son be of good cheer thy sins are
forgiven thee.

5. In that Christ said here, thy sins are forgiven thee, notwithstanding
he knew the Scribes would murmr and mutter against his speech: Heming.
he teaches us to be faithful in our calling, and diligent in doing our
duty, mauger the beard of all captious and cauilling adversaries. As S^m. 3.
in natal. Dom.
Bernard said of another text, Luke 2. 8. Haec mea sunt, mihi apponuntur, mihi
proponuntur imitanda. This was spoken by Christ, and written by Matthew for our
instruction. Has then almighty God given such power unto men, as to pronounce
the pardon of sin to the sick man in his bed? Is the doctrine of confession
and absolution agreeable to the Scriptures, and practice of the Church as well
present as primitive? then albeit some scribbling Scribe, pen an invectiue
pamphlet against a discreet Pastor executing this office, or some
selfe-conceited Pharisie tell the people, this man blasphemeth: he may
notwithstanding (upon good information of Calvin. Inflit. lib. 3. cap. 4. 21.
22.
faith and repentance, as Christ in this place) say to the sick sinner in his
bed, thy sins are forgiven thee, and by Christ's authority committed unto
him, I absolve thee. That absolution as well private as public belongs
principally, yea properly tanquam ex officio to the Minister, as Christ's
ambassador in his ecclesiastical function: I refer you to the Postils of
Melancthon, Culman, Zepperus upon this place: to Martin Bucer in Inter scripta
A^glicana, page 688.
articulis concordiae: Melancthon in Matthew. 18. verse. 18: and in Johan. 20.
verse. 23: and in tract. de poenitentiatit. Confessio, tom. 2. fol. 191. Oleuian
de substantia foederis, part. 2. page 278. 279. and sequent. Luther. Musculus,
Cruciger apud Melancthon in Page 256.
Concilijs Theologicis: Doctor Field, lib. 3. of the Church, chap. 25. Master
White, way to the true Church, page 230. 231. For mine own part, I wish
unfeignedly that all popish abuses of Confession and absolution utterly
abolished, they might one day be more fully restored in our Protetestant
Churches unto their primitive sincerity.

6. Christ in saying, thy sins are forgiven thee, does Heming.
instruct us more fully concerning his own person and office, for which he was
sent into the world: namely, Luke 19. 10.
to seek and save that which was lost. Vnlinke the phrase, and you shall find
a Gospel in every word. Son, If we be sons, how can our father in heaven
deny us any good thing? Matthew. 7. 11. Be of good cheer. Romans 8. 31.
If God be with us, who can be against us? if he will have us merry, what
shall make us sorry? Thy in particular, sins in the plural, many sins, all
sins, are forgiven freely, yet fully, through my grace, not upon thy merit.
For he says not (as Musculus. Heming.
Interpretors observe) thou shall satisfy for thy sin: but ecce remittuntur
tibi, behold they be forgiven. Again, it is very remarkable that Christ saw
their faith: but said thy sins. I grant with Euthymius and Chrysostom.
Theophylact in loc.
other ancient fathers, that undoubtedly this sick man had some faith,
otherwise he would never have sought after Christ so greedily, neither would
Christ have received him into favor so graciously: yet Saint Matthew, Mark,
chap. 2. verse. 5. Luke chapter 5. verse 10. attribute most unto the faith of
the porters, all of them relating the story thus: And when Jesus saw, not his:
but their faith. And so many Doctors understand this Text, as Com. in Luc. 5
Ambrose, Catechil. 5.
Cyrillus Hierosolimitanus, Com in loc.
Hierome and Anselm. Heming.
other. If Christ then be so willing to grant our requests upon the prayer and
invocation of other; Them. in loc.
how ready will he be to hear when our selves out of our own faith are
suitors for our selves? Undoubtedly this saying, thy sins are forgiven, is a
B. Lat. sermon. Gosp 20. Sun. after Trinity.
standing sentence, spoken not only to the palsy man here: but as a general
proclamation unto every one that believes.

And behold certain of the Scribes said within themselves, this maen
blasphemeth] A man may blasphem Ludolph. de vita Christ. part. 1. c 47.
Bonauent. in Luc. 5. Beauxamis. Panigaro^ (...) loc.
three ways especially: first, ascribing to God that which is unbefitting his
excellent majesty: secondly, by denying to God his proper attributes: thirdly,
by giving that unto himself which is only due to God. And in this third kind
the Scribes imagined Christ to blaspheme, because none can forgive sins
except God. Esaias 43. 25. I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine
own sake. Christ therefore proves himself to be God, first by knowing their
thoughts, and secondly by doing this miracle. Jesus saw their thoughts; ergo,
God. For 1. Kings 8. 39.
God only knows the hearts of all the children of men, according to that of
Justin. Mart. de monarch. dei. Totus oculus est and qui minime fallitur quia
minime clauditur. Bernard. lib. 5. de consid.
Philemon an old Poet:

Qualis Deus mihi dicite, censendus est,
Qui cuncta cernit, ipse sed non cernitur.
Whether is it easier to say thy sins be forgiven thee? or to say arise and
walke] Rupert. in loc.
With God it is all one to say and to do; but with men it is more easy to say
this, then to show this. And therefore that ye may know that the son of man
has power to forgive sins on earth: Theophylact.
I will by curing the palsy man's body, prove that I can also save his soul.
Carnal men believe their sense more then their Savior, Hierome.
fit ergo carnale signum vt probetur spirituale, Chrysostom.
facit minus quod est manifestius, vt demonstret maius and non manifestum. And
it is worth observing that Christ never openly forgave the sins of any, Non
hoc ante dicoret quam factis comprobaret. Rupert. in loc.
till by working of miracles he showed evidently that he had power to grant
pardons. Ambassadors are not believed in another Nation, until they deliver
their letters of credence. Christ therefore showed his Commission, and Musculus.
letters testimonial, or rather a plain Patent: That ye may know that the
Son of man has authority to forgive sins on earth, I say to the sick of
the palsy, arise, take up thy bed, etc.

Arise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house] So many words are set down for
the greater Maldonat ex Chrysoct.
manifestation of the miracle, as if he should say, Thou that could not
sit, now stand: thou that could not go, now walk: thou that were carried
in thy bed, Hieron. epist. ad Rustic.
now carry thy bed: and Chrysostom. Theophylact. Euthy^.
so demonstrate that thy former agilitie, strength, and health, is truly
restored again. Go to thine house, that thy friends and acquaintance who knew
thee to be sick, may confess my power in making the whole. If Christ would
have had this palsy man to follow him, he would not have said, take up thy
bed: but Matt. 16. 24.
take up thy cross. For to be Christ's follower is not opus puluinaris, sed
pulueris, a featherbed is unfit for our swift race in the Matthew. 7. 14.
narrow way, where Matt. 10. 10.
two coats are troublesome.

Kilius in loc.
Mystically, this palsy man is every man unregenerate lying sick in the bed
of his sin, not able to stir hand or foot of himself for the good of
himself. He must therefore be renewed in the spirit of his mind after God in
righteousness and true holiness. Now the power to forgive sins and to work
this cure is given to Christ only. So Psalm. 51. 2. 7.
David, Wash me througly from my wickedness, and I shall be whiter then the
snow. So Chap. 31. 18.
Jeremy, Convert me Lord, and I shall be converted. And it is, as our Church
speaks, a great marvel, nay, says Apud Veg. in loc.
Augustine, it is a more strange miracle to convert a sinner and to make him a
new man, then it was in the beginning to make the old world. For there was
nothing to hinder God in creating the great world; but in renewing this our
little world, besides our own natural corruption, all evils on earth, all
devils in hell are ready to withstand him. In more particular, he that will not
work for his living has the palsy in his Rupert. in loc.
hands, he must therefore so learn Christ, as that he steal no more, but
rather labor with his hands the thing which is good. And so the Gospel and
Epistle meet together in their argument and aim, both insinuating that Jesus
Christ is the Savior of soul and body. Wherefore let us as the beholders of
this miracle, glorify God, and pray with our Church:

O God, for as much as without thee we are not able to please thee: grant that
the working of thy mercy may in all things direct and rule our hearts through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Epistle.
EPHESIANS. 5. 15. Take heed therefore how yewalke circumspectly, not as unwise,
but as wise men, etc.
IT is an axiom that will abide the touchstone, whosoever is a good man is a
wise man, and on the countrary, whosoever is an irrepentant sinner is a fool.
Solomon affirms it in his Chap. 1. 7. 22. and 8. 5.
Proverbs, and Christ a greater then Solomon confirms it in his Gospel,
expressing the dangerous estate of improuident sinners by the parable of the
Matthew. 25.
foolish Uirgins, and terming the prodigal child's repentance Luke 15. 17.
coming unto himself, as if he had been out of his wits until his
amendment, as the Greek (...) does import, and the Latin resipiscentia, quasi
Tert^llian lib. 2. con ra Marcion, vel vt alij resipiscere q^si res^pere.
receptio mentis adse. So Paul advises us in my text to walk circumspectly-,
not as unwise: but as wise men. And to be wise men according to the doctrine of
Paul is to be new men Ephesians. 4. 22.
to cast off our old conversation, and to be renewed in the spirit of our mind,
to speak more particularly, the learned Atheist is a fool, Psalm 14. 1. The
fool has said in his heart, there is no God. The witty harlot is a fool,
Prou. 9. 13. a foolish woman is troublesome, etc. The covetous (albeit the
world repute him only wise, Varrol. 4. de ling. Lat.
Dives quasi Diuus, as being a petite god on earth) is notwithstanding in the
Scriptures estimate but a fool, Luke 12. 20. O fool this night will they
fetch away thy soul from thee. But because the drunkard is a most apparent
gross fot, our Apostle wills us here principally to take heed of
drunkenness, be not drunken withwine, etc.

That we may walk circumspectly, Ardentin loc.
three points are to be considered especially,

Quo. Quo modo. Qua via.
The Ecclesiastes 2. 14.
wise man's eyes are in his head, he therefore Heb. 12. 2.
looks unto Christ, Coloss. 3. 1.
seeking the things above, where Christ our head sits at the right hand of
God: and he walks unto the City which is Heb. 13. 14.
to come, in the right way with a right eye. The way to heaven is to know God
and his Christ, John 17. 3. a lively faith working by love, Galat. 5. 6. and to
walk in this right way uprightly, is to shun the mountains of presumption and
the pits of despair, to turn neither to the right hand nor to the left, to
run our race neither hastily nor slowly, but as Paul here, circumspectly. Now
the drunkard (as it is in the Proverb) is Esaias 28. 7.
out of the way, to speak the best of him in charity, reeling in the way, for
tippling heads have topling heels. It is a popish axiom, caute, si non cast;
but the truth is, no man walks charily, but he who walks chastely. Our
Apostles caute, is as much as Aqui^. in loc.
cauete, take heed of every thing which is an hindrance to your walking in the
ways of the Lord, but especially take heed that ye be not drunken with wine
wherein is excess.

Concerning this one sin school Authors have moved many questions, as
first, whether a man being sick may be drunken medicinally for his health?

2. Whether a man taking an inebriatiue potion, not knowing the force thereof,
hereby commits any sin?

3. Whether a man ouercharging his stomach at a public feast, not in any
carnal delectation intemperatly carrowsing, but upon complement only pledging
ordinary cups of kindness, may justly be condemned of excess?

4. Whether the courteous invitor urging his guest in love, may be said to
make the riot, and if either be thought author of misrule, whether
occasionaliter, or causaliter?

5. Whether any subject in answering his Sovereigns health, may wittingly and
willingly transgress in this kind?

6. Whether any for fear of stabbing, or any such like imminent peril, should
endanger his soul to save his body; and if any of these kinds are to be
excused, whether a toto, or a tanto?

For the resolution whereof, I refer you to 22. quast. 150. art. 1. 2. and
sequent.
Thomas, In Aurea summa, fol 157
Altissiodorensis, In Thomam vbi supra.
Caietan; holding it sufficient at this time to treat of voluntary, wicked,
inordinate drunkenness implied in our text. First, voluntary, be not:
insinuating that it is in our own power. Secondly, wicked, drunken with wine.
For, as Ardens in loc. ebrietas sancta.
Divines are bold to speak, there is an holy drunkenness, as that of the
blessed Apostles on Whitsunday; and that of Martyrs and Saints in every age,
who taking the cup of salvation into their hands are so filled with the spirit,
that they are even sick with love, Cant. 2. 5. and inebriated as it were with
the Psalm. 3. 68.
plenteousnesse of Gods house. Thirdly, inordinate, wherein is excess, making
men absolute Luther. Beza. Piscator.
dissolute, ready to commit all uncleanness even with greediness. All these
being put together, make drunkenness a grandame in Babylon, and a very
monopoly of mischief, transgressing every precept of the whole Law.

The first Commandment is, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. The meaning
whereof Christ expounds it, Matthew. 22. 37. is, thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind. He says not (as
Chrysostom notes upon the place) fear the Lord: for the most impudent
Atheists have trembled, often in whom there is no perfect love, 1. John 4. 18.
which expels fear. Neither says he, know the Lord: for heathen men have
some knowledge of God by nature: Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handie work. Neither says he, believe the
Lord thy God: for the James 2. 19.
devils also believe; but he says expressly that which is the Romans 13. 10.
fulfilling of the Law, love the Lord thy God. As then our Romans 6. 16.
Apostle said, he is our master to whom we submit our selves as servants to
obey: so that is our God assuredly which we like best and love most. And
therefore for as much as the glutton and drunkard is totus venture (as Erasmus
said of a Friar) all belly, and all for the belly: without all doubt his belly
is his Philip. 3 19
God, and his glory his shame.

The second Commandment is, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
etc. thou shall not bow down to them, and worship them. Albeit drunkards
cannot endure to kneel one half quarter of an hour in the temple: yet they
can be content to kneel, and that on both knees, and those bare, pressing and
answering healths in the tauernes either to their good Captain, who many times
is but a swaggerer; or else to their fair Mistrisse, who sometimes is little
better then a strumpet; or else forsooth unto their Sovereign, using the
devils logic, he that will not be drunken for Caesar, is no friend to
Caesar. Hieron. com. in Tit.
Accusationis occasio est, adiuratum per Caesarem frequentius non bibisse. This
ungodly Vide Ambros. lib. de Elia, c. 17
devotion and idolatrous adoration of he-saints and she-saints, as they protest
unfeignedly from the bottom of their heart unto the bottom of the cup, is so
full of scandal and scorn, that there can be but a little difference between
a drunkard in upholding his wine-worship, and a Papist in observing his
willworship.

As for the third Commandment: a drunkard always blasphemeth God in his works,
ofter in his words. It is an old proverb, Show me a liar, and I will show thee
a thief: so show me a swaggerer, and I will instantly show thee a swearer. For
when once he begins to seem to himself valde disertus, a very fine man,
faecundi calices cumiam fecere disertum: he will talk of God most, although
he think of him least. It is recorded in the Matthew. 8. 31.
Gospels history that the dispossessed devils entreated Christ that he would
suffer them to go into swine; because the chief place of the devils residence
is the soul of the swilling drunkard. Matthew. 12. 43
In dry places he finds no rest, Bonauent. diet. sal^t. c. 29.
that is, in a sober mind he gets no footing: he dwells in low countries and
in wet ground, in such as are filled with wine. Now when the spirit of God is
gone which should direct their speech and guide their thoughts, and Satan is
entered in and taken possession of their horse; then undoubtedly the door of
their lips is shut up from Gods praise, but open as hell mouth always to swear
vainly, to forswear villanously.

Touching the sanctifying of the Sabbath enjoined in the fourth Commandment;
an Alehouse in a Parish is ordinarily the devils chapel; while Gods
congregation is chaunting in the Church, boon companions are chatting in the
tavern, having their letanie, gospels and epistles in derision of our common
prayers, and the welsh sermon in scorn of our preaching: Church hom.
concerning the time and place of prayer.
so that they more dishonor God, and serve better the devil on Sunday, then
in all the days of the week beside.

The fifth Commandment requires honor to fathers

Oeconomicall, Parents. Husbands. Masters.
Political, Betters in office. Elders in years.
Ecclesiastical, Tutors. Pastors. Prelates.

Now the drunkard in this habit of sin dishonors all at once, disobeying
the counsel of his Parent, commandment of his Master, statutes of his Prince,
direction of his Elder, lesson of his Tutor, exhortation of his Preacher,
discipline of his Prelate. Scandalizing also by these leaud courses his mother
the College, his mother the University, his mother the Church.

Against the sixth Commandment a drunkard offends more principally two ways:
first, in Vide Ambros. lib. ae Elia, c. 16
^uinating the state of his own body by disorder and intemperance.

Owin Epigram: vt Venus eneruat vires, sic copia ^acchi. Virgil.
Una salus sanis nullam potare salutem,
Non est in pota vera salute salus.
Secondly, being apt in this humor to stab other, according to that of Uirgil:
Bacchus ad armavocat. And as another ancient Horat.
Poet, in praelia trudit inermem. Church ^om. against drunkenness.
Alexander the great being drunken killed his dear friend Clitus, for whose
life when he was sober he would have given half his Empire. The records of
our Courts afford innumerable presidents in this kind, in so much as the
common epithete to quarrelling is drunken, as a drunken fight, or a drunken
fray, neque enim faceret haec sobrius vnquam, for no man in his right wits
admits of any such desperate courses.

The drunkard is occasioned to break the seventh Commandment by his large
commons, and leaud companions. For the first, Romans 13. 13.
after drunkenness ensues chambering, after chambering wantonness, Hieron.
epist. Amando.
pro membrorum ordine or do vitiorum est: and as Loc. com. tit. de libidinibus.
Luther excellently, gula soror est, immo irritamentum and procus, and minister
luxuriae, For temetum, Perottus in Cornucop.
some conceit, is so called, eo quod tentet, and Isidor. etym. lib. 20. c. 32.
vinum ab implendo venas: examples hereof in Scriptures are the Sodomites,
Herod, Lot, David, and in our Polydor. Anglican. hist. lib. 3. page 56.
Chronicle Uortigerius.

Secondly, the drunkard is enticed to the sin of incontinence by leaud
company: for although an Inn was called in old time Isidor. etym. lib. 15.
cap. 2.
propina, and of late corruptly popina of the Greek (...), signifying hunger,
because Tauernehouses were first erected only for the necessary refection of
travelers and strangers, and not for idle meetings of neighbors: yet
afterward they became places of notorious riot and excess, in so much that the
Ecclesiasticus 26. 30.
Wiseman said expressly, Two things are hard and perilous, a Merchant cannot
lightly keep him from wrong, and a Uictualler is not without sin. And it is
well observed out of the second chapter of Joshua, verse 1. that the word in
Hebrew used for an hostess signifies an harlot also, the messengers of Joshua
went into an harlots house, that is, says our English gloss, into a
Tauerne-house, and in Latin stabulum is an Inn, and prostibulum a whore. Now
the filthy communication and uncomely gestures usual in such places and among
such persons are so great motives unto sin, that as Martin Luther was won^ to
say, It is as strange a miracle for a man to converse with such and not to
burn with lust, as it was for the three children to be in the fiery furnace
and not to be ^corched. Pro. 6. 27. 28
For can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be burnt? or can a
man go upon coals and his feet not hurt? Ambros. de poe^it. li. 1. c. 14.
Pascitur libido conuiuijs, nutritur delicijs, vino accenditur, ebrietate
flammatur. In these two respects I may pronounce with Com. in Tit. 1.
Hierome, Nunquam ego ebrium putabo castum. Adulterers and drunkards are of
such affinity, Heliodor. Aethio^. hist. lib. 13.
that in ebrietatem amans, and in amorem eb^ius procliuis admodum, a wanton
will easily turn drunkard, and a drunkard as soon become wanton.

As for the eighth Commandment: he that is drunken with wine first is a thief
to himself in his excessive riot, and then being in need is occasioned to
steal from others also. Drunkenness is Bonauent. diet. salut c. 8.
regius morbus, a costly sin, for he that draws his patrimony through his
Church him. against drunkenness.
throat, eating and drinking more in an hour then he is able to earne in a
whole week, must in fine come to beggary: Prouer. 23. 21. the drunkard and the
glutton shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags. He does
cast his house so long out of the window, that as Luscinius in salibus and
iocis.
Diogenes said, at the last his house does cast him out of the door, having
left nothing rich except a rich nose. The prodigal child wastfull in the
beginning of his journey, was in the end so needy, that he was desirous to be
fellow commonor with Luke 15. 16.
swine. Diogenes derided a young riotous gallant, who spent so much at dinner
that he had nothing but a Radish root for his supper. In a word, the most
ordinary progress of a mean man given over to tippling is nothing else but
this, from luxury to (...) quia perditus and nihil si^i and suis seruans.
Zanch. in loc.
beggary, from beggary to theeuery, from Holborne to Tyburne, from the alehouse
to the gallows.

As for the ninth Commandment: Lib. de men. da^. ad consent. cap. 14.
Augustine makes eight kinds of lies, which Lombard. sent. l 3. did. 38. and
gloss^ Psalm. 5.
other have reduced unto three, mendacium officiosum, iocosum, malitiosum. And
these may be contracted into two, to wit, a merry very lie. All which a
drunkard has at his fingers ends: for the merry lie, cogging and jesting are
the chief props of his tottering estate. And as for malicious lies, if he be
on his Ale-bench, and sit down in the seat of the scornful, he will, as Luke
2. 1.
Augustus Caesar once, tax the whole world, prattling of Priest and Clerk, yea
Prince and people, censuring all he knows, often more then he knows. He
will not spare his other self, his best self, his own self. Bacchus is
painted by the Poets usually naked: ^ulgentius mytholog. l. 2. ^ab de Dionysio.
hereby signifying that a drunkard reueales all the secrets of his heart,
Plutarch. l. de garrulitate.
quicquid est in cord sobrij, est in lingua ebrij. The which is a most odious
fault in ciuility: for who will familiarly converse with such a dolt as can
neither keep his own, nor his friends counsel? In vino veritas helps him
not a whit; for seeing all truths are not to be told at all times, he may
bear false witness when he makes a true report, because the meaning of the
commandment is, that we should not move any tales either false or true,
whereby the credit of our neighbor is lost or lessened: but that on the
contrary we should endeavor by all means possible to maintain his honest
reputation among us. And therefore the gabling drunkard in moving many false
prattles, and so making many foul quarrels, offends against the ninth
Commandment especially.

The naming of the last Commandment is enough, he that is guilty of the fact,
of necessity must be accessory to the motion. And therefore to conclude this
evidence, even as a General that besieges a City, labors especially to
gain the Tower or the Castle, knowing that if he possess it, he shall
instantly command the whole Town: so likewise the devil who daily does
assault our little city, plots how he may be possessed of our Capitol and
Sconce, being assured that if our head be tippling, our eyes will be wanton,
our tongue blasphemous, our throat an open scpulchre, our hands ready to stab,
our feet swift to shed blood: in brief, all our members at his service to
become Romans 6. 13.
weapons of unrighteousness, to commit all manner of sin even with
greediness. And so the drunkard is like mare mortuum, as no fish can live in
the one, so no virtue in the other, Augustine.
abominatur a Deo, despicitur ab angelis, deridetur ab hominibus, destituitur
virtutibus, confunditur a daemonibus, conculcatur ab omnibus.

But the foulness of this unhappy sin will appear yet to be greater, if
we consider it according to our several estates, as we are

Men. Civil men. Christian men. Collegiate men. Clergy men.
If we consider our selves as men, we shall easily see that drunkenness makes
us no men. Virgil. epigramide venere and vino.
Demens ebrietas, it is a voluntary madness, whereby men deprived of their use
of reason are like horse and mule without understanding. Hanc qui habet,
seipsum non habet, he that has this sin has lost himself, and is become
Chrysostom. in Act. hom. 27.
rather a beast then a man, nay Dadraeus lo^. com. tit. ^brie. tas.
worse then a beast, for we can not enforce a beast to drink more then he
need: Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch hom. 1.
est voluntarius demon, a drunkard, as it is in our English proverb, will
play the devil.

Bez^epigram.
Quaeris quis sit homo ebriosus? atque
Nullus est homo Maeuole ebriosus.
Secondly, if we consider our selves as civil men, this one sin overthrows
all the four cardinal and chief virtues. As Justice, for how shall any man
do right unto other, who cannot do reason unto himself? Prudence, which is
often drowned in this sincke, and especially maintained by moderate diet, as
the Aristot. ethic. lib. 6.
Philosopher intimates in the word (...) to be quasi (...). Temperance, for
foulness of body follows ordinarily Ezech. 16 49.
fullness of bread. Fortitude, for as S. Lib. de Elia cap. 13.
Ambrose notably, Quos mane insignes armis spectaueras, vultu minaces, eosdem
vesperi cernas etiam a puerulis rideri, sine ferro vulneratos, sine pugna
interfectos, sine host^ turbat^s, sine senectute tremulos, Judith 13. 2. 8.
Holofernes having lost his wit in wine, lost his head also by the hand of a
silly woman. And that of a modern Poet is memorable, de duce Dipontino.

Pons superauit aquas, superarunt pocula pont^m,
Febre tremens peri^t, qui tremor or bis erat.
Thirdly, if we consider our seiues as Christian men, 1. Tim. 5 6.
he that lives in pleasure is dead while he lives: ergo, says Epist. Oceano
tom. 2. fol. 324.
Hierome, a drunkard is not only dead, but buried in his sin also. There be
many Esaias 5. 11. Joel 1. 5. Prou. 23. 29.
woes denounced against him in this, and more woes executed on him in the next
life. For I tell you (says our Apostle) that they who do such things shall
not inherit the kingdom of God, Galath. 5. 21. (...), Phauorinus apud Zanch.
in loc.
quod non possit (...) seruari.

Fourthly, if we consider our selves as scholars, our honorable founders in
great wisdom foreseeing the manifold inconveniences of tippling in Students,
ordained that we should have but a spare diet in the College, and forbad all
excessive riot and inordinate commessation in the town. A Gentleman hearing
that his son at University was given to dicing, answered, that want of money
would occasion him happily to leave that fault. Afterward understanding that
he was given to whoring, said, that either marriage or old age would one day
cure that folly. But when he was informed of his Moral upon Ariost. Or ando
surioso, lib. 35.
wine bibbing, out upon the villain (said the father) I will surely disinherit
him, for that fault will increase with his years. A gamester will continue so
long as his purse lasts, an adulterer so long as his loins last, but a
drunkard so long as his lungs and life last.

Fifthly, if we consider ourselves as Clergiemen, he that is given to 1. Tim.
3. 3.
wine should not be made Bishop, and if any Prelate or Priest after
consecration become a winebibber, ebrietatibus vacans, aut cesset aut
deponatur, as it is in the 42. Canon of the Apostles, according to the
computation of Theodorus Balsamon. And by the seventh Iniunction of Queen
Elizabeth, Ecclesiastical persons are forbidden haunting of Alehouses and
Tauernes. I know Paul may meet his acquaintance at the market of Appius, and at
the three Tauernes, Acts 28. 15. but this ought to be for his honest
necessities, as the former Iniunction intimates, and not to keep rank riot at
unlawful hours. He that is irregular in this kind, after admonition and
warning, is worthy to be suspended Vide Balsam. in Apost can. 42. and Photium.
Tit. 9. cap. 27. and 35.
ab officio and beneficio. A great gallant having provided a great feast for
his neighbors, desired the parish Priest to wash first and to sit down last:
hereby signifying (says mine Mensa philosophica fab. de milite.
author) that Clergymen ought to be primo mundi, sed postremo ebrij. Thus as
you see, by surfeiting and excess Ambros. de Elia, cap. 14.
vina are made venena, that is, in the words of holy Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
Scripture, the wine of drunkards is so bitter as the poison of Dragons, and
the cruel gall of Aspes. In some respect worse, says Vbi supra.
Ambrose, then any venom; for the most deadly poison has helped many, whereas
the drunkards potion heales none, but hurts all, a root of much evil, a rot of
every virtue.

Preached at S. Mary's in Cambridge on Whitsunday anno 1602. The remnant of
this text concerning Psalms, and Hymmes, and spiritual songs, is expounded
Epist. Sund. 5. after Epiphanie. The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 22. 1. Jesus said unto his Disciples, the kingdom of heaven is like
unto a man that was a King, which made a great marriage for his son, etc.
THis Gospellin Marlorat. Panigarol. in loc.
effect is all one with that appointed to be read on the second Sunday after
Trinity, B. Latymer sermon. upon this Gospel.
both teach one point, and tend to one purpose. Wherefore, lest I seem double
diligent, I refer you to my large notes upon that other text, and entreat you
to be content with a short paraphrase for the present.

The kingdom of heauen] The Church militant on earth, is this kingdom of
heaven, I say militant, and that for Jacob de Vorag. sermon. 1. in l^.
two reasons especially: first, because this marriage feast is called a dinner,
verse. 4. and after dinner there follows another banquet, namely the Supper of
the Lamb, Apocal. 19. 9. This dinner then is a feast of grace, that supper a
feast of glory. Secondly, because none can be thrust out of the Church in
heaven triumphant, many crowd unto Gods dinner in the militant without any
wedding garment or bridelace: but at the last day when he shall*come to view
his guests, he will cast them out of the wedding chamber into utter darkness,
as it is in the 13. verse. The Church under the cross then is this kingdom,
gathered together by the preaching of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 2. 9.
a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people.
Not kingdoms in the plural, but in the singular a kingdom, as being governed
by one and the same Lord, under one and the same law. And it is a kingdom of
heaven, as being the way to the kingdom of heaven, because, says Sermon. 136.
de temp.
Augustine, per portam ecclesiae intramus in portam paradisi. And a kingdom of
heaven, for that her Philip. 3. 20.
conversation is in heaven, and her Coloss. 3. 2.
affections set on things above. The synagogues of Satan are a kingdom of
darkness, but the Church a kingdom of light. Jacob de Vorag. vbi supra.
For as in heaven some bodies give light and receive none, as the Sun: other
receive light and give none, as the firmament: other both receive and give, as
the Stars and Moon: so Christ in the Church, is the James 1. 17.
father of lights, and the sun of righteousness. Malac. 4. 2. giving light
unto John 1. 9.
all, and receiving light from none. The lay people resemble the firmament,
called to receive light in the public preaching of the Word, and not to give
light, except it be candlelight in their own private families. Indeed there
be many blazing Stars and prodigious Comets in this our heaven, but such are
not properly lights, but fires: as the Philosopher, ignes fatui. The Preachers
of the Word are stars in the firmament, first receiving light from Christ,
and then communicating it to other, as the words of their Patent import, Mat.
5. 14. Ye are the light of the world.

This King is God the E^hym. Anselme.
Father, a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, able to do Psalm. 135. 6.
whatsoever he will in heaven, in earth, and in hell. As one does gloss my
text, Regens in coelo per gloriam, in mundo per gratiam, in inferno per
iustitiam. His Son the Bridegroom is Ephesians. 5. 32.
Christ, and his Bride the Church, and God made this marriage by Christ's Greg.
hom. 38
incarnation. Arden^.
For as the best way to reconcile two disagreeing families or enemie-kingdomes,
is to make some marriage between them: even so the word became John 1. 14.
flesh and dwelt among us in the world, that he might hereby make our Ephesians.
3. 14. 16.
peace, reconciling God to man, and man to God. At this great marriage dinner
the D. Latymer.
Bridegroom himself is the best dish, even the body and blood of Christ
preached in his word, and presented in his Sacraments. And albeit this feast
especially concern the Jew, Melancthen.
yet appertains it unto all, as begun in the Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the
woman, etc.
beginning of the world, and enduring to the end of the same. The Patriarchs
and Prophets in old time, the Preachers and Pastors in our time, call and
invite men every day to this marriage. The latter course at this feast, or the
B. Latymer.
sweet meats, are remission of sins, everlasting life, such joy as no tongue
can express, or heart conceive. The time when the King comes in to see his
guests, is either the particular hour of our Panigarol.
death, or else the general day of Hieron. Musculu^.
judgment, when he shall separate the reprobate from his elect, Matthew. 13. 40.
and 25. 32. God is every where, seeing all things always; Thomas in Gen 18. Idem
Panigarol. and Coster. in loc.
yet that hereby Judges may learn not to condemn any but upon good
information, almighty God said of Sodom, I will go down now, and see whether
they have done altogether according to that cry which is come unto me, Genesis
18. 21. and of Babel, Come, let us go down, Genesis 11. 17. and here the King
is said to come in among his guests, and to spy the man which had not on a
wedding garment, before he commanded him to be bound hand and foot, and to be
cast into utter darkness.

The wedding garment, as Origin.
some think, is Christ: or as Eusebius. Emiss.
other, the new man: or as other, Hieron.
observing of the Commandments of Christ: or as other, a Euthym.
pure conversation: or as other, an upright heart, coming to the marriage
Aretius.
rather out of duty, then for a dinner: or as other, Ardens.
charity: or as other, Gregor.
grace: or as other, Kilius.
faith: or as other, Melanct.
regeneration, consisting in faith and repentance. All which upon the point are
the very Panigarol.
same: so that, (as Calvin. Fulk. Zepper.
our Divines observe) the question is idle whether faith or godly life be this
garment, because good works always proceed from faith, and faith always shows
it self by good works. Hypocrites are they who want the wedding garment, Tit.
1. 16.
professing that they know God but in their works denying him.

But it is a more dark Problem, how the King when he came to see the guests
found but one without a wedding garment, and how that one may be called his
friend. See Panigarol part. 1. hom. in loc.
Answer may be, that all reprobate sinners are called one, because they be all
of one kind, namely faithless: or one, because the root of all sin did
proceed from Romans 5. 19.
one: or one, because James 2. 10.
he that fails in one point is guilty of all: or one, to show the quick
sight of God, who can, if there be but one hypocrite among many, soon spy
him: or one, Coster. in loc.
because many such hypocrites are less esteemed then one righteous man:
Ecclesiasticus 16. 3. One that is just is better then a thousand ungodly
children: or one, to show that at Christ's own Table there was one Judas among
the blessed Apostles, as Theophilus. Alexan. apud Panigarol. vbi supra.
some construe it. And this one whosoever he be, may be called a friend,
Euthym.
for that he did seem by profession a friend: or a friend, ex part dei,
calling him unto the marriage, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
willing that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
He was Hieron.
used by the King as a friend, but in coming without a wedding garment he was
Coster.
foe to himself: or friend in derision; as if he should say, You are a kind
friend indeed to come in hither without your wedding apparel, and bride-lace:
for the Scriptures admit of Ironies, as Genesis 3. 9. Adam where art thou? or a
friend, for that he was Panigarol.
once a friend, as Simon is termed the Matthew. 26. 6.
Leper, for that he was a leper: and Matthew the Matthew. 10. 3.
Publican, for that he was a Publican: and Jerusalem a sincke of sin, the
holy city, for that it was once holy, Mat. 27. 35. In reporting these
different opinions I will imitate the sage Judges of our Law, who sometime
determine to hear, not hear to determine.

The Epistle.
EPHESIANS. 6. 10. My brethren be strong through the Lord, etc.
THe life of man is a I^b 7. 1.
warfare on earth, and every Christian is a professed soldier, having 2. Cor.
7. 5.
fightings without, and terrors within. He must therefore learn two things
especially: first, how to choose his arms: and secondly how to use them. Our
Apostle does instruct him here concerning both. As for the choice, the
Zanchius.
defensive weapons are the girdle of verity, breast plate of righteousness,
s^ooes of preparation, shield of faith, helmet of salvation. Offensive, the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. As for their use, Paul advises
us also to put them on, and to put them all on, and so to put on the whole
armor, as that we may stand in all good, and withstand all evil. All which is
implied in the 11. verse, containing a proclamation ad arma, put on all the
armor of God. And a reason, that ye may stand, etc.

In the proclamation four points are remarkable:

1. Every Christian is charged with armor. 2. This armor must be Gods armor.
3. Panoplia, complet armor, all the armor of God. 4. This complet armor must
not only be showed abroad, or hung up at home: but used and employed daily,
put on.
The reason hereof is manifest and manifold: first, that we may be able to For
so long as a man stands in battle he is well, if he fall down then in
ieopardie..
stand in battle. Secondly, that we may so stand, as that we may withstand.
Thirdly, that we may so withstand, as that we may foil our enemies assaulting
as well as retiring. Fourthly, that we may repel not only some few, but all
assaults. Fifthly, all assaults not only of the flesh and the world, but of the
devil also, which is the prince of darkness, and general commander of all
forces against us in these spiritual skirmishes. Judith 15. 1.
Olofernes being slain, his soldiers instantly fled. Lombard. in loc.
If we conquer the rulers and governors of the darkness of this world, we
shall easily discomfit their followers and instruments. If we cast the Anselm.
rider, his horse will instantly be taken and tamed. Every Christian ought to
put on the resolution of Captain Pareneticall treatise to the Princes of
Europe, page 26.
Ferras, always bearing arms against the greatest Emperor of the world,
wrestling not against blood and flesh only, but against principalities,
against powers, against spiritual craftiness in heavenly things.

For the first point: armor is necessary, whether we consider our own
weakness, or our enemies strength. Our weakness, as being unapt and unable by
nature to 2. Cor. 3. 5.
think so much as a good thought, and therefore we must be strong through the
Lord, Lombard.
who gives his soldiers power and might, Psalm. 144. 1.
teaching our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. It is reported of
Xiphlin in vita Traiani.
Traian that he would cut in pieces his own garments, rather then his
soldiers should want a ragge to bind up their wounds: but our Captain Christ
has given unto such as march under his banner his own flesh and his own
self, willing us not to put on his armor, but also to Romans 13. 14.
put on himself, that we may be strong through the power of his might, who can
do whatsoever he will, and will do whatsoever is best for all his followers.
Again, we need arms in respect of our enemies, as being many, mighty,
cunning in plotting, cruel in executing.

1. Many, Kilius.
for these governors and princes have many soldiers and subjects under them,
Aretius.
improbos spiritus, and homines pessimos, an Ecclesiastes 1. 15.
infinite number, against a little flock and an handful of people.

2. Mighty, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, Z^chius.
that is, not simply with flesh and blood; or Lombard. Aquin.
only, for then Marlorat.
one sword should be so long as another, and one man so strong as another: but
we fight men against devils, even weaklings against powers and principalities,
as it were silly lambs against roaring lions.

3. Cunning in plotting, as being spiritual and invisible, fighting so
craftily, Anselme.
that we know not on which side they will assault. Satan in the beginning was a
Genesis 3. 1.
Serpent for his subtlety, but now being endued with almost six thousand
years experience, become a Dragon and an old Serpent, Apocal. 20. 2. Cui
nomina mill, mill nocendi arts, quoth Ad Heli^dor. de vita (...).
Hierome. Such a 2. Cor. 2. 11.
circumuenting enemy, that being a prince of darkness, he can 2. Cor. 11. 14.
transform himself into an angel of light. Avarice is a work of darkness,
peevishness a work of darkness, inordinate drinking a work of darkness. But
he does cover and cloak these with armor of light, insinuating, that
covetousness is commendable thrift, obstinacy noble resolution, and
drunkenness a point of good fellowship. Gross wickedness is easily seen,
and prevented soon: but our chief adversaries abound with spiritual
wickedness and invisible craftinesses, and their ordinary soldiers are in
their generation Luke 16. 8.
wiser then the children of light.

4. Cruel in executing and prosecuting; Satan is an Apoc. 12. 10.
accuser of his brethren, and a John 8. 44.
murderer from the beginning, called in holy Scripture a Lion for his might,
and a roaring Lion for his malice, seeking daily whom he may devour, 1. Peter
5. 8. Now these descriptions are set down not that we should faint, Calvin.
Bullinger. Kilius.
but rather encouraging us to fight. For seeing our enemies are Augustine de
Ciuit. l. 8. c. 22.
superbia tumids, inuidentia liuids, fallacia callidi, a iustitia penitus
alieni, so many, so mighty, so malicious, so crafty, so willing and able to
hurt us, it behooves every man to be well appointed and armed, that he may be
able to resist in the evil day.

The second point observed in the Proclamation, is, that our armor must be
Gods armor, not armor of the flesh, for Ierem. 17. 5.
cursed is the man that makes flesh his arm. Not armor of the world, for our
enemies are worldly governors, and the chief of them is John 12. 31
the Prince of the world. Psalm. 20. 7.
Some put their trust in Chariots, and other in horses, but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God. Not armor of the devil, for then we shall have
nothing but his leauings. His armor is Popish exorcisme, superstitious
crossing, holy water and the like: which he little fears as being framed in
his own shop, and given us at his appointment. The weapons of our warfare are
not 2. Cor. 10. 4.
carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds. Against spiritual harms
we must use Primasius.
spiritual arms; against the works of darkness we must Romans 13. 12.
put on armor of light, Aquin.
that is, virtues against vices, as being vestimenta put on, munimenta armor,
ornamenta of light. Let us then if the devil at any time tempt to cruelty,
pride, impatience; put on Coloss. 3. 12.
tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekness, long suffering, etc. as
it is in the present Epistle, we must arm our selves with the breast plate of
righteousness against iniquity, with the girdle of truth against heresy, with
the helmet of salvation against despair, with the shield of faith against
infidelity. The devil is mystically that huge Leuiathan esteeming Job. 41.
iron as straw, and brass as rottenwood, when the sword does touch him he will
not rise up and he laugheth at the shaking of the spear, in the earth there is
none like him, he fears not our fleshly weapons, or worldly weapons, and
therefore that we may stand against his force, we must put on the armor of
God, and dwell under the Psalm. 91. 1.
defense of the most high.

The third thing considered in the proclamation, is, that we put on Sarcerius.
B. Latymer. Mariorat.
all Gods armor, or the whole armor of God, as it is verse 13. If we should
arm our head only, the devil happily would strike at the foot: if the foot
only, then he might hurt our head: if both, and leave our breast unarmed, he
might wound us at the heart. Wherefore that we may repel all assaults of the
devil, we must Aretius.
tanquam milites cataphracti, put on all the armor of God. I cannot examine
every particular weapon in this Armourie, learn only three points of war in
the whole.

First, that Paul here makes no mention of a back Curete for the Christian
soldier. There is an helmet for the head, a corselet for the breast; in a
word, a shield for all the fore-parts, only no guard, no regard of the hinder.
It is a complete armor, and yet without any defense for the back: signifying
hereby that every Christian ought to keep his Zanchius.
station in Gods army, never forsaking the banner of Christ, until death his
1. Cor. 15 26.
last enemy be destroyed. It is G^euara.
written of Bias falling into the hands of his enemies, and his soldiers
crying, what shall we do? that he did answer, Report ye to the living that I
die fighting, and I will report to the dead that ye did escape flying. When
Restitution of decayed intelligence, page 176.
William the Conqueror had landed at Pemsey near to Hastings in Sussex, he
caused all his ships to be sunck, that all hope of flying back might be taken
away. The Numantine would rather die then fly; so the Christian warrior must
continue Apocal. 2. 10
faithful unto the end, like Iudg^s 16. 30
Sampson killing enemies at his death as well as in his life.

(...) in symbolis.
Mars dubious, victorque cadit, victusque resurgit.
Qui fugit, huic merito^ulla corona datur.
The second remarkable point of war is, that we must above all other weapons
of defense take the shield of faith. And the reason hereof is plain, because
the helmet couers only the head, the corselet the breast, and the sandall the
foot: but a Zanchius.
shield couers all the body. Let us then above all, or as Vulgar Latin.
other read in all, use faith. In Anselm.
all tentations and combats, Royard, hom. 2. in loc.
or in putting on all the weapons aforesaid, have a lively faith and assured
confidence, without which all the rest have no force. The sword of the Spirit
without faith is no scripture to thee, the girdle of verity without faith is no
truth unto thee, all thy righteousness without faith is unrighteousness.
Seeing then it is impossible without faith either to please God, or resist the
devil, in all, and above all use the shield of faith, wherewith ye may
Caietan.
not only reject or avoid: but also quench all the tentations of the wicked,
albeit they be Calvin.
darts in respect of their sharpness, and fiery for their destroying, one
sin Lombard. Zanchius.
kindling another, as drunkenness kindles adultery, and adultery murder. All
the world, says Saint 1. Epist. 5. 19.
John, lies in wickedness, positus in maligno, Royard. vbi supra.
that is in malo igne, set on fire by the devil, here called the wicked,
Sarcerius.
as being author of all evil, and master of all the fiery works in the world,
Matthew. 6. 13. and 13. 38. But be of good cheer, faith over comes the world,
1. John 5. 4. One shield of faith is able to bear, yea to beat off all the
fiery darts of the wicked world, flesh, and devil.

The third point of war is, that the Christian soldier is armed with a sword
so well as with a buckler: and this sword is the word of God, being Heb. 4. 12.
powerful in operartion and sharper then any two edged sword. Viues in August.
lib. 14. de Ciuit. cap. 12.
Sharp in a literal, and sharp in a mystical exposition: or sharp in
discoursing of thing Ans^lm. (...) Heb. 4.
temporal, and sharp in teaching things eternal: or Aquin. lect. 2. in Heb.
4.
acute in moving us to virtue, and acute in remoouing us from vice. Does the
flesh entice thee to wantonness? strike with the sword of the Spirit, Thou
shall not commit adultery. Does the world tempt thee to vanity? strike with the
sword of the Spirit, 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love
the world, the love of the father is not in him. Does Satan assault thy faith,
and tempt thee to superstition and idolatry? strike with the sword of the
Spirit, Matthew. 4. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Does
Death in the last hour of thy spiritual combat affright thee? strike with the
sword of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 15. 54.
Death is swallowed up in victory, the sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the law: but thanks be unto God which has given us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Calvin.
By the buckler of faith a Christian soldier is able to defend himself, by
the sword of the Spirit able to confound his enemy. So that our adversary
going about daily seeking whom he may devour, rejoices exceedingly when
either B. (...). sermon. upon this Epistle.
Papists hinder the reading, or, Atheists hurt the preaching of the word. As
the 1. Sam. 13. 19
Philistians would not suffer a Smith in Israel, lest the Hebrwes should make
them swords or spears: (...) in euangel. dom. 1. qu^ra. Co^ 5.
so the devil cannot endure that we should hear sermons, and read holy
Scripture, lest out of this shop we get armor to repel his assaults in the
evil day.

The last obseruable thing in the proclamation is, that a Christian ought not
only to know Gods armor, but also Zanchius.
put it on. For as it is not enough for the service of our Commonweal that
we keep good weapons at home, or that we show them at musters abroad, except
we have skill and will (as occasions of the State require) personally to serve
with them: even so, to have the sword of the Spirit rust at home, or sometime
to flo^ish a little with it abroad, is not sufficient for the soldier of
Christ, except he can and will use Gods armor, and stand in battle against
all assaults of the devil. As in Physic the best prescript can do no good
except it be taken: so the most complet armor is no defense when as it is not
worn. We must in adversity put on patience, in prosperity put on humbleness
of mind, at all times Coloss. 3. 14.
above all these put on love, giving every man his own. If we will overcome
the princes of darkness, we must put on the armor of light.

But observe here that we must use the weapons of God in the wars of God,
against enemies of God only, that we may stand against all assaults, and
quench all the fiery darts of the devil. Many men hit the soldiers of
Christ, and hurt the friends of God with armor of God. As Heretics
fraudulently cite scriptures against scriptures, and Fathers against Fathers,
and so make God as it were fight against himself. Velleiu^ hist. lib. 1.
Silla said, ante frangendus hostis quam vlciscendus ciuis, our force must not
be spent in private grudges against our brethren, but in the public quarrel
of the Gospel against the common enemy. The Scorpions in Apollonius in hist.
mirabilib^.
Caria when they sting, kill homebred people: but hurt not any stranger. On the
contrary, there be certain little Snakes in Babylon which only bite
forreiners, and not inhabitants. It is a fools fray to strike him that is
nearest; Mc. Greenham in a ser^ at S. Mary's in Camb. upon the coming out of
Martin marprelate.
indiscreet Schismatikes using lies and libels the weapons of the devil in
good causes, offend the Church as much as open heretics employing Gods armor
in bad causes.

In this our spiritual warfare we have many great encouragements to fight
valiantly: first, our weapons are good, a complet armor: secondly, our
Captain is good, even the Lord of hosts, having all power and might: thirdly,
our cause good. Now

Iucan.
Causa iubet melior superos sperare secundos.
Propertius.
Frangit and attollit vires in milite causa.
Again, the continuance of our fight is little, but our reward great. In Rome
the military age was from Auius Gell^us lib. 10. c. 28.
seventeen to forty and six, or in dangerous times until fifty. Psalm. 90.
10.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten, and in all this time there
is no time for peace; we are legionum filij, borne in the field, and sworn
soldiers in our swaddling clouts, always bearing arms against the common enemy
from our holy baptism to burial. All which is called in the 13. verse the
evil day: in regard of the sharpnes Aquin. Anselm. Zanchius.
evil, in regard of the shortness Oecumen.
a day. Now the soldiers resolution is aut sors, aut mors, either victory the
beginning of joy, or else death the end of misery. So the Christian in this
holy war may comfort himself:

Horat.
Aut cito mors veniet, aut victoria laeta. Either God will end our danger, or
our days: and then we shall be no longer soldiers in armor, but gown men
in Apocal. 7. 9.
long white robes, having palms in our hands, and Apocal. 4. 4.
Crowns on our heads as conquerors, according to that of 2. Tim. 4. 7.
Paul; I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course, from henceforth
is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
Judge shall give me at that day, and not me only, but unto all them also that
love his appearing.

The Gospel.
JOHN 4. 46. There was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum,
etc.
THis Gospel Heming.
teaches us, whether we should flee for succor in all the troubles of this
life: namely to the fountain of all welfare Jesus Christ. According to that of
Chap. 12 3.
Esaias; Ye shall draw water out of the wells of the Savior. To this well a
Christian ought to come not with feet, but with faith, and then Joel 2. 32.
every one that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

In the whole story you may behold 4. principal persons:

1. A loving father. 2. A sick son. 3. A pitiful Savior. 4. Dutiful
servants.
In the father observe two things: his

Great fortune, being regulus, a little king, a ruler. Great faith, having
three Beda. Ludolphus. Panigarol.
degrees, a Beginning, in desiring Christ to come down and heal his son.
Increase, in believing the word that Jesus had spoken. Full growth, in that him
self simply believed and all his household.

As for the greatness of his honor. Apud Thom. in loc.
Origin thinks he was of Caesar's family. In Esaiae cap. 65. circa prin.
Hierome, that he was a Palatine, happily controller of Herod's house. De vita
Christi part. 1. cap. 63.
Ludolphus and Lyra, that he was Deputy Lieutenant of Galile, for Galile
belonged unto the jurisdiction of Herod, Luke 23. 7. See Musculus and Maldonat
in loc.
Other, that he was a ruler in Capernaum, where his son was sick. What he was
it is uncertain now, for one generation passes, and another generation
succeeds, Ecclesiastes 1. 4. and the fashion of this world goes away, 1.
Cor. 7. 31. But it is certain that he whilome was Theophylact. Euthym. Erasmus.
either noble by descent, or degree; favored in the Court, honored in the
Country, a man of worth and quality. Which our Evangelist insinuates in his
style, calling him aruler, as also Origin apud Thom. in loc.
for that he was attended well, his servants met him, verse. 51. Aretius.
Marlorat. Zepperus.
Where note by the way, that it is not impossible for a great man to be a good
man, or for Caesar's favorite to be Christ's follower. Almighty God has elect
children among all sorts of people, Magdalen among harlots, Zaccheus among
oppressors, Matthew among Publicanes, and here this ruler in Herod's Court.
Indeed De Consid. lib. 4.
Bernard was wont to complain that the Court is wont to receive such as are
good, but to make them bad. Bonos facilius recipere quam facere, nam plures in
aula defecisse bonos quam profecisse malos probauimus. And Lib. 5. de ass.
Budaeus says all Courtiers must be like Cameleons, accommodating themselves
unto all companies, vt assentioni and assentationi sci^e asseruiatur,
resembling an herb called Tripolium, which (as In mirabilibus narrat.
Antigonus reports) every day changes color thrice, being sometime white,
sometime violet, sometime carnation. Apparent parasites, Magdehur. epist
^refix. C^nt. 7.
vno ore calislum and frigidum pro suis commodis efflare periti: creeping up to
honor through a S^neca. Per mi^e indignita^es in consummationem dignitatis.
thousand dishonors.

Hippolitus a Collibus in Aulico politico.
In aula Regis non est multum legis,
Si qui sunt boni coguntur esse onos,
Si qui sunt mali sunt in gratia regali.
And S^resbur. in policrat.
another to the same purpose: Quo quis corruptior moribus, and corrumpentior
muneribus eo beatior. The Court is all for money, making Ioh 1. 14.
oxen to labor, and asses to seed. A mint of fashions, an exchange of
complements, a shame to shamefastness, Bez ^ in epitaph. Secret. Reg. Gall.
omnis sceleris matter nutrixque nefandi. Yet notwithstanding Joseph was a good
man in the Court of Pharao, Daniel a good man in the Court of Darius, Mordecai
a good man in the Court of Ahasuerus, and this ruler a good man in the Court of
Herod.

The faith of this ^uler in the beginning was very weak: first, in Chrysostom.
hom. 34. in Joan. Idem Hugo Cara. and alij.
that he did not seek unto Christ until he was almost at his own doors, as
the context evidently, Jesus came again into Cana a town of Galile, where he
had made of water wine, and there was a certain ruler, etc. Secondly,
Musculus. Pon^an.
for that he did not entreat Christ to cure the sin so well as the sickness
of his son. Thirdly, for that he came not to Christ in the Panigar^
beginning of his sons infirmity, but as we may gather at such a time when
all other Physicians had forsaken him, even at the point of death. Fourthly,
all Interpretors observe, that he was Brentius apud Marlorat in loc.
rudissimae fidei and infantis, in beseeching Christ to come down and heal
his son, as if Christ being God could not as well have helped him absent as
present. Again, when he believed Christ's saying, Go thy way, thy son
lives: his faith as yet was See Panigar. part. ^. hom. in loc.
infirm and full of wavering. Augustine. tr^ct. 16. in Joan. ^dem Leontius apud
Maldonat. in loc.
Otherwise he would never have made such a doubt, and asked such a question of
his attendants, at what hour began he to amend? But when he knew certainly
that his son was healed miraculously by Christ, and not by casual or any
natural means, himself and his whole family believed absolutely. When he
first heard of Christ his faith was a very spark, when he believed Christ, it
did kindle, but when he believed in Christ it was a great flame giving light
to his household. So that our blessed Savior in uttering one word, healed
Cyrillus.
two, namely the fathers soul and the sons body. Thus I have showed unto you
the faith of this old father, and the fruits thereof: first, in being so
careful for his child. Secondly, See Zepper. Con. 1. and Ferus Con. 2. in loc.
for that in his affliction he went not for help to witches, as Saul, 1. Sam.
28, 8. nor to devils, as Ahazia, 2. King. 1. 2 nor only to Physicians, as King
Asa, 2. Chron. 16. 12. but to Christ, and that in his own person, although a
ruler and a man of eminent quality. Thirdly, in that he was such an earnest
suitor again and again, desiring Christ to visit his sick son. Fourthly, in
that he cast off his doubting and infidelity. Lastly, yet chiefly, for that all
his house was instructed in the faith of Christ, and fear of God. So Joshua 24.
15.
Joshua, so Acts 16. 15.
Lydia, so Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue Acts 18. 8. and so must
Melanct. Musculus. Bullinger.
every master of a family bring up his household in instruction and information
of the Lord. Every man is a King and a Prophet in his own private house, so
that he can want no means, except he want a mind to perform this holy
business.

In the sick son you may note

1. His sickness expressed in the text, sick of a fever. 2. The causes of his
sickness, surfeiting and riot, implied (as may be suspected) Pontan in loc.
that he was the son of a ruler, and in Ludolphus de vita Christ. part. 1.
cap. 63.
Capernaum a dissolute City.
Prou. 31. 30.
Favor is deceitful, and Ecclesiastes. 11. 10.
youth is vanity, riches avail not in the day of wrath Prou. 11. 4. nay the
scepter cannot keep us from the sepulcher. Young men as well as old men, and
Gentlemen as well as Poor men are sick and weak and die. The children of
rulers ordinarily be most unruly, given over to chambering and wantonness, and
so by consequent they be Zepper. Con. 1. in. loc.
more subject to sickness then other, in being more subject to sin then
other. A drowsinesse of spirit is their quartan, incontinence their tertian,
pride and gluttony their quotidian ague. How sin resembles a fever in
condition, kind and cure: see Ludolphus vbi sup. in margin. Jacob. de Uorag.
sermon. 2. Ferus sermon. 4. in loc. Bonauentura diet. salut. cap. 1. Pontan.
Bibliothec. Con. Tom. 4. fol. 313.

In Christ, the third, yet the most obseruable person in all this history, 2.
things are to be considered especially:

1. His rebuking the ruler. 2. His relieuing the ruler.
The Ruler was at the first in fide tepidus aut frigidus, as Tract. 16. in Joan.
Augustine notes, and therefore Christ chides him, except ye see signs and
wonders ye will not believe. Uerba rogantis audimus, cor diffidentis non
videmus: sed ille pronunciauit, qui and verba audiuit, and cor inspexit. This
reprehension is not Iudge-like, but Heming.
father-like, concerning the Marlorat.
whole Nation of the Jews in general, as much as this Ruler in particular. In
token whereof (as Musculus Aretius.
Interpretors observe) Christ uses not the singular, except thou: but the
plural number, except ye. Maldonat in loc.
As if he should have said, I must in regard of your incredulity show signs
and wonders, otherwise ye will not believe. I will heal thy son therefore
not so much upon thy petition, as for the confirmation of others faith. I will
not go down to thine house, yet I will work such a wonder in thine house,
that not only thy self but all thine shall believe. Go thy way, thy son
lives.

The petition of the Ruler consists of Ardens.
two branches: one, that Jesus would come down; another, that he would heal
his son. Now Christ rejected the first as being unfit, but he granted the
second wherein he prayed well, helping his child not by going down, but by
speaking one word, Thy son lives.

In the servants here mentioned two virtues are commendable: first, Zepper.
love to their master in obeying his commands and rejoicing at his good.
Secondly, Aretius.
faith in Christ: The ruler did believe the word of Jesus, and they the report
of the ruler, and so both hereby became happy. Let every master in like sort
teach his household, and every servant hear the good instruction of his master,
Heming.
that there may be so many Churches as there be families, and so many Chapels
as there be chambers in every house: that being armed with the complet harness
of God, we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and withstand all his
assaults in the evil day.

Grant we beseech thee merciful Lord, to thy faithful people, pardon and
peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a
quiet mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Epistle.
PHILIP. 1. 3. I thank my God with all remembrance of you always in all my
prayers, etc.
THis Epistle to the Philippians has three parts: a

Subscription, Paul and Timotheus. Paul Zanchius.
as author inditing, Timotheus as approuer or happily penner, writing this
Epistle: both the servants of Jesus Christ, and dearly beloved of the
Philippians. Inscription, to all the Saints in Christ Jesus which are at
Philippi: that is, all such as are Lombard. Anselm. Aquin.
baptized, and have given up their names unto Christ in ^retius. Zanchius.
professing the Gospel, all in Philippi, but unbelieving Primasius.
Pagans. Description of their perfeuerance, together with an exhortation unto
the same, Beza.
which is the maine scope of all this excellent letter. Part whereof is our
present text, Containing Praise to God, and in it observe Matter Past, a good
beginning: Because ye are come into the fellowship of the Gospel. Present, an
happy proceeding: From the first day until now. Future, a blessed end: Surely
certified that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it etc.
Manner in respect of Extension of Time, always in all my prayers. Persons, for
you all.
Intension, having you in my remembrance, and praying for you with gladness,
as loving you from the very heart root in Jesus Christ.

Prayer to God, that their love may increase more and more in knowledge and
judgment, being so filled with the fruit of righteousness, unto the glory of
God, as that they may be pure Oecumen. Marlorat.
before God in their Lombard. Anse^m.
conscience, and without offense before men in their credit.

The Sarcer. Zanc^ius. Kilius.
sum of all is in brief, that the Pastor ought to bless God always for the
present graces of the Church, as also most heartily to pray for the further
and future good of the same. And the people likewise must on their part bring
forth in their life such excellent fruit of righteousness, as that they may
be both a 2. Cor. 1. 14.
rejoicing and a Philip. 4. 1.
crown to their Pastor. As the legal high Priest had the names of the
children of Israel graven in his Exodus 28. 29.
breastplate: so the Preacher of the Gospel ought to have his Cure stamped in
his breast, always in all his prayers having them in perfect memory. Queen
Mary said, Calice was imprinted in her heart: so Paul here to the Philippians,
I have you in my heart. And to the Corinthians 2. Cor. 3. 2.
elsewhere, Ye are our epistle written in our hearts. See Epist. Dom. 12. and
18. post Trinity.

Because ye are come into the fellowship of the Gospell] The chief subject of
his thanks and gladness is Brentius apud Marlorat. in loc.
not the goodness of their soil, nor yet the greatness of their City
(though it were the Acts 1^. 12.
chief in the parts of Macedonia) but their fellowship of the Gospel Lombard.
Aq^in. Anselme.
in word and deed, believing the word preached, and relieuing their Pastor
persecuted: being companions of Paul in bonds, as they were partners of Paul in
grace: Aretius.
Commonors in respect of the Epist. Jude verse. 3.
common faith, and commonors as Philip. 4. ^4.
communicating to his affliction. Hence we may learn, that although every
subject ought in duty to thank God for crowning our nation with a world of
outward blessings, as honor, plenty, peace: yet above all, in all our
devotions always to praise God for the fellowship of the Gospel. And therefore
the 17. of November, in which it was happily ^estored, and the 5. of November
in which it was miraculously preserved, ought to be had in a perpetual
remembrance.

From the first day until now] The first day of their conversion is mentioned
Acts 16. and this now was his Zanchius.
first imprisonment at Rome, recorded Acts 28. or as other, his second
apprehension at Rome, by computation about Rhem. Argument epist. Philip.
ten years after the first. All which time the Philippians continued constant
in the sincere profession of Christianity; Caietan.
neither reduced to their old Gentilisme, nor seduced by false teachers unto
new heresy. Ungrateful Schismatikes Brightman Apocalyp. Apocalyp. page 105.
106. etc.
affirm that the Church of England is like the Church of Laodicea, neither hot
nor cold; proud, but yet poor, blind, naked, miserable: but it is our duty to
thank God always in all our prayers, for that our Church has against a world
of popish and peevish oppositions in the midst of a crooked generation, even
from the first of Queen Elizabeth, unto the eleventh of King James,
incessantly continued in the fellowship of the Gospel. And it becommeh us to
judge that he which has begun a good work in this kingdom, will perform it
until the day of Jesus Christ.

He that has begun a good work in you will perform it] Royard. in loc.
Three things are requisite in an absolute agen^, power, skill, and will. Power
is attributed especially to God the Father, wisdom to God the Son,
willingness and love to God the holy Ghost. He therefore that begins a good
work, can and will accomplish it unto his glory. This sentence confutes
abundantly the Aquin. Zanchius.
Pelagians, holding that the beginning of every good work is only from Gods
grace, but the consummation of the same from our own virtue. Whereas our
Apostle gives Oecumen.
all to God, Ardens.
the first and second and third grace. The first is, operans gratia, whereby
God begins a good work in us, without us, in giving a Philip. 2. 13.
will to do well. The second is, cooperans gratia, whereby God performs it,
giving to our will ability, working in us and with us, according to that of 1.
Cor. 15. 10.
Paul; I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of
God which is with me. So the most accurate August. ser. 15. de verbis apost.
Doctor excellently, Qui fecit te sine te, non iustificabit te sine te. The
third is, saluans gratia, whereby God crowns our will and work in the day of
Jesus Christ, Tit. 3. 5.
not by the merits of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy saving us. In the words of Apud Ardens in loc.
Gregory: Primo Deus agit in nobis sine nobis, vt postea nobiscum agat: and
per immensam misericordiam remuneret in nobis illud, ac si solum processisset
ex nobis. And so this saying of our Apostle makes against the Papists also,
which are Dr. Fulke answer to Rhem preface 52*
cater-cousins to the Pelagians in the question of freewill and humane merit.
For seeing God is 1. Cor. 15. 28.
all in all, and 1. Cor. 12. 6.
works all in all, end, middle, beginning; it must assuredly proceed from
grace, that any man works with grace. God in every good work makes a
beginning, 2. Cor. 3. 5. helps in the middle, 1. Cor. 15. 10. confirms unto
the end, 1. Cor. 1. 8. And therefore Radulphus Ardens, a Perkins treat. Christ
the true gain.
very learned man in his age, Vt habetur in eius vita praefix. hom. edit. Colo^.
flourishing from the year 1040. to 1100. (says in an homily preached upon
the Epistle Sunday 18. after Trinity) seeing by one grace we come to another
grace they be called merits improperly, for all our own works are loss that
Christ might be the true gain and advantage. Philip. 3. 8.

And this I pray that your love may increase yet more and more] Matthew. 24. 12
Christ had foretold that the love of many should be cold in the latter ages
of the world, Paul therefore begs of God earnestly that the Church of Philippi
might abound with the gift of charity: not only that they might have love,
Zanchius.
but that it might increase, yea that it might increase yet, and that more and
more. The word ((...)) does import that our love must not be contained within
the lists of our private persons, or particular acquaintance: but that it
should ouerflow like a fountain to the benefit of the whole Church: and that
not for a time, but until the day of Christ: that is, until either he call us
to him in Primasius. Lombard. Anseim.
our particular deaths, or he come to us in Caietan. Marl^rat.
his general Judgment. This our love must have two Aretius.
companions especially, Knowledge and understanding. Seeing love 1. Cor. 13. 7.
believes all things, it is exceeding necessaire that our love should abound
in knowledge, Theophylact. Oecumen.
whereby we may discern between good and bad, between Heretic and Catholic,
and in understanding, which is a spiritual experience gained by much exercise,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 21
trying all things, and then accepting the most excellent. ((...)) is Zanchius.
Theoricall, and consists in general notions of the Bible, whereas ((...)) is
practical in Christian experiments, and particular actions. A true judgment
whereby men are able not only to mark and make difference between good and
bad, Anselm.
but also between good and better, and so in fine choose the best. Our
adversaries as well the popish as the peevish abound (as they pretend) with a
very great love to God and his people. But because their zeal is not joined
with all understanding and knowledge, the fruit thereof is not the fruit of
righteousness, a pure life before God, and without offense before men: but the
bitter root of all schism in our Church, and sedition in our Commonweal. So
that whereas Psalm. 69. 9.
David said, The zeal of thine house has even eaten me: we may contrariwise
say, Their zeal has even eaten up thine house. The Sea dangerous positi^ns of
reform. lib. 2. cap. 4. 9. 11. 12. 13.
Puritan zeal calls it in word, the Casaubonepist. ad Front. page 81. 82.
and sequent.
Romish zeal endeavors to make it in deed, a den of thieves, a fear of
Antichrist, a shameless Babylon, a mother of abomination and desolation.

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. Filled with the fruit of
righteousnesse] If we construe this of Justification, it is apparent that good
works are not the cause: but the Aretius. Sarcerius. Beza.
consequent of our righteousness, as the fruit makes not the tree to be good,
but only shows it to be good. If we take righteousness here for
sanctification, observe with In loc.
Zanchie the four causes of good works:

1. Efficient, Primarie, Christ: Which comes by Jesus Christ, working in us
the will and the deed, Philip. 2. 13. Secundarie, our selves: As being Esaias 61.
3.
trees of righteousness planted by the Lord, and so by Christ's especial grace
the just man Psalm. 1. 3.
brings forth his fruit in due season, and continuing in well doing is filled
with the fruit of righteousness.
2. Material, fruit. Internal in thought, external in word and deed. For a
good tree bears fruit on every bough and on every branch. 3. Formal,
righteousness. A conformity to the divine law, Christ's imputative
righteousness is perfect, our inherent righteousness is imperfect. 4. Final
Benefit of our brethren, for trees bear fruit for the good of other. Glory and
praise of God, and Theophylact. Aretius.
here we may learn the difference between the good works of Christians and
other. A Gentile does a good work, but not in Christ: an hypocrite does a good
work, not unto Gods glory: but for Matthew. 6. 2.
men's praise. Whereas the true Christian is filled with the fruit of
righteousness, especially for this end, that Luke 15. 10.
Angels in heaven may Caietan enim and Zanchius r^ferunt gloriam ad angel^s in
coelo, laudem ad homines in terra.
glorify God, and men on earth also praise God in his Saints. And as the just
man is a Lombard. in loc.
glory and praise to God: so God one day will praise the just, in saying, Come
ye blessed, etc. and glorify him also both in body and soul by Jesus Christ
in the kingdom of glory.

The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 18. 21. Peter said unto Jesus, Lord, how often shall I forgive my brother
if he sin against me, etc.
THis Gospel is a large Zepper. con. 2. in loc.
Comment upon the fifth petition of the Pater Noster, and it may be parted

Into

Peter's question: How often shall I for give my brother if he sin against me,
till seven times? Christ's answer: delivered First simply by way of proposition:
I say not unto thee until seven times: but seventy times seven times. Then
amply by way of Hieron. Ludolphus. Caietan.
exposition in the parable following, therefore is the kingdom of Heaven
likened, etc.

Peter said unto Iesus] In this question of Peter observe first his reverence,
then his diligence. Reverence toward Christ his Teacher, in calling him Lord,
or Master, or Sir. An 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Elder that rules well and labors in the word is worthy of double honor: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20
despise not prophesying, but Heb. 13. 17.
obey such as have the oversight of you. Give thy learned and discreet Pastor
the ^ir. and not the sir. Secondly, we may note Peter's, Euthym.
diligence questioning and arguing with his Master Caietan.
about that he taught a little before, verse. 15. And it is a Aretius.
commendable practice, for as reading makes a full man, so conference a ready
man. A duty much omitted in our time, because some men have too bad a conceit
of themselves and dare not, other too good an opinion of themselves and will
not ask their Teachers any question. See Gosp. on Sexages Sunday.

Jesus said unto him] In this answer two points are remarkable: what he said,
and to whom. I say not until seven times, but seventy times seven times: that
is, 490 times, and then (as Apud Erasmum annot. in loc.
Origens interpretor is of opinion) a man is not bound to forgive his brother
any more. But most expositors affirm that Christ here names a certain number
for an uncertain, a definite for an Euthym. Pontan. Iansen.
infinite. An usual trope even in our common speech, I have heard it a
thousand times. I would not do this, or suffer that for an hundred pounds.
Almighty God the father of mercy forgiueth us more then seventy times seven
times, for Pro. 24. 16.
the just man falls seuentimes a day; so that if we live but seventy days,
our sin will stand in need of pardon seventy times seven times. But if we
continue long, and become the sons of many years, assuredly we shall be the
fathers of many sins, and need forgiveness seventy thousand times seven
times. O Lord Psalm. 19. 12.
who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.
Now we must be merciful Luke 6. 36.
as our father in heaven is merciful, extending our compassion toward our
brother offending us not only seven times, as Peter said, or seventy times
seven times, as Christ in the bare letter of the text: but according to the
true meaning of the same, Maldonat in loc.
vicibus innumer abiliter innumerabilibus, Toties quoties August. sermon. 15. de
verbis Domini.
even so many seven times as he trespasseth against us.

The next point to be considered is the party to whom our blessed Savior
spoke this, and that is Peter. Jesus said unto him, I say to thee, etc. Petrus
hic gerit personam ecclesiae. Anselm. in loc.
To Peter as to a public Preacher, and to Peter as to a private person. In the
words a little before Christ spoke of ecclesiastical censures, If thy brother
hear thee not, tell it to the Church, verse. 17. and in the 18. I say unto you,
whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and Melanct. postil.
and Com. in loc.
so this text (as the coherence shows) ought to be construed of the
Ministers absolution as well as of other men's forgiveness. Here then all
Pastors are taught not to discomfort and despise the poor penitent soul: but
rather to pronounce Gods pardon and absolution as often as he truly repents
and unfeignedly believes his holy Gospel. It was an heresy defended by Hieron.
lib. 2. adversus Iouin.
Montanus, Alphonsus de Castro Tit. paeniten. haeres. 3.
Nouatus, and August. haeres. 48. and Epiphan haeres. 6^.
Meletius, that such as after baptism and solemn repentance fell into
relapse, and committed any grievous crime, as adultery, sacrilege, murder and
the like, ought not to be received again into the bosom of the Church. But
Apud Melanct. Com. in loc.
Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and Anselme Bishop of Canterbury confute them out
of this text, Thou shall forgive thy brother seventy times seven times. If thy
brother will not hear thee, tell the Church: if he will not hear the Church,
hold him as an heathen or a publican: s Enarrat. in loc.
but if he repent and hear thee, thou have won thy brother unto God, and
thou Confess. Anglican. art. 16.
must again receive him into the Church.

And this may be construed of the Churches absolution, so most expound it of
mutual forgiveness in private between brother and brother. A lesson often urged
by Christ as exceeding necessary, whether we consider God, our neighbors, or
our selves. In not forgiving we wrong God, to whom Heb. 10. 30.
vengeance belongs: our neighbors, in that our private Philip. 2. 3.
quarrels often hinder the public peace of the Church: our selves, hereby
neglecting other business of importance, yea the greatest of all our own
souls eternal estate, for Matthew. 6. 14.
except we forgive other, God will not forgive us, as Christ shows in the
conclusion of his ensuing parable.

Yea but is it unlawful to defend our selves against the violent hands and
virulent tongues of such as injury us in our goods and good name? No. When a
brother offends in this kind, Corripiamus verbis and si opus est verberibus,
quoth Sermon. 15. de verbis Domini.
Augustine. As every Christian must be tender of his conscience in regard of
himself, so Melanct. postil. in loc.
jealous of his credit in regard of other. We may therefore sue the slanderer
even for the Gospels glory, lest good men be scandalized, and God himself
blasphemed upon any false report spread abroad of us. Indeed the seditious
Anabaptists, and Julian that scoffing Apostata say, that this and other like
places of holy scripture disanull the Magistrates authority. For if we must
all always forgive, none may punish the faults of his brother. Here we must
aptly distinguish between private revenge, and public justice. A private
person ought only to admonish his brother, a public magistrate being Gods
Lieutenant, to whom vengeance belongs, may punish him also. For 1. Pet. 2. 14.
Governors are sent of God for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. If then a Minister of estate forgive the bad, he
does injury the good. It is a true saying of Sermon. 22. de verbis apost.
Augustine: Sic vigilet tolerantia vt non dormiat disciplina. Christ in this
present chapter intimates Ludolphus d^ vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 8.
three sorts of correction. The first is of love, If thy brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he
hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, etc. The second is of fear, If
he will not vouchsafe to hear them and thee, tell it to the Church. The third
is of shame, If he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee as an
heathen man and a publicane. So likewise the temporal Magistrate Romans 13. 4.
bears a sword not in vain, for he is the minister of God to take vengeance
on him that does evil. And if he strike with the sword of Justice, it is not
August. cont. literas Pe^ilian. lib. 3. cap. 4.
ferrum inimici vulner antis, sed medici secantis. According to the tenor of
this doctrine, Genesis 14.
Abraham delivered his nephew Lot from the hand of his enemies. And so 1. King.
22.
Michaiah the Prophet defended himself against the wrongs of Zidkiiah. And so
Acts 25. 11.
Paul appealed unto Caesar: and Christ accurately confuted all the forged
imputations of his adversaries, John 8. 49. See Epist. 3. Sund. after Epiphan.
August. de verbis Dom. sermon. 15. postil. Melanct. and Zepper. in loc.

In the parable following note the

Matter or narration, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain man,
etc. and in it these five Circumstances: 1. Who is the Creditor. 2. Who is the
debtor. 3. What is the debt. 4. The time when our Creditor, calls for a
reckoning. 5. What is to be done when our account is called upon.
Moral o^ application, so likewise shall my heavenly father, etc.
The Creditor is God, as Christ expounds himself, verse 35. who lends us
every good and perfect gift, See Pontan. in loc.
as well natural as supernatural. He created us according to his own image,
redeemed us with his own blood, and sanctifies us with his own spirit:
making us Psalm. 8. 6.
Lords of the World, Pro^er. 1. 8.
sons of the Church, Heb. 1. 14. Matt. 25. 34.
heirs of Heaven. The riches of his mercy toward us are so precious for their
nature, so great for their number, as that they far exceed ten thousand
talents. See Epist. 4. Sunday after Easter.

As for the second circumstance, Apud Hieron. in loc.
some think the devil is this debtor. Apud Vega^ in loc.
Origin and Thomas understand this of Clergymen. Rabanus apud Thom. and
Anselm. in loc.
Other expound it of the Jews only. But Augustine, Ardens and other
ordinarily construe this of all men, as being servants and debtors unto the
heavenly King. Granat. in loc.
Servants, not as other creatures in respect of their creation only, but in
respect of our redemption also. Debtors, James 3. 2.
for in many things we ^inne all. And sins are debts, as Christ teaches in his
prayer, forgive us our debts. And our manifold sins arise to the sum of ten
thousand talents, even Melanct.
three tun of gold, an Culman.
infinite mass of money.

Our debt is great in magnitude and multitude. We sin against God in Dan. 5.
2^.
whose hand our breath is, Acts 17. 28.
in whom we live, and move, and have our being; against such a God as Wisdom
11. 17. 19.
orders all things in measure, number and weight, before whom all the world
is as a drop of the morning dew, that falls down upon the earth; against
such a God at whose look the Psa. 104. 32
earth trembles, and the pillars of Job 26. 11.
heaven quake; against such a God as has the Ap^al. 1. 18.
keys of death and hell, Luke 12. 5.
able to kill the body and to destroy the soul. And as our sins are infinite
in respect of their infinite object: even so infinite in respect of their
infinite number, as being Psalm. 40. 15.
more then the hairs of our head. Almighty God created Adam according to his
own likeness, and bestowed many notable gifts upon him belonging to his
posterity, the which being lost in his fall, God f exacteth them of us in our
account. This debt is Heming.
old which of our selves we can no way discharge, and beside this original
debt, we run in arrerages every day. The particulars of thy debt will amount
quickly to the sum of ten thousand talents, if thou shall examine thy
several transgressions of the several Commandments in the Decalogue. Tell
me, beloved, or for that it is impossible to tell, I pray think, how often
have thou blasphemed the name of God, how often profaned his Sabbath, how
often dishonored thy father and mother, how often committed adultery, how
often abused thy neighbor in false witness, how often coueted his house,
wife, servant, etc. and thou shall in conclusion find that thou do owe to
God for the breach of every one of the Commandments, above ten thousand
talents. Or if thou will a little consider only but how much time thou
spendest vnprofitablely, Seneca.
vel nihil agendo, vel aliud agendo, vel male agendo: thou will easily feel
thy debt to be so great, as that thou can not make satisfaction for it,
although thou sell even thy self, thy wife, thy children, and all that thou
have. Apo^a. 22. 11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he that is filthy, let him be
filthy still. O Ecclesiastes 11. 9*
young man, rejoice in thy youth and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know, that God for all these things will bring
thee to judgment. As it is in the Text here, the King takes account of his
servants.

He takes account of Ludolphus de vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 9. Idem Pontanin
loc.
four things especially: De bonis commissis, as he shows in the parable of
the Steward, Luke 16. De bonis omissis, as in the parable of the Talents,
Matthew 25. De malis admissis, as in the parable of the two debtors, Luke 7. De
malis seu peccatis dimissis, as in this present. This one mentioned in the text
is every one, for Gods all-seeing eye beholds all our thoughts and words and
deeds, as if all men in the world were but one. He sends forth his summons in
this life by the preaching of the Zepper.
law, by the clamor of the Anselm.
conscience, by Heming.
crosses and losses, or other signs of Gods wrath in heaven and in earth, as
it were citing us to his universal audite. Granaten. Vega.
But in the particular death of every man, and in the general judgment of all
men he finisheth his account. Heb. 9. 29.
For it is appointed unto men that they shall once die, and after that comes
the judgment: in which every man shall have his doom, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. In that day there
shall be judgment James 2. 13.
merciless to him that shows no mercy, the cruel and ungracious servant who
took no compassion on his fellow, shall be delivered to the Iaylors, and kept
in prison until he pay the Matthew 5. 26.
utmost farthing. For, as I^ loc.
Ardens acutely, Quorum vita mortua est in culpa, eorum mors viuet in poena:
Their death is ever living in sorrow, whose life was ever dead in sin.

What then is to be done that our debt may be forgiven? according to the tenor
of this scripture, Culman. Heming.
we must humbly fall down before God our Creditor, ingeniouslie confessing our
inability to make payment, and heartily craving releasement for the merits and
satisfaction of his ^onne Christ Jesus, who Romans 4. 25.
dyed for our sins, and is risen again for our justification, and now
sits at the right hand of God as our mediator and advocate, promising in his
Matt. 11. 28
holy word to refresh all such as groan under the burden of their debt. And
because faith is working by Galat. 5. 6.
love, we must in our conversation bring forth the fruit of righteousness,
Ephesians. 4. 32.
forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake forgiueth us. Here the
Gospel and Epistle meet, Paul says, I pray that your love may increase yet
more and more, etc. And Christ says in his application (which is the very
Bullinger apud Marlorat.
key that opens all the secrets of the whole Parable) so likewise shall my
heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your heart forgive not every
one his brother their trespasses. This one point is pressed here by sundry
reasons: as first from Christ's own commandment, I say forgive thy brother
offending thee seventy times seven times: Secondly, from Gods example: Thirdly,
from the proportion of our debt, our heavenly king forgiueth us ten thousand
talents, and therefore let us not strive with our fellow for an hundred pence:
Fourthly, from the dangerous event, because the pitilesse man is cast into
prison of hell. As then we desire to do the will of Christ, and to be
followers of God as dear Children, and to fly from the vengeance to come: let
us be courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiving our brethren
seventy times seven times: and that Hieron. Culman. Iansen.
not only from the teeth outward; but as Christ in the text expressly from our
hearts, in truth and in deed. Augustine. 15 de verbis Domini.
Si dicis dimitto, dimitte: melius est cum clamas ore, and dimittis in cord,
quam blandus ore, crudelis in cord. Whosoever takes this course with his
creditor shall be loosed of his bonds, and released of his debt: the which one
word Heming.
release does overthrow the Monkish doctrine of satisfaction, and quench also
the fire of purgatory: for releasement and payment, forgiveness and
punishment are quite contrary. The debt is forgiven: ergo, not satisfied: the
debtor is forgiven, ergo, not imprisoned in Purgatory. Shall not the gates of
Matthew. 16. 18.
hell prevail against us? and shall the muddie walls of Purgatory hedge us
in? Has our Saviors soul gone down to the Ephesians. 4. 9.
nethermost hell, and yet made no passage through the suburbs of hell, as they
reckon it? Has he bound the Matthew. 12. 29
strong man that he should not hurt us, and will he now torment us himself, or
set other we know not whom to do it? Coloss. 2. 8.
Beware lest any spoil you by vain reason and Philosophy, whereas the Bible
does admit of no Purgatory but Christ and the cross, John Frith epistle to
the Reader before his answer to Raftels Dialog.
the word of faith, Acts. 15. 9. John 15. 2. and the rod of affliction, Hebr.
12. 6. See Gospel 5. Sunday after Epiphanie.

The Epistle.
PHILIP. 3. 17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and look on them which
walk, even so as ye have us for an ensample, etc.
SAint Paul in this text exhorts the Church of Philippi to

Follow him, and other Apostles of the like carriage, because their conversation
is in heaven. Flee false teachers, and such as walk wickedly, because their
Courses are damnable, being Erroneous in doctrine, enemies of the cross of
Christ. Corupt in manners, whose belly is their god.
End is damnation, and glory their shame.

Be followers of me] This argues his Ardens in loc.
confidence, not B. Latymer. sermon. in loc.
arrogance. For having instructed his Philippians every way that is
commendable, Royard.
by word, by writing, by working: and knowing 1. Cor. 4. 4.
nothing by himself wherein he was wanting in his Apostleship: he speaks
thus as their watchman, and not as his own trumpetor, out of unfeigned zeal
sincerely to keep them from error, not out of selfeloue vainly to sound his
own praise. Sarcerius. Piseator. Kilius.
Hence Pastors are taught to be 1. Pet 5. 3.
paternes unto their flock 1. Tim. 4. 12.
in word, in conversation, inloue, in spirit, in faith, in pureness; that it
may be said of every Prelate truly, which a Poet of a Pope flatteringly,

Hic viuens lux vrbis erat, defunctus eclipsis,
Urbs stetit Urbano stante, ruente ruit.
And look on them] He joins other with himself to Aretius.
decline envy. There be many false Teachers among you, but I would not have
you to follow them. Other there be, though a few that walk as I do. (...),
Mark them Lombard. Zanel^ius.
accurately, for we may not imitate every one, but only such as Paul; and Paul
not in every thing, but (as himself 1. Cor. 1. 11.
elsewhere does expound himself) Be ye followers of me, even as I am of
Christ. B. Latymer.
If these words, as I am of Christ, be brought hither unto the clause, be
followers of me, then all is well: otherwise Christians (as B. Latymer here
notes) are not bound in conscience to be Saints apes. Imitate David in that
wherein he was a man according to Acts 13. 22.
Gods own heart, but abhor his murder and adultery. Follow Judas Maccabeus in
his hearty devotion and hardy valor in the Lords war, but imitate him 2. Mac.
12. 43
not in bestowing money to make a sacrifice for the dead. Imitate Peter in his
Matt. 16. 16.
confessing, but not in his Matt. 26. 72.
denying Christ. So Paul and his followers are to be followed, but with a
Aretius.
quatenus, in Anselm.
that they were perfect, proceeding by one rule, and minding one thing, as the
words before: and Caietan. Zanchiue.
for that their conversation was in heaven, as the words after intimate.

Many walke] Not after the spirit, Erasmus.
as I, but after the flesh, all for the belly. Which Aretius observes out of
the two Greek words [(...)] in this, and [(...)] in the verse going before.
Good Pastors and good people walk in their vocation orderly, but the wicked
are dissolute in their courses and march out of rank. B. Latymer.
If many such walkers in Paul's age, there must of necessity be more now. For
Satan bound in the Primative times, is in this latter end of the world Apocal.
20. 7.
loosed again out of his prison, and his Apoc. 12. 12.
wrath is great, knowing that he has but a short time. There is now such
horrible rebellion, inhumane cruelty, monstrous heresy, barbarous
drunkenness, even among such as profess the Gospel, that a man would think
the whole world were turned devil: and therefore seeing the wicked walkers are
not a few, but many; Aretius. Zanchius.
the more, the more heed ought to be taken of them. As Paul in this present
chapter at the second verse, Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of
the concision.

Of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping] That he warned them
often argues his Sarcerius.
diligence, that he did it now weeping his Calvin.
zeal and piety. Weeping for that the Lombard. Anselm.
simple seduced were damnified, and the subtle seducing (if they did not
repent) hereby damned. So Samuel mourned for Saul, 1. Sam. 15. 35. and so Paul
bewailed his 2. Epist. 12. 21.
Corinthians, and the Prophet Cap. 9. 1.
Jeremy; Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for the Qaine of the daughter of my
people. There be many learned and industrious Preachers in England which often
admonish you of such as walk wickedly, but I fear we want weeping Pastors and
weeping Prelates, earnest men in Gods cause. For if they weep over their
spiritual children, as Monica did over Augustine her natural son: I may
boldly tell them, as that reverend Bishop did her, August. Confess. l. 3. c. 12
Fieri non potest vt filius istarum lachrymarum per eat.

Enemies of the Cross of Christ] Al such as derogate from the merit of Christ's
passion, are enemies to Christ's Cross. As the 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Jews unto whom Christ crucified is a stumbling block, and the Gentiles unto
whom his cross seemed foolishness, and the B. Latymer.
Papists as they be merit-mongers and masse-mongers, it is a great contempt of
Christ's cross to think that any can merit heaven for himself, but it is a
greater scorn to sell his good works for a little silver, and so bring other
to heaven by deeds of supererogation. Again, the Papists are enemies of the
Cross of Christ in their Mass, making it a daily sacrifice for the quick and
the dead; whereas Christ was Heb. 9. 28.
once, not often, offered to take away the sins of the world. See Epist. 4.
Sunday in Lent.

In a word, all such are enemies of Christ's Cross Ardens. Mirlorat. Zanchius.
qui crucem Christi, vel non credunt vel non portant, which either believe not,
or bear not his Cross. As the false Apostles in Paul's age, who taught that a
man is justified by circumcision and works of the Law, which is so derogatory
to the sufferings of Christ, as that it is said expressly, Galat. 2. 21. If
righteousness be by the law, then Christ died in vain. And in maintaining
this assertion, they did Galat. 6. 12.
seek carnally to please, left they should suffer persecution for the cross
of Christ, as has at large been showed Epist. 15. Sunday after Trinity.

Whose end is damnation] Lombard. Aquin. Anselm.
That is, eternal destruction in hell: and therefore take heed how ye follow
them in the labyrinth of error, lest the blind leading the blind Matthew. 15. 14.
both fall into the ditch. Here Sarcerius. Aretius.
Divines observe Paul's antithesis between the good and the bad Apostles. The
good are the John 15. 14.
friends of Christ, but the bad enemies of his cross. The good have their
conversation in heaven, but the bad, mind earthly things. The good shall have
their vils bodi fashioned like to Christ's glorious body, so that their shame
shall be turned into glory: but the wicked on the contrary shall have their
glory turned into shame. They flourish happily for a time, but their end is
damnation.

Whose belly is their God] Photius. Ardens. Lombard.
That is our God which we like best and love most. And therefore the false
Doctors in Paul's age, who to serve their own turn joined together
Circumcision and Christ in the business of our salvation. And such in our
days as thrust themselves into the Clergy that they may B. Latymer.
buckle the Gospel and the world together, and set God and the devil at one
table, preaching pleasant things in the Princes ear, that they may get riches
and go gay: what I pray do they but make their belly their God? And, as Lib.
de Ieiunio aduersus psychicos sub fin.
Tertullian adds, their lungs his temple, their paunch his altar, the Cook
the Priest, the fattie fume of their meat their holy Ghost: their sawces their
spiritual gifts, their belching their prophecy: their love boyleth in their
kettle, their faith warmeth in their kitchen, their hope lies in their meat;
he that feasteth most and of delicate fare is provided best, is holiest among
them.

And glory their shame] That is, they boast Primasius Anselm. Zanchius.
in circumcisione membri pudendi. Or as Oecumen.
other, they glory in sin, whereof they should be ashamed. B. Latymer.
Or their short glory shall be turned into long shame, their earthly pomp to
confusion eternal, at the last day.

Our conversation is in heauen] First in respect of our Coluin.
union with Christ, in whom heaven and earth are met: Pomeran. apud Marlorat.
in so much as all Gods elect are called often in holy scripture the kingdom
of heaven. For albeit they be 1. Pet. 2. 11.
pilgrims on earth, and dwell in houses of Job. 4. 19.
clay: yet they live not according to the Romans 12. 2.
fashions of the world, but after the laws of that city which is Galat. 4. 26.
above, praying always that the kingdom of God may come, and that his will may
be done. See Epist. Easter day.

Secondly, the conversation of godly men is in heaven, in respect of their
Aquin.
affections, as minding Coloss. 3. 2.
heavenly things, and not earthly things. Perkins exposit. Cred. art. ascens.
In the world if a man make purchase of a Lordship, his heart is always there,
there he pulls down, and builds again, there he makes himself orchards and
gardens; there he means to live, there he means to dye. Christ Jesus has
bought the kingdom of heaven for us (the most blessed purchase that ever was)
and has paid for it the dearest price that ever was paid, even his own
precious blood: and in this city he has prepared a John 14. 2.
mansion for us, and made us free Denizens of it: all our joy therefore should
be there, Anselme.
Corpore ambulantes in terra, sedcorde habi^ antes in coelo. From whence we
look for the Lord Jesus Christ, Zanchius.
unto the wicked a Judge, but unto such as love his coming a Savior, who
shall change our vile body, etc. Where four points are considerable.

1. Who? Jesus Christ, as being the resurrection and the life: Ioh. 11. 2. and
5. 25. 2. What? our vile body, for as he renews our mind by grace, making
it conformable to his mind: so likewise will he change our vile body, that it
may be like his glorious body. 3. By what means? accerding to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. 4. After what manner?
he shall change, not the substance nor the lineaments of our body: but the
Transformabat quoad qualitatem non quoad quantitatem. Theo ^oret.
quality, making this 1. Cor. 15. 53.
corruptible to put on incorruption, and this mortal, immortality, changing
our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.
P^udentius apoth. de resurrect. carnis humanae.
Nosco meum in Christo corpus consurgere, quid me
Desperare iubes? veniam quibus ille reuenit
Calcata de morte vijs, quod credimus hoc est.
Et totus veniam, nec enim minor, aut alius quam
Nunc sum, restituar: vultus, vigor and color idem
Qui modo viuit, erit: nec me vel dente vel vngue
Fraudatum reuomet patefactifossa sepulchri.
The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 22. 15. Then the Pharisees went out, and took counsel how they might
entangle him in his words, etc.
CHrist in this Gospel answers a captious question of his adversaries after
such a sort, that he Job. 5. 13.
caught the wise in their craftiness, and as the Psalm. 9. 15.
Psalmist, in the same net which they hid privily, themselves are taken.

In the question these Aretius.
six circumstances are to be discussed especially, the

Time when. So soon as Christ had delivered his Parable concerning the marriage
dinner of the Kings son, then the Pharisees went out. End why: to tangle him
in his words. Manner how: took counsel how. Questionists, Pharisees, as
chief authors. Their disciples with Herod's servants, as actors or subordinate
instruments.
Proeme: Master, we know that thou art true, etc. Problem: Is it lawful that
tribute be given to Caesar, or no?
In Christ's answer two points are remarkable, to wit, his

Conflict in Confounding his adversaries, Jesus perceiving their wickedness.
Confuting, show me the tribute money. Concluding, give therefore to Caesar,
etc.
Conquest, When they heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went
their way.
Then the Pharisies] Kilius.
Even at that time when Christ in his doctrine sought their eternal salvation,
they conspire to work his utter destruction. At that instant Chrysostom.
when they should have believed in him ( Ierem. 5. 3.
having faces harder then a stone) they went out from him. And I pray whither?
into the Psalm. 1. 1.
counsel of the ungodly, Heming.
for counsel is the foundation to work upon. Wherefore? to entangle him. And
for that heretofore they could not entrap him in his Ardens.
morals, or in his miracles: here they take counsel how to catch him in his
words. A fit and (as they thought) a fecible plot. It was exceeding fit, in
that Christ had often entangled them in their words, and therefore seeing they
could not at any time find an hole in his coat, they went about to discover a
botch in his doctrine, that, as it is in the byword, they might Pontan.
cry quit. Again, they conceived it to be very fecible, for that the tongue
is glib, according to that of Saint Cap. 3. ^. 2.
James, if any man offend not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle
all the body.

Their disciples with Herod's seruants] Executing their malice by deputies, as
being Calvin. Lud^lphus ex Chrysostom.
^sse known, and so less suspected of treachery. But these disciples as apt
scholars, were Anselm.
peers in mischief, though vnder-lings in age to their masters. And with
these were joined the Herodians also, that is (as In loc.
Theophylact and In Matt. 12.
Euthymius) such as thought Herod to be Christ. Hicron. and Chrysostom.
Other affirm that they were soldiers of Herod, or as our translation here,
servants of Herod, Iansen. Con. cord. ca. 1. 6
not of Herod the Tetrarch, but of Herod the King. Maldonat. in loc.
Factors in his Court for the Roman tribute; for Herod favored the taxes of
Caesar, and they flattered Herod. A sect altogether opposite to the Pharisees
in the question about Joseph. antiquit. ^ib. 18. c. 2.
tribute: for whereas the Pharisees always pretended the good of Gods Temple,
the Herodians on the contrary contended for the benefit of Caesar's exchequer;
and yet both agreed and took counsel together against the Lord and against
his anointed, Psalm. 2. 2. See Gospel Sunday 18. after Trinity.

Master, we know that thou art true] Thom. and Pontan in loc.
That a man may speak freely the truth, he must have knowledge, zeal,
boldness. All which our Sauious adversaries ascribe to him here. Knowledge of
the truth, in that he was a master and taught the way of God. Zeal and love
to the truth, in that he was true, teaching truly. Boldness, in that he
respected not the person of any. Where by the way Ardens. Calvin. Vega.
Divines observe the commendable parts of a good Pastor: First, he must be for
his learning a master, able to teach, 1. Tim. 3. 2.
apt to teach, a Romans 2. 19.
guide to the blind, a light to them that are in darkness. Secondly, he must
be true, which Ardens applies to pureness of life: but In loc.
Marlorat is of opinion that the words, and teach truly the way of God,
expound the clause, thou art true. Thirdly, Kilius.
he must not utter his own dreams, or the Iere. 23. 16.
vision of his own heart, but teach the way of God. 1. Pet. 4. 11.
If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God. Fourthly, he must have
Heming.
certainty of doctrine, teaching the truth aright, or truly. For so says the
Lord, He that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully, Ierem. 23. 28.
And Romans 12. 6. If any man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it
according to the proportion of faith. Fifthly, he must be stout in delivering
Gods embassage, not caring for any man, etc. Ezech. 2. 6. Son of man, fear
them not, Esaias 58. 1.
cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgression, and to the house of Jacob their sins.

Now the Pharisees uttered all this proem out of Euthym.
impudent flattery: Psalm. 55. 22.
Their words were softer then butter, having war in their hearts, and
smoother then oil, yet were they very swords; calling Christ master, and yet
scorning to be his scholars: Ioh. 9. 28. Be thou his disciple (say they to
the blind) we be Moses disciples. Affirming here that he was true: but John
7. 12.
elsewhere that he deceives the people; saying upon this occasion that he
taught the way of God: but at another time quite contrary, John 9. 16.
this man is not of God. Highly commending his undaunted spirit, that they might
hereby provoke him either to speak treasonable words against Caesar, or
insupportable words against the people.

Is it lawful that tribute be given to Caesar, or no?] God ordained in his
Exodus 30 13 14. etc.
law that every man of twenty years old and above should yearly give half a
shekell, as an offering to the Lord, toward the reparation of his house and
other pious uses. And this collection, as Commen, in Matthew. 22.
Melancthon coniecturally, did amount every year to three tun of gold. Now
when the Romans had conquered the Jews, and made them, as we read Luke 2.
tributarie; this money given unto the Temple, was paid into Melanct. vbi sup.
and Zepper. con. 1. in loc.
Caesar's Exchequer. Hereupon there did arise first a great disputation among
the chief Priests and Pharisees, whether it was lawful to pay this tribute
unto Caesar, or no. Then after ward insued open rebellion among the people,
Judas of Galile being their Captain, as S. Luke mentiotioneth, Acts 5. 37. For
this Joseph. Antiquit. lib 18. c. 1.
Judas Galileus conspiring with one Sadducus a Pharisie, drew away much people
with him openly maintaining against the faction of Herod, that this exaction of
the Roman Emperor was intolerable, contrary to the laws of God and
immunities of the Jews his free people. By which it does appear that the
quaere concerning Caesar's tribute was exceeding captious, and a mere Dilemma.
Ardens.
For if Christ had answered, it is lawful, the Pharisees had accused him unto
the chief Priests, as being all for the Temple: but if he should have said,
it is unlawful, the servants of Herod would have Luke 20. 20.
delivered him unto the secular power of the Governor, as a seditious fellow
perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, Luke 23. 2.
Luther. Heming.
If he should have disputed against the tribute, he had offended Caesar: if for
the tribute, displeased the people, who did bear this burden against their
wills. And so the Pharisees might have had a gap opened to destroy him if the
people did abandon him. In both appeared imminent danger, if not death.
Hitherto concerning the Pharisees question, hearken now to Christ's answer.

But Jesus perceiving their wickednesse] Or as S. Cap. 12. 15.
Mark, their hypocrisy: or as S. Cap. 20. 23.
Luke, their craftiness. For Prou. 21. 30.
there is no wisdom neither understanding nor counsel against the Lord.
Wherefore Christ Aretius.
as God seeing their hypocritical humor, and understanding their treacherous
intent, accommodates his answer, Jacob. de Vorag.
non ad eorum verba blanda, sed ad eorum corda praua, to the foul malice of
their mind, and not to the fair words of their mouth. Obiecting against them
Pontan.
four faults especially: first, folly, noted in the word why? For if I am (as
you say) true, then I am God, because Romans 3. 4.
every man is a liar, and only God ture, yea truth it self, John 14. 6. and if
I be the son of God, I can easily make your wisdom Job 5. 13.
foolishness. Secondly, treachery, why tempt ye? Thirdly, ingratitude, why
tempt ye me, who teach unto you the way of God truly, Matt. 23 37.
desiring often to gather your children together, even as the Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Fourthly, Dissimulation, ye
hypocrites. Having thus in a trice confounded them, he proceeds in the next
clause to confute them, even by their Musculus. Aretius.
own words and deeds, as the soldiers of 2. Mac. 12. 22.
Tymotheus were wounded with the points of their own swords. For, says he,
show me the tribute money: and they took him a penny, and he said unto them,
whese is this image and superscription? They said unto him, Caesar's. Then he
said unto them, Give therefore to Caesar, etc. Luther. Culman. Calvin.
As if he should say, your selves have let in the Romans, acknowledging Ioh.
19. 15.
no King but Caesar. And in token of your homage, you say that the current
coin among you bears his image and superscription: and therefore seeing
Caesar by conquest has made himself Lord over you, give to Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods.

In which one sentence we may note many profitable lessons, as first, Musculus.
that it is our duty to give every one his own: Romans 13. 7.
tribute, to whom tribute: custom, to whom custom: fear, to whom fear:
honor, to whom honor. Ardens.
Deo religionem, sibimunditiam, parentibus honorem, familtaribus prouidentiam,
fi^ijs correctionem, fratribus amorem, dominis subiectionem, subiectis
benignitatem, omnibus aequitatem. Unto God the things of God, unto men the
things appertayning to men, and unto the Euthym, in loc.
devil himself that which is his due, charging him with all our sin and
iniquity. Secondly, from hence we learn that the spiritual kingdom of the
Church, and the civil kingdom of Caesar are Heming. Culman.
distinct and separate, (that albeit they be both of God) Barelatus de
authoritate Papae cap. 2.
each of them being included in his bonds, may not enter upon the borders of
the other. A Anglican. Confess. art. 37. explained in the conclusion of Queen
Eliz. Injunctions. I lem D^. Fulke in loc.
Prince may not minister the Sacrament, nor a Priest manage the scepter.
Thirdly, Zepper. Aretius. Aquin. 22. quaest. 10. 4. art. 6.
this scripture shows evidently that the kingdom of Christ abrogates not the
kingdom of Caesar, but that the Gospel is a good friend unto Commonweals,
in teaching Princes how to govern, and the people how to be subject unto the
higher powers. It is not Christ and his word, but Antichrist and the Pope, who
deny to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, absoluing the subject from his
allegiance to the Sovereign, Elienfis ad apolog. B^llar, respon. cap. 2. page
71.
Caesari sublata nonreddit, and (quod caput est inturiae) defendit non
reddenda, tollere ea potuissese, posse etiam iam, cum volet, quoties volet,
atque apudse detinere, ad se enim non ad Caesarem pertinere. This intrusion
upon the things of Caesar is thought unjust and uncouth, even by the Sorbon and
Parliament of Paris in France, by the Commonwealth of Uenice, by the Seminary
Priests in England; in a word, distasted of all Pope-lings in the world, except
the serpentine brood hatched of the Spanish egg Ignatius Loiala. Read the
books of Watson, especially Quodlibet 8. art. 7. 8. Barclai of the authority
of the Pope: Roge. Widdrington apolog. pro iure principum: Sheldons general
reasons proouing the lawfulness of the Oath of Alleigance. The ready pens of
our accurately learned Caesar and his judicious Divines have so foiled in this
argument the Popes bul-begger Cardinal Bellarmine, that it may be said of him
aptly, which once Catalog. glor. mundi, part. 5 considerat. 28
Cassanaeus of the whole Roman Empire, nihil in principio fortius, nihil in
fine debilius.

Give therefore to Caesar the things which are Caesars] Euthym. Iansen.
He says not date: but reddite, because tribute is due debt unto Caesar. And
if we must pay tribute to Caesar a Panim Emperor: Buflinger, Beza.
much more to Christian Kings and Queens Esaias 49. 23.
which are nursing fathers, and nursing mothers unto the Church. If we deny
this duty we are no better (if father Sermon at Stamf^rd.
Latymer be judge) then thieves. Always provided that we reserve to God such
things as are Gods, and give to Caesar only such things as are Caesar's: for
Ferus sermon 2. in loc.
it is not said here, reddite Caesariquae petit: sed quae sunt illius. Now the
things of Caesar are principally Melanct. Com. in loc. Idem Zepper. and Culrian.
three: Honor, obedience, tribute. We must honor them as the Romans 13. 4.
Ministers and 2 Samuel 14. 17
angels of God, as the N^mb. 27 17
sheepheards and Psalm. 47. 9.
shields of his people, under whose Ezech. 31. 3. 6
shadowing boughs our nests are built, and our young brought forth. And in this
respect also we must obey Caesar in such things as are Caesar's: but if Caesar
intrude upon the things of God, and coin a new Creed, or broch another
Gospel, it is better to obey God then man, Act. 4. 19. The laws Melanct. Com.
in loc. Idem Erasmus in para.
order requiring that first we give to God the things which are Gods and then
unto men the things of men. See Epistle 4. Sunday after Epiphanie.

As for the tributes of Caesar, if they be just and reasonable we must pay
them as his wages: if unjust and unreasonable, we must Luther. Zepper. Melanct.
postil in loc.
be are them as our punishment. We may refell his arguments in parliament, and
repel his oppression according to courses of law: but we may not in any case
rebel with the sword. And yet (as Melancthon and other upon this text) Caesar
himself is bound to keep the commandment, Thou shall not steal, remembering
always that almighty God has made him a sheapheard, and not a wolf; a nursing
father, and not a cursing tyrant; a 2. King. 13. 5.
deliverer, and not a de^ourer of his people. August. de ciuit. l. 4. c. 4.
Remota iustitia quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia? quoniam and
ipsalatrocinia quid sunt nisi paruaregna? Saint Sermon. 4.
Ambrose notably to the same purpose, Quod Caesar praecipit ferundum est, quod
imperator indicit tolerandum est: sed fit intolerabile dum illud praeda
exactionis accumulat. The gracious Apothegme of Basil. Dor. li. 2. page 99.
our noble Sovereign to his dearest son Henry the Prince is worthy to be
written in letters of gold, Enrich not your self with exactions upon your
subjects: but think the riches of your people your best treasure.

Unto God those things which are Gods] Melanct. Zepper.
As if he should say: Ye Pharisees are careful for the money of the Temple, but
in the mean while ye neglect the divine worship and word of God* Erasmus
annot. in loc.
Ye give to Caesar the penny that has his inscription and image: why then, I
pray, confecrate ye not to God your soul, wherein is imprinted Gods image and
superscription? How Christians are Gods penie, having his image by creation,
and inscription in holy baptism, whereby Christ Apoca. 22. 4.
writes his name in their foreheads, and so marks them as it were for the
children of God and inheritours of the kingdom of heaven: See Ludolphus de
vita Christipart. 2. cap. 35. Ardens, Musculus, Pontan, Ferus in loc.

If we now conform our selves according to Christ's image, he shall hereafter
(as it is in this days Epistle) transform our vile body, that it may be like
his glorious body, 1. Cor. 15. 49.
for as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image
of the heavenly. Take heed therefore that Satan imprint not his stamp in
you, because Christ at the Ludolphus.
last day will say to thy soul, as he did to the Pharisees here: whose is
this image and inscription? If thou be branded with the Apocal. 23.
marks of Satan and Antichrist, hell is thy portion; if Ephesians. 4. 30.
sealed by the holy spirit of God unto the day of redemption, heaven is thine
inheritance. Give then unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, Ambros. in
Luc. cap. 20.
leave to the world the things of the world, that thou may the better give
to God the things of God. Origin apud Thom. in loc.
Or give to thy body such things as are necessary tribute, and to thy soul
such things as are convenient and profitable for thy soul. Or give to thy
Pastor such things as are the Pastors, and unto the Prince such things as
appertain to thy Prince, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
that thou may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Remember the proverb, He that eats the Kings Goose, shall have the
feathers stick in his throat seven years after: and observe the Commandment,
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

When they heard these words, they marueiled, and left him, and went their way]
This happy conquest of Christ is full of Luther. Zepper.
consolation, in that his spirit Romans 8. 9.
dwells in us, and Matt. 10. 20.
speaks in us, helping our infirmities, and inabling us in our disputations
before Kings and Councels to plead the Gospels cause so powerfully, that he
Psalm. 2. 4.
who dwells in heaven shall laugh his enemies to scorn, yea the Lord shall
have them in derision. When the Acts 6. 9. 10.
Libertines and Cyrenians disputed with Saint Stephen, they were not able to
resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke. So the godly learned, and
truly stout Martyr of Jesus Christ Master John Philpot, at a Examination 11.
as Mr. Fox in his martyrdom.
conference holden in Bishop Boners house, told Doctor Morgane plainly, Thou
art not able to answer that spirit of truth which speaks in me, for the
defense of Christ's true religion. I am able by the might thereof to drive thee
round about this Gallery before me. So silly women and young boys endued and
strengthened by the spirit, in the quarrel of Christ argued so peremptorily,
so profoundly, that Boner as being too wicked to dismiss them, and too weak
to convince them, ordinarily for saking all his Logic and Rhetoric, Mr. Fox
in the martyrdom of Ioane Horns.
knock them down with the butcherly axe of his sentence. So we read in Hist.
lib. 10. cap. 3. cited in part 1. Church hom. for Whitsunday.
Eusebius, of a subtle Philosopher, who being an extreme adversary to Christ
and his doctrine, could by no kind of learning be converted unto the faith:
but was able to withstand all arguments that could be brought against him, even
with little or no labor. At length there started up a poor simple man of small
wit, and less knowledge, one that was reputed among the learned as an idiot:
and he on Gods name would needs take in hand to dispute with this proud
Philosopher. The Bishops and other Divines standing by, were much abashed at
the matter, as fearing that they should be brought to shame by his doings, he
notwithstanding goes on, and beginning in the name of the Lord Jesus, brought
the Philosopher to such a point in the end, that he could not choose but
acknowledge the power of God in his words, and to give place to the truth.

The Epistle.
COLOSS. 1. 3. We give thanks to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
THis proem of Paul's Epistle to the Colossians is in effect Sarcerius. Aretius.
all one with that to the Corinthians, expounded Sunday 18. after Trinity: and
to the Philippians expounded Sund. 22. after Trinity. Wherefore lest I seem
tedious in tautologies, I will only part it, and so depart hence to the
Gospel ensuing.

It consists of Melanct. Zanchius.
two parts, a

Congratulation for their gifts in present possession, and in it Who: ver. 1.
Paul an Apostle, not of Galat. 1. 1.
men, but of Jesus Christ. Not through his own Sarcerius.
intrusion, or for his own Primasius.
merit: but by the will of God. And Timotheus his brother: in respect of their
Zanchius.
common faith on earth, and common father in heaven. When: Always praying: or
as our translation, always in our prayers. As Caietan. Aretius. Marlorat.
often in our devotion as we think of you, we thank God for you since the
day we first heard of yourfaith, v. 4. 9. To whom: Unto God and the father of
our Lord, etc. that is, as we read, to God even the father. Or to God Calvin.
Beza*
as the father of our Lords Jesus Christ, in Matthew. 3. 17.
whom only God is well pleased. As if he should say, seeing every James 1. 17.
gift is from God and bestowed on us for Christ: it is our bounden duty to
thank God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ always in all our prayers;
Combard.
able to hear, because God, for that is a style of Bullinger apud Marlorat.
majesty; willing to help, because the father of Jesus, for that is a style of
mercy. For whom: For you, because 1. Cor. 13. 4.
love does not envy, but rejoice for others good. For you Saints at Colosse,
verse 2. that is, Saints by 1. Cor. 1. 2.
calling, all such as are consecrated to God in holy Theophylact.
baptism, Aretius.
sanctified by the sanctifying spirit. In a word, Piseator.
all the faithful in Colosse. For what. As Aretius for the 3. principal
virtues of a Christian: Faith, and that a true faith, having Christ Jesus for
the Calvin.
proper object, and wholly relying upon his Bullinger.
merits. Love, and that according to Philip. 1. 9.
knowledge, loving especially the Saints, and those not a few, but without
Primasius.
exception of person, in respect of Caietan.
blood, affinity, fashion, or faction, all. Hope. and that an assured hope,
expecting an inheritance that is Here in alluding to careful parents hoording
up treasure for their babes: v^ Zanchius in loc.
laid up in store; and that in a sure Lombard. Anselm.
and secure place (where Matthew. 6. 20
neither the moth nor canker corrupts, and where thieves neither dig thorough
nor steal) in heaven. As S. 1. Pet. 1. 4.
Peter interprets Paul, an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades
not away, reserved in heaven. All which is conveyed unto them by the preaching
of the Gospel, here commended a Aquin.
veritate, dilatatione, profectu. That is in two words in respect of it
Contents, as being the word of truth, verse. 5. Extents, as being come to all
the world, and fruitful in all good works, verse. 6.


Comprecatio^ for their further increase and future proficience Zanchius.
in Plentiful wisdom and spiritual understanding, whereby to know the will
of God, verse. 9. Fruitful obedience, whereby to do the will of God, walking
worthy of the Lord, verse. 10. that is, as becomes his Philip. 1. 27.
Gospel, and his Lombard. Anselm.
glory, pleasing him in all things, etc. Cheerful patience, whereby to
suffer according to the will of God and that with ioyfulnesse, verse. 11.

The difference between patience and long suffering may be, that the first is
Aretius.
circa grauiora pericula; the second, circa leuiora. Theophylact.
The one teaches us to forbear when we can revenge; the other, to bear when
we cannot revenge. Or patience Case* an.
leuelleth as it were the mind in our present affliction, which is but for a
moment; long suffering exalts it in expectation of our future 2. Cor. 4. 17.
far most excellent and eternal weight of glory, when as we shall be made
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, verse. 12. Spiritual
understanding is most useful in our contemplative life, obedience in our
active, patience needful in both. And therefore let us pray with Paul here to
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be strengthened with all might,
through his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with
ioyfulnesse, etc.

The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 9. 18. While Jesus spoke unto the people, behold, there came a certain
ruler, and worshipped him, saying, my daughter is even now decased, etc.
TWo points are to be considered in this Gospel especially, the

Goodness of Christ, in relieuing all sexes and all sorts of men, hearing a
ruler who was rich and a Jew, healing a woman who was poor and a Gentile.
Comforting a distressed father, recovering a diseased woman, raising a deceased
damsel. Lewdness of the people, verse. 24. laughing Christ to scorn.
In the first miracle wrought upon the woman which had an issue of blood, note
circumstance of

Time: verse. 22. the woman was made whole even the same time. Place: verse. 19.
20. in the way to Iairus house. Person, To whom. Before whom. By whom this
work was done.

In the second miracle three persons are remarkable: the

Physician, Christ. Patient, a deceased Domosell. Mediator between both, a
certain Ruler.
In that Christ healed the sick woman instantly so soon as she believed in
him, and he saw her: he teaches us Ferus. D^zinloc.
hereby not to defer any work of charity, but to do good turns in a good
time. Prou. 3. 28.
Say not unto thy neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow will I give
thee, if thou have it now, for hope that is deferred is the fainting of the
heart: but when the desire comes it is a Tree of life, Prouerbe^ 13. 12. And
in that our blessed Savior cured this woman in the way to Iairus house: he
gives us an Ludol^hus ex Chrysostom.
example to spend all our hours profitably, B. Latymer. sermon. upon this
Gospel.
never intermitting any fit opportunity to do good, redeeming the time because
the days are (...), Ephesians. 5. 16.

In the party to whom, observe first her grief, then her grace. She was a Luke
8. 47.
fearful and a silly woman, vexed with an vocleane and uncomfortable disease
twelve years, in such sort (that as Saint Mark reports in his fifth chapter,
verse 26.) she suffered many things of many Physicians: some torturing her with
one medicine, some with another, and yet none did her any good, but rather much
hurt. For as Mark 5. 26. L^ke 8. 43.
other Evangelists have recorded this History more fully, she spent all that
she had, and it auailed her nothing, but she became much worse. Whereby she was
made bis misera (says Paraph. in loc.
Erasmus) or as Postil in loc.
Hemingius, many ways unhappy. For her sickness brought her to weakness, her
weakness to physic, physic to beggary, beggary to contempt. And happily
remorse of conscience made these wordly grieuances more bitter: for whereas the
Eccle. ^8. 15.
wise* man affirms, He that sinnetb before his maker, shall fall into the
hands of the Physician: she might per adventure conceive that God had cast her
away. This (as you see) was her hard case, vexed in mind, troubled in body,
beggered in her estate, despised in her place.

From hence we may note first against Lib. de Solem^ne cap. 5. la^m alij
sc^tivant apud ^udolphum de vita Christi, part 1. c. p. ^9.
Ambrose that this afflicted woman was not Martha the sister of Mary, Beauxamis
Har. Tom. 1. fol. 160.
because Martha was rich, as we find in the Ioh. cap. 11. and 12.
Gospels history, whereas this Haemorrhousa had wasted all her wealth upon
Physicians.

Secondly, by this example you see, K^llius in loc.
what an inestimable ie well health is, in that this Haemorrhousa willingly
became a beggar in her estate to be better at ease. Uitanon est viuere, sed
valere; it is more comfortable to die quickly, then to liuesickly. In loc.
Theophylact, H^st. l. 7. c. 14.
Eusebius and Zozomen and (...) apud Vegam, and Zepperum in loc.
other report, that this woman healed of her bloody flux, and returned home to
Caesarea Philippi, did erect against her own doors a brazen image of Christ,
in perpetual remembrance of this great benefit. It is our duty likewise to
bless God always for his blessings in this kind.

Thirdly, in that our father in heaven, after long sickness sends at the
last happy deliverance to his children: it may teach us in all our distress,
never to distrust his mercy, but to say with Job 13. 15.
Job, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. And with Genesis 32. 26.
Jacob, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. Tobit ^. 14. 2.
Toby was blind eight years, and then the Lord restored his sight again.
Saint Luke reports in his Luke 13. 11. 12.
Gospel, how a crooked woman after she was bowed together eighteen years in
such sort, that she could not lift up her self in any wise, was made straight
and loosed from her infirmity. Kilius in his explication of this text, says he
was acquainted with a man, who lay twenty years bedred, and of those twenty,
fourteen upon one side, who notwithstanding afterward married, and begat
children, and lived in perfect health a long time. Saint Cap. 5 v. 59
Iobn mentions a certain man made whole, which had been diseased eight and
thirty years. And Acts 3. we read of a Creeple from his mothers womb, whose
fecte and ancle-bones received strength in so great measure, that he could
stand, and walk, and leap. Here this woman had a bloody flux twelve years,
and yet Christ as soon as she touched his vesture, said, Daughter be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, etc.

Hitherto concerning her grieuances: I come now to her graces, and they be
principally three: Faith, Invocation, Humility. Which Caten. Aurea in l^.
Aquin notes out of three words in the text, Credidit, dixit, tetigit: quia his
tribus, fide, verbo, and opere omnis salus acquiritur. Her faith was so great,
that she certainly persuaded her self, if she might but touch only the
hemme of Christ's garment, she should attain her former health. Our blessed
Savior cried often in the Prou. 1. 21.
streets among the people, Matt. 11. 28.
Come to me all that are laden, and I will ease you. Now Heming.
surely this woman heard this gracious promise, believing it to be true in
general, and applying it to her self in particular. He calls all men, and
promises he will refresh all such as are combred; I am one of that all, one of
those which are heavy laden, I therefore verily believe that he will hear me
and heal me. Let us in like sort stir up our faith in all adversity, when
any trouble without, or terror within assaulteth us, and it alone shall Ephesians.
6. 16.
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Happily some will object, This woman
had Christ in her eye, present at her fingers end, but I poor soul, may
complain with Ioh. 20. 2.
Mary Magdalene, They have taken away the Lord, and he is now gone far from
us. Against this tentation of the flesh, oppose the word of Christ unto Job.
20. 29.
Thomas his Apostle, Blessed are they which have not seen and have believed,
and his promise to all his followers, Matt. 28. 20.
I am with you always until the end of the world, with us in his Sacraments, in
his word, by his power and spirit and grace: being a Psalm. 46. 1.
very present help in all affliction unto such as call upon him, I say such as
call upon him faithfully. Wherefore James 4. 8.
draw near to him, and he will draw near to thee; come to him, and call upon
him (as this woman here) with a steadfast hope, no way doubting of his might and
mercies, and his spirit shall Romans 8. 16.
assure thy spirit, that thou art his child, and that thy faith has made thee
safe.

The second virtue noted in this woman, is her invocation or manner of praying.
The Ruler in my text worshipped Christ, and said, my daughter is even now
deceased, etc. The Matt. 15. 2
Cananite called after him, Have mercy upon me, O Lord the son of David. And
blind Mark. 10. 48
Bartimaeus also cried unto him, O son of David, and being rebuked, he cried
much more, Son of David have mercy on me. But this a B. Latymer.
shame^ast woman, Eut^ym. in 8 L^c. and Theophylact. in l^c.
as blushing to publish her uncleanness before the whole multitude, and fearing
happily that she should have been thrust out of the company for impurity,
speaks not a word to Christ openly, but prays only to her self in secret:
If I may but touch even his garment I shall be whole. Wishes are her words, and
sobs her sacrifices, and yet Christ hears her groans and grants her hearts
desire, saying, Daughter be of good comfort, etc. Insinuating Heming.
hereby that the prayer which pearceth the clouds is not a wagging of the
lips, nor a babbling of the tongue: but rather an humble Psalm. 25. 1.
lifting up of thy soul to God, Offer then unto Christ a I^l 2 15.
rent and a Psalm. 51. 17.
broken heart, in seeking thy Savior heartily, praying heartily, repenting
heartily; that he may turn to thee, and turn his judgments away from thee,
saying to thy soul, Psalm. 35. 3.
I am thy salvation.

The third virtue commended in this woman is her discreet Calman. Ludolphus.
Aretius.
humility, who knowing her own unworthiness, and considering her loathsome
sickness, did not presume to come before, but behind Christ, as it were B.
Latymer.
stealing her health. And this her relike is worth our obserueuing also: for as
pride is the first stop; so lowliness the first step unto blessedness. It is
an eminent grace for a man speaking with the tongues of Angels to transport his
audience with the wind of words, and floods of eloquence whither he list: and
yet if learning be not seasoned with humility, it rather 1. Cor 8. 1.
blows up then builds up, and as the Aristotle.
Philosopher said, is no better then a sword in a mad-mans hand. Prophesying is
an excellent gift, but if any preach themselves, and go before Christ Ierem.
23. 16.
auouching the vision of their own hearts, and not following after Christ in
delivering out of his mouth his errand faithfully: what are they but as a 1.
Cor. 13. 1.
sounding brass or as a tinkling cymball? In running after delight, riches,
honor: come behind Christ, evermore treading in his ways, and touching the
hemme of his vesture.

The persons before whom, are the Ruler, verse 18. the Disciples, verse 19. and
a great multitude, Mark 5. 24. Christ acted this miracle before Iairus,
Theophylact. in loc. and Euthym. in Luc. 8.
for the strengthening of his weak faith; encouraging him hereby to belceue,
that he could recover his daughter, as well as cure this woman. Before the
Disciples and the multitude, for the confirmation of his doctrine, showing
Ludolphus
hereby that he knew the secrets of all hearts, as also Chrysostom. Theophylact.
E^thym.
that the lively faith of this Haemorrhousa might not be concealed, but openly
commended as an example for all men. And therefore Jesus inquired immediately,
Mark 5 30. Luk 8. 45.
who has touched my clothes? and he looked round about, to see her, and when
the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and fell down before
him, and told him before all the people, for what cause she had touched him, and
how she was healed instantly. The brief whereof is recorded here by S.
Matthew, When he saw her, he said, Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has
made thee whole. Propounding her as a B. Latymer.
Schoole-mistresse to all the world, to learn by her how to trust in God, and
to come to Christ in all manner of afflictions.

The person by whom, is Christ, and in him obseruo what he said, and what he
did. His words Zepper. Con. 1. in* loc.
contain consolation, Daughter be of good comfert: and commendation, thy faith
has made thee safe. The word Daughter, is Jacob. de Vorag. ser. 2. in ioc.
magnae familiaritatis: be of good comfort, magnae securitatis: Thy faith has
made thee safe, magnae iocunditatis. Here then are set down three notable
effects of a lively faith: it makes us the children of God, Daughter: it
brings comfort, be of good cheer: it procures salvation of body and soul, thy
faith has made thee whole.

Christ said in the Ioh. 20. 17.
Gospel, Iaescend to my father, and unto your father. Unto my father by
Theophylact. Euthym. C^ietan. in Joan. 20.
nature, but unto your father by grace: August* tract. 121. in Joan.
non ait, ascendo ad patrem nostrum: aliter ergo meum, aliter vestrum: natura
meum, gratia vestrum And this adoption of the Father electing, of the Son
redeeming, of the holy Ghost assuring us that we are the children of the most
high: is on our part, by faith only. For John 1. 12.
unto such as received him, he gave power to be the sons of God* even to such
as believe in his name. Ideo f^a, quta fides tua te saluum fecit, as S. Hierome
upon my text. This woman is Christ's daughter in that her faith made her whole.
Here then observe that a Christian is most honorable, being son to a King, Heb.
2. 11.
brother to a King, R^m. 8. 17.
heir to a King, yea to the King of Psalm. 24. 7.
glory, to the King of all Kings Ecclesiast. 5 7
higher then the highest. He were a foolish poor man that were ashamed of the
kindred which the King did challenge of him: Deering. lect. 10. Heb.
he is more foolish though he were a King himself, that is ashamed of the
son of God, when he does offer himself unto him. For Christ is the Luke. 2.
25.
consolation of Israel, as it follows in the next clause to be considered, he
brings comfort to his children, Daughter be of good cheer. The reprobate
account the children of God unhappy wretches, even Wisd. 5. 4.
mad men, having them in derision as the 1. Cor. 4. 13.
filth of the world. But as Lib. 1. de guber. dei.
Saluianus truly, nemo miser alieno sensu, sed suo. Men are not miserable for
that other think so, unless themselves feel it so. The children of God then
having the 1. Tim. 4. 8.
promises of this life and that which is to come, cheered in conscience while
they live, filled with eternal joy when they be dead, have both hereafter and
here such comfort as Philip. 4.
passes all understanding.

The last effect of a lively faith is salvation of body and soul, Thy faith
has made thee safe. For whereas it is said here, The woman was made whole even
the same time: we must expound it (as Enarrat. in loc.
Anselme and Zapper con. 1. loc.
other intimate) not that she was healed at that hour when Jesus turned about
to her, and spoke, but in the same moment of time, wherein she touched his
vesture. Hi^ron. in loc.
Non enim dixit fides tua te saluam factura est, sed saluam te fecit: in eo
enim quod credidisti, iam salua facta es. It was then her trust and not her
touch, her faith and not her finger, which haled unto her this health and
help. For the multitude thrust Christ, and trod on him (as S. Luke reports)
and yet only this woman is said to touch him. And Ferus Con. 3. Granat. Con. 2.
and Zepper. Con. 1. in loc.
so when we come to divine service, sermon, or sacrament without lively faith,
hearty devotion, holy reverence; we touch his outward element, but take not
his inward grace to the comfort of our soul. We do tangere panem domini touch
his hemme, but not contingere panem dominum touch him. And the reason hereof is
plain, for that our faith and our fingers go not together. And therefore when
any tread in the courts of the Lord, hearing his word, and receiving his
sacraments: I say when any come to the Church, and yet feel no virtue to come
from Christ: it is assuredly for that Esaias 29. 13.
their lips are near him, as it were, pressing among the multitude: but their
heart far from him, not attending, much less attayning his saving grace.

From Latymer. Fulk. Zepper. in loc.
hence we may learn (against Arboreus, Maldonate, Beauxamis, and other Popish
authors in their Commentaries upon this place) not to put any trust in the
relics of Saints, or impute any saving virtue to the vestments of our
Savior. For the virtue which healed her went not out of the coat, but out of
Christ immediately: he said not there is virtue proceeded from my vesture, but
I perceive that virtue is gone out of me, Luke 8. 46. There was no great or
extraordinary virtue in his garments after his death, when the soldiers had
parted them among them: nor in his life when he wore them, for the people that
thronged him, received no benefit by them, but only she and they that touched
him by faith. And therefore Ferus sermon. in loc.
some by Christ's garment understand the scriptures, in which our Savior is
wrapped: but if a man unfold them, he shall behold the best Crucifix that ever
he saw: for Christ crucified is the end of all the Law, scope of all the
Prophets, and as it were hemme of all the Bible. Apud Thom. in loc
Rabans and Ansel. in loc.
other affirm, that this garment was Christ's humane nature, for he Philip. 2.
7.
took on him the shape of a servant, and put on our rags that he might
clothe us with his robes. Now the hemme of his humane nature was his passion,
and his passion was a Heb. 9. 14.
sacrifice for our sin: so that to touch the hemme of his garment, is nothing
else, but to believe with 1. Tim. 1. 15
Paul, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am
chief. Yea but happily some will object, it was neither the woman's finger nor
faith that made her whole? but Christ's own virtue, Luke 6. 19. The whole
multitude sought to touch him, for there went virtue out of him, and healed
them all. He might have said then it was my virtue, not thy faith? It is true,
that Christ's own virtue and grace does only cure the sins of our soul, and
sores of our body: but his virtue is not apprehended but by the finger of
faith. And therefore Christ (as we read in Saint Cap. 6. ^. 5. 6.
Mark) could do no great works in his own country, because of their
unbelief, because they wanted an hand to touch his vesture. Cyprian, apud
Granat. Con. 1. in loc.
Quantum enim vas fidei capacis afferimus, tantum gratie inundantis haurimus.
Hence you may know both how Gods grace, and our faith is said to justify. Ye
are saved by grace through faith, Ephesians 2. 8. by grace effectiue, by faith
apprehensiue: See Epistle 17. Sunday after Trinity.

Now faith in respect of it object, is called in Galat. 3. 22.
scripture the faith of Jesus Christ: but in respect of the subject in which it
is Aretius in loc.
inherent, my faith and thy faith. As our text here, thy faith has made thee
whole. By this which Christ said, is showed also what he did, he spoke the word
and it was done, he commanded and it was effected, even the same time the
woman was made whole. In general, to confirm his Gospel; in particular,
intimating that all physic is in vain, B. Latymer. Kilius. Zepper.
except the great Physician of the world (who visits and redeemeth his
people) bless it. So much of the parts and persons of the first miracle. Let
us now come to the second, and in it (according to the texts order) inquire
first of Iairus.

In whom observe,

First, his fashion, in that he was a Ruler, as our Evangelist. Ruler of a
Synagogue, as Mark and Luke. Ruler of a Synagogue in Capernaum, as may be
collected out of them all.
Then his faith, and the fruits thereof. 1. His fatherly love toward his
daughter, in desiring help for her at Christ's hand. 2. Invocation, and
worshipped him. 3. Hope, Come, and lay thine hand upon her, and she shall live.

Acertaine ruler] I have showed Gospel 3. Sun. after Epiphan. Trinit. Sund. and
21. after Trinit
often, how many great men have been good men, and that the Pharisees
objection is false, John 7. 48.
Does any of the rulers believe in Christ? For he that keeps Israel, has in
every See Beauxamis. Har. tom. 1. sol. 160.
age stirred up as well Ecclesiastical as Civil governors to favor his
children, and further the business of the Gospel. I will upon this occasion
add one thing only to the perpetual honor of England, namely, that
Constantine the Great our countriman was the first Christian Emperor, Lucius
our countriman the first Christened King, Henry 8. our countriman the first
Catholic Prince that utterly shaked of the Popes unlimited jurisdiction in his
dominions, and our King James of blessed memory the first of his rank who did
oppose that Antichrist of Rome with his own pen in the quarrel of religion.

This Iairus was a ruler of a Synagogue. Now that ye may the better understand
what office this was, I must inform you, that there was in all Iewry but one
Temple, Deuteronomy. 16.
where the people were commanded to celebrate their solemn feasts, and offer
up their sacrifices unto God. And there was only but one, for the preservation
of Melanct. postil. in loc. Idem Hospinian. de origin templorum, cap. 4.
unity in piety, that there might be but one only religion, of one only God,
in one only Temple. Where by the way note, that uniformity in discipline is an
hedge to unity and doctrine. Where Canons and Injunctions of order are
despised, and every man left unto himself: There many times are so many sects
as Cities, and almost as many Gospels as gossips. On the contrary, when all
things in the Church are done 1. Cor. 14. 40.
orderly, when the Christian Magistrate enioies in outward ceremonies one kind
of discipline for the public worship of God: there for the most part, an union
in law breeds an union in love, a conformity in fashion an uniformity in faith,
Ephesians. 4. 3. 15.
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, following
the truth in love. This I take to be the true reason, why Gods Israel had but
one Tabernacle and one Temple.

But there were Synagogues in Vide Sigon. de repub. Heb lib. 2 cap. 8. and
Hospinian vbi sup.
every town, where divine prayers and Gods holy word was read and expounded
every Sabbath, as Saint Luke records, Acts 15. 21. And for this purpose there
was a Melanct post in loc.
Covent, or College of students, and sons of the Prophets, among which our
Iairus here was a ruler: as Ser. upon this Gospel.
Bishop Latymer imagines a Churchwarden: or as other, Ma^donat. in loc.
expounder of the Law and the Prophets, as it were public Professor in
Divinity, the b Melanct.
Diez con. 1. in loc.
Prior of the place, the Kilius.
Rector of the Schools. Here then observe both antiquity and vtility of
Colleges and Universities, as being in Vide Hospinian. de origin scholarum,
cap. 4. 5.
all ages the Nurseries of Gods vineyard, out of which Impes of hope have
been translated into the Church and Commonweal. So then if thou wish well
unto thy Country, speak well and (as occasion is offered) do well unto the
schools of the Prophets, in that they be Seminaries of learning and
fountains of holy religion. If thy son be fit, and thy self be fitted also
for means and money, send him unto Iairus the ruler of the Synagogue. If he
be fit, I say, for when a man is out of his proper calling in any society, it
is as much as if a joint were dislocated in the body. To make thy son a
tradesman, if he be most apt for learning; or to send him to the Court, when
he is fitter for the Cart: is as much as if a man should apply his toes to
feeling and not his fingers, and to walk on his hands and not on his feet. It
was a memorable fact of that famous Bishop* of Lincoln, Robert Grosthead, Sir
George Paul in the life of Archbishop Whitgift. p. 85.
who being upon a time solicited to prefer his poor kinsman, and thereupon
enquiring what condition of life he followed, and understanding that he was an
husbandman: Why then (answered he) if his plough be broken, I will repair it,
or rather then fail bestow a new upon him, whereby he may go on in his
course: but so to dignifie him, as to make him forsake his calling and trade
wherein he was brought up, I mean not to do.

Now that a father may the better accommodate his child with a fit calling: he
See Perkins treatise of Callings.
must observe both his inclination and natural gifts. Every child even in his
infancy, does affect some one particular occupation or condition of life more
than another: and therefore the judicious Nazian. epist. ad Eudoxum.
Athenians before they placed their children in any calling, used to bring them
into a public place where tools and instruments of all sorts were laid: and
then accurately to mark with what kind of instrument they took delight,
applying them afterward to the like Art with good success. And it is not
amiss for Christians to follow Heathens in this, or any like commendable
practice.

Secondly, parents must observe the natural endowments of their children,
applying such as excel in eminent gifts of the mind unto courses of learning:
and other which excel in gifts of the body to trades and mechanical
occupations. Magdeburg. Cent. 3. col. 250
Origin that great Clerk when he was a child, used to question with his father
Leonides about the sense of the Scripture, whereupon he was made a scholar.
Athanasius also was first put to learning (as Apud Magde. cent. 4. col. 1027
Ruffinus and Zozomene report) for that he was found by the sea side doing the
part of a Bishop among a company of little children like himself, examining and
baptizing them according to the solemn order used in the congregation.
Archbishop Whitgift the Camden. Britan* in Commit. Lincoln.
peerless Prelate in our age for learning and piety, Idem Camd. in commit.
Cant.
consecrating his whole life to God, and his painful labors unto the
Churches happy peace, was applied first unto the School, for Sir George Paul
vbi supra page 2.
that his Uncle Robert Whitgift Abbot of the Monastery of Wellow, found an
extraordinary towardliness in him. And because many parents are ignorant, and
most parents exceeding partial in judging of their own childrens inclination
and ingenuity: the best way for them is to be directed heerin by some judicious
friends, and then out of mature judgment, to give unto Caesar, the things
appertaining to Caesar, accommodating such unto secular courses as are most apt
for the Commonwealth: and unto God the things which belong to God, committing
them unto Iairus, and consecrating them unto the sacred function of the
Ministry.

That Iairus was a ruler of the Synagogue in Capernaum, is insinuated Luke 8.
41. and in the first verse of this present chapter of our Evangelist, as I have
copiously proved in the beginning of mine Exposition, Gospel Sunday 19. after
Trinity. Capernaum then had a good Melanct. ^m. in loc.
Pastor, and as we read, Matthew. 8. 5. a good Captain, and Christ the best of
all often resided in that City: yet notwithstanding (as truth it self Matthew.
11. 23
witnesses) it was a very wicked and dissolute place, deserving greater
damnation in the day of judgment than the land of Sodom and Gomorrah. Let not
then any vigilant Minister, or diligent Magistrate be discouraged in his
place, for that his people bring not forth any fruits of righteousness
answerable to the means of their instruction: for Ezech. 3. 19.
if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his
wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity: but thou have delivered thy soul.

Having thus examined the fashion of the ruler, it remains I should treat of
his faith, and fruit thereof also. But for as much as I have spoken of these
virtues in the woman afflicted with the bloody flux, and other like petitioners
unto Christ often elsewhere: I think that I have a Supersedeas out of the
Chancery to meddle no more with him at this time, and a Capias corpus as it
were, for his deceased daughter. Concerning whom I note with Com. in loc.
Aretius the pregnant circumstances of her death, and the true demonstrations
of her rising again from the dead. Saint Cap. 5. v. 23.
Mark reports indeed the petition of the Ruler otherwise, My little daughter
lies at the point of death, etc. and Saint Cap. 8. v. 42.
Luke, she lay a dying: not as our Evangelist here, my daughter is even now
deceased. And yet all agree, for Iairus happily said his daughter was dead
coniecturally, Theophylact. Euthym. Beauxamis.
because he left her at home so desperately sick. And Augustine. de consensu.
Evangelist l. 2. c. 28.
so Mark and Luke set down what Iairus said, but Matthew what Iairus thought.
Or as Enarrat in loc.
Anselm, it may be that the Ruler said both, and made two requests: one that he
would lay his hands on her, and heal her malady, for that she was a dying:
another, (being informed certainly that she was even now deceased) that he
would come, and lay his hand upon her, and restore her to life. So that the
first evidence to prove her dead, is her fathers own confession. A second is
Christ's assent, instantly following Iairus. A third, the relation of certain
coming from the Rulers house, meeting Christ and him upon the way, Mark 5.
35. Thy daughter is dead, why diseasest thou thy master any further? A fourth
argument is the derision of the tumult in Iairus house, when Jesus said, the
damsel is not dead, etc. They laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was
dead. A fifth invincible proof was the preparation for her funeral, as the
multitude weeping, and the minstrels playing over the dead; a fashion in
Ambros. in Luc. 8.
old time crept in among Gods people from the Gentiles, according to that of
the Ovid. 4. fast.
Poet,

Cantabat maestis tibia funeribus. The demonstrations of her rising again from
the dead, are Surg^t, Ambulat, Edit. The damsel arose, says our Matthew, and
walked, as Saint Mark reports, and eat, as Saint Luke. The witnesses hereof
are Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the maid. For
Jesus thrust out of the doors (at Musculus.
least out of the chamber where the damsel lay) the minstrels and all the
rude company making a noise, Hieron. Chrysostom. Hilarious.
because they were not worthy to see mysterium resurgentis qui resuscitantem
indignis contumelijs deridebant. Or happily to Aretius.
shun vain ostentation and popular applause. Or for Maldonat.
that he would not as yet have this great my racle known, as Mark and Luke
intimate.

In the Physician Jesus, note first his facility, who would instantly come,
verse 19. then his faculty, who could instantly cure the deceased Damsel,
according to the request of her own father, verse 25. For whereas Iairus said,
Come, and lay thine hand upon her, and she shall live: Christ arose, followed
him, and took the Damsel by the hand, and raised her again from the dead.
Mystically, Ludolphus.
Christus venit per gratiam praeuenientem, manum imponit per gratiam
concomitantem, and tunc anima viuit per gratiam cooperantem.

And they laughed him to scorne] Musculus. Heming.
The world is blind, and cannot judge aright of Christ's doctrine and doing,
the wisdom of the flesh is at enimity with God. And therefore lest unhappily
we turn scorners with the world, let us believe the Gospel, especially that
article (which is our chief comfort) the resurrection of the dead. And by B.
Latymer.
Christ's example we may learn to be content when we be despised in this world,
that we may be glorified with him in yonder world, as also to Ludolphus.
proceed in doing any good office, notwithstanding the scoffs of malicious and
ignorant people. Nam Lipsius reiect^ncula Sannionis cujusdam ad finem. l. de
Di^ Sichemiensi.
vt ignis paleam exurit, aurum nitidius reddit: sic istae calumniae vanum aut
vacuum aliquem absumant, vera virtute granem illustrant. On the contrary, to
be praised of naughty folks, is almost as great a shame as to be praised for
naughtiness. Remember the sweet advice of De ser. Dom. in monte, lib. 2. in
prin.
Augustine: Si homines inter quos viuis, te recte viuentem non laudauerint,
illi sunt in errore: si autem laudauerint, tu in pe^ieulo.

So much of the literal exposition of these two miracles. In a mystical,
Jacob. de Vorag. ser. 1. in loc.
every sinner is like the woman infected with an issue of blood. Osea. 4* 2. By
swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they break out, and
blood touches blood. Where Rupert, and Calvin. in Hos^ae cap. 4. Idem Greg
mag, in multis locis v^i Ribera number. 3. in Hoseae 4.
Divines understand by blood, sin. Hieron. in loc. Hoseae.
As if he should say, the wicked heap sin upon sin, adding new sins unto
their old. For when a man runs from one foul fault unto another, blood
touches blood. As when a wicked thought issues into some wicked act, and act
to custom, custom to necessity, necessity to desperation. And then as a man
desperate in sickness, cares not what meat he does eat: so the man rechlesse
in sinning, Ephesians. 4. 19.
given over to commit all uncleanness even with greediness, cares not what
villainies he deuoureth, until Christ the Physician of his soul stop his
bloody flux, directing him with his word which is holy, and sanctifying him
also with his spirit which is holy. Nay the devout people living in blind
popery, Luther. post. mayor in loc.
could never have their conscience truly quieted (although they spent almost
all their wealth upon Monkish Doctors, healing by the doctrine of satisfaction
and merit) till they did understand that justification is only by faith, and
that it alone makes a man whole. Postil. in loc.
Melancthon delivers another allegory: This woman (says he) does aptly
resemble the Jewish Synagogue, vexed a long time with many mischieses and
miseries, especially tortured with unconscionable Princes, and unskillful
Priests or Physicians of the soul, the Pharisees and Sadduces, on whom she
wasted all her strength and goods, and yet she was not a whit the better, but
rather much worse, till the blessed Lord of Israel, her Savior in his own
person came to visit and redeem her. And so Iairus is a Beauxamis ex Emisseno.
type of all the Patriarchs and holy Prophets 1* Pet. 1. 10. 11.
expecting Christ, and earnestly desiring that he would Esaias 64. 1.
break the heavens and come down, and lay his hand upon the Synagogue being
at the point of death, and heal her. Saint In Luc. 8.
Ambrose, Com. in loc.
Hierome, In loc.
Rupert, Anselm, and F^rus ser. 3. (...). 25. post Pent.
other affirm, that this woman and this wench are plain figures of the
Gentiles and Jews. The woman a Gentile b In loc.
had her disease twelve years, and the rulers daughter a ^ew raised here was
twelve year old. The woman fell sick when the wench was borne: so the
Gentiles went their own ways into superstition and idolatry, when the Jews
in Abraham believed. Again, as Christ here went to raise the wench, and by
the way the woman was first healed, and then the wench revived so Christ came
to the Jews, as being sent to the Matt. 15. 24.
lost sheep of Israel especially, but the Gentiles believed first, and were
saved, and in the end the Jews also shall believe.

Christ Melanct. in Matthew. 9.
in the three years of his preaching raised three sorts of dead. The first
year the Widows son in Naim, Luke 7. the second year Iairus daughter,
mentioned in this scripture: the third year Lazarus, John 11. Now Soarez
tract. 3. in Matthew. 9.
Iairus daughter raised in her fathers house resembles the Jews; the Widows
son carried out of the Town gate resembles the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 12.
altanss from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of
promise until Christ's coming, as it were shut out of the City of God.
Lazarus who laid in his grave four days, is a figure of the Jewish remnant,
which asore the worlds end shall be raised out of the pit of ignorance and
incredulity, wherein they have lien dead many hundred years, and at the length
acknowledge Christ Jesus (whom their fathers crucified) to be their Messiah and
Savior. Esaias 10. 21. The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob unto
the mighty God. For though thy people, O Israel, be as the sand of the sea, yet
shall the remnant of them return. And Saint Romans 11. 25.
Paul says, I would not that ye should be ignorant of this secret (lest ye
should be arrogant in your selves) that partly obstinacy is come to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles become in, and then all Israel shall be
saved, as it is written, the deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn
away the ungodliness from Jacob. When the woman is fully cured which was
diseased, the damosel shall be raised which was deceased. When the fullness of
the Gentiles is past, almighty God remembering his old mercy shall graft the
Jews in again, and convert them unto the Christian faith.

It is well Relation of religion used in the West parts of the world. sect. 53.
observed, that beside the Jews natural and inrooted obstinacy, there be
three great impediments which hinder their conversion: First, the scandals of
us Christians, as the most unbrotherly dissentions among Protestants, and most
abominable superstition and gross worshipping of Images among the Papists.
Secondly, want of means to teach and instruct them, because the Papists among
whom they live, will not suffer the new Testament in the vulgar tongue.
Thirdly, loss, which the Papists by their conversion shall incur, and (it
should seem by their toleration of Iudaisme) they had rather have the crowns,
then save the souls of the Jews, it was necessary that the son of man
should suffer, as it is written of him, and yet Matt. 26. 24.
woe be to that man by whom the son of man is betrayed: it had been good for
that man if he had never been borne. So it is necessary that the Jews should
persist in their unbelief for a time; but woe be to them whose scandals are
hindrances to their conversion. For the hour shall come, when Iairus daughter
shall be raised again, she is not dead, but sleeps. Albeit the Jews are in
a dead sleep, the Lord in his due time will rouse, yea raise them up again
from their incredulity.

For conclusion of the whole, by the goodness of Christ in restoring the sick
woman unto health in the way, raising the dead wench unto life in her fathers
house; we may learn Ferus Con. 1. in loc. Sanitas in via, vita in patria.
what to look for at his hand: namely grace, while we be pilgrims in this our
short, yet troublesome race; but glory, when as we shall rest in heaven, our
everlasting home. According to that of David, Psalm. 84. 12.
The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
such as walk uprightly.

The Epistle.
JEREMY 23. 5. Behold, the time comes, says the Lord, that I will raise up
the righteous branch of David, etc.
THe Church ends, as she began, with her only Lord and Savior: which Petrus
Machado ord. ff. praedicat. prouinc^al.
occasioned one to call his postil annulus Christianus, as it were the
Christians round, or ring. Sarcerius in epist. Dom. 22. post. Trinit.
For all the Gospels are fraught with excellent doctrines of holy faith in
Christ, and ordinarily the Epistles are nothing else but earnest exhortations
unto the fruit of faith, a godly life; that we may Co^oss. 1. 10.
walk worthy of the Lord and please him in all things. As then on the first
Sunday, the Gospel intimating that Christ is come [ behold thy King comes,
etc.] and the Epistle teaching that we must imitate our King being come, [ put
on the Lord Jesus, etc.] are in stead of a Preface: so this Epistle and Gospel
on the last Sunday (the one prophesying that the Lord our righteousness shall
shortly come, Behold, the time comes, etc. and the other preaching that he is
already come, this of a truth is the same Prophet that should come into the
world) may serve for a Ferus ser. 3. in euangel. Dom. 26. post. Pentecost.
conclusion or epilogue to all the rest of the whole year.

The Gospel is expounded Sunday 7. after Trinity. The Epistle contains an
abridgement of all the chief doctrine delivered in the Church, even from the
first in Aduent unto this present day; showing that Christ is God, and man, and
so participating of both natures in one person, is the sole Mediator between
God and man. Our Hiero. trooem. in lib. 1. Com. Ierem.
evangelical Prophet as another Matthew proves here Christ to be man, in that
he was a branch of David. And yet not a mere man, in that the righteous, in
whom is Esaias 53. 9.
no guile: whereas the scripture witnesses of other men that they were Psalm.
5^. 5.
conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, that Psalm. 14. 4.
all are gone out of the ways of the Lord, and that none does good, no not
one. Christ's high style, the Lord our righteousness, is an evident
demonstration of his Godhead, as Interpretors have noted against Arians and
Jews out of this place. Uide Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 13.. 9. Galatin. de
arcanis, lib. 8. cap. 3. Melanct. proposit. de eccles. propos. 25. Tom. 2. fol.
320. Bellarm. de Christo lib. 1. cap. 7. Indeed there be 1. Cor. 8. 5.
many Lords, and yet but Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Lord, which is the Lord: and many righteous comparatively, but none Aug.
ep. 54.
simply good, or righteousness it self, but only Mark. 10. 18.
God the most holy.

Now Christ as God-man, or Man-god, is the King of his redeemed ones, in whom
observe three royal virtues especially,

Wisdom, verse 5. Justice, verse 5. Mercy, saving Judah, verse 6. and
delivering Israel, verse 7. 8. Hieron. in loc.
Not as by Moses out of Egypt only: but out of the hands of Luke 1. 74.
all their enemies, and calling them out of all countries and corners of the
world, to Matt. 8. 11.
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, being our
righteousness Theophylact. Aquin. Piscator in 1. Cor. 1. 30. Idem Bellarm. de
Iustificat. lib. 2. cap. 10.
efficienter, as author of every good and perfect gift in us: and sufficienter,
in giving himself a ransom for all men, 1. Tim. 2. 6. and obtaining eternal
redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. a Jesus immediately saving us himself, not by
giving us power to become our own Saviors. And so the righteousness whereby
we are saved, is not the righteousness which we by him act for ourselves, but
that which he in his own person has wrought for us; an imputative, not an
inherent justice, August. de Ciuit. Dei, li. 19. c p. 27.
consisting not in the perfection of virtue, but in the free pardoning of our
sins. According to that of Psalm. 32. 1.
David, Blessed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered.
The words of this text, as Hierome notes are well interpreted by Paul, 1. Cor.
1. 30. Christ is made to us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption, that according as it is written, he that rejoices, let him
rejoice in the Lord. As if he should have said, Dr. Fulke in loc. ad Cor. ex
Chrysest. Oecumen. Beda.
If these graces are our own, we may vaunt in our own. But for as much as
Christ is made to us from God, not only the beginning of holiness, wisdom,
righteousness, etc. but the perfection of all these: let not flesh boast it
self in his presence, but he that does glory, let him glory in the Lord. As
Christ was made 2. Cor. 5. 21
sin for us, even so are we made the righteousness of God in Christ. He was
sin through imputation only, 1. Pet. 2. 22.
for he did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. And so we
are made righteousness, in that our unrighteousness is not imputed unto us,
Romans 4. 8. As Loc. Com. tit. de Iustitia Christiana and remissione peccatorum.
Martin Luther is bold to speak, Christiana sanctitas non est actiua, sed
passiua sanctitas, extra nos est iustitia, non in nobis. It is a righteousness
in God, whereby we stand righteous before God. It is true that we work
righteousness according to the proportion of grace bestowed upon us in this
life: but for as much as we Matt. 5. 6.
thirst after the full righteousness in another world, and have received only
the Romans 8. 23.
first fruits of the spirit here; to say that we are now thoroughly clean
Ephesians. 5. 27.
without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, is to iustle Christ out of his
justice, and to take from him his due title of honor, which is given him in
our text, the Lord our righteousness. See Gregor. apud Magdeburg. Cent. 6.
col. 681. Luther. vbi supra in margin. Melancton in Cat. and loc. Com. and
exam. tit. de Iustificatione and bonis operibus. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap.
11.. 11. Dr. Morton Apolog. lib. 1. cap. 2.. 11. and 1. 7. 2. and lib. 2. cap.
11. Dr. Abbots answer to Bishops Epistle to the King, page 138. 139. etc.

Wherefore learn to sing with Psalm. 4. 1.
David: O God which art my righteousness: and to say with Vbi sup.
Luther, Tues Domine Jesus, iustitiamea, ego autem sum peccatum tuum: tu
assumpsistimeum, and dedisti mihi tuum: assumpsisti quod non eras, and dedisti
mihi quod non eram, etc. I conclude with a meditation of Sermon. 61. in Cant.
Bernard: Thy righteousness, O my dear Savior, is not a short cloak that
cannot cover two, but being a Apocal. 7. 9.
long robe, and a large righteousness, it will wholly cover thee and me: a
multitude of sins in me, but in thee what shall it cover, O Lord, but the
treasures of thy goodness? To thee, ( sweet Jesus) the beginning and ending,
which have out of the riches of thy superabundant grace blessed my studies
hitherto, guiding, as I hope, my pen with thy finger, even from the first
lesson unto this last line: be given all honor, power and praise, now and for
ever.

Glory be to God on high, and peace to men in earth. Amen*
FINIS.

