An exhortacion to the carienge of Christ's cross, with a true and brefe
confutacion of false and papisticall doctrine.

2. Timo. 3.

All, that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecucyon.

The holy sprite of God* which is his earneste pledge, 2. Cor. (...).
given to his people for their comfort and consolacion, be poured into our
hearts, by the mighty power and merits of our alone savior Jesus Christ,
now and for ever. Amen
BEcause I perceive plainly, that unto the evils fallen upon us, which
profess Christ's gospel, greater ar most like to ensue, and after them
greater, till y^ measure Gene. 15
of iniquity be vpheaped (except we shrynke, and having put our Luke. (...)*
hand to ye plough, do look back, and so, with Loths wife, fall into Gene. 19.
gods heavy displeasure incurably, al which god forbid) and because I am
persuaded of you, my dearly beloved brethren and sisters, through out the
Realm of England, which have professed unfeignedly the gospel of our lord and
sauyoure Jesus Christ (for unto such do I write this Epistle or book) how yt,
as you have begone to take part with gods gospel and truth, so thro^ugh his
grace ye will persener and go on forwards, notwythsta^dyng the storms risen
and to a rise: I can not but write some thing unto you, to encourage you to go
on lustelye in the way of the lord, and not to become faint hearted or fearful
persons, whose place S. John appoynteth with Apoca. 21.
^nbeleuers, murderers and idolatours in eternal perdicio^, but cherfully to
take the Lords cup Psalm. 75.
and drink of it, before it draw toward the dregs and boto^. Whereof at
length they shall drink with the wicked to eternal destruction, which will not
receive it at the first with gods children, with whom god begins his 1.
Peter. 4*
judgment: that as the wicked world reioyseth when they lamente, John. 16.
so they may rejoice wha^ the wicked world shall mourn, and without end feel
woo intolerable.

The. 1. Chapter.
What we be / and where we be.

FIrst therefore, my dearlye beloved in the lord, I beseech you to consider,
that though ye be in ye world, yet you are not of ye world: John. 14.
you are not of them, which look for their portion in this life, Psalm. 17.
whose captain is ye god of this world: even Satan, who now 2. Cor. 4.
rufleth it apace, as he were wood, because his time on earth is not Apo. 12.
long.

But you are of them, which Heb. 11.
look for a city of gods own buildyng. You are of them, which know themselves
to be here but 1. Pet. 2. Hebr. 13.
pilgrems and strangers: for here you have no dwelling place.

You are of them, whose portion is the lord, and which have their Psalm. 116 119.
hope in heaven: whose captain is Christ Jesus the son of god, and governor
of heaven and earth. Unto him is given all power, yea he is god almighty, with
the Math. 28. Roma. 9. 1. John. 5.
father and the holy ghost, praise worthy for ever.

You are not of them, which receive the beestes mark, which Apo^a. 13. Luke.
6.
here rejoice, laugh and have their hearts ease, joy, paradise and pleasure:
but you are of them, which have received the an^gels mark, Eze. 9. Math. 5.
yea gods mark, which here lament, mourn, sigh, sobbe, weep and have your
wilderness to wander in, your purgatory and even hell. You are not of them,
which Esa. 22. 1. Cor. 15.
cry: let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. You are not of that
number, which say, Esai. 28.
they have made a couenaunte with death and hell for hurting them. You are not of
them, which take it but for a vain thing, to serve Mal. 3.
the lord. You are not of the^, which are lulled and rocked a sleep in Iesabels
bed, a bed of securitye. You are not in the number of the^ which say: tush, god
is in heaven ^z^. 8. P^^^. 73.
and sees us not, nor much passes what we do. You are not of the number of
the^, which will fall down for ye much of ye world, to worship the feynde: or
for displeasyng Lu^e. 4.
of men, to worship the golden image. Dani. 3.


Finally, you are not of the number of them, which set more by their pigs,
then by Christ: Math. 8 Lu^e. (...). (...). (...). 2
which, for ease and rest in thy^ life, will say and do, as Antiochus byddeth
them do or sayr And will follow the multitude to do evil, with Zedechias and
y^ ^xo. 23. (...). Reg. 22.
300. false prophets, yea Achab, Iesabel and y^ whole court, and country. But
you be of the number of them, which are dead already, or at lest in dying
daily Roma. (...) Colossi. 3*
to your selves and to the world. You are of them, which have made a
covenant with god, to forsake themselves and Satan in this world. You are of
them, which say: nay, the lord has Mal. (...)
all things written in his memorial book for such, as fear him and
remember his name.

You are of them, which have their loins girded about, and their lyghtes
burning in their hands, like unto men that wait Luke. (...)*
for their lords coming. You are in the number of them, y^ say: the lord
looks down from heaven, Psalm. 14. 33. 101.
and beholds all the children of men: from the habitacion of his dwelling he
considers al them, that dwell upon the earth.

You are of the number of them, Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 4.
which will worship the only lord god, and will not worship the works of man's
hands, though the oven burn never so whote. You are in the number of them,
Daniel. 3.
to whom Christ is precious and dear: which cry out rather, because (...).
Pet. 2.
your habitacion is prolonged here, as David did, which Psalm. 120.
Mattathias followed and ye godly (...). Mac. 2.
Jews: which knew the way to life to be a straight way, and few to go through
it: which will Math. 7.
not stick to follow poor Miche as, although he be racked and (...). Reg. 22.
cast into prison, having ye Son, Moon, seven stars and all against him.
Thus therefore, dearly beloved, remember first, that (as I said) you are not of
this world: Satan is not your captain: your joy and paradyse is not here:
your companyons are not ye multitude of worldlynges and such as seek to please
men, and to live here at ease in the service of Satan.

But you ar of another world: Christ is your captain: your Phil. 3. Heb. 13.
joy is in heaven, where your conversation and ciuilite is: your companions are
the fathers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, Martirs, virgins, co^fessours,
and the dear saints of god, which followed the lamb whether soever Apoc. 7.
he went, dipping their garments in his blood: knowing this life Job. 78. 14.
Psalm. 90. 102.
and world to be full of evil, a warfare, a smoke, a shadow, a vapor, and
as replenish^d, so en^ironed with all kid of miseries. Jacob. 4.


The. 2. Chapter.
Persecucyon is not strange.

This is the first thing, I would gave you often and diligently with your
selves to consider and muse upon? namely, what you be, and where you be. Then
secondarely forget not to call to mind, that you ought not to thynte it any
strange thing, if misery, trouble, aduersite, persecucion and displeasure come
(...) pon you. (...) Peter. 4.


For how can it other wise be, but that trouble and persecucion must come upon
your Can the world love you, which ar none John. 14.
of (...) ^orldiye men are (...)e (...)urs of your chief enemi, and can they
regard you? Can Satan suffer you to be in rest, I. Peter. 5.
which will not do him homage? Can this way be easy, which of it self is
straight? Will you Math. 7.
look to trauayll, and to have no foul way nor rain? Will shypmen shrink (or
sailors of ye sea) if storms arise? Do they not look for such?

And dearly beloved, did not we enter into gods ship and arc of baptism at
the first? Will 1. Peter. 4.
you then count it strange, if perils and tempests blow? Are not you
traueling to your heavenly city of Herusalem, where is all joy and felicite?
And will you now tarry by the way for storms or showers? The mart and fayer
will then be past, the John. 9. Math. 25.
night will fall, ye can not trauayll, the door wylbe sparred, and the bryde
wylbe at supper. Therefore away with deyntie nicenes. Will you think, the
father of heaven will deal more gentlye with you in this age, then he has
done with other his dearest friends in our ages? What way and wether, what
storms and tempests, what disease, trouble and disquie(...)ies found Abel,
Noe, (...), Isaac, Jacob and good Joseph? Which of these Gene. 4. 6. (...). 8.
9. etc.
had so fair a life and restefull times, as we have had? Moses, Aaron, Samuel,
David ye king and all the good kings, priests and prophe^es in the old
testament, at one time or another, if not through ^u^e their life, did feel a.
1000. parts more misery, then we have feite hitherto.

As for the new testamente, lord god, how great was the affliccion of Mari,
Joseph, ^achary, Elizabeth, John Baptist, the^ whom among the children of we
Math. 11.
men, none arose greater, of all the ^posiles and evangelists, yea of Jesus
Christ our lord, the dear son and dearlyng of god? And since the time of
the apostles, Eusebius Eccl. hist. Tripart. historia.
how many and great are the number of martyrs, confessors and such, as have
suffered the sheding of their blo^ in this life, rather then they would be
stained in their journey, or lodge in any of Satan's ynnes, so that the storms
or winds, which fell in their trauelynges, might not touch them? Wherefore,
dearli beloved, let us think what we are, and how far unmeet to be matched
with these: with whom yet we look to be placed in heaven.

But with what face can we look for this, that are so fearful, unwilling and
arsward, to leus that, which, will we nyl we, we must leave: and that so
shortli, as we know not the time when? Where is our abrenouncing and forsakyng
of the world and the flesh, which we sole^pnely swear in baptism? Ah
shameless cowardes that we be which will not follow the trace of so many
fathers, Patriarks, ki^gs, pristes prophets Apostles, Euangelystes and
saints of god, yeaeuen of the very son of God? How many now go with you
lusreli, as I and al, your brethren, in bands and exyle for the gospel? Pray
for us, for (god wyllyng) we will not leave you now: we will go before you. You
shall see in us, that we preached no lies nor tales of tubbes, but even the 1.
Peter. 2.
very true word of God, for the which we, by gods grace a help of your
prayers, will wyllyngly and ioifulli give our blood to be ^ed, for the
confirmacion of the same: as already we have given liberally our goods,
living, friends, and natural country. For now we are certain, yt we be in
the high way to heavens bliss, as Paul says: By many tribulacions and
persecucions we must enter into gods kingdom. And because we would go thither
our selves and bring you thither also, therefore the devil stereth up the
coals. And forasmuch as we al loitered in ye way, he therefore has received
power of god, to over cast the wether, and to stere up storms: yt we gods
children might go faster, making more speed and have to go on forwards.

As for counterfeites and ypocrytes, they wyltary and lyngertyl the storm be
paste. And so when they come, the market will be done, and the doors sparred, it
is to be feared. Read mat. 25. This wind will blow gods children forward,
and the devils derlynges backwarde.

Therefore like gods children let us go on forward a pace: ye wind is on our
back: hoyse up the sails, lift up your hearts and hands unto god in prayer,
Thren. 3. Heb. 6.
and keep your anchor of faith to cast in time on the rock of gods word, and
on his mercy in Christ, and I warrau^t you. And thus much for you secondlye to
consider, that afflyccion, persecucion and trouble is no strange thing to gods
children: and therefore it should not dismaye, dyscourage or discomfort us,
being none other thing, then al gods dear fre^des have tasted in their
journey to heaven ward.

As I would in this trouble so^e time that ye should consider, what you be by
the goodness of god in Christ, even citizens of heaven, though you be
presently in the flesh, even in a strange regio^, on every side full of fearce
enemies, and what wether and way the dearest friends of god have found: even
so would I have you thirdly to consider for your further comfort, that if you
Philip. 3.
shrynke not, but go on forward, preassyng to ye mark appointed, all the power
of your enemies shall not overcome you, neither in any point hurt you.

The. 3. Chapter.
Trouble can not hurt gods children.

But this must not you consider according to ye judgment of reason and her
sense, but after the judgment of gods word and the experience of faith. Else
you mar al. For to reason and experyence or sense of the outward man, we
poor souls (which stycke to gods word to serve him, as he requires only)
are counted to be vanquished and overcome, in that we are cast into prison,
lose our liuinges, friends, goods country and life also at length concerning
this world.

But dearly beloved, gods word teaches other wise, and faith faleth
accordyngly. Is it not written: who shall separate us from ye Roma. 8,
love of god? shall tribulacyon, or anguishe, or persecucyon, either ^onger,
either nakedness, either peril, either sword? As it is written: For thy sake
are we killed al day long, and be counted Psalm. 44
as sheep appointed to be slai^ne. Nevertheless in all these things we overcome,
through him that loved us.

For I am sure, that neither death, another life, neither angels, nor rule,
neither power, nether things present, neither things to come, neither higth,
nor loweth nether any other creature shall be able to part us from that love,
where with God loves us in Christ Jesus our lord.

This spoke one, which was in afflyccyon (as I am) for the lords gospel sake:
his holy name be praised therefore, and he grant me grace with the same to
continue in life sufferyng unto the end. This (I say) one spoke which was in
affliccio^ for the gospel: but yet so far from being overcome, that he
rejoiced rather of the victory, which the gospel had.

For though he was bound, yet the gospel was not bound. And 2. Tim. 2
therefore rendereth he thanks unto god, who always gives victory in
Christ, and opens 3. Cor. 2.
the sauoure of his knowledge bivs, and such as suffer for his truth:
although they shut us up never so much, and drive us never so far out of our
own natural country in every place.

The world for a time may dysceaue it self, thinking it has the victory:
but yet the end will try the contrary. Did not Cayn think he had the victory,
when Abel was slain? But how say Gene. 4.
ye now, is it not found otherwise? Thought not ye old world, that they were
wise and well, and Noe a fool, which would crepe into an arc, leaving his
Gene. 7. 8.
house, lands and possessions? for I thynk he was in an honest state.

As for the world, they judged that he was a dastard and a fool. But I pray
you, who was wise wha^ ye flood came? Abraham (I Gene. 12.
trow) was counted a fool, to leave his own own country and friends, kyth and
kine, because of gods word. But, dearly beloved, we know it proved otherwise. I
will leave all the patriarchs, and come to Moses and the children of Israel.

Tell me, were not they thought to be overcome and stark mad when for fear
of Pharao, at gods word, they ran into the Exo. 14.
reed Sea? Did not Pharao and the Egipcians think the^ selves sure of the
victory. But I trow it proved clean contrary. Saul was thought to be well, and
Dauyd (...). Re. 16. and c
in evil case and most miserable, because he had no hole to hid him in: but yet
at length Saul's misery was seen, and David's felicity began to appear. The
Prophet Micheas, being cast into prison for telling Achab the (...). Reg. 22.
truth, was thought overcome of Sedechias and the other false Prophets. But,
my good brethr^^ and sistern, the holy (...) (...)orye tells (...)yse.

Who did not think the prophets unhappy in their time. For they were slain,
prisoned, Iere. 20,
laughed to scorn, and rested at of every man. And so were all the Apostles,
yea the dear beloved (...). Cor. 4.
friend of god, John Baptyste: who was beheaded, and that in prison, even at a
dauncynge damsels desyer.

As al these, to the judgment of reason, were than counted heretics, run
agates, unlearned fools, fyshers, publicans etc. so now unhappy and overcome
indede, if Gods word and faith did not show the contrary. But what speak I
of those? Look upon Jesus Christ, to whom we Roma. 8.
mu^t be like (...) here, if we will be like him else where.

How say you, was not he taken for a most fool, a sedicyous person, a new
fellow, an heretyke and one overcome of every body, eue^ forsaken both of God
and men? But the end told them, and tells us another tale. For now is he in
majesty and glory joyful. When he was led to Pilate or Herod, or when he was
in prison in Caiphas house, did not there reason think, that he was
overcome? When he was beaten, buffeted, scourged, crowned with thorn, hanged
upon the cross, and utterly left of all his disciples, taunted of ye high
prystes and holy fathers, cursed of the commons, rayled on of the Magistrates,
and laughed to scorn of the lewd heathen: would not a man then have thought,
that he had been out of the way, and his disciples, to follow him and beeleue
him. Think you, y^ whiles he lay in his grave, men did not point with their
fyngers, wh^ they saw any that had loved, or believed in him and his doctrine,
saying: where is their master and teacher now? Whatis he gone? For soth if
they had not been fools, they might well have known this learning, he taught,
could not long continue. Our doctors and Pharisees are no fools, now they
may se. On this sort men either spoke, or might have spoken against al
such, as loved Christ or his doctrine: but yet at length they and all such
were proved fools and wicked wretches. For our savior arose mawgrie their
beerdes, and published his gospel plentifully, spyte of their heads and the
heads of all the wicked world, with the great powers of the same: always
ouercommyng, and then most of all, when he and his doctrine was thought to
have the gretest fall.

Now, dearly beloved, the wicked world rejoices: the papists are puffed up
against poor christ and his people, after their old kind: now cry they:
where are these new found preachers? Are they not in the tower, Mar shalsye,
in the flete, in ye kings benche, in new gate etc. and beyond the seas? Who
would have thought that our old bishops, doctors and deanes were fools, as
they would have made us believe, and in deed have persuaded so^e already, which
are not of ye wysesre, specially if they come not home again to the holy
church? These and such like words they have to cast in our teeth, as tryumphers
and conquerours. But dearly beloved, short is their joy: they begyle the^
selves: this is but a lyghtning before their death. As god, after he had given
ye wicked Jews a time to repent, visited them by Despasian and Eusebius. Eccl.
histo. Lib. 3. ca. 5 6. 7. 8. 9.
Titus, most horribly to their utter subversion, delyueryng first of all, his
people from among them: even so (my dear brethren) will he do with this age.

When he has tried hye chil dren from amongst the^ (as now he begins) ano
by sufferyng, has made us like to his Christ, and by being overcome to
overcome in deed to our eternal comfort: the^ will he, if not otherwise, 1.
Thessa. 4.
come himself in the clouds. I mean our dear lord, who^ we confess,
preach and believe on. He will come (I say) with the blast of a tro^pe and
showte of an Archangel, and so shall we be caught up in the clouds to mete him
in the air: The angels ga Math, 13.
theryng together y^ wicked wretches (which now walter and wa low as the
world and wind blows) to be tied in bondels, and cast into the fire, which
burns for ever most paynfullye. There and then shall they se, who has the
victory, they or we.

When they shall see us a far of in Abrahames bosom, then Luke. 16.
will they say: alas, we thought these folks fools, and had the^ Sapi. 3.
in derision: we thought their life madness, and their end to be without honor.

But lo, how they are counted among the children of God, and their porcyon is
with ye saints. Alas, we have gone amysse, and would not harke^.

Such word (...) these shall the wicked say on ^^y in hell, though now they
triumph as co^querours. And th^^ much for you thirdly to lofe often upon:
namely, that what soever is do^e unto you (yea even very death) shall not dashe
or hurt you, no more then it did Abel, David, Daniel, John Baptiste, Jesus
Christ our Lord, with other the dear saynctes of God, which have sufferd for
his names sake. Let not reason therefore be judge in this matter, but faith and
gods word: in the which if we set before our eyes ye shortness of this The
time of sufferi^ is but a triffle.
present time, wherein we suffer, and consider the eternity to come, we shall
find it most certain, that our enemies and persecutors shall be helples in
intolerable pains: and we, if we persevere unto the end, shall be daungerles
in such felicite and joy, as the very heart of man in no point 1. Cor. 2. Isa.
64.
is able to conceive. Considering this (I say) we can not but even contemn and
set nothing by ye sorows and grefes of the cross, and lustely go through thick
and thynne with good courage.

Now have I declared unto you. 3. things, necessary to be much ^^used upon
of every one, which will abide by Chrys^e and his gospel in these troublesome
time, as I trust you al will: namely, first to consider that we are not of this
world, nor of ye number of the worldlynges, nor any reteyner to S^^n: that we
are not at home in our own country, but of another world, of the congregation
of the saints and reteynees to Christ, although as Hebru, 2,
yet in a region ^^^lete and full of intractable enemies.

Secondly, that we may not think it a strange thing to be persecuted for
gods gospel: from the which the dearest friends of God were in no age free: as
indede it is impossible they should be any long time, their enemies being
always about them to destroy them, if they could. And thirdly, that the
assaults of our enemies, be they never so many and fearce, shall in no point be
able to prevail against our faith (albeit to reason it seems other wise)
where through we ought to conceive a good courage and comfort. For who will be
afraid, when he knows, that the enemies can not prevail?

The. 4. Chapter.
The cross is commodyous and profitable.

FArthermore, for ye more encouraging of you unto the cross, I will give you a
fourth memorandum. Nameli, of the commodities and profits, which come by the
trouble and affliccion now rise^, and hereafter to arise unto us, which be
gods children, elect through Jesus Christ. But, here ye may not look to have
me a rehearsal of all the commodytyes, which come by ye cross to such, as are
well exercysed therein: for that were more then I can do. I will only speak
of a few, thereby to occasion you to gather and at the length to feel and
perceue moo. First, there is no cross, which comes upon any of us The first
commodite of ye cross.
without the counsayll of our heavenly father.

As for the fansye of fortune, it is wicked, as many places of scripture do
teach. Amos. 3. Thren. 3. Math. 10. Sopho. 1. Esa. 45. Psalm. 145.


We must needs, to the commendacion of gods justice, who in all thiges is
rightuous, aknowledge in our selves, that we have deserved of the hands of
our heavenly father this his cross and rod, now fallen upon us. We have
deserved it, if not by our unthankfulness, sloth, negligence, intemperaunce
and our sins done often by us (whereof our conscyences can and will accuse us,
if we call them to cou^sayll with the examinacyon of our former life) yet at
left by our original and birth sin: as by dowtyng of the greatness of Gods
anger and mercy, by self love, concupyscence and such like sins, which as
we brought with us into this world so do the same ever abide in us, Psalm. 51.
Hebr, 12,
and (even as a spring) they always bring forth some thing in act with us,
notwythstanding the fight of gods good spirit in us against it. Gal. 5.


The first commodity therefore, that the cross brings, is knowledge, and
that duble: of god, and of our selves. Of God, that he is just, pure, and
hates sin. Psalm. 5. Psalm. 51.


Of our selves, that we are borne in sine, and from top to too desyled with
concupiscence and corrupcion: out of the which Gene. 8. Iere. 17. Ephesians. 2.
(...). Reg. 8.
have sprung all the evil, that ever at any time we have spoken and done.

The greatest and most special whereof we are, by ye cross, occasyoned to
call to mind, as did the brethren of Joseph their evil fact against him,
when Gene. 4^.
the cross once came upon them. And so by it we come to the suerest step to
get health for our souls: that is, we are driven to know our sins,
original and actual, by gods justice declared in the cross.

Secondlye, the end, wherefore The second commodity of the cross.
god declares his justice against our sin original and actual, and would
have us by his cross to consider the same, and to call to mind our former
evil deeds: The end hereof (I say) is this: namely, that we may lament,
besory, sygh and pray for pardon, to the intent that so doing, we might
obtain and have ye same, by the means of faith in the me rytes of Jesus
Christ, his dear son: and that we being humbled, because of ye evil y^
dwells in us, might also become thankeful for gods goodness, living in
continual vigilance and warenes, and suppressyng the evil, which lies in us,
that it brig not forth fruit unto death at any time. Jacob. 1.
This second commodity of the cross therefore, must not we count to be only a
knowledge, but also Note.
a great gain of gods mercy, with wonderful rich and precious virtues of
faith, repentance, re myssyon of sins, humilytye, thankfulness,
mortificacion, and diligence in doing good.

Not that properly the cross works these things of it self, but be cause
the cross is ye mean and may, by the which god works the knowledge and
feeling of these things in his children: as many both testimonies, and also
ensaumples in scripture, are easily found of them, that diligently weye what
they hear or read therein. The third commodity of the cross.


To these. 2. Commodities of the cross, join this third, of gods syngular
wisdom: that it may be coupled with his justice and mercy. On this sort let us
overcome it.

When we se the gospel of god and his church persecuted and troubled, as now
it is with us: Thus I say let us conceive the matter: namely, that because the
great learned and wise men of the world use not their wysdom to love and serve
god, as to natural reason he opens himself ma^ifestli in his visible
creaturs: Roma. 1.
therefore does god justly infatuat them, and makes them foolysh, geuynge them
up to insensyblenes, especially herein. For concerning the affliction, which
comes for the gospel upon ye gospellers, they reason on this manner: If this
were gods word (say they) if this people were Man's reason concerning the
affliccio^ of the church.
gods children: surely god would then bless and prospere them and their
doctrine.

But now, in that there is no doctrine so much hated, no people so much
persecuted as they be therefore it can not be of God. This is of god, which
our queen and old bishops have professed.

For how has god prospered and kept them? What a notable victory has god
given to her, where as else it was impossyble Success.
that things so should have come to pas, as they have done? And The duke of
North.
did not the great captain confess his fault, that he was out of the way and
not of the faith, which these gospellers profess? How many are come again
from The relentyng of many.
that, which they professed to be gods word?

The most part of this realm (notwythstandyng the diligence of preachers to
persuade them, concerning this new learning, which now is persecuted) never
consented to it in heart, as experience teaches.

And what plages have come Plages.
upon this realm, since this gospel (as they call it) came in amongst us?
Before we had plenty, but now there is nothing like as was.

But (to let this pas) al ye houses of the parliament have overthrown
Parliament
the laws, made for the stablyshing of the gospel: and new laws ar erected
for the co^tinuaunce of that, which is contrary, and was had before.

Al these things do teach plainly, that this their doctrine is not gods
word. Thus reason the worldly wise, which see not gods wisdom. For else, if
they considered that there was with us unthankfulness, no amendme^t The cause of
our persecucyon.
of life, but all kind of conte^pte of god, alkinde of shameless synnyng,
against the preaching of the gospel: they must needs see, that god could not
but chastise and correct. And that as he let Satan loose, after he had bound
Apoca. 20.
him a certain time: so for men's unthankfulness and to punish the same, he
has let those cha^pyo^s of Satan run abroad, to plage us by them. Great was
Gods anger against Achab, because he saved Benadad the king of Siria, when he
had given him into 3. Reg. 20.
his hands, and afterward it turned to his own destruction. God would, that
double sorrow should have been repayed unto them, because of the sorrow that
they did to the saints of God. Read Apo. 18. As for ye victory Causes of
victory.
given to ye Queen's hyghnes, if me^ had any godli wit, they might se many
things in it. First that God has done it, to win her heart with kindness unto
his gospel: and as well because yt they, which went against her, put their trust
in horses and power of men and not in god: as because y^ in their doctrine they
sought not the propagacion of gods gospel. Which thing is easily now seen, by
the co^fessyon of ye captain: his heart loved poperye, and hated the gospel.
Besides this, men may easily se, he was purposed never to have furthered the
gospel: but so to have handled the livings of ministers, that there should
never have been any ministerye in manner hereafter.

And what one of the Counsaylours, which would have been taken as gospellers
in our good kings days, declare now that even they loved the gospel?
Therefore no meruayll, why god fought against them.

They were ypocrites, and, under the cloak of the gospel, would have debarred
the Queen's highness of her right. But god would not so cloak them.

Now for the relenting, returnyng and recantyng of some, from Why manirelent
and recant.
that which they have once professed or pa^ched, alas, who would wonder at it?
For they never came to the gospel but for commodite and gaynes sake, and now
for gain leave it.

The multitude is no good argument, The greater sort.
to move a wise manne. For who knows not, moo to love this world better then
heaven, themselves better the^ their neighbors? Wide is the gate (says
Christ) and broad is ye way, that leads to destruction, and many there be,
which go in thereat.

But strayte is the gate, and Math, 7,
narow is the way, which leadth unto life, and few there be that find it. All the whole multitude cried out upon Jesus: crucifye Math. 27. John. 19.
him, trusse him up: but I trow they were not the better part, although they
were the bigger. Al Chaldee followed still their false gods, only Abraham followed
y^ true god. And where as they sai, Gene. 12.
that greater plages are fallen upon the realm in poverty and such Plages.
geer, then before: it is no argument to move others, the^ such as love their
swyne better then Christ. Math. 8.
For the devil chefelie desires, his seat to be in religion. If it be there,
then will he meddle with nothing that we have, al shall be quiet enough.

But if he be raised thence, then will he beg leave to have at our pigs. As
long as with us he had the ruling of relygio^, which now he has gotten again:
then was he a Robyn good fellow, he would do no hurt. But wha^ he was tombled
out of his Throne, by the preaching of the gospel: then stered he about, as he
has done. Notwythstandyng, to be short, surely effectual he has not been,
but in the children of Ephe. 1.
unbelief: them in deed he has sterred up to be covetous, oppressors,
blasphemers, usurers, whoremongers, thieves, murderers, tyrauntes.

And yet perchance he suffered them to profess the gospel, the more thereby
to hinder it, and cause it to be slaundered. How many now do appear, to
have been true gospellers? As for the The parliament.
parliament and statutes thereof, no man of wisdom can think other wise, but
that look, what the rulers will, the same must there be enacted.

For it goes not in those houses by the better part, but by ye bigger part.
It is a common saying, and no less true: Mayor pars vincit meliorem, ye
greater part overcomes y^ better. So they did inco^de^ning christ, Nicodemus
co(...)sail John. 7.
not being regarded. So did they in many general councels, which purposli I
will not recite: for all wise men know, y^ acts of parliame^ts are not for gods
law in respect of gods law, but in respect of the people.

Now what we are god knows, and all the world sees: more mete a great deal
to have the devils decrees, then gods religion, so great is our contempt in
it. And therefore justly for our sins (as Job says) god has Job. 34.
set ypocrytes to reign over us: which can no more abide gods true religion,
then the owl the light, or blered eyes the brighte Son.

For it will have them to do their duties, and wait in diligent doing of the
works of their vocacion.

If gods word, I mean, had place, bishops could not play Chau^celours and
idle prelates, as they do: priests should be otherwise known, then by their
shaven crowns and typpettes, But enough of this. I will now return to the
third commodite coming by the cross.

Here let us see the wisdom of god, in making the wisdom of the world
folyshe. For it knows The ignorance of worldly wisdom.
little of man's corrupcyon, how foul it is in the syghte of god and
displeases him: it knows little, the portion of Gods people to be in another
world. It knows little the patron of Christians, Christ Jesus: it knows
little the judgments of god, the great malice of Satan to gods people, the
price and estimacyon of the gospel. And therefore in the cross it sees not, as
gods wisdom would men should se: namely: that god, in punishing them which sin
lest, would Luke. 13.
have his anger against sin better considered and feared: and that, in
punishyng his people here, he kyndleth their desire toward their restful and
peaceful 2. Cor. 5.
home.

For, in punishyng his servants in this life, he does by yt means conform
and make them like to Christ: that as they be like in sufferyng, so they may
be partakers Philip. 1.
in reygning.

In punishinge his church in the world, he does thereby give even a
demonstracyon of his 2. These. 1. 2. Pet. 2.
judgment, which shall come on al men, when the Godly shall there find rest,
though now they be afflicted: and the wicked, now wallowyng in wealth, shall
be wrapped in woe and smarte.

In punishinge the professors of his gospel on earth, he does Job. 1. Acts.
16. 17. 18. etc.
by the same set forth the malice of Satan, against the gospel and his people,
for the more confirmyng of their faith: and ye gospel to be gods word in
deed, and the^ to be gods people. For else ye devil would let them alone. In
punishynge the lovers of his truth more then others, which care not for it:
he thereby puts Psalm. 119.
them in mind, how they have not had in price, as they should have had, the
rule of his word, and gospel. Before such trial and experience by trouble,
perchance they thought they had believed, and had had faith: which now these
was but a lyppe faith, a mocte faith or an opinion. All why che things, we
see, ar occasions for us to take better head by means of the cross.

Therefore thirdly let us se the cross to be commodious for us, to learn
gods wisdom, and what is man's follyshnes: gods dyspleasure at sin: how
the elect desire to be with God, and their conformity with Christ: the
general judgment: the mas lyce of Satan: hatred of sin: the gospel to be
gods word, and how it is much to be esteemed etc. thus much for this.

How will I brefelye show you, the cross to be profitable The fourth
commodity of the cross.
for us, to learn and behold better the prouydence, presence and power of
god, that al these may be coupled together, as in a cheie to hang about our
nectes: I mean gods justice, mercy, wisdom, power, presence and prouydence.

When all things be in rest, and men be not in trouble, the^ ar they
forgetful of god commonly, and attribute to much to their own wysedomes,
policies, provisions, and diligence: as though they were the procurers of
their own fortune, and the workers of their own wealth.

But when the cross comes, and that in such sort, as their wits,
policies and friends can not help: then, though ye wicted dyspayre, and run
from god to their avowryes, saynctes and unlawful means, yet do the godly
therein behold the presence, prouydence and power of god. For the scripture
teaches, that al things, well and woo, should be considered as gods work: al
Amos. 3. Thren. 3. Esa. 45. Soph. 1. Math. 10.
though Satan, the devil, be the instrumente, by whom god works justly and
mercifully. Justly to the wicked, and mercyfulli to the godly: as by ye
ensaumples of wicked Saul, and godli Job, The devil is gods instrumente.
we may easily see gods work by Satan, his instrumente in them both.

The children of god therefore, which before forgate god in prosperity, are now
in aduersytie awaked to see god and his work, and no more to hang on their
own forecastes, power, friends, wisdom, riches etc. But learn to commit
themselves unto gods prouydence and power: whereby they are so preserved and
governed, and very often even miraculously delivered, y^ y^ very wicked can not
but see gods providence, presence and power, in the cross and afflyccyon of
his children: As these, his children I mean, to their joy do feel it, thereby
lernyng to know god, to be ye governor Esaias. 45. Ose. 2, 1. Reg. 2. Luke. 1.
Psalm. 139.
of al things. Be it is that gives peace: he it is y^ sends war: he gives
plenty, and pouer tie: he sets up, and casts down: he brings to death,
and after gives life: his presence is every where: his prouydence is within
and without: his power 1. Perer. 5.
is the pillour, whereby the godly stand: and to it they leene, as to a thing,
no less able to set up, then to cast down.

Which thing full well the Apostle saw in his affliccions: and therefore
reioysed greatly in them, that eminentia virtutis 2. Cor. 1.
dei, gods power, might singularly be seen therein.

Concerning this I might bring forth innumerable ensamples of the afflyccyon
of Gods children, both in the old and new testament: wherein we may se, how
they felt gods presence, prouydence and power, plentifully. But I will omit
ensaumples, because every one of us, ye have been or be in trouble, can not but
by the same the rather remember gods presence, which we feel Presence.
by his hand upon us presently: his providence, which leaves Providence
us not vncared for, without any of our own provision: his power, Power.
which both preserves us from many other evils, that else would come upon us,
and also makes us able to be are more, then we thought we could have done. So
very often does he deliver us by such means, as have been thought most folysh
and little to be regarded.

And therefore we shake of our sleep of security and forgettinge of god, our
trust and shyffte in our own policy, our hanging on men, and on our own
power. So that the cross, you se, is commodious fourthly for us, to se gods
presence, prouydence and power: and our own negligence, forgetfulness of God,
securyte, love, trust and confidence in our selves, and in things of this
life, to be cut of, as the other ar to be taken hold upon. And this shall
suffice for the commodities, that come by the cross, where through we may be
in love with it for the commodities sake: which at length we shall find, though
presentli in sense we feel them not.

No castigacion or punishment is sweet or joyous for the present time, but
grievous: never Heb. 12.
the les, afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them,
which are exercised therein. As we see in medicynes: the more wholesome they be,
the more unpleasant often times is the taiste. As in purgacions, pills and
such like bitter things. Yet upon the phisicians word we will gladly drink
them, for the profit which comes of the^. And, dearly beloved, although to
lose life, goods or friends, for gods gospels sake, seem a bitter and sower
thing: Yet, seeing our phisician, which can not lie (Jesus Christ I mean)
tells us that it is very wholesome, how so ever it be toothsome: let us with
good chere take ye cup at his hand, and drink it merely.

If the cup seem unpleasant, and the drink to bitter, let us put some sugar
therein: eue^ a piece of that, which Moses cast into the bitter water, and made
it Exo. 15.
pleasant. I mean an ounce or quantity of Christ's affliccio^s and cross,
which he suffered for 1. Pet. 4.
us.

If we call these to mind, and cast of them into our cup (consyderyng what he
was, what he suffered, of whom, for whom, to what end, and what came there of)
surely we cannot loathe our medicine, but wynke and drink it lustely.

Justly therefore drink ye cup.

mes, where he promised to give abread, even his flesh: in institutyng John. 6.
the sacrament of the altar, as they calit, performed the same: and that, as
in all things, which he promised, he was found true, so in this the Catholyke
church has believed, and does believe no les.

And therefore, so sone as y^ priest in the mass has fullye spoken these
words, this is my body, if he purpose or if his intencyo^ be as he speaks
(for that is requisite teach they) then y^, which before was bred, and seems
to the eye to be bred, is made in rerye deed Christ's body, flesh, blood and
bone, even the self same, which was crucified, rose again, and descended up
into heaven. So y^ he, which believes not this, is a most heinous he retyke,
and cut of from the Catholyke church, and is not mete to receive this holy
sacrament: because he can not without this faith of Christ's natural, real,
corporal and carnal body, under the form or accident of bred and wine,
otherwise receive this sacrament, then unworthily and to eternal damnacyon.
This is a short sum of their doctrine, concerning the supper.

Now concerning the sacrifice Of the sacryfyce.
they teach, that though our sauyoure him self did in deed make a full and
perfect sacrifice propiciatorye and satisfactory, for the sins of all the
whole world, never more so (that is to say bloudeli) to be offered agaie: yet in
his supper he offered y^ same sacrifice unto his father, but un bloudely: that
is to say, in will and desyer, which is accounted often even for the deed, as
this was.

Which unbloody sacrifice he commanded his church to offer, in remembrance
of his bloody sacryfyce: as the principal mean, whereby his bloudye sacrifice
is applied both to the quick and dead, as baptysine is the mean, by the which
regene racion is applied, by the priest, to the infaunte or child, that is
baptized.

For in that, the supper of Christ is to them not only a sacrament, but also
a sacrifyce: and that not only applicatorye, but also propiciatory, because it
applies the propiciatory sacrifyce of Christ, to whom the pryeste or minister
will, be he dead or alive. And in that, even from the begynnig, the fathers,
say they, were accustomed in the celebracyon of y^ supper, to have Prayer for
the dead.
a memorial of the dead* and also in that this sacrifice is a sacrifice of the
whole church, y^ dead being members of the church, of charity as they can
not but offer for them, even so they can not but pray for them after the en
sample of the Catholyke church: because it is a wholesome thing, says Judas
Machabeus, to pray for the dead, that they may be delivered from their sins.
Whereunto, all the doctors do consent, say they.

Now, as for prayeng to saints, they teach, that al be it there is Prayer to
saynctes.
but one mediator of Rede^pcio^: yet of intercessyon the holy saits of god,
departed this life, may well be counted mediators. And therefore it is a point
of a lowly heart and humble spirit, which god well lyfeth, to call upon the
saints to pray for us first: lest by our presumpcion to come into gods
presence, we being so unworthy, and god being so excellent and full of
majesty, we more anger and displease god. Where as by their help god may be
entreated, to make us more worthy to come unto him, and the sooner to grant us
our peticions. For if the holy saynctes of God, here being upon the earth,
could and would pray for the people, obteinyng many thiges at gods hand: it is
much more to be believed now (say they) that they can and will, if we pray to
them, obtain for us our humble and godly desyers. And therefore to ye end
there sacrifice propiciatori, which in the mass they offer, may be the more
avaylable, they use about it, much praying to saints. So of these. 4. as of.
4. pillours, their mass stands.

The which mass, you may se, what it is, and how precious and worthy a piece of
work it is, by their doctrine concerning the supper, the sacrifice, the
praying for the dead and to the dead: whereof I have given you a Sum, in the
most honest, godly and religious wise, that the best of the^ do set it forth
in.

For else, if I should have showed you this their doctrine, as some of them
set it forth: as I know you would abhor it, so the subtyle papystes would
say, that I rayled and misreported them.

Therefore because they shall have no such occasyon, nor you by their most
subtle colors be disceaued, I have, in the best manner I can, reported a
Sum of their doctrine.

The which to the end you might the better consider and have, I will now
tell you, as gods word teaches, how these four points are to be believed and
received. And then will I open the fylthines and abomina cyon, which in this
their doctrine is deuellyshly contained.

The. 6. Chapter.
How gods word teaches of the supper, with confutacyon of the Papystes
heresy of tra^subst. about the same.

COncerni^g y^ supper of our lord, which Christ Jesus did institute to be a
sacrament of his body and blood, we believe, that his words in the same supper
accordingly are to be understand: that is, sacramentally, as he me^t them, and
not symply, contrary to his meaning, as the papists wrest them.

And this is taught us, not only by innumerable such like places, as where
baptism is called Titus. (...).
regeneracyon because it is a sacrament of it: circumcision is called gods
covenant, because it Gene. 17.
is a sacrament of it: but also by ye plain circumstaunces of ye text, as
thereof the Evangelists with Math. 26. Mark. 14.
the Apostle S. Paul do write plainly affirmyng, that our savior Christ did
give, and his disciples did eat that, which he took and brake, and bad them
deuyde Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 10. 11
among themselves, that is, bred and wine.

For we may not think, that Christ's natural body was broken, nor that his
blood can be divided. And plainly our savior says concerning the cupp, that
he would not drink any more Math. 26. Mark. 14
of the fruit of the vine (which is not his blood, I trow, but wine) until
he should drink it new with them after his resurreccyon.

But to make this matter more plain: like as many things in Chrysts supper
were figuratively John. 13. Luke. 22
done and spoken: as y^ washig of the disciples fete: y^ paschall la^be was
called the passion: Judas was said to have lift up his hele against him: so
does Luke and Paul plainly alter the words concerning the cup, calling that
the new testament, which Matthew and mark call his blood: yea expreslye five
times the Apostle calls the sacrament of Chrysts body, after y^ co^secracio^
spoken (as they term it) bred. Is not the bred which we break (says he) the
communyon of 1. Cor. 10. 11
Christ's body:

Whose exposicion I will more boldly stycke unto, then unto all the papists
dreams, as long as I sleep not with them, by gods grace. They have none other
sentence but these. 4. words: this is my body

But ask the^ what this, this, is, and they will not say as y^ Apostle does,
namely that it is bread.

No, then they will say, that we hang all by reason, the matter being a matter of
faith: Where as they themselves altogether hang on reason, as though Christ can
not be able to do that, which he promises (bred still in substance remaynyng,
as the Accidents do) except it be transubsta^ciate. Is not this, trow you, to
make it a matter of reason, and to hedge gods power in within the limits of
reason:

If Christ's words, that follow (which is given for you) be to be understand
for which shall be given or shall be betrayed for you, and not so precyselye as
they be spoken (for that were to make Christ a liar) why is it so heinous a
matter with ye papists, because we do not so precyselye take the words
immedyatly going before: namelye, this is my body, as to admit, that if there
be bred, then Christ is a liar: Might not we reason and say then: if Christ's
body at y^ time was not betrayed (as in deed it was not) nor his blood shed,
the^ is Christ a liar.

But here they will say, all men may know, that Christ by the present tence,
meante the future tence: and in the scripture it is a most usual thing, so to
take tence for tence.

And I pray you, why may not we say, that al men may know it is most
common in scripture, to give unto signs y^ nams of the things, which they
signifye: And no man is so foolyshe, but he knows, that Christ the^
instituted a sacrament, whole sacramentally to be understand: that is, that
the sign, or visible sacrament, should have not only y^ name of the thing
signified, but also some similitude there with, or else it were no sacrament.

But take bred away (as the papystes do) leaving there but the accidents
only, which do not feed the body: and then what shallrese^ble and represente
unto us Christ's body, broken for the fode of the soul: As wine com forteth
the heart, so does Christ's blood, shed on the cross, comfort the soul. But
take wine away by transubstanciacy on, as the papystes do, and tell me what
similitude remains: None at also no sacrament at all: so Christ's institucion
is taken away. Well, do theireiect gods commandment Math. 15.
for their tradicions sake: Our faith therefore is, that the supper of the lord
is y^ sacrament of Christ's bodi and blood. These words (this is my bodi,
which is broken for you: this is mi blood of the new testament which is shed
for your sins) are most true words and plain, accordig to Christ's meaning,
to al them, which do as he byddeth them: that is, to all such as take, eat
and drink.

Which words the papists keep in their purse, or else their private masses
could not stand. To such, I say, as take and eat this sacrament in sorowinge
for their synfullyfe past, and purposyng to amend, above al things remembryng
and beleuyng, that Christ's body was broken for their sins, and his blood
shed for their iniquities: all such (I say) as verily as they see, take,
taist and eat bread, and drink wine, which goes into their bodi, fedeth it
and nourishes it: even so verily the soul and spirit by faith receaueth, not
only Christ's body broken, or his blood shed (for the flesh profyteth John.
6.
nothing, it is the sprite that quickens, says Christ) but eue^ whole
Christ, into whom they are incorporate, and made one with him, flesh of his
flesh, Ephesians. 5.
and bone of his bones.

That is to say: as Christ's body is immortal and glorious, even so are theirs
now by faith and hope, and at the day of the Lord they shall be in very deed.
Then which thing, what can be greater?

This we teach and beeleue concerning this sacrament, dete styng and abhorryng
the horrible error of transubstanciacion, which makes bread and wine our God
and Christ: and causes men to be gasers, gapers and worshyppers, yea
ydolators, rather then takers and eaters, as Christ commands: and which
makes Christ's sacrifice of none effect, as now shall be showed by gods grace.

For this shall suffyse to the declaracyon of our faith, concerning the Lords
supper, whereunto agrees the Catholic church and all the fathers.

As full well thou may see in the bishop of Canterburyes book: which is far
from being answered, either by the bishop of Worceter his book in english, or
Marcus. (...) C. in latin, y^ thou nedest no more to confyrme thy faith in this
matter, but to read them with an indifferent mind, not being addict otherwise,
the^ to the desyer of the truth.

As for this doctrine of transubstanciacyon, it is a new found thing about a.
600. years old: even then brought out, when Gata^ was latte^ lose after. a.
1000 Apo. 20.
years, that was bound. Even then was it establyshed, when there was more
mischefe among the prelates, specially the pops, about the sea of Rome, who
cold catch it, then ever there was among the emperors for the empire.

In the primitive church, popes were martird for Christ's spouses safe, that is
the church: but now one poisoned another, and one slew another, for ye rose
colored Apo. 17. 18
whore of babilo^s safe, that is, y^ popysh church. In. 160. years there was
nere hand. 50. popes, whereas in no such time therwer above. 33. emperors. And
in the mids of this miserable state and time, this doctrine of
transubsta^ciacion was the popes beginning, as they might have ley sure from
co^spiring against princes, and one against another, to establish it, as the
very principal pilloure of al their power: and no meruel. For, this being
admytted, then have they power over Christ, the king of al kiges, y^ he be
where they will, when they will and aslong as they will under their power. Where
through the other must needs follow, y^ if they have power over Christ and
that in heaven, to brig him down at their pleasure: Much more the^ oueral
earth, emperors, kigs, prices and people. Yea eue^ over ye devil, purgatory
and hell have they full power and jurisdiction, being now gods in earth,
which sytte in the holy place even as god, yea (...) Thessa. 2.
above God: to make what article of faith shall please them, as they have done
this of transubstanciacion: which might as well be denied as granted, says
Scotus super. 4. se^te^. did. 11. Gabriel super ca^. mis.
Duns, one of their own doctors, and master Gabriel also, if it so pleased the
holy father and his spouse, the church of Rome. Before this time, all the
fathers diligence, labor and care was to call men to the receauynge of this
sacrament, for the co^firmacion of their faith: that as verelye as they did
eat bread and drink wine here, so should they not doubt, but that by faith
they did feed on the body of Christ, broken for their sins, and on his blood,
shed for their iniquytyes.

And therefore some times would they call the sacrament bread, a figure or a
sign: some time would they call it the body and blood of our savior Jesus
christ as the nature of sacraments is, to be called with the name of the
things, which they do signifye: that there by men's minds might be
wythdrawne from the consyderacyon of sensyble and visible things, to things
heavenly, which they do sygnyfye and represente.

And their care, and crying unto the people, was to receive it: and therefore
they made decrees, that such, as would not receive and be present, should be
sparred out of the church.

O how ernest was Chrysosto^ herein: Read his. 61. homilye unto the people of
Antioche. But after that this decree and doctrine of transubstanciacion came
in, no crying out has there been to receive it (no, that is the prerogatyue of
the pryestes and shaven shorelynges) but altogether the end of their crying
out was, as now, to believe transubstanciacion, Christ to be there flesh,
blood and bone, at every altar, between every pryestes hands, yea in every
pryestes mouth, when it pleases them, be they never so stynkyng, fylthy
sodomites, adulterers, dron kardes, blasphemers, dycers etc. The crying and
teaching of the clergy continually has been, to beeleue transubstanciacion,
and then to come to church to se their maker once a dai, to hold up their
hands, to knock on their breasts, to streke their faces, to mutter up their
laten prayers, to tak holy water and holy bread, to live in obedyence to the
holy father and holy church, his spouse. This was all they required.

Drink, dice, card, fight, swear, steal, lie: no matter, so that in y^
morning they see their God, all is well, good catholyke people, no man shall
hurt them or persecute them.

But if any man should not allow nor worship this god of their makig, although
he lived a most godly life, and were a man full of charity, sobrietye and very
religious: Oh such is an heretic or schismatyke. Nothing could please these
wolfes, but even the blood and life of such a poor sheep: as men have felt
before, and now begin to feel.

Let all the pack of them burden those iustlye, whom now they imprison and
cause to fly the realm, of any other thing, then only of this, that we
will not serve their god of bread and wine. And then will we suffer shame. But
I have been to long herein. Now to our doctrine and belef, for the second
point, concerning Christ's sacryfice.

The. 7. Chapter.
How gods word teaches of Christ's sacryfyce, and the popes blasphemye
therein reveled.

(...)ryne and faith, (...)s behalf, is as in (...)her: that is, accor(...) to
gods holiword: namely, y^ Jesus Christ, the son of god and second Adam, by
whom we receive righteousness unto life, as by y^ first Adam we received sin
unto death: our faith is (I say) that this Christ in our flesh, which he took
of the substance of the virgin Mary, but pure and with out sin, for the
satisfyinge of gods ^^st displeasure, deserved by and in our flesh, did in the
same suffer unjustly all kinds of miserye and (...)ryng up himself unto his
eternal father, with a most willing, obedyent heart and ready mind, when he was
crucyfyed upon the cross. And therbi as he satisfied gods justice, so he
meryted and procured his mercy, peace, favor for all them, which either before
that time were dead, either were at that time present, either should afterward
come and believe. By and in that offeringe, done for them and their sins. So
that god the eternal father (I say) would be in this their Christ, their
god and father, and not lai their sins committed to their charge to
condemnacyon.

This doctrine the holy scripture teaches almost eueri where, but specially in
y^ Epistle to the Hebrews the. 1. 7. 8. 9. Chapters this is most lively ser
forth, how that by one oblacion, once offered by this Christ himself, all, that
be gods people, are sanctified.

For as in respect of them, that dyed in gods couenaunte and eleccion before
Christ suffered his death and offered his sacrifice one alone and
omnisufficient, never more to be offered, he is called the lamb slain from the
beginning Apoca. 13.
of the world and the one alone mediator between god and man, 1. Timo. 2.
whose forth coming was from the beginning: Even so, in respect Mich. 3. 5.
of the virtue and efficacy of this one sacrifice to al gods people,
continually unto the worlds end, the holy ghost does tell us, that thereby he
has made holy such, as be children of salvation.

And says not, shall make holy, or does make holy, lest any manne should
with the papists in deed reiterate this sacrifice again.

Although in words they say otherwise, as anon we shall see, if hereunto I
show you the mean, whereby to apply this sacrifice, which I will do very
brefely.

For in the. 17. of S. John our savior does very plainly show this in these
words: for their sakes, says he, I sanctyfye my self, that they also might
be sanctyfyed through the truth. I pray not for them alone, but for those
also, which shall believe on me through their preaching. Here our savior
applies his sacrifice, in teaching and prayeng for them.

And as he teaches them, as ministers, to do the like, that is, to preach
and pray for the applycacyon of his sacryfyce to y^ church: so does he
teach them and all the church, to apply it unto themselves by beleuyng it and
by faith. The which thing the Apostle S. Paul in many places, but most
plainly in the second to the Corinthyans the fifth chapter in the later end
does teach. Read it, and se. So that now as ye have Christ's one only
sacrifice, which he himself on the cross offered once, as sufficient for all
that do believe, and never more to be reiterated: so have you, that for the
applyinge of it to his church, the ministers should preach and pray, that
their preaching might be effectual in Christ.

And as Paul was ready him self, to suffer death for the confirmacion of the
faith of the elect: so should the church and eueri member of the same (which
is of years of discrecion) by beleuyng in Christ through the ministers
preaching, apply it to themselves. As for infauntes, I need not in this case to
speak of gods eleccion. It is most certain. This kind of applyinge, as it
kills y^ papistical priests, which hate not the devil worse, then true
preaching: so does it cast down al their soale massing and foolish foundacio^s
for such, as be dead and past the ministry of gods word. And also it
pulls away the opinion of opus operatu^ and of perseuera^ce in impiety from
such, as would enjoy the benefit of Christ's death.

The. 8. Chapter.
Of praying for the dead, the true doctrine.

NOw as concerning the third, that is, of prayeng for the dead and
sacrificing for them, as in the other we confess, teach and believe according
to gods word: so do we in this. Namely, that in holy scripture, through out
the Canonical books of the old and new testament, we find nether precept nor
ensample of prayenge for any, wha^ they be departed this life: but that as
men dye, so shall they arise.

If in faith in the Lord toward the south, the^ need they Eccle. 11.
no prayers, then are they present lie happy, and shall arise in glory. If in
unbelief, without John. 5.
the lord toward the north, the^ are they paste all help, in the damned
state presently, and shall rise to eternal shame.

Wherefore, according to the scripture, we exhort men to repent. And while
they have time, Gal. 6.
to work well.

Eueri man shall bear his own burden, every man shall give account Col. 3.
Romans 14. 2. Cor. 5.
for him self, and not sir John nor sir Thomas, that sing or pray for them.

Every man shall receive according to that he himself does in this body,
while he is here alive, be it good or bad: and not according to that his
executors, or this chauntry priest, and that fraternite does for him.

Whereby we may well see, if we will, that as prayer for the dead is not
avaylable or profitable to the dead: so is it not of us allowable or to be
exercysed.

For as they, that are departed, be past our prayers, being either in joy or in
misery, as is above showed: Even so we, having for romans 10. 14.
it no word of god, where upon faith leneth, can not but sin in doing it, in
that we do it not of faith, because we have no word of god for it.

Therefore with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, y^ prophets, Christ Jesus and the
Apostles, we bury the dead in a conuenyent place, and mourn in measure, as men
having hope of the resurreccion, 1. Thessa. 4
not because of them: for that were a great point of ingratitude, they being
departed Apoca. 14.
out of miserable condycyon into a most blessed state.

Therefore we give thanks to god for them, praise his name for his power and
might showed on them. And pray, that we may depart in the same faith, and
joyfully rise with them in the resurrection, which we desire and wyshe the lord
would haste^. We mourn (I say) not because of them, but of our selves, that
have lost the company of such our helpers and furtherers in spiritual and
temporal benefytes, by them being admonyshed of our immortality, and of the
vanity of this life: that we might the more contemn it, and desire the
everlasting life, where they and we shall never be separated. This is our faith
and doctrine for them, that be departed: who though they be members of the same
body mistical of Christ, y^ we be of: yet should they in this case be
discerned from the mylitaunte members, they being at rest, and having finished
their coursse and fight, in no point 2. Timo. 4.
neding any of our help, except we should to arrogantly set up our own
merits and prayers, and pull down Christ, as though we were able to get pardon
and hyer rowme in heaven for others: where al our ryghtuousnes, and the best
thing we do, is so far from helpyng others, that thereby we can not help
our selves, but had need to cry dimitte nobis debita nostra: being no better
in gods syghte, then a Luke. 11.
defiled woman's cloth, although to the syghte of men, they Esa. 64.
may seem gorgyous and gaye. For if the papystes would say, as when they are
pressed with blasphemye, in extollynge their own merytes and works of
supererogacion against Christ, there use, that our prayers do the^ no good in
respect of the worthynes of their prayers, but in respect of gods goodness: in
y^ gods goodness is not to be looked for other wise, the^ he has promised, let
them either show men his p^omes, or else in this be half keep silence, and
exercise themselves better in doing their duties to their brethren, that be
alive. Toward whom their charytye is very cold: all though when they are
dead, then there will pretend much, then will they pray for them: but yet not
for naught and freli, as true charity workth. For no penny, no pater noster.

Give nothing, and then they will neither sing nor say Requiem, nor placebo, I
warraunt you.

But of this suffycient. Now to the last, of prayeng to the dead, or to saints
departed this life.

The. 9. Chapter.
Of praying to saynctes.

HEre we confess, teach and believe, as before is said, according to gods
holy word, that as all Jacob. 1.
and every good thing comes only from god the father, by y^ means of Jesus
christ: so, for the obtaininge of y^ same, Psalm. 50. 1. Timo. 6. Hebru. 13.
Psalm. 5.
we must call upon his holy name, as he himself commands very often.

But for as much as god dwells in a light inaccessible, and is a consumyng
fire, and hates all impiety and uncleanness, and we be blind, stubble,
grass, haie and nothing but filthy, unclean and synneful: and because that
therefore as we may not, so we dare not approach to his presence: it has
pleased this good god and father, of his love, to se^d a spokesman and
mediator, an in tercessor and advocate between him and us, even Jesus Christ
his dearly beeloued son: By whom we might have free entrance with boldness,
to come before his presence and Throne of mercy, to find and obtain grace
and help in time of need. For this our mediator and advocate Hebru. 2. 4
is with his father of the same substance, power, wisdo^e and majesty, and
therefore may way well with him in all things: and with us he is of the same
substance which we are of, even flesh and man, but pure and with out sin,
in all things being tempted like unto us, and having Heb. 3. 4.
experyence of our infirmytyes, that he might be merciful and faithful on our
behalf, to pourge us from our sins, and 1. Pet. 2. Math. 3. 17.
to bring us into such favor with the father: that we might be not only
dearly beloved through him, the only dearlyng of the father, Math. 7. 1.
John. 5. John. 14.
but also obtain whatsoever we shall ask according to his word and will, in
the name of this same our mediator, savior, intercessour and advocate. So y^
easy it is to see, that as it is an obedyente service to god ye father, to call
always upon him in all Psalm. 50.
our need: so to come to his presence through Christ, is to the honor of
CHRIST'S medyacyon, intercessyon, and aduocatship. And therefore, as it cannot
be but against the almighty God and father, to ask or look for any thing
else where, at the hands of any that be departed this life, as though he were
not the geuer of all good things, or as though he had not commanded us to
come un to him: so we see, it is manyfestli against Christ Jesus our lord, by
any other saint, angel or archangel, to come and move any thing at our
fathers hands: As though he were not our mediator, advocate and
intercessoure, or else not a sufficient advocate, mediator and intercessour,
or at leest not so merciful, meke, gracyous, loving and ready to help, as
others.

Where he only so loved us, as the very hearts of al men and angels never were
able to conceive any part of ye height, depth Ephesians. 3.
breadth and length of the same, as it is.

If his own heart blood was not to dear for us, being his very enemies, and
never desirous to do his will: How is it possible, that he will contemn us, for
coming unto him with purpose and desyer to serve him? Many other reasons I
could give you, wherefore the saynctes are not to be prayed unto: for that
pulls from faith in Christ: It makes them gods, it is ydolatrye etc. But
this may suffice. So yt now you see by gods word, what our faith is
concerning these. 4. things.

Which that you may the more love, embrace and be co^te^t to carry with you
through fire and water, I will now go about by gods grace, as brefelye as I
can, to show, how abominable their doctrine is: even out of the short Sum
thereof, already before by me rehearced.

The. 10. Chapter.
The popish doctrine of the sacrament confuted more largelye.

First, where they allege the Catholyke church to have taught, concerning
the supper, the doctrine of tra^substa^ciacio^ of Christ's real and carnal
presence: dearly beloved, know that this is a manifest lie. For as the
Catholyke church never knew of it for. 900 years at the least, after Christ's
ascension: so after that time, no Transubstancyacyo^ is a new doctrine.
other church did obstynatlye defend, cruelly maintain, and wylfullye wreste
the scriptures and doctors for the establyshing of it, save only the popish
church, as their own doctors, Duns and Gabriel, do teach. Read the bishop
of Canterburyes book against Winchester, and see.

Where as they say, that Christ in his supper, by taking bread and speaking
the words of consecracyon, did make it his flesh, accordig to his promise in
John John. 6.
(when he says: and ye bread, y^ I will give, is my flesh etc) so y^ they would
therbi seem to have. 2. places of Scripture for this their doctrine of
transubstanciacyon and real or carnal presence: Although diversely I cold
improve this, yet for because I would not be over tedious unto you, even by the
same their sentence you shall se, how lernedly they lie.

The sentence is this: And the bred, that I will give, is mi flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world. First mark, that he says: the bread is my
flesh. He says not: shall be my flesh, but it is my flesh.

This I trow makes against them. For the sacrament a year after at the lest
was not institut. Again, he says: that the bread is his flesh, which he will
give for the life of the world.

Here would I ask them, whee there Christ's death was for y^ life of the
world, or in vain. If they say, it was for the life of the world, then why do
they apply and give it to the sacrament? Was it crucified? Or if it be the same
sacrifice (for so they say) either it was effectual, or not. If it was
effectual, then Christ's death neded not.

If it was not effectual, then Christ was not god, and could not do that he
would: thus ye may see their ungodly foolysh: nes, or foolyshe ungodliness,
I can not tell which to call it well.

Where as they require the in tente of the priest, to consecrate Of the
priests in tente.
Christ's body: for as much as we know not any man's intent, (god only knows
the heart) yea the words we know not, they ar so spoken in hucker mucker: I
pray you, into what a doubtfulnesse are we brought, whether it be y^ sacrament
or no? In what peril are we of worshipping a piece of bred for our Christ? Is
not this (trow you) sweet and comfortable geer, y^ a man shall always stand
in doubt, whether he have received the sacrament or no? Where as they will have
it bred to the eye, and not to the mouth, judge the^ whether a dog may not
eat Christ's body: judge whether the devil, if he would come in the liknesse
of a pryeste, might not swalow up Christ and so brig him into hell. From
whence, because there is no redemption there, Christ's body should never
come, but be damned. Judge whether the taist of thy mouth, is not as much to be
credited, as the sight of the eye: specially in y^ the scripture so often
calls it bred after ye consecracyon, as before I have showed. Judge whether
Christ's body be not very pretty, that it can lie in so little a rowme. Judge
whether Christ has moo bodies then one, when percha^unce the priest has. 20.
or 100. before him. Judge whether the priest break not Christ's body in
breaking of it. Judge whether it be semelye, to chawe Christ's body, with the
teeth. Judge whether Christ did eat his own body, yea or no: for Christ did
eat the sacrament with his disciples. Judge whether it be semely, that Christ
should be kept so in prison, as they kep him. Judge whether it be semeli, that
Christ's body should be so din dle danled, and used, as they use it. Judge
whether y^ people knockig and knelynge at the eleuacion of that they see (for
they see but the forms of bred and wine, and not Christ's body, if it be as
the Papystes feyne) judge, I say, whether the people, by the papystes own
doctrine, be not made ydolatours.

Many moo absurdities there be, which I purposiye omytte. This little is enough,
hereby to give you occasyon to know the more.

Where they say, that ye bred is made Christ's body, flesh, blood etc. That
is: that Christ's body is made of the bred: As the Bishop of Wynchester, in
his book for this matter of the devils sophistie, and else where does affirm:
You may se; how shame leslye, yea blasphemouslye they speak.

For Christ's body crucified was borne of the virgin Mary: even of her
substance. But they say, the supper is that body, which was crucified. Now,
I trow, bread is one thing, and the virgins flesh another thing. Therefore
in deed they deny Christ in the flesh, that they may stablish their Christ in
the bred: which is the very note of Antichrist.

Last of al, where as they say, that they receive the sacrament to damnacion,
which do not be leave their transubstanciacyon: If with Paul their words were
conferred, you should see otherwise.

For he says: they receive this bread (for so he calls it after the words
of consecracyon) unworthily, which do not esteem Christ's body.

As in deed the papystes do not, which would bring Christ down out of
heaven, for thieves and whores to chawe and eat, for mothes, to corrupt, and to
be in danger of mowlynge: as if they keep their hosts long indede they will
moulde, and then will they burn the^. Do these men (trow you) esteem
Christ's body: Paul plainly shows in y^ same place, that ye wicked man,
which receaueth y^ sacrament un worthily, eats not Chrysts body, but his own
da^nacio^: which, I trow, be not Christ's body. And this shall serve for this
time to show you how shameless, fylthy and abominable this their doctrine of
transubstanciacion is. If in so short a su^me of their doctrine there be so
many abominacions, I pray you, how much is in the whole sum of the same? Now
for the sacrifice.

The. 11. Chapter.
The popish doctrine of the sacrifice confuted.

FIrst, in that they grant Christ's sacrifice on the cross, done by himself,
to be full and perfect enough, we may well se, y^ we need not this, which they
have found out, in deed to make the other un perfect: for else it neded no
reiteracion.

But seeing they reiterate it by this and make it nedeful even as baptism,
easily may all men know, yt though they speak one thing, they me^e another:
and so are dyssemblers and destroyers of Christ's sacrifice, little consyderinge
the great pain that Christ suffered, seeing they weie it no better.

Where as they say, that it is the same sacrifice, which Christ offered on y^
cross, but vnbloudely (wherein they seem to deni tran substanciacion: for else,
I trow, it must needs be bloudi) I would thus reason with the^: in as much as
Christ's sacrifice on ye cross was the only perfect, and al sufficient
propiciatory sacrifice for the sins of the world, as they confess, this
could not be the same, because it was done before that upon the cross.

Or else the full perfect sacryfice was then in the supper finished, and so
Christ's death is in vain and a foolysh thing.

If Christ's death be not foolish, but in deed (as it is) the full and perfect
sacryfice for y^ sins of the world: Then this, which they feine, that he
offered in his last supper, is not the same, prate what pleases them. Or else
it is not of value, take whether they will.

Whereas they prate of Christ's will, that it was accepted before his father for
the dead: as they shall never be able to show so much as one word, to prove
that Christ would in his supper, sacrifice himself to his father for the
sins of the world (for there is not one word thereof through out the whole
bible) so do they belie god the father, which would in deed have his son to
drink the cupp, that he prayed to be taken from him: or else make christ's death
frustrate, and more then need, which is the only thing, that all their
doctrine tends unto. For if the father allowed his will for the deed, I pray
you, who sees not now, the ded to be more then needs?

Where they say, that Christ commanded his church, to offer this sacrifice
to his father in remembrance of his bloudye sacrifice: I would pray them to
show me, where he commanded it, and then good inoughe. But, dearlye beloved,
they can never show it. If they will say: Hoc facite: to take facere for to
sacrifice, as some teach it: then will I say, that a boy of. 12. year old
can tell they lie.

For hoc facite (do you this) pertains to the whole action of Christ's
supper, of taking, eati^g and drinking of y^ sacrament etc. And as well spoken
to the lay men as to ye priests. But, I trow they will not suffer the lay
men, to say mass another while now for them.

No, this were to much against their honor and gain also. But if one would
ask them what they offer to the father, the^ a man should se their
abominacions. For if they say, nothing, then men would take them, as they
be, liars.

If they say: bread and wine, as indede they do in their mass horriblye, then
in that they say they offer the same thing, which Christ offered on the
cross, and he offered his body: bred must needs be Christ's body, and so
Christ's body is bred and wine. If they say yt they offer up christ, in that
the offerer must neds be as good at the lest, yea better the^ the thing offered
(for God is no strompet, to like the offer token, and gift better, then the
offerer and geuer) then must they needs show themselves open Antichrists. For
they make themselves equal with Christ, yea better then he: which thing indede
their holy father and graundsire, the pope, does.

For where Christ would take upon him to teach nothing, but that he had
received of his father: And therefore willed men to search the scriptures, as al
his Apostles did, whether their doctryn was not according thereunto: the pope,
and his prelates, will be bold to teach what please them more, then God byddeth,
yea clean contrary to y^, which god bids. As it is plain by all these. 4.
points, transubstanciacion, sacrifice, praying for the dead and to the dead.
But see, I pray you, their abominacions. The sacrifice of Christ, for the
redemption of ye world, was not simply his bodi and his blood: but his body
broken, and his blood shed. That is, all his passion and sufferyng in his body
and flesh.

In that therefore they offer, as they sai, the same sacrifice, which Christ
offered: dearly beloved, do they not as much, as in them is, kyl, slaye, whyppe
and crucify Christ again? Ah wretches and Antichrists.

Who would not desire to die for his master Christ's cause, against this their
heinous and stinking abominacion? Where as they call this sacrifice of y^ mass
the principal mean, to apply the benefit of Christ's death to the quick and
dead: I would gladly have them to show, where and of whom they learned it.
Sure I, am they learned it not of Christ. For when he sent his dysciples Math.
28. Mark. 16. Luke. 24.
abroad, to apply unto men ye benefyte of his death, he bad them not mass it,
but preach the gospel, as ye mean by the which god had appointed beleuers to
be saved. The which thing Peter told Acts. 10. Col. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 5.
Cornelius plainly, as Paul also teaches almost every where in his epistles.
But in deed preaching they may not away with, as well for that it is to
paynefull, as for that it is nothing so gainful, nor in auctorite or estimacio^
with the world. Nothing so displeases y^ devil, as preaching y^ gospel, as in all
ages easily we may well se, if we will mark, to our comfort in this age. And
therefore by geuinge his daughter, idolatry, with her dowrye of worldly wealth,
riches and honor, to the Pope and his shaue^ shorelings: they have by this
means in many years been begetti^g a daughter, which at length was delivered
to destroy preaching: even the minion Missa, mestres Missa, who daunceth
dayntelye before the Herodes of the world, and is the cause, even whi John
Baptist and ye preachers be put in to prison and lose their heads. This
daunsynge damsel, the derlyng of her mother, the fair garlande of her
fathers (for she has many fathers) the gawdye galaunte of her graundesyre, is
trymmed and trycked on the best and most holy manner or wyse^, y^ can be: even
with the word of god the epistle and the gospel: with the sacrament of Christ's
body and blood: with the pomander and perfumes of prayer, and al godly things,
that ca^ be: but blasphemously and horribly abused, to be a mairmaide, to amase
and bewitche men, sailing in the seas of this life, to be enamored on her.

And therefore, besides her aforesaid goodli apparel, she has al kind of sweet
tunes, dityes, melodies, singing, playing, rynging, knocking, kneling,
standi^g, lifting, crossing, blessing, blowi^g ^nouing, ince^sing etc. Moreover
she wants no gold, silver, precious stones, Jewels and costly silks,
veluettes, sate^s, damastes etc. And al kind of things, which are gorgious in
the sight of men: as, if you call to mi^d the chalices, copes, vestiments,
crucifixes etc. you can not but see.

And here to she is bewtyfyed, yet more to be showed, and set forth in lying
words and titles, given to her: that she has all power in heaven, earth and
hell: that she has all things for soul and body, for quick and dead, for
man and beast.

And lest men should think her to coye a dame, lo sir, she offerth her self
most gently to al, that will come, be they never so poor, evil, stinking and
foul, to have their pleasure on her. Come who will, she is Iho^e good feloe.
And y^ not only to make her self common to them, that will: but also to plye
them plentyfully, with most pleasant promyses (but falsely) and giving most
licen^^o^^

graffed into him: ye supper, yt we are fed with Christ, spirituallye with his body
and blood, yea that we be incorporated into Christ, to be flesh of his flesh
and bone of his bones, as he, by being borne of ye virgin Mary, was flesh of
our flesh, and bone of our bones. Away therefore with their abominable
doctrine, that the sacrifice of the mass is the principal means to appli
Christ's death to ye quick and dead: wherein al men may se that they lie boldly.

For as the word of god in the ministry pertains not to the dead (for who
will be so made, as to go and preach on dead men's graves, yt the dead me^ may
hear) so likewise do not the sacraments. Little beholding were men to Christ
and to ye Apostles, if this were the principal mean to apply salvation, y^
they would use it so little and preach so much. Paul, having respect to ye
chefest end, wherefore he was sent, said y^ he was not sent to baptize, but to
1. Cor. 1.
preach. And often says he, y^ he was an apostle, segregate of god Roma. 1.
Gal. 1. 2. Timo. 4.
to preach ye gospel. And y^ bishop Timothi did he warn, to preach in season
and out of season, speaking never a word of this massing or sacrificing
Christ's body. Last of al, where they make a similitud, that as by baptism the
minister applies to y^ child regeneracio^, so in this etc. Oh, y^ this
similitude were well looked on, the^ would it make the^ to bluster: for they ar no
more like, then an apple like an oyster. In baptysme the child is alive, but
here y^ man is dead: in baptism the child is present, but here y^ man is
perchance. 40. miles of if he sacrifice for ye quit, yea. 100. miles from him:
in baptism the child receaueth the sacrament, but here you must look and gape.

But beware you take not, for ye may receive but once a year, and then also
you must receive but ye one half, the cup he will keep from you. In baptism
is required gods eleccion, if y^ child be an infaunt: or faith if he be of
age. And therefore he recites the promise, that it may be heard: but here is
no faith required.

For how can men beeleue, when they are dead? No promise is the^ preached or
heard. So that even this their similitude makes the matter plain enough.

For baptysme, al men know, to be no sacrifice.

But of this I have spoken a little before, that if applying come by the
priests massyng: then were preaching in vain, beleuynge in vain, godly life
in vain, ye priest were gods fellow, yea Christ's superior, as is before
sard. Now to the third, of praying for the dead: wherein I will be brefe.

The. 12. Chapter.
The confutacion of the papystes sacrificing and praying for the dead.

FIrst when they say, this applicatory sacrifice may be called a propiciatory
sacrifice, because it applies the propiciatorye sacrifice, to whom the priest
will, be he dead or alive: as I would have you to note, how they grant,
that of it self it is not a propycyatorye sacryfyce, whereby they varye from
that, which they else where teach, that it is the self same sacrifice, which
Christ offered on the cross, un bloudely: so I pray you forget not, that ye
priest is gods fellow: for he may apply it to whom he will.

Therefore honor sir John, and make much of sir Thomas. For though god could
make thee alone: yet alone, with out the priest, he can not save thee.
Again, if sir John be thy friend, care neither for god nor the devil: live as
thou will, he will bring thee to heaven, although thou slip into hell.

So they write, that Gregory by massing did with Traiane y^ emperor. It makes
no matter how thou live here, so thou have the savior of the pope and his shave
lynges.

Whereas they say, that the fathers from the beginning were accustomed to make
memorials for the dead: this I grant to be true, as we do in our communion.

But to gather, that therefore they prayed for them: it no more follows, then
to say, that our english service does allow it, where it does not. For ye
must note, that there is a memorial for the dead as well in giving thanks to god
for them, as in praying for them: for to say, to pray for the dead, is a
general word, includyng in it geuyng of thanks.

And therefore when we read in the aunciente fathers of the primitive church, of
the memorials for the dead or prayinge for the dead, it is not to be
understand, that they prayed for to deliver them from purgatory (for y^ was not
found out then) or from hell, as our papists do in their prayers of the
mass, forther is no redemption: or for pardon of their sins, as though they
had it not, for if they depart with out it, they are damned: or for to get them
a hier place in heaven, for that were injurious to christ, that we should
purchase places, and hyer rowmes in heaven for others: But either for the
desyer of the more spedy coming of Christ, to hasten the resurrection, either
y^ they might not be thought negligent or careless over y^ deed: tyther that the
living might be occasioned to increase in love to the church here in earth, who
still follows with good will and love, even men wha^ they be departed: either to
admonish the church to be diligent over such as live, and careful to extend
her love, if it were possible, even to the deed.

On this wise should we expound not only the former, but also y^ later
fathers, as Austen, Chrisosto^e and others. Which though in some places they
seem very manifestli to allow praying for y^ deed, yet they are not to be
understand otherwise, the^ I have said for them. For never knew they of our
merits and purgatory: for if they had but drea^ed thero^, surely they would
have be^ much more circu^spect in their speakigs and writings of this, the^
theiwer. Where they say, that because this sacrifice is the sacryfice of the
whole church, whereof the dead be members, therefore they should be prayed for:
as before I have showed, that we must put a difference between the members of
the church militaunte here on earth, and those which be now in rest and
peace with god: so would I have you to note here, that they should pray for none
other dead then such, as be members of Christ's Church.

Now in that al such dye in the lord, and therefore are happy, I would gladly
learn, what good such prayer does to those so departed.

As for purgatory pyke pursse, they pass not upon it. But that this is a
sacrifice applycatorye or propiciatory, the papists ca^ never prove. Where
they say, charity requires it: I answer, that in as much as charity
follows faith, and will not go a foot farther then faith shows the way:
seeing faith is not but of the word of god, and gods Roma. 10.
word for this they have not: easy it is to perceive, that this praying thus
for the dead is not of Christian charity. But be it y^ charity required it, I
then meruail why they ar so uncharitable, that will do nothing herein with out
money. Why will they not pray without pens? If the pope and his prelates were
charitable, they would, I trow, make swepe stake at once with purgatory.

Where they allege the sentence of the Machabees: as all men of learning
know, the fathers allow not that book to be gods spirit or catholic: so do
I wonder, that in all the old testamente this sacrificing for the dead was
never spoken of before. In all the sacrifices, that God appointed, we read of
never one for the dead.

This geer came not up, till the religion was wonderfullye corrupt among the
Jews.

As with us it was never found out, til horrible corrupcion of religion and
ignoraunces of Gods word came into the church of god, when preaching was
put down and massynge came up.

Then faith in Christ was cold, penance became popyshe, and trust was taught
in creatures, ignorance abounded: and look what the clergi said, that was
believed. Then came up visions, miracles, dead sprites walking and talking how
they might be releued by this mass, by that pylgremage gate going.

And so came up this pelf of prayinge for the dead, which Paul, the apostles
and all the prophets never spoke one word of. For all men may easelye see,
that it is a thing which helps much vice, and hyndreth godliness.

Who will be so earneste to amend, to make restytucyon of that he has gotten
vniustli, and live in a Godly love and true frare of GOD, being taught that
by prayers, by masses, by foundynge of Chaunteryes etc. when he is gone, he
shall find case, and releafe, yea and come to joy eternal: Christ's doctrine
is, that the way of salvation is strayte. But this teaching, heapyng of masses
one upon another when we are dead, makes it void.

Christ's teaching is, that we should live in love and charity: the Son
should not go down on our wrath. But this doctrine, to pray for the dead to be
delivered out of purgatory, teaches rather to live in little love, in wrath
even till our deaths day. For sir John can and will help, sir thomas, by a
mass of Scala celi, will bring us into heaven. Christ's doctrine is, that he
is the way, but this doctrine makes the massyng priest the way. Away in deed
it is, but to hell and to ye devil. Dearly beloved, therefore take good heart
unto you for this geer: rather, then you would consent unto it, to loose life,
and all that ever you have.

You shall be sure with Christ to find it, and that for ever, with infinite
increace.

Last of al, where they allege the catholyke church and consent of al doctors
in this matter: as I wyshe you should know, that to be the true and catholyk
church, which is grounded upon gods word, which word they have not for them
in this matter: So would I ye should know, that there is no membre of the
church, but he may err. For they be men, and al men be liars, as Dauyd says.

Now if all the members may err, then you may easeli se, where to your faith
ought to leene: eue^ unto gods written word. Hear the church, and the
doctors of y^ church: but none otherwise the^ as teachers, and try their
teaching by gods word. If they teach according to it, then beeleue and obey
them.

If contrary, then know they be but men, and always let your faith leene
to gods word.

Howbeit, for this matter of prayinge for the dead, know of truth, that there
be no doctors of 400, or. 500. year after Christ's ascension, but if they in
so^e places seem to allow prayinge for the dead, yet they would be taken in
some of the senses which I have specified. In many places do they by diverse
se^tences declare it them selves. But of this enough.

The. 13. Chapter.
The refutacion of the heresye of prayinge to saints, departed out of this
world.

NOw to the last of prayinge to saynctes. First where they say, there be moo
mediators of intercession then Christ, making a distinction, not learned out
of gods book in such sense, and for such purpose as they allege: I wyshe
they would look on the. 8. to the Romans, and 1. John. 2. and there shall
they learn, to take better head.

The one says: Christ sits on the right hand of his father, and prays
for us.

The other says: he is our advocate, that is, a spokesman, co^forter,
intercessor, and mediator. Now would I ask them, seeing that Christ is a
mediator of intercessyon, as I am sure they will grant: whether he be
sufficient or no.

If they say no, then all me^ will know they lie. But if they say yea, then
may I ask, why they are not content with sufficient. What fault find ye
with him? Is there any more mercyful, the^ he: Any, more desirous to do us
good, the^ he? Any, that knows our grefe and need, so much as he?

Any, that knows the way to help us, so well as he? No, none so well. He
cries: Ask, and ye shall have: come to me, and I will Math. 7. Math. 11. John.
16.
help you: ask, that your joy may be full.

Hitherto ye have not asked any thing in my name. Therefore my good brethren
and sisters: let us thank god for this mediator. And as he is one alone
mediator for redemption, let us take him even so for intercession. For, if
by his work of redempcyon, of enemies we are made friends: surely we, being
fre^des and having him above on the Roma. 5. Heb. 1.
right hand of his father, shall by him obtain althynges.

Where they call it a point of a lowly and an humble spirit, to go to
saynctes, that they may pray for them: you may caselise, it is a point of an
arrogau^t here and a false untrue sprete. For in as much as god plainly byddeth
the, that thou put naught to his Deu. 12. Apo. 22. Psalm. 50.
word, nor rate aught there from, in that his word is, thou shalt call upon
him in thy need: why art thou so arrogau^t and proud, that y^ wilt go to Peter
or Paul, to pray for thee? Where haste thou gods word? Do y^ think, god is
true of his promise? Whithen do thou not go unto him? Doste y^ think, that
god at any time receaueth thee for thy worthynes? On whom be his eyes, but upon
him, that trembles at Esa. 65.
his words?

Blessed are they, that be pore Math. 5.
in sprite, and think themselves unworthy of gods help. Wherefore has god
sworn, that he will not the death of a syuner, but y^ sinners might be most
certain ^^e. 33.
of his love and mercy, to be much greater, then they be able to conceive? His
mercyes are above al his works. Psalm. 145.


But thou, that ru^nest to saints, thynkest that it is not so, for else
wouldeste thou go to him thy self: that thou, seeing his so much goodness,
mighteste the more love him, which thou can not, if thou use other means,
then by Christ only.

Where they bring in the ensaumple of saynctes praying for the people, and
obteynyng benefytes for them, whylest they were living here on earth: And so
gather, that much more they will and can do it now for us, in that they be
with GOD, if we will pray unto them: very easeli may we put this away by many
reasons.

First, that the cases be not like. For, when they were alive, they might know
the need of the people.

But now, who can tell, whether they know any thing of our calamities and
need? Esaye says: Abraham did not know them, Psalm. 63.
that were in his age. Again, if the people had come to them, to have desired
their prayers, as they would have taken this for an admonishment of their duty
to the people: So would they again have warned the people of their duty,
that with them they also would pray unto God them selfs. Whereas there be no
such reciprocal and mutual offices between the dead and the living: now can
not we admonish them and tell them of our needs.

Or if we should go about it, surely we should still stand in a doubt,
whether they did perceue us or no.

For if they did perceive the miseries of their brethren, surely their rest
would not be without great grefe: and of this we are sure, that they can tell
us nothing also.

Besides this, this their reasoning smells, as it that went before, of man's
reason, which is 1. Cor. 1.
a fool in gods service, and of a good intent, which is not according Roma. 10.
to knoweledge. We may not do after that, which is good Deuteronomy. 12.
in our own eyes, but according to that, which God bids us do.

In our eyes it seems good, that as to kings and great men we use means by
men, which are of their privy chamber or ner about the^, either co come to
their spech, or to atteyne our suits: so we should do to Good by his saynctes.

But to dream on this sort, with god to use saints so, were and is unto
faith very foolyshe. For god uses no such privy cha^bers, to hide himself
in. He is at hand (says David) to all that call Psalm. 145.
upon him.

And Moses said before him: god is nere the in all thy prayers. Deuteronomy. 4.
No nation has their gods so nigh unto them, as our god is to us in all our
prayers. He needs none to put him in reme^berau^ce Hebr. 4. Psa. 33. 95.
of us, for he has al things open to his eyes: the height of ye hills and
the botomes of the depthes are in his sight. Nothing can hyde it self from
his knowledge. He has ordained Christ Jesus alonely, to be the mean, by who^
we shall speed and receive our requests, 1. Timo. 2.
which be according to his will: if we open our purse mouth, that he may
pour into y^ same, I mean faith.

For as a thing poured upon a vessel or other thing, ye mouth being closed, is
spilt and lost: so if we ask any thing according to gods will by Christ, ye
same does us no good, except the purse mouth of our heart be opened, by faith
to receive it.

But to make an end, S. Paul tells Roma. 10.
plainly, that without faith prayer is not made. Now in that faith is due
only to God (for Hiere. 17.
cursed is he, that has his faith in man, saint or aungel) to God only let us
make our prayers, but by Jesus Christ, and in his name only. For only in
him is the father Math. 3. 17
well pleased.

This if we do, and that often, as Christ wylleth (oportet semper orare, we
must pray always) Luke. 18.
then shall we undoubtedly in all things be directed by gods holy sprite,
whom Christ has promised to be our doctor, teacher John. 14. 15. 16. Psalm.
27.
and co^forter. And therefore need we not to fear, what man or devil can do
unto us, either by false teaching or cruel persecucion. For our pastor is
such one, y^ none John. 10.
can take his sheep out of his hands. To him be praise for ever.

Ame^.
The. 14. Chapter
The knittynge up of the matter and conclusyon or peroracion, with the autors
desire and prayer, for the persecuted brethren.

ANd thus much, my good brethren and sisters in our dear Lord and sauyoure
Jesus Christ, I thought good to write unto you for your comfort in these
trouble some days, and for the co^firmacion of the truth, that ye have
already received. From the which if you for fear of man, loss of goods,
friends or life, do swerve or depart: you depart and swerve from Christ, and
so snarre your self in Satan's sophistry, to your utter subuersio^. Therefore,
as Peter says, watch 1. Pet. 5.
and be sober: for as a roaring lio^, he seeks to devour you. But be ye
strong in faith: that is, stagger Acts. 2. Deu. 20.
not, waver not in gods promises and be assured that they perteine unto you,
that god is your God, that he is with you in trouble, and will deliver you and
gloryfye Psalm. 91.
you.

But yet see, that ye call upon him, specially that you enter not into
temptacion, as he taught Math. 26.
his disciples to pray even at such time, as he saw Satan desire to Luke. 22
sift them, as now he has desired to sift us. O most dear sauyor, prevent him
now, as thou did then with thy prayer, we beseech thee: and grant, that our
faith faynte not, but strengthen us to confirm the weak: that they deny not
thee and thy gospel, that they return not to their vomit and puddle of myer
in popery and 2. Peter. 2.
supersticion: As massyng, praying to saints, prayinge for the dead, or
worshippyng the work of men's hand, in stead of thee their savior. Oh let
us not so run down headlong into perdicion, Heb. 6. 10. Math. 10. Mark. 8.
Luke. 11. Gene. 19. Math. 27.
stombling on those sines, from the which there is no recovery, but a causynge
of thee to deny us before thy father, makig our later end worse, then the
beginning: as chanced to Loths wife, Judas Iscarioth, Fra^cisc. Spira in these
our days, and to many other.

But rather strengthen us all in thy grace, and in those things, which thy
word teaches: that we may here hasarde our life for thy sake.

And so shall we be sure to Math. 16.
save it: as if we seek to save it we can not but lose it. And it being lost,
what profyt can we have, if we wanne the whole world? Oh set thou always
before our eyes not (as reason does) this life, or the pleasures of the same,
death of the body and prysonment etc. But everlasting life, and those
unspeakable joys, which undoubtedly they shall have, that take up their
cross, and follow the.

Set ever before us also the eternal fire, and perpetual destruction of soul
and body, that they must needs at length leap into, which are afraid of the
hoar froste of adversity, that man or the devil stereth up, to stop and
hinder us from going forward in our journey to heavens bliss: to the which,
O Lord, do thou bring us for thy name sake. Amen.

Pray for all your brethren, which be in prison and exile, and so absent from
you in body, but yet present with you in spirit, and heartily pray god, once
to prove us and trust us again with his holy word and gospel: that we may be
suffered to speak, and you to hear his voice, as heretofore we and you have
done, but unthankfully and negligentli (I may say) yea very unworthily and
carnally. And therefore is his most just anger fallen now upon us.

He remember his mercy toward us, in his time, we beseech him.

Amen.
The Contents of this book, as they follow in every Chapter.
The Preface to the Christian reader. folio. 3 The. 1. Chapter. What we be and
where we be. folio. 5 The. 2, Chapter. Persecucion must not be strange unto
us. fo. 11 The. 3. Chapter. Trouble can not hurt Gods children. folio. 19 The.
4. Chapter. The cross is commodious and profitable. folio. 33 The. 5. Chapter.
How the papists hold their. 4. special articles, which they so grievously
persecute for. 60 The. 6. Chapter. How Gods word teaches of the supper,
with confutacion of transubstanciacyon. folio. 69 The. 7. Chapter. How Gods
word teaches of Christ's sacrifice, with the Romysh blasphemye therein
reproved. folio. 85 The. 8. Chapter. Of prayinge for the dead, the true
doctrine. folio. 90 The. 9. Chapter. Of prayinge to saints. 97 The. 10.
Chapter. The Romyshe doctrine of the sacrament confuted more largely. folio.
102 The. 11. Chapter. The popyshe doctrine of the sacryfyce in m^ssynge
confuted. folio. 111. The. 12. Chapter. The confutacion of the papystes
sacrificing, and prayinge for the dead. folio. 127 The. 13. Chapter. The
refutacion of the heresy of praying to saynctes, departed out of this world.
fo. 139 The. 14. Chapter. The knettynge up of the(...)ter and conclusion or
peroracio^wyth prayer for the help of god in this time of dangers and diverse
te^ptacions. folio. 149
FINIS.

