The unbelief of St. Thomas the Apostle, laid open for the comfort of all that
desire to believe.

Whereunto is added a comfortable Treatise for all that are afflicted in soul
or body.

The first armeth us against despair in the hour of death; the second against
impatience under the Cross.

By Nicholas Bound, Doctor in Divinity.

London, Printed for Robert Allott at the black Bear in Paul's Churchyard.
1628.

To the right Worshipful Sir ROBERT GARDENER Knight, and to the virtuous Lady
ANNE GARDENER his religious and loving wife, their own hearts desire in Christ.
RIght Worshipful Sir, though the kingdom of Ireland did bereave his country
of yours, of a great part of that good, which by a certain right it hoped for
from you^ by reason of your long service there under Queen Elizabeth of
blessed memory, in the chiefest and most honorable seat of Justice, by the
space of 15. or 16. years together: yet the benefit unto both the Kingdoms
was thought to be so great thereby, that the loss was so much the more easily
borne.

And now at the last this country does willingly acknowledge, that it has
great cause to thank God, not only for your safe return unto it some years
past, furnished with greater experience for government; but also with hope of
never departing from them any more: saving that in your last employment, under
his Highness (whom God long preserve) into his Islands of Iarsie and Garnesie,
they were suspended from that hope by the space of certain months.

Which being faithfully performed and ended, their hope is renewed, that you
being now at the last, merito tuo maximo donatus rude, may say of this
country Here is my rest. Which my self ha^^ more special cause to desire in
regard my ministry, which by your presen^^ you have often and long given
great countenance unto.

And you, good Madame, both since th^^ happy joining of you both together, a^^
long before, by your continual coming to the public assemblies, though a
goo^ way off; both winter and summer; neue^ hindered by the heat of the one,
or the cold of the other, and that by the space of 20. years, have given so
good an example, like unto those, that traueled without wearisomnes through the
veil of Baca, Psalm. 84.6.^
with hope to appear before God in Syon; that you have encouraged many unto
the like pains, and have left the slothful without excuse. By which, and some
other good examples like this, the credit of Gods word among us has in some
tolerable sort been hitherto vpheld.

For which, and for many other great favors from you both, I present these
small fruits of my poor labors unto you, as a perpetual testimony of my
thankefulnes unto you; and to God for you. Desiring him to multiply his graces
upon you, and long to preserve you to your own mutual comfort, and the good
of so many, as do depend upon you.

And the like blessing of God be upon the good and forward hopes of the
worshipful M. William Spring your only child; that his youth may be still so
seasoned with religion and learning, that in time to come he may in the seat
of Justice for the good of his country, by his deserts go beyond all his
progenitors: and so long uphold the credit of that right worshipful house. And
so I most humbly take my leave of you all. Norton in Suff. Iun. 24. 1608.

Your Worships in all reverend and dutiful affection, Nicolas Bownde.

THE UNBELIEF OF. S. Thomas the Apostle laid open, for the comfort of all that
desire to believe: which armeth us against despair in the hour of death.
Ioh. 20.24. etc. But Thomas one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with
them, when Jesus came. 25 The other Disciples therefore said unto him, We have
seen the Lord: but he said unto them, Except I see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put mine hand
into his side, I will not believe it. 26 And eight days after again his
Disciples were within, and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus, when the doors
were shut, and stood in the mids, and said; Peace be unto you. 27 After he
said to Thomas* Put thy finger here, and see mine ^ands, and put forth thine
hand, and put it ^^to my side: and be not faithless, but faithful. 28 Then
Thomas answered, and said unto him, My Lord, and my God. 29 Jesus said unto
him, Thomas, because thou has^ seen me, thou beleeuest: blessed are they, tha^
have not seen, and have believed.


THis text of Scripture is appointe^ to be read for the Gospel upon S. Thomas
day, because it co^tainet^ a memorable story of him, whose blessed memori^ we
keep upon that day: to that end that we might be thankful unto Go^ for him,
and for the excellent gif^ bestowed upon him, and the gre^^ good done to the
Church by his m^^nisterie and preaching: and that w^^ might labor to imitate
his virtue and to profit by his great infirmity wherein consists the true
and rig^^ observation of this, and all other su^^ like days.

And not in the worshipping of him, and praying to him, and setting up candles
before his image, and offering to him, as they did in the time of Popery; when
they prayed unto God to be heard at his intercession, and for his merits, and
blood shedding; as they did upon other such days for the rest of the Apostles,
and Saints. And they thought that the celebrating of those days was a great
honor and service acceptable unto them, and they kept them to that end, that
they might become their patrons, and fare the better for their sakes before
God: and they know no other use of them unto this day.

Wherein they offer great indignity unto Christ, first, in robbing and
spoiling him of the honor and office of his mediation and intercession, to
whom only it belongs: of whom the Apostle thus writes: it is Christ which
is dead, yea or rather which is risen again: ^om. 8.24.
who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us, and
therefore who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? And Christ
himsel^e thus speaks of his own office: Whatsoever ye ask in my name, Ioh.
14 13.
that will I do, that the father may be glorified in the son.

Secondly, they do great wrong unto him, in hallowing any days to the honor
of any, but of God alone. For all things that are sanctified, are sanctified to
his honor and worship only, who only is to be worshipped and served with
divine worship: therefore the bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, and the water in Baptism, are sanctified to the honor of Christ, and
of none other: as those that represent unto v^ the breaking of his body, and
the shedding of his most precious bloo^ for the forgiveness of our sins. An^
so are and ought the Churches to be confecrated to the name and honor of God
alone (who only is there to be served) and not of any Saint, as in time past
they have been.

And so ought the days also: As under the law all the Sabbaths were
consecrated unto the honor of God the creator of heaven and earth: and under
the Gospel unto the honor of Christ the Redeemer of his Church: and all other
days, that are now put a part among us from the common affairs of the world,
they are sanctified to that end, that God might be honored in them, and by
them.

And therefore we put a great difference between these holy days, and the
Sabbath, or Lords day. First of all in that we know this later to stand upon a
better foundation then they, as having his institution from Christ and his
Apostles, and so does bind all nations, and is perpetual, never to be
changed. Whereas the former have their warrant only from men, and so do not
bind all Churches alike, and may be changed, yea taken clean away: and serve
only for Christian policy, and good order in the Church, that men upon these
days might come together, and serve God. And therefore it is to be provided,
that there should not be too many of them, least thereby men should be hindered
from the necessary works of their callings; which has moved the reformed
Churches, as in this Realm, so els-where, to cut off many that were used in
the time of Popery, and so to keep themselves in a mediocritie, neither
having too many, nor putting down all.

Secondly, there is a difference between them, in the manner of keeping the
one, and the other: for on the Christian Sabbath the laws of our kingdom and
Church do restrain all men from many things, as from markets, and faires, and
keeping of Assizes and Sessions for the execution of justice: which they do
tolerate and permit upon other holydaies. Whereas in the time of blindness
they sometimes preferred these days before the Sabbath; and had more solemn
service and feasts upon them, and counted it a more deadly sin then to work,
then upon the Sabbath day.

Besides this, they appointing these days to the honor of men, did thereby
greatly dishonor the Saints themselves. For what greater dishonor can there
be unto any man, then to make him a traitor? and to give unto him that honor,
that is due only to the Prince? And if any should in simplicity and good will
ascribe so much to the greatest noble man in the Realm, that at the last he
should give him the titles that belong unto the King, and so bring him into the
suspicion of treason against his will, it were no honor, but dishonor unto
him: So the Papists in extolling the Saints so highly, that they consecrate
days unto them, and thereby seek to honor them, and hope that therefore they
will become Patrons unto them: all which are proper unto Christ; in so doing
they dishonor them: for they make them, as much as lies in them, to be
traitors unto Christ, in robbing him of that honor that is proper unto him.

And these Saints if they were now alive upon earth, would not only not take
this honor unto themselves, and thank them for it, but altogether refuse it,
and rebuke them for it: as Paul and Barnabas did unto the people at Lystra,
when they brought bulls with garlands, and would have sacrificed unto them: They
rent their clothes, and ran in among them, Act. 14 14
saying, O men, why do you these things? we are men subject unto the like
passions, that you be: and preach unto you, that you should turn from these
vain things unto the living God.

IN this text there are these four things principally to be observed: first of
all the great infidelity of S. Thomas the Apostle, who did not believe the
resurrection of Christ, reported unto him by all his fellow Apostles, who had
seen him, v. 24, 25. Secondly, the great mercy of Christ, who did not cast
him off, and leave him to perish in this unbelief of his, but most lovingly in
time convenient sought to pull him out of it by all good means; even the very
same, which himself desired. verse. 26, 27. Thirdly, the increase of faith in
Thomas by these means, appearing by the confession that he made, after that he
was thus confirmed, namely, that he did believe, not only that he was risen
again, but for him, and therefore calls him, his Lord, and his God. v. 28.
Lastly, here Christ upon this occasion delivers a general doctrine, and so
applies this fact of Thomas unto the whole church; even that they should be
blessed, who should believe in him, though they did not see him, as he had done.

I do not purpose to entreat of all these, but only of so much, as does
concern the unbelief of S. Thomas. But before I come to it, it may seem
somewhat strange, that S. John in his Gospel does write this of his fellow
Apostle, seeing it tends so wholly to his discredit. The other Evangelists
all of them have left it out, it may seem in favor of him; and it might be
thought, that it had been better, if he had passed it over with silence also.
But this Apostle living longer then all the rest, about an hundred years after
Christ, and so seeing all their writings, does add this, as a matter of
special moment: as indeed in it there is offered to the Church great
instruction and consolation.

And this plain dealing of his is a note of that integrity, that is to be
found in all the Scriptures, as being penned by the spirit of God. For they
came not in old time, as S. Peter says, 2. Pet. 1.2.
by the will of man: but holy men of God did speak and write, as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. And therefore they greatly differ from the writings
of men, which savor of the spirit of men; and so are in many things partial:
as this is a common fault in many Historiographers, that they flatter great
men, and speak only of their virtues, which they set out to the full: but
their vices either they wholly conceal, or lightly pass the^ over; especially
when they are their friends, and of the same rank and order with them, as S.
Thomas was unto the Apostle S. John. But it is not so in the Scriptures, which
proceeding from the spirit of truth, are no more partial, then God himself,
with whom there is no respect of persons: ^om. 2.11.
in so much that the penners of them do lay open the greatest sins of the
greatest men in their time, even of the Kings and of the Priests.

Sam. 2.8.
As of Heli, how he honored his children above God, and caused the sacrifices
of the Lord to be despised, and troaden under foot: and of Manasseh king of
Judah, how he caused his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of
Ben-hinnom, Chr. 33.6
and gave himself to witchcraft, and to charming, and to sorcerie: and used
them that had familiar spirits, and soothsayers: and did very much evil in the
sight of the Lord, to anger him: yea, the Prophets do not spare them, that were
nearest in blood to them, or nearest in any bond of affinity, or friendship.
Number 12.
For Moses does set out the murmuring of Aaron his own natural brother, and
of his sister Miriam, and how God did punish them for it: which he did not to
de^ame them, or with a mind to be revenged of them: for the Lord gave this
testimony of him, that he was a very meek man, verse. 3.
above all the men that were upon the earth.

And the Apostles do write the truth boldly and sincerely of their fellow
Apostles, though their faults were exceeding great, and not the like almost
heard of. Math. 2^
As how Judas did for thirty pieces of silver sell and betray his Lord and
master Christ into the hands of his most deadly enemies. And how Peter did not
only deny him once, but the second time did forswear him, verse. 7^
yea did curse and banne himself, if that ever he did but know him.

And to conclude this point, their vprightnes in their writings appears so
much the more, that they do not spare themselves, but publish their own
faults to the praise of God, as his spirit in them did direct them. For Moses
declares at large how slow and backward he was to take upon him that calling,
that God had appointed him unto, and what excuses and delays he made, in so
much that the Lord was very angry with him. ^xod. 4.14


And David writes of the adultery and murder, that he had secretly committed
against Bath-sheba, and her husband Vriah: and confesses openly, that he had
deserved death for both of them, when he thus prays, ^sal. 51.14. ^iddamim.
Deliver me from bloods, O Lord. So likewise the Apostle Paul spares not
himself, because it was not he, but the spirit of God that spoke in him, Gal.
1.13
in that he had persecuted the Church of God cruelly, and wasted it. This kind
of simple dealing is one argument not of the least moment, among many other, to
euince that the Scriptures are written by Gods spirit: and are therefore
Canonical, for they are not partial: but the spirit of truth and simple
dealing does maruelously appear every where in them.

But it may further be demanded, though such things as these be written of the
Saints, whether they should be read openly in the Church upon those holy days,
that carry their name: as if, when we keep the memory of a man, all his evil
deeds should be reckoned up, tending to his infamy and discredit. Concerning
which, as the providence of God therein is to be acknowledged, who has thus
disposed of it: so we are to reverence and highly esteem the godly wisdom of
those holy fathers, who did first appoint those days thus to be kept. For they
did it to the honor of God; and therefore would by the reading of these texts
of scripture have all men know, what the Saints were of themselves: and what
infirmities, unbelief, and other sins they were subject unto; even the same
that we are: as Paul and Barnabas said of themselves, ^ct. 14.14.
We are men subject to the like passions, that you are: and as S. James says
of the Prophet Elias, ^^m. 5.17.
that he was a man subject to the like passions, as we are. That so if they
were any thing, we might know from whence it came, and so as Paul says of
himself, I am the least of the Apostles, ^ Cor. 15.^0.
which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church
of God: but by the grace of God, I am that I am: and his grace which is in me,
was not in vain: but I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but
the grace of God which is with me. So we might say of them, being put in mind
by the Scriptures that are read even upon those days, wherein we keep the
greatest memory of them, what they were of themselves, and what they were by
the grace of God: and so not so much honor them, as praise God for them.

For the purpose of those ancient fathers of the Church, who appointed these
days thus to be kept, was not to set out the Saints themselves, that we might
glory in them, and in their merits: but in the merits of Christ, and in the
mercy of God showed to the^ for his sake: and so not only to teach us how
rightly to esteem of them, but that in them, as in a glass we might see, what
we are subject unto: and yet ^ow gracious God is to pore sinners, (...) so
might take comfort in the mercy of God showed to them. As here what great
vnbeeleefe was in Saint Thomas, and yet Christ did help him of it, and saved
him? to show us, that we are as full of unbelief, as he, and much more: yet
Christ will not refuse us, if we do not obstinatly remain in it, but are
willing to be helped of it, and have a desire to believe, by the means that he
shall bestow upon us. And this is the use that we are to make of the unbelief
of S. Thomas, even then when we hear it read upon his day.

The Papists did not so: for besides that they had a great number of
cou^terfeit Saints in their Cale^der, whose names were not written in the book
of life; some of them traitors, and others as ill, or worse then they: upon
their festival days, they caused to be read out of Legenda aurea, that is
their Legend of lies, a story of their lives, full of all virtues, and
miracles that they wrought, some in their life, some after their death, whereof
most were fained, and some of them most absurd. And thus they made them to be
Gods upon the earth, not making mention of any fault of theirs at any time,
especially so great as these, that we have heard of in S. Thomas, S. Paul, and
the rest.

Whereby it came to pass, partly by the observation of those days, and partly
by hearing what was then reported of them out of their stories, that the common
people were brought into a superstitious admiration of them, and had no hope by
imitating their virtues to be like them: but rather did worship them by means
of the strange and incredible things, that they heard of them. And so here was
no comfort from them for poor sinners, but only for their merits and
mediation: for they did not speak of their infirmities and falls. But we see,
how the Scriptures set out the true Saints of God after an other manner: not
only in their miracles and virtues, but in their greatest corruptions and
sins: that we knowing what they were of themselves, and what they are by the
mercy of God, and the grace of Christ; the poorest sinner might be comforted
in themselves by the one, and give thanks to God for the other. Seeing that
there is no sin in themselves, which they have not seen pardoned and cured
in some of the Saints or other: nor any grace wanting to themselves, which by
that experience of Gods goodness which they have scene in others, they might not
hope for in themselves in some measure.

But I come to the principal thing in this text, which is the great infirmity,
and wonderful unbelief that was in the Apostle S. Thomas, declared in these
words of his own that when the rest of the Disciples had told him, that they
had seen the Lord, he answered them, Except I see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put mine hand
into his side, I will not believe it.

The circumstance of time, and many occurrants going before this, do aggrauate
the greatness of his unbelief. For this was done the eight day after Christ's
resurrection: then he did show himself unto Thomas, as it is said, verse. 26.
Eight days after his Disciples were again within, and Thomas with them, then
came Jesus, when the doors were shut, and stood in the mids, and said, Peace
be unto you: after he said to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see mine hands:
and put forth thine hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
faithful. In the mean season he had ^ppeared unto Marie Magdalene at the
sepulcher the first day of his resurrection early in the morning, and she
knew him: for he called her Marie, and she answered, Rabboni, that is to say,
master, verse. 17. at what time, she was willed to go tell the Disciples, that
he was risen: and she did so: and also showed them, what other words he had
spoken unto her: but none of them did believe her: as S. Mark says. Mark.
16.11.
Thus at the first hearing of it, Thomas was incredulous, as well as the rest.
And the same day toward the evening he appeared unto two other as they were in
the wa^^ to Emaus, and they returned presently, and told the Disciples of it,
bu^ they did not believe them neither. verse. 13.


The same night therefore he appeared unto the eleven, as they sat^ together,
and cast in their teeth the^^ unbelief, and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them, wh^^ had now twice told them, that the^ had seen him,
being risen again, verse. 14. And because their unbelief was so great at that
time, to put them out of al doubt for the time to come, he showed them his
hands, and his side that was pierced, and the print of the nails in the one,
and of the spear in the other, and bad them look on them, that they might
know that it was he indeed, Ioh. 20.20.
as S. John the Evangelist does report it.

At this time Thomas was not present among them. The Lord of his infinite
wisdom and goodness thus disposing of it, for the further good both of Thomas,
and of all the rest, and of the whole Church: that by this means there might
be a new confirmation of his resurrection, by a second and more sensible
apparition: when they should not only see again the print of the nails in
his hands, but for Thomas also to put his finger into them. But in the mean
while, all the rest tell him, what they had seen, namely, not only Christ in
some form, but so certainly that he spoke unto them, and showed them his hands
and his feet, and the print of the nails in them, so that they could not
possibly be deceived in so clear a matter: yet for all this he not only not
gives credit unto some one of them severally, but not unto all of them
jointly, being so many, and so credible witnesses: and further, is so wilful
and obstinate, and so addicted to his own senses and feeling, that he tells
them plainly, that unless he himself see the print of the nails in his hands,
and may put his finger into them; and the print of the spear in his side, and
may put his hand into that, he will never believe it.

This is a marvelous thing, and may seem justly to be wondered at, that he
being an Apostle, and one that had been conversant with our Savior Christ a
long time, and had heard his doctrine, and seen his miracles; yea, had
preached salvation in his name with the rest: and had heard Christ often say,
that he must be put to death, and the third day rise again: that though he did
generally believe in him, yet he was not persuaded particularly of this article
of his resurrection. But such is our corruption, and we do so receive the
Spirit but in measure, that we may be true believers in many particulars: as we
see in the Apostle here, who believing Christ to be the son of God, and the
Savior of the world, and so held the maine point of salvation, failed in the
particular manner, and was not yet persuaded of the truth of his resurrection.
But for all this we are not to account him, as an infidel, but think thus
with our selves, if such a man as he, was subject unto so great doubtings, no
marvel then, if I in many particulars find my faith to be so full of doubting
and wavering. Only let us in these doubtings still use the means, and God
will at one time or other bless some of them unto us. As Thomas here not
believing that Christ was risen, though the rest of the Apostles did tell him
of it, did not forsake their company, but came into their assemblies upon the
Lords day, to serve Christ with them, and then Christ did appear unto him, and
rid him of his unbelief. Whereas if he had been still absent, as he was
before, and therefore he remained longer in his unbelief then they, God might
have deprived him of all means, and justly have given him up to his unbelief.

But this is a greater wonder, and herein his unbelief does appear much more:
that besides the former things, when the other Apostles, whom he by long
experience knew to be very reverend and credible me^, told him that they had
seen the Lord, and after what manner, even with the prints of the nails, and
of the spear in his body, yet he so distrusted all of them, that he would
believe none of them. Oftentimes we believe meaner men and of less credit in
matters of great uncertainty, and of small moment: therefore not to believe so
many and of so good credit, and in a thing of great moment, it being true
also, does plainly show, how deeply unbelief was rooted in him. Especially if
we consider how he further adds, that if there were never so many more of
them, let the^ be, what they will be, that should tell him so, he would believe
none of the^ but his own self, and his own sense and feeling: for v^les he
could see in his hands the print of the nails, and put his finger into the
print of the nails, and put his hand into his side, he would not believe it.

And it seems, that the rest of the Apostles were subject unto this
unbelief, though not in the like measure: for when Marie Magdalen at Christ's
commandment, came unto them, and finding them weeping and mourning, told them
for their comfort, that Christ was risen; though they heard her say, ^ar. 16.11
that he was alive, and had appeared to her, they believed it not: nay they
were so far from believing it, that her words seemed unto them, ^uk. 24.11.
as a fained thing: so that they were not only somewhat doutfull of the matter,
but did wholly reject it as a mere fable. Moreover, when two of the disciples,
the name of the one being Cleopas, going to Emmaus, Christ did appear unto
them in the way, and though they knew him not at the first, yet at the last
their eyes were opened, so that they knew him perfectly, and so returning to
Jerusalem, said unto the eleven, The Lord is risen indeed: and so do avouch
it constantly with a note of asseuerance; and told them also, what was done in
the way, and how they knew him at the last: Mar. 16.^
They believed them neither. So that this case was not of Thomas alone, but of
all the rest, that we might see that the best servants of God of all, are
greatly pestered with these remnants of unbelief. That as David says, If
thou, Psalm. 13^^
O Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? that is, not the
best man in the world, much less such a wretch as I: So we may say, if these
holy men were so full of unbelief in this thing, no marvel, if such a poor
sinner as I am, stand doubtful and perplexed in many things: and as Christ did
succor them, I hope he will be merciful unto me, that desire to believe.

And it is very probable, that the rest of the Apostles in this unbelief of
theirs, were subject unto the same temptations that Thomas was, and had the
same thoughts to hinder the^ from believing, that he had: and namely, that they
spoke within themselves, as he did openly, though for shame they did not utter
it, as often it falls out, that many are afraid to utter their temptations,
they are so fearful and so strange, that they think, that none are
possessed with them, but themselves. But the Apostle tells the Corinthians,
that no tentation had taken hold of them, ^or. 10.13.
but such as appertains unto man; that is, which proceeds of man's
infirmity, and which man's nature is subject unto: that they might not be
discouraged, or despair for that, that he had said unto them. And therefore he
adds, that God is faithful, and would not suffer them to be tempted above
that, that they were able, but would give an issue with the temptation, that
they might be able to bear it: as he did here unto the rest of the Apostles,
and to Thomas himself.

And that they had indeed the same thoughts of unbelief that Thomas had, it
appears by the fact of Christ. For when he came among them, and they were
abashed and afraid, Luke 24.3
supposing that they had seen a spirit, he said unto them; Why are ye
troubled? and wherefore do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold mine hands, and
my feet, for it is my self; handle me, and see: and when he had thus spoken
he showed them his hands and his feet. So that Christ in showing them his
hands and feet, that so they might be rid of those thoughts and doubts, that
hindered them from believing; did manifestly show, that he knew the thoughts of
their hearts to be these, that unless they saw in his hands and feet the
print of the nails, they would not believe that it was he. Christ therefore
like a skillful physician of their souls did apply his medicine according to
their malady; and therefore when as at his first apparition he did show unto
them his hands and his feet, he doing all things in wisdom and to some good
purpose, did thereby declare, what thoughts of unbelief they were troubled
with.

If such holy men as these, who had so many means to help their faith, did
not sufficiently profit by them at the first; but were found thus incredulous:
then we may be assured, that unbelief is more deeply rooted in us, then we be
a ware of: and if after many means, and long continuance in the same we find
it in our selves more then we would, we must not too much suspect our selves,
as long as we are sorry for it, and do groan under it, as under an heavy
burden, desiring to be eased of the same. For indeed there is no sin in the
world, that has more infected mankind, then that: it came in with our first
parents even in Paradise, and it will continue as long as there is any man upon
earth: it is the first sin that possesses all men: and it is the last that
we must strive against: in so much that when we have overcome all other, then
will our unbelief most of all trouble us. And especially we shall find this to
be true in all afflictions, and in the hour of death: when the temptations of
pride, of vo^uptuousnes, of revenge, etc. shall ^eaue us, as having received
their ^eadly blow; then will unbelief, and ^istrust fall upon us afresh, as
though (...) had never been wounded, or never so much as incountred with.

For seeing that faith is, as the A^ostle calls it, Ephesians. 6.16.
A shield wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the devil: therefore
he labors most of all to pull it out of our hands altogether, or so to
weaken it in many things, that his darts may easily pearce through it into our
souls to destroy them: that is, his temptation may deceive us one way or
other. For as long as this shield of faith is whole, and we be able to hold it
out against our spiritual enemy, we shall prevail against him, whether he
tempts us unto any sin in time to come, or for any sin of the time past.
But if we let fall the shield of faith, or do not defend our selves with it;
we lie open to all temptations of Satan: that is, if we altogethe^ give over
faith, or fall to doubting o^ the truth of his word.

Adam and Eve were first over come by unbelief, and that was the cause of
their ruin: for the devil b^ disputing with the woman like a subtle
Sophister, brought her at the last to call into question the truth of Gods word,
and to say, Genesis 3.3.
Of the fruit of the tree, which is in the mids of the garden, God has said,
ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, least ye die: whereas the
Lord had said in express words before, chap. 2 17.
In the day, that ye shall eat thereof, ye shall die the death: that is, ye
shall assuredly die: which if they had steadfastly believed, they had not been
overcome of his temptation. So in all sin that we commit there is unbelief,
more or less; for if we fall by presumption, then we believe not his
threatenings; if by despair, then we believe not his promises. And justifying
faith though it principally looks to the promises of salvation; yet generally
it respects the whole lord of God. The manifold sins then that we see in
other, and do ^ommit our selves, do apparently show, how full of unbelief we
and the whole world is: for if we did believe God to be true in his
threatenings, and in his promises, we should be kept from sin.

Besides, when men are fallen into any sins, what is the cause that they do
not speedily repent them of the^, and so leave them, but only unbelief? For
if they did rightly believe either the promises of God, as, At what time soever
a sinner shall return from his sins, ^zek. 18.21.
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and shall not
die: all his transgressions, that he has committed, shall not be remembered, or
laid to his charge: they would presently repent, and leave their sins, that
they might be forgiven them. Or if they believed his threatenings; as, Kiss the
son, Psalm. 2.12.
least he be angry, and ye perish in the midde way, when his wr^th shall
suddenly burn, blessed are all that trust in him: they would speedily repent,
whiles mercy is offered; least God take them away before, or bring some great
judgment upon them. But contrary to the truth of Gods word (according to the
nature of vnb^leefe) they imagine some thing of their own head, wherein they
rest; and let all men say to the contrary, what they will, they will believe
none but themselves, and their own conceit.

As that, they shall do well enough though they continue in their sins: or
that they shall have time enough hereafter to repent them at their leisure: and
that they may repent them when they list, or some such like: of which there is
nothing promised in the word of God, but the clean contrary set down often and
very plainly. Therefore that men, when they have fallen into any sin, do so
easily continue in them, and either repent the^ not at all, or do it very
slowly, and that does bewray sufficiently, how full of unbelief they are.
Seeing therefore that it is so universally spread over all men, no marvel, if
the better sort do complain so much of it in themselves, and find it to be a
great deal more, then they would.

Agine, let us be in trouble, and want means to help our selves, and see if
we be not prone to distrust God? and so not to depend on his providence: but
rather to use unlawful means to help our selves: or to be too restles and
unquiet in the use of those that are lawful: and so either altogether to
forget to seek unto God by prayer: or else to do it very coldly, and with
little hope. Though God has said, Call upon me in thy trouble, ^sal. 50.15.
so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. ^ebr. 13.6.
And be contented with those things, that ye have, for God has said, I will
not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Heb. 6.31.
And first seek the kingdom of God; and his righteousness, and all things
necessary shall be ministered unto you: and a thousand such promises more: which
does show that unbelief possesses men every manner of way, and there is no
man in the world altogether free from it, though it be a great deal more in
some, then in other.

And to be short, when we are tempted unto any sin, we by lamentable
experience find, that we are too easily overcome, because we believe not Gods
threatenings, that he will assuredly punish it. And when we are tempted for any
sin, how soon are we ready to despair, because we believe not the promises
of forgiveness unto the repentant? So that this sin is found in the whole
course of our life: in so much that when we have overcome many other sins in
the first and second table; then we shall be either wholly overcome with
unbelief, or greatly polluted with it.

The Devil did greatly assault our Savior Christ with this, both in the first
entrance into his office, and also in the last discharging of it. First of all
in the wilderness, when he would by that long time of abstinence and want of
corporal food by the space of forty days, and forty nights, have
persuaded him, that God had forsaken him, and had no care of him: for then he
would have provided for him all this while: and therefore he must now shift for
himself, and if he could do any thing, he must show his power, If he be the
son of God indeed, ^ath. 4.3.
he must command that those stones he made bread. Secondly, when he was upon
the cross; for then they that passed by reuiling him, and wagging their heads,
^ap. 27.39.
said, If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross: and the Priests
also mocking him, said, He saved others, but he cannot save himself: if he be
the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross: so that they
concluded against him to the weakening of his faith, that God did not care for
him, because he did not presently deliver him.

Thus by tempting him to unbelief in the beginning, he sought to discourage
him from it: and by the same temptation of unbelief in the ending, to cause
him to give it over, before he had happily finished it. And after the same
manner the devil sets upon all the members of Christ: in the beginning of
their calling, he greatly buffeteth them with unbelief, and puts into them
many fears and doubts, that their sins shall not be pardoned; that so they
might as men tired in the combat, give over, and return to their old byas.
And before their death he terrifieth them again with fear, that they shall
not go to heaven, that so in despairing of so great a matter, they might give
over seeking it any longer. But Christ did overcome by the power of his Spirit
in those temptations of his, that by the same Spirit he might succor us in
ours. ^eb. 2.17.
And so in all things he was made like his brethren, that he might be
merciful, and a faithful high Priest to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people: for in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. As he did here in due season help the unbelief of the
Apostles, in showing unto them his hands, and his feet; but most of all his
weak and poor servant Thomas. For when he had said, ^^h. 20.25.
Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe: Then a
little after Christ appeared unto him, and said unto him, Put thy finger here,
verse. 27.
and see mine hands; and put forth thine hand, and put it into my side; and be
not faithless, but faithful.

But to proceed, the first degree of Thomas his unbelief appears in this,
that he did hear this often, and of diverse, that were very credible, and yet
he did not believe it: as first of all of diverse holy and godly women, Luke
24.^.
and namely of Marie Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Marie the mother of James, and
other women with them, who early in the morning returning from the sepulcher,
told the eleven that Christ was risen: and also he heard it again of Cleopas,
and an other disciple, verse. 33.
who told them, they had seen him, and spoken with him after his resurrection:
and now the third time he heard it of all his fellow Apostles, being ten in
number, all of them very credible, who did avouch it unto him upon their own
knowledge, and said, that they had seen him themselves. It was appointed in
the equity of the law, that in the mouth of two witnesses, ^eut. 19.15
or at the mouth of three witnesses, every matter should be established.
Therefore there was no color to discredit so many witnesses, especially
coming in to testify the same truth at several times. But herein appears
the nature of infidelity, which is, to cause us, though we hear the truth of
God witnessed unto us by sundry men, and at diverse times, not to believe any
one of them in diverse things, but only our selves. And though they be never so
grave, and reverend, and constant in auouching of it, and sound in proouing of
it, yet all shall be as we think, and say our selves, and not otherwise: and
thus they are wiser in their own conceit, ^^r. 26.16
then seven men that can render a reason. Whereby it comes to pass, that
they hinder themselves in their salvation: for though God send his servants
unto them, to tell them his will, they will believe nothing, but as they
conceive themselves.

And this though it be a great sin, yet it was not proper unto Thomas only,
but it was found in the rest of the Apostles at this present. And that we might
not wonder at it in the^ without any profit, we shall see it as deeply rooted
in our selves, and others: for this is but a looking glass to let us see our
own unbelief in. For how often have we heard one and the same truth
constantly delivered unto us by the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles? and
yet we do not believe them: we have sundry times heard them, and read them,
yea they have bin often preached unto us, and that by sundry of the faithful
ministers and servants of God; and yet we gi^e no credit unto them: and this is
too true, whether we look to Gods fearful threatenings, or his merciful
promises, both for this life, and the life to come.

How oftentimes, and by how many men have we heard, that unless we repent, we
shall all perish; and yet very few believe it, for they go on full in their
sin, and think that they shall do well enough. And that every tree, ^ath.
3.10
that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the
fire: that is, all wicked ones, that will not speedily amend their lives, shall
be cast into hell fire: and yet though they live never so wickedly, they think
to be saved, as well as the rest. And though a sinner do evil an hundred
times, ^ccles. 8.^.
and God prolong his days, yet it shall not go well with him at the last; yet
men think the contrary, that seeing they have escaped in one sin
unpunished, and the second, and third time, that therefore it shall go well
with them for ever: and they think, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 50.2^.
that because God holds his tongue, he is like them, and likes their ways
well enough.

Moreover, how often have we heard, and by how many, that he that is angry
with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of judgment: Matthew. 5.2
1. Ioh. 3.1^
and whosoever hates his brother is a manslaier: and yet men nourish these
evil affections in themselves, as though these sayings were utterly false. And
has it not often been sounded in our ears by men of great credit, That
neither adulterers, 1. Cor. 6.^
nor fornicatours, shall inherit the kingdom of God: but yet I would to God,
that the wicked lives of too many did not sufficiently bewray the thoughts of
their hearts, namly, that they did not only somewhat doubt of the truth of
this, but they think it to be a mere fable: and let men say what they will
against these sins, they will believe none but themselves: so wholly are
their hearts possessed with infidelity.

Yea let a man come, and deal with one in any sin of his, in which he is
settled, and denounce the judgments of God against him out of the truth of his
word: and let a second and a third man likewise preach the same unto him at an
other time: and he yet is resolute in himself, he knows as much of that
matter, as any man can tell him, he will believe none but his own deceitful
heart, and his own feeling; unless he feel the smart of it upon himself, he
will give no credit unto it: like unto the men of Sodom, who when righteous Lot
told them of fire and brimstone, that should come down from heaven upon them
for their horrible wickedness, they judged him to be an old doting fool, ^^n.
19.1^.
and would not believe it, until they saw it, and felt it themselves burning
about their ears, when it was too late.

By this infidelity, which is in us naturally, we are enemies to our own
salvation, in that we will not believe this part of Gods holy word, preached
unto us often by them, that are worthy of all credit. And this was ^he estate
of all of us, till God of his great mercy did reform us, and purge ^s of this
unbelief, that for the amendment of our lives, and repen^ing us of our sins,
that we might ^e saved, we would believe nothing of Gods judgments, and of
hell fire, though preached by many; but only ^uch things, as our blind reason
did ^erswade our false hearts of: and that ^e did stick fast unto, whatsoever
^hen said, and of never so many to the ^ontrarie. And the same unbelief
^emaineth still in us in measure in ^at part, that is unregenerate.

We must therefore examine our selves, that we may find it out, and pray to God
to help us against it, which no doubt he will, if we seek unto him, and be
desirous to be helped of it; as he did here his servant Thomas the Apostle. For
this story of his unbelief is written, to comfort all those that are fallen
into unbelief, and are desirous to be rid of it, and to believe, as this
Apostle was. But if men for want of due examination and trial of their own
heart, do^ presume of that, that is not in them* and so imagine that they
believe when they do not, or to have more faith then they have; they shall on^
day find, that their fantasy hat^ deceived them, and they shall be farr^ from
being helped in that, that the^ want. For many think that it is the^ easiest
thing in the world to believe when as indeed it is the hardest; an^ it is more
hard to overcome our reason in believing, then the affections of our heart in
doing: and therefore Christ says, The gate is strait, Math. 7.14.
and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

And that which has bin said of Gods judgments, it is true also of his
^romises, that there is as much vn^eleefe in us toward the one, as to^ards the
other. For how often have ^e read the same sweet and comfor^able promises of
God made for our ^ood: yea how often have they bin ^reached over and over
again unto ^s; and yet we rather not believe the^ ^t all, or not as we should.
Let us take ^ne for example. The Lord says by ^is Prophet, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day ^f thy trouble, so I will deliver thee: and who so
ever shall call on the ^ame of the Lord shall be saved. Joel 2.22.
Yet ^hen trouble and affliction comes, ^h how few do believe this to be
^rue? as appears by their practice; for how few or none at all almost do
seek unto the Lord by earnest and fervent prayer? and they that do, with how
little confidence and hope of being heard, do they practice it? which shows
howful of unbelief they are.

Few or none can say, as Solomon does, Prove. 18.10.
that the word of the Lord is their strong tower, and that they run to that, as
to their sure defense: or as David taught the people to say, Some trust in
chariots, Psalm. 20.7.
and some in horses, but we remember the name of the Lord our God; that this is
the first thing that they remember, as that that shall do them most good. But
prayer is either so wholly neglected, or men come to it so slowly, as it were
drawing their legs after the^, and last of all, as though they did no^ one whit
believe the promises thi^^ way made unto them.

Nay, which is more, if any com^ to them in their trouble, and tell the^ that
they have often found this to be true by experience in themselves: as David
does, The poor man cried, Psalm. 34.6.
and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles: yet we do not
believe that we shall find it to be true in our selves. Especially if God
defer us any while, we can give no credit to the truth of his promises,
until we see them verified in our selves: but we are ready to say, unless we
see and feel these things in our selves, we will not believe it.

Again, how often, and by how many have we heard this truth of God, Romans 8.28.
All things work together for ^he best unto them, that love God: that is, God
will turn all the afflictions of his people unto their good in ^he end: yet
when the least cross ^oth befall us, how are we dismayed, ^s though this were
false, because we ^oe not believe it? And if any shall then say unto us, be of
good comfort, bear it patiently, the Lord herein seeks your good, and you
shall come out of this affliction better the^ you were before; yet we think it
a matter impossible; yea, a mere fable: and that it is better for us to be
otherwise, and so we will not believe him: nor others, though they should come
immediately, and tell us the same upon good trial, that they found it to be so
in themselves, as Daui^ says, Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I hau^ been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes:
67.
and before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy word: and as
the Apostle Paul als^ says upon his own experience, and the rest of the
faithful in whos^ name he speaks, Romans 8.28.
We know, that al^ things work together for the bes^ unto them that fear God.
Not only I my self, but many others also do know this to be true. Which is as
if a skillful Physician should say unto his sick patient; take this potion,
though it be bitter, it is for your health, I have found the proof of it by
long experience: nay not only I my self, but all we Physicians do know it to
be so: and yet the patient would believe none of them, but himself. Oh what a
great note of infidelity is within us? how had we need to strive against it?

To be short, how often have we heard this promise of our Savior Christ; Math.
6 33.
First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all outward things
shall be ministered unto you: and that also of the Apostle Paul unto Timothy, 1.
Tim. 4.8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of this life,
and of that that is to come: yet let us be in any want, and it is a wonder to
see, how hardly or not at all we with cheerfulness depend upon Gods
providence, until such time as we can see, how to provide for our selves. Let
other men come, and say what they will, and what they have found by experience
in themselves, and in others concerning the truth of this, we do not almost
regard it, or take any comfort in it: so full of unbelief are we, and so
common a thing is it in the matters of God, to give credit to none but to our
selves: as the Apostle S. Thomas says of himself here.

Lastly, let us come to the matter of our salvation: Revel. 12.10
if Satan the accuse^ of the brethren, and our own conscience do set before
our eyes the remembrance of our sins, and press us somewhat therewith;
though we be heartily sorry for them, and do weep bitterly, Math. 26 75.
as Peter did at the remembrance of his fall, and do wish a thousand times that
we had never committed them, and thus travel and groan under the heavy burden
of them, as that that is able to press us down unto the bottom of hell, and
unfeignedly turn from them unto God, saying with David, Have mercy upon me,
Psalm. 51.1.
O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the multitude of thy
compassions put away mine iniquites: yet how hard a matter is it then to find
that in our hearts, which we say with our mouth, I believe the forgiveness of my
sins; especially in the day of temptation, and in the hour of death: though
we have oftentimes before heard the blessed saying of the Apostle, This is a
true saying, 1. Tim. 1.^
and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners: and that comfortable voice of our Savior Christ, Come unto me
all ye that are weary, Matthew. ^^
and laden, and I will ease you.

This then we see is no new thing, for men not to believe sundry parts of Gods
word brought unto the^ by the ministry of diverse of his faithful servants, by
reason of the great unbelief and hardness of heart that is in them: whereby it
comes to pass that their own understanding does more prevail with them to
distrust, then the testimony of many to believe. How then had we need to find
out this unbelief in our selves: which when we have done, we are not to judge
too hardly of our selves, seeing that it is so common: but only lament and
bewail it, and seek unto Christ to be helped of it, who is the author and
finisher of our faith: ^^^. 12.2.
and say with the Apostles, ^^^. 17.5.
Lord increase our faith: and with the man in the Gospel, ^^^ 9.24.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief.

And if there be such great streams of unbelief in Gods children, till they be
helped of it, what a bottomless sea, think you, is there of it in the wicked?
whereby it comes to pass, that they are filled with all atheism and
prophannes; casting the word of God behind their backs, so that let never so
many learned and godly men, witness the truth unto them for their amendment,
they will believe no more, then they have determined before hand with
themselves. Let us pray to God for them, that they may have better minds, even
desirous to believe; and then shall they be helped in time, as the Apostle S.
Thomas was. And for our selves, let us labor to have teachable hearts, that we
may reverence and give credit unto them, who in the mystery of our salvation
know more then we do: and have in the matter of faith a great deal more
experience then we our selves. That so it may come to pass, of what mind so
ever we have been before, that when Gods faithful servants, whom we should
esteem and trust, they shall tell us so and so: whether for Gods judgments,
or for his promises, or for the direction of our lives, we may believe, and
obey them. Then shall we come to faith, and be confirmed in it: ^^^. 1^.17.
for he that regards instruction, is in the way of life.

And if in other matters we think it reasonable, that we should believe those,
that have more knowledge the^ our selves; yea even clean contrary to that,
that we thought before: as for the matter of our health we believe many
skillful Physicians for the state of our bodies, and many expert lawyers for
the state of our lands and goods; why should we not then in matters of
divinity, and for the state of our souls, give more credit to many skillful
Divines then to our selves. Especially when as the general rule holds as
well in that, as in any other science: that every skillful man is to be
credited in his own art and faculty: our reason is more corrupt in this,
then in any other thing, and therefore there is more cause that we should
believe others, then our selves.

Therefore as in other matters, when we are doubtful, we confer with them
that have more skill and knowledge, and give credit unto the^ contrary to our
own thoughts, and we are ready to rely upon them rather then upon our
selves: So let us do in matters of faith, and let us not offer Gods servants
and our selves this great wrong, that we will believe all men in other things,
saving then in this. It is too much, that we have done it so often already,
let us not continue in it, that we should come to the Church, and hear Gods
word preached, and go away not believing it: and come again the next day, and
then depart away, as full of unbelief, as before: and thus from day to day,
and so still be of this mind, that whatsoever men say, we will believe none but
our selves, thinking that we have reason as well as they, and therefore unless
we can conceive it by reason, we will not admit it, whatsoever they say.

For faith is above reason, therefore we must believe the servants of God in
things, whereof we can conceive no reason: nay reason is against faith, and
there is nothing in us more to hinder us from believing, then to harken to our
own reason. ^or. 2.14.
For the natural man (by his best reason) perceives not the things of the
spirit of God: for they are foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them (by
his own wit) because they are spiritually discerned: that is, by a
supernatural inlightning of the sprit of God. So that matters of faith we can
not only not by reason comprehend the^, but they seem foolishnes unto all the^
that will no further give credit unto things, then they be demonstrated by
reason: which made the Apostles, when the women came from the sepulcher, and
told them that Christ was risen, not only not to believe them, but that their
words seemed unto the^ as a fained thing, Luke 24.11
and a mere fable that had no truth in it: and therefore Christ says in the
Gospel, Math. 16.
If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, that is, his own reason
most of all, that so he may believe others contrary unto it.

And this is that which is so highly commended by the spirit of God in our
father Abraham, Romans 4.1
that he above all hope (that reason could affoard him) believed under hope,
that he should be the father of many nations: for he considered not his own
body, which was now dead (that is, void of strength, and unmeet to get
children) being almost an hundred years old: neither the deadness of Sarahs
womb: neither did he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief; but was
strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God, being fully assured, that he
that had promised it, was able to do it: where we see, that renouncing his
own reason, which would have held him in unbelief, he rested upon the truth
and power of God, and so believed above that by reason could be showed him, or
he able to conceive: and so must we do also.

^^^. 11.3.
The Apostle says, that through faith we understand, that the world was
ordained by the word of God, and that the things which we see, are not made of
things which did appear: that is, that this great and beautiful frame of the
world was made of nothing, is a matter not to be comprehended by any reason,
but only by faith: which made not only the Epicures, but also some of the
wisest Philosophers, to hold, that the world was not eternal: for it was unto
them a principle in reason, that of nothing, ^omes nothing, neither can you so
multiply nothing, that there should come any thing of it. Therefore the
Apostle says, that he that will hold, that all these things, which we see in
^eauen and earth were made of nothing, he must believe it above all ^eason.

And who can by any reason con^eiue the truth of this article of our ^aith, The
resurrection of the body? that is, that these very bodies of ours, ^eeing
turned into dust and ashes, ^^e same in every part and member ^ould be raised
up again. Some of ^^e wiser sort of the Heathen did ac^^owledge the
immortality of the ^ule, and that there was a place of ^y for them that lived
well, and of pain for them that swarued from the rules of right reason, after
death. Bu^ that the same bodies of men should rise again, they did not so much
as once dream of it, because they could not comprehend it by any reason^
therefore in that matter we must believe others above all reason.

The like is to be said of alms, which has a promise of increase: so that by
giving to the poor we shall not loose any thing, but gain: which is a thing
contrary to reason, that the more a man should give away from himself, the
more he should inric^ himself: and therefore few do believe it, which makes
them covetous and hard hearted, and to be wi^^ling to depart from nothing,
lea^^ they should want themselves: and ^^ specially to be most hard hearted ^^^
their poor brethren in the times o^ scarsitie and want, when they should be
most liberal, and by that meane^ best provide for themselves: which S. Paul
was so fully persuaded of, that he does commend it unto us by an excellent
comparison, saying, 2. Cor. ^.^
He which sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly: and he that sows
liberally, shall reap also liberally. Where he compares alms unto sowing of
seed: the more a man sows, the more he reapeth by Gods blessing: the more a
man gives, the more he receives by Gods promise: the one we see by
experience, which makes me^ in the times of dearth and scarsitie, to sow most:
the other we comprehend by faith, which makes the believer in the hardest
times, to be most liberal. Thus we see, what unbelief is in us, in that we
give no credit unto others, any further then we can conceive a reason of it:
which is the same, that was in S. Thomas, and yet he was cured of it, and so
may we by the same grace of God, if we will learn this lesson; that in the
time of temptation we believe others above our selves: which if we do not, it
is the next way to remain in unbelief for ever: but if we can come unto this,
there is hope of us in time.

THe 2. degree of Thomas his unbelief, appears in this; that he would not only
not believe this, being thus often told him, diverse times, and by sundry
credible persons, but he will believe none but himself: for he says in plain
words, Except I see in his hands, the print of the nayls, I will not believe
it. Which is, as if he had said; you indeed tell me, that you have seen Christ
risen again, and so do diverse others; I have heard these things often; but I
have not yet seen him my self; what others have seen, that appertains not
unto me, unless I see him my self, I will not believe it. This therefore is
further to be considered, because sometime it falls out, that there is good
cause, why we should not believe a thing spoken often, and by many.

And if they be of any good credit, though there be no cause in truth to
suspect them, yet it may seem unto us, that there is some: and hereupon it
comes to pass, that some in their unbelief take exception against the
Preachers, and think that they have some cause, why they should not believe
the^ in the things that they have preached unto them, though in truth there be
none. But yet to be altogether of this mind, that S. Thomas was here in this
matter, that we will believe none in the world, but our selves, that seems to
be such a thing as wants all color of reason. And yet thus unreasonable is
unbelief, as we see most clearly in this example: for he says very
peremptorily, that unless I my self do see in his hands the print of the
nails, I will not believe it. He does not say, unless better men then you do
tell me so; or unless I hear more in number; or unless I hear better reason for
this matter, then I do yet, I will not believe it: but if all men in the world
tell me of it never so often, unless I see him mine own self, I will believe
none of them: which is, as if he had said, In this case I will believe my
self, and no body else.

We see then whether unbelief will drive us, if we give place to it, even that
we shall believe none but our selves. And indeed so it is in all sorts, in
whom it reigns, they will believe no more from any man, then they can
persuade themselves by their own reason: unto that they obstinatly stick
against all men: and so are not ashamed to say, I will believe none of you all;
I will believe mine own self, and further I will not be lead by any: no man
shall draw me to ^eleeue that, which mine own reason tells me not. And thus
they so much abound in their own sense through unbelief, that they persuade
themselves, that they have more reason for that they hold, then all other men
have for the contrary.

And so let men say never so much against that, which they have conceited
themselves, they still imagine, that they have some thing to say against it, and
some reason, why they should not believe them. And this is most true, not only
in matters of faith, but for life and conversation: which is the cause, both
that Papists and other heretics are so obstinately addicted to their errors;
and also wicked men so altogether wedded unto their sins; that neither the
one, nor the other can be reclaimed from them. And therefore when men have
said what they can, they will not give the^ over, for they have determined to
believe none but themselves: and of this mind will they be, till God rid
them of their unbelief: and then the saying of Christ shall be verified upon
them, Ioh. 20.29.
Blessed are they, that have not seen, and have believed: that is, they shall
believe others, besides themselves, and so blessed shall they be: as indeed
this is the way to faith, and so to blessedness, to distrust our selves, and to
believe the servants of God, speaking unto us in his name: of who^ Christ has
said, ^^ath. 20 40.
He that receives you, and your doctrine, receives me.

And that we might come unto this, we are to remember, that true faith yeildes
unto the bare word o^ God against our own reason; and so gives glory unto
God, Romans 4.20.
as the Apostle says, acknowledging, and reuerencing his truth, mercy, and
power, where we can see no reason o^ it, and so praising him for the same, and
resting in it. Which we see to be true in Abraham not only in the birth of
Isaac, which was beyond the course of nature, and so above all reason: but also
in the offering up of the said Isaac his son, whom he loved, and in whom he
received the promises, even that with him God would establish his covenant,
Genesis 17.^
and with his seed after him for ever: and therefore take away him, and take
away all, and the hope of all: and yet at the commandment of God, he was
contented to offer him up for a burnt offering in mount Moriah: which he did by
faith, chap. 22
as the Apostle says: Hebr. 11.
for he considered that God was able to raise him up eue^ from the dead: and so
he measured the performance of the promises of God, not by his own reason,
though never so great, but by the truth and power of God.

The like may be said of Noah concerning the building of the Arc, of whom it
is said; ^^rs. 17.
that by faith he being warned of God of the things which were not as yet
seen, moved with reverence, prepared the Arc to the saving of his household.
In which matter if he had consulted with flesh and blood, and conferred with
his own reason, he should never have undertaken so great a matter. For how
could he thereby imagine that all the world should be drowned except his
family, and that they should be saved, and all the rest perish: when by the
space of 120 years, he both preparing the Arc, and preaching their
destruction, not one man or woman would believe it, besides his own family of
eight persons; might not he have thought that he was deceived rather then they
all. And how could he have hope that four men should govern so great a
vessel, wherein should be male and female at the least of every living thing
upon the earth and in the air, with sufficient provision for them all by the
space of an whole year: and that not in the great Ocean sea, but when the
whole world was a sea. And where could he think ^o have means to take and
bring in all these fowls of the heaven, and beasts of the earth? and how could
^hey attend upon them all to feed them, and to do all things necessary unto
them? And many more things might be put into his head, to cause ^im to desist
from this work, as a thing impossible: and no doubt he ^as subject unto many
of these, and ^uch like temptations, but the Apo^tle shows us, how he
overcame the^ ^ll, even by faith: whose nature and ^ropertie is, to rely upon
the com^andement and promise of God a^oue all reason, and contrary unto ^t.

But on the otherside unbelief, which is contrary unto faith, that rests
wholly and only upon reason; in so much that unless they can see some reason,
how that may be done, that is said, and promised, they will not believe it,
they think it impossible, they reject it as an unreasonable thing. A most
lively pattern whereof we have in that great man of Samaria, in the days of
Ahab king of Israel: at what time by reason of the fiege of the king of Aram,
there was such an extreme famine, that women did eat their own children. ^.
king. 6.28.
Then the prophet Elisha did prophecy unto them great plenty on the sudden,
even the next day following. To whom this great prince, ^hap. 7.2.
on whose hand the king leaned, answered, and said, Though the Lord would make
windows in heaven, could this thing come to pass? as though he had said, this
is impossible, though the Lord shall rain down corn from heaven among us? for
he could not conceive ^y any reason, how either the siege should be so suddenly
raised; or if it ^ere, how it should come to pass, that corn being so
unreasonably ^eare to day, it should be so excee^ingly cheap to morrow. But
God verified his own word unto them at ^he time appointed, and this man saw it
with his eyes, but never tasted of it, because of his unbelief. For the king
appointed him to be governor, and to sit in the gate of the city, to see the
corn sold to the people, who so thronged, verse. 20.
that they troad upon him, and there he died.

The whole world is full of this unbelief, that they will believe no more then
their own reason persuades them unto: and that that goes against their reason
they are ready to cross it, though it be never so true. For how many are
there, that have set down with themselves, that whatsoever the Preachers say,
they have determined a course, which they think, they have good reason for: in
that they mind to continue, beyond that they will not go; they are so settled,
that out of it, they will not be removed; they hope they are not now to
learn, they are too old to be taught; they trust that they have not lived so
long for nothing; they have wit and reason as well as other men; and so that
that they have conceived they will stick unto, that course they have entered
into, they purpose to continue in, and in that they mind to live and die; and
this course they hold for doctrine both of faith and manners, for duties to God
and to men; and thus they will believe none but themselves, and their own
reason.

And thus though they come to the Church from day to day, they come not to
learn any thing, they have determined beforehand what they mind to do. They
will learn of no man, they can teach themselves sufficiently. Whereupon it
comes to pass, that though they daily hear their sins rebuked, they will
amend nothing; and the judgments of God denounced against them, they will
believe nothing: they think, they have better reason for their doings, then
any man can have against them. And if they be called upon to increase in
knowledge and godliness, and so to go on to perfection; they stand still at a
stay, and think it not necessary; they like well of their own doings, and no
man shall remove them from them, they will believe none but themselves:
unless I see reason for it mine own self, I will not believe you.

Thus through unbelief the word is choked in the greatest part of the
hearers, as our Savior Christ shows in the parable of the seed: and it
profits them not one whit, no more then it did the Jews, when it was
preached unto them, because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it.
^ct. 4.2.
And so that is the very cause, why in this long time of preaching, there has
bin so little good done, even the great unbelief that reigns in men every
where. Of which the Prophet Isai had too great experience in his time in them
to whom he preached, and does with great grief complain of it, when he cries
out thus pathetically, who will believe our report? and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? ^^a. 53.1.
meaning, that none would believe it, but those whose hearts God touched by his
holy Sprit. And thus by their doings men do too apparently show, that though
they do not utter it with their mouths, yet they say it with their hearts,
that let men say what they will, because as they think they have some reason
against it, they will believe none but themselves.

Let us labor to see this unbelief in our selves in any measure, that we have
it, and be sorry for it, and strive against it: and pray God to forgive us, and
help us. And that we might this way be helped, let us not be too much addicted
to our reason, and measure things by it: for our natural reason being
corrupt, it does not only not further us unto faith, but does sometimes hinder
us from it; not only because faith is of things above reason, but contrary
unto it. Therefore in the matter of our salvation we must be so far from
being addicted to our own will and reason, as that we must utterly deny it,
that we might believe: as the Apostle Saint Thomas should have done here: and
have said, though this that you tell me be a matter impossible in mine
understanding and reason, and I cannot possibly conceive how it should be: yet
because so many of you being of conscience to speak the truth, I believe it.

And thus did Abraham concerning the promise, which God had made unto him: ^om.
4.20.
for it is said, that he did not despise or reason against the promise of God
through unbelief: where these two are joined together as subordinate, and come
helping one the other, namely, reason and unbelief, and not reason and faith.
So that if we hearken to reason, it will cause us to doubt rather then believe:
and the next way to believe, is not to listen or give credit unto the disputes
and doubts that reason will minister unto us. For it is able to object many
things against that that we should believe: and therefore if we will be Christ's
disciples, we must deny no^ only all our sinful affections tha^ might draw
us from obeying, his doctrine, but our reason especially which might dissuade
from believing it. That when our reason shall tell us one thing, as that we may
continue in our sins a while longer, we may repent at leisure, and be saved
well enough: and that the way to heaven is not so straight, as men speak of
and then we shall hear the contrary out of Gods word daily, we must believe
that contrary to our reason, if we will be saved. For Thomas remaining in this
unbelief, he might have perished for ever, but that Christ had mercy on him
extraordinarily, and yielded unto his unbelief for the good of the Church;
that for his sake, he might show himself unto his Apostles after his
resurection another time.

Therefore first of all let us pray to God to sanctify our reason, and to
inlighten it by his holy spirit, that we may be capable of the mysteries of
word of God: Psalm. 119.18.
as David does, Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law. And
secondly when we come to hear, and read the word of God, let us bring these
minds with us, that what reason soever we seemed to have for our opinions and
doings before, when we shall hear the contrary avouched by the servants of
God, and proved out of the scripture, we give them over and credit them above
our selves. And let us renounce that reason of ours, that shall minister unto
us any thing against that that has been taught us out of the Scripture, and
not harken unto it. For if we should hold the Angels of Go^ accursed, ^^al. 1.8.
if they deliver any thing to us contrary to the written word of God: then much
more should we accurse and deny our own reason, that should suggest any thing
unto us contrary to the same: and let us no^ after so long time of preaching be
still of this mind, that we will believe none but our selves.

A Third degree of the unbelief of S. Thomas appears in this, that he says,
Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it. For,
as though it had not been sufficient that he had said, that he would believe
none of them; nor any other that should tell him as much as they did: he would
believe none but himself: he further adds, that unless he might see in his
hands and feet the print of the nails, and put in his finger into them, he
would not believe it. Which is as if he had said, if I may not only see
himself, as you say you have done: but may be sure of it, and therefore may
also see in his body these marks, that he had on the cross, and especially if
I may come so near unto him, that I may feel the^, and put my finger into
them, I will believe it; otherwise I will not. So that he will no further
believe, for all their sayings then his outward senses shall persuade him; and
namely, his sight and feeling: if I may see and feel, I will believe, and till
then I will not believe.

O wonderful infidelity: especially in one that was so near Christ, and had
been so long time conversant with him. For what if Christ had never appeared
unto him, nor unto any other of the Apostles? was it not sufficient unto them,
that he had often before in their hearing said; that he should be put to
death, ^atth. 16.31. ^^ap. 17.9. ^^d 26.32.
and the third day rise again: And that they were charged to show no man that
vision which they saw upon the mountain, until he was risen again from the
dead: and after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galile. Should
they not have been left without excuse in their unbelief? Seeing they had
heard it from his own mouth so often before his death: and now after his
resurrection diverse credible women did tell them that they had seen him risen
again, according as he had often told them.

Besides, if he were of that mind, and thought that he had good reason for it,
that he would not believe, unless he did thus see and feel him why may not
other be of the same mind too? and so Christ should have remained upon the
earth unto this day, and not have ascended into heaven: or else often since he
should have descended to show himself to those that should believe: if none
would believe further then they should see and feel. Moreover after that he
had thus seen him and felt him himself, would he not have thought it strange,
if others would not have believed him, when he preached unto the^ the
resurrection of Christ? why then does he make such a straight rule to himself?

Surely that in him we might see a pattern of that great weakness that is in
us, and how full of unbelief we be: and a lively example of the great mercy
of Christ in bearing with sinners in the same: and by all means putting them
out of the same in time, that they might be saved.

And why does he say thus rather then any thing else, Except I may see and
feel, etc. Are these two senses such sure judges of the truth, that they
cannot be deceived? May not a man think, that he sees and feels that, which
he does not? and may he not again doubt, whether he seeeth and feels that,
which indeed he does? How came it to pass that when Elisha had caused water
to come miraculously into a valley of the wilderness, for the Kings of Israel, of
Judah, and of Edom, that the Moabites when as early in the morning the sun
rose upon the water, and they saw the water as red as blood over against
them; they said, This is blood: the kings are surely slain, and one has
smitten an other: but when they came to the host of Israel they found it
otherwise. And as the sight of these men deceived them, so did the feeling of
Isaac deceive him in his old age. For his son Iaakob coming unto him in the
person and habit of his elder brother Esau to receive the blessing: when he
felt the roughnes of his neck and hands, which Rebekah had covered wi^h
skins, he judged by his feeling that it was Esau. For he said, Come near my
son, that I may feel thee, whether thou be my son Esau or no; and when he
had felt him he said, The hands are the hands of Esau.

Thus we see that sight and feeling may easily be deceived: and yet this is
the nature of unbelief, to give credit more unto these deceivable senses,
then to many other things, that are most sure and certain. And many men in
matters of faith will almost believe nothing, until such time, as they see and
feel them: and therefore when they are taught what in heaven is prepared for
them that serve God; what in hell for them that disobey him: they are ready to
say, who has seen them? giving us to understand, that they will not believe
them, until they either see them, or feel them themselves. Was not this
unbelief universally spread over the face of the whole world before the flood,
when Noah the pr^^cher of righteosnes declared unto the the judgment of God,
that should come upon them for their sins; and namly, that God would bring a
flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh wherein was the breath of
life under the heaven, because all flesh had corrupted his way, and the earth
was filled with cruelty; and thus he continued preaching an hundred and twenty
years: But none of them believed it though they saw him also all this while
preparing the Arc for the saving of himself and his family. And therefore
they continued still in their impenitencie, and in their sins, till the flood
came and took them all away. And so they said to Noah, some in their thoghts,
some in their words, as Thomas did here in an other case to the Apostles: You
say that the world shall be drowned, but except we see the rain come in such
measure, and feel it, we will not believe it.

And was not the like infidelity afterward in all the men of Sodom where just
Lot lived, and was vexed with their uncleanly conversation: for which he
denounced Gods judgment against them: and at the last by special revelation
of the Angels that were sent unto them, he said unto his sons in law which
had married his daughters, Arise, go out of this place, for the Lord will destroy
this city; but he seemed to his sons in law as though he had mocked. Thus
they would not believe it, because they saw it not, nor any likelihood of it,
till fire and brimstone came down from heaven, and fell upon them, and
consumed them. And so they being condemned, and the city overthrown, they
were made an example unto them that after should live ungodly, and which would
not believe the truth of Gods judgments against sin in the mouths of his
servants any further then they shall see and feel themselves.

Thus we see how common this is among all unbelievers, so far as infidelity
prevails with them, that they will believe nothing that is threatened against
sin any further, then they see and feel it themselves. When in the famine of
Samaria there was exceeding great plenty against the next day promised by
Elisha the Prophet, did not one of the Princes say; when I see it, I will
believe it, and not before. Whereupon this answer was given unto him, Behold,
thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not eat thereof. And so
unbelief discredits not only the threatenings, but the promises, except they
can see them with their eyes, and feel them with their hands: of which we
shall speak more afterward.

Does not S. Peter say, that there shall come mockers in these last days, which
will walk after their lust, and say, where is the promise of his coming? for
since the fathers died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the
creation. Wherein he shows how men through unbelief will make a mock of
Christ's second coming, and of the end of the world, and of the day of
judgment: because with their eyes they do not see any such thing likely to
come to pass: when they shall see some great alteration in heaven and in earth
bending that way, they will believe it, and no sooner, nor any further.

And we find by experience the truth of this daily in many, that they will
believe nothing of this matter any further, then they can see themselves. And
our Savior Christ in the Gospel has foretold, and forewarned us of this, when
as he says: As it was in the days of Noah, ^^k. 17.26.
so shall it be in the days of the son of man: they eat, they drank, they
bought, they sold, they married wives, and gave in marriage, unto the day that
Noah went into the Arc, and the flood came and destroyed them all.

Likewise also, as it was in the days of Lot, they eat, they drank, they
planted, they built: but in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire
and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all: after these insamples shall
it be, when the son of man shall be revealed: that is, not only it shall
come suddenly and all things shall continue in their ordinary course: but men
shall then give themselves to all pleasure and worldlines: and shall neither
believe it, nor think of it, till it come: as the men of the old world did
not: of whom the Evangelist S. Matthew says, that they knew nothing, till the
flood came and took them all away: so shall also the coming of the son of
man be. They knew nothing, not that they had not heard of it, for Noah did
preach unto them an 120. years before: but they did not believe it, nor regard
it, because they saw it not: even so shall it be toward the end of the world:
though they have heard of these things an hundred times, yet they will know
nothing til they see it.

And not only this sin reigns in the wicked, that they will believe no
more of the promises and threatenings; of the joys of heaven, and pains of
hell, then they can see and feel themselves: and so because they do neither of
them yet, they will believe none of them; let men say what they will, and never
so long: and so they go on in their sins, and live thereafter: which is
greatly to be lamented. But also if we will examine our selves, and other men,
we shall find, that this was in our selves, and in them, til^ the Lord had
mercy upon us. That though we had often heard that God was just, and would
punish sin, ye^ we presumed otherwise, and did not believe it, because we
escaped a while in our sins, and did not see and feel the truth of it in our
selves: and by that means went on, and were hardened in our sins. And so
that was verified in us, as well as in others, which the Lord complains ^f by
his Prophet; Psalm. 50.21.
These things have ^hou done, and I held my tongue: therefore thou thoughtest
that I was ^^ke thee: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thee.

And thus not only before our cal^^ng, infidelity did wholly bear ^^e sway in
us: but also since that time great remnant of it still remains (...) us: so
that in many things we will ^eleeue no further, then we see, and ^ele,
especially in the time of temp^^ion: for if we be in any great trou^^e, Job
and then if there be a messenger God sent unto us, or an interpreter ^his
word, one of a thousand, as Elihu calls him: who shall bid us be of good
comfort, and put our trust in God, he will help us and deliver us in his good
time: and declare unto us many promises of his word, to that end. We then, if
we want means to help our selves, we are ready to say, O but I see not how,
and which way that should be. So that if we did presently use the promised
help that we might feel it, or had means to bring it to pass, that we might
see it, we say, we would believe it, or else not. S^^ our faith goes no further
to comfor^ us, then our senses of seeing and feeling. And this is too true, in
what affliction soever we be, either of poverty, sickness, or any other
distress.

And this unbelief of ours is (...) much the more dangerous and the more
deeply rooted in us, becau^^ though we have had experience (...) Gods goodness
toward our selves i^^ time past, wherein we may remember how he has helped
and delivered us beyond all that we could foresee, or have any hope of: yet at
another time we trust him and his word, no further then we can see our selves.
Thus the people of Israel doubted of the power of God, whether he would give
them flesh in the wilderness according to their desire, though they ^ad seen
his power before in giving ^he^ water out of the hard rock: whereof David
speaks after this manner, They temped God in their hearts, Psalm. 78.18.
in ^equiring meat for their lust: they ^pake against God also, saying, Can
God prepare a table in the wilderness? Behold, he smote the rock, that the
^ater gushed out, and the streams ^uerflowed: can he give bread also? ^^r
prepare flesh for his people? Where he aggrauateth their sin ^f infidelity,
in that they seeing before how he beyond all hope brought water plentifully out
of the rock to supply their want, they did now doubt that they should have no
flesh, though Moses had promised it unto them from God, because they could not
see how in the wilderness such abundance should be prepared for so great a
people, that every one might have enough.

And we our selves are subject to the like, not only in these outward things,
and are therein too much mislead, because we rely wholly upon our outward
senses: but also in the matter of our salvation, therein our unbelief does
especially show it self, so that we can hardly or not at all believe any thing
beyond our sense and feeling. For when we are humbled under the weighty hand
of God with the sight of our corruption and sins, and have the feeling of
Gods wrath upon us for them in any measure: the^ though we hear the
comfortable promises of the gospel made to all that unfeignedly turn from them:
Romans 8.1.
As there is no condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Esa. 1.16.
And if you will inwardly walk and make your selves clean from them, and take
away the evil of your works from before your eyes; cease to do evil, and
learn to do good: though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made
white as snow: though they were red as scar^et, they shall be as white as wool:
that ^s, if you leave the^, I am ready to forgive them, though they be never
so many: and then we find by the grace of God, that we utterly detest them, and
are weary of them, as of an im^ortable burden, and have cast them ^way from us,
as a filthy cloth: yet because we see not the light of Gods ^ountenance
shining clearly upon us, and have not the feeling of his love powered into our
hearts, we cannot believe the pardon of them, as we ought. And unto all the
promises, that are brought for our comfort, we are ready to object: alas, we
have no feeling of that, that is said unto us. Which is as if we should thus
speak; you say thus and thus unto me, but I can have no comfort in it: for
unless I see it, and feel it, I will not believe it. Which unbelief though it
be very great, yet Christ Jesus does bear with them a while in it, and help
them of it in due season, as he did his servant Thomas the Apostle here.

And truly as the Devil did by Gods permission thus far prevail with the
Apostle S. Thomas that he was brought to this straight, that without sight and
feeling he would not believe: So with this one temptation of his he has so
mightily prevailed against many of the best servants of god, that he has
brought them to a very low ebb, even almost to their wits end. For besides
that he has driven them to this extremity, which is very great, that they will
believe no more of Gods favor toward them, then they can see and feel in
themselves: he has gained this also at their hands, which is much more: that
because they have no feeling, therefore they say they have no faith: as though
these two were both one, feeling and faith; or as though they were always
necessarily joined together.

And hereupon have come the great complaints and outcries, which some of them
have made against themselves, in the time of their trouble: and not only of
those, who have grossly and apparently fallen into some sin, and therefore
there was some manifest cause of it: but of those also which have lived
blamelesly, neither have been tainted with any great sin: And yet both of
them in the time of their temptation have uttered many bitter words against
themselves; as that they are altogether out of the favor of God; that they are
not in the number of them that shall be saved; they have no part in Christ;
they are none of Gods children, and such like. And why so? for say they, they
have no sight and feeling of the favor of God in themselves, and therefore
they have no faith, neither can have: for except they have some feeling in
their hearts, they cannot believe.

And this temptation has lien upon the conscience of some more heavily, and of
others less: upon some longer, upon others shorter time: even as it has
pleased the Lord either in wisdom to try the one, or in mercy to succor the
other. This was that that did so oppress David, as appears in many Psalms,
that he was almost in despair of himself: when he said, Psalm. 13.1.
How long will thou forget me for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from
me? and will the Lord absent himself for ever? and 7^.7.
and will he show no more favor? is his mercy clean gone for ever? and does
his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be merciful? and has he
shut up his tender mercy in displeasure: and, My God, my God, and 22.1
why have thou forsaken me? and art so far from my health, and from the voice
of my roaring? I cry by day, but thou hear not: and by night, but have no
audience. And thus he continued, till it pleased God for our instruction and
comfort to give him victory; partly by considering the former merciful
dealing of God toward himself and others; partly by meditating upon the
constant truth of his promises, which made him at the last trust unto him, and
depend upon him without any present help or feeling. And thus he ends the
38. Psalm, which he made to put himself in remembrance of some great
affliction of God, that was upon him, and therefore intitles it a Psalm of
remembrance: ^^al. 38.
in which are many grievous complaints both of his sins, and of the
punishment of them, without any feeling of present help and comfort; only he
says, that he would wait upon God, ^^s. 15.
hoping that he would show himself favorable in time, though he had no
present feeling of it. And so must we do in the like case. But in the mean
season we see, that this measure of unbelief, that was in the Apostle S.
Thomas, that he would believe no more, then he could see and feel, is and has
been in others also, and that all of us are subject unto it more or less.

But that we may arm our selves sufficiently against this grievous temptation,
and comfortably support our selves, when we shall fall into it; we must
consider that faith and feeling are not only not all one, nor always joined
together: but also that they are many times severed in the children of God: so
that there is faith, where there is not, nor ca^ be any present feeling: yea,
that the greatest faith sometimes is, where there is no feeling at all. And to
this end we must remember, what the Apostle says of the nature of faith, It
is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things, which
are not seen. Where he says, that faith is of such things, as we see not, and
of those things which are but hoped for, and we as yet have not the present
possession and feeling of them, and yet we believe them. And this he proves
by most excellent examples, when as first of all he adds, Through faith we
understand, ^ers. 3.
that the world was ordained by the word of God: so that the things which we
see are not made of things which did appear: that is, we know by faith, that
the whole world was made of nothing, and this verily we believe: but who did,
or ever could see this? Therefore we do, and must believe that which we have
not, neither can see: and so we have the knowledge of it by faith, and not by
sight.

^^rs. 7.
Secondarily, he thus speaks there of the faith of Noah: that he being warned
of God of the things, which were as yet not seen, moved with reverence
prepared the Arc to the saving of his household. Where two things are noted,
that he believed that which he could not see: 1. that all the world should be
drowned for their sins: 2. that by repentance and faith himself had found
favor with god, and should be saved in the waters: and therefore he made the
Arc according to Gods commandment long before he saw the flood, or any toke^
of it, that he might be saved in it. And so he believed the judgment of God to
come upon the wicked, and salvation promised himself, though he could not see,
nor have any present feeling of either of the^. And this is that operation of
faith which it must have in us; even to cause us to believe both the
threatenings of gods judgments against impenite^t sinners, and the promises of
salvation to the^ that walk before him in truth, though we have no present
sight or feeling either of the one, or of the other. For we must consider the
constant truth of Gods word, both in his justice and mercy, which in time
shall be verified, though for the present there be no visible signs and tokens
thereof to be seen or felt of our selves, or any other.

The third example is of Sarah the mother of us all: of whom it is said, that
through faith she received strength to conceive seed, verse. 11.
and was delivered of a child, when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful which had promised. When a man child was first promised unto her,
being both old and barren; as long as she measured things by sight and
feeling, she believed not this, neither could: ^en. 18.11.
For she saw, that it ceased to be with her after the manner of women,
therefore she laughed at it within her self, as at a thing impossible: for
which she was reproved with these words, Shall any thing be hard to the Lord?
But when she gave over consulting with reason, she believed not only
without, but clean contrary to all sense and feeling: for she looked only
to this, that he was just and true, who had promised it unto her: and by this
faith was made fruitful. So in matters of faith we must not look what we see
and feel in our selves, or in any means to effect them; but what God has
promised, and how faithful he is to perform.

And so did Abraham, of whom it is written, Genesis 15.5.
that the Lord brought him forth, and said, Look up now to heaven, and tell
the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy
seed be: and Abraham believed the Lord. And the Apostle commends this faith
in him so much the more, because he considered not his own body, Romans 4.1
which was now dead; (that is, void of strength and vigor to get children)
being almost an hundred year old: neither the deadnes of Saras womb, who was
both aged, and barren. Both which if he had looked unto, he could have had no
sight or feeling of that, that was promised: for they were directly against it.
But he gave this glory to God, verse. 2^^.
that he was fully assured, that he that had promised it, was able to do it:
and so above hope, he believed under hope, that he should be the father of many
nations, according to that which was spoken unto him, So shall thy seed be.
And so he believed that, which he neither had, nor could have any present
sight, or feeling of.

Thus both Abraham and Sarah believed that, which they could have no feeling of
in themselves: and so must all the sons of Abraham, and daughters of Sarah.
And thus to do is not only faith, but the greatest faith. For if they could
have seen how this might have been done: and have felt such strength in their
bodies, that they might perceive it very likely by the course of nature; then
it had been no great matter to believe it: nay it had been great infidelity
not to believe it. So for us to believe the promises of God, when we may see
and feel, how they may be performed, that is a matter of no moment: but when
all things go against them, and we have no sight or feeling at all in our
selves, of that that is said unto us: then to believe God, and to give this
glory unto him, that he is able to perform it, is a matter of great faith. And
therefore here it is said of Abraham, not only that he believed, but that he
was not weak in faith: verse. 1^.
that is, very strong and constant in faith. So that the Spirit of God
commends this in him, as an high degree of faith, that he believed without
sight or feeling: to show us that faith is so many times severed from feeling,
that it is the^ the strongest, when we constantly believe that, which we
neither see, nor feel, but wait upon God for them both.

And this is that, which was in our Savior Christ also: who though he did
always put his trust in his father, and was sure that he loved him: and his
faith this way was as precious and pure as gold: yet it did most of all show it
self in his full strength, when he came to suffer upon the cross: when it was
so many ways assaulted, that contrary to all sense and feeling he remained
constant, and so overcame: to succor all those, that shall be oppressed with
the temptations of unbelief, because they have no feeling. For when things did
lie so heavy upon him, he being then to bear all our sins and corruptions,
and in them to appear before God his father, and to answer for them; yea, to
satisfy his wrath by enduring the full punishment of them: first of all it is
written of him, that he began to wax sorrowful, ^ath. 26.37.
and grievously troubled in his mind: and this grief was so deadly, that he
was not able to contain it in himself, but did bewray it with most lamentable
words unto his Disciples, that he might have comfort from them; saying, verse.
38.
My soul is very heavy unto the death, tarry ye here, and watch with me: and
then because his grief was not assuaged; 39.
he fell upon his face down to the ground, and prayed, saying, O my father, if
it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And thus he prayed the second and
third time. And that it might appear, what uncomfortable striving he had in
himself all this while, not only with death; but with the fearful judgment
of his angry father; it is further added, that he fell into a great agony,
Luke 22.^
and distraction of mind, whereby all his body was distempered, so that for
anguish his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the cold ground.

And at the last when he was upon the cross, he was further assaulted with
temptations from the speeches of men, even his enemies, which reviled him,
^ath. 27.39.
wagging their heads, and casting out many opprobrious speeches against him, 40.
saying, If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross: he trusted in
God, let him deliver him, if he will have him: for he said, I am the son of
God. Whereby his discomforts and discouragements for our sakes, were so
increased, that at the last he brast forth into these most lamentable words, 46.
and as the Evangelist says, straining as it were all the parts of his body,
and powers of his spirit, he cried with a loud voice; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? All this while what present sight and feeling could he have
of Gods favor? when as not only all things outwardly did show, but his words
also did abundantly declare, that inwardly he felt the contrary.

Therefore his faith was now the greatest, as it was meet it should be, to
encounter and overcome so many and great temptations: when as contrary to all
these things, which he saw and felt, he not only prayed most earnestly unto his
father, and continued therein, praying three times the same words, with such
feruencie of spirit, that being upon the cold ground, he sweat water and
blood: and he prayed in faith; Heb. 5.7.
For when he did offer up those prayers and supplications with strong crying
and tears unto him, Luke 22.4
that was able to save him from death, he was heard in the thing which he
feared; and God sent an Angel unto him from heaven to comfort him. Whereby he
came to this resolution of mind, that he quietly submitted himself in these
his sufferings unto the will of his father; saying, Abba, father, Mark. 14.
all things are possible unto thee: take away this cup from me: nevertheless,
not that I will, but that thou will be done. And being now at the point of
death, and in the midst of all his sufferings, and in the height of his
temptations, that it might appear that he had overcome all, ^^k. 23.46.
he cried out with a loud voice, straining himself to the uttermost, when life
was almost out of his weak and painful body, Father, into thine hands I
commend my spirit; and when he thus had said, he gave up the ghost, and
quietly died. Which words of his being uttered with great zeal, did show the
excellency and perfection of his faith; especially if we consider in what case
he was then: and so his faith was the greatest, when he had the least feeling.

And thus no doubt the servants of God in their several afflictions of body
and mind, and otherwise are in measure made like unto Christ: when as having
nothing, that by any sight or feeling, inward or outward, might minister unto
the^ any comfort, and therefore in such cases they are greatly discouraged and
cast down in themselves; yet they hold out constantly in them to the end:
then the more like they are unto Christ in his sufferings, the more like shall
they be unto him in his glory. For then is their faith the greatest, when in
this forlone estate of theirs (as it may seem) they can pray unto God as
Christ did, and seek for all help and comfort from him: and never leave
praying till God hear them, as Christ continued in his prayer, till an Angel
was sent unto him. And in the mean time whatsoever becomes of them, they with
a quiet and meek spirit resign up themselves wholly to his blessed will,
being contented whatsoever they desire, that not their own, but Gods will may
take place: as Christ did, when he said, Father not mine, but thy will be done.

And if they do so, that that affliction present, of what nature and kind
soever, shall make an end of the^, they can quietly and peaceably commend their
souls and bodies, even themselves wholly living and dying into his blessed
hands; as Christ did also upon the cross, when he was ready to give up the
ghost: being persuaded, that nothing ever perished that was committed unto his
custody: according as he says himself, Those that thou gave me, ^oh. 17.12.
have I kept, and none of them is lost, but the child of perdition; that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. If we can thus do, though all this while we have
no feeling of any present comfort, yet it may be truly said unto us as it was
to the woman of Canaan, who with many discouragements, and without all sight or
feeling of any favor from him, pursued our Savior Christ with her prayers,
and would not give over, or take any repulse, O woman, great is thy faith: and,
O man, Math. 15.2^
great is thy faith, that do thus, whosoever thou art.

And we have a worthy example of the truth of this in one of the Martyrs, of
our own country, and in the memory of man, as it is largely set out by M. Fox
in his laborious work of the Acts and Monuments of the Church. The effect of
which story shortly is this: M. Robert Glouer of Couentry gentl. and Master of
Arts in Cambridge, was in the reign of Q. Mary, with many the servants of God
by the malicious practices of the Papists apprehended, and brought before the
Bishop of the Diocese for his faith and religion, and after examination he was
sent to prison: where he received great comfort from the Lord from time to
time; and as his afflictions did increase, so did the comforts of the Lord
abound; till at the last by the permission of God, for his further trial and
comfort, the Devil did greatly assault him in prison by the consideration of
his unworthiness to be counted in the number of those, that should suffer for
Christ's sake: which temptation of the enemy, though he did constantly resist
at the first; yet after that he was condemned to death by the Bishop, and was
at the point to be delivered out of this world, it so happened, that two or
three days before the time of his burning, his heart being lumpish, and
destitute of all spiritual consolation, and feeling of gods favor, he felt in
himself no aptnes or willingness, but rather an heaviness and dulnes of spirit,
full of much discomfort to bear that bitter cross of Martyrdom, ready now
to be laid upon him.

Whereupon he fearing himself, least the Lord had utterly withdrawn his
woonted favor from him, made his moan to one M. Austen Bernher a minister,
and a familiar friend of his: signifying unto him, how earnestly he had prayed
day and night unto the Lord, and yet could receive no motion, nor sense of any
comfort from him. Unto whom the said Austen answering again, willed and
desired him patiently to wait the Lords pleasure, and howsoever his present
feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just and true, he exhorted him constantly
to stick to the same, and play the man: nothing misdoubting, but the Lord in
time would visit him, and satisfy his desire with plenty of consolation.
Whereof (he said) he was right certain and sure, and therefore desired him,
whenever any such feeling of Gods heavenly mercies should begin to touch his
heart, that then he would show some signification thereof, whereby he might
witness with him the same: and so departed from him.

The next day, when the time came of his martyrdom, as he was going to the
place, and was now come to the sight of the stake: although all the night
before praying earnestly to God for strength and courage, he could find none,
neither had any sight or taste of the favor of God in himself, suddenly he was
so mightily replenished with Gods holy comfort, and heavenly joys, that he
could not smother it in himself, but cried out clapping his hands to Austen,
and saying on this wise, Austen, he is come, he is come, etc. and that with
such joy and alacrity, as one seeming rather to be risen from some deadly
danger, to liberty of life, then one passing out of this world by any pains
of death. Here we see that great was his faith, when he was willing to give his
body to be burnt for the testimony of Christ, and was now going to the stake
to that end, though he had no feeling of Gods favor then by any joys that he
felt in himself. He could never have suffered thus for the truth, if he had no
faith: if then he had died in this case without the sense of any special
comfort, he must needs have died in the faith of Christ for which he did
suffer: and so he should have had faith, yea very great faith, not only
living, but dying without any sense or feeling.

But I will come unto an other example, which though it be far more ancient in
time, yet is better known unto us, as being recorded in the holy Scripture.
The patience of Job as it is set down as a pattern, and commended to all men
to follow, so none can doubt of his faith also, but that it was very great:
When he is thus nu^bred among the faithfullest men that have lived upon the
face of the earth. When the land sins against me by committing a trespase,
Ezec. 14.13.
then will I strech out mine hand upon it, and though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job were among them, they should deliver but their own souls by
their righteousness; says the Lord God. When all that misery came upon him,
that we read of in the Scripture: as that in one day he lost seven thousand
sheep, Job 1.3.
three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred she asses:
and all his sons and daughters died a violent death after a strange manner;
and in his own body he was smitten with sore boiles from the sole of his
foot, unto the crown of his head. And he being in this pitiful case, all
friends did forsake him; yea they tha^ were younger then he did mock him, chapter
30 1.
and they whose fathers he refused to set with the dogs of his flocks And his
men servants and maids took him as a stranger, chapter 10. 16.
and though h^ called them, they would not answer him; though he prayed them
with his mouth: and his breath was strange unto his wife, though he prayed her
for the childrens sake of her own body. And three of his pricipall friends did
set themselves against him, and by their reasoning did greatly discourage him,
as though he had been an hypocrite all the days of his life, and that his
holiness of life was but in show, and not in truth. And he had no rest neither
night nor day, for when he laid himself down, he said, When shall I arise:
chapter 7.4.
and so measuring the evening, he was weary with tossing too and fro, unto the
dawning of the day. Neither was he quiet waking nor sleeping: for when he said,
my couch shall relieve me, 13.
and my bed shall bring comfort in my meditation, the lord feared him with
dreams, and astonished him with visions.

Now when all these things came upon him at once, whereby his estate was more
miserable, then I have expressed, or you are able to conceive, what sense and
feeling could he possibly have of Gods favor, either inward or outward, when
all things thus went against him? yet now his faith was at the highest, and did
show it self in the greatest measure, when he uttered this most excellent
saying, Lo, ^^^. 13.15.
though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. So that he would not give over his
trust and confidence in Gods goodness, though he should proceed further against
him unto death. And most of all when he further adds, I am sure, ^^k 19.25.
that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth; and though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God in my flesh:
whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
though my raines are consumed within me. So that though he died in that case
without all outward comfort, or inward feeling, yet he would put his trust in
God: having the testimony of a good conscience, and relying upon the promise of
God made concerning the resurrection of his body, and life everlasting in the
world to come.

Thus then we ought to be so far from being discouraged in our selves for
want of the sight and feeling of inward comforts, as though therefore we had
no faith; as that when they shall be altogether taken from us for a while,
though very long, and many years: yet if we can then hold out in a godly life,
and not give over a good conscience, as Job did; and if we still call upon the
name of God, and stay upon his promises ^n life and death, though we do not
^et enjoy them: all the world shall ^hen witness for us, that our faith is
exceeding great, though we our selves be not able to see it, neither can be
persuaded of it. For as when the sun shines most clearly, and men do see
the brightness of it, and do feel the scortching heat of it, then it is an
easy matter to believe, and to say confidently, there is a sun in the
firmament: even children and those that are of mean capacity, are able to say
so, and do believe as much, and have such a full persuasion of it, that if all
the world should tell them the contrary, they would not believe them, neither
could they possibly doubt of it, their sight and feeling did sufficiently
instruct them. But when the clouds shall cover it, or in the night both the
light and heat thereon shall be taken away; then to be full^ persuaded, that
the sun is still i^ the heavens, and that it has lost nothing of the light
and heat of it; tha^ is a matter of a deeper conceit, an^ more experience.

Even so when the testimonies of Gods favor and love are so many and great,
and so plentifully upon us, both outwardly and inwardly, that they may easily
be seen and felt; then to believe, that God is gracious unto us, and to be
persuaded of his favor toward us, is that which the weakest in faith may
attain unto without any difficulty: But when all these shall be taken away,
not only in our own judgment, but in the opinion also of others, and the
light of Gods countenance shall be, as it were, darkened with the clouds of
adversity, and all things outwardly shall be as uncomfortable unto us, as the
darkest night of winter; yet then to believe, that God is one and the same
toward us, and that his love suffers no eclypse at all, but is the same
still to us, and to all those that are his, because whom be once loves, he
loves unto the end, ^m. 11.29.
and that the gifts and calling of God are without repentance: and that all the
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, ^^l. 25.50.
unto those that keep his covenant, and his testimonies; that is, that he is
not only merciful unto them in the beginning, but also true and constant in
his mercies toward all his even unto the ending, to finish and make perfect in
them that good work of his, that he has begun in them. ^am. 15.29.
For he is not like unto man that he should repent him of any thing, that he
has done: and as S. James says, ^^m. 1.19.
with him there is no variablenes, or shadow of turning. To be, I say, thus
persuaded, when these things shall be upon us, and so to rest in the truth of
Gods promises, and to wait patiently for a comfortable feeling of the
performance of them in our selves, is a matter of greater faith, and of longer
experience.

Again, as if a man does come into a fruitful garden or orchyard, well set
with many trees in the spring time, when all things are green and blossom, or
in summer, when the trees are full of fruit; it is the easiest thing in the
world then even at the first sight to be persuaded, that the trees are living
and growing: and he that has the weakest senses, and meanest wit, and least
experience, is able to say so: But to come thither in the depth of winter, when
all the fruit shall be gathered, and the leaves fallen, and see all the bows,
white with the whore frost, and rine hanging upon every twigge, so that
outwardly they seem to be dead and rotten; yet then to be persuaded, that they
are living, and that the sap is at the root, which in time will come into
all the branches again, and show it self, as before, in putting forth leaves,
blossoms, and fruit: this requires better judgment, and more experience.

So is it in the matter of faith: when all the testimonies of Gods love do
abundantly show themselves, as it were in somer, it is an easy matter to
believe: but when all these shall be fallen away from us, as they were from
Job; and there is a very hard and long winter full of many storms come upon us;
yet then not to be too much discouraged and cast down, as though all were
clean lost and gone: but to be persuaded, that the favor of God is not clean
dried up, but is at the root, that is, is the same in Christ toward us, that
ever it was; and that, as the Apostle says, ^eb. 13.6.
Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, and will be the same for ever: and that
the light of Gods countenance is not clean put out, but darkened, and covered
with a veil for a time: and so with a quiet and meek spirit to wait upon God
in all well doing, till there be a new spring, and till the sun break out of
the clouds again. Thus to do, is that great faith, that shall uphold us in all
extremities. And as in these cases we would condemn others of want of wisdom,
which would believe no more then they saw or felt: so must we condemn our
selves and others of want of spiritual and heavenly wisdom of the word of
God, that in such cases as these of our salvation, we will believe no more,
then we can see and feel: and we must commend the other to be of better
judgment, and greater faith, who do believe more then they could either see
or feel.

For the releeuing of our selves therefore in such cases as these, what must
we do? We must do that, which Thomas the Apostle should have done: namely,
he should have believed those that told him, that Christ was risen, and that
they had seen him: and he should have believed the words of Christ himself,
who had foretold him, that he should be put to death, and that within three
days he should rise again: which words of Christ must needs have been
verified in their time, though none had ever seen him. So must we do, even
believe the word and promises of God, in the mouths of his faithful servants,
who are able both to see further into them, and also to discern more
testimonies of faith, and of the favor of God in us, then we our selves can
do. And though we, whom they do most of all concern, do not see them at
all, or as we desire: it is sufficient, that others, whom we ought to credit,
do see them in us, and do constantly and upon their credit avouch the same
unto us.

For it is most certain and true, though eury man should best know himself:
yet it so often falls out, that we are not fit judges of our selves, and of
our own estate, neither of body, nor of soul: and therefore if we will be
rightly persuaded of our selves, we must not so much rely upon our own
judgment, as give credit unto others; which may and do see that in us, which
we our selves do not, neither can. As when a man is daungerously sick of
some disease, though he have some general knowledge of the estate of his body,
yet he may take himself to be stronger or weaker, nearer or further off from
death, then indeed he is: and therefore in such case we ask the advice of some
skillful Physicians, and trust their judgment better then our own; in so much
that though a man be a very skillful Physician, he will hardly or not at all
practice upon him self in great extremities, but uses the help of other
Physicians, and is contented to be ordered at their discretion: Even so when a
man is dangerously sick in his soul, either of unbelief, or otherwise, he is
not to judge of himself at that time, though he be a very good christian, but
he must for his recovery out of that estate, use the help of other godly
ministers, and hearken unto their judgment concerning himself.

And that we might see the truth of this most clearly in an other case, we must
consider, that as when the Devil prevails against us by presumption, we so
favor our selves, and are so partial that way, that we imagine, both that we
have those virtues and graces of God in us, and that in great measure, which we
have not, neither can any man see them in us; and also that we are free from
those corruptions and sins, which yet do apparently break out in us, and all
the world may easily see them: So on the otherside, when he has gotten the
advantage of us by diffidence and despair, he makes us to rigorous and hard
against our selves; and persuades us that we want those graces, which do
apparently show themselves to others; and to have those sins and corruptions,
and that measure of the^ which in truth we have not, neither is any able to
discern them in us, though we cry out against our selves for them.

So that in both these estates, wherein we deceive our selves of our selves, if
we will be helped, we must deny our selves, and not measure our selves by our
selves, but give credit to those, who as they are wise to discern, and
faithful to judge; so are they also true to report what they think of us, and
of our estate. Which if we will not do, we must needs continue in our
unbelief, and other sins so much the longer: and it shall be a very hard
thing to recover us out of the same. Let us therefore as we love our own good,
in such extreme cases as these, when by the temptation of Satan we are brought
to a narrow point, hearken unto those faithful ministers and godly brethren
of ours, who are able, (because they are out of temptation, and the case is not
their own) better to judge of us, then we our selves: and then have we made a
good entrance unto the turning of our souls, though we be not presently
restored to perfect health: and though we have not present comfort, yet the
extremities of our fears shall be greatly stayed: and this staying of us will
minister further hope of full recovery: and it is none of the least mercies of
God to see, that we have been deceived in our selves, and are not able rightly
to judge of our selves. Thus we see, how faith, and great faith, is without
feeling: and when we be oppressed with this temptation, how we must help our
selves by believing others more then our selves, yea even of our own selves.

Moreover, to this effect must we be admonished, that as in the natural life
there are three ages, the infancy, the childhood or youth, and the riper and
perfect age: so in the spiritual life the Scripture makes mention of three
ages; for of those that are in Christ, and truly belong unto him, some are newborn babes, 1. Pet. 2.2.
as S. Peter calls them, but newly begotten of the immortal seed of the
word of God: others are little children, Gal. 4.19
that have more profited in knowledge, and in the mystery of their salvation;
and some are in comparison of them, perfect men, Ephesians. 4.^
and are coming unto the measure of their full age in Christ. These latter are
able to judge of themselves, and of others: for by ^ong custom they have their
wits Heb. 5.14.
exercised to discern both good and evil: the second sort, is less able to
judge of themselves, the third not at all. A babe though it be heir apparent
unto the crown of the greatest Monarch in the world, it has no sense or
feeling of it: nay, though it lives, it is not able to judge of it self,
whether it has life or no: but others do see by the operations of life, that
it is a living creature, and has an immortal soul: and dying in that estate,
yea as soon as it is borne, it shall herafter live for ever and ever.

So a great many, that are borne again of water, Ioh. 3 5.
and of the Spirit, and thereby are made heirs of the kingdom of God, as
Christ says to Nicodemus; they are never but babes, beyond that age they never
go, and some of them fall asleep in the Lord, as soon as they are made
partakers of this spiritual birth; as the thief upon the cross died
presently after his conversion: and Christ shows us in the Gospel, that some
are called at the eleventh hour to work in the vineyard, that is, Math. 20.6.
in their later part of their life they are called to ^tate of salvation and
grace, and to receive the reward of their calling, which is eternal life. In
which estate of theirs they can have little or no feeling at all of their
spiritual life. But as other children die before they know, that they were
alive; so these die before they did feel any great power of the spiritual
life in themselves. But as others did see that it was alive, because they saw
how it desired the milk of their mothers, and how they did thrive by it: so
others may see in such spiritual infants, that the life of God is in them by
the appetite that they have unto the word of God, that they esteem it, as
their appointed food, as Job says of himself, Job 23.1^
and that thereby they grow in many graces of the Spirit of God, as in a fear
to offend him, and in a desire unto their own salvation, though they have
little assurance, sense, or feeling of it in the^selue and so are heirs of the
kingdo^^ ^f God, though they die before ever they had any great feeling of it
in themselves.

And for those that are of riper age in Christ, and have had some feeling of
their salvation, and have lost it; they are not to be addicted to their own
judgment, to think they never had it, because it is now lost, or that they
shall never have it again, because it is taken from them for a while; for the
life of God may still be in them, though the present feeling of it be taken
away: and therefore at this time, concerning their own present state, they must
believe others, that can see more into them, then themselves. For as in some
diseases of the body a man may have all his senses taken away from him for a
while; or he may be so sore wounded in the head, and his brain so distempered,
that he can not tell, whether himself be alive or dead: but o^^^rs by their
breathing, and some (...) operations of life do see evidently, that life
remains in them, and so hope that they may be recovered. So a man may be so
spiritually sick of unbelief, or so sore wounded in his soul with
temptations, that he cannot see any token of Gods favor in himself; but yet
by the prayers that ^e makes unto God to be helped ^ut of these distresses, by
the love that he bears unto God, and to Gods people, and other operations ^f
the spirit of God in him, they that ^re wise shall be able to discern that ^^e
life of Gods spirit breaths in ^^em, to whom they must give cre^it above
themselves: and so think, ^^at they are in a better estate of salvation, then
they can see themselves to be.

And it must not seem strange unto us, that other should see better into our
estate, then we our selves can. For oftentimes it falls out, that some great
affection of the mind so blinds us, that we imagine that we have not that,
which indeed we have. He that is blinded with covetousness of these worldly
goods, by the insatiable desire that is in him, never satisfied, though he has
more to liu^ on then many hundreds, yet still h^ is complaining of his want,
and poverty; and says, that he has nothing and tell him of this, and of that
which God has bestowed upon him, ye^ because he has not all that he des^reth,
he makes no account of the^ and all is unto him, as though he ha^^ nothing. So
he that is sick of a spir^tuall covetousness, and desires the feeling of
Gods favor in a gre^^ me^sure, and such an assurance of his salvation, as
might be without al doubt: which because he can not come unto, because the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and in it there is nothing but doubting, he
imagines that because there is some want of assurance and feeling, that
therefore there is no feeling at all: as the covetous man by reason of some
want, says that he has nothing: the want of that, which he has not, so
blinds his eyes, that he can not see that, that he has: so the want of some
assurance so troubles them, and they have so great a desire unto more, that
they can not see that they have, but for want of some, deny all.

A remedy against which temptation is, not to deceive our selves any longer
with an imagination of such a measure of assurance of salvation ordinarily in
the children of God, which should be without all wavering or doubting: or such
a measure of feeling of the love of God, and joy therein, as should abandon all
distrustfulnes and sorrow: this is not to be looked for in this world: Psalm.
16.11.
the fullness of joy is in the presence of God, and at his right hand only are
pleasures for evermore: here we have them but in measure: there indeed is joy
unspeakable, and most glorious without all interruption; when we shall see God
face to face: 1. Cor. 13.12.
and know him as we are known, whom now we behold as through a glass, and so
may sometimes doubt, whether we see him or no. This measure we must be
contented with, and so pray as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 106.4, 5.
Remember me, O Lord, with the favor of thy people, that I may see the
felicity of thy chosen: where he desires not such joy and feeling of the
favor of god, which he did imagine himself, but which God does usually bestow
upon his people, which is that that is joined with much doubting, and many
fears, even then sometimes when it is at the best: and so not imagine, that
unless we have it according to our own desire, we have it not at all, or as
Gods people use to have it. For undoubtedly it is thus with the best, at one
time or other.

And concerning this desire of feeling and assurance, we must understand thus
much, that none can have this, but those that believe: so that though we should
want them both altogether, yet the desire that we have unto them, does
manifestly argue that we have faith. For who can desire to feel the heat and
light of the sun, but he that has life in him? a dead carkase cannot do it.
So ^f there were not the life of the Spirit in us by faith, we could not have
a^y desire to feel the favor of God ^n us in truth at all. He that is never
so weak, yet if he still desire strength, it appears that there is life in
him: so when we most earnestly desire to be strengthened in the assurance of
our salvation, it is a manifest token, that the life of God is still in us:
therefore let us comfort our selves with such desires, and know assuredly, that
as they be of God, so he will satisfy them in his good time: for the Lord
hears the desire of the poor, Psalm. 10.17.
he prepares their heart, and bends his ear unto them: that is, as he
gives them so earnestly to desire these things, which others neglect, so he
will show by giving also that which they do desire, that he has not given
them such holy desires in vain. For the saying of our Sauiou^ Christ must be
verified upon all men without respect of persons, Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are all they that hunger and thirst, no^ only after righteousness, but
after any other graces of his Spirit, for the^ shall be satisfied and filled.
And the saying of the virgin Marie shall be verified in them, Luke 1.53.
He has filled the hungry with good things, and sent away the rich empty:
that is, as they that have no such desires, can look for no such feeling, so
they that are insatiable in their desires that way, shall be satisfied in time
with abundance of feeling: and if they wait upon God with patience, believing
these promises, it shall be unto them according to their faith.

That I might not say here that, which is yet most true, that while they so
vnmeasurably desire it, they have it in a good measure. For herein is the
saying of S. Augustine most true, that the desire of any grace of God, is in
some sort the grace it self. He that unfeignedly desires the forgiveness of his
sins, does with this desire obtain the remission of them. He that desires a
greater measure of repentance, does from day to day profit in repentance: he
that desires not to sin, is no sinner before God: he that desires the
favor of God, has obtained it already: he that desires the assurance of his
salvation, and the feeling of Gods favor, he has both of them in some sort
already. When Abraham was willing to offer up his son Izack at Gods
commandment, Heb. 11.17.
he is said to have don it by faith: his desire before god, was as though he
had done it: so when we offer up these desires unto God, it is as well with us
in his account, as though we had the things themselves.

For as the Apostle speaks o^ alms, ^. Cor. 8.12.
if there be first a willing min^ it is accepted according to that a man has,
and not according to that tha^ a man has not: that is, God looks not so much
to his deed, as to his desire: as the poor widow that offered but two mites,
was more accepted of God, and commended by Christ, then they that offered much,
because of her great desire. So when in the sacrifice of prayer we offer up our
hearts unto god with holy desires either for assurance of his favor, or
feeling of our salvation, we are accepted of him, as though we had them: and
when he gives us this desire, he begins to work the grace it self: and
that desire is the earnest penny and pledge of the thing it self.

Christ says in the Gospel, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, Math. 5.2
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. So that the desire unto
any sin, is the sin it self before God: then the desire unto any virtue, is
the virtue and grace it self before God. And therefore he that looks up unto
God with an earnest desire of his salvation, he has obtained it already
before God, who sees and aloweth the desire of his heart. He that looks on
his own unbelief and corruptions with a desire to be rid of them, he is
thereby discharged of them before God. Thus we see, that to desire feeling is
an argument of faith, as to desire meat is an argument of life: yea to desire
feeling, is the very beginning of it in our selves: and therefore we must be
comforted over them.

Concerning which feelings, we must also consider, that in them that have them
in the greatest measure, they are not always alike: but they are going and
coming, as the day and the night. And as in the course of nature there is not
one tenor of things, but Gods works are subject to many changes: so is it in
the course of Gods grace: that which we have received, does not always
continue alike, neither have we the same feeling of it to day, that we had
yesterday: whether we look to the feruencie of prayer, or zeal to Gods word,
or love to his Saints, or assurance of our salvation. Here we must comfort our
selves with the remembrance of that that we have found in our selves in times
past, and hope that we may find the like again: and say as it is in the
Psalm, Psalm. 77.1 and 119.5^
I have remembered the times past, and have been comforted. For as the woman
that is quickened with child, and feels it stir in her body, though she
do not always feel it stir alike; and sometimes not at all, and sometimes
more weakly then before: yet she assures her self, that the child is living,
because she has felt it stir before, and so hops that she shall do
again. So when Christ is formed in us first of all, as the Apostle speaks,
Gal. 4.1
we have the feeling of him stirring and moving in our hearts by his holy
Spirit, dwelling in us: which lively motions though we feel not so strongly
moving in us afterward, or not at all; yet we doubt not, but that Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith still, Ephesians. 3.17.
and hope to feel it as sensibly again in time, as we have done: and so much
the more, because Christ being formed in us, never dies: and therefore the
remembrance of our former Feelings must comfort us over the want of them for
the time present: for they are not always alike in any that have them: it is
sufficient that we have had them, therefore if we labor after them, they will
return unto us again, when it shall please God. And thus much for this, that
S. Thomas in this matter of faith addicts himself to his own feeling.

THe fourth and last degree of his unbelief appears in this, Except I see in
his hands the print of the nails, and in his side the print of the spear, I
will not believe it. For why should he desire this? not only to see him, and
to feel him; but to see in his hands the print of the nails, and to put his
finger into them; and to see in his side the print of the spear, and to put
his hand into it. Did he not know that these wounds and skarres were proper
unto his body only while it was subject unto infirmity and weakness: and that
after his resurrection his body was glorified? And so he might have thought,
that though it should be granted unto him to see him, yet he could not by any
reason or ground from the Scripture, have hope to see him thus: and yet he
says, Except I see the print of the nails, etc. I will not believe it: he
does not say, except I see him: but, except I see him with the print of the
nails, and of the spear, I will not believe it.

This is then the nature of unbelief, that when it will not profit by the
ordinary means, that God has appointed for the confirming of faith; it
desires such things, whereof there is no warrant, either from reason, or from
Scripture. As here S. Thomas neglecting what Christ had said unto him, that
when he should be put to death, within three days he would rise again: and
that also which was told him by the Apostles, and diverse others, namely, that
he was risen again, and had appeared unto such and such: he says, Except I
see him my self, with the print of the nails in his feet, and of the spear
in his side, I will not believe it. Concerning which point; though Christ did
rise indeed out of the sepulcher with these marks in his glorified body, and
did retain them whiles he tarried on the earth, that thereby it might more
certainly be known, that the same body of his that was crucified, was raised
up again; yet Thomas had no general rule to lead him to think that it
should be so, but rather according to the common condition of the bodies of all
the faithful in the day of resurrection, so to conceive of the body of Christ
raised up. For that which is said of the resurrection of all the faithful, the
members of Christ's mystical body, must needs be much more true of him the
head: for it belongs to them only by virtue of his resurrection. Now of them
the Apostle writes thus to the Corinthians; 1. Cor. 15.42.
The body is sown in corruption, and raised in incorruption: that is, with
nothing tending thereunto as wounds do: it is sown in dishonor, having no
glory nor beauty on it, as Christ's body was most of all, when besides that the
life was gone out of it, and so it looked pale and wanne; it had also many
deformites by the stripes of his whippings, and the crown of thorns, and the
print of the nails in his hands and feet, and of the spear in side: it is
raised in glory; that is, with all perfection and excellency of beauty without
any blemish at all: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: and
therefore without marks and tokens of weakness and infirmity: for a body sore
wounded, even unto death, as Christ's was, has less power in it, then it had
before. Therefore seeing he desired to see Christ's body raised up, he should
not have desired to see it thus, and with these marks.

And for the further confirmation of this, we may remember what the Apostle
says touching the glorious state of our bodies to be raised up: Our
conversation is in heaven, ^^al. 3.20.
from whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ: who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himsel^e: therefore as we shall be raised up without skarres and marks of
infirmity, which many have in these days of their pilgrimage: so he had no
reason to think, but that Christ's body should be. Therefore though he would
not believe, till he saw him, he could not look to see him after this manner,
that he prescribes.

And though he did at the last appear with these marks in his body both to
the eleven first, and afterward unto Thomas: yet it was not because his body
was properly, and of it own nature then subject unto them, no more then it was
to hunger, when he did eat with them: Luke 24.43.
but it was by a special extraordinary di^pensation; as when Angels that have
^o bodies, did appear in the shape of men. Therefore this could not be ^ooked
for: and it was in respect of the ordinary course of Gods dealing somewhat
unreasonable, to tie the Lord unto that for the strengthening of his faith, and
to say, Except I see the print of the nails, and of the spear, I will not
believe it: for others had seen him, and not seen him with these; Ioh. 20.15.
as Marie Magdalen at the sepulcher, where she mistook him to be the
gardener, or the keeper of that place, where Christ was buried in a garden:
Mark. 16.12.
and the two Disciples in their journey, as they were going to Emmaus.
Therefore we must take heed, how we yield to our vnbeleef^ for it will make us
look for and desire such things at the hand of God for the confirming of our
faith, a^ have no ground either from Scripture, or from reason: though it
pleases God of his infinite goodness to bear with men sometimes this way and
to yield to them, either to the strengthening of their faith, or to the leaving
of them without excuse in their unbelief. So that as the Apostle says of
covetousness, 1. Tim. ^.^.
They that will be rich fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish
and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction; So we may say
of unbelief, that it causes men to desire many foolish and unreasonable
things, and such as often tend to their own hurt.

Thus in the Gospel our Savior Christ in the parable of the rich glutton, and
in his person notes out the thoughts and desires of unbelievers here in this
world: where he is brought in speaking unto Abraham after this manner; I pray
thee father, Luke 16.27.
that thou would send Lazarus unto my fathers house (for I have many
brethren) that he may testify unto them, least they also come into this place
of torment. Thus unbelievers would have dead men come from heaven, and tell
them what is done there, and what in hell: but Christ shows what answer
Abraham gave him for our instruction; 29.
They have Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them: as if he had said,
they do sufficiently declare the truth of these things, of the^ they may
learn them, and so it is needelesse to have any come from heaven to tell them,
there are enough upon the earth, that do declare it daily: and so do the
Apostles, and the Evangelists now much more. But the rich man said again, 30.
Father Abraham, but if one come from the dead, they will amend their lives:
which is as if he had said, Though they do hear daily out of the Scripture,
what punishment is in hell for the wicked, yet they do not believe it, except
some come from the dead, and tell them of it, and then they would.

Thus foolish is unbelief, to neglect the certain testimony of the Prophets
and Apostles, which is the ordinary means to reveal his will unto us, and to
desire that Angels or dead men might come from heaven, or from hell to speak
unto them, and then they would believe the^: which in these days is so
extraordinary, that it is not to be looked for. But this is a short and plain
answer for such men set down there from Abraham, who said thus unto him, 31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rise from the dead again. Where Christ shows not only what are
the means of knowing these things, even the books of the Prophets and Apostles
in which the will of God is perfectly set down concerning all things, that are
needful for us to know, and that the other is not to be desired, nor hoped
for. So if they had them, they would not profit by them, when as they neglect
the other: but yet we see by this, that unbelief is full of these foolish
desires.

And truly if we could so well see into the hearts of men, as Christ did when
he uttered this parable, we should see, that the greatest part of the world is
still of this mind, to neglect all the ordinary means, that God has
appointed either to work faith in them at the first, or to confirm it in them
afterward; and to desire such means, as are impossible and not to be looked
for, because they are contrary to the word of God. For the Apostle says, ^ob.
1.1.
At sundry times, and in diverse manners God spoke in the old time to our
fathers by the Prophets: but in these last days he has spoken unto us by his
Son: that is, in the old time. God did sundry ways declare his will unto
men, as sometimes by visions when they were waking, and by dreams when they
were sleeping, by Vrim and Thu^mim in the Priests breast, by Angels from
heaven, by the Prophets, etc. but now he has fully declared his will by his
son Christ, and has appointed that we should come to the knowledge of it by
that order which Christ has established: who when he ascended up into heaven,
gave unto his Church, Pastors and teachers, Ephesians. 4.12.
for the repairing of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet together (in the unity
of faith, and the acknowledging of the son of God) unto a perfect man, and unto
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ: therefore as long as we live,
we are to look for no other means then these of Pastors and teachers, the
other have ceased long ago, as being appointed for the old world.

But yet unbelieving men refuse these, and with itching ears they linger after
the other: and some are ready to say, Oh if I might have an Angel come and tell
me of the destruction that shall come upon the wicked for their sin, Genesis
19.13.
as Lot had in Sodom, I would believe it: and some are ready to say, if Lazarus
might come from the dead, that is, if some of those my friends and aquaintance
that are dead, might rise out of their graves, and come and tell me, what they
have seen and felt in heaven and hell, if I might have but a little conference
with them, I would believe them. Or if I could see into the heavens, and there
behold Christ standing at the right hand of God, as Stephen the Martyr did: Act
7.56.
or if I could hear him speak unto me from heaven, and call me from my
sins, as Saul did, ^^k 9.4.
when he was a persecuter, then I would hearken unto him, and become a new man.
And others think, Oh if they might be rapt into the third heavens, 2. Cor. 12 ^
and be taken up into paradise, as Paul was, and there hear God speak unto
them, then they would perform great matters, and lead an Angels life: or if
being here on earth they might see God come down from heaven unto the^, and
they might have some sure token, that it was he that spoke unto them, as the
Israelites had in the wilderness, Exodus 19
when God spoke there unto them upon Mount Sinai, then they would yield great
obedience, and nothing should draw the^ from that, which they had heard. These
and many such foolish and impossible things do men desire, and then they say
they would believe all things, and until the^ they need not, neither will
they.

But what says the Apostle to the Romans? Romans 10.^
The righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in thine
heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ from above) or
who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring Christ from the dead.) But
what says it? The word is near thee even in thy mouth, and in thine heart;
this is the word of faith which we preach. Where he shows what are the
doubtful and wavering thoughts of unbelievers concerning that salvation, that
is purchased for us by Christ, and offered unto us in the Gospel: and how those
thoughts and imaginations by faith are to be repr^ssed. For they which seek
righteousness in themselves, that by the works of the law they might be
justified and saved, being always unquiet and doubtful of their salvation,
because they cannot find perfect righteousness in themselves, are ready to say,
if I might see any Saint or Angel come from heaven to carry me thither, or to
assure me that I shall come thither; or any come from the depth of hell to tell
me, that I am delivered from thence, I could believe it.

But the righteousness of faith, that is, true faith whereby we are made
righteous in Christ, suppresseth these thoughts of unbelief; and tells us
according to that, that is preached in the Gospel, that Christ has fulfilled
all things needful for our salvation; even that he has suffered the curse of
the law to deliver us from hell, and that he has fulfilled the righteousness of
the law to bring us to heaven, and he has ascended up thither for us in our
nature, to prepare a place for us: and he has prayed unto God for us, that
where he is we may be to behold his glory. Thus true faith for the certentie
of our salvation, bids us rely upon that, that Christ has don for us, and upon
that, which this way is set down in the Gospel: and so our consciences shall
be quieted, and no man need to ask these questions, who can ascend up into
heaven, or bring us from hell? seeing that the Gospel teaches that both these
are done by Christ for all those that embrace their calling by a true faith.

But unbelief neglecting this, desires that, that is unreasonable, and says,
Oh, but I see none that has ascended up to heaven, and come down again to
tell me, what is there done for me. Who shall ascend? who is he that has, or
will do so much? then I could believe it. And I see none, that has descended
into hell, and returned, to tell me that I am delivered from thence. Who shall
descend into the deep? where is he that has, or will do this for me? then I
could believe it. And so not only the unbelievers are wholly possessed and
ouerco^ with these doubtful thoughts; but all men, so far as unbelief
prevails in them, are ready to say thus, at least in their hearts, Oh, if any
might come from heaven, to assure me, that I shall come thither, and be saved,
then I could believe it: or if any might come from hell, to assure me that I am
delivered from thence, then I should be quiet in my mind, and delivered from
these fears, that I am incombred with.

But what says faith? say not thus in thine heart, etc. that is, have thou no
such doubts in thy mind, but consider what Christ has done for thee, to bring
thee to heaven, and to deliver thee from hell: and what the gospel does this
way offer unto thee, and what thou have heard preached out of it to this end,
and rest in the^: For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
Romans 10^
and shall believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved: that is, if thou profess plainly, and sincerely, and openly, that
thou take Jesus only to be thy Lord and Savior; and that it was the very
counsel and purpose of God, in the resurrection of his son to redeem us
from death, and hell, as it is preached unto us in the Gospel, thou shall be
saved. So faith leads us from these vain speculations unto that, that is
revealed unto us in the word.

And whereas the best believers are subject unto these temptations at one time
or other, by reason of the re^nants of unbelief abiding in the^: yet the
Apostle gives us to understand, that they come from unbelief, and not from
faith: but that it is the nature of says to strive against them, and to
suppress them in measure, so far forth as faith prevails, and gets the
victory in them. So that when they begin to have these doubts in their minds,
and to think with themselves, how shall I ascend into heaven? how shall I
escape hell, I cannot tell what shall become of me? then faith is as a voice
speaking behind them, to admonish them of their duty, and as it were pulling
them by the elbow bids them hold their peace, Oh say not in thine heart, who
shall ascend into heaven, etc. Oh have no such thoughts in thy mind: this were
to deny what Christ has done for thee concerning thy redemption from hell, and
thy ascension into heaven: therefore say not so in any case, no not in thine
heart: give over reasoning with unbelief, and rest in the word of God.

Thus we see how unbelief binds God to unreasonable courses, and desires of
him for the strengthening of faith things not to be desired: therefore as we
see from whence such do arise, so we must strive against unbelief, that we
might overcome such foolish conceits. And thus the unbelieving Jews did reason
against our Savior Christ, when he was upon the cross, and thereby did show
what wicked and absurd thoughts their infidelity did drive them unto. If thou
be the son of God, Matthew. 27.^0.
come down from the cross: he saved others, but he cannot save himself: if
he be the king of Israel, 42.
let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe in him: 43.
he trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said,
I am the son of God. Behold what unreasonable things they do, as it were,
bind Christ unto, that they might believe in him, or else they will not: for
they say, let him now come down from the cross, and now save himself, or else
never.

They did not consider how all the prophesies of the Messiah set down in
Scripture were verified in him, even from his first conception, unto this very
hour: how he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of a virgin, and of
the house of David, and in Bethleem: how the wise men came from the East unto
Jerusalem, and told them that the King of the Jews was borne, and that they
had seen his star: neither what old father Simeon, and Anna the prophe^esse
said of him in the temple, when he was circumcised. They regarded not his
doctrine full of authority and ^ower, themselves being driven to confess,
that never man before spoke ^ike unto him: they were not moo^ed with his
miracles, when they ^aw how by his own power he hea^ed them of incurable
diseases, made ^he blind to see, the lame to go, the ^eafe to hear: cast out
the devils by ^he power of his word; raised up the^ that were dead: and did
many more ^^ings else, which were sufficient to ^onuince them, that he was the
true ^essiah and Savior, to whom all ^^e Prophets gave witness: neither did
they give any credit unto the voice of God himself, which they heard from
heaven, when he was baptized, Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: at what time also the
heavens were opened, and the Spirit of God descended like a dove, and lighted
upon him. Much less did they give credit unto the testimony of John, who
said of him, Behold the lamb of God, Ioh. 1.36.
that takes away the sins of the world.

None of all these they regarded they were not sufficient to cause the to
believe in him, they despised the^ all, as though they had been nothin^ worth;
but such a foolish thing (...) this they desire, and that should satisfy them:
if he would come down^ from the cross, and that even ve^ now at their
appointment, and tar^^ no longer, then they could beleeue^ him indeed: but if
he would not d^^ that at all, or not now presently wi^^ out any delay they will
not believe in him. Which if he had done, he had forsaken his office of
redemption, for he came to suffer and die for us, that he might by his own
sufferings deliver us from death, and to die upon the cross, Gal. 3.13.
that he might redeem us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on tree. And when he had
suffered all things needful for our salvation, saying upon the cross, It is
finished, Ioh. 19.30.
and so gave up the ghost, and afterward was buried: God raised him up at the
time appointed, even the third day, and loosed the sorrows of death, Act. 2.2^
because it was impossible, that he should be held of it any longer, as S.
Peter says. But see the foolishnes of unbelief, the Jews would have god then
to deliver him before it was time, even so soon as he was upon the cross, and
before he had suffered, or else they would not believe that he was the son of
God, or that he had any power to save himself or others.

And after this manner the Devil teaches other men also by unbelief to
reason against good men, and against themselves: as if such a man were an
upright man, such an one as he makes show of, God would not suffer him to be
so and so afflicted, but he would deliver him from this cross, that is upon
him: and so did the three friends of Job reason against him to the great
weakening of his faith: as this was also none of the least temptations unto
David, when the wicked said of him in his misery, Psalm. 42.10.
Where is now thy God? as if they had said, Surely, if God were his God, he
would have delivered him long before this. And of themselves they are ready to
say, if God would now deliver me out of this affliction; if he would now help
me out of this trouble, I would think that he had some care of me indeed: and
unless they have some present ease, or relief, they can not be persuaded of
the truth of his promises. But what says the Scripture? Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble: so will I deliver thee. So that we
must seek unto God for the performance of his promises: But how? even as it is
said in an other Psalm, and 5.3.
Hear my voice in the morning, O Lord: for in the morning will I direct me
unto thee, and I will wait: that is, after that he had prayed unto God, he
would patiently wait upon him with trust, till God did show, that he had heard
him. Even as suitors do at the court, when they have put up their petitions
unto the King, or the Counsel, though they have not a present answer, they ^re
not discouraged, and therefore give still attendance, and tarry their leisure,
with hope of speeding at the last.

And how long must we thus wait upon God for his deliverance? even until it
pleases him to discharge us: not prescribing unto him any time. Even as it is
said in one of the Psalms of degres, ^^c. 130.6.
My soul waits on the Lord, more then the morning watch watches for the
morning: that is, even as they that are set to watch all night, do not give
over their station till the morning come, though the night be never so long: so
we in affliction must not cease waiting upon God until the time appointed. And
when is that? even when he gives us our hearts desire, and not before. Even as
the Psalmist speaks in the name and person of the whole church, showing after
what manner, and how long he would seek unto God. and 123.2.
Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maid unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. So that he would continually and
earnestly wait upon God for his defense, not doubting of it, until such time
as he found it by experience: and therefore if he defer a while, we must
tarry the longer, with good hope waiting. As the Prophet Habacuk says, that
after long prayer he received this answer from the Lord concerning the
deliverance of the Church: that it was deferred a long time, therefore he would
have him to wait, for undoubtedly in time it should come, and not fail,
saying, Habak. 2.3.
The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the last it shall speak, and
not lie: though it tarry, yet wait thou, for it shall surely come, and shall not
stay.

But unbelief says, I could be^eeue these promises, if I might now enjoy
them, and unless I be presently delivered, I cannot think, that God regards
me: and so it tieth Gods favor to present deliverance. And though the
Scripture has said, that affliction is like unto fire, and that our faith and
patience is like unto gold; and therefore as the gold must tarry in the fire
until all the dross be consumed, and the gold refined: so God will have us to
endure the cross, until our corruption be thoroughly purged, and our faith
and patience b^ proved to be pure and good; yet we are ready to say, that
unless he deliver me now, I cannot believe, tha^ he has any respect unto me.
An^ unto all that, which faith says vnt^ us, concerning the tarying of God
leisure; unbelief is ready to mak^ answer, that unless God give it now I
will think that I shall never have i^ And as faith or unbelief preuailet^ in
us at any time; so are these thogh^ more or less in us, in the time of any
affliction: for the one is of the flesh, and the other of the Spirit, and both
these being in the regenerate, Gal. 5.17
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and
these are contrary one to an other: so that ye can not do the same things
that ye would, as Paul shows to the Galatians.

And this is that, which every one of us has experience of in our selves: for
how often when we have been in trouble, have we thought, and said in our own
hearts; unless God give me such and such means, there are none that will do me
good: and unless these help me, I can not look for help from any: and so we
are ready to tie Gods help to times, and to means. Whereas faith says
otherwise out of the word of God, namely, that he has other times, and means
in his hands to do us good by, and that he is able to help us when all means
fail us. And besides, what if he will not deliver us at all? but will have us
drink of that cup, that he has given us, even unto death: as Christ
himself did: his love is never a whit the less unto us, no more then it was
unto him. Thus we see, how this unbelief reigns in this world, and yet how
Christ of his infinite goodness and mercy, bears with those that are his in
it for a while, and cures them of it at the last, as he did with the Apostle
Thomas, and as he has done with us very often, and in many things.

And this is that, which the Prophet notes to have been very often in the
people of Israel, whiles they were in the wilderness, of whom he says, ^^al.
78.41
They returned, and tempted God, and limited the holy one of Israel: that is,
according to the straitnes of their own heart in their unbelief, so did they
imagine of Gods presence and power: and therefore they are said, to limit the
holy one of Israel, and as it were to compass him in certain bounds, and to
indent with him after this manner: if he would do so and so for them, they
would think that he cared for them, and were among the^ for their good: and if
he would not do so, they would not believe it. And thus they did often, and
therefore it is said, they returned and tempted God: for when they had tempted
God thus one way, then they did it an other way. For sometimes they desired
water, sometimes meat, sometimes dainty flesh, as quails; and that so
importunately, that they said, unless they had these things according to their
own desire, they thought either that God could not do it, or that he cared
not for them: and thus they spoke against God, saying, verse. 19.
Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? behold, he smote the rock that the
waters gushed out, and the streams ouerflowed: can he give bread also, and
prepare flesh for his people? And thus did they not only once, but many times,
and for many things: in so much that the Prophet speaks with admiration, How
often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert! And
thus for their assurance that God was with them, and that he was willing and
able to help them, they desired these outward things, and so by the foolishnes
of their desires did apparently show the unbelief that was in them.

So do many unbelievers of our time: look what they earnestly desire, if they
have it not, they will not believe that God cares for them: and hereupon some
of them say, if I might have such a thing, I would think that God loved me: and
others say, if God would bestow this or that upon me, I would hope that I were
in his favor. And what things are they then which they desire? only outward,
and appertaining to this life: and so according to their present wants through
unbelief they limite the love of God, some to one thing, some to an other, and
will not be persuaded of it, but by the inioying of such things as themselves
desire.

And it is thus not only in the unbelievers: but all Gods children, so far
as the remnants of unbelief do prevail in them, are subject unto these
temptations, and to these desires: and are ready to say, if I were rid of this
affliction, which has lien heavily upon me a long time, I could be persuaded
of his favor toward me. By which we are thus to profit, thereby to see, what
infidelity is lurking in us, that so we might be sorry for it, and seek to be
helped of it. And then we shall see the remedy against it to be this: that as
the Apostle S. Thomas should not have tied the certenty of Christ's
resurrection, to his apparition and showing of himself unto him, saying, Unless
I see him my self, I will not believe it: for it was true, and to be believed
of him and others, that Christ was risen again, though they had never seen
him: much less should he have tied it unto this, that he would see him in that
form, that he was in upon the cross, with the wounds and marks in his body,
saying, Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger
into the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe
it: for he might have appeared unto him in some other form, as he did unto
others, at diverse times.

Even so we are not to tie the certentie of Gods favor to any one thing, and
to say, unless I have this o^^ that, I can not be persuaded of Gods favor: much
less unto any of these outward things, which appertain unto our bodies, and
to this life: for God our heavenly father has many ways and means to assure
his children of his love and favor toward them; and does it as our earthly
fathers do, not only to some one way, and to others an other way, but even
unto the same not alike at all times, and by the same things. But especially
there are more sure pledges and tokens of his love, which he bestows upon his
children, then all the outward benefits in the world; which only for the most
part the unbelievers desire, and measure gods favor by them. For there are the
graces and gifts of his holy Spirit proper unto the elect, as a love of God and
of goodness, an hatred of evil, a desire to please God, a delight in the
company of the godly, and such like: in bestowing of which upon man, he does
most of all manifest his love unto them. There are also his holy word and
Sacraments, whereby he works the beginning and increase of these and other
graces in those that are his: rare and inestimable testimonies of his favor:
of which it is said in the Psalm, ^^al. 147.19.
He shows his word unto Iaakob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel:
he has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his judgments.
Where he makes this a note of the love of God to the people of the Jews,
above all other nations, that they had among them the doctrine of everlasting
life, which others wanted. And so this is none of the least testimonies of Gods
favor toward us, that we live in these happy days and blessed times, in
which the Gospel is purely and sincerely preached, and that we enjoy the
ministry of it.

But the greatest token of all, whereby God has manifested his love unto us, is
the death of his son: of which Christ speaks in the gospel, God so loved
the world, Ioh. 1.16.
that he gave ^is only begotten son, that who^oeuer believes in him, should
not ^erish, but have everlasting life: where ^e notes the excellency of the
love ^f God, by the excellency of the gift. He so loved the world with an
extra^rdinarie and wonderful great love, that he gave his only begotten son
^o save us: and this is the fountain and cause of all other benefits of his
^estowed, and to be bestowed upon us: ^s the Apostle says; Romans 8.32.
God that spared ^ot his own son, but gave him ^r us all to death, how shall
he not ^ith him give us all things also? and (...) him there are purchased and
pre^^red for us everlasting joys in the ^^ngdome of heaven: and though we
^^ant many things in this world, yet God gives us patience, and minds well
contented with our estate, as a token that he loves us. So that by all these
things, or by any one of them, and by many more is Gods love known and to be
believed. Therefore we must not be so foolish to stin^^ God by unbelief, and
say, if I man have this or that, I will be persuade of his favor: for there
are other things besides those which we im^gine, whereby he may manifest h^^
favor unto us most clearly: and the also not only in this world, but (...)
the world to come: not only whi^^ we have in present possession, b^ which we
enjoy through hope.

And therefore this is singula^ commended in the faith of Job, the when he had
lost al his worldly goo^ and in respect of his outward esta^ he was brought
unto nothing; ye^ did put his trust in God: beleeu^ that his favor was not
tied to the^ nor to any one of them: but that it was the same then, that it was
before: and so uttered this comfortable speech proceeding from faith in Gods
goodness; Job 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord.
He does not say, if God would restore all unto me again (as he did in time,
yea he doub^ed them) then I would believe that ^^e cared for me: but even
whiles he remained in the want of all, he bles^ed and praised the name of God;
which could not be without great ^aith. Yea he said further, that if he should
die in that estate, yet he would ^^at his trust in God, and believe ^^at he
cared for him: and 13 15
Lo though he ^ay me, yet will I trust in him, and ^^e shall be my salvation:
in which ^ords he confesses, that he was so ^^re, even in this great
extremity, from despairing of life or salvation, as that in the very power and
instant of death he would trust in him; for he had other testimonies of Gods
favor, then all his outward prosperity: even the testimony of a good
conscience, that he had walked before him in sincerity and truth, and that he
had been no hypocrite; as he declares at large in the Chap. 31.

And he had further, for the upholding of his faith, the constant truth of Gods
promises; and those not only for this life, but for the life to come: and
therefore he doubted not, but that it should go well with him, though he died
in that estate: for he hoped at the last day to rise again, and to behold
Christ his Savior to his everlasting comfort: when he says, Oh that my words
were now written, and 19.23.
oh that they were written even in a book: and graven with an iron pen, in
lead or in stone for ever; for I am sure that my redemer lives, and he shall
stand the last on the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I shall see my self, and my eyes
shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins are consumed within me.
Where we see how he says, that in the midst of all his afflictions he did
rejoice and glory in this, even in the testimony of a good conscience, whereby
he did so rest in the promises of God concerning his resurrection, and life
eternal, which was to come, that this did confirm him in the favor of God
against all temptations.

Thus true faith binds not Gods favor to any of these outward things, whereby
men do commonly desire to be assured of it: but it looks unto better things,
whereby his love is most apparent; and that not only in this life, but in the
life to come most of all: as they be promised and set down in the word of God.
And that is the remedy against the foolish and vain desires of unbelief. Let
us not therefore tie the assurance of Gods favor unto any one thing, but
seeing that he has many ways to declare it, let us believe the promises of
his word, and pray him to seal the^ up in our hearts by what means it shall
please him best: and let us not be so froward and perverse, as to think it is
not constant unto us, unless it be sealed up that way, which we our selves do
most of all desire.

Therefore to conclude the sum of all in few words. We see by the weakness of
S. Thomas, not only what we are subject unto, but also how we may help our
selves and others against the same. He did not believe that Christ was risen
again, though it was told him at sundry times by diverse, that were very
credible: we must therefore in the matter of faith give credit unto the word of
God brought unto us, in the mouths of his faithful servants, if they be but
two or three. Secondly, he ^in this case would believe none but himself: we
must believe in the mystery of our salvation others rather then our selves,
and think especially that in the time of temptation others are able better to
judge of our estate, then we our selves can, and so be not ^oo much addicted to
our own o^erweening.

Thirdly, he would believe nothing ^f this matter any further then himself was
able to see and feel: now because these may deceive us, we ^ust believe
without any sight or ^eeling: especially seeing that faith is ^f things that
are not seen, and the fa^our of God is not always sensible (...) his
benefits, we must believe his lord without: yea contrary to any thing, that we
can see or feel. Lastly, he would not believe except he saw Christ with his
wounds, and so in that form, which ordinarily was not to be looked for: we
therefore must not by unbelief tie the testimonies of Gods favor for the
assurance of our faith unto such things as are unreasonable, and commonly not
to be looked for: neither unto any one particular thing, because he has many
ways to confirm the same unto us* and pray him to give us grace, tha^ we may
profit in faith by any, that h^ shall bestow upon us.

And seeing it is so hard a thing to believe, and there is so much infidelity
hidden in the hearts of the bo^^ servants of God; let us labor to search into
the depth of our own, that fi^ding the same in our selves, we man whiles we
have time use in fear a^^ those good means, that God hat^ appointed for the
beginning and increase of faith in us, that so by his blessing we daily going
on forward from faith to faith, we may at the last come to that measure of it,
against which the very gates of hell be not able to prevail: that so we may
both in temptation, and under all crosses, and in the hour of death, so carry
our selves, as God may be glorified, we our selves may be comforted, and others
may be furthered by our Christian calling, and good example: which Christ the
author and finisher of our faith grant unto us, for his own name sake: to
whom with the father and the holy Spirit, one true, immortal, invisible, and
only wise God, be ascribed as most due all honor, praise, and glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

