A Sermon of repentance, made by John Bradforde.

Luke. xiii. Except you repent you shall all likewise peryshe.

Apoc. ii. Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent thee.

To the Christian reader, John Bradforde wyssheth the true knowledge and peace
of Jesus Christ, our alone and omnisufficiente savior.
GReat and heavy is Gods anger against us, as the most grievous plague of
the death of our late king (a prince of all that ever was sithen christ's
ascension into heaven in any region pereles) now fallen upon us, does
pronosticate. For when Gods judgment has begone with his child thus our
dear dearlynge, let othermen think as they can, I surely cannot be persuaded
otherwise, but that a grievous and bitter cup of Gods vengeance is ready
to be powered out for us Englyshmen to drink of. The whelpe God has beaton to
fraye the bandogge. 1. Pe. ii^^
Judgment is begone at Gods house. In Gods mercy to him wards he is taken
away, that his eyes should not see, the miseries we shall feel: Heb. xi.
he was to good to tarrye with us so wicked, so froward, so perverse, so
obstinate, so malicious, so hypocritical, so covetous, unclean, untrue,
proud, carnal. etc, a generation. I will not go about to paynte us out in
our colors. All the world which never saw England, by hear say sees
England. God by his plagues and vengeance I fear me will paynt us out, and
point us out* we have so mocked with him and his Gospel, that we shall feel
it is no bourdyng with him. Of long time we have covered our covetousness and
carnalitie, under the cloak of his Gospel, so that all men shall see us to
our shame* when he shall take his Gospel away, and give it to a people that
will bring forth the fruits of it, then shall we appear as we be. To let his
Gospel tarry with us, he can not, for we despise it, contempne it, are glutted
with it, we disdain his Manna, it is but a vile meat think we: we would be
again in Egypt, and sit by the greasy flesh pottes, to eat again our
garlike, onions, and leekes. Sithen Gods gospel came amongst us, we say now
we had never plentye, Ie. x^iiij
therefore again let us go and worship the queen of heaven. Hie. vij.
Children begin togather sticks, the fathers kyndle the fire, and ye women
make the cakes to offer to the queen of heaven, and to provoke the lord to
anger. The earth can not abide now the words and sermous of Amos: Am. vij.
the cause of all rebellion is Amos and his preaching, Act. xvij
It is Paul and his fellows, that makes all out of order. Summa, the Gospel is
now (...) and (...), the outcaste and curse of the realm: and so are the
preachers, therefore out of the doors with them. So that I say, God can not let
his Gospel tarry with us, but must needs take it away to do us some pleasure
therein, for so shall we think for a time: Genesis xix.
as the Sodomitanes thought when Lot departed from them, Genesis vi.
as the old world thought when Noe crept into his arcke: as the Iero
solomytances thought when the apostles went thence to Peltis. The^ were they
merry, the^ was all pastyme: Ex. xxxij.
When Moses was absente, then went they to eating and drinking, and rose
again to play. Then was al peace, al was well, nothing amysse. But alas,
suddenly came the floude and drowned them, the fire and burnte them up, Titus
and besieged them, Gods wrath waxed hot against them. Then was weal away,
mourning and woe: then was cryenge out, wringing of hands, renting of
clothes, sobbyng and sighynge for the miseries fallen, out of the which they
could not escape. But oh you morners and cryers out: ye renters of clothes, why
mourn you: what is the cause of your mysery? The Gospel is gone, gods word
is little preached, you were not disquieted with it? Noe troubles you not, Lot
is departed, the apostles are gone? what now is ye cause of these your
miseries? Will you at y^ length confess it is your sins? Nay now it is to
late. God called upon you and you would not hear him, therefore yell and cry
out now, for he will not hear you: You bowed your ears from hearing of Gods
law, therefore your prayer is execrable. But to come again to us Englishmen, I
fear me I say, for our unthankfulness sake, for our impiety and wickedness, as
God has taken away our king, so will he take away his gospel: yea so we
would have it, then should all be well think many. Well, if he take that
away, for a time perchance we shall be quiet, but at length we shall feel the
want to our woe, at length he will have at us, as at Sodom, at Jerusalem* and
other places. And now he begineth to brew such a brewing, wherein one of us is
like to destroy an other, and so make an open gappe for foreign enemies to
devour us, and destroy us. The father is against the son, ye brother
against the brother. And lord with what conscience? Oh be thou merciful voto
us, and in thine anger remember thy mercy, suffer thy self to be entreated, be
reconciled unto us, nay reconcyle us unto the. Oh thou god of justice, judge
justly oh thou son of God which came to destroy ye works of Satan, ^ Ioh.
iij
destroy his furoures now smokinge, and almooste set on fire in this real
me. We have sinned, we have sinned, and therefore art thou angrye. Oh be not
angrye for ever. Give us peace, peace, peace, in the lord, Set us to war
against sin, against Satan, against our carnal desires, and give us the
vyctory this way. This victory we obtayn by faith. This faith is not without
repentance, as her gentleman vssher before her. Before her. I say in
discernynge true faith from false faith, lyppe faith, Englishmens faith: for
else it sprynges out of true faith. This vssher then of repentance, if we
truly possessed, we should be certain of true faith, and so assured of the
victory over death, hell, and Satan: his works then which he has styrred
up, would quayle: God would restore us politic peace, right should be right
and have right, Gods Gospel should tarry with us, religion should be cherished,
superstition suppressed, and so we yet somethynge happy, notwithstanding the
great loss of our most graciouse liege soueraygne Lord. All these would
come to pass you see, if the gentleman vssher I spoke of, I mean repentance,
were at ynne with us. As if he be abse^t, we may be certain ye lady faith is
absent, wherefore we ca^ not but be vanquished of the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and so will Satan's works prosper though not in all things, to bleare
our eyes, yet in that thing which the most of all desires. Therefore to
repentance for our selves priuatelye, and for the realm and church publicly
eueryone should labor to stir up both our selves and others. This, to the
end, that for my part I might help, I have presently put forth a sermon of
repentance, which has lain by me half a year at the least, for the most
part of it. For the last summer as I was abroad preaching in the countreye,
my chance was to make a sermon of repentance the which was earnestlye of
diverse desired of me, that I should give it them written or else put it forth
in prynt. The which thing to grant, as I could not (for I had not written
it) so I told them that had so earnestlye desired it. But when no nay would
serve, but I must promise them to write it as I could: I consented to their
request that they should have it at my leisure. This leisure I prolonged so
long, that as I wene I offended them, so did I please my self, as one more
glad to read other men's wrytynges, then in such sort to publyshe my
wrytynges for other men to read, not that I would others not to profyt by me:
but that I knowing how short my suppellex and store as, would be loath for the
enemies to have just occasion of evil speaking and wrestinge that which
symplye is spoken. But when I considered this present time, to occasion men now
to look upon all things in such sort as might move them to Godlynes, rather
then to any curiouse questioninge, I for the satisfienge of my promise, and
profytinge of the simple ignorant and rude, have now caused this Sermon to be
prynted, the which I beseech God for his Christ's sake, to use as a mean
whereby of his mercy it may please him to work in me and many others true
hartye repentance for our sins, to the glory of his name. Thus fare thou
well in the Lord. The. xij. of Iulie. Anno. M. D. LIII,

A sermon of repentance made by John Bradforde.
THe life we have at this present, is the gift of God, in whom we live move,
and are, Acts. xvii. and therefore is he called Jehovah, Exodus iii. for the
which life, as we should be thankful, so we may not in any wise, use it
after our own fantacie, but to the end for the which it is given and lent us,
that is, to the setting forth of Gods praise and glory, by repentance,
conversion, and obedience to his good will, and holy laws, whereunto his long
sufferynge does (as it were) even draw us, if our hearts by impenitency were
not hardened. And therefore our life in the scripture is called a walking, for
that as the body daily draws more and more* near his end, that is the
earth: even so our soul draws daily more and more, near the death, that is:
salvation or dampnation, heaven or hell. Of which thing, in that we are most
careless, and very foles (for we alas, are the same to day, we were yesterday,
and not better or nearer to God, but rather nearer to hell, Satan, and
perdition, being couetouse, idle, carnal, secure, neclige^t, proud, etc.) I
think my labor cannot be better bestowed, then with the Baptist, Christ Jesus,
and his Apostels, to harp on this stringe, which of all other is most
necessary, and that in these days most specially. What string is that says
one? Forsooth brother the stryng of repentance ye which Christ our savior did
use first in his ministry, and as his minister at this present I will use unto
you all.

Repent, for the kingedome of heaven is at hand. Math. iiij.

This sentence thus pronounced, and preached by our savior Jesus Christ, as
it does command us to repent, so to the doing of the same, it shows us a
sufficient cause to stir us up thereunto, namelye, for that the kingdom of
heaven (which is a kyngedome of all joy, peace, riches, power, and pleasure)
is at hand, to al such as do so, that is, as do repent. So that the meaning
hereof is, as though our savior might thus speak presently: Syrs, for that I
se you al walking the wrong way, even to Satan and unto hell fire, by
following the kyngedome of Satan, which now is colored under the pylled
pleasures of this life, and folyshnes of the flesh, most subtelly to your
utter undoing, and destruction: Behold and mark well what I say unto you:
The kingdom of heaven that is another manner of joy and felicity, honor,
and riches, power, and pleasure, then you now perceive or enjoy, is even at
hand, and at your backs, as if you will turn again, that is, repent you,
you shall most truly and pleasauntlye feel, see, and enherit: Turn again
therefore I say, that is: repent, for this joy I speak of, even the kingdom
of heaven, is at hand.

Here we may note first the corruption of our nature, in that to this
commandment, repent you, he adds a cause, for ye kingdom of heaven is at
hand: for by reason of the corruption and sturdines of our nature, God unto
all his commandments, commonly either adds some promise to provoke us to
obedience, or else some such sufficient cause, as cannot but tickle us up to
hearty labourynge, for the doing of the same: as here to the commandment of
doing penance, he adds this aitiologie or cause, saying: for the king dome
of heaven is at hand.

Again in that he joins to the commandment, the cause, saying: for the
kyngedome of heaven is at hand: we may learn that of the kyngedome of heaven,
none (to whom the ministerye of preaching does appertain) can be partaker, but
such as repent and do pennaunce.

Therefore dearly beloved, if you regard the kyngedome of heaven, in that you
cannot enter therein except you repent, I beseech you al of every estate as you
would your own weal, to repent and do penance, the which thing that you
may do, I will do my best now to help you by gods grace.

But first because we cannot well tell what repentance is, through ignorance,
and for lack of knoweledge, and false teaching, I will (to begin with all,
show you what repentance is.

Repentance or pennaunce is no English word, but we borowe it of the
Latinistes, to whom pennaunce is a forethinkynge in English, in Greek, a
being wise afterward, in Hebrewe, a conversion or turnyng, the which
conversion or turnynge, in that it can not be true and hartye unto God
especially, without some good hope or trust of pardone for that which is all
ready done and paste, I may well in this sort defyne it, namelye, that
pennaunce is a sorrowynge or forethynkynge of our sins paste, an earneste
purpose to amend, or turnynge to GOD, with a trust of pardone.

This diffinicion may be divided into three parts, that pennaunce or
repentance should contain, first a sorowynge for our synues: Secondlye a
trust of pardonne, which otherwise may be called a persuasion of Gods mercy,
by the merits of Christ, for the forgiveness of our sins: And thyrdely
apurpose to amend, or conversion to a new life: the which third or last
part, cannot be called properly a part, for it is but an effect of pennaunce,
as toward the end you shall se by Gods grace. But least such as seek for
occasion to speak evil, should have any occasion, though they tarry not out
the end of this sermon: I there fore deuyde penance into the iii foresaid
parts, of sorowing for our sin, of good hoope or trust of pardon, and of a
new life. Thus you now se what penance is, a sorowyng for sin, a purpose to
amend, with a good hope or trust of pardone.

This pennaunce not only differs from that which men comonlye have taken to
be pennaunce, in saying and doing our enjoined lady psalters, Seven Psalms,
fastinges, pilgrimages almose deeds, and such like things: but also from that
which the more learned have declared to consist of three parts, namely
Contricion, Confession and Satisfaction.

Contricion they call a just and a full sorrow for their sin, for this
word, just, and full, is one of the differences between contricion and
attricion.

Confession they call a numbering of all their sins in the ear of their
ghostly father: for as (say they) a judge cannot absolve with out knoweledge
of the cause or matter, so cannot the Preiste or gostly father absolve from
other sins, then those which he does hear.

Satisfaction they call a mendes making unto God for their sins, by their
undue works, opera indebita, works more the^ they need to do, as they term
them. This is their pennaunce which they preach, write, and allow: but how
true this gear is, how it agrees with gods word, how it is to be allowed,
taught, preached, and written, let us a little considre. If a man repent not
until he have a just and full sorowynge for his sins (dearly beloved) when
shall he repent? for inasmuche as hell fire, and the ponishment of the devils
is a just ponyshmente for sin: Inasmuch as in all sin, there is a contempt
of GOD, which is all goodness, and therefore there is a deserte of all
ylnesse: Alas who can bear or feel this just sorrow, this full sorrow for
our sins, this their contrition, which they so do discern from their
attricion? Shall not man by this doctrine rather despair then come by
repentance?

If a man repent not until he have made confession of all his sins, in the
ear of his goostlye father: if a man can not have absolution of his sins,
until his sins be told by tale and number, in the priests ear, in that as
Dauyd sayethe, none can understand, much less then utter al his sins.
Psa. xix
Delicta quis intelligit, Psalm xxxviij.
Who can understand his sins? in that David of him self complayneth (else
where,) how that this sins are over flowed his head, and as a heavy burden
do depresse him: halasse shall not a man by this doctrine be utterly driven
from repentance? Though they have gone about somethyng to make plasters for
their soores, of confession, or attricion, to aswage this gear, biddinge a man to hope well of his contricion, though it be not so full, as is required
and of his confession, though he have not nombred all his sins, if so be
that he do so much as in him lies: Dearelye beloved in that there is none but
that herein he is gyltye (for who does as much as he may) trow ye that this
plaster is not like salt for sore eyes? Yes undoubtedly when they have al
done they can for the appeasing of consciences in these points, this is the
some that we yet should hope well.

But yet so hope that we must stand in a mammeryng and doubting, whether
our sins be forgeuen. For to believe remissionem peccatorum, that is to be
certain of forgeuenes of sins, as our creed teaches us, they count it a
presumption. Oh abomination, and that not only hereat, but at all their
pennaunce as they paynte it.

As concerning Satisfaction by their opera indebita, vndewe works, that is by
such works as they need not to do, but of their own voluntarynesse, and
wylfulnesse (wylfulnesse in deed) who sees not monstrous abomination,
blasphemy, and even open fighting against God. For if Satisfaction can be
done by man, then Christ died in vain for him that so satisfies, and so
reyngneth he in vayn, is he a bishop and a Priest in vain.

Gods law requires love to God with all our heart, Den. vi
soul, mat. xxij
power, Mar. xx
might, and strenghte, so that there is nothing can be done to Godwarde,
Luke. x.
which is not contained in this commandment, nothing can be done over, and
above this.

Again Christ requires that to manward we should love one another, Ioh. xiij
as he loved us. Trow that we can do any good thing to our neyghbourwarde,
which is not herein comprised?

Yea, let them tell me when they do any thing so in the love of God and their
neighbor, but that they had need to cry, Mat. vi
Demitte nobis debita nostra.

Forgive us our sins, so far are we of, from satisfieng, does not Christ
say, Lu. xvij.
when you have done all things that I have commanded you, say that ye be but
unprofitable servants? Put no thing to my word, Ap. xxij.
says god. yes, De. iiij. xij.
works of supererogation, superabhomination say they. Whatsoever things are
true says the apostle S. Paul. Philip. iiij. whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are conueniente, whatsoever
things are of honest report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
have you them in your mind and do them, and the god of peace shall be with you.
I ween this well looked on, will pull us from popish satisfactory works
which do deface Christ's treasures and satisfaction.

In heaven and in earth was there none found that could satisfy gods anger
for our sins or get heaven for man, but only ye son of God Jesus Christ,
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, who by his blood has wrought the work of
satisfaction, and alonelye is worthy all honor, glory, and praise, for he
has opened the book with the seven seals, Apoca. v.

Dearly beloved, therefore abhor this abomination, eue^ to think that there
is any other satisfaction to Godward for sin, then Christ's blood only:
blasphemye it is, and that horriblye to think otherwise.

The blood of Christ purifieth (says S. John) from al sin, Apo* xiii
and therefore he is called ye lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
because there was never sin forgeuen of God, nor shall be from the beginning
unto the end of the world, but only through Christ's death, prate the pope
and his prelates as please them, with their pardons, purgatories, purgations,
place bois, trentales, diriges, works of supererogations, superabhominations.
etc.

Esaias. xliii. I am he says the Lord, which put away thine offenses, and
that for mine own sake, and will no more remember thine iniquities: put me in
remembrance (for we will reason together) and tell me what thou have for thee,
to make thee ryghtuous. Thy first father offended sore. etc. And thus writes
S. John, 1. Ioh. ij.
If any man sin we have an advocate says he with the father, eue^ Jesus
christ the ryghtuous, and he is the propiciation or satisfaction for our
sins: As in the.iiii. chapter, he says, that God has sent his Son to be
a propiciation or mean, for the taking away of our sins, according to
that which Paul writes. Heb. ii. where he calls Christ, a merciful and
faithful priest, to purge the peoples sins, so that blind bussardes, and
perverse papists they be, which yet will prate our merits or works, to
satisfy for our sins in part or in whole before baptism or after. For to
omyt the testimonies I brought out of John and Paul, which the blind cannot
but see: I pray you remember the text out of Esaye, which even now I
rehearsed, being spoken to such as were the^ the people of God, and had been a
long time, but yet were fallen into grievous sins after their adoption into
the number of gods children, it is for my own sake says God, that I put away
thy sins. Where is your partig of the stake now? if it be for gods own sake,
if Christ be the propitiation, the^ recant, except you will become ydolaters,
making your works God, and Christ? Say as David teaches: not to us lord,
not to us, but to thy name be the glory.

And it is to be noted that God does cast in their teeth, even the sin of
their first father, least they should think that yet perchance, for the
ryghtuousnes and goodness of their good fathers, their sins might be the
sooner pardoned, and so god accept their works. If they had made satisfaction
for that which is done to the congregation publicly by some notable
punishment, as in the primatyue church was used to open offenders, sparkles
whereof and some traces yet remain, when such as have sinned in adultry go
about the church with a taper in their shyrtes. Or if they had made
satisfaction for restitution to manward of such goods as wrong fully is
gotten, ye which true pennaunce cannot be without: Or if by satisfaction they
had mente a new life to make amends to the congregation thereby, as by their
evil life they did offend the congregation, in which sense the apostle seems
to take that which he writes.ii. Cor. vii. where tholde interpretoure calls
(...) satisfaction, which rather signifies a defense or answering again: if
I say, they had taken satisfaction any of these ways, then they had done well,
so that the satisfaction to God had been left alonely to Christ.

Again, if they had made confession either for that which is to god
pryuately, either for that which is to the congregation publikelye, either for
that which is a free consultation, with some one learned in gods book, and
appointed thereunto as first it was used, and I wysh were now used amongst us,
either for that which is a reconciliacion one to another, it had been
somethynge: yea if they had made it for faith, because it is a true
demonstration of faith, as in Paul we may se to the Romans the.x. and to the
Hebrews, when he calls Christ the captain of our confession, that is of our
faith. And so confessors were called in the prymitiue church, such as man
fully did witness their faith, with the parell of their lives: if I say they
had taken it thus, then had they done right well.

And so contricion, if they had left out their subtle distinction between it
and attricion by this word just or full, making it a hartye sorrow for their
sins, then we would never have cried out against them therefore. For we say
pennaunce has three parts, contricion, if you understand it, for a hartye
sorrowyng for sin. Confession, if you understand it for faith of free
pardonne in Gods mercy by Jesus Christ. And satisfaction if you understand
it not to Godwardes (for that only to Christ must be left alone) but to
manwarde in restitucion of goods, wrongefully or fraudulently gotten, of name
hindered by our sclau^ders, and in newenes of life: although as I said before,
and anon will show more plainly by gods grace, that this last is no part
of pennaunce in deed, but a plain effect or fruit of true pennaunce.

I might here bring in examples of their pennaunce, how perilous it is to be
embraced, but let the example of their graunde sier Judas serve, in whom we
see all the parts of their pennaunce, as they describe it, and yet
notwithstanding was he damned. He was sorry enough as the effect showed, he had
their contricion fully out of the which he confessed his fault saying: I have
betrayed innocent blood and thereunto he made satisfaction, restorynge the
money he had received. But yet all was but lost, he hanged up him self, his
bowelles burste out, and he remains a child of perdition for ever. I would
wish that this example of Judas, in whom you see the parts of their pennaunce
contricion, confession, and satisfaction, would move them to pennaunce, and to
describe it a little better, making hope or trust of Gods free mercy a piece
thereof, or else with Judas they will mar all.

Perchance these words, co^tricion, confession, and Satisfaction were used as
I have expounded them at the first. But in that we see so much danger and
hurt by using them without expositions, either let us join to them open
expositions always: or else let us not use them at all, but say as I write,
that pennaunce is a hartye sorrow for our sins, a good hope or trust of
pardone thorough Christ, which is not without an earneste purpose to amend,
or a new life. This pennaunce is the things whereto all the scripture calls
us, this pennaunce do I now call you al unto, this must be continuallye in us,
and not for a lent season, as we have thought, This must increase daily more
and more in us, without this we cannot be saved.

Search therefore your hearts all, all swearers, blasphemers, liars, flatterers,
baudye or idle talkers, gesters, bribers, couetouse, dronckardes, glottonnes,
whoremongers, thieves, murderers, slaunderers, idle lyuers, necligente in their
vocation. etc, All such and al other as lament not their sins, as hope not
in Gods mercy for pardon, as purpose not heartily to amend, to leave their
swearinge, drunkenness, shhoredome, covetousness, ydelnesse, etc. all such I
say shall not, nor cannot enter into Gods kyngedome, but hell fire is
prepared for them, wepinge and gnasshinge of teethe, whereunto alas I fear
me very many will needs goo, in that very many will be as they have been,
let us even to the wearynge of our toungue to the stompes, preach and pray
never so much to the contrary, and that even in the bowelles of Jesus
Christ, as now I beseech you all, all, all, and every mothers child, to
repent and lamente your sin, to trust in Gods mercy, and to amend your
lives.

Now me thinks you are some what astonnied, whereby I gather that presentlye
you desyer this repentance, that is, this sorrow, good hope, and newness of
life: the which that you may the rather attain and get to your comfortes,
as I have goone about to be a mean to stir up (by Goedes grace) this desiae
of repentance, so through the same grace of God, will I go about now to show
you, how you may have your desire in this behalf. And first concerning this
part, namely sorrow for your sins and hartye lamenting of the same.

For this (if you desire the having of it) you must beware that you think
not that of your selves, or of your own free will, by any means you ca^ get
it, you may easily deceive your selves, and mock your selves, thinking more of
your selves then is semelye.

Al good things, and not pieces of good things, but all good things (says
S. James comes from God ye father of light. Iam. i.
If therefore pennaunce be good (as it is good) then the parts of it be good.
From God therefore do they come, and not of our free will. It is the Lord that
mortifieth, i. Reg. ij
that brings down, that humbles says the scripture in sundry places.
After thou had stricken my thigh says Ieremye, Hie. xxxi
I was ashamed* Lo he says, after thou had stricken me: and therefore
prays he even the last words almoost he writes: Turn us lord and we shall
be turned, Lam. v.
the which thing Dauyd does very often. Wherefore, first of all, if thou
would have this part of pennaunce, as for the whole (because it is gods
gift. Acts. v
Act. xi. ii, Timo. ii. so for this part, go thou unto God, and make some
lyttel prayer, as thou can unto his mercy for the same in this or like sort.

Merciful father of our savior Jesus Christ, bcause I have sinned and done
wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire of repentance whereto
this long sufferaunce does draw my hard heart. I beseech thy mercy in Christ to
work the same repentance in me: and by thy spyryt, power, and grace, to
humble, mortifye, and fear my conscience for my sins to salvation, that in
thy time thou mayeste comfort and quycken me, thoroughe Jesus Christ thy
dearly beloved son. Ame^. After this sort I say, or otherwise, as thou
thynkeste good, if thou will have this first part, contricion, or sorrow for
thy sins, do thou beg it of God, through Christ. And when thou haste asked
it, as I have labored to drive the from trusting in thy self, so now I
gooe about to move thee from flattering of thy self, from sluggyshnes and
negligence, to be diligente to use these means following.

Unto prayer which I would thou should first use as thou can: Secondly,
get thee Gods law as a glass to toote in, for in it, and by it comes the
true knowledge of sin, without which knoweledge there can be no sorrow.
For how can a man sorrow for his sins, which knows not his sins? As
when a man is sick, the first step to health, is to know his syckenesse,
even so to salvation the first step thereto, is to know thy dampnation due
for thy sins.

The law of God therefore must be gotten, and well tooted in, that is, we
must look in it spirituallye, and not corporallye or carnally as the outward
word or letter does declare and utter, and so our savior teaches us in
the.v. of Math, expoundinge the.vi. and.vii. commandments, not only after
the outward deed, but also after the heart, making there the anger of the
heart a kind of murder, lustinge after an other man's wife, a kind of adulterye.

And this is one of the differences between Gods law and man's law. That of
this (man's law I mean) I am not condempnable, so long as I observe
outwardely the same.

But Gods law goes to the root, and to the heart, condempnynge me for the
inward mocion, although outwardlye I live most holely. As for example. If I
kill no man, though in my heart I hate: man's law co^dempneth me not: but
otherwise does gods law: And why, for it sees the fountain whence the evil
does spring, If hatred were taken out of the heart, loftiness in looks,
detraction in tongue, and murder by hand, could never ensue. If lustinge were
out of the heart, curiosity in countenance wanto^nes in words, the^ baudie
boldness, in body would not appear. In that therefore this outward evil
springes out of the inward corrupcion: seeing gods law also is a law of
liberty, as says S. James: Iam. ij.
And spiritual as says S. Paul: To. vij.
Perfectly and spiritually, it is to be understand, if we will truly come to
the knowledge of our sins. For of this inward corruption, reason knows but
little or nothing: To. vij.
I had not known says Paul, ye lusting (which to reason, and to them which
are gyded only by reason, is thought but a trifle) I had not known says he,
this lusting to have been sin, if ye law had not said Non concupisces, thou
shall not lust.

To the knowledge therefore of our sin (without which we cannot repent or be
sorry for our sin) let us secondly get gods law as a glass to toote in: and
that not only literally, outwardly, or partly, but also spiritually,
inwardlye, and thoroughly: let us consider the heart and so shall we see the
foul spots we are stained withal, at least inwardly, De tempore Barlarico
(...).
whereby we ye rather may be moved to harti sorrow and sighi^g For as s. Austen
says it is a glass which fears no body: but even look what a one part so it
paintes the out. In the law we see it is a foul spot not to love the Lord our
God wtal (al I say) our heart soul, power, might and strength, and that
continually, In the law it is a foul spotte, not only to make to our selves
any graven image or similitude, to bow thereto. etc, but also not to frame our
selfs wholly after the image whereto we are made not to bow to it, to worship
it. In the law we se yt it is a foul spot, not only to take gods name in vain:
but also not earnestli, heartily, and even continually to call upon his name
only, to give thanks unto him, to believe, to publishe, and to live his holy
word. In gods law we se it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an
open prophaner of ye saboth day: but also not to rest from our own words and
works yt ye lord might both speak and worcester us, and by us: not to hear his holy
word: not to communicate his Sacraments, not to give occasion to others to
holiness, by our example in godly works and reverent esteminge of the
ministry of his word.

In Gods law we see it a foul spot to our souls not only to be an open
disobeyer of our parents, magistrates, masters, and such as be in any
authority over us: but also not to honor such, even in our hearts, not to
give thanks to God for them, not to pray for them to aid, to help, or releue
them, to bear with their infirmities. etc. In Gods law we see it a foul
spotte in our souls not only to be a manqueller in hatered, malice, proud
looks, bragges, backbiting, raylinge, or bodily slaughter: but also no to love
our neighbors, yea our enemies, even in our hearts, and to declare ye same
in all our iesture words and works. In Gods law we see it a foul spot to our
souls, not only to be a whoremonger in lusting in our hearts in wanton
loking, in unclean or wanton talking, in actual doing unhonestly with out
neyghbors wife, daughter, servant. etc. but also not to be chaste, sobre,
temperate in heart, lokes, tongue, apparel, deeds, and to help others there
unto accordinglye. etc. In Gods law we see it is a soul spot to our souls,
not only in heart to covet, in look, or word, to flatter, lie, color, etc,
in deed to take away any thing which pertayneth to another: but also in heart
countenance, word and deed, not to keep, save, and defend that which
pertayneth to thy neighbor as thou would thine own.

In Gods law we may see it a foul spot, not only to lie, or bear false
witness against any man but also not to have as great care over thy neighbors
name, as over thine own. Sin in gods law it is (we may se) and a foul spot
not only to consent to evil, lust, or carnal desires, but eue^ the very
natural or carnal lusts and desires themselves, for so I may call the^ natural
it self, being now so corrupted as self love, and many such like, by reason
whereof, I trow there is none* that toteth well herein, but though he be blameles
to ye world and fair to ye show, yet certaynely inwardly, his face is foul
araied and so shamful saucie ma^gie, pocked and skabbed, yt he cannot, but be
sorry, at the co^te^placio^ thereof: and that so much more by how much he
continues to look in this glass accordingly. And thus much co^cerni^g the
second mean to ye stirring up of sorrow for our sin: yt next unto prayer, we
should tote in gods law spiritually: yt which toting if we use with prayer (as I
said) let us not doubt, but at ye length, gods spirit will work, as now to such
as believe, (for to ye unbelievers al is in vayn: Their eyes ar stark blind they
can see nothing) to such as believe (I say) I trust something is done eue^
already. But if nether by prayer nor by tooting in Gods law spiritually, as yet
thy hard unbelieving heart fealeth no sorrow nor lame^ting for thy sin: Thirdly
look upon ye tagge tied to gods law, for as to ma^s laws, there is a tagge
tied, yt is a penalty. So is there to Gods law a tagge tied, that is a
penalty: and that no small one, but such a great great one, as cannot, but
make us to cast our currish tails between our legs, if we believe it, for all
is in vain, if we be faythles not to believe, before we feel.

This tage is Gods maledictio^ or curse, Gal. iij.
maledictus omnis (says it) qui no^ permanet in omnibus quae scripta sunt in
libro legis ut faciat eam, Lo, accursed (says he) is al no acception, al
says God which continues not, in all things (for he that is guilty of one is
guilty of the whole lays S. James) In all things therefore, (says the holy
ghost) which are written in the book of the law to do them: he says not to
hear them, to talk of them, to dispute of them, but to do them.

Who is he now that does these? Rara auis, few such birds, yea none at all.
For all are gone out of the way, though not outwardlye by word or deed, yet
inwardly at the least, by defaulte and wantinge of that which is required: so
that a child of one nights age is not pure, but (by reason of birth sin) in
danger of Gods malediction. Much more the^ we which halas have dronken in
iniquity as it were water, Job. xv.
as Job says: but yet halas we quake not. Tell me now good brother why do
you so lightely consider Gods curse, that for your sins past you are so
careless as though you had made a covenant with death and damnation as the
wicked did in Esayes time? what is Gods curse? At the popes curse with book,
bell, and candle, oh how trembled we, which hard it but only, though the
same was not dyrected unto us, but unto others, but to this Gods curse,
which is inco^parably, more fell, and importable, and is directed, yea ha^ging
over us al, by reason of our sins, halas how careless ar we? Oh faythles hard
hearts. Apoc. iij.
Oh Iezabels gestes, rocked and laid a sleep in her bed, Oh wicked wretches,
which being come into the deep of sin do co^te^pne the same, Oh sorowles
sinners and shameless shrinking harlots, Is not the anger of a king death? and
is ye anger of the king of al kings a matter to be so lightlye regarded, as we
do regard it, which (for our sins) are so recheles yt we slug and sleep it
out? As wax melts away at the heat of ye fire (says David) so do the
wicked perish, at the face or countenance of the Lord: If dearly beloved his
face be so terrible, and intolerable for sinners, and ye wicked: What trow we
his hand is? At the face or apearing of gods anger, the earth trembles: but we
earth, earth, yea stones, iron, flintes, tremble no thing at al? if we will not
tremble in hearing, woe unto us for then shall we be crasshed a pieces in
feelinge: if a lion rore the beasts quake, but we are worsse the^ beasts,
which quake nothing at the roaring of the lion, I mean ye lord of hosts. And
why? because the curse of God, hardenes of heart, Chreno. iij, is already
fallen upon us, or else we could not but lament and tremble for our sins, if
not for the shame and foulenes thereof: yet at the least for the maledictio^
and curse of God, which ha^geth over us for our sins.

Lord be merciful unto us for thy Christ's sake, and spare us in thine anger,
remember thy mercy toward us. Amen.

And thus much for the third thing to the moving of us to sorrow for our
sins (that is for ye tagge tied to Gods law, I mean for the malediction and
curse of God.

But if our hearts be so hard that through these we yet feel not hearty sorrow
for our sins: Let us fourthlye set before us examples past, and present, old
and new: that thereby the holy spirit may be effectual to work in his time,
this work of sorowing for our sin.

Look upon Gods anger for sin in Adam and Eve: For eating a piece of an apple.
Were not they the dearest creatures of god cast out of Paradyse? were not they
subject to mortality, traueil labor. etc? was not the earth accursed for
their sins? Do not we all, men in labor, women in traueling with child,
and all in death, mortality, and misery, even in this life feel the same?
And was god so angry for their sin and he being the same God, will he say
nothing to us for ours, halas much more horrible then the eating once of one
piece of an apple?

In the time of Noe and Lot, Genesis vi.
God destroyed the whole world with water, Genesis xix
and the cities of Sodoma and Gomorra, Seboim and Adamah with fire and brimston
from heaven, for their sins: Namely for their whoredoms, pride, idleness,
unmercifulness to the poor, tyranny. etc. In which wrath of God even the very
babes, birds, fowls, fishes, herbs trees, and grass perisshed. And think
we that nothing wylbe spoken to us, much worse and more abominable the^
they? For all me^ may see if they will ye the whoredo^s, pride, unmercifulness,
tirannie. etc, of England far passes in this age, any age yt ever was before.
Genesis xix
Lots wife loking back was turned into a salt stone, and will our loking back
again, yea our running back again to our wickedness do us not hurt? if we were
not already more blind the^ bettels we would blush. Pharao his heart was
hardened so yt no miracle could convert him: if ours were any thing soft, we
would begin to sobbe.

Of six hundredth thousand men, Iosu^ and Caleb.
alonely but twain entered into the land of promise, because they had te^ times
sinned against the Lord, as he him self says. Number, 14. And trow we that god
will not swear in his wrath, that we shall never enter into his rest, which
have sinned so many ten times as we have toes and fingers, yea hears of our
heads and beardes I fere me, and yet we pass not.

The man that swear, Leu. 24 and he that gathered sticks on the Saboth day,
Number. 13. were stoned to death: but we think our swearing is no sin, our
bibbing, rioting, yea, whore hunting on the Saboth day, pleases god or else we
would some thing amend our manners.

Helias negligence in correcting his sons, i. reg. iij.
nipped his neck in two: But ours which pa^per up our children like puppets,
will put us to no plounge?

Helias sons for disobeying their fathers monicion brought over them Gods
vengeance, and will our stubbernes do nothing?

Saul his malice to David, iij. Reg xxi. xxij.
Achabs displeasure against Naboth, brought their blood to the ground for
dogs to eat, 4. kin. 21
yea their children were hanged up and slain for this gear, 4. kin. 10
but we continue in malice, envy, and murder, as though we were able to wage
war with the Lord.

David's adultrie with Bethsabe was vysyted on the child borne, 2. kin. 11 xij.
xiij. xvi. xv
on David's daughter, defiled by her brother, and on his children one slaying
another, on his wives defiled by his own son, on him self driven out of his
realm in his old age, and otherwise also, although he most heartily repented
his sin: but we are more dear unto god the^ David, which yet was a man after
gods own heart, or else we could not but tremble, and begin to repent.

The rich glottonnes gaye paunche fyllynge, Lu. xvi.
what did it? it brought him to hell, and have we a plackarde that God will do
no thing to us.

Achams subtle theft provoked Gods anger against all Israel: Iosu. vij
and our subteltie, yea open extorcion is so fine and politic, that God cannot
espy it.

Giezi his covetousness brought it not the leprosy upon him, iiii. re. v
and on all his sede. Act. i.
Judas also hanged him self: But the covetousness of England is of an other
cloothe and coulloure. well, if it were so, the same tailor will cut it
accordyngelye.

Anania and Saphira by lyinge, Act. v.
lynked to them sudden death: but ours now prolongeth our life the longer,
to last in eternal death.

The false witnesses of the two Judges against Susanna, Da. xiij
light on their own pates, and so will ours do at length.

But what go I about to auouche aunciente exaumples, where daily experience
does teach. The sweat the other year, the storms the winter following will us
to way them in the same ballaunces.

The hanging, and killing of men them selves, which are alas to ryfe in all
places, requier us to register them in the same rolls.

At the least in Children, infauntes, and such like, which yet can not utter
sin by word or deed, we see Gods anger against Sin, in punysshynge them
by syckenes, death, myshappe or otherwise so plainly that we cannot but groan
and grount again, in that we a little more have gusshed out this gear
gorgeousely in word and deed.

And here with me a litel look on gods anger, yet so fresh, that we cannot but
smell it, although we stop our noses never so much I pray God we smell it not
more fresh hereafter. I mean it forsooth (for I know you look for it) in our
dear late sovereign lord the kings majesty. You al know he was but a child
in years: defiled he was not with notorious offenses. Defiled quod he? nay
rather adorned with so many good and wonderful qualities as never prince was
from the beginning of ye world. Should I speak of his wisdom? of his rypenes
in judgment? of his learning? of his Godly zeal, heroical heart, fatherly
care for his commons, norcely solicitude for religion? etc nay so many
things are to be spoken in commendatio^ of gods excedyng graces in this
child, that as Salust writes of Chartage I had rather speak nothing then to
little, in yt to much is to little. This gift God gave unto us Englysh men,
before all nations under the son, and that of his exceeding love toward us.
But alas and welawaye for our unthankfulness sake, for our sins sake, for our
carnalitie, and prophan living, gods anger has touched not only ye body, but
also the mind of our king, by a long sycknes, and at length has taken him
away by death, death, cruel death, fearful death, death. etc

Oh if Gods judgment be begone on him, which as he was the chiefest, so I
think the holiest, and godliest in ye realm of England, Psalm. xxxvij.
alas what will it be on us, whose sins are ouergrowne so our heads, that
they are climed up into heaven.

I pray you my good brethren know that gods anger for our sins toward us
cannot but be great, yea to fell, in that we se it was so great, that our
goodking could not bear it. What followed to Iewry after the death of Josias?
God save England, and give us repentance, my heart will not suffer me to tarry
longer herein. I trow this will thruste out some tears of repentance.

If therefore to prayer for gods fear, the tootynge in gods glass and the tagge
thereto, will not burste open thy blockysh heart, yet I trow the tossinge to
and fro, of these examples, and specially of our late king, and this
troublesome time, will tomble some tears out of thine heart, if thou still
pray for Gods spirit accordynglye. For who art thou (think always with thy
self) that GOD should spare thee, more then they, whose examples thou have
hard? what friends haste thou? were not of these, Kings, Prophets, Apostles,
Learned, and commen of holy stocks? I deceive my self, think thou with thy
self, if I believe GOD, being the same GOD that he was, will spare me, whose
wickedness is no less, but much more then some of theyrs: he hates sin
now, as much as ever he did: the longer he sparethe, the greater vengeance
will fall. The deeper he draws his bow, the soorer will the shafte pearce.

But if yet thy heart be so hardened, that all this gear will not move thee:
Suerlye thou art in a very evil estate, and remedy now know I none. What
said I none? know I none? yes, yet there is one which is suresbye as they
say, to serve if any thing will serve. you look to know what this is?

Forsooth the passion and death of Jesus CHRIST. You know the cause why
Christ become man, and suffered as he suffered, was the sins of his people
thot he might save them from the same. Consider ye greatness of the soore. I
mean sin, by the greatenes of the Surgion, and of the salve. Who was the
Surgion? no Angel, no saint, no Archaungel, no power no creature in heaven,
nor in earth, but only he by whom al things were made, all things are ruled
also, even Gods own dearlyng, and only beloved Son, beco^mynge man.

Oh what a great thing is this that could not be done by the angels,
archau^gels, potestates, powers, or all the creatures of God, without his own
Son, who yet must needs be thruste out of heaven, as a man would say, to
take our nature and become man? Here have ye the surgion, great was the cure
that this mighty Lord took in hand.

Now, what was the salve? Forsooth dear gear, and of many compositions. I
cannot recite al, but rather must leave it to your hartye considerations. Three
and thyrtye years was he curing our sore: he sought it earnestly, by
fasting, watchinge, prayinge. etc.

The same night he was betrayed, mat. xx^*
I read how busy he was about a plaster in the garden, Lu. xxij.
when he lying flat on ye ground prayenge with tears, and that of blood not a
few, but so many as did flow down on the ground again, cryinge on this
sort: Father says he, if it be possible, let this ruppe depart from me,
that is, if it be possible else mankyndes sins can be taken away, grant
that it may be so. Thou hardest Moses cryinge for the ydolaters: Thou hardest
Lot for the zoarites: Samuel, Dauyd, and many other for the Israelites, and
dear Father, I only am thine own son, as thou have said, in whom thou
art well pleased, will thou not hear me? I have by the space of three and
thyrty years done always thy will, I have so humbled my self that I would
become an abiecte amongeste men to obey thee: Therefore dear father if it be
possible grant my request, save mankind now without any further labor,
Salues, or playsters? But yet (says he) not as I will, but as thou will.

But sir what hard he? though he sweat blood and water in making his
plaster for our sore of sin, yet it framed not: twyse he cried without
comfort: yea* though to comfort him, GOD sent an Angel, we yet know that
this Plaster was not allowed for sufficient, until hereunto Christ Jesus was
betrayed, forsaken of all his Discyples, forsworn of his dearelye beloved,
bound like a thief, belyed on, buffeted, whypped, skourged, crowned with
thorns, derided, crucified, racked, nailed, hanged up between two thieves,
cursed and rayled upon, mocked in myserye, and had given up the ghost
then bowed down the head of Christ, that is GOD the father, which is the
head of Christ, i. Corinth. xi. then allowed he the plaster to be sufficient
and good for the healynge of our sore, which is sin. Now would God abide our
breath, because the stincke, that is dampnation or gyltynesse was taken away,
by the sweet savor of the breath of this lamb, thus offered once for all.

So that here dearelye beloved, we as in a glass, may se to the broosynge of
our blockyshe hard hearts, Gods great judgment and anger against sin:
The Lord of Lords, they king of kings, the brightness of Gods glory, the
son of GOD, the dearelynge of his father, in whom he is well pleased,
hangs between two thieves, Psalm. xxiij.
cryinge for thee and me, and for us all, My God, my god, why haste thou
forsaken me?

Oh hard hearts that we have which make tuttes for sin? look on this
toote in the very heart of Christ, pierced with a spear, wherein thou
mayeste see and read Gods horrible anger for sin? woo to thy hard heart
that pearsed it.

And thus much for the first part of repentance, I mean for the means of
workynge contricion. First use prayer, the^ look on GODS law, thyrdely, se
his curse, fourthlye, set exaumples of his anger: and last of all, set
before thee, the death of Christ, from this and prayer cease not, till thou
feel some hartye sorrow for thy Sin. The which when thou fealeste, then
labor for the other part, that is faith on this sort.

As first in contrition I willed thee not to trust to thy free will for
thattaininge of it, so do I will thee in this. Faith is so far from the
reach of man's free will: that to reasonne it is plain folyshnes. Therefore
thou must first go to GOD, whose gift it is: thou must I say, get thee
to the father of mercy, whose work it is,

John the syxth, that as he has brought ye down by contricion, and humbled
thee, so he would give the faith, raise thee up, Collossians. ii, and exalte
thee.

On this manner therefore, with the Apostles, and the poor man in the Gospel
that cried, Lord increase our fayeth, Lord help my unbelief, pray thou
and say.

O merciful GOD, and dear father of our Lord and sauyoure Jesus Christ, in
whom as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him,
forasmuch as he often bids us, to ask of thee, and there to promyseth that
thou will hear us, and grant us that which in his name we shall ask of
thee: Lo gracious father I am bold to beg of thy mercy thoroughe thy Son
Jesus Christ, one sparckle of true faith and certain persuasion of thy
goodness, and love toward me in Christ, where through I being assewred of
the pardonne of all my sins, by the mercyes of Christ thy Son, may be
thankful to thee, love thee, and serve thee, in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

On this sort I say, or otherwise, as God shall move thee, pray thou first
of all, and look for thy request at GODS hand without any doubtyng,
though forthwith thou feeleste not the same: for often times we have things
of GOD given us, long before we feel them as we would do. Now unto this
prayer use thou these means following.

After prayer for faith, which I would should be first: Secondlye because
the same spryngeth out of the hearing, not of Masses, Mattens, Cannons,
councels doctors, decrees, but out of the hearing of gods word: Get the gods
word, but not that part which serves specially to contricion, that is the
law, but the other part which serves specially to consolacion, and certain
persuasion of gods love toward the, that is the Gospel or publication of Gods
mercy in Christ, I mean the free promyses.

But here thou must know, yt there is two kinds of promises one which are
properly of ye law, another which are properly of the Gospel.

In the promyses of the law, we may in deed behold Gods mercy, but so that
it ha^geth over the condition of our worthynes, as if thou love the Lord with all thy heart. etc, thou shalt find mercy.

This kind of promyses though it declare unto us Gods love, which promises
where he needs not, yet unto him that feleth not Christ, which is the end of
the law, they are so far from co^fortinge, that utterly with the law, they
bring manne to great despair, so greatly we are corrupt: for none so loves
GOD as he ought to do. From these therefore get the to the other promyses of
the Gospel in which we may see such plenty and frank liberalite of Gods
goodness, that we can not, but be much comforted, though we have very depelye
sinned.

For these promyses of the gospel do not hang on the condition of our
worthynesse as the promyses of the law do: but they depend and hang on Gods
truth, that as GOD is true, so they can not, but be performed to al the^
which lay hold on them by faith, I had almost said which cast them not away by
unbelief.

Mark in them therefore two things, nameli, that as well they are free
promyses, without any condition of our worthiness, as also that they are
universal, offered to al, (all I say) which are not so stubborn as to keep
still* their hands, whereby they should receive this alms in their bosoms
by unbelief: As concerning infantes and children you know I now speak not,
but concerning such as be of years of discrecion.

And now you look that I should give you a taste of these promyses which are
both free and universal, excepting none but such, as except themselves? Well
you shall have one or two for a say.

In the third of John says our Savior: so God the Father loved the world,
that he would give his dearling, his own only son, that all that believe in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Lo sir, he says not that
some might have life: but al says he, And what all? all yt love him with all
their hearts? all yt have lived a godly life? nay, all yt believe in him, all
though thou have lived a most wicked and horrible life, if now thou believe in
him, thou shalt be saved. Is not this sweet gear?

Again says Christ. Mat. xi come unto me all you that labor, and are laden,
and I will refresh you. Let us a little look on this letter: come unto me. Who
should come Lord? Priests, Holy men, Monks, Freres? Yea cobblers, tinkers,
whores, thieves, murderers also, if they lamente their sins. Come unto me
says he, all ye that labor and are laden, that is, which are afraid for your
sins: And what will thou do Lord? and I will refreshe you says he.

Oh what a thing is this: and I will refresshe you: wot you who spoke this?
he that never told lie, ^. Pet. ii.
he is the truth, there was never gyle found in his mouth: and now will he be
untrue to the good brother, which art sorry for thy grievous sins? no
forsooth? Heaven and earth shall pass and perish, Mat. 24*
but his word shall never fail.

Saint Paul says, i. Tim. ij God would have all men saved: lo he excepteth
none. And to Titus. ij, the grace of God brings salvation to all me^. As from
Adam all have received sin to dampnation: so by Christ al have grace offered
to salvation, if they reject not the same. I speak not now of infantes I
say: nor I need not to enter into the matter of predestinacion, In preathinge
of repentance, I would gather where I could with Christ.

As surely as I live says god I will not the death of a sinner. Ezec. 3.
Art thou a sinner? yea. Lo god swears he will not thy death, how canste
thou now perish? Consider with thy self what profit shouldeste thou have to
believe this to be true to others, if not to thy self also. Satan does so:
Rather consider with Peter, that the promise of salvation pertayneth not only
to them which are nigh, Actun^. ij
that is, to such as are fallen a little: but also to all whom the LORD has
called, be they never so far of. Lo now by me the Lord calls thee thou
manne, thou woman, that art very far of. The promise therefore pertayneth to
thee, needs must thou be saved, except thou with Satan say, GOD is false:
ij. tim. ij.
and yet if thou do so, GOD is faithful, and can not deny him self: as thou
shall feel by his plages in hell, for so dishonoringe God to think that he is
not true.

Will he be found false now? the matter hangs not on thy worthynesse, but it
hangs on Gods truth. Clap hold on it, and I warrante thee, Christ is the
propiciation of our sins, yea for the sins of the whole world Believe this
man, I know thou beleuest it: Lu. xvij.
say therefore in thy heart still, Mar. ix.
Domine adauge mihi fide^, lord increase my faith Lord help my unbelief. John.
xx
Blessed are they which see not (by reason this gear) but yet believe. Hope man
past all hope, as Abraham did Roma. iiij.

And thus much for a taste of these promyses which are every where, not only
in the new testament, but also in the old. Read the last end of Leuiticum.
xxvi. The Prophet Esaias from the.xl Chapt. in the.xxx. says he, God tarrieth
loking for thee, to show the mercy, read the.ij. Regum. xxiiij. Psalm.
xxxiij. Joel. ij. etc.

Howebeit, if this gear will not serve, if yet thou fealeste no faith, no
certain persuasion of Gods love: then unto prayer, and diligent consyderinge
of the free and universal promyses of the Gospel.

Thyrdely set before the, those benefits, which god has to foregeuen thee,
and presently gives thee. Consider how he has made the a man, or a woman,
which might have made the a tode, a dog And why did he this? verily because
he loved the: and trow est thou that if he loved the, when thou wast not, to
make the such a one, as he most graciouslye has made ye, will he not troweste
thou now love the, being his handye work? does he hate any thing that he
made? is there unableness with him? does he love for a day and so fare well? Ioh.
xiij
no forsooth, he loves to the end, Psa. 87
his mercy endures for ever. Say therefore with Job, Operimanuum tuarum
porrige dexteram to the work of thy hand, put thy helping hand.

Again has he not made the a Christian man or woman, where if he would, he
might have made thee a Turk or Paynim: This thou knoweste he did of love.
And do thou think his love is lessoned if thou lamente thy sin? is his
hand shortened for helpinge thee. Can a womanne forgette the child of her
womb? and though she should do it, yet will not I forgette the says the
Lord.

He has given thee limbs, to see, hear, go. etc, He has given thee wit,
reason, discretion, etc. He has long spared thee, and borne with thee, when
thou never purposedst to repent, and now thou repenting, will he not give thee
mercy? wherefore does he give the to live at this present? to hear me to
speak this, and me to speak this? but of love to us all. Oh therefore let us
pray him that he would add to this, that we might believe these love tokens,
that he loves us, and in deed he will do it. Lord open our eyes, in thy
gifts to see thy gracious goodness. Amen.

But to tarrye in this I will not: every man let him consider Gods benefytes,
paste, and present, publyke and private, spiritual and corporal, to the
confirminge of his faith concerning the promyses of the Gospel, for the
pardone of his sins. I will now go to show you a fourth mean to confirm
your faith of this gear, even by examples.

Of these there are in the scriptures very many, as also daily experience does
diversely teach the same, if we were diligente to observe things accordinglye,
wherefore I will be more brief herein, having respect to time, which steals
fast away.

Adam in Paradyse transgressed grievously as the paynful punishment, Genesis iii.
which we al as yet do feel, proves, if nothing else.

Though by reason of his sin he displeased God, sore and ran away from God,
for he would have hyd him self, yea he would have made God the causer of his
sin, in that he gave him such a mate, so far was he from askinge merry yet
all this not withstandinge, GOD turned his fearce wrath, nether upon him, nor
Eve, which also required not mercy, but upon the serpente Satan: Promysing
unto them a sede Jesus Christ, by whom they at the lenght should be
delivered: In token whereof, though they were cast out of Paradyse, for their
nurture, to serve in sorrow, which would not serve in joy, yet he made the^
apparel to cover their bodies, a visible sacrament and toke^ of his inuisyble
love and grace, concerning their souls.

If God was so merciful to Adam, which so sore brake his commandment, and
rather blamed God, then asked mercy, troweste thou oh man, that he will not be
mercyful to the, which blameste thy self and desyrest pardon.

To Cayn he offered mercy, Genesis iiij
if he would have asked it: What haste thou done says God? the voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me, out of the earth: Oh merciful Lord (should Cayn
have said) I confess it. But halas he did not so: And therefore said God. Now,
that is, in that thou desyrest not mercy, now I say: be thou accursed. etc. Lo
to the reprobate he offered mercy, and will he deny it thee which art his
child.

Noah did not he sin and was dronke: Gent. ix
God Lot also both in Sodom dissembled a little with the Angels, Genesis xix
prolonginge the time, and out of Sodom he fell very foul: Gene. 38 xxxvij.
as did Judas, and the Patriarchs, against Joseph, but yet I wene they found
mercy.

Moses, Number. xi
Myriam, Aaron, though they tombled a little, yet received they mercy: yea the
people in the wilderness often sinned and displeased God so that he was
purposed to have destroyed them: Exodus 32
let me alone says he to Moses, that I may destroy them, but Moses did not
let him alone, for he prayed still for them, and therefore God spared them.
If the people were spared through Moses prayer, they not praying with him,
but rather worshipping their golden calfe, eatinge, drinkinge, and making ioly
good cheer: why shouldeste thou doubt, whether God will be merciful to thee:
having as in deed thou have, one much better then Moses to pray for thee and
with thee, To. viij
even Jesus Christ who sytteth on the right hand of his father and prays for
us, Hebr. iij.
being no less faithful in his fathers house the church the^ moses was in the
Sinagoge. ii. Re. ^i.
David ye good King, had a foul foil, when he committed whoredom, with his
faithful servants wife Bethsabe, where unto he added also a mischeuous
murder, causing her husband his most faithful soldier Vrye to be slain with
an honest company of his most valiant me^ of war, and that with the swearde
of the vncircumcisised. In this his sin though a great while he lay a sleep
(as many do now a days, god give them win waking) thinking that by his
sacrifices he offered, all was well, God was content: yet at length when the
Prophet by a parable had opened the poke and brought him in remembrance of his
own sin in such sort, yt he gave judgment against him self, the^ quaked
he, his sacryfices had no more taken away his sins, then our sir John's
trentals, and waggynge of his fyngers over the heads of such as lie aslepe in
their sins, out of the which when they are awaked, they will well se, it is
nether mass, nor mattens, blessyng, nor crossyng will serve? then (I say) he
cried out saying, peccaui domino, I have sinned says he against my Lord,
and good god which has done so much for me, I caused in deed Vrye to be
killed, I have sinned, I have sinned, what shall I do? I have sinned and am
worthy of eternal dampnatio^. But what says God by his Prophet: Dominus
(says he) transtulit peccatum tuu^ non morieris, the Lord has taken away
thy sins, thou shall not dye. Oh good God, he said but peccaui, I have
sinned, but yet from his heart, and not from the lyppes only, as Pharao and
Saul did, and incontinentelye he hears: Thou shalt not dye: the Lord has
taken away thy sins, or rather has laid them upon an other, yea translated
them upon the back of his son Jesus Christ, who bare them, and not only
them, but thine and mine also, if that we will now cry, but from our hearts,
peccauimus, we have sinned good Lord, we have done wickedlye, enter not into
judgment with us, but be merciful unto us after thy great mercy, and according
to ye multitude of thy compassions, do away our iniquities. etc. For indede God
is not the god of David only, Romans x.
Idem deus omnium, he is the God of all: So that Quicunque inuocauerit nomen
domini salus erit He or she whosoever they be that call upon the name of the
lord, shall be saved: In confyrmation whereof, this historye is written, as are
also the other, I have recited, and many mo which I might recyte.

As of Manasses ye wicked king, which slew Esaias the prophet, and wrought
very much wickedness, yet the Lord showed mercy upon him, being in preson,
as his prayer does teach us. Nabugodonozar, Dan. iij
though for a time he bare gods anger, yet at ye length he found mercy. The
city of Niniue also found favor with God, Iona. iij.
as did many other, which I will omit for times sake and will bring forth one
or two out of the new testament, that we may se God, the same God in ye new
testament he was in tholde.

I might tell you of many if I should speak of ye Lunatike, such as were
possessed with deuyls, lame, blind, domme, deaf, lepers etc. but time will not
suffice me, one or two therefore shall serve. Mary Magdalene had seven
deuylles, but yet they were cast out of her, and of all others, she was the
first that Christ appeared unto after his resurrection. Ioh. xx.
Thomas would not believe christ's resurrection though many told him which
had seen and felt him, by reason whereof a man might have thought, that his
sins would have cast him away: except I should see and feel (says he) I
will not believe. Ah wylfull Thomas: I will not says he, but Christ appeared
unto him, and would not leese him, as he will not do thee good brother, if
that with Thomas thou will keep company with the disciples as Thomas did.
Ioh. xx.
Peter his fall was vgglie, he accursed him self if ever he knew Christ, mat
xxvi
and that for fear of a gyrle, Lu. xxiii
and this not once, but even three diverse times, and that in the hearing of
Christ his master, but yet the third time christ looked back, and cast on him
his eye of grace, so that he went out and wept bitterly: and after christ's
resurrection not only did the angels will the women to tell Peter that
Christ was risen but Christ him self appeared unto him seuerallye: such a good
Lord is he.

The thief hanging on the cross, said but thus: Lord when thou come into
thy kyngedome remember me, and what au^swer had he? This day says Christ
shalt thou be with me in paradyce. Lu. xxiij
What a comfort is this, in that he is now the same Christ, to thee, and me,
and us all, if we will run unto him: Heb. xiij
For he is the same Christ to day and to morrow, until he come to judgment.
Then in deed, he wylbe in exorable, but now is he moore ready to give then
thou to ask, if thou cries he hears thee, yea before thou cry. Cry
therefore, be bold man, Esa. xxx
he is not parciall, call says he, and I will hear thee. Ask, and thou
shalt have, seek and thou shall find, Mat. vij
though not at the first, yet at the length, if he tarry a while, it is but to
try thee. Nam veniens ueniet, et non tardabit. Heb. x*
He is coming and will not be long.

Thus have you. iiii. means, which you must use to that tayning of faith, or
certain persuasion of gods mercy toward you, which is the second part of
pennaunce: namely, prayer, the fre and universal promises of Gods grace, the
recordation of the benefits of god past and present, the examples of gods
mercy, which although they might suffice, yet will I put one moo to them,
which alonelye of it self is full sufficient, I mean the death of the son
of God Jesus Christ, which if thou set before the eyes of thy mind it will
confyrme thy plackarde, for it is the great seal of England, as they say,
yea of all the world, for the confyrmation of all patentes and perpetuities of
the everlasting life, whereunto we are all called.

If I thought these which I have before recited, were not sufficient to
confyrme your faith of gods love toward such as do repent. I would tarry
longer herein: But because both I have been long, and also I trust you have
some exercise of conscience in this daily (or else you are to blame) I will but
touch and go. Consider with your selves, what we are, misers, wretches, and
enemies to God: Consider what God is, even he which has al power, majesty,
might glory, riches, etc. perfectlye of him self, and neadeth nothing, but
has all things: Consider what Christ is: Concerning his godhead, coequall with
his father, even he by who^ al things were made are ruled and governed:
Concerning his manhood, the only dearlyng of his father, in whom is all his
joy. Now sir what a love is this, that this God, which neadeth nothing, would
give wholly his own self to thee his ennemy, wreakyng his wrath upon him
self, in this his son, as a man may say, to spare the, to save thee, to win thee, to bye thee, to have thee, to enjoy thee for ever.

Because thy sin had separated the from him, to the end you myghteste come
eftsoon into his company again, and therein remain, he him self became as a
man would say, a sinner, or rather sin it self, even a malediction or a
curse: that we sinners, we accursed by his sin, that by his oblation or
offeringe for our sins, by his curse, might be delivered from sin, from
malediction. For by sin, he destroyed sin, killinge death, satan, and
sin, by their own weapons, and that for thee and me (man) if we cast it not
away by unbelief. Oh wonderful love of God? who ever hard of such a love?
The father of heaven for us his ennemies, to give his own dear son Jesus
Christ, and that not only to be our brother, to dwell among us, but also to
the death of the cross for us? Oh wonderful love of Christ to us all: that was
content and wylling to work this feate for us? Was there any love like to this
love?

God in deed has commended his charity and love to us herein, Rom* v.
that when we were very enemies unto him, he would give his own son for us:
That we being men, might become as you would say gods, God would become man:
That we being mortal, might become immortal, the immortal God would become
mortal man: That we earthlye wretches might be sitizens of heaven, the Lord of
heaven would become as a man would say earthlye, that we being accursed,
might be blessed, God would be accursed: That we by our father Adam, being
brought out of paradise, into the puddel of al pain, might be redeemed, and
brought into paradyce again, god would be our father, and an Adam there unto:
That we having nothing, might have all things, God having all things, would
have nothing. That we being vessels and slaves to al, even to satan ye fend,
might be lords of all, and of Satan, the lord of al would become a vassal
and a slave to us all, and in danger of Satan: Oh love incomprehensible? who
can otherwise think now, but if the gracious good Lord disdayned not to give
his own Son, his own hearts joy for us his very ennemies, tofore we thought
to beg any such thing at his hands, ye tofore we were: who I say, can think
otherwise, but that with him he will give us all good things?

If when we hated him, and fled away from him, he sent his son to seek
us, who can think otherwise, the^ yt now we loving him, and lamenting
because we love him no more, but that he will for ever love us.

He that gives the more to his enemies, will not he give the less trow you
to his friends? God has given his own son, then which thing, nothing is
greater to us his enemies, and we now being become his friends, will he deny
us faith, and pardone of our sins, which though they be great, yet in
comparisone, nothing at all.

Christ Jesus, would give his own self for us, when we wylled it not, and
will he now deny us faith if we will it.

This will is his earnest that he has given us, Phil. ij.
truly to look in deed, for the thing wylled: And look thou for it in deed,
for as he has given thee to will, so will he give thee to do.

Jesus Christ gave his life for our euylles, and by his death delivered us:
Oh, then in that he lives now, and cannot dye, will he forsake us? His heart
blood was not to dear for us, when we asked it not: what can then be now to
dear for us, askyng it? is he a chaungelyng? is he mutable as man is? can he
repent him of his gifts? Did he not foresee our falls? paid not he therefore
the price. Because he saw we should fail sore, therefore would he suffer sore.
Yea if his sufferynges had not been enoughe, he would yet once more come
again. GOD the father I am sure, if the death of his son incarnate would not
serve, would him self and the holy ghost also become incarnate, and dye for
us. This death of Christ therefore look on, as ye very plege of Gods love
toward the, whosoever thou art, how deep soever thou have sinned? See Gods
hands are nailed, they cannot stryke thee, his feet also, he cannot run
from thee, his arms are wide open to embrace the, his head hanges down to
kiss the, his very heart is open, so that therein see, root, look, spy,
pepe and thou shalt se nothing therein but love, love, love, love to the, hide
thee therefore, lay thy head there with the Euangeliste. John. xiij. iij. ^e,
xix


This is the clyfte of the rock wherein Helias stood, this is the pillow of
down, for all aching heads. Anoint thy head with this oil let this ointment
enbaulme thy head, and wash thy face: Tarry thou here, and cock sure thou art
I warrant thee: Say with Paul, what can separateme from the love of god? To. viij
can death, can pouertye, syckenesse, hunger, or any mysery persuade the now,
that God loves the not? Nay nothing ca^ separate the from the love where with
god has loved ye in christ Jesus: whom he loves, he loves to the end.
John.xiii. So that now, where abou^daunce of sin, has been in thee, the more
is the abou^daunce of grace. But to what end? forsooth that as sin has
raygned to death as thou se est, to the kyllyng of Gods son, so now grace
must reign to life to the honoring of gods son, who is now alive, and
cannot dye any more.

So that they which by faith feel this cannot any more dye to God but to sin,
whereto they are dead and buried with christ. As Christ therefore lives, so do
they, and that to God, to ryghtuousnes and holiness. The life which they live is
in fide fily dei. in the faith of the son of God, whereby you see that now I
am slipped into that which I made the third part of penance, namely newnes of
life, which I could not so have done, if that it were a part of it self in
deed, as it is an effect, a freewyt, of the second part that is of faith or
trust in Gods mercy.

For he that believes, that is, is certainly persuaded sin to be such a thing
that it is the cause of al misery, and of it self so greatly angreth God, that
in heaven nor in earth nothing could appease his wrath save alonely the death
and preciouse bloudshe dinge of the son of God, in whom is all the delight
and pleasure of the father: He I say that is persuaded thus of sin: the same
cannot but in heart abhor and quake to do or say, yea to think any thing
willingly which Gods law teachet him to be sin. Again he that believes, that
is, is certainly persuaded Gods love to be so much toward him, yt where through
sin he was lost, and made a fire brand of hell: the eternal Father of mercy,
which is the omnisufficient God, and needs nothing of us, or of any thing yt
we can do: to deliver us out of hell, and to bring us into heaven, did send
eue^ his own most dear son out of his bosom, out of heaven, into hell as a
man would say, to bring us as I said from thence, into his own bosom and
mercy, we being his very enemies: He I say that is thus persuaded of gods love
toward him, and of ye price of his redemption, by the dear blood of the la^be
imaculate Jesus Christ: the same man cannot but love god again, and of love do
that, and heartily desire to do better yt which might please God. Trow you that
such a one knowi^g this gear by faith will willingly walter and wallow in his
woeful lusts, pleasure and fantisties. Will such a one as knows by faith
christ Jesus to have given his blood, to wash him from his sins, play the sow
to walter in his puddell of fylthie sin and vice again? Nay rather the^ he
wylbe defiled again, by wilful sinning, he will wash often the fete of his
affections, watching over ye vice still sticking in him, which as a spring
continually sends out poison enough to drown and defile him, did not the
sweet water of Christ's passion in gods sight wash it, and his blood satisfy
the rigor of Gods justice due for the same.

This blood of christ shed for our sins, is to dear in the sight of him,
that believes that he will abhor in his heart to stamp it, and tread it under
his feet.

He knows now by his belefe that it is to much that hitherto he has set to
little by it, and is ashamed thereof. Therefore the resydue of his life he
purposes to take better heed to him self then to fore he did. For because he
sees by his faith the greuousnes of Gods anger, the foulenes of sin, the
greatness of Gods mercy, and of Christ's love toward him, He will now be
headie, to pray God to give him his grace accordingly: that as with his eyes,
tongue, hands, feet. etc. He has displeased God doing his own will, even so
now, with the same eyes, tongue, ears, hands, feet. etc. He may displease
his own self, and do Gods will. Willinglye will he now do that which might
renew the death of the son of God: He knows he has to much sin
unwillingly in him, so that there to he will not add wylling offenses.

This willing and witting offending, and sinning, whosoever does flatter him
self therein, does evidently demonstrate and show that he never yet in deed
tasted of Christ truly. He was never truly persuaded, or believed how foul
a thing sin is, how grievous a thing Gods anger is, how joyful and
precious a thing Gods mercy in christ is, now exceeding broad, wide, high and
deep Christ's love is. Perchance he can write, prate, talk, and preach of
this gear, but yet he in heart by faith, never felt this gear. For did he
once feel this gear in deed, the^ would he be so sarre from continuing in
sin willingly and wittingly, that wholly and heartily, he would give over him
self to yt which is co^trari, I mean to a new life, renewing his youth, eue^
as the Egle does. Psalm. ^iii.

For as we being in ye servitude of sin demonstrate our service by giving
over our me^bres to ye obeyinge of sin from iniquity to iniquity: eue^ so
we being made free from sin by faith in Jesus Christ and endewed with gods
spirit, a spirit of liberty.ij. Cor. iij* must needs demo^strate this fredo^
and liberty by giving over our me^bres to thobedie^ce of ye spirit by ye
which we are led and gyded from virtue to virtue, and al kind of holiness. As
thunbeleuers declare their unbelief by ye working of ye evil spirit in the^.
Ephesians, ij* outwardly the fruits of the flesh. Gal. v.

Even so the beleuers declare their faith by the workinge of gods good spirit
in the^ outwardly the fruits of the spirit. For as the devil is not dead in
those which are his but works still to their dampnacion: so is not God dead
in them which be his, but works still to their salvation: the which working
is not the cause of ye one or the other being in any, but only a demonstracion, a
sign, a fruit of the same, as ye aple is not the cause of ye aple tree, but a
fruit of it. Thus then you see briefly that newnes of life is not in deed a
part of penance but a fruit of it, a demonstracion of the iustyfying faith, a
sign of gods good spirit possessing the heart of the penitent: As the old
life is a fruit of impenitencie, a demo^stracio^ of a lip, faith or unbelief
a sign of Satan's spirit possessing the heart of the impenitent, which al
those be that be not penitent. For mean I know none, he that is not penitent,
that same is impenitent, he that is not governed by Gods spirit, the same is
governed by Satan's spirit. For all that be Christ's are governed with the
spirit of Christ, Romans viii, which spirit has her fruits, Gala. v. Al other
that be not Christ's are the deuyls. He that gathers not with Christ,
scatters abroad.

Therefore dearly beloved I beseech you to consider this gear and deceive not
your selves. If you be not Christ's, then pertain you to the devil, of which
thing the fruits of the flesh does assure you, as whoredom* adultry,
uncleanness, wantonness, ydolatri, witchcraft, envy, strife, contencion, wrath,
sedicion, murders, dronkenes, glottonie, blasphemy slouthfulnes, ydlenes,
baudy talking, sclaunderinge. etc. If these apples grow out of the apple
trees of your hearts, surely, surely the deuylis at Inn with you: you are his
birds, whom, when he has well fed you, he will broch you and eat you, chaw
you, and champ you, world without end in eternal woe and misery. But I am
otherwise persuaded of you al: I trust you be al Christ's Jesus his people and
children, yea brethren by faith.

As ye see your sins in Gods law and tremble syghe, sorrow, and sob for the
smae, even so you see his great mercies in his Gospel and free promises, and
therefore are glad, merry, and ioyefull for that you are accepted into Gods
favor, have your sins pardoned, ij. Cor. i.
and ar endued with ye good spirit of God, eue^ the seal and sign manuel of
your election in Christ before the beginning of the world.

The which spirit, for that he is the spirit of life given to you, to work in
you, with you, and by you here in this life, i. these. iiij
sanctificacio^ and holiness where unto you are called, i. Petr. i
that ye might be holy even as your heavenly father is holy: I beseech you all
by admonicion and warninge of you that you would stir up the gifts of God
given to you generalli and particulerli to ye edifying of his Church, ij. Tim. i
that is I pray you that you would not moleste the good spyryt of God by
rebellinge against it, Ephesians. iiij
when it provoke and calls you to go on forewardes, that he which is holy,
Apo. xxij
might yet be more holy, he which is righteous might be more righteous. As
the evil spirit moves and stirs up the fylthy, to be yet more fylthy, the
covetous, to be more covetous, the wicked to be more wicked.

Declare you now your repentance by works of repentance bring forth fruits,
and worthy fruytes, let your sorowing for your euyls demonstrate it self,
by departinge from the euyls you have used, let your certayntie of pardon of
your sins through Christ and your joy in him be demonstrated by pursuing
of the good things which gods word teaches you: you are now in Christ Jesus
gods workema^ship to do good works, Ephesians. ij
which God has prepared for you to walk in For the grace of God yt brings
Titus. ij
salvation unto al men has apeared, and teaches us that we should deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we should live sobrelye, righteouslye
and godly in this present world, lokinge for that blessed hope, and glorious
apearing of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, which gave him
self for us, to redeem us from al unrighteousness and to purge us a peculier
people unto him self, fervently given unto good works. Titus. ij.

Again Titus.iij, for we our selves also were in times past unwise,
disobediente, deceived, in danger to lusts, and to diverse manners of
voluptuousnes, living in maliciousnes and envy, full of hate, hating one
another. But after that the kyndnes and love of God our Savior, to manward
appeared, not by ye deeds of righteousness which we wrought, but of his mercy
he saved us, by the fountayn of the new birth, and with the renewing of the holy
ghost which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that we
once justified by his grace, should be heirs of eternal life through hope.
This is a true saying: but I will make an end, for I am to tedious.

Dearly beloved repent your sins, that is be sorye, for that which is past,
believe in gods mercy for pardon, how depely soever you have sinned, and both
purpose and earnestly pursue a new life, bringing forth worthy and true
fruytes of repentance.

As you have given over your members, from sin to sin, to serve the devil:
your tongues to swear, to lie, to flatter, to skolde to jest, to skoffe, to
baudy talk, to vain iangeling, to boasting. etc. Your hands to picking,
groping, idleness, fighting, etc, your fete to skipping, going to evil, to
dau^sing etc. your ears to hear fables, lies, vanities, and evil things.
etc. So now give over your me^bres to godliness, your tongue to speak your ears
to hear, your eyes to see, your mouths to taste, your hands to work, your
feet to go about such things, as may make to Gods glory, sobriety of life,
and love to your brethe^, and that daily more and more diligently: for in a
stay to stand you cannot, either better or worsse you are to day then you were
yesterdaye.

But better I trust you be and will be if you mark well my theme, yt is Repent
you, ye which thing that would do, as before I have hu^blye be sought you: eue^
so now yet once more I do again beseech you, and yt for the tender mercies of
God in Christ Jesus our lord, Repent you repent you, for the kingdom of heaven
that is, a kingdom full of al riches, pleasures, mirth, beauty, swetenes, and
eternal felicity is at hand. The eye has not seen the like, i. Cor. ij. esa*
lxiiij
ye ear has not heard the like, the heart of man cannot conceive the
treasures and plesures of this kingdom, which now is at hand, to such as
repent, yt is to such as are sorry for their sins, believe gods mercy through
christ, and earnestly purpose to lead a new life: the god of mercy through
Christ his son, grant us his holy spirit and work in our hearts this sorrow,
faith, and new life which through his grace I have spoken of, both now and for
ever. AMEN.

Imprinted at London in Paul's Church yearde, at the sign of the Rose, By
John Wight.


