A DOUBLE SVMMONS: THE ONE, To unfeigned REPENTANCE. THE OTHER, To the worthy
receiving of the LORDS SVPPER.

Delivered in two notable Sermons: MADE, By that worthy Martyr of Christ, JOHN
BRADFORD: Who suffered in Smith-field Ano. Domini. 1555.

MAT. 4.17. Amend your lives, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe. 1617.

To the Christian Reader, JOHN BRADFORD wishes the true knowledge and peace of
Jesus Christ, our alone and sufficient Savior.
GREAT and heavy is Gods anger against us, as the most grievous plague of the
death of our late King (a Prince of all that ever was since Christ's ascension
into Heaven, in any Region, peerlesse) does Prognosticate. For when Gods
judgment has begun with his Child, let other men think as they can, I
surely cannot be persuaded otherwise, but that a grievous and bitter cup of
Gods vengeance, is ready to be poured out for us Englishmen to drink. The
whelpe God has beaten to fray the bandogge: Judgment is begun at Gods house:
In Gods mercy to him-wards, he is taken away, that his eyes should not see
the miseries which we shall feel.

He was too good to tarry with us, so wicked, Heb. 11.
so froward, so perverse, so obstinate, so malicious, so hypocritical, so
covetous, unclean, untrue, proud, and carnal a generation. I will not go
about to paint us out in our colors: God by his plagues and vengeance, I fear
me, will paint and point us out: We have so mocked with him and his Gospel,
that we shall feel it is no bourding with him.

Of long time we have covered our covetousness and carnality, under the cloak
of his Gospel; so that all men shall see us to our shame, when he shall take
his Gospel away, and give it to a people that will bring forth the fruits of
it: To let his Gospel tarry with us, he cannot; for we despise it, contemn
it, are glutted with it. Since his Gospel came amongst us, we say now, we had
never plenty; therefore, again, let us go and worship the Queen of heaven,
and to provoke the Lord to anger. The earth cannot abide now the words and
Sermons of Amos. Amos 7. Acts 17.
The cause of all rebellion, is Amos and his preaching. It is Paul and his
fellows, that make all out of order. Summa, the Gospel is now, Panto on
peripsema, and catharma tou cosmou, The our-east and curse of the Realm, and
so are the Preachers: therefore, out of the doors with them. So that, I say,
God cannot let his Gospel tarry with us, but must needs take it away, to do
us some pleasure therein: for so shall we think for a time; as the Sodomitanes
thought, when Lot departed from them: as the old world thought, Genesis 19. Genesis 7
when Noe crept into his Arc: as the Ieru^olomitanes thought, when the
Apostles went thence to Peltis. Then were they merry, then was all pastime.
When Moses was absent, then went they to eating and drinking, and rose again
to play: But alas, Exodus 32
suddenly came the flood, and drowned them: Gods wrath waxed hot against them.
Then was lamentation, mourning and woe: then was crying out, wringing of hands,
renting of clothes, sobbing and sighing for the miseries fallen; out of the
which they could not escape. Well, if he take that away, for a time, perchance,
we shall be quiet, but at length we shall feel the want to our woe, at length
he will have at us, as at them.

O be thou merciful unto us, and in thine anger remember thy mercy: We have
sinned, we have sinned, and therefore art thou angry; o be not angry for ever.
Give us peace, peace, peace in the Lord: set us to work against sin, against
Satan, against our carnal desires, and give us the victory this way. This
victory we obtain by faith. This faith is not without Repentance, as her
Gentleman-usher before her.

This Usher then, Repentance, if we truly possessed, we should be certain
of true faith, and so assured of the victory over death, hell, and Satan. His
works then which he has stirred up, would quail, God would restore us
politic peace, right should be right, and have right: Gods Gospel should
tarry with us, Religion should be cherished, Superstition suppressed: and so
we yet something happy, notwithstanding the great loss of our most gracious
Liege, sovereign Lord. All these would come to pass you see, if the
Gentleman-usher I speak of, I mean, Repentance, were at Inn with us. As if
he be absent, we may be certain, that Lady Faith is absent. Wherefore, we
cannot but be vanquished of the world, the flesh, and the devil, and so will
Satan's works prosper, though not in all things to bleare our eyes, yet in
that thing which he most of all desires. Therefore, to Repentance, for our
selves privately, and for the Realm and Church publicly, every one shall
labor to stir up both our selves and others. This, to the end, that for my
part I might help, I have presently put forth a Sermon of Repentance, which
had lain by me half a year at the least, for the most part of it. For, the
last Summer, as I was abroad preaching in the Country, my chance was to make a
sermon of Repentance, the which was earnestly of diverse desired of me, that I
should give it them written, or else put it forth in print, which I could not
do, for I had not written it, and so I told them.

But when no nay would serve, I promised to write it as I could, at my leisure;
this leisure I prolonged so long, that (as I think) I offended them: so did I
please my self, as one more glad to read other men's writings, then in such
sort to publish mine own, for other men to read: not that I would others not
to profit by me, but that I, knowing how slender my store is, would be loath,
the enemies should thereby take occasion of speaking.

But when I considered this present time, to occasion men now to look upon all
things, in such sort as might move them to godliness, rather then to any
curious questioning: I, for the satisfying of my promise, and profiting of the
simple, ignorant, and rude, have now caused this Sermon to be printed: the
which, I beseech God for his Christ's sake, to use as a mean, whereby of his
mercy, it may please him to work in me, and many others, true hearty
repentance for our sins, to the glory of his name.

Thus fare thou well in the Lord, The xij. of July. 1553.
To the Christian READER, Thomas Samson wishes the felicity of speedy and full
conversion to the LORD.
GOdly Learned men do write and publish books, to profit ye age in which they
live, and the posterity. This desire was in the Author of this Treatise, M.
John Bradford, who preached and published this Sermon of Repentance. And now
that we, which do live after him, and are the posterity, may take as much or
more profit by it, then they did for whom it was first preached and published
it is by new imprinting published again. Nothing is added to this Sermon, or
altered in it: only to the Sermon of Repentance is added another Sermon of the
Lords Supper, which he also made, and was never printed before. And aptly are
they joined together. For in perusing of the last, thou shall see how
necessarily he draws the doctrine of Repentance to them al, which do with due
preparation receive the holy Sacrament of Christ. They are counted the most
profitable Teachers, which have good experience by practice in themselves, of
that which they do teach to others: such as may safely say; Brethren, be ye
followers of me, and look on them which walk so, as ye have us for an example,
Phil. 3.17. And surely, such a pattern was M. Bradford in his life time, of
this doctrine of Repentance: for I knew him familiarly, and must needs give to
God this praise for him, that (among men) I have scarce known one like unto
him. I did know when, and partly how it pleased God, by effectual calling to
turn his heart unto the true knowledge, and obedience of the most holy Gospel
of Christ our Savior. Of which God did give him such an heavenly hold and
lively feeling, that as he did then know, that many sins were forgiven him,
so surely he declared by deeds that he loved much. For where he had does
gifts and calling, to have employed himself in civil and worldly affairs
profitably; such was his love of Christ, and zeal to the promoting of his
glorious Gospel, that after that God had touched his heart, he changed, not
only the course of his former life, as the woman did, Luke 7. but even his
profession and former study, as Paul did.

Touching the first, he presently sold his Chains, Rings, Brooches, and
Jewels of gold, which before he used to wear, and did bestow the price of this
his former vanity, in the necessary relief of Christ's poor members, which he
could hear of, or find lying sick, or pining in poverty. Touching ye second,
the change of his study; and being in the inner Temple in London, at the study
of the common Laws, he went to Cambridge to study Divinity, where he heard D.
Martin Bucer diligently, and was right familiar and dear unto him. In this
godly course he did (by Gods blessing) so profit, that that blessed Martyr, D.
Ridley, then B. of London, did, as it were, inuit him and his godly companion,
M. Tho. Horton, to become fellows of Penbrooke Hall in Cambridge: And
afterward, the said D. Ridley called our Bradford to London, gave him a
Prebend in Paul's Church, lodged him in his own house there, and set him on
work in preaching. And besides, often preaching at Paul's Cross, and else where
in London, and sundry places in the country, and specially in Lancashire, His
native country (for he was borne at Manchester.)
he preached before K. Edward the sirt, in Lent, the last year of his reign,
upon the 2. Psalm: and there in one Sermon, showing the tokens of Gods
judgment at hand, for the contempt of the Gospel, as yt certain Gentlemen,
upon the Sabbath day, going in a Whirry to Paris Garden, to the Bearebaiting
were drowned: and that a dog was met at Ludgate, carrying a piece of dead
child in his mouth: he with a mighty and Prophetical spirit said. I summon you
all, even every mothers child of you, to the judgment of God, for it is at
hand; as it followed shortly after, in the death of K. Edward. In which state
and labor of preaching he continued, till the cruelty of the Papists cut him
off; as the history of his life and death (compiled by that faithful servant
of the Lord Jesus, M. John Fox) shows.

In all stops and stays, in his laborious calling, he was much helped forward
by a continual meditation, and practice of repentance and faith in Christ; in
which he was kept by Gods grace, notably exercised all the days of his life.
Even in this mean time he heard a Sermon, which that notable Preacher, M.
Latimer made before K. Edward the 6. in which be did earnestly speak of
restitution to be made of things falsely gotten: which did so strike Bradford
to the heart, for one dash of a pen which he had made, without the knowledge
of his master (as full often I have heard him confess with plenty of tears)
being Clarke to the Treasurer of the Kings Camp beyond the Seas, and was to
the deceiving of the King, that he could never be quiet, till by the advice of
the same M. Latimer, a restitution was made. Which things to bring to pass,
he did willingly forbear and forgo all the private and certain Patrimony
which he had in earth. Let all bribers and poling Officers learn their lesson
here.

But besides this, our Bradford had his daily exercises and practices of
repentance. His manner was, to make to himself a Catalogue of all the grosest
and most enorme sins, which in his life of ignorance he had committed, and to
lay the same before his eyes when he went to private prayer, that by the sight
and remembrance of them, the better to stir him up to offer to God the
sacrifice of a contrite heart, and to pray for pardon and the increase of
grace, to the detestation of sin, and love of obeying the good will of God.

His manner was this: He used in the morning to go to the Common prayer in the
College where he was, and after that, he used to make some prayer with his
Pupils in his Chamber. But not content with this, he then repaired to his own
secret prayer, by himself, as one that had not yet prayed to his own mind: for
he was wont to say to his familiars, I have prayed with my self. Let secure
men mark this, which pray without touch of breast, as the Pharise did; and so
that they have said an ordinary prayer, or hear a common course of prayer,
without any thing else, they think they have prayed well, and as the term is,
they have served God well. Let us learn by Bradfords example, to pray better,
that is, with the heart, and not with the lips alone, Quia Deus non vocis, sed
cordis auditor est, as Cyprian says: that is, Because God is the hearer of the
heart, and not of the voice: that is to say, not of the voice alone without the
heart, for that is but lip-labor. This conscience of sin, and exercise in
prayer had Bradford, clean contrary to that cursed custom of those graceless
men, which do joy to make large accounts of their lewdness, and do glory
therein; so feeding their delights with their lives passed, as the dog
returns to smell of his cast gorge, and the horse to his dung; such as the
Prophet, Esaias 39. says: They declare their sins as Sodom, they hide them
not, woe be to their souls.

Another of his exercises was his: He used to make unto himself an Ephemeris,
or a Iournall, in which he used to write all such notable things, as either he
did see or hear, each day that passed. But whatsoever he did hear or see, he
did so pen it, that a man might see in that book, the signs of his smitten
heart. For, if he did hear or see any good in any man, by that he found and
noted the want thereof in himself, and added a short prayer, craving mercy,
and grace to amend. If he did hear or see any plague or misery, he noted it
as a thing procured by his own sins, and still added, Domine, miserere mei,
Lord, have mercy upon me. He used in the same book to note such evil thoughts
as did rise in him; as of envying the good of other men, thoughts of
unthankfulness, of not confidering God in his works, of hardness of heart,
when he did see other moved and affected. And thus he made to himself, and of
himself, a book of daily practices of repentance.

Besides this, they which familiarly kept company with him, might see how he
used to fall often into a sudden and deep meditation, in which he would sit
with fixed countenance and spirit moved, yet speaking nothing a good space. And
sometimes in this silent sitting, plenty of tears should trickle down his
cheeks, Sometime he would sit in it, and come out of it with a smiling
countenance. Oftentimes have I sat at dinner and supper with him, in the house
of that godly harbourer of many Preachers and servants of the Lord Jesus, I
mean M. Elsyng, when either by occasion of talk had, or of some view of Gods
benefits present, or some inward cogitation and thought of his own, he has
fallen into these deep cogitations, and afterward he would tell me of them,
that I did perceive, that sometimes his tears trickled out of his eyes, as well
for joy, as for sorrow. Neither was he only such a practiser of repentance in
himself, but a continual prouoker of others thereunto, not only in public
preaching, but also in private conference and company: for in all companies
where he came, he would freely reprove any sin and misbehauiour which appeared
in any person; especially swearers, filthy talkers, and popish praters: and
this he did with such a divine grace and christian majesty, that ever he
stopped the mouths of the gaine-sayers: for be spoke with power; and yet so
sweetly, that they might see their evil to be evil, and understand that it
was good indeed, to the which he labored to draw them in God.

To be short, as his life was, such was his death: for at his death, as the
History witnesses, when the flames of fire did fly about his ears in
Smithfield, his last speech, publicly noted and heard was this, Repent
England. Thus was our Bradford a Preacher, and an example of that repentance
which he preached: As Jonas preached to Niniue (and yet does) he preach
repentance; and surely England has now much more cause to repent, then it had
when Bradford lived: for all states and sorts of persons in England, are now
more corrupt, then they were then.

Let therefore now Bradfords Sermon, his life, his death, move thee, O England,
to repent; I wish and warn, that as in Niniue, so in England, all from the
highest to the lowest, do unfeignedly repent. The Court, the Church, the City,
the Country, Princes, Prelates and people: let all and every one repent, and
depart from that evil which he has in hand, and turn wholly to the Lord. And
I do humbly beseech thy Majesty (O glorious Lord Jesus) to work now by thy
Spirit in our hearts, the same sound repentance, which thy holiness did first
preach to men, when thou saydest: Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand.
This work in us, O gracious God our Savior. AMEN.

A FRUITFUL Sermon of Repentance, made by the constant Martyr of Christ, Mr.
John Bradford. 1553.
MAT. 4.17. Amend your lives, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.


THe life we have at this present, is the gift of God, in whom we live, move;
and are; and therefore he is called IEHOVA, For the which life, as we should
he thankful, so may we not in any wise use it after our corrupt fantasies; but
to the end for which it is given and lent us, that is: to the setting forth of
Gods praise and glory, by repentance, conversion, and obedience, to his good
will and holy laws; whereunto his long suffering does, (as it were) even draw
us, if our hearts by impenitency were no hardened. And therefore our life in
the Scripture is called a walking; for that as the body daily draws more and
more near his end, that is the earth: even so our soul draws daily more and
more near unto death, that is, salvation, or damnation, heaven or hell.

Of which thing, in that we are most careless, and very fools, (for we alas,
are the same to day, we were yesterday, and not better or nearer to God, but
rather nearer to hell, Satan and perdition; being covetous, idle, carnal,
secure, negligent, proud etc.) I think my labor cannot be better bestowed then
with the Baptist, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, to harp on this string,
which of al other is most necessary, and that in these days most specially.
What string is that, says one? Forsooth, brother, the string of repentance,
the which Christ our Savior did use, first in his Minestery; and as his
Minister, at this present, I will use unto you all: Mat. 4.17.
Repent for the: Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

This sentence thus pronounced, and preached by our Savior Jesus Christ, as it
does command us to repent, so to the doing of the same, it shows us a
sufficient cause to stir us up thereunto; namely, for that, The kingdom of
Heaven (which is a kingdom of all joy, peace, riches, power and pleasure) is
at hand, to all such as do so, that is, as do repent: So that the meaning
hereof is, as though our Savior might thus speak presently: Syrs, for that I
see you all walking the wrong way, even to Satan, and unto hell fire, by
following the kingdom of Satan, which now is colored under the vain
pleasures of this life, and foolishness of the flesh, most subtly, to your
utter undoing and destruction: behold, and mark well what I say unto you: The
Kingdom of Heaven, that is, an other manner of joy and felicity, honor, and
riches, power and pleasure, then you now perceive of enjoy; is even at hand,
and at your backs: and if you will turn again, that is, Repent you, you
shall most truly and pleasantly feel, see, and inherit. Turn again
therefore, I say; that is Repent, for this joy I speak of, even, The Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand.

Here we may note, first the corruption of our nature, in that to this
commandment, Repent you, he adds a cause, For the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand: For by reason of the corruption and sturdines of our nature, God unto all
his commandments, commonly, either adds some promise to provoke us to
obedience, or else some such sufficient cause, as cannot but tickle us up to
hearty laboring for ye doing of the same: as here to the commandment of doing
penance, he adds this Aetimologe or cause saying: For the kingdom of heaven
is at hand.

Again, in that he ioineth to the Commandment the cause, saying: For the
kingdom of heaven is at hand We may learn that of the kingdom of heaven, none
(to whom the ministry of preaching does appertain) can be partaker, but such
as repent and do penance. Therefore, dearly beloved, if you regard the kingdom
of heaven, in that you cannot enter therein, except you repent: I beseech you
all of every estate, as you desire you own peace of conscience, to repent and
do penance. The which thing that ye may do, I will endeavor my best now, to
help you, by Gods grace.

But first, because we cannot well tell what repentance is, through ignorance,
and for lack of knowledge, and false teaching: I will (to begin with all) show
you what Repentance is. Repentance, or penance is no english word, but we
borrow it of the Latinists, to whom Penance is a fore-thinking in English: in
Greek, a being wise afterward: in Hebrew, a conversion or turning; the which
conversion or turning, in that it cannot be true and hearty, unto God
especially, without some good hope or trust of pardon, for that which is
already done and past: I may well in this sort define it; namely, that penance
is asorowing or fore thinking of our sins past, an earnest purpose to amend,
or turning to God with a trust of pardon.

This definition may be divided into three parts: First a forrowing for our
sins: Secondly, a trust of pardon, which otherwise may be called, a
persuasion of Gods mercy, by the merits of Christ, for the forgiveness of our
sins: And thirdly, a purpose to amend, or conversion to a new life. The which
third, or last part, cannot be called properly a part; for it is but an effect
of penance, as toward the end ye shall see, by Gods grace. But lest such as
seek for occasion to speak evil, should have any occasion, though they tarry
not out the end of this Sermon: I therefore divide Penance into the three
foresaid parts:

1 Of sorrowing for our sin. 2 Of good hope, or trust of pardon. 3 Of a new
life.
Thus you may see what penance is: a sorrowing for sin, a purpose to amend,
with a good hope or trust of pardon.

This penance not only differs from that which men commonly have taken to be
penance, in saying and doing our enjoined Lady Psalters, seven Psalms,
fastings, Pilgrimages, Alms deeds, and such like things; but all from that
which the more learned have declared, to consist of three parts: namely,
Contrition, Confession, and satisfaction.

Contrition, they call a just and a full sorrow for their sin. For this word,
just, and full, is one of the differences, between Contrition and Attrition.

Confession, they call, a numbering of all their sins in the ear of their
ghostly father: for as (say they) a Judge cannot absolve without knowledge of
the cause or matter; so cannot the Priest, or ghostly father, absolve from
other sins, then those which he does hear.

Satisfaction, they call amends making unto God for their sins, by their undue
works, Opera indebita, Works more then they need to do, as they term them:
This is their penance which they preach, write, and allow: But how true this
stuff is, how it agrees with Gods Word, how it is to be allowed, taught,
preached, and written, let us a little consider. If a man repent not, until he
have a just and full sorrowing for his sins (dearly beloved) when shall he
repent? For in as much as hell fire, and the punishment of the devils, is a just
punishment for sin: In as much as in all sin, there is a contempt of God,
which is all goodness, and therefore there is a desert of all illness: alas, who
can bear for feel this just sorrow, this full sorrow for our sins, this
their contrition, which they do so discern from their attrition? Shall not man
by this doctrine, rather despair, then come by repentance? If a man repent not
until he have made confession of all his sins in the ear of his ghostly
father: if a man cannot have absolution of his sins, until his sins be told
by tale and number in the Priests ear (in that as David says) none can
understand much less then utter al his sins: Delicta quis intelligit? Who can
understand his sins? In that David of himself complayneth else where, how that
his sins are ouerflowed his head, and as a heavy burden do oppress him;
alas, shall not a man by this doctrine, be utterly driven from repentance?
Though they have gone about, something to make plaster for their sorces of
confession or attrition, to assuage this srruffe; bidding a man to hope well of
his contrition, though it be not so full as is required, and of his confession,
though he have not numbered all his sins, if so be that he do so much as in
him lies: dearly beloved, in that there is none, but that herein he is guilty
(for who does as much as he may) think ye, that this plaster is not like salt
to sore eyes? Yes undoubtedly, when they have done all they can, for the
appeasing of consciences in these points, this is the sum, that we yet
should hope well, but yet so hope, that we must stand in a mammering and
doubting, whether our sins be forgiven. For to believe Remissionem
peecatorum, that is: To be certain of forgiveness of sins, as our Creed
teaches us, they count it a presumption. O obomination, and that not only
herein, but in all their penance as they paint it!

As concerning satisfaction, by their Opera indebita, Undue works, that is: by
such works as they need not to do, but of their own voluntarinesse and
wilfulness: (wilfulness in deed) who sees not monsterous abomination,
blasphemy, and even open fighting against God? For if satisfaction can be done
by man, then Christ died in vain, for him that so satisfies, and so reigns
he in vain; soi s he a Bishop and a Priest in vain. Gods law requires love
to God with all our heart, Deuteronomy. 6.2 Mat. 22.
soul, power, might and strength: to that there is nothing can be done to
Godward, Mar. 20. Luke 10.
which is not contained in this Commandment: nothing ran be done, over and
above this. Again, Christ requires to man ward, That we should love one
another, Ioh. 3
as he loved us. And think you, Beloved, that we can do any thing to our
Neighbor ward, which is not herein comprised?

Yea, let them tell me, when they do any thing so in the love of God, and
their Neighbor, but that they had need to cry: Remitte nobis debita nostra,
Forgive us our sins. Mat. 6.
So far are we off from satisfying. Does not Christ say: Luke 17
When you have done all things that I have commanded you, say; that you be but
unprofitable servants? Put nothing to my word, says God. Apoc. 22 Deu. 4.1.
Yes, works of supererogation, (yea, superabomination) say they. Whatsoever
things are true (says the Apostle S. Paul) whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things
pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue,
or if there be any praise: have you them in your mind, and do them, and the
God of peace shall be with you. Beloved, this lesson well regarded, would pull
us from popish Satisfactory works, which do deface Christ's treasures and
Satisfaction.

In heaven and in earth was there none found that could satisfy Gods anger for
our sins, or get heaven for man, but only the Son of God, JESUS CHRIST, the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who by his blood has wrought the work of
Satisfaction; and he only is worthy all honor, glory, and praise; for he has
opened the book with the seven Seals.

Dearly beloved, therefore abhor this abomination, even to think that there
is any other satisfaction to Godward for sin, then Christ's blood only.
Blasphemy it is, and that horrible, to think otherwise. The blood of Christ
purifieth (says Saint John) from all sin. And therefore he is called the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, because there was never sin
forgiven of God, nor shall be from the beginning, until the end of the world,
but only through Christ's death: Prate the Pope and his Prelates as please
them, with their Pardons, Purgatory, Purgations, Placeboes, Trentalles,
Diriges, works of Supererogation, Superabomination etc.

I am he (says the Lord) which puts away thine offenses, Esaias. 45.
and that for mine own sake, and will no more remember thine iniquities. Put
me in remembrance (for we will reason together and tell me what thou have for
thee, to make thee righteous. Thy first Father offended sore, etc. 1. John. 2.
And thus writes Saint John, If any man sin, we have an Advocate (says he)
with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation,
or satisfaction for our sins.

As in the fourth Chapter he says; That God has sent his Son to be a
propitiation, or satisfaction for our sins: According to that which Paul
writes, where he calls Christ a merciful and faithful Priest, to purge the
peoples sins. Heb. 2.
So that blind Bussards, and perverse Papists they be, which yet will prate,
our merits or works to satisfy for our sins, in part, or in whole, before
Baptism, or after.

For to omit the testimonies I brought out of John and Paul, which the blind
cannot but see: I pray you remember the text out of Esaias, which even now I
rehearsed, being spoken to such as were then the people of God, and had bin a
long time, but yet were fallen into grievous sins, after their adoption into
the number of Gods children. It is for mine own sake (says God) that I put
away thy sins. Where is your parting of the stake now? If it be for Gods own
sake, if Christ be the propitiation: then recant, except you will become
Idolaters, making your works God and Christ. Say as David teaches: Not to us
Lord, not to us, but to thy name be the glory.

And it is to be noted, that God does taste in their feeth, even the sin of
their first father, lest they should think that yet, perchance, for the
righteousness and goodness of their good fathers, their sins might be the
sooner pardoned, and so God accept their works.

If they had taken Satisfaction, for that which is done to the Congregation
publicly, by some notable punishment, as in the Primitive Church was used to
open offenders, sparkles whereof, and some traces yet remain, when such as
have sinned in adultery, go about the Church with a Taper in their shirts: Or
if they had made Satisfaction for restitution to man ward, of such goods as
wrongfully are gotten, the which true penance cannot be without: Or if by
Satisfaction, they had meant a new life, to make amends to the Congregation
thereby, as by their evil life they did offend the Congregation; in which
sense the Apostle seems to take that which he writes in 2. Cor. 7 where the
old Interpreter calls Apologian, Satisfaction, which rather signifies a
defense or answering again. If I say, they had taken Satisfaction any of these
ways, then they had done well, so that the Satisfaction to God had been left
all only to Christ.

Again, If they had made Confession, either for that which is to God privately,
either for that which is to the Congregation publicly, either for that which
is a free consultation with some one learned in Gods book, and appointed
thereunto, as first it was used; and I wish were now used amongst us, either
for that which is a reconciliation of one to another, it had been some thing:
yea, if they had made it for faith, because it is a true demonstration of
faith: as in Paul we may see, when he calls Christ the Captain of our
Confession, Romans 1.
that is, of our faith (and so Confessors were called in the Primitive Church)
such as manfully did witness their faith with the peril of their lives: if, I
say, they had taken it thus, then had they done right well.

And so Contrition, if they had left out their subtle distinction, between it
and Atttirion, by this word just or full, making it a hearty sorrow for their
sins, then we would never have cried out against them therefore. For we say,
penance has three parts; Contrition, if you understand it for a hearty
sorrowing for sin; Confession, if you understand it for faith, of free pardon
in Gods mercy, by Jesus Christ; and Satisfaction, if you understand it not to
God-wards (for that only to Christ must be left alone) but to man ward in
restitution of goods wrongfully or fraudulently gotten, of name hindered by our
slanders, and in newness of life: although, as I said before, and anon will
show more plainly by Gods grace, that this last is no part of penane in deed,
but a plain effect or fruit of true penance.

I might here bring in examples of their penance, how perilous it is to be
embraced: but let the example of their graund Sire Judas serve, in whom we see
all the parts of their penance, as they describe it; and yet notwithstanding
he was damned. He was sorry enough, as the effect showed: he had their
contrition fully, out of the which he confessed his fault, saying: I have
betrayed innocent blood: and thereunto he made satisfaction, restoring the
money he had received. But yet all was but lost, he hanged up himself, his
bowels burst out, and he remained a child of perdition for ever. I would wish
that this example of Judas, in whom ye see the parts of their penance,
contrition, confession, and satisfaction, would move them to penance, and to
describe it a little better, making hope or trust of Gods free mercy a piece
thereof, or else with Judas they will mar all.

Perchance these words, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, were used as
I have expounded them at the first. But in that we see so much danger and hurt
by using them without expositions; either let us join to them open expositions
always, or else let us not use them at all, but say as I write, that penance
is a hearty sorrow for our sins, a good hope or trust of pardon through
Christ, which is not without an earnest purpose to amend, or a new life. This
penance is the thing, whereto all the Scripture calls us. This penance do I
now call you all unto: this must be continually in us, and not for a Lent
season, as we have thought: this must increase daily more and more in us:
without this we cannot be saved.

Search therefore your hearts all, all swearers, blasphemers, liars flatterers,
lewd, or idle talkers, iesters, bribers, coueteous persons, drunkards,
gluttons, whoremongers, thieves, murderers, slanderers, idle livers, negligent
in their vocation, etc. All such, and all other as lament not their sins, as
hope not in Gods mercy for pardon, and purpose not heartily to amend, to leave
their swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, covetousness, idleness, etc. All such
I say shall not or cannot enter into Gods kingdom, but hell fire is prepared
for them, weeping, and gnashing of teeth: whereunto, alas, I fear me, very many
will needs go, in that very many will be as they have bin; let us even to the
wearing of our tongue to the stumpes, preach and pray never so much to the
contrary, and that even in the bowels of Jesus Christ: as now I beseech you
all; all, and every mothers child, to repent and lament your sin, to trust in
Gods mercy, and to amend your lives.

Now me thinks, ye are somewhat astonished: whereby I gather, that presently you
desire this Repentance, that is: this sorrow, good hope, and newness of life.
The which that you may the rather attain, and get to your comforts, as I have
gone about to be a mean to stir up in you (by Gods grace) this desire of
Repentance, so through the same grace of God, will I go about now to show you,
how you may have your desire in this hehalfe.

And first concerning this part, namely, sorrow for our sins, and hearty
lamenting of the same: For this, if you desire the having of it, you must
beware, that you think not that of your selves, or of your own free will, by
any means you can get it. You may easily deceive your selves, and mock your
selves, thinking more of your selves then is seemly. All good things, and not
pieces of good things, but all good things, says Saint James, Iam. 1.
come from God the Father of light. If therefore penance be good (as it is
good) then the parts of it be good. 1. Reg. 2.
From God therefore do they come, and not of our free will. It is the Lord
that mortifieth, that brings down, that humbles, says the Scripture in
sundry places: Ierem. 31.
After thou had stricken my thigh (says Jeremy) I was ashamed Lo he
says, After thou had stricken me: and therefore prays he, even in the
last words almost, he writes, Turn us, Lam. 5.
O Lord, and we shall be turned. The which thing David used very often.

Wherefore first of all, if thou would have part of penance, as for the
whole, Acts 22. 2. Tim. 2.
because it is Gods gift; so for this part go thou unto God, and make some
little prayer, as thou can, unto his mercy for the same, in this, or like
sort.

MErciful Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I have sinned and done
wickedly; yet, through thy goodness, have received a desire of repentance,
whereto, this thy long sufferance does draw my hard heart: I beseech thee, for
thy mercies sake in Christ, to work the same repentance in me; and by thy
Spirit, Power, and Grace, so to humble, mortify, and fear my conscience for my
sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou may comfort and quicken me
again, thorough Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son. AMEN.

After this sort, I say, or otherwise, as thou think good, if thou will have
this first part, Contrition or sorrow for thy sins, do thou beg it of God,
through Christ. And when thou have asked it, as I have labored to drive thee
from trusting in thy self; so now I go about to move thee from flattering of
thy self, from sluggishnesse, and negligence, to be diligent to use these
means following. Unto prayer, which I would thou should first use as thou
can: secondly, get thee Gods Law as a glass to toot in: for in it, and by
it, comes the true knowledge of sin, without which knowledge there can be
no sorrow. For how can a man sorrow for his sins, which knows not his
sins? As when a man is sick, the first step to health, is to know his
sickness: even so to salvation, the first step, is to know thy damnation due
for thy many sins.

The Law of God therefore must be gotten, and carefully looked in; we must
look in it spiritually, and not corporally, or carnally, as the outward word
or letter does declare and utter: and so our Savior teaches us in Matthew,
expounding the sixth and seventh Commandments, not only after the outward
deed, but also after the heart, making there the anger of the heart, a kind of
murder; lusting after another man's wife, a kind of adultery.

And this is one of the differences, between Gods Law, and man's law; that of
this (man's law I mean) I am not contemnable, so long as I observe outwardly
the same. But Gods Law goes to the root and to the heart, condemning me for
the inward motion, although outwardly I live most holily. As for example: If I
kill no man, though in my heart I hate, man's law condemns me not: but
otherwise does Gods Law. And why? for it sees the root whence the evil does
spring. If hatred were taken out of the heart, then loftiness in looks,
detraction in tongue, and murder by hand, could never ensue. If lusting were
out of the heart, curiosity in countenance, wantonness in words, loathsome
boldness in body would not appear.

In that therefore this outward evil springs out of the inward corruption:
seeing Gods Law also is a law of liberty, as says Saint James: Iam. 2. Romans 7.
and spiritual, as says Saint Paul: perfectly and spiritually it is to be
understood, if we will truly come to the knowledge of our sins. For of this
inward corruption, reason knows little or nothing. I had not known (says
Paul) that lusting (which to reason, and to them which are guided only by
reason, is thought but a trifle:) I had not known (says he) this lusting to
have been sin, if the Law had not said, Non concupisces, Thou shall not lust.

To the knowledge therefore of our sin (without which we cannot repent, or
be sorry for our sin,) let us secondly get us Gods Law, as a glass to look
in: and that not only literally, outwardly, or partly; but also spiritually,
inwardly and thoroughly. Let us consider the heart, and so shall we see the
foul spots we are stained withal, at least inwardly, whereby we the rather
may be moved to hearty sorrow and sighing. For, as S. Austine says, it is a
glass which fears no body, but even look what a one thou art, so it
painteth thee out.

In the Law, we see it is a foul spot, not to love the Lord our God, with
all (I say) our heart, soul, power, might and strength, and that continually.

In the Law it is a foul spot, not only to make to our selves any graven
Image or fimilitude, to bow thereto, etc. but also, not to frame our selves
wholly after the Image whereto we are made, not to bow to it, or worship it.

In the Law we see that it is a foul spot, not only to take Gods name in
vain, but also not earnestly, heartily, and even continually to call upon his
name only, to give thanks unto him only, to believe, to publish, and live in
his holy word.

In Gods Law, we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
prophaner of the Sabbath day, but also not to rest from our own words and
works, that the Lord might both speak and work in us and by us; not to hear
his holy word, not to communicate his Sacraments, not to give occasion to
others to holiness, by our example in godly works, and reverent esteeming of
the Ministry of his Word.

In Gods Law, we see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
disobeyer of our Parents, Magistrates, Masters, and such as be in any
authority over us; but also not to honor such even in our hearts, not to give
thanks to God for them, not to pray for them, to aid, to help, or reliue
them, to bear with their infirmities, etc.

In Gods Law, we see it is a foul spot in our souls, not only to be a
manqueller in hatred, malice, proud looks, brags, backbiting, railing, or
bodily slaughter: but also not to love our neighbors; yea, our enemies, even
in our hearts, and to declare the same in all our gestures, words, and works.

In Gods law, we see see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be a
whoremo^ger in lusting, in our hearts, in wanton looking, in unclean and wanton
talking, in actual doing unhonestly with our neighbors wife, daughter,
servant, etc. But also not to be chaste, sober, temperate in heart, looks,
tongue, apparel, deeds, and to help others thereunto accordingly, etc.

In God Law, we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only in heart, to
covet, in look or word to flatter, lie, color, etc. in deed to take away any
thing which pertains to another: but also in heart, countenance, word and
deed, not to keep, save, and defend that which pertains to thy neighbor,
as thou would thine own.

In Gods Law, we may see it a foul spot, not only to lie and bear false
witness against any man; but also, not to have as great a care over thy
neighbors name, as over thine own.

Sin in Gods Law it is we may see, and a foul spot, not only to consent to
evil lust, or carnal desires, but even the very natural or carnal lusts, and
desires themselves, for so I may call them: nature it self, being now so
corrupted, are sin, and self-love, and many such like. By reason whereof, I
think there is none that looks well therein, but though he be blameless to
the world, and fair to the show; yet certainly, inwardly his face is foul
arrayed, and so shameful, saucy, mangy, pocky, and scabbed, that he cannot but
be sorry at the contemplation thereof, and that so much more, by how much he
continues to look in this glass accordingly.

And thus much concerning the second mean, to the stirring up of sorrow for
our sin, that next unto prayer we should look in Gods low spiritually. The
which looking, if we use with prayer, as I said, let us not doubt, but at the
length Gods Spirit will work, as now to such as believe; for to the unbelievers
all is in vain, (their eyes are stark blind, they can see nothing) to such as
believe (I say) I trust something is done even already. But if neither by
prayer, nor by diligent looking into Gods law spiritually, as yet thy hard
unbelieving heart feels no sorrow, nor lamenting for thy sin: Thirdly, look
upon the tagge tied to Gods Law: for to man's law there is a tag tied, that is,
a penalty, and that no small one, but such a one, as cannot but make us to cast
our currish tails between our legs, if we believe it; for all is in vain,
if we be faithless, not to believe before we feel.

This tagge, is Gods Malediction or curse. Maledictus omnis (says it) qui non
permanet in omnibus quae seripta sunt io libro legis, vt faciat eam. Lo,
accursed (says he) is all, no exception, all, says God, which continues not
in all things (for he that is guilty of one, is guilty of the whole, says S.
James:) in all things therefore (says the holy Ghost) which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. He says not, to hear them, to talk of them,
to dispute of them, but, to do them.

Who is he now that does these? Rara Auis, few such Byrds; yea, none at all.
For all are gone out of the way, though not outwardly by word or deed, yet
inwardly at the least by default, and wanting of that which is required: so
that a child of one nights age is not pure, but (by reason of birth sin) in
danger of Gods Malediction: then much more we, which alas, have drunken in
iniquity, as it were water, as Job says: But yet we quake not.

Tell me now, good brother, why do you so lightly consider Gods curse, that for
your sins past you are so careless, as though you had made a covenant with
death and damnation, as the wicked did in Esays time? what is Gods curse? At
the Popes curse, with book, bell, and canlde; O! how trembled we which heard
it, although the same was not directed unto us, but unto others? For this Gods
curse, which is incomparable, more fell and importable, and is directed to us;
yea, hanging over us, all by reason of our sins: alas, how careless are we?
O faithless hard hearts! O Iezabels ghests, rocked and laid asleep in her
bed! O wicked wretches, which being come into the depth of sin do contemn
the same! O sorrowlesse sinners, and shameless shrinking harlots!

Is not the anger of a King death? and is the anger of the King of all kings, a
matter to be so lightly regarded as we do regard it, which for our finnes are
so wretchlesse, that we slugge and sleep it out? As ware melts away at the
heat of the fire (says David) so do the wicked perish at the face or
countenance of the Lord.

If, dearly beloved, his face be so terrible and intolerable for sinners, and
the wicked: what think we his hand is? At the face and appearing of Gods
anger, the earth trembles: but we earth, earth: yea, stones, iron, flints,
tremble nothing at all. If we will not tremble in hearing, woe unto us, for
then shall we be crashed in pieces in feeling. If a Lion roar, the Beasts
quake: but we are worse then beasts, which quake nothing at the roaring of the
Lion, I mean the Lord of Hosts. And why? because the curse of God, hardness
of heart, is already fallen upon us, or else we could not but lament and
tremble for our sins: If not for the shame and foulness thereof; yet, at the
least, for the malediction and curse of God, which hangs over us for our sins.

Lord be merciful unto us for thy Christ's sake, and spare us in thine anger,
remember thy mercy toward us Amen.

And thus much for the third thing, to the mooning of us to sorrow for our
sins: that is, for the tagge tied to Gods Law, I mean, for the malediction
and curse of God. But if our hearts be so hard, that through these, we yet
feel no hearty sorrow for our sins: let us fourthly set before us, examples
past and present, old and new; thereby the holy Spirit may be effectual, to
work in his time this work of sorrowing for our sin.

Look upon Gods anger for sin in Adam and Eve, for eating a piece of an
apple. Were not they, the dearest creatures of God, cast out of Paradise? Were
not they subject to mortality, travail, labor, etc. Was not the earth
accursed for their sins? Do not we all, men in labor, women in traueling
with child, and all in death, mortality and misery, even in this life feel
the same? And was God so angry for their sin, and he being the same God,
will he say nothing to us for ours (alas) more horrible then the eating once,
of one piece of an apple?

In the time of Noe and Lot, Genesis 6.
God destroyed the whole world with water; and the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra,
Sebiom and Adamah, Genesis 19.
with fire and brimstone from heaven for their sins: namely, for their
whoredoms, pride, idleness, unmercifulness to the poor, tyranny, etc. In
which wrath of God, even the very babes, birds, fowls, fishes, herbs, trees,
and grass perished: and think we that nothing will be spoken to us, much
worse, and more abominable then they? For all men may see, if they will, that
ye whoredoms, pride, unmercifulness, tyranny, etc. of England, far passes in
this age, any age that ever was before. Lots wife looking back, Genesis 19.
was turned into a salt stone: and will our looking back again, yea our
turning back a gain, to our wickedness, do us no hurt? If we were not
already more then blind Beetles, we would blush. Pharao his heart was hardened
so, that no miracle could convert him: if ours were any thing soft, we would
begin to sob.

Of six hundred thousand men, Joshua and Caleb.
only but twain entered into the Land of promise, because they had ten times
sinned against the Lord, as he himself says: and think we, Number. 14.
that God will not swear in his wrath, that we shall never enter into his rest,
which have sinned so many ten times, as we have toes and fingers; yea, hairs
on our heads and beards (I fear me) and yet we pass not.

The man that swear, and he that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, Leuit. 24.
Number. 15.
were stoned to death: but we think our swearing is no sin, our bribing,
rioting, yea, whore-hunting on the Sabbath day, pleases God, or else we would
something amend our manners.

Helias negligence in correcting his sons, 1. Reg. 5
nipped his neck in two: but ours which pamper up our children like puppets,
will put us to no plunge? Helias sons for disobeying their fathers admonition,
brought over them Gods vengance: and will our stubbornness do nothing?

Saul's malice to David, Acabs displeasure against Naboth, 3. Reg. 21.22.
brought there blood to the ground for dogs to eat; yea, their children were
hanged up and slain for this cause: 4. Reg. 21. 4. Reg. 10.
but we continue in malice, envy and murder, as though we were able to wage
war with the Lord.

David's adultery we Bethshabe, was visited on the child borne; on David's
daughter, defiled by her brother, and on his children, one slaying another, his
wives defiled by his own son, and himself driven out of his Realm in his
old age; and otherwise also, although he most heartily repented his sin: But
we are more dear unto God then David, which yet was a man after Gods own
heart, or else we could not but fromble, and begin to repent.

The rich glutton who insatiably delighted in gluttony; what did it avail him?
it brought his soul to hell, and have we any pre-eminence that God will do
nothing to us.

Achans subtle theft provoked Gods anger against all Israel: and our
subtlety; yea, open extortion, is so fine and politic, that we think God
cannot epsy it.

Gehezi his covetousness, brought it not the Leprosy upon him, and on all his
seed? Judas also hanged himself. But the covetousness of England is of an
other cloth and color: Well, if it were so, the same Tailor will cut it
accordingly.

Anania and Saphira by lying, linked to them sudden death: but ours now
prolongeth our life the longer, to last in eternal death.

The false witness of the two Judges, against Susanna, lighted on their own
heads, and so will ours do at length.

But, what go I about to avouch ancient examples, where daily experience does
teach? The Sweat the other year, the Storms the Winter following, will us to
weigh them in the same balances. Men, hanging and killing themselves, which
are (alas) too rife in all places, require us to register them in the same
roules. At the least, in Children, Infants, and such like, which yet cannot
utter sin by word or deed; we see Gods anger against sin, in punishing them
by sickness, death, mis-hap, or otherwise, so plainly, that we cannot but
groan again, in that we have poured out these sins in word and deed more
abundantly.

And here, with me, a little look on Gods anger, yet so fresh, that we cannot
but smell it, although we sloppe our noses never so much; I pray God we smell
it not more fresh hereafter, I mean it forsooth (for I know you look for it)
in our dear late Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty. You all know, he was but
a child in years, defiled he was not with notorious offenses: Defiled, said I;
nay rather, adorned with so many good gifts, and wonderful qualities, as never
Prince was from the beginning of the world. Should I speak of his wisdom, of
his ripeness in judgment, of his learning, of his godly zeal, heroical
heart, Fatherly care for his Commons, Nurcely solicitude for Religion? etc.

Nay, so many things are to be spoken in commendation of Gods exceeding graces
in this Child: that, as Salust writes of Carthage; I had rather speak
nothing, then too little, in that too much is too little.

This gift God gave unto us English men, before all nations under the Sun,
and that of his exceeding love toward us. But, alas, alas; for our
unthankfulness sake, for our sins sake, for our carnality and profane living,
Gods anger has touched, not only the body, b^^ also the mind of our King, by a
long sickness, and at length has taken him away by death; death, cruel
death, fearful death. O, if Gods judgment be begun on him, which as he was
the chiefest, so I think the holiest, and godlyest in the Realm of England,
(alas) what will it be on us, whose sins have ouergrowen so our heads, that
they are climed up to heaven? I pray you (my good brethren) know, that Gods
anger toward us for our sins, cannot but be great: yea, too fell, in that we
see it was so great, that our good King could not bear it. What befell Iewry,
after the death of Josias? Lord save England, and give us repentance: my heart
will not suffer me to tarry longer herein: I hope this will cause some
repentance.

If therefore the prayer for Gods fear, the looking in Gods glass, and the
tag thereto will not burst open the blockish heart, yet hope I, that the
repetition of these examples; especially of our late King, and this troublesome
time, will move some tears out of thine heart, if thou will pray for Gods
Spirit accordingly. For who art thou (think always with thy self) that God
should spare thee, more then them whose examples thou have heard? What friends
have thou? Were not of these Kings, Prophets, Apostles, learned, and come of
holy Stocks? I deceive my self (think thou with thy self) if I believe that
God, being the same God that he was, will spare me; whose wickedness is no
less, but much more then some of theirs. He hates sin now as much as ever
he did. The longer he spares, the greater vengeance will fall: the deeper he
draws his Bow, the sorer will his shaft pierce.

But if yet thy heart be so hardened, that all this will not move thee; then
surely art thou in a very evil estate, and remedy now I know none. What, said
I, none? Know I none? Yes, there is one, which is suresby, as they say, to
serve, if any thing will serve. You look to know what this is: Forsooth, the
Passion, and Death, of JESUS CHRIST. You know, the cause why CHRIST became man,
and suffered as he suffered, was the sins of his people, that he might save
them from the same.

Consider the greatness of the sore, I mean sin, by the greatness of the
Chyrurgion, and the salve. Who was the Chyrurgion? no Angel, no Saint, no
Archangel, no power, no creature in heaven nor in earth: but only he, by whom
all things were made, all things are ruled also; even Gods own Deareling, and
only beloved Son, becoming man.

Oh what a great thing is this, that could not be done by the Angels,
Archangels, Potentates, Powers, or all the creatures of God, without his own
Son? who of necessity must come down from heaven, to take our nature, and
become man. Here have ye the Shyrurgion: great was the cure, that this mighty
Lord took in hand.

Now, what was the salve? Certainly, of an inestimable value, and of many
compositions: I cannot recite al, but rather must leave it to your hearty
consiberations. Thirty-three years was he curing our sore: He sought it
earnestly, by fasting, watching, praying, etc. The same night that he was
betrayed, I read how busy he was about a plaster in the Garden, when he lying
flat on the ground, praying with tears, and that of blood not a few, but so
many as did flow down on the ground again; crying on this sort: Father (says
he) if it be possible, let this Cup depart from me. That is, If it be
possible, that else the sins of mankind can be taken away: grant that it may
be so. Thou heardest Moses crying for the Idolaters: Thou heardest Lot for the
Zoarites: Samuel, David, and many other for the Israelites: And, dear Father,
I only am thine own Son, as thou have said, in whom thou art well pleased:
will thou not hear me? I have by the space of thirty-three years, done
always thy Will: I have so humbled my self, that I would become an abject
amongst men, to obey thee. Therefore (dear Father) if it be possible, grant my
request, save mankind, now without any further labor, salues, or plasters. But
yet (says he) not as I will, but as thou will.

But Sir, what heard he? Though he sweat blood and water, in making his
plaster for our sore of sin, yet it framed not. Twice he cried without
comfort; yea, though to comfort him God sent an Angel, we know, that yet this
plaster was not allowed for sufficient, until hereunto, Christ Jesus was
betrayed, forsaken of all his Disciples, forsworn of his dearly beloved,
bound like a Thief, belyed on, buffeted, whipped, scourged, crowned with
thorns, crucified, racked, nailed, hanged up between two thieves, cursed and
railed upon, mocked in misery, and had given up the gho^t: then bowed down the
head of Christ, that is, God the Father which is the head of Christ: then
allowed he the plaster, to be sufficient and good for the healing of our
sore, which is sin. Now would God abide our breath, because the stink, that
is; damnation or guiltiness, was taken away, by the sweet savor of the breath
of this LAMB, thus offered once, for all.

So that here, dearly beloved, we as in a glass may see, to the brusing of
our blockish hard hearts. Gods great judgment and anger against sin. Genesis 6.
Genesis 19.
The Lord of lords, the King of kings, the brightness of Gods glory, the Son
of God, the Deareling of his Father, in whom he is well pleased; hangs
between two thieves, crying for these and me, and for us all: My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me?

Oh hard hearts that we have, who delight in sin. Look on this, see the very
heart of Christ pierced with a spear, wherein thou may see, and read Gods
anger for sin. Woe to thy hard heart that pierced it.

And thus much for the first part of Repentance, I mean, for the means of
working contrition. First, use prayer: then look on Gods Law: thirdly, Genesis
19.
see his curse: fourthly, set examples of his anger before thee: and last of
all, set before thee: the precious death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

From this and prayer cease not, til thou feel some hearty sorrow for thy
sin. The which when thou feel, then labor for the other part, that is,
faith, on this sort.

As first, in Contrition, I willed thee not to trust to thy free will, for the
attaining of it: so do I will thee in this. Faith is so far from the reach
of man's free will, that to reason it is plain foolishness. Therefore, thou
must first go to God, whose gift it is: thou must, I say, get thee to the
Father of mercy, whose work it is, that as he has brought thee down by
Contrition, and humbled thee, so he would give thee faith, raise she up, and
exalt thee.

On this manner therefore, with the Apostles, and the poor man in the Gospel
that cried: Lord increase our faith: Lord help my unbelief, pray thou and
say: O merciful God and dear Father, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; in
whom, as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him,
forasmuch as he often bids us to ask of thee, 2. Tim. 2.
and thereto promises that thou will hear us, and grant us that which in his
name we shall ask of thee: lo, gracious Father, I am bold to beg of thy
mercy, through thy Son JESUS CHRIST, one sparkle of true faith and certain
persuasion of thy goodness and love toward me in Christ, wherethrough, I
being assured of the pardon of all my sins, by the mercies of Christ thy Son,
may be thankful to thee, love thee, and serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

On this sort, I say, or otherwise, as God shall move thee, pray thou first of
al, and look for thy request at Gods hand, without any doubting, though
forthwith thou feel not the same: for oftentimes we have things of GOD
given us, long before we feel them as we would do. Now unto this prayer, use
thou these means following.

After prayer for faith, which I would should be first; secondly, because the
same springs out of the hearing, no of Masses, Mattins, Cannons, Councels,
Doctors, Decrees, but out of the hearing of Gods word, get thee Gods word:
but, not that part which serves specially to Contrition; that is, the Law: but
the other part, which serves specially to consolation and certain persuasions
of Gods love toward thee, that is, the Gospel or publication of Gods mercy
in Christ, I mean the free promises.

But here thou must know, that there are two kinds of promises: one, which is
properly of the Law, another of the Gospel. In the promises of the Law, we
may indeed behold Gods mercy, but so, that it hangs upon the condition of
our worthiness, as, if thou love the Lord with all thy heart, etc. thou shall
find mercy. This kind of promise, though it declare unto us Gods love, which
promises where he needs not: yet unto him that feels not Christ, which is
the end of the Law, they are so far frnm comforting, that utterly with the
Law they bring man to great despair: so greatly we are corrupt, for none so
loves God as he ought to do. From these therefore get thee to the other
promises of the Gospel, in which we may see such plenty and frank liberality
of Gods goodness, that we cannot but be much comforted though we have very
deeply sinned. For these promises of the Gospel do not hang on the condition
of our worthiness, as the promises of the Law do: but they depend and hang on
Gods truth, that as God is true, so they cannot but be performed to al them
which lay hold on them by faith; I had almost said, which cast them not away by
unbelief.

Mark in them therefore two things; namely, that as well they are free
promises, without any condition of our worthiness: as also, that they are
universal offered to all, all (I say) which are not so stubborn, as to keep
still their hands, whereby they should receive this alms in their bosoms, by
unbelief. As concerning Infants and children, you know I now speak not; but
concerning such as be of years of discretion. And now you look that I should
give you a taste of these promises, which are both free and universal: except
none but such as except themselves. Well, you shall have one or two for a say.

In the 3. of John says our Savior: So God the Father loved the world, that
he would give his Dearling, his own only Son, that all that believe in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Lo, sir, he says not, that some
might have life: but all, says he. And what all? All that love him with all
their hearts? all that have lived a godly life? Nay, all that believe in him
Although thou have lived a most wicked and horible life: if now thou believe in
him, thou shall be saved. Is not this sweet grace?

Again, says Christ: Come unto me, all ye that labor and are laden, and I
will refresh you. Let us a little look one this letter: Come unto me: Who
should come? Lords, Priests, Holy men, Monks, Friars? Yea, Cobblers, tinkers,
whores, thieves, murderers also, if they lament their sins. Come unto me
(says he) all ye that labor and are laden; that is, which are afraid of your
sins. And what will thou do, Lord? And I will refresh you (says he.)

Oh what a thing is this: And I will refresh you? Wot you who spoke this? He
that never told lie: He is the truth, there was never guile found in his mouth:
and now will he be untrue to thee (good brother) which art sorry for thy
grievous sins? No forsooth: heaven and earth shall pass and perish, but his
word shall never fail.

Saint Paul says, God would have all men saved: Lo, he excepteth none. And to
Titus: The grace of God brings salvation to all men. As from Adam, all have
recieued sin to damnation: so by Christ, all have grace offered to salvation,
if they reject not ye same. I speak not now of Infants, I say: nor I need not
enter into the matter of Predestination. In preaching of repentance, I would
gather where I could with Christ.

As surely as I live, (says God) I will not the death of a sinner. Art thou a
sinner? Yea: Lo, God swears, he will not thy death. How can thou now
perish? Consider with thy self, what profit thou should have, to believe
this to be true to others, if not, to thy self also: Satan does so. Rather
consider with Peter, that the promise of salvation pertains not only to them
which are nie; that is, to such as are fallen a little: but also to all, to
whom the Lord has called, be they never so far off.

Lo, now by me, the Lord calls thee, thou man, thou woman, that art very
far off. The promise therefore pertains to thee: needs must thou be saved,
except thou with Satan say, God is false: And if thou do so, God is faithful,
and cannot deny himself: as thou shall feel by his plagues in hell, for so
dishonouring God, to think that he is not true. Will he be found false now? The
matter hangs not on thy worthiness, but it hangs on Gods truth. Clap hold
on it, and I warrant thee, CHRIST is the propitiation for our sins; yea for the
sins of the whole world: believe this, man: I know thou beleeuest it: say
therefore in thy heart still: Domine audage mihi fidem: Lord increase my faith:
Lord help my unbelief. Blessed are they which see not (by reason) this but yet
believe: Beloved, we must hope above hope, as Abraham did.

And thus much for a taste of the promises, which are every where, not only in
the new Testament, but also in the Old. Read the last end of Leuiticus 26. The
Prophet Esaias 30. Where he says: God tarrieth looking for thee to show thee
mercy. Also the 40. and so forth to the 60. Read also 2. Kings 24. Psalm. 33.
Joel 2. etc.

Howbeit, if all this will not serve, if yet thou feel no faith, no certain
persuasion of Gods love: then prepare thy self unto prayer, and diligent
considering of the free and universal promises of the Gospel: Thirdly, set
before thee those blessings which heretofore, and at that present, God has
given thee. Consider, how he has made thee a man or a woman, which might have
made thee a Toade, or a Dog. And why did he this? Verily, because he loved
thee: And think thou, if he loved thee when thou wast not, to make thee
such a one, as he most graciously has: will he not now love thee, being his
handy work? Does he hate any thing that he made? Is there unableness with
him? Does he love for a day, and so farewell? No, beloved, God loves to the
end, his mercy endures for ever. Say therefore with Job. Operi manuum tuarum,
porrige dexteram, that is: To the work of thy hands, put thy helping hand.

Again, has he not made thee a Christian man or woman, where if he would,
he might have made thee a Turk or Pagan? This thou know he did of love.
And do thou think his love is lessened, if thou lament thy sin? Is his hand
shortened for helping thee? Can a woman forget the child of her womb? and
though she should, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord. He has given
thee limbs, to see, hear, go, etc. He has given thee wit, reason,
discretion, etc. He has long spared thee, and born with thee, when thou never
purposedst to repent: and now thou repenting, will he not give thee mercy?
Wherefore does he grant thee to live at this present, to hear him to speak
this, and me to speak this but of love to us all? Oh, therefore let us pray
him, that he would add to this, that we might believe these love tokens, that
he loves us, and indeed he will do it. Lord open our eyes in thy gifts, to see
thy gracious goodness. Amen.

But to tarry in this I will not. Let every man consider Gods benefits, past
and present, public and private, spiritual and corporal, to the confirming
of his faith, concerning the promises of the Gospel, for the pardon of his
sins.

I will now go about to show you a fourth mean to confirm your faith in this,
even by examples. Of these there are in the Scriptures very many; as also daily
experience does diversely teach the same, if we were diligent to observe things
accordingly: wherefore, I will be more brief herein having respect to time,
which steals fast away.

Adam in Paradise transgressed grievously, as the painful punishment, which
we all as yet feel, proves, if nothing else. Though by reason of his sin, he
displeased God sore, and ran away from God, (for he would have hid himself;
yea, he would have made God the causer of his sin, in that he gave him such a
Mate, so far was he from asking mercy): yet all this notwithstanding, GOD
turned his fierce wrath, neither upon him nor Eve, which also required not
mercy; but upon the Serpent Satan: promising unto them a seed, Jesus Christ;
by whom, they at the length should be delivered. In token whereof, though they
were cast out of Paradise for their nurture, to serve in sorrow, which would
not serve in joy; yet he made them apparel to cover their nakedness: a visible
Sacrament, and token of his invisible love and grace, concerning their souls.
If God was so merciful to Adam, which so sore brake his commandment, and
rather blamed God then asked mercy: think thou, O man, that he will not be
merciful to thee, which blamest thy self, and desire pardon?

To Cain he offered mercy, if he would have asked it. What have thou done,
says God? The voice of thy brothers blood, cries unto me out of the earth. O
merciful Lord (should Cain have said) I confess it: But alas, he did not so,
and therefore, said God: Now, that is, In that thou desire not mercy: Now: I
say, be thou accursed, etc. Lo, to the reprobate he offered mercy, and will he
deny it thee, which art his child?

Noah, did he not sin and was drunk? Good Lot also, both in Sodom dissembled a
little with the Angels, prolonging the time: and out of Sodom, he fell very
foul: as did Judas, and the Patriarks against Joseph; but yet I ween they
found mercy. Moses, Myriam, Aaron, though they stumbled a little, yet received
they mercy: yea, the people in the wilderness often sinned and displeased God,
so that he was purposed to have destroyed them. Let me alone (says he to
Moses) that I may destroy them. But Moses did not let him alone, for he prayed
still for them, and therefore God spared them. If the people were spared,
through Moses prayer, they not praying with him, but rather worshipping their
golden Calfe, eating, drinking, and making jolly good cheer: Beloved, why
should thou doubt whether GOD will be merciful to thee? having, as indeed
thou have, one much better then Moses to pray for thee, and with thee; even
Jesus Christ, who sits on the right hand of his Father, and prays for us,
being no less faithful in his fathers house, the Church, then Moses was in
the Synagogue. David, that good King, had a foul foil, when he committed
whoredom with his faithful servants wife, Bethsheba: whereunto he added also a
mischievous murder, causing her husband, his most faithful Soldier Vria to
be slain, with an honest company of his most valiant men of war, and that
with the sword of the uncircumcised.

In this sin, though a great while he lay asleep (as many do now a days, God
give them good waking) thinking, that by the Sacrifices he offered, all was
well, God was content: yet at length, when the Prophet, by a Parable, opened
the offense, and brought David in remembrance of his own sin, and in such
sort, that he gave judgment against himself: then quaked he, his Sacrifices
had no more taken away his sins, then our Sir John's Trentals, and wagging of
his fingers over the heads of such as lie asleep in their sins (out of the
which when they are awaked, they will see, that it is neither Mass nor
Mattins, blessing nor cursing will serve) then, I say, he cried out, saying:
Peccaui Domine: I have sinned, says he, against my Lord and good God, which
has done so much for me. I caused indeed Vriah to be killed, I have sinned, I
have sinned. What shall I do? I have sinned, and am worthy of eternal
damnation. But what says God, by his Prophet: Dominus (says he) transtulit
peccatum tuu^, non morieris: The Lord has taken away thy sins, thou shall
not dye. Oh good God, he said, but Peccaui, I have sinned: but yet from his
heart, and not from the lips only, as Pharaoh and Saul did, and incontinently
he hears: Thou shall not dye, the Lord has taken away thy sins: Or rather,
has laid them upon an other; yea, translated them upon the back of his Son
Jesus Christ, who bare them, and not only them, but thine and mine also, if
that we will now cry but from our hearts, Peccauimus: We have sinned, good
Lord, we have done wickedly; enter not into judgment with us, but be merciful
unto us after thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of thy
compassions, do away our iniquities, etc. For indeed, God is not the God of
David only: Idem Deus omnium, He is the God of all: So that, Quicunque
inuocauerit nomen Domini, salus erit. He or she, whosoever they be that call
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. In confirmation whereof, this
History is written, as are also the other which I have recited, and many mo
which I might recite. As of Manasses the wicked King, which slew Esaias the
Prophet, and wrought very much wickedness; yet the Lord showed mercy upon him
being in prison, as his Prayer does teach us. Nebuchadnezzar, though for a time
he bare Gods anger, yet at the length he found mercy.

The City of Niniuie also found favor with God, as did many other, which for
breuity I will omit, and will bring forth one or two out of the new Testament,
that we may see God to be the same God in the new Testament, that he was in the
old.

I might tell you of many, if I should speak of the Lunatike, such as were
possessed with Devils, Lame, Blind, Dumb, Deaf, Lepers, etc. But time will not
suffer me; therefore, one or two shall serve. Mary Magdalen had seven devils,
but yet they were cast out of her: and of all others, she was the first that
Christ appeared unto, after his resurrection. Thomas would not believe Christ's
resurrection, though many told him, which had seen and felt him: by reason
whereof, a man might have thought that his sins would have cast him away.
Except I should see and feel (says he) I will not believe. Ah wilful
Thomas: I will not, says he. But Christ appeared unto him, and would not leese
him, neither will he thee, beloved, if with Thomas, thou will keep company with
the Disciples, as Thomas did. Peter's fall was ugly, he accursed himself, if
ever he knew Christ, and that for fear of a Maiden, and this not once, but
three several times, and that in the hearing of Christ his Master: but yet the
third time Christ looked back, and cast on him his eye of grace, so that he
went out and wept bitterly. And after Christ's resurrection, not only did the
Angels will the woman to tell Peter, that Christ was risen, but Christ himself
appeared unto him severally: such a good Lord is he.

The Thief hanging on the Cross, said but this: Lord, when thou come into
thy Kingdom, remember me: And what answer had he? This day (says Christ)
thou shall be with me in Paradise. What a comfort is this, in that he is now
the same Christ to thee and me, and to us all, if we will run unto him? for
he is the same Christ to day and to morrow, until he come to judgment. Then
indeed, he will be inexorable: but now is he more ready to give then to ask.
If thou cry, he hears thee, yea before thou cry.

Cry therefore, Esai. 31. Mat. 7.
be bold, man, he is not partial. Call, says he, and I will hear thee: Ask,
and thou shall have: Seek, and thou shall find though not at the first, yet
at the length. If he tarry a while, it is but to try thee. Nam veniens veniet,
Heb. 10.
and non tardabit: He is coming, and will not be long.

Thus have you four means, which you must use to the attayning of faith, or
certain persuasion of Gods mercy toward you, which is the second part of
penance; namely, prayer, the free and universal promises of Gods graces, the
recordation of the benefits of God, past and present, the examples of Gods
mercy. Which although they might suffice, yet will I put one more to them,
which all only of it self, is full sufficient: I mean, the death of the Son
of God, Jesus Christ: which if thou set before the eyes of thy mind, it will
confirm thy assurance: for it is the great Seal of England, as they say; yea,
of all the world, for the confirmation of al Patents and perpetuities of the
everlasting life, whereunto we are all called.

If I thought these, which I have before recited, were not sufficient to
confirm your faith of Gods love toward such as do repent, I would tarry
longer herein. But because I have been both long, and also I trust, you have
some exercise of concience in this daily (or else you are to bsame) I will but
touch and go, Consider with your selves what we are misers, wretches, and
enemies to God. Consider what God is, even he, which has all power, majesty,
might glory, riches etc. perfectly of himself, and needs nothing, but has
all things. Consider what Christ is: concerning his Godhead, coequal with his
Father, even he by whom all things were made; he, I say, by whom all things
are ruled and governed: Concerning his Manhood, the only Dearling of his
Father, in whom is all his joy. Now Sir, what a love is this? that this God
which needs nothing, would give wholly his own self to thee, his enemy,
wreaking his wrath upon himself, in this his Son: as a man may say, to spare
thee, to save thee, to win thee, to buy thee, to have thee, to enjoy thee for
ever. Because thy sin has separated thee from him, to the end thou might
come eftsoons into his company again, and therein remain; he himself became,
as a man would say, a sinner: or rather sin it self, even a malediction or
curse: that we sinners, we accursed by our sin, might by his oblation or
suffering for our sins, by his curse, be delivered from sin and from
malediction. For by sin, he destroyed sin, killing Death, Satan, and
Sin, by their own weapons; and that for thee and me (man) if we cast it
not away bp unbelief. Oh wonderful love of God. Who ever heard of such a
love? the Father of Heaven for us his enemies, to give his own dearly beloved
Son, Jesus Christ, and that not only to be our Brother, to dwell among us:
but also, to the death of the Cross for us? Oh wonderful love of Christ to us
all, that was content and willing to work this deed for us. Was there any
love like to this love?

God indeed has commanded his charity and love to us herein, that when we
were very enemies unto him, he would give his own Son for us. That we being
men, might become, as you would say, Gods; God would become man. That we being
mortal, might become immortal, the immortal God would become mortal man.
That we earthly weretches might be Citizens of Heaven, the Lord of Heaven would
become as a man would say, earthly. That we being accursed, might be blessed,
God would be accursed. That we, by our father Adam, being brought out of
Paradise, into the puddle of al pain, might be redeemed, and brought into
Paradise again, God would be our Father and an Adam, thereunto.

That we having nothing, might have al things; God having al things, would
have nothing. That we being vassailes, and slaves to all, even to Satan the
Fiend, might be Lords of all, and of Satan: the Lord of all would become a
vassaile, and a slave to us all, and in danger of Satan. Oh love
incomprehensible. Who can otherwise think now, but if the gracious good Lord
disdained not to give his own Son, his own hearts joy for us his very
enemies, before we thought to beg any such thing at his hands; yea, before
we were? who, I say, can think otherwise, but that with him, he will give us
all good things? If when we hated him, and fled away from him, he sent his Son
to seek us: who can think otherwise, then that now we loving him, and
lamenting, because we love him no more, but that he will forever love us? He
that gives the more to his enemies, will not he give the less to his friends?
God has given his own Son, then which nothing is greater; even to us his
enemies: and we now being become his friends, will ne deny us faith and pardon
of our sins? which though they be great, yet in comparison they are nothing at
all. Christ Jesus would give his own self for us, when we willed if not: and
will he now deny us faith, if we will it? This will is his earnest, that he
has given us truly to look indeed, for the thing willed. And look thou for
it in deed: for as he has given thee to will, so will he give thee to do.

Jesus Christ gave his life for our evils, and by his death he delivered us. O
then, in that he lives now, and cannot dye, will he forsake us? his heart
blood was not too dear for us, when we asked it not: what can then be now too
dear for us, asking it? Is he a changeling? Is he mutable as man is? Can he
repent him of his gifts? Did he not foresee our falls? Paid not he therefore
the price? Because he saw we should fall sore, therefore would he suffer
sore. Yea, if his suffering had not been enough, he would yet once more come
again. God the Father, I am sure, if the death of his Son incarnate, would
not serve, would himself and the holy Ghost also become incarnate, and dye for
us.

This death of Christ therefore look on, as the very pledge of Gods love
toward thee, whosoever thou art, how deep soever thou have sinned. See, Gods
hands are nailed, they cannot strike thee: his feet also, he cannot run from
thee: his arms are wide open to embrace thee: his head hangs down to kiss
thee: his very heart is open, so that therein look; nay even spy, and thou shall
see nothing therein, but love, love, love, love to thee: hide thee therefore,
lay thy head there with the Evangelist.

This is the clift of the Rock, wherein Helias stood. This is for all aching
heads a pillow of down.

Anoint thy head with this oil, let this ointment enbalme thy head, and wash
thy face.

Tarry thou on this firm Rock, and I Will warrant thee. Say with Paul, What can
separate me from the love of God? Can death, can poverty, can sickness,
hunger, or any misery, persuade thee now that God loves thee not? Nay, nothing
can separate thee from the love, wherewith God has loved thee in CHRIST JESUS:
whom he loves, he loves to the end. So that now where abundance of sin has
bin in thee, the more is the abundance of grace. But to what end? Certainly,
that as sin has reigned to death, as thou see, to the killing of Gods Son:
so now Grace must reign to Life, to the honoring of Gods Son, who is now
alive, and cannot dye any more.

So that they which by faith feel this, cannot any more dye to God, but to sin
whereto they are dead and buried with CHRIST.

As Christ therefore lives, so do they, and that to God, to righteousness
and holiness. The life which they live, is, In fide Filij Dei: In the faith of
the Son of God. Whereby you see that now I am slipped into that, which I made
the third part of penance: namely, newness of life, which I could not so have
done, if that it were a part of it self indeed, as it is an effect or fruit of
the second part; that is, of faith, or trust in Gods mercy. For he that
believes, that is, is certainly persuaded, sin to be such a thing, that is
the cause of all misery, and of it self so greatly angreth God, that in
heaven nor in earth, nothing could appease his wrath; save alonely the death
and precious bloud-shedding of the Son of God, in whom is all the delight and
pleasure of the Father: he, I say, that is persuaded thus of his sin; the same
cannot but in heart abhor and quake, to do or say; yea, to think any thing
willingly, which Gods Law teaches him to be sin.

Again, he that believes, that is, is certainly persuaded, Gods love to be so
much toward him, that where through sin he was lost, and made a fire brand
of hell; the eternal Father of mercy, which is the omni sufficient God, and
needs nothing to us, or of any thing that we can do, to deliver us out of
hell, and to bring us into heaven; did send even his own most deer Son out
of his bosom, out of heaven into hell (as a man would say) to bring us, as I
said, from thence into his own bosom and mercy, we being his very enemies: he
I say, that is thus persuaded of Gods love toward him, and of the price of his
redemption, by the dear blood of the Lamb immaculate, JESUS CHRIST, the same
man cannot but love God again; and of love do that, and heartily desire to do
better, the which might please God.

Think you, that such a one, knowing these things by faith, will willingly
insist and wallow in his wilful lusts, pleasures, and fantasies? Will such a
one, as knows by faith, Christ Jesus to have given his blood to wash him from
his sins, play the Sow to nuzle in his puddle of filthy sin and vice again?
Nay, rather then he will be defiled again by his wilful sinning, he will
wash often the feet of his affections, watching over the vice still sticking in
him; which as a spring, continually sends out poison enogh, to drown and
defile him, if the sweet water of CHRIST'S passion in Gods sight, did not wash
it, and his blood satisfy the rigor of Gods justice due for the same.

This blood of Christ shed for our sins, is so dear in the sight of him that
believes, that he will abhor in his heart, to stamp it, and tread it under
his feet. He knows now, by his belief, that it is too much, that hitherto he
has set too little by it, and is ashamed thereof. Therefore for the residue of
his life, he purposes to take better heed to himself, then before he did.
Because he sees by his faith, the grieuousnes of Gods anger, the foulness of
sin, the greatness of Gods mercy, and of Christ's love toward him, he will
now be heedy to pray unto God to give him his grace accordingly; that as with
his eyes, and tongue, hands, and feet, etc. he has displeased God, doing his
own will: even so now with the same eyes, tongue, etc. he may displease his own
self, and do Gods will: Willingly, will he not do that which might renew
the death of the Son of God. He knows he has too much sin, unwillingly in
him, so that thereto he will not add willing offenses.

This willing and witting, offending and sinning, whosoever does flatter
himself therein; does evidently demonstrate and show, that he never yet
indeed, tasted of Christ truly. He was never truly persuaded, or believed, how
foul a thing sin is, how grievous a thing Gods anger is, how joyful and
precious a thing, Gods mercy in Christ is, how exceeding broad, wide, high and
deep Christ's love is: Perchance he can talk and preach of faith, but yet truly
in part he never felt it.

For if he did once feel this rauishing Consolation indeed, then would he be so
far from continuing in sin, willingly and wittingly, that wholly and heartily
he would give over himself to that which is contrary, I mean, to a new life,
renewing his youth, even as the Eagle does.

For as we, being in the servitude of sin, demonstrate our service, by giving
over our members to the obeying of sin, from iniquity to iniquity: even so, we
being made free from sin, by faith in Jesus Christ, and endued with Gods
Spirit, a Spirit of liberty, must needs demonstrate this freedom and
liberty, by giving over our members to the obedience of the Spirit: by the
which we are lead and guided from virtue to virtue, and all kind of holiness.
As the unbelievers declare their unbelief, by the working of the evil spirit
in them, outwardly the fruits of the flesh: even so the believers declare their
faith, by the working of Gods Spirit in the^ outwardly the fruits of the
spirit. For as the Devil is not dead in those which are his, but works still
to their damnation: so is not God dead in them which be his, but works still
to their salvation. The which working is not the cause of the one or the other
being in any; but only a demonstration, a sign, a fruit of the same: As the
Apple is not the cause of the Apple tree, out a fruit of it.

Thus then you see briefly, that newness of life, is not in deed a part of
penance, but a fruit of it, a demonstration of the justifying faith, a sign of
Gods good Spirit possessing the heart of the penitent: as the old life is a
fruit of impenitency, a demonstration of a lip-faith, or unbelief, a sign of
Satan's spirit, possessing the heart of the impenitent, which al those be, that
be not penitent.

For mean I know none: He that is not penitent, the same is impenitent: he
that is not governed by Gods Spirit, the same is governed by Satan's spirit.
For all that be Christians are governed with the Spirit of Christ, which spirit
has his fruits. All other that be not Christ's, are the Devils. He that
gathers not with Christ, scatters abroad.

Therefore, my dearly beloved, I beseech you to consider this, and deceive not
your selves. If you be not Christ's, then pertain you to the devil: of which
things the fruits of the flesh does assure you, as whoredom, adultery,
uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, envy, strife, contention,
wrath, sedition, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, blasphemy, slothfulness,
idleness, vain talking, slandering, etc. If such like fruit as these grow
out of the trees of your hearts; surely, surely, the Devil is at Inn with
you, you are his birds: whom when he has well fed, he will broach you, and eat
you, chaw you and champ you, world without end, in eternal woe and misery. But
I am otherwise persuaded of you all. I trust you be all CHRIST JESUS his
people, and his children; yea, and his brethren by faith.

As ye see your sins in Gods Law, and tremble, and sigh, sorrow and sob for the
same: even so you see his great mercies in his Gospel and free promises, and
therefore are glad, merry and joyful, for that you are accepted into Gods
favor, have your sins pardoned, and are endued with the good spirit of God,
even the Seal and sign, MANVEL of your election in Christ Jesus, even before
the beginning of the World.

The which Spirit, for that he is the Spirit of life, given to you, to work
in you, with you, and by you here in this life satisfaction, and holiness,
whereunto you are called, that ye might be holy, even as your heavenly Father
is holy: I beseech you al by admonition and warning of you, that you would
stir up the gifts of God, given to you generally and particularly, to the
edifying of his Church, that is: I pray you, that you would not molest the good
Spirit of God, by rebelling against it, when it provoke and calls you to
go on forwards, that the which is holy, might yet be more holy, he which is
righteous, might be more righteous; as the evil spirit moves and stirs up
the filthy to be yet more filthy, the covetous, to be more covetous, the
wicked, to be more wicked.

Declare you now your repentance, by works of repentance. Bring forth fruits,
and worthy fruits.

Let your sorrowing for your evils, demonstrate it self, departing from the
evils you have used.

Let your certainty of pardon of your sins, through Christ, and your joy in
him be demonstrated, by persuing of the good things which Gods word teaches
you. You are now in Christ Jesus, Gods workmanship, to do good works which God
has prepared for you to walk in.

For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and of our Savior,
Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself, fervently
given unto good works.

Again, Titus 3. For we our selves also were in times past unwise,
disobedient, deceived, serving lusts, and diverse pleasures living in
maliciousness and enny, full of hate, and hating one another. But after that
the kindness and love of God our Savior to manward appeared, not by the deeds
of righteousness which we wrought, but of his mercy he saved us by the
fountain of the new birth, and with the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he
shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior; that we once
justified by his grace, should be heirs of eternal life, through hope. This is
a true saying. But I will make an end, for I am too tedious.

Dearly beloved, repent your sins: that is, be sorry for that which is past,
believe in Gods mercy for pardon, how deeply soever you have sinned, and both
purpose and earnestperuse a new life, bringing forth worthy and true fruits of
Repentance. As you have given over your members from sin to sin, to serve the
devil; your tongues to swear, to lie, to flatter, to scold, to jest, to
scoff, to beastly talk, to vain iangling, to boasting, etc. Your hands to
picking, groping, idleness, fighting, etc. Your feet to skipping, going to
evil, to dancing, etc. Your ears to hear fables, lies, vanities, and evil
things, etc. So now, give over your members to godliness, your tongues to speak,
your ears to hear, your eyes to see, your mouths to taste, your hands to
work, your feet to go about such things as may make to Gods glory, sobriety of
life, and love to your brethren, and that daily more and more, diligently: for
in a stay to stand you cannot, either better or worse you are to day, then you
were yesterday. But better I trust you be, and will be if you mark my Theme;
that is; Repent you. The which thing that you would, as before I have humbly
besought you: even so now, yet once more I do again beseech you, and that for
the mercies of God in Jesus Christ our Lord: Repent you, repent you, for the
kingdom of heaven (that is, a kingdom full of all riches, pleasures, mirth,
beauty, sweetness, and eternal felicity) is athand. The eye has not seen
the like, the ear has not heard the like, the heart of man cannot conceive
the treasures and pleasures of this kingdom, which is now at hand to such as
repent; that is, to such as are sorry for their sins, believe Gods mercy,
through Christ, and earnestly purpose to lead a new life.

The God of mercy, through Christ his Son, grant us his holy Spirit, and
work in our hearts this sorrow, faith, and new life; which through his grace I
have spoken of, both now and for ever. Amen.

AN Other Sermon, made also by the said, Master JOHN BRADFORD, upon the Lords
SVPPER.
1. Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ.


THere are two Sacraments in CHRIST'S Church: the one of imitatio^, that is
wherewith we be enrolled, as it were in the household and family of God, which
Sacrament, we call Baptism: the other, wherewith we be conserved. fed, kept, and
nourished, to continue in the same family, which is called the Lords Supper, or
the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, broken for our sins, and shed
for our transgressions.

Of the former Sacrament, that is, of Baptism, to speak now I am not
purposed, because occasion and time serve not so thereto. Babtism is in place
of Circumcision. Christian men's children ought to be baptized.
Of the second therefore, will I speak something, by Gods grace, if that first
you remember this, that Baptism in Christ's Church, now since Christ's death, is
come in place of Circumcision, which was in the same Church before Christ's
coming: Whereby we may see, that Christian Parents seem to be no less bound
to offer their Infants and Babes to be baptized, that they may be taken and
accounted of us, as members of Christ's mystical body, whereunto they are
received and sealed: Gal. 4.
then were the Hebewes their children to be taken as pertaining to the covenant
and league with God, wherewith they were enrolled, alonely the circumstance of
of the eight day, not necessary to be observed, being now abrogated.

But to come again: Of the Lords Supper, I am purposed presently to to speak,
through the help of God, because we are assembled in Christ (I hope) to
celebrate the same.

Now, that the things which I shall speak, may be better observed, and carried
away of you, I will tell you how, and in what sort I will speak of it. Three
things would I have marked, as the principals and scopes, whereto I will
refer all that I shall at this time speak thereof. They be these: Who what
and wharfore That is (to make it more plain) Who did institute this thing which
we are about to celebrate, this is the first.

The second is, What the thing is, whch is instituted.

And the last is, Wherefore and to what end it was instituted, whereby we shall
be taught how to use it.

Who did institute this Sacrament.
For the first, Who did institute this Sacrament and Supper. You all do know,
that things are more esteemed sometime for the dignity and authority of the
person, sometime for the wisdom of the person, sometime for the power and
magnificence of the person, and sometime for the tender love and kindness of the
person. If need were, I could by examples set forth every one of these, but I
hope it is not necessary. Now then how can the thing which we be about to
celebrate, but be esteemed of every one highly, in that the author of it does
want no dignity, no authority, no wisdom, no power, no magnificence, no
holiness, no tender love and kindness? but has all dignity, authority,
wisdom, power, magnificence, etc. and all that can be absolutely wished.

He is God eternal, coequall, and substantial, with the Father, and with the
holy Ghost, the Image of the substance of God, the wisdom of the Father, the
brightness of his glory, by whom all things were made, are ruled and governed.
He is the King of all kings, and the Lord of all lords. He is the Messiah of
the world, our most dear and loving Brother, Savior, Mediator, Advocate,
Intercessour, Husband, Priest. So that the thing which comes from him, cannot
but be esteemed, loved, and embraced, if dignity, authority, wisdom power,
glory, goodness, and mercy like us. Yea, if any thing that can be wished,
like us, then cannot this which our Lord did institute, but like us; and that
so much the more, by how much it is one of the last things which he did
institute and conmaund. God open our eyes, to see these things accordingly: so
shall we come with more reverence to this Table of the Lord: which thing he
grant for his mercies sake. Amen.

And thus much for the first, who did institute this Sacrament.

Now to the second. What the Sacrament is. If we shall ask our eyes, What the
Sacrament is.
our hands, and the reason of man: they will all make a consonant answer, that
it is bread and wine. And verily, herein they speak the truth, and lie not; as
by many things may be proved, although the Papists prate their pleasure to the
contrary.

And here, my dearly beloved, I think I shall not be either tedious or
unprofitable unto you, if I tarry a little in showing this verity, that the
substance of bread and wine remain in the Sacrament, after the words of
consecration (as they call them) be spoken. Whereby we may learn what
shameless beasts they be, which wuld enforce men to believe
Transubstantiation, which is an error: whereupon in a manner, Upon
transsubstantiation, all popery almost is builded.
depends all Popery; for it is the stay of their Priesthood, which is
neither after the order of Aaron, nor after the order of Melchisedech: but
after the order of Baal, which thing is something seen by their number. For the
false Prophets and Priests of Baal were always many mo in number, when the
wicked were in authority, then the true Priests and Prophets of the Lord, as
the holy Histories of the Bible do teach. Read 3. Kings chap. 18.

The Sacrament of the popish Mass not the Sacrament of Christ's body.
That in the Supper of the Lord, or in the Sacrament of Christ's body (which the
Papists call the Sacrament of the Altar) as though that were Christ's Sacrament,
which thing they can never prove: for it being perverted, and used to a
contrary end, as of sacrificing propitiatorily, for the sins of the quick
and of the dead; of idolatry, by adoring or worshipping it by godly honor,
etc. is no more Christ's Sacrament, but an horrible profanation of it; and
therefore, as Christ called Gods Temple, which was called an house of prayer;
for the abusing and profaning of it by the Priests, a den of Thieves: so this
which the Papists call the Sacrament of the Altar, full truly may we call an
abominable Idol: And therefore, I would all men should know, that the
Sacrament of the Altar, as the Papists now do abuse it, omitting certain
substantial points of the Lords institution, and putting in the stead thereof,
their own dregs and dreams, is not the Sacrament of Christ's body nor the
Lords Supper: whereof when we speak reverently, as our duty is, we would not
that men should think we speak it of the popish Mass: (that I say) in the
Supper of the Lord, or in the Sacrament of Christ's body, there remains the
substance of Bread and Wine, as our senses and reasons do teach, these many
things also do teach the same.

The first reason against Transsubstantiation.
First, the holy Ghost does plainly tell us, by call it often bread, after the
words of Consecration, as 1. Corinthians 10. Is not the bread which we break,
a pertaking of the body of Christ, says Paul?

Lo plainly he says: The bread which we break, Not only calling it bread,
but adding thereto breaking, which cannot be attributed, either to Christ's
body, whereof no bone was broken, either to any accident, but must needs be of
a substance, which substance if it be not Christ's body, cannot be but bread.

As in the 11. Chapter fonre times he plainly calls it: He that eats of
this bread: He that receives this bread, etc. And in the Acts of the Apostels
we read, how that in speaking of the Communion They met together to break
bread, etc. So that it is plain, that the substance of Bread and Wine do
remain in the Supper, after the words of Consecration: As also may appear
plainly by CHRIST'S own words, which calls that which he gave them in the
cup, Wine, or the fruit of the Vine; as both Matthew, and Mark do write.
Whereby we fee, that there is no Transsubstantiation of the Wine: and
therefore may we also see, that there is no Transsubstantiation of the bread.

An answer to the Papists cavil for the foresaid reason. Mat. 26 Exodus 7.
As for the Papists cauilling, how that it has the name of bread, because it
was bread: as Simon the Leper, was called still leprous, though he was healed:
or as Moses Rod, being turned into a Serpent, was called a Rod still, it
proves nothing. For there was in the one a plain sight, and the senses
certified that Simon was no Leper: and in the other, a plain mention, that the
Rod was turned into a Serpent. Contrariwise, concerning the Sacrament, neither
the senses see any other thing then bread, neither is there any mention made of
turning. And therefore their cavil is plainly seen to be but a cavil, and of
no force. But to come again, to bring me reasons of transsubstantiation.

The second reason against Transsubstantiatio^. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. 1.
Cor. 11.
Secondly, that the substance of bread remains still, the very text does
teach. For the Evangelists, and the Apostle Saint Paul do witness, that
Christ gave that to his Disciples, and called it his body which he took, on
which he gave thanks, and which he brake: but he took bread, gave thanks on
bread, and broke bread; Ergo, he gave bread, and called bread his body, as he
callled the Cup the new Testament.

So that it follows by this, that there is no Transsubstantiation. And this
reason I my self have promised in writing, to prove by the authority of the
Fathers: namely, Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Hieronimus,
Augustinus, Theodorete, Bid, if so be I may have the use of my books.

The third reason against Transsubstantiatio^.
Thirdly, that in the Sacrament, there is no Transsubstantiation of the bread,
by this reason I do prove: Like as by our Savior Christ, the Spirit of truth
spoke of the bread, This is my body: So says the same Spirit of truth, of the
same bread, That we many, are one body, 1. Cor. 10
and one bread etc.

So that as it appears, the Sacrament not to be in ye Church, by
Transsubstantiation, even so is it not Christ's natural body, by
Transsubstantiation.

The forth reason against Transsubstantiatio^.
Fourthly, I prove that there is no Transsubstantiation by Luke and Paul's words
spoken over the Cup. For no less are they effectual to transsubstatiate the
Cup: then their words spoken of the bread, are opeartorious and mighty to
transsubstantiate the bread. For as they say of bread, This is my body, so say
they of the cup, This Cup is the new Testament: which thing is absurd to be
spoken or thought; either of the cup, or of the thing in the cup by
Transsubstantiation. Yea, rather in saying these words, This Cup is the new
Testament: we are taught by their coupling this word, Cup, to the
demonstratiue, This, how we should in these words, This is my body, know that
this word, This, does their demonstrate bread.

The fifth reason.
Fifthly, that the substance of bread remains in the Sacrament, as the reasons
before brought forth do prove, so does the infinition of a Sacrament. For the
Fathers do affirm it, to consist of an earthly thing, Ireneus Augustinus.
Chrysostomus.
and of an heavenly thing, of the word and of the element, of sensible things,
and of things which be perceived by the mind. But Transubstantiation takes
clean away that earthly thing, the keement, the sensible thing, and so makes
it no Sacrament. And therefore the definition of a Sacrament full well teaches.
that bread which is the earthly thing, the sensible thing, and the element
remains still, as saint Augustine says: the word comes to the element, (he
says not, takes away the element,) and so it is made a Sacrament.

The sixth reason against Transsubstantiation.
Sixthly, the nature and property of a Sacrament, teaches this also which I have
affirmed. for as Cyprian wrieth, that Sacraments bear the names of the things
which they signify: so does Saint Augustine teach, Cyprian, in Sermon de
Chrismat. Augustinus ad Bonifacium.
that if Sacraments have not some signification with the things whereof they be
Sacraments; then are they no Sacraments.

Now in the Lords Supper this similitude is first in nourishing, that as bread
nourishes the body; so Christ's body broken, feeds the soul. Secondly, in
bringing together many into one, that as in the Sacrament, many grains of Corn
are made one bread: many Grapes are made one lyquour and Wine: so the multitude
which worthily receive the Sacrament, are made one body with Christ, and his
Church. Last of all, in one unlikely likelinesse or similitude, that as bread
eaten, turns into our nature: so we rightly, eating the Sacrament by faith,
turn into the nature of Christ.

So that it is plain to them that will see, that to take the substance of bread
away, is clean against the nature and property of a Sacrament.

I will speak nothing how that this their doctrine of Transubstantiation,
beside the manifold absurdities it has in it, (which to rehearse I omit) it
utterly overthrows the use of the Sacrament, and is clean contrary to the
end wherefore it was instituted, and so is no longer a Sacrament, but an Idol;
and is the cause of much Idolatry, converting the peoples hearts, from an
heavenly conversation to an earthly; and turning the Communion, into private
action, and a matter of gazing and piping, of adoring and worshipping the work
of men's hands, for the living God which dwells not in Tempels made with men's
hands, much less lies he in Pixes and Chests; whose true worship is in
spirit and verity, which God grant us all to render unto him continually. Amen

The seventh reason against transubstantiation.
The Sacrament of Baptism does also teach us, that as the substanae of the
water remains there: so in the Lords Supper, remains the substance of bread
after consecration. For as by Baptism we are engrafted into CHRIST; so by the
Supper we are fed with Christ. These two Sacraments, the Apostle gladly
coupleth together, 1. Cor. 10. and 1. Cor 12. We are baptized into one body
(says he) and have drunk all of one spirit, meaning it by the Cup: as
Chrysostom and other great learned men do well interpret it. As therefore in
Baptism, is given unto us the holy Ghost, and pardone of our sins, which yet
lie not lurking in the water: so in the Lords Supper, is given unto us the
Communion of Christ's body and blood, that is, grace, forgiveness of sins,
innocence, life, immortality, without any Transubstantiation, or including of
the same in the bread. By Baptism, Gal. 3.
the old man is put off, and the new man put on, yea, Christ is put on, but
without Transubstantiating the water. And even so it is in the Lords Supper. We
by faith spiritually in our souls do feed on Christ's body broken, do eat his
flesh and drink his blood: do dwell in him, and he in us but without
Transubstantiation.

An answer to the Papists cavil for the foresaid reason.
As for the cavil they make, that we are baptized into one body, meaning
thereby the mystical body, and not the natural body of Christ, whereby they
would enforce that we are fed with the natural body of Christ; but we are not
ingrafted into it, but into the mystical body, and so put away the reason
aforesaid. As for this cavil, I say, we may soon avoid it, if so be that we
will consider how that Christ which is the head of the mystical body; is not
separate from the body, and therefore to be ingrafted to the mystical body, is
to be ingrafted into the natural body of Christ, to be amember of his flesh,
and bones of his bones: as Pope Leo full well does witness, in saying: that
Corpus regenerati fit caro crucifixi: The body (says he) of the regenerate, is
made the flesh of Christ crucified. And hereto I could add some reasons for
the excellency of Baptism. I think it be more to be gotten, then to be
nourished. As for the excellent miracle of the patefaction of the Trinity, and
the descending of the holy Ghost in Baptism in a visible form, the like
whereto was no seen in the Lords Supper: I will omit to speak of further,
then that I would you should know how it were no mastery, to set forth the
excellency of this Sacrament, as well as of the Supper.

The eight reason.
It is a plain sign of Antichrist, to deny the substance of bread and wine to
be in the Lords Supper after consecration: for in so doing and granting
Transubstantiation, the property of the humane nature of Christ is denied. For
it is not of the humane nature, but of the divine nature, to be in many places
at once. As Dydimus, De spiritu sancto, does prove thereby the divinity of the
holy Ghost.

Now grant Transsubstantiation, and then Christ's natural body must needs be in
many places, which is nothing else but to confound the two natures in Christ; or
to deny Christ's humane nature, which is the self same that S. John says, to
deny Christ to be come in the flesh. And this who so does, by the testimony
of. S John, is an Antichrist in his so doing, whatsoever otherwise he do prate.

Read S. Augustine, in his Epistle to Dardanus, and his 50. and 30. Treatise
upon Saint John, and easily you shall see how that Christ's body must needs be
in one place. Oportet in vno loco esse: But his Truth is in all places.

The ninth reason.
If there be no substance of bread in the Sacrament, but Transsubstantiation,
then Christ's body is received of the ungodly, and eaten with their teeth, which
is not only against S. Augustine (calling this speech, Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of man, etc. A figurative speech:) but also against the
plain Scriptures, which affirm them to dwell in Christ, and Christ in them,
and they to have everlasting life that eat him; which the wicked have not,
although they eat the Sacrament. He that eats of this bread, (says Christ)
shall live for evermore. Therefore, they eat not Christ's body, but (as Paul
says) they eat in judgment and damnation, which, believe it, is an other
manner of thing then Christ's body.

This does S. Augustine affirm, saying: None do eat Christ's body, which is not
in the body of Christ, that is (as he expounds it) in whom Christ dwells
not, and he in Christ. Which thing the wicked do not, because they want faith
and the holy Spirit, which be the means whereby Christ is received.

To the things which I have brought hereforth, to improve transsubstantiation,
I could bring in the Fathers to confirm the same, which succeeded contnually
many hundred years after Christ. Also I could show that Transsubstantiation is
but a new doctrine, not established, before Satan (which was tied for a
thousand years) was letten loose. Also I could show, that ever hitherto, since
it was established, in all times it has been resisted and spoken against. Yea,
before this doctrine, the Church was nothing so endowed with goods, lands, and
possessions as it has been since. It has brought no small gain, no small
honor no small ease to the Clergy: and therefore no marvel though they
strive and fight for it.

It is their Maozim, it is their Helena. God destroy it with the breath of his
mouth, as shortly he will for his names sake. Amen.

If time would serve, I could and would here tell you of the absurdities which
come by this doctrine: but for times sake I must omit it. Only, for Gods sake
see this, that this their doctrine of Transsubstantiation is an untruth,
already I have proved; and forget not, that it is the whole stay of all Popery,
and the pillar of their Priesthood: whereby Christ's Priesthood, Sacrifice,
Ministry, and Truth is let, yea perverted, and utterly overthrown.

God our Father, in the blood of his Son JESUS CHRIST, open the eyes and
minds of all our Magistrates, all other that bear the name of CHRIST, to see
to it in time, to Gods glory, and their own salvation. Amen.

Now to return to the second matter, what the Sacrament is; you see that to
the senses and reason of man, it is bread and wine: Which is most true, as by
the Scriptures, and otherwise I have already proved: and therefore away with
Transsubstantiation.

But here, lest we should make it no Sacrament, for a Sacrament consists of
two things: and least a man should by this gather, that we make it none other
thing but bare bread, and a naked sign, and so rail at their pleasure on us
saying: How can a man be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, by unworthy
receiving it, if it be but bare bread, and so forth? For this purpose, I will
now speak a little more hereabout, by Gods grace, to stop your mouths, and so
to stir up your good hearts, more to the worthy estimation and preception of
this holy mystery.

When a loving friend gives to thee a thing, or sends to thee a token (as
for an example, a napkin, or such like) I think thou do not as thou
should do, if that with the thing, thou considerest not the mind of thy
friend, that sends or gives the thing; and according thereunto esteemest and
receiuest it.

And so of this bread, think I, that if thou do not rather consider the mind
of thy lover Christ, then the thing which thou see: yea, if thou do not
altogether consider Christ's mind, thou dealest unhonestly, and Strumpetlike
with him. For it is the property of Strumpets, to consider the things given and
sent them, rather then the love and mind of the giver and sender: whereas the
true lovers do not consider, in any point, the things given or sent, but the
mind of the party.

So we, if we be true lovers of Christ, must not consider harely the outward
thing which we see, and our senses perceive; but rather altogether, we must
and should see and consider the mind of Christ, and hereafter and accordingly
to it, to esteem the Sacrament.

But how shall we know the mind of Christ? Surely, as a man's mind is best
known by his word: so by Christ's word shall we know his mind.

Now his words be manifest, and most plain: This (says he) is my body:
therefore, accordingly should we esteem, take, and receive it. If he had
spoken nothing, or if he had spoken doubtfully, then might we have been in
some doubt. But in that he speaks so plainly, saying: This is my body: Who
can, may, or dare be so bold as to doubt of it? He is the truth and cannot
lie; he is omnipotent and can do all things: therefore it is his body. This I
believe, this I confess, and pray you all heartily to beware of these and such
like words, that it is but a sign or figure of his body: Except ye will
discern betwixt signs which signify only, and signs which also do
represent, confirm, and seal up (or as a man may say) give with their
signification. As for an example: An Iuy bush, is a sign of Wine to be sold:
the budding of Aarons Rod, did signify Aarons Priesthood, allowed of the
Lord: the reservation of Moses Rod, did signify the rebellion of the children
of Israel: the stones taken out of Jordan, Gedeons fleece of woole, etc. Such
as these, be signs significatiue, and show no gift. But in the other signs,
which some call exhibitiue, is there not only a signification of the thing, but
also a declaration of a gift is, in a certain manner, a giving also: As
Baptism not only signifies the cleansing of the conscience from sin, by
the merits of CHRIST'S blood, but also is a very cleansing from sin. And
therefore it was said to Paul, that he should arise and wash away his sins, and
not that he should arise and take only a sign of washing away his sins. In
the Lords Supper, the bread is called a partaking of the Lords body, and not
only a bare sign of the Lords body. This I speak not, as though the elements
of these Sacraments (were Transsubstantiate) which I have already impugned
either, as though Christ's body were in bread or wine, or that they were tied to
the elements otherwise then Sacramentally, and spiritually, either that the
bread and wine may not, and must not be called Sacramental, and external
signs: but that they might be discerned from significatiue and bare signs
only, and he taken for signs exhibitiue; and representiue. By this means a
Christian conscience will call and esteem the bread of the Lord, as the body
of Christ. For it will never esteem the Sacraments of Christ, after their
exterior apearance, but after the words of Christ.

Whereof it comes, that the Fathers, as Chrysostom and others, do speak
with so full a mouth, when they speak of the Sacrament: for their respect was
to Christ's words. If the Schoolmen which followed had the same spirit which
they had, then would they never have consented to Transsubstantiation. For with
great admiration some of the Fathers do say; that the bread is changed or
turned into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood: meaning it of a
mutation or change, not corporal, but spiritual, figuratine, Sacramental, or
mystical. For now it is no common bread, nor common wine, being ordained to
serve for the food of the soul. The Schoolmen have understood it, as the
Papists now speak of a substantial changing, as though it were no great
miracle, that common bread should now be assumed into that dignity, that it
should be called Christ's body, and serve for a celestial food, and be made a
Sacrament of his body and blood.

As before therefore I have spoken, Christ's presence in the Supper.
I would wish that this Sacrament should be esteemed, and called of us
Christian men, after Christ's words: namely, the bread Christ's body, and the
wine Christ's blood, rather then otherwise. Not that I mean any other presence
of Christ's body, then a presence of grace, a preserver to Faith, a presence
spiritually: and not corporally, really, naturally, and carnally, as the
Papists do mean. For in such sort Christ's body is only in heaven, on the
right hand of God the Father almighty, whether our faith in the use of the
Sacrament, ascends and receives whole Christ accordingly.

Yea, but one will say, that to call the Sacrament on that sort, An objection.
is to give an occasion of Idolatry to the people, which will take the Sacrament
which they see simply for Christ's body, as by experience we are well taught:
and therefore it were better to call it bread, and so less harm should be,
especially in this age.

To this objection I answer, An answer.
that indeed great Idolatry is committed to, and about this Sacrament; and
therefore men ought, as much as they can, to avoid from occasion or confirming
it.

But in as much as the holy Ghost is wiser then man, and had foresight of the
evils that might be, and yet notwithstanding, does call it Christ's body: I
think we should do evil, if we should take upon us to reform his speech.

If Ministers did their duties in Catechizing, and Preaching, then doubtless,
to call the Sacrament Christ's body, and to esteem it accordingly, could not
give occasion to Idolatry, and confirm it.

Therefore, Woe unto them that preach not.

There be two evils about the Sacraments, which to avoid, the holy Ghost has
taught us. For least we should with the Papists, think Christ's body present in,
or with the bread really, naturally, and corporally, to be received wc our
bodily mouth (where there is no other presence of Christ's body then spiritual,
and to the faith) in many places he keeps still the name of bread, as in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, the tenth and eleventh Chapters. And least we should
make to light of it, making it but a bare sign and no better then common
bread, the holy Ghost calls it Christ's body; whose speech I wish we would
follow and that not only as well to avoid the evil, which is now a days
most to be feared, concerning the Sacrament, I mean, of contemning it: as also
for that no faithful man comes to the Sacrament to receive bread simply, but
rather, yea, altogether to communicate with Christ's body and blood. For else to
eat and drink (as Paul says) they have houses of their own.

The contempt of the Sacrament, in the days of King Edward, has caused these
plagues upon us presently, the Lord be merciful unto us. Amen. And thus much
for the objection, of calling the Sacrament by ye name of Christ's body.

Another objection of Christ's presence in the Sacrament,
What (says one?) to call the Sacrament Christ's body, and to make none other
presence then by grace, or spiritually to faith, which is of things hoped for,
and of things which to the bodily senses do not appear, is to make no presence
at all, or to make him none otherwise present, then he is in his word when it
is preached: and therefore what need we to receive the Sacrament, in as much
as by this doctrine, a man may receive him daily in the field, as well, and as
much as in the Church, in the celebration and use of the Sacrament?

So this objection, I first answer: that indeed, neither the Scripture, nor
Christian Faith, will give us leave to make any carnal, real, natural,
corporal, or any such gross presence of Christ's natural body in the
Sacrament.

For it is in Heaven, and the Heavens must have it (as says Peter) till
Christ's coming to judgment, except we would deny the humanity of Christ, and
the verity of man's nature in him. The presence therefore which we believe and
confess, is such a presence, as reason knows not, and the world cannot
learn, nor any that looks in this matter with other eyes, or hears with
other ears, then with the ears and eyes of the Spirit and of Faith.

Which Faith, though it be of things hoped for, and so of things absent to the
corporal senses, yet this absence, is not an absence, indeed, but to reason,
and the old man; the nature of Faith, being a possession of things hoped for.
Therefore, to grant a presence to Faith, is not to make no presence at all, but
to such as know not Faith: And this the Fathers taught, affirming Christ to be
present by grace, and therefore, not only a signification; but also an
exhibition and giving of the Grace of CHRIST'S body; that is, of life, and of
the seed of immortality, as Cyprian writes. Wae eat Life, and drink Life,
faith Saint AUGUSTINE.

We feel a presence of the Lord by Grace, or in Grace, says Chrystome: We
receive the celestial food, that comes from above, says Athanasius. We
receive the property of the natural conjunction, Athanasius Hylarius.
and knitting together, says Hilarious. We receive the nature of the flesh the
blessing that gives life in bread and Wine, says Cyrillus. Cyrillus.
And else where he says, that with the bread and Wine, we eat the virtue of
Christ's proper flesh, life, grace, and the property of the body of the only
begotten son of God; which thing he himself expounds to be life. Basilius.
Basilius says, that we by the Sacrament receive the mystical Aduent of
Christ's, grace, and the very virtue of his very nature. Ambrosius.
Ambrose says, that we receive the Sacrament of the true body. Epiphanius.
Epiphanius says, we receive the body or grace. And Hierome says, that we
receive spiritual flesh, Hieronimu
which he calls other flesh, then that which was crucified. Chrysostom
says, Chrisostomus.
that we receive influence of grace and the Grace of the holy Ghost. Saint
Augustine says, that we receive grace and verity, the invisible grace and
holiness of the members of Christ's body. All the which sayings of the Fathers,
do confirm this our faith and doctrine of the Sacrament, we granting in all
things herein unto them, and they in like manner unto us. And therefore, the
lying lips, which both belie ye Doctors, as though they granted a carnal and
real presence of Christ's body, naturally and corporally after the Papists
declaration and meaning: and which belie us also, as though we denied all
presence of Christ, and so made it but a bare sign.

These lying lips the Lord will destroy, if they repent not, and with us
believe, and teach the truth, that the Sacrament is the food of the Soul a
matter of faith, and therefore spiritually and by faith to be talked of and
understood: which faith they want, and therefore they err so grossly, in
that they would have such a presence of Christ, as is contrary to all the
Scriptures, and to our Christian Religion: whereby comes no such commodity to
the receiver, as by the Spiritual presence which we teach, and according to
Gods word do affirm.

For we teach these benefits to be had by the worthy receiving the Sacrament;
namely, that we abide in Christ, and Christ in us. Again, that we obtain by
it a celestial life, or a life with God: moreover, that by Faith and in
Spirit, we receive not only Christ's body and blood, but also whole Christ,
God and man. Besides these, we grant, that by the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament, we receive remission of our sins, and confirmation of the new
Testament. Last of all, by worthy receiving, we get all increase of
incorporation with Christ, and amongst our selves, which be his members: then
which things what more can be desired? Alas, that men consider nothing at all,
how that the coupling of CHRIST'S body and blood to the Sacrament, is a
spiritual thing; and therefore there needs no such carnal presence as the
Papists imagine. Who will deny a man's Wife, to be with her Husband, one body
and one flesh, although he be at London, and she at York? But the Papists are
carnal men, guided by carnal reason only, or else would they know how that
the holy Ghost, because of our infirmity, uses metaphorically the words of
abiding, dwelling, eating and drinking of Christ, that the unspeakable
conjunction of Christ with us, might something be known. God open their eyes
to see it.

And thus much for this.

Now to that part of the objection, which says, that we teach CHRIST to be
no otherwise present in the Sacrament, then in his word: I would that the
Obiectors would well consider, what a presence of CHRIST is in his word. I
remember that Saint Augustine writes, how that Christ's body is received
sometime visible, and sometime invisible.

The visible receipt, he calls that which is by the Sacrament: the invisible
receite he calls that which by the exercise of our faith, with our selves,
we receive. And saint Hierom in the third book upon Ecclesiastes, affirms,
that we are fed with the body of Christ, and we drink his blood, not only in
mystery, but also in knowledge of Scripture. Wherein he plainly shows, that the
same meat is offered in the words of ye Scriptures, which is offered in the
Sacrament; so that no less is Christ's body and blood offered by the
Scriptures, then by the Sacraments. Upon the 147. Psalm, he writes also,
that though these words: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood: may
be understood in mystery, yet he says, it is more true to take Christ's body
and his blood, for the word of the Scriptures, and the doctrine of God. Yea,
upon the same Psalm he says plainly, that Christ's flesh and blood is powered
into our ears, by hearing the word: and therefore great is the peril, if we
yield to other cogitations whilst we hear it. And therefore, I think, Saint
Augustine says, that it is no less peril to hear Gods word negligently,
then so to use the Sacrament. But hereof may no man gather, that therefore it
needs not to receive the Sacrament, or to affirm that a man may as much by
himself, meditating the word in the field, receive Christ's body, as in the
Church, in the right use of the Sacrament. For Christ ordainth nothing in
vain, or superstitiously, he ordains nothing whereof we have not need:
Although his authority is such, that without any questioning, his ordinances
are to be obeyed.

Again, though in the field a man may receive Christ's body by Faith, in the
meditation of the word, yet deny I that a man does ordinarily receive Christ's
body, by the only meditation of Christ's death, or hearing of his word, with so
much sight, and by such sensible assurance (whereof God knows our infirmity
has no small need) as by the receipt of the Sacrament, not that Christ is not
so much present in his word preached, as he is in, or with his Sacrament: but
because there are in the perception of the Sacrament, more windows open for
Christ to enter into us, then by his word preached or heard. For there, I mean
in the word, he has an entrance into our hearts, but only by the ears,
through the voice and sound of the words: but herein the Sacrament, he has an
entrance by all our senses, by our eyes, by our nose, by our taste, and by our
handling also.

And therefore the Sacrament full well may be called, seeable, sensible,
tasteable, and touchable words. As therefore, when many windows be opened in
an house, the more light may come in then when there is but one opened: even
so, by the perception of the Sacraments, a Christian man's conscience has more
help to receive Christ, then simply by the word preached, heard, or meditated.

And therefore me thinks, the Apostle full well calls the Sacraments,
obsignations, or sealings of Gods promise. Read Romans the fourth, of
Circumcision. And thus much for the answer of the objection aforesaid.

Now to return from whence we came; namely, to the consideration of the
second thing, what the Sacrament is: I have told you, that it is not simply
Bread and Wine, but rather Christ's body, so called of Christ, and so to be
called and esteemed of us. But here let us mark what body, and what blood
Christ called it.

Christ's presence in the Supper.
The Papists still babble: This is my body, This is my blood. But what body it
is, what blood it is, they show not.

Look therefore, my dearly beloved, on Christ's own words, and you shall see,
that CHRIST calls it his body broken, and his blood shed. Mark, I say, tha
Christ calls it his body which is broken, his blood which is shed presently,
and not which was broken, or shall be broken, which was shed, or shall be shed,
as the Greek Texts do plainly show: thereby teaching us, that as God would
have the Passover called, not which was the Passover, or shall be the
Passover, but plainly the Passover; to the end that in the use of it, the
passing over of the striking Angel, should be set before their eyes as
present: so in the celebration of the Lords Supper, the very Passion of Christ
should be as present, beholden with the eyes of Faith.

For which end, Christ our Savior did specially institute this Supper, saying:
Do ye this in remembrance of me: or as Paul says: Show you the Lords death
till he come.

The Supper of the Lord then, is not simply Christ's body and blood, but Christ's
body broken, and his blood shed. Wherefore broken? Wherefore shed?
Forsooth, that teaches Christ himself, saying: Broken for you, Shed for your
sins, and for the sins of many. Here now then we have occasion in the use of
the Sacrament, to call to mind the greatness and grieuousnesse of sin, which
could not be taken away by any other means, then by the shedding of the most
precious blood, and breaking of the most pure body, of the only begotten Son
of GOD, Jesus Christ; by whom all things were made, all things are ruled and
governed, etc.

Who considering this thing, shall not be touched to repent? Who in the
receiving of this Sacrament, thinking that Christ says to him: Take, eat,
this is my body, which is broken for thee: This is my blood which is shed for
thy sins, can but tremble at the grieuousnesse of his sins, for the which
such a price was paid? If there were no plague at all else, to admonish man of
sin, how grievous a thing it is in Gods sight, surely that one were enough.
But alas, how are our hearts bewitched, through Satan's subtilties, and the
custom of sin, that we make sin a thing of nothing? God open our eyes in
time, and give us repentance, which we see this Sacrament does, as it were,
enforce us unto, in the reverence and true use of the same.

Again, in hearing that this which we take and eat, is Christ's body broken
for our sins, and his blood shed for our iniquities, we are occasioned to
call to mind the infinite greatness of GODS mercy and truth, and of Christ's
love toward us. For what a mercy is this, that God would for man, being lost
through his wilful sins, be content; yea, desirous to give his own only
Son, The Image of his substance, the brightness of his glory, being in his
own bosom, to be made man for us, that we men by him, might be; as it were,
made Gods? What a mercy is this, that God the Father should so tender us, that
he would make this his Son, being equal with him in divinity, a mortal man
for us, that we might be made immortal by him? What a kindness is this,
that the Almighty Lord should send to us his enemies, his dear Darling to be
made poor, that we by him might be made rich?

What bowels of compassion was this, that the omnipotent Creator of Heaven and
earth, would deliver his own only beloved Son for us creatures, to be not
only flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, that we might by him through
the holy Ghost, be made one with him, and so with the Father, by communicating
the merits of his flesh; that is, righteousness, holiness, innocence, and
immortality: but also to be a slain Sacrifice for our sins, to satisfy
his justice, to convert or turn death into life, our sin into righteousness,
hell into Heaven, misery into felicity for us? What a mercy is this, that GOD
will raise up this his Son CHRIST, not only to justify and regenerate us?
but also in his person, to demonstrate unto us our state, which we shall have:
for in his coming we shall be like unto him.

Oh wonderful mercy of God, which would assume this his Christ, even in humane
body, into the heavens, to taken and keep their possession for us, to lead
our captivity, captive, to appear before him always praying for us, to make
the throne of Justice a throne of mercy, the seat of glory a seat of grace! So
that with boldness we may come and appear before God, to ask and find
grace, in time convenient. Again, what a verity and constant truth in God, is
this, that he would, according to his promise, made first to Adam, and so to
Abraham, and others in his time, accomplish it, by sending his son so
graciously? Who would doubt hereafter, of anything that he has promised?

And as for Christ's love, oh, whose heart can be able to think of it any thing
as if deserves? He being God would become man: He being rich would become
poor: He being Lord of all the world, became a servant to us all, he being
immortal, would become mortal, miserable, and taste of all Gods curses; yea,
even of hell it self for us. His blood was nothing too dear, his life nothing
considered, to bring us from death to life.

But this his love needs more hearty weighing, then many words speaking: and
therefore, I omit and leave it to your considerations. So that in the receiving
of this Supper, as I would you would tremble at Gods wrath for sin: so would I
have you to couple to that terror and fear, true faith, by which ye might be
assuredly persuaded of Gods mercy toward you, and Christ's love, though all
things else preached the contrary.

Do every of you surely think, when you hear these words, Take eat, this is
my body, broken for your sins: Drink, this is my blood, shed for your sins:
That God, ye eternal Father, embracing you, Christ calls and clippeth you
must lovingly, making himself one with you, and you one with him, and one with
another amongst your selves.

You ought no less to be certain now that God loves you, pardons your
sins, and that Christ is all yours, then if you did hear and Angel out of
heaven speaking so unto you. And therefore rejoice and be glad, and make this
Supper Eutharichiam, a thanksgiving as the Fathers named it. Be no less
certain, that Christ and you now are all one, then you are certain, the bread
and wine is one with your nature and substance, after you have eaten and drunk
it. Howbeit, in this it differs, that you by faith are, as it were, changed
into Christ, and not Christ into you, as the bread is: for by faith he dwells
in us, and we in him. God give us faith in the use of this Sacrament, to
receive Christ as he gives us hands to receive the element, simbole, and
visible Sacrament. God grant us not to prepare our feeth and belly (as Saint
Augustine says) but rather of his mercy, he prepare and give us true and
lively faith, to use this and all other his ordinances to his glory and our
comforts. He sweep the houses of our hearts, and make them clean, that they
may be worthy Temples and lodgings for the Lord. Amen.

Wherefore the Sacrament was instituted.
Now let us come and look on the third and last thing; namely, wherefore the
Lords did institute this Sacrament. Our nature is very obliuious of GOD, and of
all his benefits And again, it is very full of dubitation and doubting of GODS
love, and of his kindness. Therefore, to the end these two things might be
something reformed and helped in us, the Lord has instituted this Sacrament; I
mean, that we might have in memory the principal benefit of all benefits,
that is, Christ's death, and that we might be on all parts assured of Communinon
with Christ, of al kindenes the greatest yt ever God did give unto man. The
former to be the end, wherefore Christ did institute this Sacrament, he himself
does teach us, saying: Do ye this in remembrance of me. The latter, the
Apostle does no less set forth in saying: The bread which we break, is it
not the partaking or Communion of the body of Christ? Is not the Cup of
blessiing, which we bless, the partaking or Communion of the blood of Christ?
So that it appears, the end wherefore this Sacrament was instituted, was and
is, for the reformation and help of our oblivion, of that which we should
never forget; and of our dubitation of that whereof we ought to be most
certain.

Concerning the former, namely, of the memory of Christ's death, what
commodity it brings with it, I will purposely for times sake omit. Only, a
little will I speak of the commodities coming unto us, by the partakeing
Communion we have with Christ. First it teaches us, that no man can
communicate with Christ, but the same must needs communicate with Gods grace
and favor, where-through sins are forgiven.

Therefore, this commodity comes here-through; namely, that we should be
certain of the remission and pardon of our sins. The which thing we may
also perceive by the Cup, in that it is called the Cup of the new Testament:
to which Testament is properly attributed, on Gods behalf, oblivion or
remission of our sins. First, I say, therefore; the Supper is instituted to
this end, that he which worthily receives, should be certain of the
remission and pardon of his sins and iniquities, how many and great soever
they be. How great a benefit this is, only they know which have felt the
burden of sin, which of all heavy things, is the most heavy. Again, no man
can communicate with Christ's body and blood, but the same must communicate with
his spirit, for Christ's body is no dead carcass. Now he yt communicates with
Christ's Spirit, co^municateth as with holiness, righteousness, innocence, and
immortality, and with all the merits of Christ's body: so does he with God and
all his glory, and with the Church, and all the good that ever it or any member
of it had, has, or shall have: Note though I apply this thus: yet I would not
that any man should think, that Communionem sanctorum, in the Creed, is not set
forth there for the better explication of that which preceedeth it namely, what
the holy Catholic Church is.
This is, The communion of Saints, which we believe in our Creed, which has
waiting on it, Remission of sins, Resurrection of the flesh, and life
everlasting.

To the end, that we should be most assured and certain of al these, Christ our
Savior did institute this his Supper, and therefore would have us to use it.
So that there is no man; I think, which seeeth not great cause of giving
thanks to God, for this holy Sacrament of the Lord, whereby if we worthily
receive it, we ought to be certain, that all our sins whatsoever they be,
are pardoned clearly: that we are regenerate and borne again into a lively
hope, into an inheritance, immortal, undefiled, and which can never wither
away: that we are in the fellowship of God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: that we are Gods Temples, at one with God, and GOD at one with us: that
we are members of CHRIST'S Church, and fellows with the Saints in all
felicity: that we are certain of immortality, in soul and body, and so of
eternal life: then which thing, what can be more demanded? CHRIST is ours,
and we are Christ's, he dwells in us, and we in him. Oh happy eyes that see
these things! And most happy hearts that feel them. My dear brethren, let us
pray unto the Lord, to open our eyes to see these wonderful things, to give us
faith to feel them. Surely we ought no less to be assured of them, now in
the worthy receiving of this Sacrament, then we are assured of the exterior
symboles and Sacraments. If an Angel from Heaven should come and tell you these
things, then would you rejoice and be glad. And my dear hearts in the Lord, I;
even now, though most unworthy, am sent of the Lord to tell you no less, but
that you worthily receiving this Sacrament, shall receive remission of all your
sins, or rather certainty that they are remitted, and that you are even now
Gods Dearlings, Temples, and fellow inheritors of all the good that ever he
has. Wherefore, see that you give thanks unto the Lord for this his great
goodness, and praise his Name for ever.

An objection of unworthy receiving.
Oh, says one, I could be glad in very deed, and give thanks from my very
heart, if that I did worthily receive this Sacrament. But (alas) I am a very
grievous sinner, and I feel in my self very little repentance and faith; and
therefore I am afeard that I am unworthy.

The answer.
To the answering of this objection, I think it necessary to speak something of
the worthy receiving of this Sacrament, in as great brevity and plainness as
I can. The Apostle wills all men to prove and examine themselves, before they
eat of the Bread, and drink of the Cup: for they that eat and drink
unworthily, eat and drink their own damnation.

Therefore, this probation and examination is necessary. If men will try their
Gold and Silver, whether they be Copper or no: is it not more necessary, that
men should try their consciences? Now, how this should be, the Papists teach
amiss, in sending us to their auricular Confession, which is impossible. The
true probation, and trial of a Christ an conscience, consists altogether in
Faith and Repentance. Faith, has respect to the Doctrine and Articles of our
Belief: Repentance, has respect to manners and conversation. Concerning the
former, I mean of Faith, we may see the Apostle teaches us, 2. Corinthians
11. Concerning the latter, for our conversation, those sins which are
commonly called mortal, or deadly, are to be removed. These sins are discerned
from other sins, by the Apostle, Romans 6. in saying: Let not sin reign and
bear sway in your mortal bodies. For truly, the^ we sin deadly, when we
give over to sin, and let it have the bridle of his liberty, when we strive
not against it, but allow it, and consent to it. Howbeit, if we strive against
it, if it displease us, then truly, though sin be in us (for we ought to obey
God without all resistance, or unwillingness) yet our sins be not of those
sins, which separate us from God, but for Christ's sake shall not be imputed
unto us believing.

Therefore, my dearly beloved, if that your sins do now displease you, if
you purpose unfeignedly to be enemies to sin in your selves and in others, as
you may, during your whole life, if you hope in Christ for pardon, if you
believe, according to the holy Scriptures and Articles of the Christian Faith,
set forth in your Creed: if, I say, you now trust in Gods merey, through
Christ's merits; if, you repent, and earnestly purpose before God to amend your
life, and to give over your selves to serve the Lord, in holiness, and
righteousness all the days of your life: although before this present, you
have most grievously sinned; I publish unto you, that you are worthy ghests for
this Table, you shall be welcome to Christ, your sins shall be pardoned, you
shall be endued with his Spirit, and so with Communion with him and the Father,
and the whole Church of God, Christ will dwell in you, and you shall dwell in
him for evermore.

Wherefore, behave your selves accordingly, with ioyfulnes and thanksgiving.
Do you now appear before the Lord: make clean your houses, and open the
doors of your hearts by repentance and faith, that the Lord of Hosts, the
King of glory, may enter in: and for ever hereafter beware of all such things,
as might displease the eyes of his Majesty. Fly from sin, as from a Load;
come away from Popery, and all Antichristian Religion; be diligent in your
vocations, be diligent and earnest in Prayer; hearken to the voice of God in
his Word with reverence; live worthy your profession. Let your light in your
life so shine, that men may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in heaven. As you have been darkness, and followed the works of
darkness, so now henceforth be light in the Lord, and have society with the
works of light. Now has God renewed his covenant with you, in Gods sight now
are you as clean, and healed from all your sores of sins. Go your ways,
sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto you. See that your houses being
new swept, be furnished with godliness and virtue, and beware of idleness,
lest the Devil come with seven spirits worse then himself, and to take his
lodging, and then your latter end will be worse then the first.

God our Father, for the tender mercy and merits of his Son, be merciful
unto us, forgive us all our sins, and give us his holy Spirit, to purge,
cleanse, and sanctify us, that we may be holy in his sight through CHRIST;
and that we now may be made ready, and worthy to receive this holy Sacrament,
with the fruits of the same, to the full rejoicing and strength (...) of our
hearts in the LORD (...) to whom be all honor and glory, world without end.
Amen.

To GOD be all Pra^^^.

FINIS

