AN EPYTAPHE upon the Death of the Right Reverent Father in God I. Iuell,
Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Sarisburie. Who deceased the.22. of
September. 1571.
If Public Weal, or Countreies clame,
might languish and bewail:
The late decease of such Deuines:
as chiefly did prevail
And clean extirp such shadowed works:
as Antichristians Ire
Or ARIVS flock, most TITYRVS like,
began for to conspire,
To ouerwhelme the Uerytie:
then may we Christians say,
We do sustain a double loss,
of IVELL at this day:
Whose name does not import so much the value, or the price:
As is his miss accounted off, by Fathers sage and wise.
No Pearl, or precious substance may, so much bewailed be,
As Country soil has cause to moan, dear IVELL now for thee.
Who has detected prudently, and published very plain:
Such Errors, as unworthy are, in Christians to remain:
As Warrierlyke, thou IVELL have, laid Battry to thy foes,
As HARDYNG, with like Popish Sects, that Papists Captain chose
For to defend their Heresies: By thee his fond Delusion,
Apparently as proved is, was brought unto confusion.
Thy zealous mind, thy sacred spright: by West, by North, by South,
Has driven of raging Papists Sect, a Snaffle in the mouth.
Whereon so long time they have fed, that Christ's Gospel clear
Unto the Lay and common sort, most brightly does appear.
So that deservedly of right, by golden Trumpe of Fame:
Thou do deserve the Title of a IVELL unto name:
For why? by thee most worthily, thy Uertues stood in stead:
By thee likewise the Flock of Christ, most preciouslie were fed.
By thee, the Path of Heavenly health: by thee, true faith was showen
By thee, the fruits of Charity, in deeds and words were known.
By thee, the in ward man was clad, and nourisht very well:
In any soil, scarce is there found, such Iuelles for to dwell.
Thy deeds agreed with steadfast words, fast fownded on the Rock,
To Christian state, a Father dear, and Patron to the Flock.
Which bears the Title of the Church, or Sheepefould of the Lord,
Approved by testimonial Acts as Scriptures do record.
If thus much then, thaccompt, was made, what Creature can denay
But England she, too soon has lost, a IVELL at this day,
When neither benefit of wealth, could cause to wander froe
The Compass of the heavenly Card, his Duty to bestow
Among his Brethren dear in Christ: then as we have begone,
Let us suppose that we have lost, this IVELL all too soon.
Desiryng God, that as he is, no doubt with him on hie,
We may become true Iuelles all, until the time we die.
So shall the heavenly Uerytie, most brightly floorish still,
And spread her Branches fair abroad, all over Sion Hill:
Whereby the Popish train may fall, that erst has been so hie,
And clean diminisht from the Earth, as withered Plants that die.
Grant this (O God) for evermore, and pearse thy Pastors hearts,
That valiantly (as IVELL did,) they play true Pastors parts.
And leave behind such worthy works, to gloryfie Gods name
As he has don: and so confound the Popish Sect with shame.
That by such mean no Papist may, the perfect Scripture wrest,
As HARDYNG has don heretofore, whom IVELL has suppressed.
And thus farewell, (dear IVELL now:) since Gods good pleasure is
To have thee hence from us among, to his Eternal bliss.
With tears I end this simple Uerse, proceedyng of good will,
Let learned sort take Pen in hand, and frame their filed Quill
To spread this Iuelles fame abroad, though Corpse be clad in Clay,
His worthy Works and Uertues rare, Dame FAME shall sure display.
FINIS.
N. BOVR.

Imprinted at London in the upper end of Fleetelane, by Richard Johnes: And
are to be sold at his Shop, ioynyng to the Southwest Door of saint Paul's
Church. 1571. October. 2.


