AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOMINICAL EPISTLES AND GOSPELS used in our English
Liturgy throughout the whole year.

TOGETHER WITH A REASON WHY THE CHVRCH did choose the same.

By JOHN BOYS, Doctor of Divinity.

The Winter part from the first Aduentuall Sunday to Lent.

ROMANS 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel.

Bernard. super Cant. ser. 65. Euangelium appellasti? ad Euangelium ibis. Have
thou appealed unto the Gospel? unto the Gospel shall thou go.

AT LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON, for WILLIAM ASPLEY. 1610.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND WORTHY KNIGHT SIR JOHN BOYS of Canterbury, my very good
Uncle, Grace and peace.
SIR, you did first plant my studies, Archbishop VVhitegift that president of
piety, watered them, and God gave increase: to God, as to the fountain of all
goodness, I consecrate all that I have: to your happy memories, as to the
conduits of much good, I dedicate this ensuing Postill, especially to your
self suruiuing, as to my best Patron in Cambridge, where the foundation of
this work was laid; unto your self, as to the chief procurer of that small
Benefice, where the frame was raised; unto your self, as to the lively pattern
of that doctrine, which is here delivered.

Accept it as your own; for it bears your name; and resembling you much,
endeavors to honor you long: so you shall encourage me daily to lessen my debt
to the Church, and increase mine obligations unto your self, that living and
dying I may continue

Your most bounden Nephew, John Boys.

THE FIRST SUNDAY IN ADVENT.
The Epistle, ROMANS 13.8. Owe nothing to any man but this, that ye love one
another, etc.
IT is a good observation of Libr. contr^ Valentin. cap. ^.
Tertullian, that heretics are wont first to persuade, then to teach: on the
contrary, that orthodoxes use first to teach, and then to persuade: the which
is Saint Paul's ordinary method: first monere, then mouere. This epistle then
allotted for this day being suitable to the rest of his writings, offers unto
your consideration two principal points.

1. An admonition: Owe nothing to any man but this, etc. 2. A double reason of
the same, 1. From the worthiness of the thing: He that loves has fulfilled
the law. 2. From the fitness of the time: Considering the season, that it is
now time, etc.

In his admonition, observe two things: 1. A precept: Owe nothing* etc. 2. An
except: But to love one another.

The Gorran. in Loc.
first does insinuate, that we must pay really: for we may not owe. fully: owe
nothing. generally: to any man.

Mel^nct. and Til^an. in loc.
Some Divines have stretched this unto all manner of duties as well of Debitum
morale, legale. Th^mas 12 ae. quaest. 99. art. 5. and P^t. Aragon. in 22 ^.
quaest. 58. art. 5.
love as law: making it a conclusion of the former doctrine; Give to all men
their due: tribute to whom tribute: custom to whom custom, etc. Estote
debitores omnibus vt nemini debeatis: (as Postil. mayor. dom. 4. ab Epiphan.
Luther observes) a strange, yet, a true saying: and it has a parallel, 1. Corinthians. 3.18. If any man among you seem to be wise in the world, let him be
a fool that he may be wise. In like manner, he that will live out of debt in
the world, let him owe so much unto every one, that he owe nothing unto any
one: so Paul Act. 20.27.
who kept nothing from any man, was notwithstanding through his love Romans 1.14.
debtor to many, 1. Cor. 9.19.
servant to all. Gorran. in loc.
Other restrain this unto pecuniarie debts, arising Lexicon Theolog.
Altenstaig. i^ verb. debitu^.
ex promisso, and commisso. Our promises are due debt. Psalm. 15. The man that
will rest upon Gods holy hill, must not swear to his neighbor and disappoint
him, though it be to his own hinderance. The word of an honest man ought to
be so current as his coin. Luther in 1. Galat. 16.
Pomponius an heathen man was so constant, as he never made lie himself, nor
could suffer a lie in other: every Christian, and a Julius Scaliger, vti
Josephus Scaliger in eius vita.
Gentleman, albeit not a Christian, ought to be just in all his words, as well
as righteous in all his ways. It is found counsel in affairs of the world;
Fast bind, fast find: Plus enim creditur annulis quam animis: as Seneca
wittily: For the seals of men are more regarded than their souls; and yet
ipse dixit of a Christian Pythagoras, is so sufficient, as Quod scripsi
scripsi, of a Jewish Pilate.

Debts ex commisso be manifold: some by borrowing, some by buying, some by
secret fraud, some by violent oppression. It is not a fault simply to borrow,
for then there could be no letting, no lending, no trading in the world: then
only debt is deadly sin, when a man has neither means nor meaning to
repay. Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not again.

Some men hold restitution a point of Popery: Citing his authority for the
lawfulness of vsuri^ when they would borow, but all eaging the text, nibil
ind^ sperant^s, when they should pay.
borrowing by Calvin, and paying by the Bible: but Bishop Sermon. Gosp. D^m. 2.
Aduent.
Latimer auoweth upon his credit, that in this all writers agree both old and
new, that restitution is necessary to salvation: Last Sermon before King Edw.
the sixth.
either restitution open or secret, or else hell. It is easy to show that in a
particular account, which he delivered in a gross sum: first it was a
received opinion among the fathers in the days of Augustine: Augustine. epist.
54.
Non remitt^tur peccatum nisi restituatur aeblatum: after entertained of the
best Justin. institut. lib. 4 tit. 1. etc. lib. 6. tit. 2.
Ciuilians: and all the Canonists and Schoolmen without exception: and still
embraced of our learned Protestant Divines; Illyricus, Brentius, Aretius, in
the exposition of the words of Luke 19.8.
Zacheus. If I have taken from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him
fourefold: In ^oc.
Melancthon, Loc. de sur^o in explicat. epist. ad Ephesians. cap 4.
Zanchius, Tract. not. of repent. cap. 11.
Perkins: and all that understand any thing at all. For no man except a new man
is saved, he must repent and be borne again: Now where there is unsained
repentance, there is contrition for sin, where contrition for sin, there
detestation of sin, where detestation of sin, there follows See Church
hom. of repentance. part. 2.
amendment of life.

Zache, renewed in mind was altered in manners: Ephesians. 4.28.
he that stole must steal no more: such then as detain the goods of other
unjustly without satisfaction or restitution, are not sorry but Prou. 2.14.
rejoice rather in doing of evil. As Vbi supra.
Augustine sweetly, Poenitentia non agitur, sed fingitur. I conclude therefore
this argument in the words of Institut. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Lactantius: Apud bonos iudices, satis babent firmitatis, vel testimonia sine
argumentis, vel argumenta sine testimonijs; nos tamen non alterutro contenti,
cum suppetat nobis vtrumque, ne cui perverse ingeuioso, aut non intelligendi,
aut contra disserendi locum relinqu^mus.

2. We must pay fully: Owe nothing. Many men are willing to pay some part of
their debts, but they cannot endure to restore all: they will not compound,
except the creditor will take 10. shillings in the pound: a common, but not a
commendable course, for a mite is debt so well as a million; tam, albeit not
tantum; so good a debt, howsoever not so great ^ debt: if we must owe nothing,
then there must be full payment of every thing. If we cannot pay, God
assuredly will accept of votall restitution as well as of actual: of that
which is in Latimer. Sermon on the Gosp. Dom. 2. Aduent.
affect, as if it had been in effect. As 2. Cor. 8.12.
Paul shows in the like case: For if there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not,:
Bernard. ep. 77
Illud pro facto reputat Deus, quod homo quidem vere voluit, sed non valuit
adimplere.

3. We must pay generally: owe nothing to any: whether he be friend or foe,
rich or poor, stranger or neighbor: restore all to all. If any man corrupting
or corrupted in secular offices, has iuiured many whom he does not know;
Perkins vbi supr^.
then his best course is to restore to God, that is, to the Church and to the
poor. Touching these and the like questions of debt, the learned may further
examine 22 ^. q. 62.
Thomas, In ^oc. Thom. supra.
Catetan, Comment in loc. Thom.
Aragon, Aphorism. in verb. debitum and restitut.
Emmanuel Sa. with many more: but the best Schooleman in this argument is thine
own conscience: For Romans 14 23.
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Lombard sent. lib. 4 did. 39.
That is, all thou condemnest in thine heart for sin, to thee is sin:
satisfy then all other so far, that thou may satisfy thy self; owe
nothing to any.

Yet this precept has his except. But this that ye love one another: here
then observe first a difference Melancthon in loc.
between civil debts and religious. A civil debt once paid is no more due:
but charity being paid is still due, August. epi. 62
debetur etiam reddita; when a man discharges other debts, Anselmus in loc. ex
Augusti^^. vbi supra.
accedit ad eum cui datur, sed ab eo recedit a quo datur. But in paying the
debt of love, the more we give, the more we have; Reddendo multiplicatur:
habendo enim redditur, non carendo: and cum reddi non possit nisi habeatur, nec
haberi potest nisi reddatur. Imo etiam cum redditur ab homine, crescit in
homine. Et tanto mayor acquiritur, quanto pluribus redditur: As Augustine does
excellently gloss this text: peruse the cited Epistle, for it is short and
sweet: of worldly wealth it may be said truly, bonum quo communius eo minus:
but in spiritual riches it is quite contrary, honum quo communius eo; ma^us:
or as the Arist^t.
Philosopher, eo melius, in the words of Prou. 11.24.
Solomon, He that scatters increases: in this except then, I note with In
loc.
Gorran, The Matter, in the word diligatis. The Manner, in the word inuicem.
The Privilege in the word nisi.


The matter is to love: the manner mutually to love: the privilege,
continually to love: Owe nothing but love: for he that loves another
fulfilleth the law. This is the first reason enforcing the former exhortation;
and it is taken from the worthiness of the thing. Love is the fulfilling of
all the law; which he proves by this induction: Thou shall not commit
adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear
false witness, thou shall not lust: and if there be any other Commandment, it
is all comprehended in this saying: namely, Love thy neighbor as thy self.
Love does no evil unto his neighbor: in deed, forbidden in the 6.7.8.
Commandments: in word, forbidden in the 9. in thought, forbidden in the 10.
Love then is the complement of the whole law concerning our duty to God and
man. Calvin. and Martyr. in loc.
For our love to man arises originally from our love to God: Augustine consess.
lib. 4. cap. 9.
Amicum in Domino, inimicum pro Domino* We love our friend in the Lord: our foe
for the Lord. This (says In Gal. 5.14.
Luther) is the shortest and longest divinity: the shortest as touching the
words and sentence, but as touching the use and practice it is more large, more
long, more profound, and more high than the whole world. I shall often handle
this common place, especially Epistle on Quinquagesima Sunday.

I come now to the second argument, from the fitness of the time: verse 11.
This also we know the season, how that it is time, that we should awake out of
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer, etc. The sum of it is, Martyr. in
loc.
that we must be more studious in performing our duty now than heretofore^
when we did first believe: for we must go forward and grow upward: from
grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, Ephesians. 4.13.
till we be of full growth in Christ Jesus: or as it is here, till we have Put
on the Lord Jesus. A A^^stot.
violent motion is quick in the beginning, but slow in the end: a stone cast
upward is then most weak when it is most high; but a natural motion is slow
in the beginning, but quicker in the end: for if a man from a Tower cast a
stone downward; the nearer to the Center, the quicker is the motion: and
therefore Chrysostom. in epist. ad Romans bom. 14.
when a man at his first conversion is exceeding quick, but afterward waxes
every day slower and slower in the ways of the Lord; his motion is not
natural and kind, but forged and forced: otherwise the longer he lives, and
the nearer he comes to the mark, the more swiftly would he run, the more
vehemently contend for that 1. Cor. 9.25.
everlasting Crown, which he shall obtain at his 2. Tim. 4.7.
races end.

The night is passed, and the day is come.] Theophylact. in loc.
Some by night understand the life present; and by day the world to come: in
this life many things are hidden as in the dark, but at the last and dreadful
day the books and registers of all our actions shall be laid open, and all
things appear naked as they are, to God, men, angels, devils. If we make but
twelve hours in our night, and six ages in the world, as usually Divines
account; then five thousand years, that is, ten hours of the night were past,
when Paul wrote this: and since that almost sixteen hundred years, that is,
an hour, and an half and a quarter; so that now there can remain but some
few minutes, and then the terrible day of the Lord will come, When 2. Pet. 3.10.
the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with
heat, and the earth with the works therein shall be burnt up. Wherefore
seeing the end of this night, and beginning of that day is at hand, let us cast
away the works of darkness, etc.

Ambros. Hieron. Aquin. in loc.
Other more fitly by night understand the time of ignorance; by day, the time
of knowledge: by night, the law wherein our Savior Christ was only shadowed;
by day, the Gospel wherein he is openly showed: and so salvation is nearer
Melancthon in loc.
because clearer. Our Apostles argument then is Sarcerius in loc.
like that of John the Baptist: Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand,
Matthew. 3.2.

The Luther. Postil. mayor. in epist. Dom. 1. Aduent.
Gospel is the day, Christ is the light: faith is the eye which apprehends
this light: and therefore seeing the day is come, let us cast away the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of light.

Sins are called the works of darkness: The Prou. 14.9.
fool makes a mock of sin: as 2. Sam. 2.14.
Abner called fighting a sport: Let the young men arise and play before us: so
many men make sin their ordinary pastime: Theophylact. in loc.
but our Apostle terms it a work, and the wiseman a weary work too: Wis. 5.7.
We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness: a work it is, but
black work: a deed of darkness; in that it does begin from Satan, who is
the Prince of darkness, and end in hell, which is utter darkness. See before
the song of Simeon: and Aquin. lect. 3. upon this Chapter.

Holy virtues are called armor of light: armor, because with them a Christian
must fight against his enemies: Ephesians. 6. See Epist. Dom. 21. post. Trin.
Light, in three Aquin. in loc.
respects.

1. As proceeding from God, who is the Father of lights: James 1.17. 2. Shining
before men, as lights in the world. Mat. 5.16. 3. Enduring the light: John
3.20.21. He that does evil hates the light: but he that does truth, comes
to the light.
Let us walk honestly, etc.] That is, comely: night walkers are negligent in
their habits: an old gown will serve their turn, without ruf or cuf: or other
handsome trim. But in the day men are ashamed, except they be in some good
fashion according to their quality. Seeing then the night is past, and the day
is come, let us put off our night-clothes, and put on our apparel for the day;
so walking as we care not who sees us in all comeliness and honesty. The
drunkard is in his night gown: the fornicator in his night-gowne; the factious
schismaticke full of strife in his night-gowne too: for he loves no comeliness
in the Church.

Not in eating and drinking, neither in chambering and wantonness, neither in
strife and envying:] Here the Defense for not lub^c^ip. cap. 8.
Nonelists except against our translation. For we should read surfeiting and
drunkenness. I answer, first in particular, that as the Scripture must be
construed by Scripture, so the Church by the Church: it being an axiom in our
law, that every man must interpret himself. And another rule: Sententia
benignior in verbis generalibus seu dubijs est praeferenda. Now the Church
elsewhere BB. Bible.
translates and Hom. against gluttony and drunkenness.
expounds it, as they would have it. Ergo: their cavil is causeless.

In general, concerning mistranslation, I refer them unto those whom it more
properly concerns; I know they know we can easily find faults in the Geneua
translation of the Psalms in English meeter used most, and preferred best of
all Scriptures in their private and public devotions: If a Salamandrie spirit
should traduce that godly labor: as the silenced Ministers have wronged our
Communion book, they would object peradventure that sometime there wants in it
reason as well as rhythme. Institut. lib. 3. cap. 4.
L^^^antius reports of Arcesilas, that having thoroughly considered the
contradictions and oppositions of Philosophers one against another, in fine
contemned them all: Et constituit nouam non philosophandi philosophiam; even so
worldlings and Atheists expending the differences of Christians in matters of
religion have resolved to be of no religion. And understanding the violent
contentions about forms of prayer and translations of Scriptures, use no
prayer, no bible, but make Lucian their old testament, and Machiauel their new.

The Church, as Paul, means too much eating and drinking, for it is lawful to
eat all manner of meat, whether it be flesh or fish. B. Latimers Sermon upon
this epistle.
But there be certain hedges over which we may not leap: The first hedge is
Leuit. 19.26. Thou shall not eat the flesh with the blood: that is to say, raw
flesh: for if we should ordinarily devour raw flesh, it would engender in us
a certain cruelty, so that at length we should eat one another, as Calvin.
in Leuit. 19. Carthusi^n. in Leui. 17. B. Babington in Genesis 9.4.5.
Divines expound that place: we may not be Canibals or man-eaters: against this
sin God has set an high hedge: Thou shall not kill: extreme famine made
Lament. 4.10. Et Josephus de bello Iudaico. lib. 7. cap. 8.
mothers murderers, and turned the sanctuary of life into the shambles of
death: extreme necessity breaks all hedges of nurture and nature: but in
ordinary course, man is no meat for man: but as Hieron. catalog. in vit^
Ignat.
Ignatius said, only manchet for God, a service and sacrifice for his maker.
Happily some will say, well then, if I devour not man's flesh, I may eat
whatsouer I lift, howsoever I get it. No, God has set a second hedge; Thou
shall not steal: thou may not take thy neighbors ox out of his stall, nor
his sheep out of his fold, nor his fish out of his poole, but thou must feed
on thi^e own meat bought into thine own house, or brought up in thine house,
on that only which is given or gotten honestly.

Neither may thou commit gluttony with thine own, for there is a third
hedge, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness. The gut is a gulf: vitae charybdis,
as Laertius in vita Diogenis.
Diogenes aptly: for some man Church hom. against gluttony, etc.
draws all his patrimony through his throat. As the Babylonians used daily to
sacrifice to their Bell, so the glutton to his belly, making it his god,
Philip. 3.19. Eat therefore moderately ^^eate that is meet, not too much, but
so much as does neither Bernard. de considerat. lib. 1.
praecidere, nor excedere necessitatem.

It is lawful sometime to feast, and to provide delicates as well as cates;
using dainty bread in stead of daily bread: but we may not with the rich Luke
16.19.
Epicure fare deliciously every day, for this is dissipare, non dispensare bona
Domini, prodigally to waste, not frugallie to spend the gifts of our Lord
bestowed upon us. Neither may thou take immeasurable what and when thou
lift: for there is a fourth hedge: Romans 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat
for whom Christ died. Have respect to thine own and others conscience: first,
thou must instruct thy brother in the truth, and then if he continue still in
his old Mumpsimus, and will not believe, but is offended out of obstinate
wickedness rather then any weakness, eat, not regarding his frowardnes,
especially where the Princes law commands thee to eat, for that is another
hedge: Romans 13.1. Let every soul submit himself unto the authority of the
higher power. Observing of Lent and fish-dayes is a policy of the State for
the maintenance of fishertownes, and increase of fishermen, and therefore this
Statute must be obeyed not only for fear of punishment, but also for
conscience, says Romans 13.5.
Paul: 2. Part hom. of fasting.
I say conscience, not of the thing, which of it own nature is indifferent,
but of our obedience, which by the law of God we owe to the Magistrate. The
Melanctho^. loc. com. Tit. de ceremon. and Christian. liber. Beza epist. 24.
Perkins t^eatise of conscience. cap. 2.
particular laws of Princes grounded upon the general laws of God, even in
things indifferent makes our obedience not indifferent, but necessary. Thus
thou may eat food of thine own moderately, without offense to thy brother,
or disobedience to thy governor.

Concerning drunkenness and the rest, often elsewhere: yet by the way note the
craftines of the Devil, and unhappiness of sin, which seldom or never
comes alone, it is unlike the Rail which flies solitary, and in this
respect most like the Partridge, who calls one another till they make a couey:
first, Paul brings in sin by the brace, gluttony and drunkenness, chambering
and wantonness, strife and envying; then as it were by the whole couey, for all
these birds of a feather fly together; immoderate diet begets chambering,
chambering wantonness, wantonness strife, strife envying; thus sin does first
couple, then increase. This text ought to be regarded of us the more, because
it was the very place to which Augustine that renowned Doctor by a voice from
heaven was directed at his first conversion, as himself witnesses, Lib. 8.
confess. cap. 12.

Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.] As we must put off the old man, so put on
the new man, and that is done Luther. and Melancth. in loc.
two ways, either by putting on his merits, or by putting on his manners. Our
Savior Christ in his life, but in his death especially wrought for us Esaias
61.10.
a garment of salvation, and Apocalyp. 7.9.
a long white robe of righteousness: now the spiritual hand of faith must
apprehend and fit this Math. 22.11.
wedding apparel on us in such sort, that all our Psalm. 32.1.
unrighteousness may be forgiven, and all our sin covered.

Secondly, we must put on the manners and excellent virtues of Christ, in whom
was no work of darkness, but all armor of light; so the phrase is used, Job
29.14. I put on justice and it covered me, my judgment was a robe and a
crown. This apparel is the true Perpetuan, never the worse, but the better
for wearing.

The Gospel. MATTHEW. 21.1. And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, etc.
CHrist is Apocalyp. 1.8.
Alpha, and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and ending; wherefore
the Church allotting a several scripture for every several Sunday thoroughout
the whole year, Ferus ser. 1. Dom. 1. Aduent.
begins and ends with the coming of Christ: for the conclusion of the last
Gospel appointed for the last Sunday, is, Of a truth, this is the same Prophet
that should come into the world; and the first sentence in the first Gospel
for the first Sunday, Behold, thy king comes unto thee. Wherein the Church
imitated the method of Gods own Spirit: for as the first prophecy mentio^ed
in the old Testament, is, The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head;
and the first history delivered in the new Testament is, The book of the
generation of Jesus Christ; so the first Gospel on the first Dominical,
according to the Churches account is Aduentual, a scripture describing Christ
and his kingdom, fitting the text unto the time: teaching us hereby two things
especially, first, what manner of person the Messiah is who does come, secondly,
what manner of persons we should be now he is come.

In the former part, observe two points, a Preface: All this was done, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken of by the prophet, verse 4. Prophecy:
taken out of Zacha. 9.9. Tell the daughter of Sion, etc.

All this was done, that it might be fulfilled] An usual phrase with our
Evangelist, as cap. 1.22. cap. 8.17. cap. 27. 35. It does insinuate the sweet
harmony between the Prophets and Apostles: as Theodoret. de curat. Graec.
affect. lib. 2.
Numenius said Plato was nothing else but Moses translated out of Hebrew into
Greek: and Ascham, that Virgil is nothing else but Homer turned out of Greek
into Latin: and as the Nouelists affirm, that our Communion Book is nothing
else but the Roman Missall and Portuis thrust out of Latin into English: and
as Divines have censured Cyprian to be nothing else but Tertullian in a more
familiar and elegant style: so the new Testament is nothing else as it were but
an exposition of the old. That difference which Cicero ad Mar. Brutum orat.
Zeno put between Logic and Rhetoric, Divines usually make between the Law
and the Gospel, the Law like the fist shut, the Gospel like the hand open.
Augustine. quaest. 73. super Leuit. In vetere nouum latet: in nouo vetus patet.
Euangelium reuelata Lex: Lex occultum Euangelium: The Gospel a revealed Law:
the Law a hidden Gospel.

This harmonicall concent may serve to confound our adversaries, and to comfort
our selves. It does abundantly confute obstinate Jews, who expect another
Messiah to come; conceiting as yet all things not to be done in the Gospel,
which was said of him in the Law: so that whereas the great question of the
world is, Who is that Christ? and the great question of the Church, Who is that
Antichrist? the Jewish Rabbis are ignorant in both.

Secondly, this harmony conuinceth all such Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marcion.
and Augustine. Haeres. 21.
Heretics, as hold two sundry disagreeing Gods to be the authors of the two
Testaments, one of the Law, another of the Gospel.

It affords also comfort: first in general it may persuade the conscience
that the Bible is the book of God. For if Prolomee was astonished at the 72.
Interpreters, because being placed in sundry rooms, and neu^r conferring nor
seeing one another, did notwithstandi^g write the same not only for sense of
matter, but in sound of words upon the selfsame text, as In admonitorio.
Justin Martyr, and De ciuit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 42.
Augustine report; then how should we be moved with the most admirable divine
conco^dance between the Prophets and Apostles, who writing the word of God in
diverse places, at diverse times, upon diverse occasions, do notwithstanding agree
so generally, Bellarmin. de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 2.
that they seem not diverse penmen, but rather in^^^ed only diverse pens of one
and the same writer?

In more particular, it may strengthen our faith in the gracious promises of
Almighty God: he speaks the word, and it is done; commands, and it is
effected: Heaven and earth shall pass, but not one jot of his word shall
perish: he promised by Zachary that the Messiah of the world should come, and
he tells us here by Mat^hew that he is come: All this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet: Behold thy king comes unto thee.
Thus much of the Pr^face generally: now to fist the words severally.

Tha^, is taken here, non Postil. cathol. con. 2. Dom. 1. Aduent. and Maldonat.
in loc.
causaliter sed consecutiue, not for an efficient cause, but rather for a
consequence and event. Christ did not thus ^ide into Jerusalem because Zachary
foretold it, but Zachary foretold it because Christ would thus ride, Christ
being the complement of the Prophets, and end of the Law: yet the word That,
insinuates (as Hom. 37. in Matthew.
Chrysostom notes) the final cause why Christ did thus ride, namely, to
certify the Jews how that himself only was that King of whom their prophet
Zach^ry did thus speak, that none but he was the King of the Jews, and
Messiah of the world.

Fulfilled] A prophecy may be said to be fulfilled Maldonat. in 2. Matthew. 15.
four ways especially: 1. When the selfsame thing comes to pass which was
literally delivered in the prophecy. So S. Math. cap. 1.22. says, Esaias 7.14.
Esayes prophecy; Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, etc. was fulfilled in Mary,
who brought forth a Son, etc.

2. When the thing allegorically signified is fulfilled, as Exodus 12 46. it is
said of the Paschall Lamb, Ye shall not break a bone thereof: yet S. John,
cap. 19.36. affirms this to be fulfilled in Christ: The soldiers brake not
his legs, that the scripture should be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be
broken.

3. When as neither the thing literally nor allegorically meant, but some other
like is done: so Christ, Math. 15. tells the pe^^le in his time, that the words
of Esaias, This people draws near unto me with their mouth, etc. were
fulfilled in them: O hypocrites, Esaias prophesied well of you, that is, of such
as are like to you.

4. When as it is daily more and more fulfilled, as Iam. 2.23. the scripture
was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God. Abraham assuredly believed God
before, but his offering up of Isaac was a greater probate of his faith: then
the scripture was fulfilled, that is, more and more fulfilled, when Abraham
thus far trusted in God. Now Christ fulfilled Zacharies saying in a literal
and plain sense, for he sent for an Ass and rode thereon into Jerusalem,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, Rejoice O daughter
Sion, for behold thy King comes, etc.

S. John and S. Matthew relate not the precise text of Zachary, but keeping the
sense, they somewhat alter the words. On the contrary, blasphemous Heretics
and Atheists use to keep the words of scripture, but altogether to change the
sense. Children full fed often play with their meat: so Lucianists of our time
play with the food of their soul, making the Bible their babble. The Lord who
will not suffer his Name to be taken in vain, mend or end them.

As for Heretics, it is always their custom to make the scriptures a ship-mans
hose, wreathing and wresting them every way to serve their turn. Tertullian.
lib. de praescript. haeretic.
Non ad materiam scripturas, sed materiam ad scripturas excogitant: First they
make their Sermon, and then they look for a text.

Herein the Papi^ts of later time most offend, who do not only feign Abdias.
Amphilochius. Hippolytus, etc.
new Fathers, and falsify the old In indic. expurgat.
Doctors, putting out, putting in, chopping and changing as shall best fit
their purpose, so that the Fathers (as Reverend Answer to M. Hardings
conclusion.
Jewel said) are no Fathers, but their children, no Doctors, but their
scholars, uttering not their own mind, but what the Papists enforce them to
speak: they do not, I say, wrong humane authors only, but also presume to
censure and const^ue Gods own books as they list, as Contra Faust. lib. 27.
cap. 32.
Augustine said of Faustus the Manichee; Legant, qui volunt, and inuenient aut
falli imprudenter, aut fallere impudenter. Hence Act. 10.13.
kill and eat to Peter is a Baronius orat. ad Paul. 5. de Venet. excom.
warrant for the Pope to depose Princes. It is written, Psalm. 91.13.
Thou shall go upon the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon
shall thou tread under thy feet, Nauclerus genesis 40. an. 1177.
therefore the Pope may tread upon the Emperors neck.

Genesis 1.16.
God made two great lights in the firm^ment, that is, two great dignities in
the Church, the Priest, and the Prince: but that which rules the day, to wit,
spiritual things, is the greater; that which rules carnal things is the
lesser: as Innocentius the third disputes in the Lib. 1. tit. 33. de mayor. and
obedi^n. cap. 6.
Decretals: and their Ibi^em in verb. inter sol^m and lunam.
Gloss further adds out of P^olomie, that the Sun contains the bigness of
the Moon seven thousand seven hundred forty four times, and so many degrees
iump is every Prela^e above every Prince. Sometime they cite the beginning
without the end, sometime the end without the beginning: sometime they take the
words against the meaning, sometime they make a meaning against the words, and
so they do not receive, but give the Gospel, as Pr^^fat. comment. in 4.
Eu^ngelist. ca^. 2.
Maldonate fitly: not admit the old scripture, but upon the point coin a new:
for in controuerted places, either they suppress the words, or else not
express the sense: as if a man should pick away the corn, and give us the
chafe; or convey away the jewels, and throw us the bag. The blessed
Evangelists had warrant from God, and we warrant from them to quote scripture,
sometime more fully for explication, and sometime more shortly for brevity,
yet without alteration of the sense, though there be some little alteration of
the sentence. In loc.
Marlorats annotation is good, that our Evangelist and other do not always
repeat the very words in the Prophets and the Law, that we might hereby take
occasion to peruse the text, and to confer place with place. Let us then
examine the words in Zachary, which are these, Rejoice greatly o daughter Sion:
shout for joy o daughter Jerusalem: Behold thy King comes unto thee.

They contain 2. remarkable points: an Exultation: Rejoice greatly, etc.
Exaltation, or commendation of Christ, as a reason of this exceeding joy:
Behold thy King comes unto thee, just, meek, etc.

In the former observe the Persons Exhorting, Principal, God: for the word of
the Lord came to Zachary, cap. 1. verse. 1. This then is not the word of man,
but the voice of God. Isntrumental: Zachary.
Exhorted, Jerusalem.
Act, rejoice.

In that Zachary was Gods organ, mark the worthiness of holy Prophets, as being
the very tongues and pens of the blessed Spirit: and this dignity belongs
also to their successors, Apostles, and other Preachers of the word, for S.
Matthew speaks in the plural, dicite, tell ye; Calvin. and Marlorat. in loc.
concluding the Prophets and Preachers, whose office is to tell Jerusalem that
her King and Savior is come into the world to seek and save that which is
lost.

Almighty God has had in all ages either Patriarks, or Prophets, or Apostles,
or Preachers, a Moses, or an Elias, a Zachary, or a Paul, or an Athanasius, or
an Augustine, or a Luther, or a Jewel, by whom he spoke to his beloved Spo^se
comfortably. Rejoice greatly daughter Sion: especially the Lord uses to ch^se
Zacharies, that is, such as are mindful of God, such as delight in the law of
the Lord, and exercise themselves therein day and night.

The persons exhorted are, daughter Sion, and daughter Jerusalem, that is,
according to the vulgar Hebraisme, Sion and Hi^rusalem, as the son of man,
for man, and son of floors, for floor, Esaias 21.10. and Psalm. 72.4. the
child^en of the poor, for the poor, as Augustine upon that place: so Ribera
in Hoseam ca^. 10. number. 28.
daughter Sion, daughter Babylon, daughter Jerusalem, for Sion, Babylon, and
Jerusalem; a phrase not strange to the Homer Iliad. 7.
Poet, who called the Grecians -- (...).

Now Jerusalem was the Metropolis of the Jews, and Sion an eminent mount
adjoining to Jerusalem, and at this time the Jews were the Leuit. 26.12.
people of God, and Jerusalem the Psalm. 87.2.
city of God. A^ Psalm. 76.2.
Sal^m was his tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. Whereas therefore S.
Matthew, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, he means, Maldonat. in loc.
using a synecdoche, Jerusalem. And whereas Zachary names Jerusalem, he
Ia^sen. in loc.
means the Church of God over the face of the whole earth, of which
Jerusalem is a figure, and so the text i^ to be construed typically, not
topically, for this joy concerns the Gentile so well as the Jew, the one as
the root, the other as the branch, as Paul shows in his epistle to the Romans
cap. 11. Indeed Christ is the glory of his people Israel, but he is the light
of the Gentiles, illuminating all such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death.

Here then observe, that Christ is the Churches joy, and only the Churches
joy: dumb Idols are the Gentiles joy: Mahumet is the Turks joy: Circumcision is
the Jews joy: Antichrist is the Babylonians joy: the Devil C^licuts joy: but
only Christ is our joy: We Cant. 1.3.
will rejoice and be glad in thee: Cant. 6.2.
I am my beloueds, and my beloved is mine: Christ is so much the Churches, as
that he is none others joy: for as Tract. de simplici^ate praelatorum.
Cyprian and other Catholic Doctors, He that has not the Church for his
Mother, has not God for his Father: and he that has not God for his Father,
has not Christ for his Savior. Augustine. sermon. 136. de tempore.
Per portam Ecclesia intramus in portam paradisi: No Church, no Christ; no
Christ, no joy.

This exultation appertains only to the Church: He that is not a son of
Sion, a Citizen of Jerusalem, is in the Act. 8.23.
gall of bitterness, and has no part nor portion in this happiness.

Now concerning the act, the matter is, to rejoice.

The manner, greatly to rejoice, with iubilation and shouting.

It is a received opinion in the world, that religion does dull our wits, and
daunt our spirits, as if mirth and mischief w^nt always together: but it is
taught and felt in Christ's school, that none can be so joyful as the
faithful, that there is not so merry a land as the holy land, and therefore
Zachary does double his exhortation, Rejoice greatly shout for joy: and Cap.
3.14.
Zophony does triple it, Rejoice ^ daughter Sion, be ye joyful o Israel, be
glad with all thine heart o daughter Jerusalem: Exulta, laetare, iubila.

Now iubilation, as the A^gustin. in Psalm. 65. and 94. Gregor. moral. lib. 2^.
cap. 14.
Fathers observe, is so great a joy, that it can neither be smothered nor
uttered: ^tatius.
Hilaris cum pondere virtus. In the words of Christ, Matthew. 11.30.
My yoke is easy, my burden is light. A new yoke is heavy, but when it is
worn and dried it waxes easy: Christ therefore did first wear and bear
this yoke, that it might be seasoned and made light for us: he commanded us to
fast, and himself did fast: he commanded us to pray, and himself did often
pray: he commanded us to forgive one another, and himself pardoned. Again,
when he says, My yoke is sweet, and my burden is light, he does insinuate,
that the yokes of other are bitter, and their burdens heavy: that it is a
sorry service to be Satan's vassal, or the worlds hireling, so that the good
man takes more delight in performing his duty, then the wicked can in all his
villainies and vanities. I was glad, says Psalm. 122.1.
David, when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord. And
Psalm. 84.2. My soul has a longing desire to enter into the courts of the
Lord. And Psalm. 81. Sing we merrily to God, etc.

An upright Christian is a Musician, a Physician, a Lawyer, a Divine to
himself: for what is sweeter Music than the witness of a Prouer. 15.15.
good conscience? What is better Physic Epictetus.
then abstinere and sustinere: good diet, and good quiet? what deeper counsel
in Law, 2. Cor. 6.10.
then in having nothing to possess all things? and what sounder Divinity,
John 17.3.
then to know God and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ? On the contrary, the
wicked is Wisdom. 5.7.
wearied in his ways, and discontented in his courses. A malicious man is a
murderer of himself, the prodigal man a these to himself, the voluptuous
man a witch to himself, the covetous man a devil to himself, the drunkard
all these to himself, a murderer to his body, a these to his purse, a witch
to his wit, a devil to his soul. The blind Iuuenal.
Poet saw so much: -- Semitacerte
Tranquillae per virtutem ^atet vnica vita.


De gubernatione Dei. lib. 1.
Sal^ia^^s has pithily comprehended all in a few words, N^mo al^orum sensu
miser est sed suo: and ideo non possunt cuiusquam falso iud^cio esse miseri,
qui sunt vere su^ conscientia beati: hoc cun^tis beatiores sunt religiosi, quia
and habent quae volunt; and meliora quam quae habent omnino habere non possunt.
Fi^ei praesentis oblectamenta capiunt, and beatisudinis futurae praemia
consequentur.

Hitherto concerning the Prophets exultation: his exaltation follows, Ecce
rex tu^s, etc. The word Behold in the Bible is like John the Baptist, always the
forerunner of some excellent thing: and indeed all our comfort consists in this
one sweet sentence, Behold thy King comes unto thee.

Behold,] look no more for him, but now look on him; Luke 10.23.
Happy are the eyes which see the things that ye see.

King,] a real and a royal Prince: Real in regard of his right, and that by
a Bernard. lib. 3. de considerat.
thr^efold title: iure creationis. merito redemptionis. done patris.
might, as being the Lord, verse. 3. who commands, and it is done, verse. 6. for
he can do whatsoever he will, and more then he will. A royal Prince both in
his affections and actions.



A tyrant does rob and spoil the people, but the Messiah is Jesus, a Savior
of his people: Matthew. 1.21.

A tyrant is a wolf to scatter and destroy the sheep, but Christ is the good
shepherd, who gave his life for the sheep: John 10.11.

Thy] Romans 9.4.
promised unto thee: borne of thee: bred up with thee: flesh of thy flesh, and
bone of thy bone: not every ones King: for Satan is Prince of the world: but
thy King: for he is God of Luke. 1.68.
Israel: his coming was sufficient for the whole world, but efficient only for
Sion. Or thy King, because it is not enough to confess in general that Christ
is a King: for the Devil himself believes the Bu^er.
Mayor of the Gospel: but the daughter of Sion must assume and believe the
Minor, that Christ is her King, Esaias 9.6. To us a child is borne, to us a Son
is given. There is great divinity, says Com^n 1. Gal. verse 4.
Luther, in Pronouns: a great Emphasis in nobis and noster, as In Esaias cap 9.6.
Bullinger and Calvin note.

Commeth] John 14.6.
Christ is the way: we Esaias 53.6.
wanderers out of the way: Augustine. ^^act. de ^picur. and Stoicis, cap. vlt.
so that if the Way had not found us, we never should or could have found the
way, P^lican. in loc.
nec opibus, nec operibus, nec opera.

Unto thee] Glossa ex Ch^^sost.
tibi, sicredis: contra te si non credis: if incredulous, against thee: but if
believing, for thee: for thy, not his good; he Ephesians. 5.2.
gave himself for thee: Postil. catholic. con. 2. Dom. 1. Aduent.
Nascens se dedit in socium, conuescens in cibum, moriens in pretium, regnans
in praemium. See Epist. Dom. 3. Quadrages.

What could have been said less, and yet what can thou wish for more? for if
Christ be a King, then he is able: if thine, then willing: if he come, he
respects not his pain: if he come unto thee, he regards not his profit: and
therefore rejoice daughter Sion, shout for joy daughter Jerusalem. These
glosses are common in the Fathers and Friars, and I shall often touch upon
them, especially Epist, and Gospel on Christmas day.

The second part of this Gospel insinuates how we must entertain Christ in
our Thoughts. The second part of this Gospel insinuates how we must
entertain Christ in our Words. The second part of this Gospel insinuates how
we must entertain Christ in our Deeds.
For the first: we must believe Christ to be that Jesus, verse. 11. that great
Prophet, who is the Messiah and Savior of the world.

For the second: we must profess and confess this faith, having Hosanna in
our mouths, and crying, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord,
Hosanna in the highest, verse. 9.

For the third: we must spread our garments in the way, cut down branches from
the trees, and straw them in the passage, verse. 8. Melancth. and Culman. in loc.
that is, forsake all, and follow Christ, profering and offering our selves
wholly to his service: or, as the Epistle does expound the Gospel, seeing our
salvation is near, the night past, and the day come, let us cast away the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, etc.

I am occasioned here justly to direct their ignorance who do not understand,
and correct their obstinacy who will not understand the wisdom of the Church,
so fitly disposing of the Gospels and Epistles, as that often the one may serve
for a Commentary to the other. As here S. Matthew. Behold thy King comes: And
S. Paul, Our salvation is nigh, and the day is come. S. Paul does advise, not
to make provision for the flesh: and S. Matthew reports, how the people
accompanying Christ, spread their garments in the way.

S. Paul commands love in all men, S. Matthew commends love in these men, who
gave such entertainment unto Christ.

The whole Gospel is a Melancthon. Postil. in loc.
lively picture of the Church, in which are four sorts of persons especially:
1. Christ, who is King and head, verse 5. and 12. 2. Prophets, who loose men
from their sins, and bring them unto Christ, verse 2. and 7. 3. Auditors, who
believe that Christ is the Messiah, openly professing this faith, Hosanna to
the Son of David, verse. 9. and manifesting this faith also by their works in
obeying the Ministers of Christ, verse 3. and performing the best service they
can, verse 8. 4. Adversaries, who much envy Christ's kingdom, saying, Who is
this? verse 10.


Concerning Christ's severity toward those who played the Merchants in the
Temple, See Gospel, Dom. 10. post Trinit.

Epist. ROMANS 15.4. Whatsoever things are written aforetime, they are written
for our learning, etc.
THis Scripture contains in it three things concerning the Scripture: What it
is written. Showing the Scriptures authority. When aforetime. Showing the
Scriptures antiquity. Why for our learning. Showing the Scriptures vtility.


For the first: things only told, passing thorough many mouths, are easily
mistold: it is long ere we get them, and we soon forget them: Almighty God
therefore commanded that his Law should be written in books, and engraven in
stone, that the syllables thereof might always be in our eyes, so well as the
sound in our ears, and that for two causes especially:

1. That the godly man might Psalm. 1.2. Joshua 1.8.
exercise himself therein day and night. 2. That the wicked might neither
Deuteronomy. 4.2.
add to it, nor detract from it.
In like manner, albeit the Romans 10.18.
sound of the thundering Apostles went out thorough all the earth, and their
words unto the ends of the world: yet the Spirit of wisdom thought it meet
that there should be a treatise written of Act. 1.1.
all that Christ did and said: and that Luke 1.2.
from point to point: entitled, Matthew. ^.1.
The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ. The Scripture then is a Bible,
because written: and the Bible, (...), in many respects excelling all other
books, especially for the maker and matter, in so much that S. Paul says,
Gal. 1.8.
If an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, let him be accursed. And Ir^naeus
cont. haeres. lib. 4. cap. 14 and Eusebius. hist. lib. 4 cap. 1^.
Justin Martyr goes yet further: If Christ himself should preach another God,
or another Gospel, I would not believe him: Ipse non crederem Domino Jesus.

This doctrine makes against unwritten verities of Papists, and fond
revelations of Melancth. in loc.
Anabaptists, and factious interpretations of Schismatikes, and impudent
conceits of Martyr in loc.
Libertines; all which equal their own fantasies with the Scriptures
authority.

The Papists and Schismatics are all for a speaking Scripture: the Libertines
and Anabaptists are all for an infused scripture: the true Catholics only for
the written scripture; Esaias 8.20.
to the Law, and to the Testimony. Psalm. 119.105.
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.

The second point to be considered is, that (...) or (...), scriptures written
aforetime, being the first book so well as the best book: for as Lib. contra
Praxeam.
Tertullian was wont to call Praxeas, hesternum Praxean: so we may term the
most ancient Poets and Philosophers, in comparison of Moses, vpstart writers.
Josephus lib. 1. contr. Apion.
Omnia Graecorum sunt n^ua and heri. As Galaton painted Homer vomiting,
Reliquos vero poetas ea quae ipse euomuisset haurientes: to signify, says De
varia hist. lib. 23.
Aelian, that he was the first Poet, and all other, as well Greek as Latin,
but his apes.

In like manner Moses is called by De curat. Graec. affect. lib. 2.
Theodoret, Oceanus theologiae, the sea of Divinity, from whom all other
writers as rivers are derived. The which point as it is excellently confirmed
by Theodoret, In Protrept.
Clemens, Libris contra Appi^n.
Josephus* and others, so it is ingeniously confessed even by the heathen
Historiographers: Clem. 1. Strom.
Eupolemus lib. de Iudaea^ regibus, auoweth Moses to be the first wise man: In
Epinomide.
Plato. that a barbarous Egyptian was the first inuentor of Arts, Justin. Mart.
in admonitorio.
Appion, Ptolomey, Palaemon, have granted the same: and upon the point, Strabo,
Pliny, Cornelius Tacitus, and others, as ^icinus reports, lib. de religione
Christiana, cap. 26. To demonstrate this more particularly; The Trojan war is
the most ancient subject of human history: but Tr^y was taken in the days of
Clem. 1. Strom.
David. about the year of the world, B^cholcer. in Chron, ad ann. 2788.
2788. and Homer flourished Idem ad ann. 3000.
anno 3000. whereas Moses was borne Idem ad annum 2373.
anno 2373.

Secondly, this (...) Martyr in loc.
confutes the Marcionites and Manichees, and all such as reject the old
Testament. For the place, to which the text has reference, is taken out of the
69. Psalm, verse 9, that the scriptures of Moses and the Prophets are written
for our instruction. It is plain by Christ's iniunctio^, John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures: as also by that of our Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. These
things happened unto them for ensamples: and were written to admonish us upon
whom the ends of the world are come. If all little histories, then much more
the great mysteries are our scholemasters unto Christ: Let us examine therefore
the third obseruable point, concerning the Scriptures utility; Whatsoever
things are written before time, they are written for our learning. The Scripture
(says Paul) is the peoples instruction: the Scripture, say the Bellarmin. de
verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 15.
Papists, in the vulgar tongue, is the peoples destruction. The Scripture,
says 2. Tim. 3.17.
Paul, does make the man of God absolute: the Scripture, say the Papists, in a
known language, makes men heretical and dissolute; but the Bible makes men
heretics, as the Sun makes men blind: and therefore In his Wicket.
Wickliffe truly; To condemn the word of God translated in any language for
heresy, is to make God an heretic.

Not to press this place nor urge any other scripture, we may beat the
Rhemish and Romish in this controversy with their own weapons, Antiquity and
Custom. For it is Sixtus Senen. bib. lib. 6. annot. 152.
acknowledged that the Christians in old time read the Bible to their great
edification and increase of faith in their mother tongue. The Rhem. preface,
sect. 4.
Armenians had the Psalter, and some other pieces of Scripture translated by S.
Chrysostom. The Sclauonians by S. Hierome: the Goths by Vulpilas, and that
before he was an Arian: The Italians three hundred years since by James
Archbishop of Genua: and the Bible was in French also two hundred years ago.
Beside these, the D. E^lk answer to Rhem. prefac. vbi sup.
Syrians, Arabians, Aethioptans, had of ancient time the Scriptures in their
several languages; as it is manifest by those portions of them, which are at
this day brought from their countries into this part of the world.

To speak of our own country; venerable Beda did translate the whole Bible
into the Fox Preface before the 4. Euang. in the Saxon.
Saxon tongue, and the Gospel of S. John into English. K. Histor. Eli. lib. 1.
cap. 37.
Alfred also considering the great ignorance that was in his kingdom,
translated both the Testaments into his native language. Queen Anne, wife to
Richard the second, had Scriptures translated in the vulgar, as Thomas Arundel,
then Archbishop of York and Chancellor of England, mentioned at her funeral
sermon, anno Polydor. Virg. hist. Anglican. lib. 20. fol. 420.
1394.

Moreover; in a Parliament of this King Richard there was a bill put in to
disanull the Bible translated into English, unto which John Duke of Lancaster
answered, and said: We will not be the refuse of al men; other Nations have
Gods laws in their own language. Thomas Arundel, as we read in the
constitutions of Tit. de magistris.
Linwood, being translated unto the sea of Canterbury, made strait provision
in a Council holden at Oxford, that no version set out by Wickliffe or his
adherents should be suffered, being not approved by the Diocesan.

It is apparent then out of our own Chronicles, that the Bible was turned into
the mother tongue before and after the Conquest; before and after the time of
Wickliffe; before and after the days of Luther: and all this pain was
undertaken by good and holy men, that the people of God reading and
understanding the Scripture, through patience and comfort of the Son might
have certain hope of another life.

As then I condemn the malice of Papists in forbidding; so likewise the
negligence of carnal Gospellers in forbearing to read those things aforetime
written for our learning. Our forefathers heretofore spared neither cost nor
pain: they ventred their crowns and their heads too for the new Testament in
English, translated by Master Tyndall: and when they could not hear the
Gospel in the Church publicly, they received much comfort by reading it in
their houses privately: the very children became fathers unto their parents and
begat them in Christ, even by reading a few plain Chapters unto them in a
corner: but in our time, when every shop has Bibles of diverse translations,
editions, volumes, annotations, the number of those who can read^ is but small,
the number of those who do read is less, the number of those who read as
they should, least of all. If a learned Clerk should ^en a treatise for thy
particular instruction, thou would instantly with all diligence peruse it.
If a Nobleman should send thee gracious letters concerning thy preferment, thou
would with all dutiful respect entertain the^. If thy father, or some
other friend, taking a journey into a far country, should pen his Will,
and leave it in thine hands and custody, thou would hold it as a great token
of his love. Behold the Bible is written by Wisdom it self for our learning,
that we may be perfect unto all good works. It is Gods Chrysostom. in 2. Th^s. 2.
Epistle, and Letters patent, wherein are granted unto us many gracious
immunities and privileges: it is his Testament wherein all his will is
revealed, whatsoever he would have done or undone: and therefore let us pray
with the Church, that we may in such wise read holy Scriptures, hear, mark,
learn and inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of Gods holy
word, we may embrace and euerhold fast the hope of everlasting life: through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Gospel. LVKE 21.25. There shall be signs in the Sun, etc.
THe Malach. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness appears in three signs: Leo. Virgo. Libra.

First roaring as a Lion, in the Law: Exodus 20.19.
so that the people could not endure his voice. Then in Virgo, borne of a Ma^th
1 25.
Virgin, in the Gospel: in Libra, weying our works in his Dan. 5 27.
balance at the last and dreadful audite. Or there is a threefold coming of
Christ, according to the threefold difference of time Past. Present. Future.

Which Sermon. 3. de aduentu Dom.
Bernard has uttered elegantly: venit ad homines. in homines. contra homines.



He came among men in time past, when as the Word was made John 1.14.
flesh and dwelt among us: he comes into men in the present by his grace and
holy Spirit: Apoc. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock. He shall in
the future come against men, to judge both the quick and the dead: but the
Son of man has but two commings in the form of man: his first coming in
great meeknes, his second in exceeding majesty. At his first coming he rode
upon an ass: in his second (as it is here said) he shall ride upon the clouds.
In his first coming he came to be judged: in his second, he comes to judge. In
his first coming the people did triumph and rejoice, crying Hosanna: but in
his second coming the people shall be at their wits end for fear, and for
looking after those things which shall come on the world.

In that therefore the Church has adjoined this Gospel of his second coming
unto that other of his first coming; it does teach all Teachers this lesson,
that their song be like David's, of Psalm. 101.1.
judgment and mercy; that in all their sermons they mingle faith and fear;
Ferus sermon. 1. in Euangelium Dom. 2. Aduent. and Acosta con. 1. Dom. 1. Aduent.
that they preach Christ to be a Judge so well as an Advocate. This method
Christ himself did use, who did as well expound the Law, as propound the
Gospel; who denounced woe to the proud Pharisees, and pronounced blessedness
to the poor in spirit; Luke 10.34.
who powered wine and oil into the wounds of him that was half dead: oil
which is supple, wine which is sharp: and when he departed he gave to the host
two pence, Theophylact. in 10. Luc.
that is, to the Preachers who take charge of him, the two Testaments, and
willed them to temper and apply these two till he come again, that thinking
on the Gospel we might never despair, and thinking on the Law we might never
presume: that looking upon Christ's first coming we might rejoice; and
expecting his second coming we might fear: because there shall be signs in
the Sun and in the Moon, etc.

In handling whereof I will not trouble you with idle curiosities: only note
two plain points:

Especially, to wit, the Certainty Of Christ's second coming. Especially, to
wit, the Uncertainty Of Christ's second coming.
The certainty, that he shall come: the uncertainty, when he shall come.

The certainty is declared here by Words: Affirmed barely: verse. 27. They
shall see the Son of man come in a cloud, etc. Enforced with an asseueratio^:
verse 22. Verily I say unto you, etc. adding further a pere^ptory conclusion:
verse. 33. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
Wonders: verse. 27. There shall be signs, etc.

The words are spoken by Christ: as it is apparent verse. 8. Now Christ is
truth: Ergo, this prophecy cannot be false. That which he foretold touching
Jerusalem in this Chapter, is in every particular come to pass: why then
should this prophecy be thought untrue, concerning the worlds destruction,
when as that other was true concerning Hierusalems desolation?

Zachary foretold that the Messiah in his first coming should in meekness
ride upon an ass, and, as S. Cap. 21.4.
Matthew reports, all that was done: behold here a greater than Zachary tells us
that the Messiah in his second coming shall ride upon the clouds: and shall we
doubt of his word, who is that eternal Word? shall we believe Zachary, who
was but one of the small Prophets, and shall we distrust him who is that great
Prophet? Ioh. 6.14.

But because men will not believe him upon his bare word, who made all the
world with his word: Psalm. 33.9. He spoke, and it was done: he does use an oath
and earnest asseueration in the 32. verse, Verily, I say unto you. etc. Because
there is none gr^ater then ^imselfe, he does swear by himself, Truth does
prot^st by Truth, This generation shall not pass, till all be fulfilled.

The word generation has perplexed as well old as new writers exceedingly.
Sometime generation in scripture signifies an age: As Ecclesiastes 1.4.
one generation passes, and another comes: and Psalm. 100.5.
the truth of the Lord endures from generation to generation* that is, ever,
from age to age. Now ^anse^ius concord. cap. 124.
generation in this acception is 100. years. So Nestor is said to live (...),
three ages, that is, three hundred years: and therefore some Divines have
referred this unto the destruction of Jerusalem only, which happened within an
hundred years after this prophecy: so learned Annot. in Matthew. 24.34.
Erasmus and Beza construe the place, both of them, interpreting the word
aetas: and the translators of Geneua following them in our lesser English
Bible, This age shall not pass: but as well the translation as observation is
defective, because Christ says here, This generation shall not pass, till all
these things be done, (...), not only those which concern the desolation of
Jerusalem, but all those likewise which concern the worlds end.

Abulensis in loc. vti postil. cathol. con. 4. Dom. 2. Adu^nt. and Iansenius
vbi supra.
Other by this generation understand the nation of the Jews, as Luke 17.25.
The son of man must be reproved of this generation: and Math. 23.36. All
these things shall come upon this generation: that is, this nation.

S. Com. ^n Matthew. 24.34.
Hierom by generation understands all mankind, as if Christ should say, the
generation of men shall continue till all be fulfilled, and then in fine they
shall acknowledge that I spoke the truth.

Aquin. caten. in Matthew. ^4.
Chrysostom, In loc. Matthew. vbi supra.
Theophylact, Euthymius, expound this of that generation only Psalm. 24.6.
which seek God; of Gods elect and faithful people, as if Christ should
speak thus, Albeit there be signs in heaven, and troubles on earth, yet
Matthew. 16.18.
hell gates shall not prevail against the Church: Matthew. 28.20.
I am with you always, says Christ, until the end of the world. The generation
of such as believe in me shall not pass, till all this be fulfilled: and
therefore let none of my followers be discouraged, but rather lift up their
heads, in that their redemption is so near. This exposition I take to be both
pertinent and profitable, because Christ in this Chapter had foretold, that his
Disciples should be persecuted and brought before Kings and Princes for
prosessing his Gospel, verse 12. Yet this generation shall not pass, but
there shall be a Church always to confess the faith in despite of the Devil.
Origin. and Aquin. caten. in Matthew. 24.
The Church one day shall pass too, but not till these things be done, then in
the end it shall inherit a better possession in Gods own kingdom without end.

Postil. catholic. vbi supra.
Other by generation vnd^rstand all that time between Christ's first coming
and his last; for the whole world being divided into three generations, a time
before the law, a time under the Law, a time after the Law* the time of the
Gospel is Hora nouissima, the last hour: 1. Epist. John 2.18. and, We are
they upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1. Cor. 10.11. so that ye shall
not look for another Gospel, or another change; for the preaching of this
Gospel and the world shall end together.

Maldonat. in Matthew. 24.34.
Other by generation understand not only the Jews, or the Christians, or all
men only, but the whole universal world, termed elsewhere the Creature. This
generation, that is, this world, in which all things are generated, shall not
end till these signs, forerunners of it ruin shall come to pass. So Christ
interprets himself in the verse following, Heaven and earth shall pass, but
my words shall not pass a^ay. That is, howsoever the earth be moveable, and
the powers of heaven shake: though both wax old as does a garment, and all
things in them are subject to mutation and change, yet Hebr. 13.8.
Christ is yesterday, and to day, the same also for ever: so that if you will
credit Christ, either upon your own reason and experience, or upon his word
and oath, believe this also, that he shall come riding on the clouds with great
power and glory to judge both the quick and the dead.

Secondly, Christ's coming to judgment is showed here by wonders in heaven,
in earth, and in the sea, which shall be like harbingers of that dreadful and
terrible day: There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the M^one, and in the
earth: the people shall be at their wits end through despair: the sea and the
water shall rore, etc.

Every man is desirous to buy the Calendar, that at the beginning of the year
he may know what will happen in the end: Merchants and Husbandmen especially,
that they may see this year what dearth, or death, or other accidents are
likely to ensue the next year. Ba^^ho^dus Pontanus bibliothe^. co^cio^u^ Dom.
2. Aduent.
Behold then here Christ's Prognostication, foretelling by signs in the Sun,
and in the Moon, and in the Stars, what shall come to pass in the end of
our years, as also, what shall betide us in the new year, the world to come.
The Thomas suppleme^t. quaest. 73 artic. 2.
Mathematicians of the world never mentioned or dreamed of an universal
eclipse of the Sun and Moon together, only Christ's Almanacke reports this. I
purpose not in particular to discuss any curious question, but only to note in
general, that these wonders in heaven, and extraordinary troubles on earth,
are manifest forerunners of the worlds ruin; that as we know Summer is near
when the trees bud, so when we see these things come to pass, we may be sure
that the kingdom of God is nigh: for as a man that is dying has many
fantasies, even so, says Chrysostom, the world declining shall have manifold
errors, in so much if it were possible Gods elect should be deceived. Matthew.
24.24.

Aristotle could not conceive the world should have an end, because he thought
and taught it had no beginning: but divine Plato who lived in Egypt, and read
(as it is Justin. Martyr in admonitorio.
supposed) the books of Moses, acknowledged the worlds creation, and so
subscribed to the worlds destruction, holding this axiom, Quod oritur,
moritur, That which has a beginning, has an end. Whatsoever has an end, had
a beginning; the which is to be construed of compounded elementarie substances,
subject to generation and corruption, as all things in this world are. For as
we read in scripture, Some things have a beginning, but no end, as Angels, and
the souls of men.

Some things have no beginning, but yet have an end, as Gods eternal decrees.

One thing, to wit, Ens Entium, Almighty God, has neither beginning nor end:
1. Tim. 6.16.
who only has immortality of all other things: the Apocal. 1.8.
first and the last: and yet in himself there is neither first nor last.

Some things have both a beginning and end, as the world, which had a creation,
and is subject to corruption.

1. John 2.17.
The world passes away, and the glory thereof, and then when as the powers of
heaven shall be shaken, and the 2. Pet. 3.10.
element shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein
shall be burnt up, then the son of man shall come in a cloud with power and
great glory.

Now this certainty of Christ's coming to judgment affords abundant matter
of comfort to the godly. affords abundant matter of terror to the wicked.
affords abundant matter of instruction to both.


Comfort to Gods elect: for when these things come to pass, then, says Christ
in 28. verse, Lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near. Now you
are prosecuted and persecuted, delivered up to the Synagogues, and cast into
prison, but at that great assise there shall be a general goal delivery, and
you that have done good, shall go into everlasting joy, and your enemies who
have done evil, into everlasting fire. Here ye mourn, but hereafter all
tears shall be wiped from your eyes: here ye sow in hope, but then ye shall
reap with joy; when as ye shall see the son of man coming in the clouds,
etc. As God is the God of comfort, so his book is the book of comfort:
Whatsoever things are written aforetime, they are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

The very soul of all the Bible is the Gospel: and the sum of all the
Gospel is the Creed: and the maine point of all the Creed is that article
concerning our resurrection and hope of eternal glory, when Christ shall
appear. The Church then has well a^nexed that Epistle to this Gospel, as a
consolation against desolation. By the book of comfort, we know that our
Redeemer lives, and that he will come again to judge and revenge our cause.

We believe that an eternal kingdom was secretly granted unto us in our
election, openly promised in our vocation, s^aled in our justification, and
that possession shall be given in our glorification: when as the Judge of the
world shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundations of the world. 1. These. 4.16.
When the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God; we shall be caught up in
the clouds to meet him, and so shall ever be with him. And therefore pray we
daily, Thy kingdom come: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

Now as this is comfortable to good men, so most terrible to the wicked: as
Christ, verse. 26. Their hearts shall (...) them for fear. They Apocal. 9.6.
shall seek death in those da^es, and shall not find it. And, as it is
Apocal. 6.16. They shall s^y to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide
us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb. This has been their day, wherein so far as they could they have
done their will; the next is the Lords day, wherein they must suffer his will;
Zoph. 1.15.
a day of anger, a day of trouble and heaviness; a day of destruction and
desolation; a day of obscurity and darkness; a day of clouds and blackness.
The reprobate shall see the son of man in the clouds above, to condemn them:
beneath, hell mouth open ready to devour them: before, the devils haling
them: behind, the Saints and all their dearest friends forsaking them: on the
left hand, their sins accusing them: on the right, justice threatening them:
on all sides, the whole world made a bone fire terrifying them; to go forward,
insupportable; to go back, impossible; to turn aside, vnauailable: no
marvel then if at the worlds end, men be at their wits end.

Thirdly, this administreth instruction unto all: for as it is in the Epistle:
Whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our instruction. And
this is so good a lesson, that if we could observe it well, we should need no
more teaching: so says the Wiseman, Ecclesiast. 7.36
Remember the last things, and thou s^alt never do amiss.

The last things are four:
Death. Judgment. Heaven. Hell.
But the chief is judgment: for all the rest attend it. Death is usher to
judgment going before; Heaven and Hell executioners following after. Death
would not be so fearful, if judgment did not follow: Hell would not be so
painful, if judgment went not before: without it heaven would not be desired,
nor hell feared. He then that remembers the last day, remembers in it all the
last things: and he that remembers the last things, cannot do amiss. Wherefore
let us ever embrace that godly meditation of S. ^^^rome: Wheth^r I eat or
drink, or whatsoever I do else, I think I h^^re the last tr^mpe: Arise ye^
dead and come unto i^dgement. The consideration of the worlds destruction is a
suffi^ient instruction to keep good men in honest courses, and to terrify bad
men from evil ways. Italians, in a great thunder, use to ring their bells, and
discharge their cannon shot, that the roaring of the one, may lessen the terror
of the other. Di^z. con. 1. Dom. 1. Aduent.
In like sort Satan hangs tinckling cymbals on our ears, and delights us with
the vanities and music of the world, that we may forget the sound of the last
trumpe, and so that Du Bartas, 1. day, 1. week, fol. 15.
day be seen, before foreseen of most.

As it is certain that Christ shall come; so most uncertain when he shall
come: for he speaks of the time not definitly, but indefinitly: verse. 25. Then
there shall be signs: verse. 27. Then shall they see the Son of man coming
in a cloud: verse. 28. When these things come to pass, then look up, for your
redemption draws near. But how near now? Ma^th. 24.36.
no man or Angel can tell. Cap. 6.2.
Esaias saw God in his throne, and the Seraphims stood upon it, covering his face
with two wings, and his feet with two wings: his face, Hieron. com. in loc.
Isaiae sup. Praeterita ante mundum and sutura post m^ndum s^ire non possumus:
sed media tant^m contemplam^r.
keeping us from the secrets of Gods eternal predestination in the beginning:
his feet, not disclosing when he will come to judge the world in the end.

The certai^tie then of this uncertainty, may teach us not to be Musculus and
Marlorat. in Matthew. 24.36.
curious or careless; not curious, for why should we presume to know more then
other men? more then all men? more then Angels? more then Christ himself? It
is a kind of sacrilege, says De gubernat. Dei lib. 3.
S^l^ianus, to break into Gods holy place, and pry into his secret
sanctuary, and to know more then he would have us to know.

Christ's Apostles were his Secretaries, his especial favorites and followers,
from whom he kept nothing which was for their good, and yet he said unto them,
Act. 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power. The glorious Angels abound with much knowledge, natural,
experimental, revealed, having far better means of knowledge then we:
forasmuch as we know the Creator by the creatures; whereas they know the
creatures by the Creator. Bernard. ser. in illud Psalmi: Audia^m quid loquatur
in me Deus. fol. 345.
Opus habet humana anima, quasi quodam vehiculo Creaturae, vt adcognitionem
Creatoris assurgat. Cum e contra long perfectius angelica natura in Creatore
notitiam habet creaturae: Angels always Matt^. 18.10.
behold the face of God in heaven, in which as in a glass they see much more
then is possible for us on earth to discern. Let not then an heavy lump of
clay presume to know more then heavens heralds: and yet Christ, to satisfy
further our curiosity, says in the 13. of Mark* that himself knows not
that day and hour. Now Mat. 10.24.25
the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord: It is
enough for the disciple to be as his master is, and the servant as his Lord. He
is a fool that will be wis^r then Wisdom it self: but Christ as man was
either ignorant of it, or else had no commission to reveal it: or as Part. 3.
qu. 10. a^t. 2. ex Augustino lib. 83. quaest* onum quaest. 60.
Aq^in; Dicitur nescire, quia non facit scire: He is said himself not to
know, because he Responsum nes^i^ndi non natu^ae, sed volunt atis. vt Hilar. de
Trin. lib. 6.
would not have us to know. Such as will enquire more touching that text, may
see Sixth. Se^en. Bib. sent. lib. 6. annot. 105. Soarez Conimbricen. traect. 3.
in Mat. Bellarm. lib. de anima Christ 1. cap. 5 sect. ^am de quarto. Iansen.
concord. cap. 124. Maldonat. in Matthew. 24.36. I will end with the saying of
Epist. 146.
Augustine: Ne nos addamus inquirere, quod ille non addidit dicere. Ecclesiast.
3.22
Let us not seek the things that are too hard for us: but that which God has
commanded let us think upon with reverence. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secret things b^long to the Lord; revealed things unto us.

Secondly, this uncertainty of Christ's second coming, may teach us not to be
careless: Nam ideo latet vltimus dies, vt obseruetur omnis dies: God would
have us ignorant of the last day, that we might be vigilant every day. This use
Christ makes in the words immediately following my text: and Matthew. 24.42. and
Mark. 13.33. It behooves us, upon whom the ends of the world are come, to be
more watchful: because Satan is grown more wrathful, Apocal. 12.12.

-- Du Bartas: 1. day, 1. week.
as Lysards cut in pieces,
Threat with more malice, though with lesser might:
And even in dying show their living spite.
The Father of mercies and God of compassion increase our faith, and fill our
lamps with oil, that when the Bridegroom shall come, we may meet him, and
enter with him into the wedding; August. soliloq. cap. 35.
where there is joy beyond all joy, pleasure without pain, life without death,
every thing that is good, without any thing that is evil. Amen.

The Epist. 1. COR. 4.1. Let a man this wise esteem us, even as the Ministers
of Christ, etc.
THe people of 1. Cor. 3.3.
Corinth in Paul's age, like the people of Survey of the pretended holy di^c.
cap. 29.
England in our time, were very factious and humorous, extolling some
Preachers, and despising other indiscreetly, without either judgment or love.
S. Paul therefore rebukes sharply this insolent rashness, and shows in this
scripture, 1. What every man should judge, verse 1. Let a man etc.

2. What he should not judge of the Preachers: in

which point he does 1. report, verse 2. 2. reprove their fault, and that two
ways: 1. (...), by way of correction, I pass very little to be judged of you,
etc. verse. 3.4. 2. (...), by way of direction, He that judges is the Lord, and
therefore judge nothing before the time, verse. 5.


Let a man] Whereas the Corinthians ascribed either too much or too little to
their teachers, our Apostle shew^s a Martyr and Calnin. in l^c.
mean, Let a man this wise etc. neither magnifying them as Christ, for they
are not Masters but Ministers, and yet not vilifying them as ordinary servants
in Gods house, for they are stewards, and that of Gods own secrets.

Albeit Paul 1. Cor 3.6.
plant, and Apollos water, only God gives increase. Paul August^n.
contra^iteras Petilian. li. 3. cap. 35
planted in preaching, Apollos watered in baptizing: some plant by their words,
other water by their works: some plant by doctrine, other water by their
exhortation: some plant by speaking, other water by writing, but in all God is
all.

He that planteth is nothing, he that waters is nothing, ^quin. in loc.
that is, no great thing, no principal agent, but a subordinate instrument:
wherefore let not a man boast in (...), Whether it be Paul or Apollos, or
Ce^has, or the word (...), or death; whether the^ be things present, or things
to come. even all are yours and ^e Chri^ts* and Christ Gods. If then the
Preachers are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ Gods, R^m. 11.36.
as of him, and through him, and for him are all things, so unto him, and not
unto men, give all the praise and glory.

Let a man esteem us not as Christ, but as the Ministers of Christ, not as
Lords, but as stewards in Gods house: now stewards administer not their own
goods but their masters, and one day must account for them, and therefore ye
must have, and we behave our selves as accountants. Luther postil. mayor. in
loc.
Antichrist then is not the vicar of God, but a factor of Satan, in preaching
his own Decrees, and equalling them with the divine law.

But albeit Preachers are servants, yet are they not mean, but high stewards:
and this is an exceeding great dignity to be Christ's mouth, Christ's voice,
Christ's messengers, Christ's angels, in so much as Matthew. 10.40.
he that receives them, receives him, and he that despises them, despises
him, as ambassadors speaking from him, and for him, as our Apostle 2. Cor.
5.20.
elsewhere. They be not only common ambassadors, but legati a latere, stewards
of his hidden secrets: not only dispensatores ministeriorum as in the vulgar
Latin; but Erasmus in loc.
according to the original, mysteriorum, administers of his sacraments, which
are mysteries, and Preachers of his faith, which is a deep secret, 1. Tim.
3.16. of all other the greatest: and yet it is the Luther loc. com. tit. de
ministerio verbi.
Ministers proper office, with John Baptist to show the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world.

They are the mouth of God in preaching to the people, and again the peoples
mouth in praying to God; even mediators as it were between God a man: as Moses
said of himself, Deuteronomy. 5. I stood between the Lord and you, to declare unto
you the word of the Lord. This does intimate how we should teach, and you
should hear. First how we should preach: If any man speak, let him talk as
the words of God. 1. Pet. 4.11.

It is a good observation, that the Lawyer ought to begin with reason, and so
descend to common experience and authority. The Physician he must begin with
^^perience, and so come to reason and authority: but the Divine must begin
with authority, and so proceed to reason and experience.

2. This may teach you to hear our voice; 1. These. 2.13.
not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God. Christ said of
the wicked Pharisees in the 23. of S. Matthew. Quae dicunt, facite: Do as they
say, but not as they do: August. contra literas Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Dicunt enim quae Dei sunt, faciunt quae sua sunt: They do their own works,
but speak the Lords word. And therefore so long as the Preachers deliver the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus, 1. Tim. 6.3.
or doctrine which is according to his words, you must entertain them as
Angels of God, even as Christ Jesus; honoring their place and reuerencing
their persons. And this I take to be the pith of the first part.

In the second, S. Paul teaches how we must not judge: first he reports, then
reproues their fault. His report is in these words: Hieron. in loc.
Hic iam quaeritur etc. Erasmus in loc.
(...), non (...): Aquin. and Gorran. in loc.
Here among you Corinthians it is discussed and disputed who is a faithful
Minister, and who is unfaithful.

And herein they wrong both God, his word, and his Ministers: God, to whom
only judgment belongs in this case. Some peradventure may judge of the
Ministers eloquence; many of his industry, but none of his faithfulness:
which is the Matthew. 24.45.
chief thing required in a steward. A man may be fruitful and yet not
faithful; an instrument to save other, and yet be condemned himself: for he
may preach Christ not for Christ, but happily for other respects: as the
fornicator makes delectation his end, not generation; so the Preacher, 2. Cor.
4.2.
adulterans verb^m, as it is in the vulgar, intends not to get children in
Christ unto God, but gain, or glory to himself. Ye know the men, ye know not
their mind: ye see their fact, not their faith; only God knows the secrets
of all hearts.

Secondly, it is an injury to Gods word, in having the faith of our glorious
Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons, James 2.1. It is not any who, who may
either privilege an error, or prejudice a truth: if another Gospel, hold him
accursed, although the Minister be an Angel: if a truth, do as they say,
though the teacher be a devil: poison in a golden cup is as hurtful as in an
earthen pot: wine in a silver bowl no better then in a wooden dish. When one
faith, I am Paul's, and another I am Apollos, are ye not 1. Cor. 3.4.
carnal? Is not this gross carnalitie, to set up Idols in the Church, and to
worship them in stead of God?

Thirdly, this is an indignity to the Preachers, in that artles men will take
upon them to judge of art. By the Pou tons Abri^gement, title, Brewer and
Butcher.
laws of the land, a person occupying the craft of a Butcher, may not use the
occupation of a Tanner; and a Brewer may not deal in the occupation of a
Cooper: Quod medicorum est promittunt medici, tractant fabrilia fabri. None
prescribe physic but such as are Doctors, at least practitioners in the
faculty: none plead at the common bar, but such as are learned in the law:
yet every one, as Hierome complains in an Epistle to Paulinus, takes upon him
exact knowledge in Theology, and will teach both Clerk and Priest what they
should say, what they should do. So that often it fares with Preachers, as it
does always with fish, none so welcome as new come: If a stranger happily come
among us, albeit he be never so weak for his learning, never so wicked for his
living; yet all the country must gad after him, and neglect their own
pastors: Matthew. 13.57.
as Christ in the Gospel, A Prophet is not honored in his own city, and in
his own house. This was a soul fault in Corinth: Apollos, and Cephas and Paul
were despised, while false teachers were deified. Indeed Paul writes in the
third chapter of this Epistle, as if some followed him, and other Apollos:
himself for his plain doctrine, and Apollos for his excellent eloquence. But
in the sixth verse of this chapter he says, he applied those things unto
himself, and Apollos figuratively; Aquin. in loc.
meaning that Peter and Apollos and himself were neglected, and other vpstart
seducers only rega^ded: he did use the names of Gods Apostles in his censure
for the benefit of the Corinthians: For your sake, that ye might learn by us
that no man presume above that which is written, and that one swell not against
another for any man's cause.

So men in our days are too partial in hearing and censuring their Teachers:
as one said, Auditories are like Faires; the Peddler and the Balladmonger has
more company then the grave rich Merchant: Children and fools hang upon them
who sell toys, and neglect those who have their shops stuffed with good
commodities: and this assuredly does discourage many Pastors learned and
profitable. For every man has not a magnanimous spirit, spernere se sperni, to
tell his auditorie with Paul, I pass very little to be judged of you. For so
this fault is reproved in the third verse.

The false teachers had extolled themselves and disgraced him; affirming 2.
Cor. 10.10.
that his bodily presence was weak, and his speech of no value. S. Paul
therefore having the testimony of a good conscience, resolutely tells the
Corinthians, I little pass to be judged of them, or you, or any man: He
Marlorat ex Martyr. in loc.
says not, I esteem not at all; but I little regard: that is, not so much
respect your judgment, as that I should be discouraged in doing my duty. The
witness of conscience is more comfortable then the vulgar breath: in
comparison of the one, I little prise the other. Or as In loc.
Gorran: It were a great thing to be judged of such as are spiritual; but it
is a very small thing to be judged of you, who are thus carnal. As De remedys
^ortuitorum ad Galionem.
Seneca: Male de me loquuntur, sed mali; mouerer si de me Marcus Cato, si
Lalius sapiens, si duo Scipiones ista loquerentur: nunc malis displicere,
laudari est.

Either of man's judgment.] Our Apostle wills us to rebuke with all long
suffering and doctrine. Now himself is a pattern of his own precept: for left
he should seem too bitter in chiding the Corinthians, and despising their
judgment; he does in this clause somewhat qualify his speech, insinuating
that he does except against all others judgment, so well as theirs. Happily
some will object it is uncivil and unchristian, not to regard what men speak
of us: As we must have care of our conscience, so likewise of our credit:

Ovid.
Qua semel amissa postea nullus eris.
It is good in our courses to gain the fore-game; for it is exceeding hard to
play an after-game of reputation. Answer is made, that albeit Paul esteemed
little their judgment in regard of 1 Thessalonians. 2.6.
himself, as expecting the praise of God, and having a good certificate from
his own conscience; yet in respect of other who might hereby be scandalized,
and so the Gospel hindered, he was assuredly grieved, and therefore reproues
here their fault boldly, that they might repent heartily: To me it is little,
but unto other it is a great scandal, that I should be thus abused and
neglected of you.

Judge not mine own self.] I know more by my self then you or any man else:
and yet I cannot judge my self, therefore much less ought ye to judge me.
This seems contradictorie to that of 1. Cor. 11.31.
Paul: If we would judge our selves we should not be judged. I answer with In
loc.
Aquine, that there is a threefold judgment: 1. Discussionis. 2.
Conde^nationis. 3. Absolutionis.



Every man may, yea must judge himself with the two former; he must examine
himself, and upon examination altogether condemn himself. Every man ought
daily to commune with his own heart, and to search out his spirit: Psalm.
77.6. Scopebam spiritum, I did as it were sweep my soul: Bernard. meditat.
cap. 5.
Diligenter attend^, qua^tum proficias vel quantum deficias: Examine thy self
whether thou have gone forward or backward in the ways of the Lord. Summon thy
self, as it were before another, and so fifth the whole course of thy life,
wherein thou have offended in thought, word, deed; by sins of omission, or
commission, against God, thy neigbour and thy self. Judge thine own self in
secret before thy self, and thou shall not be condemned at the last day before
all the world. Do this, says Vbi supra.
Bernard, Si non semper, aut saepe, saltem interdum: If not always, or often,
at least sometime: especially, says our Apostle, when ye come to receive the
blessed sacrament of our Lords Supper: Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.

The second kind of judgment is of condemnation. So Cap. 13.1^.
Job: I will reprove my ways in his sight. Cap. 9.20.
If I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me. So Psalm.
143.2.
David: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. And S. 1. Epist. 1.10.
John: If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth of
God is not in us.

A Christian in this world is August. tract. 80. in Johan. alluding to that of
S. John* chap. 15.2.3.
mundus and mundandus: clean in part, and in part to be made clean: Hieron.
epist. ad C^esiphont. tom. 2. fol. 254.
all his perfection consists in acknowledging his imperfection; all his
righteousness in Augustine. de c^^it. Dei lib. 19 cap. 27.
forgiveness of sins, rather then in perfection of virtue. Yea but, say the
Pelagians, and after them the Papists, Elizabeth and Zachary were just,
observing all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1.6. Job an
upright man departing from evil, and preserving his innocence, Job 2.3. In
David no wickedness, Psalm. 17.3. and here Paul; I know nothing by my self.

I answer to the first: If Zachary was a Priest, then a sinner: for as we
read, Heb. 7.27. the Priests manner was first to offer sacrifice for his own
sins, and then for the peoples. If then Zachary did sacrifice, he had sin,
and sin is a transgression of the Law: so that he did not exactly keep the
whole law, but himself and his wife so far observed the commandments as
that they were blameless in the worlds eye: Bacer. and Beza in loc.
no man could justly condemn them for doing unjustly.

But, as Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Augustine said, Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia
discutias eam: Woe to the commendable life of man, if God set mercy aside in
judging of it.

Even their own Sermon. de quadruplici debito.
Bernard confesses ingeniously, that if the Lord should take a strait account
of us his stewards, it were impossible that any should answer the thousanth,
yea the least part of his debt, nec millesimae nec minimae parti.

For the commendation of Job, it is not simple but comparatiue: There was none
like him on the earth; at least none so righteous in that part of the earth in
the land of Vz. Gregor. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 1.
It was a great praise to be so good among that people, who were so bad.
According to the measure of humane perfection Almighty God has given him so
great testimony of righteousness, says De peccatoru^ meritis and remissione,
lib. 2. cap. 12. tom. 7. fol. 472.
Augustine: Have thou not considered my servant Job? how none is like him in
the earth, an upright and just man, one that fears God, and eschueth evil.
But himself is afraid of himself: Verebar omnia opera mea: So the Romish
translation has it: I was afraid of all my works, Job 9.28. And in the second
verse of the same chapter: How shall a man be justified before God? and in the
third verse: If I contend with him, I shall not be able to answer him one for
a ^housand.

Now for David, his praise was not general, but particular and partial. There
was no wickedness found in him, Euthymius in loc.
that is, no plot or practice against Saul; whereof he was accused unjustly: but
otherwise in other things, his sins were so many, and those so heavy, that
he cries out in the 38. Psalm, Put me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger,
etc. David was no traitor, but David was an adulterer, and a cru^ll murderer:
He turned from nothing the Lord commanded him all the days of his life, save
only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. 1. Kings 15.5.

What, had David no fault else, but only that against Vriah? Yes surely, David
was Psalm. 51.5.
conceived in sin, and shapen in wickedness. As he was the son of many
years, so the father of many sins. In his private conversation he did so
much offend, as that he says in the 130 Psalm, If thou O Lord be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, oh Lord who may abide it? That text then is to be
construed of his public government, as the circumstances import; as he was a
King, the Scripture gives him this commendation, that, excepting the matter of
Vriah, he gave no public scandal in the whole time of his reign. David was
in many things a bad man, but in most things a good King.

So likewise this speech of Paul: I know nothing by my self, is not Cal^in i^
loc.
general, extended to the whole course of his life, but particular touching
his Apostleship. So Bishop Sermon. 3. before King Ed. 6
Latimer said: As for sedition, for ought that I know, me thinks I should not
need Christ, if I might so say. Paul knew nothing, that is, no unfaithfulness in
exercising his ministry; which he did utter here, not to i^stifie himself,
as it is apparent in the next clause, but to glorify God. As we find in the
15. Chapter of this Epistle, verse. 9. I am the least of the Apostles, not
worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God: but by
the g^^ce of God I am that I am, and his grace was not in vain, for I labored
more abundantly then them all; yet not I, but the grace of God which is with
me. S. Paul then, assisted with Gods especial grace, found nothing in himself
to condemn himself, for his unfaithfulness in preaching: but in other actions
he was so buffeted with Satan, and ouerladen as it were with his infi^mities,
as that he grievously Romans 7.24.
complains: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? He that calls himself in Ephesians. 3.8.
one place the least Saint, in 1. Tim. 1.15.
another acknowledges himself the greatest sinner. But what need we look
any further? He that here says, I know nothing by my self, says also, yet
herein am I not justified: as I do not condemn, so not absolve my self. The
Papist then in citing this text, has lost a pound to gain a penny: For
although a man do all that he can, he is still an unprofitable servant. I know
no unfaithfulness in me, yet I am not hereby justified: for, as In loc.
Gorran and Aquin note, Paul might have many secret sins unknown to
himself: according to that of Psalm. 19.12.
David; Who can tell how often he offends? O cle^se thou me from my secret
faults. Every way of a man (says Prou. 21.2.
Solomon) is right in his own eye: but the Lord pondereth the heart: and who
can say, Prou. 20.9.
I have made mine heart clean? Or, as D. Fulk in loc. D. ^bbot contra Bishop,
page 574. Calvin. institut. lib. 3. cap. 14. Sect. 18. and cap. 17. sect. 14.
our Divines expound it, howsoever Paul was faithful in his office, yet his
and all our good works are stained with some blemish.

There was iniquity in the holy sacrifices of the children of Israel: but
their high Priest did bear the iniquity to make the offering acceptable
before the Lord: Exodus 28.38. There is unholiness in our holiest actions, but
Christ our high Priest has borne the iniquity: and they are accepted of God
in him, not by themselves or their own perfection, but as perfumed with the
sweet incense of Christ's obedience: who to make both us and them acc^ptable,
gave himself an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God:
Ephesians. 5.2. See Epist. Dom. 3. Quadrages.

The Gospel. Matthew. 11.2. When John in prison heard the works of Christ.
THis Gospel has two principal parts: A question moved by S. John Baptist,
in the 2.3. verse. An answer made by our Savior Christ, in the rest.

In the question four things are regardable: 1. The place where: in prison. 2.
The time; when, he heard the works of Christ. 3. The messengers: he sent two
of his disciples. 4. The message* Art thou he that shall come, etc.

Christ's answer concerns either the Message Of John. Christ's answer
concerns either the Or person Of John.
That which concerned the message of John, he delivered unto the messengers:
verse. 4.5.6. Go and show John what ye have heard and seen.

That which concerned the person of John: he delivered unto the multitude when
the disciples of John were departed: verse. 7.8.9.10.

Wherein observe these three circumstances: 1. When: After John's disciples were
gone, avoiding hereby all flattery. 2. To whom: To the multitude, confirming
in them a reverend opinion of John. 3. What: his speech altogether te^ded unto
the praise of John.

And it is partly Negative, showing what he was not for his life: verse. 7.8.
Affirmative, showing what he was for his office, verse. 9.10.

This I take to be this Gospels anatome and epitome.

When John, in prison.] Psalm. 34.18.
Many are the troubles of the righteous. If they were many and not troubl^s,
^hen, as it is in the proverb, The more the merrier: or if they were troubles,
and not many; then, the fewer the better cheer. But it has pleased almighty
God to couple them both together; in nature, troubles; in number, many: that
through many tribulations we might enter into the kingdom of God: Act. 14.22.

Some therefore are touched in their reputation, as Susanna: some crossed in
their children, as Ely: some persecuted by their enemies, as David: some
wronged by their friends, as Joseph: some tormented in their body, as Lazarus:
some suffer loss of goods, as Job: some restrained of their liberty, as here
John in prison. As Naples is called in Ortelius.
history, the butt, and Millaine the bale of fortune: so the good man is the
butt of the wicked, whereat he shootes his sharpest head arrows: and therefore
we must put on Gods armor, following S. Ioh^s example. When we are in prison,
or in any other affliction, we must not fly to witches, or rely too much on
men, but immediately send to Christ; I say send two messengers unto God, our
alms and our prayers: for they will do our errand for us, as they did for
^ornelius, Act. 10.4.

Not to follow the common postils in this argument, I note out of these two
circumstances, of place and time, two commendable virtues in John, to wit, his
discretion and humility. The disciples of John held their master a greater
Prophet then Christ: albeit he told them plainly, that h^e was not worthy to
untie the latchet of Christ's sho^e, Matthew. 3.11. Behold then his exceeding
wisdom, who sent his disciples unto Christ, ^hen himself was most abased in
regard of his pr^sent imprisonment, and imminent death, and when Christ on the
other side, was most famous for his wondrous works and strange miracles: When
John b^ing in prison, heard ^he works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples
unto him.

The disciples of John had three faults, as we find in the Gospel: Envy:
John 3.26.
Behold he that was with thee beyond Jordan baptizeth, and all men follow him.
Ignorance; supposing John 3.28.
John to be Christ. Incredulity; joining with the Pharisees against Christ,
saying: Matthew. 9.14.
Why do we, and the Pharisees fast often, and thy disciples fast not?

Now in Jacob. de vorag. ser. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent.
Christ's school there were three perfections opposite to these three defects:
Examples of humility against envy: words of wisdom against ignorance:
works of wonder against incredulity. John therefore sent his disciples unto
Christ, that seeing his humility, their envy might be lessened; that hearing
his wisdom their ignorance might be rectified; that wondering at his works
their incredulity might be confounded: and because Clem. Strom. 2.
faith is the mother of all virtues, and infidelity the nurse of all
wickedness, the Baptist then sent his disciples, when he heard of the great
works of Christ; that going, they might see; seeing, wonder; wondering,
believe; believing, be saved.

A good example for all Marlorat. ex Calvin. in loc.
Preachers to follow; that they take their hint, and best opportunity to
benefit their auditors. Every Pastor is a steward in Gods house; and a steward
must not only provide meat enough, but also prepare it in due season:
otherwise, says De considerat. lib. 3.
Bernard, it is not dispensatio, but dissipatio. This ought to be their first
and last L^dolphus de vita C^risti, part. 1. cap. 56. and Zepperus co^. 1. Dom.
3. Aduent.
care: for John in prison even at deaths door was most careful to commend his
scholars unto the best Tutor: and this pattern fits all parents, as well as
Preachers. In a word, all D^z cone. 2. Dom. 2. Aduent.
superiors that they be watchful, for the good of such as are under them. 1.
Tim. 5.8.
If there be any that prouid^th not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel. If such as
neglect their families in temporal things, be worse then infidels; how bad are
they who neglect them in spiritual things, using no pains in their life, nor
care at their death; that their servants and children after their departure,
may be brought up in instruction and information of the Lord?

But that which is especially noted out of those circumstances, is, John's
humility, who was not vain glorious, or factious, or any way desirous to draw
disciples after him, but rather to send them unto other, who could better
instruct them. If all our Preachers were like John, there would be much less
division, and much more devotion in the Church. An itching shepherd must
necessarily make a scabbie sheep.

He sent] When the Pastor is restrained of his liberty, let him not cease to
provide for his flock: when the Master of the family cannot come to Church
himself, let him send his servants unto Christ.

Two] For mutual society, because Eccles. 4.9.
two are better then one: if one fall, the other may lift him up; if one
forget, the other may remember: and yet not mo then two, lest turba should
prove turbulenta, lest many heads should make many Creeds. Beauxamis har.
Euang. T^m. 2. fol. 255.
As Iosuah sent two to spy the promised land; so John sent two to spy the
promised Lord.

Art thou he that shall come] At the first sight hereof some may suppose that
John did doubt, whether Christ was the true Messiah or no: for otherwise he
would never have sent his disciples with this question; Art thou he that shall
come* etc. But if you call to mind that which is written before; that John
baptized Christ in Jordan, and how he saw the holy Ghost descending upon him,
and how he pointed him out with the finger, This is the Lamb of God. Or if you
shall advisedly consider what follows after this question of John in this
present Chapter, what honorable testimony Christ gave of him, that he was not
a reed shaken with the wind; that is, an inconstant man, one that preached
Christ to be come, and now to make question of his coming: that he was a
Prophet, yea more then a Prophet: if, I say, we note the text either precedent
or consequent, it will appear more manifest then light at noone that John
himself did no way doubt of Christ: and therefore to let pass all other
expositions, I follow with the whole stream of Iansen. Concord. cap. 47.
Be^uxamis vbi sup. Culman. conc. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent. Musculus Ma^d^n, etc. in
loc.
late writers, that old interpretation of S. Com. in loc.
H^erome, Hom. 27. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, In loc.
Theophylact, Euthymius, Hilary, Lib. 9. in Mat. fol. 80.
Rupertus, all which are of this opinion, that John Baptist made not this doubt
in regard of himself, but in the behalf of his doubting disciples, as yet not
thoroughly persuaded that Christ was the Savior of the world: and therefore did
he send them unto Christ, that by occasion of Christ's answer, hearing his
words, and seeing his wonders, they might be fully satisfied, and in fi^e saved.

A candle being put in a close room, will show forth it self through the
little cranies of the walls, and chinckes of the window. John was a John 5.35.
burning and shining lamp: and therefore though he was shut up in prison, yet
notwithstanding shined in his humility, wisdom, love, zeal before men, even
like the Sun giving the greatest glimpse at his going down.

Go and tell Iohn] Why tell John? He knew before that Christ was the Messiah:
he might have said rather; I tell you; not, Go you and show John: M^ldona^. in
loc.
but Christ would take no notice of their unbelief, lest h^e should shame and
discourage them too much.

What you have heard and seene] What you have heard of others, and seen your
selves: for as S Cap. 7.21.
Luke reports at that very time before their eyes, our Savior cured many of
their sicknesses and plagues, and of evil spirits, and unto many blind men he
gave sight: as if he should reason thus; I have made the premises; it
remains only that ye gather the conclusion: Esaias 35.5.
he that inlightneth the eyes of the blind and opens the ears of the deaf,
and Esaias 61.1.
binds up the broken hearted, and preaches good tidings unto the poor, etc.
he is assu^edly the Messiah of the world: But I do all these; therefore go
tell John what ye have heard and seen, the blind receive their sig^t, the
lame walk etc. Ye know the tree by his fruit. Bernard. ^pist. 107.
Non ex ^elijs, non ex floribus, sed ex fructibus. Here then we may l^arne to
teach ignorant people with our works as w^ll as our words, Ludolph. vbi ^upra,
and Acosta Con. 3. Dom. 2. Aduent.
that all men may see, so well as h^a^e what we are.

Yea but why did not he show them in plain terms, but demonstrate by miracle,
that he was the M^ssias? He told the woman of John 4.^6.
Samaria before she did ask: why then did he not tell them when they did
ask? Chrysostom gives this reason; because Christ knew the woman of Samaria
would easily believe, therefore he used a bare word only: but the disciples
of John were hard of belief, and therefore he ^hought it best to teach them by
works, and not by words: John 5.36.
I have greater witness ^hen the witness of John; for the works which the
Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witn^sse of
me, that the Father has sent me. Wherefore John 10.38.
though ye believe not me, yet believe ^he works: Go show what ye have seen;
the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the leapers are cleansed, and
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, etc. These John 15.24.
works which I have done, the like whereof were never done, testify that I am
he who should come: and so will your master John, that he look for none
other. This answer was thought sufficient by Christ, which is wisdom it
self: Go and show John the things that ye have heard and seen. But if Christ
now will find any faith among our Atheists, he had need to come with new
miracles, I might have said with more then miracles, lest our searching wits
find the reason of them: or otherwise conclude them to be but our ignorance of
the cause. Men and Gods, as it is in the fable of the golden chain, were not
able to draw Jupiter down to the earth, and yet Jupiter was able to draw them
up to heaven: so we must submit our reason unto faith, and not faith unto
reason.

And as they d^parted, Ies^s began to say unto the people.] This part of our
Saviors answer concerns the commendation of John: if Cic^ro orat. pro
Archiapoet. O fortunate, qui tuae virtutis Homerum praeconem inueneris.
Alexander the great accounted Achilles happy for that he had so good a
trumpeter of his honor as Homer, what an exceeding glory was it for the Baptist
to be thus extolled by Christ, who being truth it self would not flatter, and
could not lie.

Ludolphus: Beau^amis: Iansen. Marlorat. Bucer. etc. in loc.
Divines out of these circumstances of persons and time, note Christ's wisdom
and sincerity; wisdom, who did not magnify John before those who did already
praise him too much: his sincerity, that would not flatter him before his own
disciples, albeit he did extol him before the people, when they were gone. It
is an old saying of In Ezechiel.
Gregory: Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, quam gladius pers^cutoris; The word of
the flatterer, hurts more then the sword of the persecuter.

A malicious enemy does often good by telling us of our vices, but a fauning
friend wrongs us in telling us of our virtues: either commending that which we
have not, or too much extolling that which we have: the which is termed in the
Canon law simonia linguae, verbal simonie. Leuit. 2.13.
Salt was used in the legal sacrifices, but not honey, that our lips may offer
up acceptable sacrifice to God. We must have salt in our Colos. 4.6.
speech, and not honey complements, as being more desirous to correct our
acquaintance wisely, then to flatter them basely.

Reusner. class. 1. Symbol. p. 145
Sidona non sunt dona, quae dant* hostium;
Nec verba quae dant verba, sed sunt verbera.
The Parasite, says the Pla^tus.
Poet, has bread in one hand, and a stone in the other; using us as the Jews
did Christ; carry us up to the top of an hill, and then cast us down
headlong. Luke 4.27.
Christ therefore rebuked the Pharisees before their face, but commended John
behind his back, not to his own but to the people, lest they should
entertain an ill conceit of him who was a Preacher and a Prophet: and here by
the way note, that the difference between the Disciples of Christ and John in
matter of ceremonies, as fasting and washing of hands, made no schism in the
Church; but John gave this testimony of Christ, that he was not worthy to
loose the latchet of his shoe: and Christ here commends highly both the
carriage and calling of John; affirming of the one, that he was not an
inconstant or vain man; of the other, that he was a Prophet and more then a
Prophet. There are three kinds of Prophets according to the threefold
distinction of time: some write of things past, as Moses: In the beginning God
created, etc. penning an hexameron many years after the world was made: some
of things to come, so Christ was foretold by the mouth of all his holy Prophets
ever since the world began: some of things present, as Zacharias in his song:
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people:
Christ being then conceived had begun his visitation; and such a Prophet was
old Simeon at Christ's circumcision: Mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Now
John is more then any of these, because he is all these; prophesying of things
past: I am the voice of him that cries in the wilderness, opening an old text
of Cap. 40.3.
Esaias; prophesying of things present: Behold the lamb of God* that takes away
the sins of the world; prophesying of things to come, Repent, for the
kingdom of God is at hand.

Secondly, John is more then a Prophet; for whereas other prophesied only in
their life; John was a prophet in his mothers belly before he was borne: for
Luke 1.41.
when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe sprang in her womb, the
which was so sensible a prophecy, that Elizabeth instantly called Mary the
mother of our Lord.

Thirdly, John was greater then the Prophets under the law, because they
prophesied of Christ to come: but John bare record that he was come, being, as
Beauxa^mis harmon. Tom. 2. fol. 258. and Albert. in loc. and Calvin. Instit.
lib. 2. cap. 9. Sect. 5.
divines have termed him, a midling, between a Prophet and an Apostle: a
prophetical Apostle, and an apostolical Prophet: T^rtullian. lib. 4. contra
Marcio^.
Limes inter vtrumque constitutus, in quo desinerent vetera, and noua
inciperent: The Baptist then is more then a Prophet, in pointing him out with
the finger; who is the very center of all the Prophets aim.

Fourthly, greater then a Prophet, Hieron. in loc.
in that he baptized the Lord of the Prophets.

But what need we look any further, when as our Savior in the very next verse
gives a sufficient reason of this assertion out of the Prophet Cap. 3.1.
Malachie: This is he of whom it is written, Behold I send my messenger before
thy face, etc. Maldonat. in loc.
Other Prophets are sent to men, but John to God, from God the Father to God
the Son: Behold, says God the Father, I send mine Angel before thee, etc.

Christ in all his Sermons usually cited text for the proof of his doctrine:
so John the Baptist; I am the voice of a crier, as says the Prophet Esaias: So
Saint Peter, This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel: so Saint Paul
builds all his exhortations and conclusions upon evidence of holy writ;
teaching us hereby, that howsoever the descant be fetched out of the school;
yet the grounds of all our preaching must be taken out of Gods own book:
Believe this, for it is written: do this, for it is written. Augustine. epist.
48.
A^di, dicit Dominus, non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Hilarious, aut Augustinus, sed dicit Dominus. Expound one text by comparing it
with another; for the Prophets are Doron Basilicon, lib. 1. page 8.
commentaries upon Moses, and the Gospel is a short exposition of both; and
that you may the better perform this, examine the questions, harmonies,
concordances, annotations, glosses of the learned Doctors in Christ's Church
from time to time; for it was an impudent speech of Abelardus, Omnes sic, sed
ego non sic: and worthily censured by Epist. 190.
Bernard: Os talia loquens ^ustibus iust^^s tunderetur, quam rationibus
refelleretur: For as the word of God was not penned in old time* so l^kewise
not to be cons^^ued in our time by any private spirit: 2. P^t. 1.20.21.

^e^old I se^^ my (...).] Our Evangelist reports (...) spoken by God the
Fath^^* but the Prophet as (...) by the Son: B^h^ld, I (...) ^end my
^ess^nger and (...) before me. This al^ering of the persons has troubled
Interpreters a little: Pet. Galat. de arcanuilib. 3. cap. 12. and Iansen.
Concord. cap. 13.
some therefore thus, I send my messenger before my face; that is, before my
Son, Hebr. 1.3. This observation is true, but not pertinent: Ribera in
Malach. 3. number. 4.5.
for to send a messenger before a man's face, is nothing else but to send a
messenger before him, as Hab. 3.5. Before him went the pestilence: and Jeremy,
Lament. 1.5. Her children are gone into captivity before the enemy: Ante
faciem tribulantis; and so Christ expounds it here, before thy face, that is,
before thee.

Now for the changing of the persons, it is usual in the Bible: Saint 2. Pet.
1.21.
Peter affirms tha^ the word of God was written by the holy Ghost; but Saint
Paul says, Hebr. 1.1. that God the Father in old time spoke by the Prophets.
Cap. 52.6.
Esaias does ascribe this unto the Son; My people shall know my name, in that
day they shall know, that I am he who sent to them: and the reason hereof is
plain; because all the works of the sacred Trinity, quoad extra, be common
unto all the three persons, and so God the Father, and God the Son, and God
the holy Ghost, send. The persons diversity then alters not the sacred
Identitie: but as Hieron. Ians^n. Maldonat. in loc.
Interpreters observe, that text of Malachie compared with this of Matthew,
proves notably that God the Father, and God the Son are all one, their power
equal, their majesty coeternall.

My messenger:] In the vulgar Latin, Angelum meum: V^ Beda in cap. 1. Marc.
Origin therefore thought John was an Angel; but other expositours more fitly,
that the Baptist was Angelus officio^, non natura; so Malachie calls other
Prophets, Angels, in his 2. Chapt. 7. The Priests lips shall preserve
knowledge, and they shall s^eke the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger
of the Lord of hosts: Angelus Domini: so Preachers are called Apoc. 2.1.8.12
Angels in the new Testament, that is, messengers and ambassadors of God; and
here the Gospel agrees with the Epistle. This is a pattern of S. Paul's
precept: Preachers are to be respected as the Ministers of Christ, and stewards
of God, for God says of John the Baptist, Behold I send my messenger, etc.

Happily some will object, if ordinary Prophets are called Angels, how does
this testimony prove John to be more then a Prophet? Answer is made by
Zachary, Luke 1.76.
that John is (...) the Prophet, and here by Matthew, that Angel, as it were
bedell or gentleman usher unto Christ. As then in a solemn triumph they be
most honored, who go next before the king; so John being next unto Christ,
even before his face, is greater then they who went far off: he was the
voice, Christ the word: now the word and the voice are so n^ere, that John was
taken for Christ. Again, John may be called that Angel, in Theophylact. in
loc.
regard of his carriage so well as his calling, for albeit he did no miracle,
yet, as Maldonat. in loc.
one said, his whole life was a perpetual mira^le: first, his conception was
wonderful; begotten, says Sermon. 6^.
Ambrose with prayer: Non tam complexibus quam orationibus: An Angel from
heaven avouches as much in the first of Luke, verse 13. Fear not Zachary;
for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a Son, and
thou shall call his name John. It was another miracle, that a babe which could
not speak, yea, that was unborn, began to execute his angelical office, and
to show that Christ was near: that dumb Zachary should prophecy, was a
third wonder at his circumcision; and so the whole life of John was very
strange, living in the wilderness more like an Angel then a man: and in a word,
those things which are commendable in other severally, were found in him all
jointly, being a Prophet, Evangelist, Confessor, Virgin, Martyr: living and
dying in the truth and for the truth. I know not (as Vbi supra.
Ambrose speaks) whether his birth, or death, or life was more wonderful.

How John does prepare the way before Christ, is showed in the Gospel on next
Sunday; yet observe this much in general, that it is the Ministers office to
show men the right way to salvation, and to bring them unto God: our Savior
has promised to come unto men; it is our duty therefore to knock at the
doors of your heart by preaching faith and repentance, to prepare the way for
our master, that when himself knocks he may be let in, and so sup with you,
and dwell with you, and you with him evermore. Amen.

The Epistle. PHILIP. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always: again, I say rejoice.
A Text of rejoicing against the time of rejoicing: whereby the Church
intimates how we should spend our Christmas ensuing; not in gluttony and
drunkenness, in chamb^ring and wantonness* doing the devil more service in
the twelve days, then in all the twelve months: but rather Colos. 3.16.
in Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, making melody in our hearts unto
the Lord: I say the Church allotting this scripture for this Sunday, teaches
us how this holy Time should be well employed, not in unholiness and mad
meriments among Lords of misrule: but in good offices of religion, as it
becomes the servants of him who is the God of order: observing this festival
in honor of Jesus, not Iacchus; always praising our heavenly Father, in loving
us so well as to send his Son to save his servants: and lest we should err
in our spiritual revels, observe in this Epistle both The Matter Of our joy.
The Manner Of our joy. The matter and object of our joy: rejoice in the Lord.
The manner: how Long; always rejoice. The manner: how Much; again and again
rejoice.


It is an old rule in Arist. Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Philosophy, and it is true in Divinity, yt affections of the mind, as, anger,
fear, delight, etc. are in their own nature neither absolutely good, nor
simply evil, but either good or bad, as their object is good or bad. As for
example, to be angry or not angry, is indifferent: Be a^grie, and sin not,
says Ephesians. 4.26.
Paul; there is a good anger. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly
(says Matthew. 5.22.
Christ) is in danger of judgment; there is a bad anger. So Matthew. 10.28.
Fear not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. So
likewise to rejoice, or not to rejoice, in it self is neither absolutely
disgraceful, nor altogether commendable: we may not rejoice in the toys of
the world, in frowardnes, or doing evil, faith Prove. ^.14.
Solomon: Non in vitijs, non in diuitijs, says Ser. de nimia fallacia
praesentis vitae, sol. 3^9
Bernard: Luke 6.26.
Woe be to you that thus laugh, for ye shall wail and weep* but we may
delight in the Lord, says David. Rejoice in Christ, says Mary: then our joy
is good, when as our joys object is good, yea God; as Paul here; Rejoice in
the Lord.

As sorrow is a straitning of the heart, for some ill: so joy the dilating of
the heart for some good, either in possession or expectation. Now Christ is our
chief good; as being author of all grace in this life, and all glory in the
next: and Zanchius in Philip. 3.1. ex Graecorum scholijs.
therefore we must chiefly rejoice in him, and in other things only for him: in
him, as the donor of every good and perfect gift: for him, that is, according
to his will: as the phrase is used, 1. Cor. 7.39. If her husband be dead* s^ee
is at liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord.

So then we may rejoice in other things; for the Lord as in the Lord: we may
rejoice in our selves, as being the Lords; and in other, because they rejoice
in the Lord. Psalm. 16.3. All my delight is upon the Saints that are in the
earth, and upon such as excel in virtue: So likewise we may rejoice with the
Ecclesiast. 9.9.
wife of our youth, and disport our selves in good company: we may make
Christmas pies, and Harvest dinners: in a word, rejoice in every thing which
may further our spiritual rejoicing in the Lord. But 1. Cor. 10.31.
whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do else, all must be done to the
honor and glory of God. Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I say, rejoice.

Yea but Christ, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn: Luke 6.21. Blessed are
they that weep. The^p^ylact. and Marlorat. ex Brent. in loc.
This rejoicing is not contrary to that mourning: for such as mourn are
blessed in being comforted: and comforted by rejoicing in the Lord. Rejoice,
says Luc. 6.23.
Christ, in that day and be glad, when any shall hate you for my sake: the
which his Apostles accordingly fulfilled, Act. 5.41. They departed from the
Council rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his
Name: that Christ would use them as his Bernard. de considerat. lib. 2.
buckler: and Romans 5.3. We rejoice in tribulations. The Father of mercies and
God of all consolation comfort us in all our afflictions: 2. Cor. 1.5.
As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds through
Christ. Esaias 61.3.
He does appoint comfort to such as mourn in Sion: he does give beauty for
ashes, oil of joy for sorrow, the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness: so that a martyr when he is most mournful, is mirthfull: he
speaks of his tormentor, as Plato in Ap^log. Socratis. and Epictet. Enc^eirid.
cap. vlt.
Socrates of Anitus; and Xiphilin. in vita Neronis.
Petus of Nero the Tyrant, Occidere me potest, laedere vero non potest: He may
well kill me, but he shall never ill me. Nihil crus sentit in neruo, cum manus
est in coelo, says In lib. ad Martyr.
Tertullian: Every cut is a wide mouth to praise Christ, as the Martyr
Prudentius Peristephan. hymn. 10.
Romanus sweetly:

Tot ecce laudant ora quot sunt vulnera.
Grates tibi o praefecte magnas debeo,
Quod multa pandens ora, iam Christum loquor.
Blessed are they that die for the Lord, because they rejoice in the Lord. No
loss, no cross can interrupt our spiritual joy: for as it follows in the
text to be considered, it must be continual, always rejoice. The Christian must
keep Christmas all his life, though not in his hall, yet in his heart: always
in his mind, albeit not always with his mouth.

It is a true rule delivered in the school, that Gods affirmative laws,
Thomas 12. ^. quaest. 71. art. 5. ad. 3.11.
obligant semper, sed non ad semper: ad semper velle, but not ad semper agere;
requiring disposition perpetual, and practice so often as occasion is offered.
Holy, just, valiant men are they who can whenever they will, and will
whenever they ought, execute what their several perfections import. There is
a time for all things, and therefore several duties ought to be discharged in
several seasons. He that says here rejoice always, says in another place, 1.
These. 5.17.
pray continually, and in all things give thanks: and therefore we need not
alwai^s actually pray, nor actually give thanks: not actually rejoice, in word
and outward gesture, but as opportunity shall require. If then as time, never
a better time, then this holy time: never greater cause to Zachar. 9.9.
shout out for joy, then now, for that our King comes unto us: it is our
bounden duty always intentionally; b^t at this time with Psalms and songs
actually. No sin, no sorrow must hinder our spiritual rejoicing. For in all
our adversity God is even at hand; Aquin. in loc.
not only nigh in his Majesty, Acts 17.^7.
though doubtless he be not far from every one of us, but also nigh in his
mercy. Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him. A
Psalm. 46.1.
very present help in trouble. Yea the Lords second coming is at 1. Pet. 4.7.
hand, when as he shall judge and revenge our cause; rewarding us with
eternal happiness, and punishing our adversaries with everlasting fire: and
therefore rejoice always in all things: I say, rejoice in the Lord: for we
cannot always rejoice in the things of this life. 1. John 2.17.
The world passes away, and the lust thereof, but Christ is evermore the same:
the beginning and end of all other things, himself without either beginning or
end. If then our joys object be God, it may be continual: but if fixed on
earthly things, exposed to manifold changes and chances; it must necessarily be
mutable. Bernard sermon. de nimia fali^ cia praesentis vite.
Gaudium in materia conuertibili mutari necesse sit re muta^a. So that as the
Ovid. de pont^, lib. 4.
Poet truly: Gaudia principium nostrisunt saep^ doloris. Prou. 14.1^.
Even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is heaviness.
The world is a sea of glass, Apocal 4.6. Bullinger ^on. 24. in Apocal.
brittle as glass, tumultuous as the sea: but he that rejoices in the Lord,
is like Psalm. 125.1.
mount Sion which stands fast for ever. If then any desire to rejoice always,
let him rejoice in the Lord.

And again I say, reioyc^.] The T^eop^^lact, in loc.
troubl^s of this life a^e so great, and our patience so little, that Paul
doubleth his exhortation Marlora^. in loc.
to press the duty, and express our dullness: and indeed our reioicing cannot
be continued, except it be multiplied again and again: rejoice therefore for
mercies already received, and again rejoice for mercies hereafter promised.
For received grace: first, for thy creation: Almighty God might have made thee
a dull ass, a venomous serpent, an ugly t^ade; whereas he created thee
according to his own image and similitude, as it were diuinitatis epitome. For
the world is Gods book, and man is Index of that book, or a commentary upon
that text: rejoice therefore in the Lord, and say with Psalm. 8.
David; What is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man, that
thou should visit him? Thou have crowned him with worship and glory: thou
make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands, and thou have put all
things in subjection under his feet, as a ladder whereby men might ascend to
the consideration of thy greatness and goodness.

For thy preservation, he might have denied thee sight, as he did to Bartimeus,
or made thee deaf or dumb, or a cripple, as we read of many in the Gospel,
and daily see many crying and dying in our streets. If the Lord of hosts had
not bin thy guard, all other creatures his soldiers would have banded
themselves against thee; fire would have devoured thee, water would have
drowned thee, mother earth would open and swallow thee quick; Habacuk ^.11
the stone out of the wall, the beam out of the timber would fight against
thee: but Psalm. 91.11.
he has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: he
does defend thee under his wings, and Deuteronomy. 28.6.
bless thy going forth, and thy coming home; bless the fruit of thy body,
the fruit of thy ground, the fruit of thy cattle; every way so bless thee,
that thou may always rejoice in the Lord.

For thy redemption, at this festival especially; consider with Ser. 1. de
Aduentu.
Bernard, Quis est qui venit, vnde, quo, ad quid, quando, qua: meditate on Gods
unspeakable love, who sent his Son, his first begotten, only begotten Son,
whom he loved as himself. The very Heb. 1.3.
character and brightness of his glory to deliver us his servants, undutiful as
unprofitable, from the hands of all our enemies. If thou have any feeling of
these mysteries, any faith, be it so small as a grain of mustard seed,
evermore rejoice in the Lord.

For thy sanctification also: many men in a reprobate sense do not call upon
God; cannot call upon God. Whereas he has given thee grace to pray with the
congregation publicly, with thine own family privately, with thy self
secretly; giving thee grace to feel thy sins, and to be sorry for the same:
rejoice for these good benefits in possession; and again rejoice for those
mercies of God in expectation; for that 2. Cor. 4.17.
most excellent and et^rnall weight of glory, which he has 2. Tim. 4.8.
laid up, and in that day will give to such as love his appearing. Let us
evermore rejoice in this Romans 12.12.
hope, saying with Cap. 3.18.
Habacuk, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

Faith is the mother of our reioicing in the Lord: for Christ dwells in our
hearts by Ephesians. 3.17.
faith, and faith is by Romans 10.17.
hearing of the word: spiritual joy then is increased by reading, hearing,
meditating on holy Scriptures. John 15.11.
I have spoken unto you these things, that my joy might rem^^ne in you: Luke
24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us, and opened
unto us the Scriptures?

It is increased also by good life. For as sin does Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve the spirit, so good works on the contrary cheer the soul. Proverbs
21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgment. Postil. mai^res cum gloss^s and
figuru in epist. Dom. 3. Aduent.
Here the Gospel and Epistle parallel; for the way of the Lord is prepared
especially by faith and repentance. Now poenitens de peccato dolet; and de
dolor gaudet: He that is a good man sorroweth in his sins, and reioiceth in
his sorrow; and that he may do this, he must rejoice in the Lord: wherefore be
not careful for that which is worldly, but make your patient mind known unto
men, and let your petitions be manifest unto God. And the peace of God which
passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds through Christ, giving
you many joys in this life, to the end; and in the next, his eternal joy,
without end. Amen.

The Gospel. JOHN 1.19. This is the record of John, When the Jews sent Priests
and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, What art thou?
THis Gospel is a dialogue between certain Priests and John the Baptist. The
Priests inquire after his person and place, carriage and calling. Their
interrogatories are five: the which are answered by S. John severally; showing,
and that directly, both what he was not, as also what he was; not Christ, not
Elias, not the Prophet; but the voice of a Crier in the wilderness.

The first question is, Who art thou? Diez conc. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent.
Quis ego sum? is the question of a good man? Tu quis es? of an envious. He
that has a bad house gads abroad. The wicked are 1. Pet. 4.15
busy Bishops in other men's diocesses. A true saying in it self, but upon
this text a false gloss: for it belonged unto the Melanct. Calvin. and
Marlorat. in loc.
Priests office to manage the business of the Church, and exactly to know
what every Prophet was. And albeit Euth^mius is of opinion, that the Jews
herein maliciously disabled their knowledge: yet it is more probable that they
made this question, to see whether he was Christ. For as we read^, Luke 3.15.
All men mused in their hearts of John, if he were not the Christ: and our John
5.35.
Savior told the Jews plainly, that they for a time reioiced more in John,
who was but a candle, then in himself who was the Sun of righteousness, and
light of the world: and albeit these messengers uttered not so much in word,
yet assuredly they harbored such a conceit in their hearts, therefore John
answering their Theophylact. and Cai^tan. in l^c.
intention, rather then their question, acknowledged ingenuously, that he was
not the Christ.

In which answer, observe the matter and the manner. In the matter he
confessed the truth, denying himself, where note his Cu^man in loc. con. 1.
modesty; and acknowledging Christ to be the Messiah, where note his Zepperus
in loc.
constancy. Forte (says Hom. 7. in E^ang.
Gregory) grave non est gloriam and honorem non petere, sed valde grave est non
eum suscipere cum offertur. It was then great humility to refuse this honor,
which not only the people, but also the Priests, as it should seem, were
ready to cast upon him: hereby teaching us in all our actions, to seek, not
our own, but Gods glory, saying with this holy Baptist, John 3.30.
he must increase, but we must decrease. The constant resolution of John is
also remarkable, confessing Christ freely, not only before the multitude, but
also before the Levites and Pharisees, men of great learning, and no less
place in the Church, and such as he might well suspect would call his preaching
into question.

But the manner of his confession exceeds far the matter: he confessed and
denied not, and said plainly, I am not Christ. The which words are not
superfluous and idle, for every tittle of the Scriptures has his worth and
weight. Such repetitions are usual in the Bible, to set out things more fully,
as Eccles. 1.2.
vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. Cant. 6.12.
Return, return, O Shulamite return, return. Ierem. 22.29.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. By this iteration then of
one and the same thing, S. John showed how unwilling he was to rob Christ of
that honor, which only belong^d unto him. When Acts 10.26.
Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, and would have worshipped him, Peter
instantly took him up, saying; Stand up, for even I my self am a man. When
the men of Acts 14.15.
Lystra would have sacrificed unto Paul and Barnabas; they rent their clothes,
and ran in among the people, crying, We are even men, subject to the like
passions that ye be. When that other John would have worshipped the glorious
Angel who showed him his revelation, Apoc. 22.9.
he said unto John; See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant: so
careful are Gods children in all ages to give God the things appertaining to
God: honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear, divine worship to whom divine
worship belongs. Here we may justly condemn the Papists, in giving that
kind of Thom. in 3. sent. did. 2. and part. 3. quest. 25. a^t. 4.
worship to the cross, which is only due to Christ. If a man should ask them
whether the crucifix were Christ, I hope they would answer with John, and deny,
and confess plainly that it is not the Christ. Give then to the crucifix the
respect due to the crucifix, reserving to the crucified that honor which only
belongs to the crucified.

If a man should ask the bread in the Sacrament, What art thou? it would
answer plainly with John, in such language as it can, I am not the Christ;
approving it self to our sight and taste, that it is a morsel of bread, a
creature, not a Creator, and therefore not to be worshipped and adored as God.
If good men on earth, and glorious Angels in heaven, have refused always to be
reputed Christ; what shameless Idolaters are they, who say; here is Christ,
and there is Christ; this is Christ, and that is Christ?

The second question is; Art thou Elias? To which John answers, No. Yet Matthew.
11.14.
Christ says, he is that Elias. An August. tract 4. in Johan. and Greg. hom.
7. in Euangel.
Angel from heaven has answered this objection, Luke 1.17. John Baptist is
Elias in power, not in person, endued with the like temperance, like wisdom,
like courage. Now the Pharisees imagined that Elias Malachi 4.5.
himself should come, not another in the spirit of Elias; and therefore John
according to their meaning, answered truly, that he was not Elias. How John and
Elias parallel, see Beauxamis Harmo^. Euangel. Tom. 1. fol. 101. Ludolphus de
vita Christi. part. 1. cap. 19. Post^l. catholic. Con. 2. Dom. 4. Aduent.
Whether Eli^s shall come before the great day of the Lords second coming, see
Luther postil. mayor. in loc. and his Majesty's Premonition, from the 62. page
to the 80.

The third question is, Art thou a Prophet? To which John answered also
negatiuely. Christ said he was more then a Prophet: himself that he was less
then a Prophet. There are three degrees of humility: 1. To submit our selves
unto our betters. 2. To give place to equals. 3. To yield unto inferiors.



All these were found in John: he submitted himself to superiors, affirming
that he was not Christ: he gave place to equals, answering that he was not
Elias: he did yield to his inferiors, in saying he was not a Prophet. Maldonat.
in loc.
Yea but John out of his humility must not tell an untruth: his father
Zacharias in the Benedictus, calls him the Prophet of the most high; and Christ,
more then a Prophet. Hom. 15. in Joan.
Chrysostom, In loc.
Theophylact, Euthymius, and other Greek fathers are of opinion, that the
Pharisees imagined John to be that Prophet spoken of by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me from among you,
even of thy brethren, unto him ye shall hearken. Beza in Ioban. 1.21.
The which text must be construed either of the whole College of Prophets, or
else of Christ, the chief of the Prophets: and therefore John answered
directly, that he was not that Prophet; (...) the Prophet. Lib. 1. comment. in
Ioban.
Rupertus, and other Latin Doctors affirm, that the Pharisees in this
interrogatory, desired to know whether his office were like that of Esaias,
Ieremias, Amos, and the old Prophets: unto which John might answer well, that
he was not such a Prophet: for their office was to foreshew Christ by some
works, or foretell him by some words; vel dictis praesignare, vel factis
praefigurare, says Rupertus. But John's embassage was not to foretell that
Christ should come, but plainly to tell that Christ was come. Thou shall be
called the Prophet of the most high: not to prefigure, but to go before the
face of the Lord. A Prophet ^s a Preacher of the Gospel, not as a Priest of the
Law.

Hitherto John Baptist answers negatiuely, showing what he was not, neither
Christ, nor Elias, nor a Prophet. Whe^ein he did not satisfy the messengers
of the Jews fully. That therefore they might return a more perfect answer,
they further importune and press him, to know what he was; What say thou of
thy self? The which is the fourth interrogatory. To this John affirmatively,
declaring what he was: I am the voice of a Crier, etc.

There were two chief prophecies of him: one, that he should be that Angel of
the Lord; and this, that he should be the voice of a Crier in the wilderness.
Here then Diez con. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent. and Maldena^. in loc.
Interpreters observe John's humility, giving himself the meanest title; not
Christ, not an Angel, not a Prophet, but only vox clamantis, etc. Culman.
con. 2. Dom. 4. Aduent.
Wherein he lively describes a good Preacher of the Gospel, he must be the
voice of a Crier in the wilderness, to make straight the way for the Lord.

The word of God is a proclamation in writing, common to all, and the Minister
is the voice of the Crier to give notice to the people, that the matter of the
proclamation concerns them and every one of them: Acts 13.26. Men and
brethren, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this
salvation sent: To Acts 3.26.
you God raised up his Son Jesus, and has sent him to bless you by turning
every one of you from your iniquities.

Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: A Preacher therefore
must cry from the bottom of his heart: the which is prefigured Ezekiel 3.1.
Son of man, eat this roll, and go and speak unto the house of Israel. Utter
nothing to the people, but that which thou have first digested thy self.

The voice] A word is first conceived in the heart: then uttered by the voice;
yet we hear the voice before we know the word: so Christ the eternal Word
was before John, and all other Preachers. In the beginning was the Word, and
that beginning was before all beginning: yet the world knew not the Word, till
it was preached by the voice of men and Angels: albeit the word in it self be
before the voice, yet unto us the voice goes before the word: John 1.15.
He that comes after me was before me. Christ then is the Word; and every
Preacher of Christ is a voice; the which one word confounds all such as being
called thereunto, do neglect their duty of preaching. In every voice,
specially a Church voice, three commendable qualities are required; that it be
clear, sweet, and high.

Clear: for as Hierome said, Omnia in sacerdote debent esse vocalia: All
things in a Divine should preach: his apparel preach, his diet preach, his
whole life preach: 1. Tim. 4.12.
An example in word, in conversation, in spirit, in faith, in pureness. Such a
voice was the Baptist; his preaching was of repentance, and he lived as a
penitent: as he did boldly speak the truth, so constantly suffer for the
truth: on the contrary, bad manners and false doctrine make harsh and hoarse
the loud voice.

Covetous Judas had an hoarse voice: filthy Nicolaes an hoarse voice: Simon
Magus an hoarse voice: Peter in denying his Master, through extreme coldness
of fear, had an hoarse voice too for a time. Manicheus, Arius, Pelagius, all
Heretical, Schismatic, Atheistical teachers are hoarse voices in Gods
quier.

I^le solus praedicat viua voce, quipraedicat vita and voce.

Secondly, the Church voice must be sweet: every seed is not to be sown at
every season, in every ground: and so it is in Gods husbandry: The voice
therefore must 2. Tim. 2.15.
aright divide the word which it sings and says; observing time, and keeping
it self in tune, speaking to the proud boldly, to the meek mildly, to all
wisely. The bells hung on Exodus 28.33.
Aarons garment were of pure gold, hereby signifying that Aarons voice should
be no founding brass, no iarring cymball, but a sweet ring, proving sweetly,
reproving sweetly, confuting error sweetly, confirming the truth sweetly;
running over all the changes of Gods ring, mentioned 2. Tim. 4. without any
jar or false stroke sweetly. Such a voice was John the Baptist, rebuking Luke
3.19.
Herod, hardened in his wickedness, rufly; taking up ye dissembling* Matthew. 3.7.
Pharisees bitterly; speaking to his own disciples gently, singing to every one
the true note fitly: and this, as Psalm. 58.5.
David speaks, is to charm wisely.

Thirdly, the Church voice must be high, and that in regard of the Matter, of
which He speaks. regard of the Men, to which He speaks.


And such a voice was the Baptist also. First for the matter, he reached many
streines never sung before: Repent, says he, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. This note was never heard of the people, nor sung by the Priests in old
time. John being more then a Prophet, exalted his voice above the Prophets, and
in a plain song, without any crotchets, preached him who is higher then the
highest.

Secondly, in regard of the men, to whom he spoke: For, as it follows in the
next word, he was the voice of a Crier. Now men use to cry aloud, Thom.
caten. i^ 3. Ma^th. ex Raban. and Beauxamis Har. Tom. 1. fol. 100.
Either When they speak to me^ which are a far off. When they speak to men
which are deaf. When they are angry.



Sinners are far off from God, and exceeding deaf: and therefore we must be
angry crying aloud, and lifting up our voice like a Esaias 58.1.
Trumpet, showing the people their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob
their sins.

First, sinners are far off, as it is said of the Luke 15.13.
prodigal child gone into a far country, like Esaias 53.6.
lost sheep, straied out of Gods pastures into Satan's enclosures: and therefore
it is our office not only to whistle, but also to cry: Return, return, o
Shulamite, return, return.

God does not go from man, Non tellus cymham* te^^urem cymba relinquit.
but man from God. He that saileth nigh a rock, thinks the rock runs from
the ship, when as indeed the ship rides, and the rock stands still: even so
we leave the ways of the Lord, and run our own courses, and then we
complain that God is far from us, and that our cry comes not nigh him. It
is true that God is Prou. 15.29.
far off from the wicked, not because he is moveable, for he is ever the
same, but because they be wandering: yet they cannot fly from his Psalm. 139.6.
Vbinon est per gratiam, adest per vindictam. August. meditas. cap. 29.
presence. The further from East the nearer unto the West: the more they go
from Gods grace, the nearer his justice: Psalm. 119.155.
salvation is far from the wicked, but iudgemen hangs over their heads. It is
our duty therefore to recall men, a Deo irato ad Deum placatum, from God as an
angry Judge, to God as a merciful Father. If we draw near to God, Iam. 4.8.
he will draw near to us: as the good father of the prodigal son, when he
perceived him a far off, he had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him. It is said in the text, that the son did go to his father;
but the father ran to meet his son. The fathers compassion and mercy, was
greater then the sons passion and misery.

Secondly, sinners are deaf, and therefore we need to cry aloud. Some will
hear, but with one ear, like Bilney to B. Tonstal, vti Fox Acts and Mon. fol.
917.
Malchus in the Gospel, having their right ear cut off, and only bringing
their left ear to the sermon, misconstruing all things sinisterly: Some stop
both their ears; like the deaf adder, refusing to hear the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely: Psalm 58.5. In Psalm. 57. Tom. 8. fol. 392.
S. Augustine writing upon those words, has reported out of natural
Historiographers, that the serpent delighting in the darkness, where withal
he has enclosed himself, claspeth one of his ears hard to the ground, and
with his tail stops the other, lest hearing the Marsus he should be
brought forth to the light: so worldly men stop one ear with earth, that is,
with covetousness; and the other with their tail, that is, hope of long life.
(...) 22.29.
Jeremy therefore cries: O earth, earth, earth. O unhappy caitiue, thou that
have nothing but earth in thy mouth, ever talking of worldly wealth: thou have
nothing but earth in thy mind, ever plotting how to join house to house, and
field to field; nothing but earth in thine hands, ever busied about the trifles
of this life; hear the word of the Lord, which 1. Tim. 6.17.18
charge thee not to trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God: and
that thou be rich in good works, evermore ready to distribute while thou have
time; stop not thine ear from the cry of the poor with hope of long life,
but remember what Job says in his 21. chap. verse. 13. They spend their days
in wealth, and suddenly they go down to hell. Luke 12.20.
O fool this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided?

Thirdly, men speak aloud, when as they be angry: so the Preacher ought to be
zealous in the cause of God; evermore displeased with the sins of his people,
saying with Psalm. 139.21.
David; Do not I hate them, O Lord, who hate thee? and am not I grieved with
those that rise up against thee? Such a crier was S. Peter* telling Simon the
Sorcerer that he was in the Act. 8.23.
gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity. Such a crier was Paul, taking up
Elymas; Act. 13.10.
O full of mischief, the child of the devil, and enemy of all
righteousness, etc. Such a crier was Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3.
Polycarpus, who told Marcion that he was the devils darling. And such a crier
every Divine should be, as a Simon helping to bear the cross of the
distressed; and a Act. 4.36.
Barnabas, which is the son of consolation: so like James and John, styled in
Mark. 3.17.
scripture Bonarges, which is, sons of thunder: as Sermon. 64.
Ambrose fitly, vox and clamor must go together, the voice preach faith, the
cry repentance; the voice comfort, the cry threaten; the voice sing mercy,
the cry sound judgment: so most Musculus and Maldonat. in Matthew. 3.3. Iansen.
concord. cap. 13. D^^z con. 1. D^m 3. Aduent.
Interpreters expound vox clamantis, according to the vulgar Hebraisine, vox
clamans. Yet it is a good observation of Aquin. caten. Mat^h. ^. Rupertus com.
in Matthew. lib. 2. ^ol. 17.
other, that John is not the crier, but the voice of the crier: for it is
Christ who cries in Preachers, he speaks by the Luke 1.70.
mouth of all his holy Prophets: he cries, O ye Prou. 1.22.
foolish, how long will ye love foolishnes? he cries, Repent, for the
kingdom of God is at hand: he cries, Come unto me all ye that are wearied and
laden, and I will refresh you. To day then if ye will hear his voice harden
not your hearts, but suffer the words of exhortation and doctrine: be moved at
his cry, lest he despise your call. As he says in the first of the Proverbs:
Because I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out mine hand,
and none would regard: therefore they shall call upon me, but I will not
answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Think on this
all ye that forget God, ye that suffer Christ to stand and knock, and cry at
the door of your hearts, and yet ye will not let him in.

In the wildernes] That is, in the world a desert of goodness, wherein the
Preacher must fight with beasts, as 1. Cor. 15.32.
Paul at Ephesus in the shapes of men, crying unto ravening wolves, covetous
foxes, roaring lions, etc. Here is the place where he must cry: for in heaven
there is no crying, but all singing, and in hell there is no crying, to take
heed of woe; but howling and crying for woe: while then you are in the Matthew.
5.25.
way, while it is called to Heb. 3.13.
day, give ear to the voice of the crier.

Or in the wildernes] That is, Calu. and Marlorat. in Mat. 3. ex Hilario and
Gregorio.
Jerusalem; out of order as a desert: or in the wilderness: that is, among the
Ex Hieronymo and Ambrosio. Pontanus in theatro Dom. 4. Aduent.
gentiles and desolate people, strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, and
aliants from the covenants of promise before Christ's coming: but now the Esaias
54.1.
desolate has more children then the married wife. The Gentiles heretofore were
without an husband, and the synagogue of the Jews had God for her love; but
now contrariewise the Church converted to the faith, bears more children unto
God then ever the synagogue did. The voice of the crier shall gather and call
so many sheep to Christ's fold, that the wilderness shall say in her heart, Esaias
49.21.
Who has begotten me these children, seeing I am barren and desolate?

Or in the wildernes] Coster. con. 3. Dom. 3. Aduent.
Literally, because that is the most fit place for the Preacher of repentance,
wherein there is least tumult: and again, to signify that the people should
follow the Pastor; not the Pastor humor the people. The Preacher is the voice
of a crier in the wilderness, not a carpet divine for table Gospellers in a
corner. I will not any further examine the place, the end is all, and that is
to make straight the way of the Lord.

The wicked walk either in circles, or else in ouertwhart ways. Impij
ambulant in circuitu, says Psalm. 12.6.
David, wearying themselves in the labyrinth of their unruly desires; or if
they walk not circularlie, they walk in wrie ways and by-waies opposite to
the Lords way: for example; The vain glorious do all their good works to be
Matthew. 7.1.5.
seen of men, and so they cross Gods way tending to another end; only the
children of God walk in the straight way, in a right line beginning and ending
in God; as every good gift is from him, so it is by them referred unto him; as
his is the power, so his is the praise.

The end of our preaching is not to make way for our selves and our own
preferment, but for our Master and his glory: Make straight the way of the
Lord, as says the Prophet Esaias. Wherefore leaving all other expositions, I
come to the Prophets interpretation, as it is recorded in his 40. Chapter, at
the 3. and 4. verses. A voice cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of
the Lord: make straight in the desert a path for our God. Every valley shall be
exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall
be straight, and the rough places plain.

Now these things are to be construed in a Hyperius in loc. Esaiae.
spiritual sense. For Thomas caten. in 3. Matthew. ex Chrysostom.
as Kings in their solemn progresses have their ways leuelled and straightned
against their coming into the country: so the Preachers as harbingers and
sumners of Christ, ought to prepare the people, that he may come unto them, as
about this time he came unto them. Presumption and pride make mountains and
hills in Christ's way; desperation holes in Christ's way; vaineglorie makes
crooked the way: covetous cares are briers and bushes in the way; noisome lust
makes foul the way: wherefore the voice of the crier in the wilderness must dig
down the mountains, exalt the valleis, stub up the briers, make smooth the
rough, rectify ye crooked. Behold, says God to the Ierem. 1.10.
Prophet, I have set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms to pluck
up, and to root out, and to destroy and overthrow, to build and to plant. The
which S^^ ^. Biis^^ against (...) Jesuits, fol. 160, 161.
text is wrested by the Papists exceedingly, to prove that the Pope has
authority to depose Princes, and dispose of their crowns at his pleasure. But
God expoundes himself in the words immediately before: I have made thee a
Prophet, and put my words into thy mouth: a Preacher with words in his mouth,
not a Magistrate with a sword in his hand; and therefore their own Lyra in
Iere. 1
glossographer interprets it thus: I have appointed thee to root up; that is,
to root up vices, to beat down heresies, and to build up virtues. And In
loc. Ierem.
Theodoret; To root up kingdoms is nothing else but to denounce Gods heavy
judgments against them: As Hierome; To cast them down by the word of
Almighty God. Vt facias opus prophetae, sarculo, non sceptro, opus est tibi,
says De considerat. lib. 2.
Bernard; That thou may do the work of a Prophet, thou must have a weeding
hook, not a scepter: And as Pastoral. part. 3 ad^on^t. 35.
Gregory notes aptly, the Prophet is willed here first to root up, and after
to plant; because the foundation of truth is never well laid, except the frame
of error be first subverted: at the first we must cast down the mountains by
the preaching of the Law; then exalt the valleys by the preaching of the
Gospel. Such a voice was the Prophet 2. Sam. 12.
Nathan: at the first he did cast down the mountain, the presumptuous
hypocrisy of King David, rebuking him for his sins, and thundering out
judgments for the same: but when he saw this huge mountain cast down, when
David was under foot, dejected in spirit, crying out, I have sinned against
the Lord; Nathan presently raises up this valley, saying, The Lord has taken
away thy sin. This course A^^. 2.
S. Peter used in his first sermon, in beginning whereof he charged the Jews
with their sins: but so soon as they were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Men and brethren what shall we do? S. Peter presently lifts them up again
by preaching Christ for the remission of sins. And well might John call
himself such a voice, for all his preaching stood upon two legs; repentance,
and faith; Matthew. 3.10.
digging down the mountains by the one, and Ioh. 1.29.
raising up the valleys by the other.

The great Doctor having heaven for his chair, earth for his school, the
whole Bible for his text, and the whole world for his audience; began this
method in the first sermon that ever was made: Genesis 3. Adam by following his
new schoolmaster the devil, waxed proud, and began to grow so big as a
mountain: God therefore does first cast him down, showing the greatness of
his fault, and then he raises him up again, by promising that the seed of
the woman should bruise the Serpents head. Seeing then we have both precept and
pattern from God himself; let us be followers of him as dear children,
pulling down the mighty from their seats, and exalting the humble and meek.
To begin with the first:

There are two sorts of mountains: One assuming too much unto themselves, out
of their own merit. The other presuming too much upon Gods mercy.

Every man is naturally like Simon the Sorcerer, Act. 8. conceiting himself to
be some great man: as Martin Loc. com. tit. de pro^ect. in Christianism.
Luther said, All of us have a Pope bred in us; an opinion of our own works:
albeit there be in us no real virtue, no true substance; yet, Narcissus like,
we are inamoured with our own shadows: and this is the Luther. vbi sup. ^it.
de praesumption.
Serpents head, the beginning of all evil: Omnium iniustitiarum est fere sola
causa iustitia. Wherefore we must labor every day to dig down this high
mountain: we must descend that we may August. confess lib. 4. cap. 12.
descendite vt ascendatis ad Deum, cecidistis enim ascendendo contra eum.
ascend: as we fell by ascending, so we must be raised by descending. Beda
wrote of the Publican: Appropinquare noluit ad Deum, vt appropinquaret ad
illum. He that will not be a mountain in Christ's way, must not be a
mount-bank of his own virtue, but level himself even with the ground,
Philip. 2.12.
working his salvation in fear and trembling.

The second kind of mountains are such as raise themselves upon mere
presumption of mercy, boasting of a shorter cut to heaven then either the good
works of Papists, or good words of Puritanes, abusing that sweet text of Romans
5.20.
Paul; Where sin abounds, there grace superaboundeth. Indeed where sin is
Call. and Aquin. in loc Paul.
felt and grieved for, the^e Gods grace is greater then our sin, Melancthon
in loc. Paul. tom. 4. fol. 124.
both in imputation and effect: for our sins are finite, whereas his
goodness is infinite, the salve is greater then the sore. August. de spiritu
and litera, cap. 6.
Non peccantis merito, sed superuenientis auxilio. But when we draw iniquity
with cords of vanity, and sin as with cartropes; when we speak good of
evil, and evil of good; when as without any remorse we sin presumptuously;
when as we fall not forward as Abraham and Ezechiel, but backward as old 1.
Sam. 4.18.
Eli, and the John 18.6.
Jews who took Christ; then assuredly the more sin, the less grace. Shall
we continue still in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. Yea God has
forbidden it, enioyning us to be holy as he is holy, that being delivered
out of the hands of all our enemies, we might serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

A man is dejected and made a valley two ways: in regard of his Great faults.
Little faith.

The voice of the Crier must pronounce Gods proclamation and general pardon
for the one, and apply it in particular for the strengthening of the other.

The fifth and last question of the Pharisees is: Why baptizest thou then, if
thou be not the Christ, neither Elias, nor the Prophet? Unto which John
answered: I baptize with water, etc.

This last interrogatorie was the first in their intention: Ammonius in caten.
Graec. ci. tat.
for the Pharisees had a tradition, that none might baptize but Christ, or some
great Prophet, and therefore they did first ask craftily whether he were
Christ or a Prophet: and then having Maldonat. in loc. ex Chrysostom.
undermined him thoroughly, with what authority do thou baptize? being
neither Christ, nor Elias, nor a Prophet? S. John's answer is opposite, but
apposite. Melancthon. loc. com* tit. de baptis. Joan. and Christi.
I am a Minister, but not a Messiah; I give the outward sign, but Christ is he
who does give the inward grace: I baptize you with water, Matthew. 3.11.
but he that comes after me shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and fire.
Doct. Fulk in Matthew. 3.11.
In which he compares the ministry of man with the power of God; the outward
baptism with the spiritual baptism: where of the first is done by the hand
of man, the other is peculiar only to Christ. Calu. and Marlorat. in 3. Mat.
11. and Melanct. vbi supra.
The comparison is not as the Papists imagine, between the baptism of John
and Christ, but between the person of John and Christ: for the baptism of
John and Christ are one, both in effect and authority: for John's baptism was
not of his own devising, but of Gods institution: as he shows his
commission in the first of Ioh. 33. He that sent me to baptize with water, etc.
a text which has made Desacramento Baptismi* lib. 1. cap. 20.
Bellarmine contradict himself twice in one page. For whereas he first had set
down peremptorily that John instituted his own baptism; now he confesses
honestly that God was author of it for the matter in general, but not for the
manner in particular: and yet after long search he cannot find in what rite
John's baptism differs from Christ's.

It is an axiom delivered in their own Lombard. sent. l.b. 4. distinct 3.
school, that there are but two things essential in Baptism, verbum and
elementu^, the outward element of water, and invocation of the blessed
Trinity. So S. Tract. 80. in Joan. Tom. 9. fol. 303.
August. Accedit verbum ad elementu^ and fit sacramentu^: Other things are
required in a Sacrament circumstantially, not substantially. Now Bellarmine out
of this text grants that John used the right element: for he says, I baptize
you with water: and out of De spiric. sanct. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Ambrose cites against himself, that John inuocated the sacred Trinity,
Father, Son and holy Ghost: Ergo. the baptism of John and Christ are one
for essence: so likewise one in effect, for John preached the baptism of
repentance Mark. 1.4.
for the remission of sins: Ergo, forgiveness of sins is by the baptism of
John* so well as by the baptism of the blessed Apostles: as Lib. 5. de baptism
cap 10.
Augustine, De baptism. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Basil. Orat. de laudib^^ Basilij.
Greg. Nyssen. out of that text observe: neither does the Vbi sup. ca. 21.
Cardinal disauow their gloss, though the Council of Sess. 7. con. 1.
Trent has denounced anathema to such as hold baptismum Ioannis habuisse
eandem vim cum baptismo Christi ^ let Matthaeus Tortus, if he can unloose this
wedge for his Master. I fear that overthwart Divine so little, that I say with
Luther; Hunc nodu^ neque soluunt, neque soluent vnquam omnes papicolae in vnum
Chaos confusi. The Scripture makes no difference between John's and our
baptism: but this only; Melanct. in 3. Mat. tom. 3. fol. 256
that we baptize in Christum passum and r^suscitatum; whereas John baptized
Acts 19.4.
in Christum passurum and resurrecturum See Epist. Dom. 17. post. Trin.

The Epistle. GALAT. 4.1. I say, that the heir so long as he is a child
differs not from a servant, etc.
IGnorant people behold rather an Greg. Nyss^n. great. de laud Theodor. solet
pictura tacens in pariete loqui. The Papist calls it the lay man's gospel.
Image well painted, then a book well written, and are sooner persuaded with
plain similitudes and familiar examples, then with subtle reasons and
accurate discourses Our Apostle therefore after he had used for his purpose
(namely, to prove that justification is not by the law, but by faith in Christ)
the comparison of a man's will, of the prison, of the schoolmaster in the
former Chapter, adds also this of an heir; wherein as in every similitude two
points are remarkable: the proposition: verse. 12. reddition in the rest.



In which our twofold estate must be considered, of Thraldom, v^der Moses.
Freedom, by Christ, when the laws tyrannical government ends: and that is,

Two manner of ways, as Luther. in loc.
Interpreters out of the text: 1. By the coming of Christ in the flesh once at
the fulness of time: verse. 4.5. 2. By the coming of Christ in the spirit daily:
verse. 6.7.

In his firstcomming, note the Fact: verse. 4. and in it the Giver: God, whose
good will appears in bestowing on us his Son: Fitly: when the time was full
come. Freely: for he was not bought or stolen, but sent.
Gift: Christ described here by his Divinity: his Son. Humanity: made of a
woman. Humility: bond to the law.

Effect: verse. 5. to redeem them which were bound unto the law, etc.

The heir as long as he is a child] This comparison is taken out of the Roman
law by which it is ordained that a pupil, albeit he be Lord of all his fathers
inheritance, should be kept under tutors and governors, until he come to
full age; to wit, under tutors till Justinian. institut. l. 1. tit. 22.
fourteen years, under Curators until Idem eodem tit. 23.
five and twenty. Idem codem tit. 20.
Tutores dantur impub^ribus, Curatores puberibus. Tutors are guardians of the
pupils Idem codem tit. 14.
person principally: so called, L. 1. D. de Tutela.
Quasituitores atque defensores; but L. in copulandi^. 8. ^. de nuptijs.
Curators are factors especially for his goods and estate.

Now the Ward, during the time of his minority, suffers much bondage;
differing, says Paul, nothing from a servant; nothing in respect of any
present possession, or actual administration of his own estate, but very much
in respect of his right and propriety, being Gorran. in loc.
dominus habitu, non vsu: as having Terms of the law. page 103.
free hold in law, though as yet not free hold in deed: and so the Ward does
differ from the slave; who was in old time no L* quod attinet. 32. D. de reg.
iuris.
person in law, but a mere chattell, and as it were of the nature of L. 2. D.
ad legem Aquileam.
cattle.

It was in Paul's age then a great slavery to be a pupil. And Sermon. at Paul's
Cross.
Bishop Latuner complained of late, that there was not a school for the Wards,
so well as a Court: a school for their learning, so well as a Court for their
lands. It should seem Gardians in his days used young Noble men not as Lords,
but as servants; as Paul here, etc.

In like manner, when we were little children, in our nonage we were heirs,
having the promise of an eternal inheritance to come, which should be given
unto us by the seed of Genesis 12.3.
Abraham: that is to say, by Christ, in whom all nations should be blessed; but
because the fullness of time was not yet come, Moses our tutor and governor
held us in bondage* The law does threaten, accuse, condemn, so long as we be
children in understanding, dwarfes in faith, ignorant of Christ. Saint Paul
calls the law rudiments of the world; not only Gorran. and Aquir. in loc.
because it is our first Galat. 3.24.
schoolmaster, and A, B, C, to Christ, but Luther. in loc.
because it leaves a man in the world, and prepares not a way for him to
heaven. I kill not, I steal not, I commit not adultery: this outward honest
conversation is not the kingdom of Christ, but the righteousness of the world.

The law when it is in his principal use, cannot justify, but accuse,
terrify, condemn. Now these are things of the world, which because it is the
kingdom of the devil, is nothing else but a puddle of sin, death, hell, and
of all evil: and so the whole law, especially the ceremonial, are Gal. 4.9.
beggarly rudiments of the world.

I speak not this to disgrace the law, neither does Paul so mean; for it is
holy, righteous, spiritual, divine: but because Paul is in the matter of
justification, it is, as Vbi supra.
Luther observes, exceeding necessary, that he should speak of the law as of a
very contemptible thing. Wherefore, when Satan assaults thee with the terrors
of the law, banish that stutting and stammering Moses far from thee: let him
utterly be suspected as an heretic, or as an excommunicate person, worse then
the Pope, worse then the devil himself, quoth Luther: bu^ out of the matter
of justification, and conflict of conscience, reverence Moses as a great
Prophet, as a man of God, even as God.

In the civil life Moses and Christ agree: for our Savior said, he came not
to destroy, but to Mat. 5.17.
fulfill the law; but in the spiritual life, the one cannot abide the other:
for Gal. 3.11.
no man is justified by the la; but the just shall ^^ue by faith. And therefore
when Christ is present, the law must depart out of the conscience, and leave
the bed, which is so Esaias 28.20.
strait that it cannot hold two, to Christ alone. Let him only reign in
righteousness, in peace, joy, life, that the soul may sleep and repose it
self in the multitude of his mercies sweetly without any terror of the law,
sin, death, hell. And thus you see the law tyranniseth over our consciences,
as the cruel tutor does over his unfortunate Ward, till God in fullness of
time gives us freedom by Christ.

When the time was full come] Not by fatal necessity, but by Gods
appointment. For there is a time for all things, and Almighty God does all
things in his due time; he created and redeemed us in his due time, preserves,
justifies, sanctifies in his due time, and he will also glorify us in his
due time.

Now the coming of Christ in the flesh, is called the fullness of time for
many respects: as, 1. For the John 1.16.
fullness of grace received by his coming. 2. Because Christ is the fulfilling
of the 2. Cor. 1.20.
promises of God, as being in him, yea and amen. 3. Because the Romans 10.4.
Law and the Lu^. 1.70.
Prophets are fulfilled in him. 4. Because the times from Christ are the 1.
Cor. 10.1^.
ends of the world, and it was fit he should come so late, when the time was
full, for Aquin. in loc.
two reasons especially: 1. Because Christ is a Lord, yea the Lord, and
therefore most meet there should be great preparation, and long expectation of
so puissant a person. 2. Because Christ is the grand Physician of the world,
and therefore very requisite al sinners, his patients, should thoroughly Matthew.
9.12. The whole need not a Physician.
feel their sickness and misery before he came to visit and redeem them; vt
conuincerentur homines de morbo, vt quantum ad defectum scientiae in lege
naturae, and quantum ad defectum virtutis in lege scripta.



His Sonne] God is father of All men, and all things, by creation generally.
His elect, by adoption specially. Christ, by nature, singularly. See before the
Creed: Art. His only Son.

Made of a woman] In expounding this clause, we must take heed of sundry wicked
heresies, on the left hand, and on the right. On the left; first, of August.
b^res. 44.
Paulus Samosatenus, and Idem. b^res. 45
Fotinus, affirming that Christ had his being and beginning from his mother
Mary: whereas the Scripture teaches plainly, that Christ was made of the seed
of David according to the Romans 1.2.
flesh: not according to his person, for that is eternal. In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God. Again, we must
take heed of Iren^us. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Ebion, holding, that Christ was not conceived of the holy Ghost, but begot of
Joseph: and the reason of his madness is taken hence; because Mary is called a
woman, not a virgin. Gloss. and August. contra F^ustum, lib. 23. cap. 7. and
Thom. 3. ^ p. quaest. 28. ar. 1. ad 3.^.
Our answer is, that a woman in scripture does not always signify the married,
or one that has known a man: but sometime it does only denotate the sex, as
Genesis 3.12. The woman which thou gave to be with m^, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat. Eua must needs be a virgin, because so soon as she was made she
was married: and yet the text calls her woman at that time, when there could
be no time for man to corrupt her.

On the right hand we must shun the rocks of Valentinus and Nestorius: of
(...). haer. 11.
Valentinus, who taught, Christ had not his body from Mary but that he brought
it with him from heaven, and passed through the womb of the virgin, as water
through a conduit pipe: contrary to the text here; made of a woman. Gorran. in
loc.
Ex muliere, non in muliere: not in a woman, but of a woman. And the
preposition Aquin. in loc.
ex, notes the matter, as an house is made of timber and stone; bread is made
of wheat; wine, of grapes: and therefore Christ had the materials of his body
from Mary: so some copies have it here, Erasmus annot. in loc.
(...), not (...). Yet Christ had not his formale principium of Mary, for the
holy Chost was agent in his wonderful conception: and therefore fitly said
here to be borne, or as we read, to be made; not begotten of a woman.

By this also we may shun Nestorius his rock, who thought Mary might not be
called the mother of the Son of God: for the text is plain; God sent his
Son made of a woman: Ergo, the Son of God was the son of Mary. For the
confutation of this error, the famous Council of Ephesus was assembled,
wherein it was Magdeburg. Cent. 5. Col. 889.
concluded, and that in the first canon, that Mary should be called the mother
of God. See before, the Creed; Art. Borne of the virgin Mary.

Bond to the law] Though he were Lord of the law, yet made he himself subject
to the law, circumcised according to the law, and presented in the Temple,
according to the law; yea it executed upon him all the jurisdiction it had over
us. It does by good right accuse, convince, condemn us. For alas, all of us
are Psalm. 14.4.
sinners, and by nature the children of Ephesians. 2.3.
(...): but Christ did no sin, neither was there 1. Pet. 2.22.
guile f^und in his mouth: yet notwithstanding the law was no less cruel
against this innocent and blessed lamb, then it was against us cursed and
damnable sinners: yea much more rigorous. For it made him guilty before God of
all the sins of the whole world. It terrified and oppressed him with such an
heaviness of spirit, that he sweat blood; and in fine, condemned him to death,
even the death of the Cross. Thus Christ was made bond unto the law, to
redeem them which were bond unto the law: for he died for our sins, and
endured all this for our sakes; and so being under the law, conquered the law
by a Luther in loc.
double right: first, as the Son of God, and Lord of the law: secondly, in
our person, which is as much as if our selves had overcome the law; for his
victory is ours.

And therefore remember always this sweet and comfortable text in the midst of
all dangers, all assaults of tyrants, all temptations of Satan, in the hour of
death especially, saying to the law; Thou have no power over me; for God the
Father has sent his Son to redeem me from thy bondage; thou do accuse,
terrify, condemn in vain: for I will Augustine. manuel. cap. 23.
creep into the hole which bloody Longinus made with his spear in my Saviors
side There will I hide my self from all my foes; I will plunge my conscience
in his wounds, death, victorious resurrection, glorious ascension; besides him
I will see nothing, I will hear nothing. 1. Cor. 15.56.
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks
be unto God, which has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Defense for not subscribing, part. 1. cap 9.
The Nouelists exception against our translating natural sons, is idle: for
our Communion book does not call us natural sons, as Christ is Gods
natural Son by eternal generation: but as it were naturalized by spiritual
regeneration, adopted through election and grace: so Paul elsewhere terms us
Romans 8.17.
Cohe^res with Christ. Neither does this paraphrase wrong the Patriarks before
the law, nor the Prophets under the law: for as I have noted out of Martin
Luther; Chirst, who came in the flesh once, comes in the spirit daily, crying
Abba Father, as it follows in the text: he is one Heb. 13.8.
yesterday, and to day, and shall be the same for ever. Yesterday, before the
time of his coming in the flesh: today, now he is revealed in fullness of
time: For ever the same lamb of God, Apoc. 13.8.
slain from the beginning of the world. The Luther. in loc.
Fathers then had Christ in spirit; which holy spirit made them free from the
bondage of the law: so that they and we are saved by one and the same grace, by
one and the same faith in one and the same Anglican. Confess. art. 7.
Christ.

How the blessed Spirit cries in our hearts, assuring our spirit that we are
the children of God; helping our infirmities, and making request for us with
sighs, which cannot be expressed; see before, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. This Epistle does accord with the Gospel, which intimates in
particular, how Christ became the Son of man, that he might make us the
sons of God: how Christ is Jesus and Emmanuel. Both fit the time, that in the
midst of Christmas our soul might magnify the Lord, and our spirit rejoice in
God our Savior: who was made of a woman, and made bond unto the law, to
redeem those who were bound unto the law: that we might be sons and heirs
of God through him.

The Gospel. MATTHEW. 1.1. Liber generationis, Jesus Christi, filij David, filij
Abraham.
SVmma Theologiae Scriptura, summa scripturae Euangelium, summa Euangelij
(...): summa summarum Jesus Christus, filius David, filius Abraham; ille
primus, ille postremus: Alpha legis, Omega Euangely: principium (...) Amen.
August. lib. 5. de ciuit. cap. 18.
Velatus in veteri Testamento, reuelatus in nouo: in illo praedictus, in isto
praedicatus. Vno spiritu dicam breuissime, nihil aliud continet verbum Domini
nisi verbum Dominum.

Innuit hoc in praesenti^itulo Matthaeus; annuit Paulus ad Corinthios Cap. 2.
verse. 2.
prim^. Non statui quicquam inter vos scire nisi Iesum Christum crucifixum.
Apertius ait Augustinus confessionum quinto, cap. 4. Infoelix homo qui scit
caetera omnia, te autem nescit: beatus autem quite scit, etiamsi illa omnia
nesciat: qui vero te and illa nouit, non propter illa beatior, sed propter te
solum beatissimus. Est ars artium, and scientia scientiarum, ea legere and
agere quae narrantur in hoc libro generationis filij David, filij Abraham.

Cuius frontispicij duo sunt luminae: Inscriptio Euangelij. Descriptio Christi.

Inscriptionis (vt ita loquar) duo praecipus sunt radij resp^cientes
Euangelium: 1. Quod, (...). 2. Quod (...). Descriptionis item duo; splendet
^nim Mal^c. ^.2.
sol iustitiae Nomine, Proprio: Jesus. Appellatiuo: Christus.
Genere, Filius David, Filius Abraham.



Vbi quatuor problemata veniunt examinanda: 1. Curhos potissimum duos ex tam
longa Parentum Christi serie Euangelista nominauerit? 2. Cur Dauidem Abrahamo,
iuniorem seniori anteposuerit? 3. Ad quem referatur secundus genetiu^s* filij,
ad Christum, an ad Dauidem? 4. Quomodo Christus and filius David, and filius
Abraham?


Ad haec omnia fusius explicanda Hicron. ad Demetriadem. Tom. 1. sol. 62.
Tulliani flu^ius siccaretur ingenij, credo Terrullianus non sufficeret. Ego
pr^inde cum In Epitaphio Nepo^ian.
Hieronymo sequar eos. qui terrarum situs in breui tabella pingunt: adumbrata,
non expressa dabo: and in his (vt aliquando Epist. 33.
Synesius in re dissimili) faciam hercle quod Echo facit, voces quas accepi
fidelissime reddam. Bucan. praef. loc. com.
Vt Aeschylum poetam dicere solitum fuisse narrat Athanaeus, tragoedias suas
esse particulas de magni coenis Homeri: sic omni studio contendi ex
instructissimis optimorum authorum mensis selectiores portiunculas decerpere.
Vos spectatissimi conuiuae pro sapientia vestra gustate, sed edent^l^; fercula
siquidem istiusmodi more candido deuoranda, non ore canino laceranda.

Inprimis occurrit libri consideratio, (...); causae vero quae s^nctissimos
Euangelistas ad scribendum impulere, partim communes, partim speciales.

Communes erant duae: Prima, vt credamus Christum. Securd^, vt credamus in
Christum.

1. Vt cred^mus Christum; and hae^ dicitur h^storic^ sides: ita Lucas in
prologo: Visum est mihi (praestantissime Theophile) omnia alte repetita ordine
ad te scribere, vt cog noscas little verborum de quibus cruditus es historicam
veritatem.

2. (...) credam^s in Christum; and hae^ nisi Satanae tentationibus Aug. epist.
80.
cedat and caedat saluisica fides est. Ita Ioannes Euangelij cap. 20. verse. 31.
Haec scrip^a sunt vt credatis Iesum ^sse Chris^um illum, and vt credentes vitam
habeatis in nomine ^ius. Has rations (et (...) ^atthaeum and Marcum) omnibus
Euangelistis f^^sse communes apparet, quia men's omnium eadem, idem spiritus,
cor vnum, via vna.

Speciales autem, quae singulis occasionem Euangelium scribendi dedere, partim
colliguntur e Scriptura. Coniectura.

Escriptura: Lucas enim, cap. 1. verse. 1. significat se ad historiam
componendam impulsum* quod intellexerat conatos esse ^ultos Euangelium texere,
qui parum fideliter id praestitissent. (...), non Stella in loc.
Matthaeus, non Marcus, Maldon^t. in loc.
sed Apelles, vt Beda; Basilides, vt Ambrosius; Merinth^s, vt memorat
Epiphaenius: aliae ferebantur etiam eo tempore euangeliae Eras^us in loc.
Nazaraeorum, Matthiae, Nicodemi, Thomae, quae postea velut apochrypha reiecit
Ecclesia. (...), conatisunt, sed quod conatiminime perfecerunt: vt Hom. 1. in
Luc.
Origenes, In cap. 1. Luc.
Ambrosius, De consensu Euangelistarum, lib. 4. cap. 8.
Augustinus annotarunt.

E coniectura: Ioannes ab Episcopis Asiae rogatus, Euangelicam narrationem
aduersus Haereticos exarauit. Cum enim Ebionaei, Cerinthiani, Nicolaitae
diuinitatem Christ's iam iam negarent, videratque caeteros Euangelistas in ea
confirmanda minus olei posuisse; ad eam potissimum probanda^ Euangelium sibi
scribendum exist^mauit: vt Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 11. Epiphanius haeresi 51.
Hieronymus in In vita Joan. Evangelist.
catalogo: nec non Augustinus in prooemio expositionis in Ioannem, and reliqui
fere omnes theologici tractatores.

Reddit alteram Hist. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Eusebius causam, quod visis Euangelijs Matthaei, Marci, Lucae, probarit
equidem omniae vtpote vera; sed quaedam esse praetermissa quae praecesserant
ante baptistae captiuita^em, and haec adijciend^ curauit.

Refertur apud Cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 569.
Magdeburgenses etiam tertia, nempe quod animaduerterat Euangelistas reliquos
historiae magis studi^sos, admodum paucas Christi conciones recitare, quibus
eum abundare cernimus.

Matthaeus autem iste noster Hieron. preoem. in Mat. and Sixth. Senen. Biblioth.
lib. 1. sol. 17.
Hebraeorum causa suam contexuit historiam. Cum enim illis di^s praedicasset
and ^am ad Aethiopes transiturus erat, Hebraico sermon descripsit Euangelium,
vt haberent certam non modo narrationem, sed quasi Magdeburg. cent. 1. lib. 2.
col. 576.
methodum vn^uersae religionis Christianae. Sic Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1. sic
Athanasius in synopsi: sic Eusebius histor. lib. 5. cap. 8. sic Augustinus lib.
1. de consensu Euangelistarum, cap. 2. sic Theophylactus and alij quam plurimi
doctores, quasi ex maiorum traditione docuerunt.

At quis ex Hebraico in Graecum verterit, pauci dicunt, and qui dicunt,
contradicunt. Maldonat. prooem. in Mat. cap. 5.
Athanasius Iacobu^, Prooem. iu Matthew.
Theophylactus Ioannem: Praefat. in Mat. quaest. 25.
Abulensis ipsum Matthaeum transtulisse putat. Augustinus dicit incertissimum,
cuius ego iudicium credo certissimum. In vita Matt^aei.
Hieronymus Hebraice se vidisse testatur in bibliotheca Caesariensi, quam
Pamphilus Martyr extruxerat: hodie inter Iudaeos reperitur, and typis etiam
excusune prodijt; quod an idem illud sit quod Hieronymus viderat ipse non
disputo, constare clamitant nonnulli; verum ego cum Annot. in Matthew. 1.
Erasmo malim extare quam constare.

Si quis adhuc desiderat plura de rationibus Matthaei, quare scripserit, de
loco vbi scripserit, de te^pore quando scripserit, adeat ille Vbi supra.
bibliotheca^ Sixti Senen. and haec omnia disceptantes copiosissime
Magdeburgenses, cent. 1. lib. 2. in vita Mat. Caesare^ Baroniu^, Ecclesiast.
annalium, Tom. 1. fol. 288. Alphons. Tostatu^, in prolog. Matthew. quaest. 2.
Atque sic accepistis (amplissimi viri) quo consilio Matthaeus Marloratus
argument. in Euang. Matthew.
praedicandi munere non contentus, etiam scriptis ad posteros transmittere
voluerit hunc librum de generatione Jesus Christi; omnem scilicet mouebat
i^pidem vt no^ modo viuus* sed etiam Maldonat. praesat. in Euangel. cap. 6.
mortuus aedificet Hierosolymam sanctam Dei ciuitatem, vt quemadmodum ad
mortuos (testante 1. Epist. cap. 4.6
Petro) praedicatum erat euangelium, ita etiam per mortuos annunciaretur. Haec
ego explicate, vos vt placuerit applicate: vel ipsum biblij nomen apud
Academicos excitat attentionem; cui magis arridet biber quam liber, indignus
omme Aca^emici; cui magis alius quis quam iste liber, indignus nomine
Christiani.

Inepte Stancarus apud Lib. de Christo mediatore, cap. 2
Bellarminum; Plus valet vnus Petrus Lombardus quam centum Lutheri, ducenti
Melancthones, tercenti Bullingeri, quadringenti Petri Martyrs, quingenti
Caluini. Rectius ego, Plus est in vna sententiola aurei huius enchiridij, quam
in omnibus Liuij, Platonis, Plutarchi, Demosthenis, addo Tullij, Aristotelis,
Theophrasti spaciosis voluminibus. Incomparabiliter pulchrior est haec
Margarita Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum, vt olim Epist. 9.
Augustinus Hieronymo.

Quemadmodum per se facundi si cum Cicerone conferantur protinus obmutescunt:
ita caeteri doctores cum Hieronymo composi^i vix sapere, vix loqui, vix viuere
videantur, vt Epist, praesix. Tom. 4. oper. Hieronymi.
Erasmus scrip^^t egregius ille prosopolatra: verum si co^parentur vni
Matthaeo, sancti spiritus Amanuensi, separatim singuli, coniunctim vniuersi,
vel ipsi P^tres velut inf^ntuli conticescunt, vt aliquando Lutherus, Ego non
curo mill Augustinos, mill Cyprianos, mill ecclesias.

Imo fatentur e pontifici^s nonnulli, Philip. Mor^aeus praesa^. lib. de Missa.
Gerson scilicet d^ctissi^us ille cancellarius Parisiensis, and ill^strissimus
Ioannes Picu^ Mirandulanus, amplecti se magis opinionem hominis laici, Idiotae,
infantuli scripturam adf^rentis: quam ipsius summi pontificis iudicium aut
vniuersalis concilij decretum, quod nullum habeat in verbo Dei fundamentum.
Haec veriora sunt quam vt negari possint, notiora quam vt tractari debeant. Ad
reliqua pergo.

(...)] Ista vox generatio mire doctorum exercuit ingenia: quidam enim
existimant hunc non esse titulum libri, sed initium tantummodo genealogiae
Christi; Alijputant esse titulum, sed vniuerso libri arg^mento non conuenire:
Al^ and titulum, and totius titulum, and totam Euangelij summam in se complecti.

Negantes titulum interpretantur (...), narrationem, catalogum sieve recensi^^m,
vt Genesis 5.1. Hic est liber gener^tionis Adam: id est, haec est narratio
genealogiae ab Adam ductae. Sic in (...) Caluinus, in annotationibus Beza, in
expositione ecclesi ^stic^ super Matthaeum Augustinus Marloratus. Alij
concedu^t oss^ titulum libri, sed ad r^tum non extend^* na^ vt M^s^s i^scripsit
penta^euchi volumen, Librum geneseos, cum agat de rerum generatione solo capite
prim^; vel, vt rectius Al^^, Abulensis.
Beres^sh, qui^ primum erat illius libri verbum: Ita Matthaeus ^ebr^ice
scribens, Hebraeorum more nomen imposuit libro ex eo quod refertur in exordio,
scilicet ex genealogia, (...) appellauit: Maldonat. in loc.
huic expositioni fauet authorum pars and mayor and melior.

Nonnulli tamen aff^rmant hunc and esse titulum, and non vnam modo part^m, sed
in^egrum Euangel^^ argumentum declarare. Nam vt Lib. 2. fol. 75.
Sixtus Senensis coll^git e Rabin^s, Hebr^a vox qua Matthaeus vtitur hoc in
loco significat non (...) generationem, sed etiam totum vitae ^^rsum; vt Genesis
6.9. Noe dicitur perfectus in generationibus suis: id e^^, in omnibus vitae
partibus* Ab^lensis in Matthew. 1.
vt perinde liber si^ ^^^erationis (...) Christi, ac sidiceret, liber de vit^
Christi, om^ia illius ge^ta ab incarnatione vsque ad (...). Vti Lucas (...)
nominau^t historiam eor^^ omnium quae caepit Jesus and facere and docere:
Actorum 1. verse. 1. Quae quidem interpretatio, fateor ingen^e (...) maxim
placet, and quia plen^or, and quia planior; in quo non tam M^ldonatum, aut
Alphonsum Tostatum, quam (...) script. v^^b. generatio.
Ill^ricum sequor. Faustus itaque, qui negabat hoc Euangelium esse, quia non
Euangelium, sed l^ber ge^erationis inscriberetur; and impius erat, and
imperitus, non intelligens omnem Christi vitam generationem appell (...) verum
ego mittam infestum hunc Manichaeum, cuius ineptas cauillationes aduersus
Matthaei titulum abunde satis doctissimus pater Lib. 2. contra Faus^um
Manichaeum, cap. 6.
Augustinus exagitauit, Tom. 6. editionis Frobenianae, fol. 147.

Cur a^tem generationis in singulari, non generationum Euangelista dixerit a
nonnullis quaeritur, quorum alij respondent caus^m e^se, quod cum duas Christus
generationes habuerit, humanam and diuinam, de sola humana. Matthaeus ageret,
vt qui de di^in^ sciebat e^se di^^um Esaiae 53. generationem eius quis
enarrabit? Alijeum Hieronymo dicunt E^angelistam en^merare generat^ones certe
multas: at Quia propter Ch^^sti generationem induc^ntur caeterae. Thom. caten^n
loc.
vnam t^^en quaerere Jesus Christi filij David, filij Abrahae. Sic enim
describitur Christus ^x nomine and genere.

Ex nomine Proprio: Jesus. Apell^t^^o: Christus.

Jesus nomen proprium, Christus appellati^um, Jesus nomen naturae; Christus
personae, sieve nomen dignitatis and ^ssicij vt Theologi loquuntur. Ita
Tertullianus ad^ersus Praxeam disputat Christum non esse nomen sed
appellationem.

At obijci solet, inconuenienter hoc diciproprium, and singular nomen illud de
quo propheta, Vocabitur nouum nomen, cum in veteri Testamento pluribus fuerit
impositum.

Respondet Part. 3. qu^^t. 37. art. 2.
Aquinas apposite, nomen Jesus alijs conuenire secundum aliquam particularem and
temporalem salutem: sed secundum vniuersalem and spiritualen^ hoc nomen esse
proprium Christo, qui saluum facit populum suum a peccatis little, vt Matthaeus
interpretatur, huius capituli verse. 21.

Jesus enim Naue, Jesus Sydrach, Jesus Iosedech, Typi tantummodo fuerunt huius
nostri Jesus. In Jesus Naue celebratur potentia: in Jesus Sydrach scientia: In
Jesus Iosedech bonitas: Jesus ergo Naue figura Christi regis: Jesus Sydrach
figura Christi prophetae: Jesus Iosedech, figura Christi sacerdotis: Vt
explicatissime doctores in tertium Zachariae, nec non Eusebius in lib. 4. de
demonstratione Euangelica, cap. 29. and Augustinus lib. 12. contra Faustum
Manichaeum, cap. 36. Contendunt alij, nomen hoc ^tiam Swarez. tom. 2 in 3.
Thom. disputat. 15. sect. 2.
materialiter acceptum, aptissime Christo vnt, soli, semper conuenire: ita
tradidit Petrus Galat. lib. 3. de arcanis, c. 20. and Sanctes Pagninus in
interpretatione nominum Hebraicoru^: and Iansenius, concordiae cap. 7. Qui
quidem omnes arcte tenent, accurateque defendunt, nomen Jesus Naue, Jesus
Sydrach, Jesus Iosedech, non fuisse conscriptum ijsdem omnino literis: nomen
enim eorum Iehosua, Christi vero Iesua; Ichosua autem significat, Deus
saluabit; and Jesus in praesents saluatorem; atque sic vni Christo, soli
Christo, semper Christo congruit hoc saluificum nomen, excogitatum a Deo,
vocatum ab Angelo, inditum a Marta and Ios^pho.

Urgent adhuc Iudaei; quod M^ssiae nomen est Emmanuel, secundum illud Isaiae
vaticinium, Ecce virgo concipiet and pariet filium, and vocabitur nomen eius
Emmanuel.

Huic obiectiunculae Matthaeus occurrit in praesenti capitulo, Vocabis nomen
eius Iesum, and vt ita vocari debuisse Maldonat. in Matthew. 1.21.
probet, Esaeiae locum citat: vt impleretur, inquit, quod Dominus per
prophetam, vocabis nomen eius Emmanuel, id est, nobiscum Deus. Emmanuel igitur
and Jesus vt (argute Lib. 3. contra Marcion.
Tertullianus) ^dem sensu, vtcunque non idem sono. Idem enim est, Deu^
nobiscum, and esse Deum seruatorem nostrum, vt site Paulus ad Romanos octauo;
Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? Accepimus plura bona Deo regenerante, quam
mala Adamo degenerante. Mayor enim dignitas Euangelica quam Angelica.

Intellexerat hoc qui non vidit omnia sanctus Bernardus; Alia nomina (inquit)
sunt Maiestatis; at Jesus est nomen misericordiae. Nam esse Dei verbum, esse
filium, esse Dei Christum, ad eius praecipue gloriam pertinet. At nomen Jesus
saluatorem sonat: quo quidem and illius gloria and saelus nostra continetur.
Ideoque merito quidem ex Ecclesiae instituto ad hoc salutare nomen assurgimus,
and genua flectimus; at hoc non aed syllabicam compositionem, sed ad saluificam
expositionem, diuini numinis maiestatem reuerentes, and pro salute nobis per
sacrum illud Act. 4.12.
nomen impensa gratias exhibentes: Hoc siquidem nomen est super omne nomen, ad
quod omne genu flectatur caelestium, terrestrium, infernorum. Ad Philippenses
2. verse. 10.

Elegantissime Lucanus vt Erasmus in Epist. Hi^ron. ad G^rontiam.
poeta: Quid satis est, si Roma parum? Ita quidem ego, Quid satis erit illi,
cui non sufficiant ista?

Si Hieron. ^pist. ad Eustochium.
cuncta corporis membra verterentur in linguas, and omnes artus humana voce
resonarent, nihil hercle dignum hoc nomine, hoc numine proferrem. I stud enim
orationibus potius inuocandum quam rationibus illustrandum. Augustine.
O bone Jesus! esto mihi Jesus. Noli Domine, noli sic attendere malum meum, vt
obliuiscaris bonum tuum: etsi ego admisi vnde me damnare possis, tu non
amisisti vnde me saluare soles: es Jesus, ^^go volens; es Christus, ergo
poteus: est enim vox (...) appellatio dignitatis and officy (sicut ante monui:)
In veteri siquide^ lege reges and sacerdotes Vncti sieve Christi dicebantur: Vt
Esaiae 45.1. Haec dicit Dominus Christo suo Cyro. Et Psalmo 105. Nolite tangere
Christos meos. Jesus autem vnctus oleo laetitiae prae consortibus (vt Psalm.
45.8.
Psalmista loquitur:) Joan. 10.31.
(...), non modo Christus Domini; sed etiam Christus, Dominus, vnctus and rex
and sacerdos: Illyricus in clau. script. verb. Christus.
Regis munera tria, iudicare, regere, tueri suos* sacerdotes item tria; docere,
orare, sacrificare. Quae quidem omnia nunc in coelis; olim in terris agebat
Jesus rex and s^cerdos noster; rex, vtpote qui filius David; sacerdos, vtpote
qui filius Abraham, vbi quatuor occurrunt examinanda.

Primum est, cur hos potissimum duos ex tam longa parentum Christi serie
Euangelist^ nominauerit? Cuius (vt Caten. in Mat. 1. and part. 3. qu. 31. art.
2.
Aquinas explicat) est ratio multiplex.

Prima, quod his potissimum promissio venturi Messiae facta fuerit: Abrahamo,
Genesis 22. verse. 18. In femine tuo benedicentur omnes Gentes terrae; quod
Apostolus intell^gendum esse de Christo clare docet ad Galatas 3.16. Abrahamo
dictae sunt promissiones, and femini eius, non dicit and feminibus, quasi in
multis, sed quasi in vno, and femini tuo, qui est Christus.

Dauidi vero iurauit Dominus: De fructu ventris tui ponam super sedem tuam:
Psalm. 132.11. Vnde populus Iudaecrum vt regem honorifice suscipientes vndi^j
clamabat, acclamabat; Hosanna filio David: acquiescunt in h^c expositione
Chrysostomus, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Irenaeus.

Secunda ratio, quia Christus eratrex, sacerdos, and propheta. David autem rex
and propheta, sacerdos Abraham, vtpote cui dixerat Dominus, Sum mihi vaccam
triennem, and arietem annorum trium: turturem quoque and co^umbam. Genesis 15.9.

Tertia ratio; quoniam in Abrahamo primo incepit circumsio: in David autem
maxim ma^ifesta Dei electio: Secundum illud, Act. 18.22.
Elegi virum iuxta cormeum. V^riusque, proinde silius specialissime dicitur a
M^tthaeo Christus, vt ostendatur esse in salute^ and circumcisioni and
electioni Gentil^um: Ita Patres, ita scholastici docuere: verum si liceret
vestra bona cum venia meam hic interponere sententiam; ego fortasse dicerem
Abrahamum and Dauidem specialiter in hoc Euangelicae structurae frontispicio
collocari, quia duae sunt principales Euangelij parts, sides and poenitentia.
E^inebat in Abrahamo fides, in Dauide poenitentia: quemadmodum itaque Christus
secundum carnalem genarationem; ita Christianus secundum spiritualem
regenerationem habendus est filius David, filius Abraham.

-- Si quid tu rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his vtere mecum.
Quod attinet ad secundum problema: Hugo Cardinal. in loc.
quadruplex est causa quare Matthaeus Abrahamo Dauidem anteposuerit.

1. Quia David erat regno clarior: eleganter enim Lib. ad Scapulam.
Tertullianus; Imperator omnibus mayor est, dum solo Deo minor est.

Scriptum in Curia Wormatiensi^ sicut Manlius loc. com.
Astra Deo nil maius habent, nil Caesare terra.

2. Ne series genealogiae turbaretur: Hebraeorum enim mos est, vbi multa
recensent, illud vnde volunt incipere vltimo loco ponere: vt Genesis 1.1. In
principio creauit Deus caelum and terram, terra autem erat inanis: Ita liber
generationis Jesus Christi, filij David, filij Abraham. Abraham autem genuit
Isaac.

3. Quia Jesus in mundum venit, non Matthew. 9.13.
iustos vocare, sed peccatores: Euangelij proinde prologo David peccator
Abrahae iusto praeponitur. Et hoc solamen miseris and Euangelium vere: nam
quomodo Jesus potest esse non Jesus peccatori, cum ipse fuerit peccatoris summi
filius, adulteri, homicidae, blasphemi David: qui non adhuc natus liberauit
parents a peccatis quomodo tam glorificatus non liberabit filios?

Animaduertere licet omnes fere qui petebant a Christo beneficia, solere prius
eum Dauidis filium appellare: Ita mulier Cananaea, Miserere mei Domine fili
David: Ita Bartimaeus, Marci. 10. Jesus fili David miserere mei. Ad hunc etiam
modum vnusquisque considenter ad gratiae thronum accedere potest and debet: O
Domine Jesus Dauidis fili, miserere mei. Sum ego fateor homo peccator, at tu
Jesus non hominis modo filius, sed hominis peccantissimi, filius David. Audacius
adhuc Loc. com. tit. de Christi passione.
Lutherus: Ignoscite quaeso; Christus omnium maximus latro, fur, sacrilegus,
homicida, scilicet reputatiue coram hominibus, imputative coram Deo: quoniam
existens hostia pro peccatis totius mundi portauit in corpore suo; peccata Noe,
qui fuit ebrius; peccata Pauli, qui fuit blasphemus; peccata David, qui fuit
homicida: non miseranda necessitate, sed miserante potius volu^tate, sicut
optime distinxit Augustinus ad Laurentium enchiridij cap. 49.

Portauit siquidem omnia omnium peccata, qui nullam ne minimam habuit labeculam
de proprio. M^hi compatitur, mihitristis, mihi dolet, inquit De fide. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
Ambrosius; in me and pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret.

Ita mihi verbum caro factum est; verbum; quid potentius? in initio enim erat
verbum: caro factum est, quid imp^tentius? Omnis enim caro foenum. Attamen qui
fecit homi^em factus est filius hominis, impij hominis, filius David. Augustine.
de ^ate^bizand. rudibus, cap. 4.
Magna miseria superbus homo; sed mayor misericordia humilis Deus. Quid
rependam ei pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi? Aug. sermon. 115. de temp.
Primo nihil eram, and fecit me: perieram, quaesiuit me; quaerens inuenit me;
inuentum redemit me; redemptum liberauit me; de host fecit seruum, de seruo
fratrem, de fratre cohaeredem: Ille qui non nouit peccatum, pro me factus est
peccatum, and filius nequissimi peccatoris David.

4. David Abrahamo, junior seniori praefertur; quia licet vtrique Messiae dicta
fuerit promissio, tamen ea quae Dauidi facta, and recentior and specialior, and
honorificentior; ideoque Iudaeis gratior, and omnium ore magis celebrata. Nam
interrogati a Iudaeis Pharisaei; Quid vobis videtur de Christo? incunctanter
responde^t, filius David; and ipsa Matthew. 12.23.
populaeris turba vifis admirabilibus Christi, dicebat illico, nunquid hic est
filius David? haec scilicet opinio tenaciter haerebat omnium animis, oportere
Messiam esse filium David; inter Iudaeos praecipue (quorum gratia praesens hoc
opus excogitatum) adeo manifestum erat, Aug. de vera Religione.
vt nulla doctorum paucitas, nulla indoctorum turba dissentiret.

Hanc rationem afferre video, Chrysostomum, Euthymium, Theophylactum, aliosque
tractatores quam plures; and hanc ego long clarissimam, eloquioque sacro
conuenientissimam esse determino.

De tertia vero quaestione: Erasmus and Maldonat. in loc.
Secundus genitiuus filij co^uenienter and ad Dauidem and ad Christum referri
potest: ad Dauidem; erat enimille filius Abraham; ac sidiceret Euangelista:
Liber generationis Jesus Christi filij David, qui David fuit filius Abrahae: Ad
Christum etiam; erat enim ille vtriusque filius, ac si Matthaeus ad hunc modum
enucleatius, hic est liber generationis Jesus Christi filij David and Abraham.
Sed quo modo iam vltimo quaeritur, and ipse breuius fortasse enarrabo, quam res
tanta dici debeat.

Isaias sacrorum vatum Homerus (vt eum appellat Lib. 5. de ass.
Bud^eus) admiranda canit sed credenda. Cap. 9. verse. 6. Paruulus natus est
nobis, filius datus est nobis: in quem locum Hom. 1. de natiuit. Christi.
Eusebius Emissenus apposite, Datus ex diuinitate, natus ex virgin; natus qui
sentiret occasum, datus qui ^esciret exordium; natus qui and matre esset
junior, datus quo nec pater esset antiquior; and sic qui erat, datus est; qui
no^ erat, natus est; in mundum nempe ve^it, qui mundum condidit: ad terrena
descendit, and caelestia non dereliquit; and affuit, and inde non defuit, vt
Epist. 3.
Augustinus olim Volusiano: humana natura accessit, diuina non recessit: illa
fuit assumpta, ista non consumpta; vel (vt Hom. 2. de natiuit. Christ.
Emissenus acutissime) verbum caro factum est, non deposita, sed seposita
Maiestate. Aug. confess. lib. 2. cap. 42.
Oportet enim Mediatorem inter Deum and hominem, habere aliquid simile Deo,
aliquid simile homini, ne in vtroque homini similis long esset a Deo; aut in
vtroque Deo similis long esset ab homine: Christus igi^ur Idem ibidem. cap. 43.
inter mortales peccatores, and immortalem iustum, apparuit mortalis cum
hominibus, iustus cum Deo.

Quemadmodum enim flores (authore Protagora) solemn habent in caelo patrem,
solum in terra matrem: Ita Christus flos de Isai. 11.1.
Iesse, Patrem habuit in coelo sine matre; in terris autem matrem sine patre;
Emissenus vbi supro.
non alter ex patre, alter ex virgin; sed al^ter ex patre, aliter ex virgin:
de Deo Deus, de Deo patre Deus filius, inquit Sermon. de duplici natiuit. Christi.
Fulgentius: alter in persona, non alius in natura: semper apudpatrem, semper
cumpatre, semper de patre, semper in patre: Aug. ser. 4. de temp.
filius ex ipso, cum ipso, hoc quod ipse.

Verus etiam homo de homine, Lombard. ^. sent. did. 8.
propter hominem, secundum hominem, super homine^; vnus tamen idemque Jesus
Christus, Emmanuel, (...), nobiscum Deus; eiusde^ Mariae filius and parens. Ita
Paulus ad Galatas quarto, Misit Deus Filium suum factum de muliere. A and O,
Apocalyp. 1.8. id est, vt exponit Sixtu^. Senen. bib. lib. 2 pa. 37.
Epiphanius, homo and Deus. Nam A. quae inferne aperitur, humanam denotat
naturam: ^, quod superne apertum est innuit diuinam. Ipsum (inquit Hom. 1.
denatiuit. Christi.
Emissenus) sanguinem quem pro matre obtulit, antea de sanguine matris accepit:
and hoc, vt exclamat Bernardus, est singulariter mirabile and mirabiliter
singular. Thom. 3 part. q. 31. art. 5.
Secundum conditionem naturae natus ex foemina: suprae conditionem naturae,
naturae ex virgin.

Iam vero Deipara, (sicut historia sacra testatur) ex stirpe Dauidica; nec non
ex Abrahamist stemmate oriunda. Christus itaque, secundum vsitatam loquendi
consuetudinem apud Hebraeos, and filius David, and filius Abraham, ^on Erasmus
in loc.
ex ijsdem prognatus, sed ex eadem generis serie propagatus.

Atque sic ea, qua potui breuitate, quaestionibus is it is omnibus enodate
respondi; quantum attinet ad contentiosos non satis, quantum ad pacatos and
intelligentes plus forte quam satis; vt ad Bonifacium scripsit Epist. 23.
Augustinus.

Si quis expectet vt ego subtilius aliquid adijciam de Christi genealogia,
quaerat ille genealogicos fabulones; qui dum anigmata nescio quae conantur
explicare, lectorum animos inextricabilibus errorum labyrinthis solent
implicare.

Horum duo sunt genera; Iudaei veteres. Iudaizantes noui.

Illi a luce veritatis Aug. cont. aduers. Legis. lib. 2. cap. 7.
auersi, and ob hoc luci veritatis aduersi. Isti genealogiam Christi, Idem
contra Faustum. li. 22. cap. 34.
vel non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt. Ambo
(quod Contra literas Petiliani. lib. 3. cap. ^6.
Augustinus de Petiliano) Multa dicendo nihil dicunt, aut potius nil dicendo
multa dicunt. O mirabilem insaniam (inquit sanctissimus Idem contra Fau^tum.
lib. 17. cap. 3.
pater) aliquid de Christo narranti, nolle credi Matthaeo, and velle credi
Manichaeo. O curas hominum! quantum est in rebus inane! Excidium Troiae post
Homerum, aut (...), post Lucam and Matthaeum contexere. Paulus instituens
Timotheum abundare fecit eum praeceptis morum, institutisque Theologiae; sed 1.
Tim. 1.4.
inutiles de genealogiae quaestiones, and inaniloquia, non ab auribus modo, sed
ab orbis Christiam sinibus arcenda iudicauit. Odi semper ego Nonatores, etiam
recens antiquitatem amplexus sum. Itaque toto hoc sermon, quod a patribus
accepi, vobis tradidi: quorum omnium haec est summa. Liber excitat lectionem;
Liber generationis electionem; Jesus deuotionem; Christus obedientiam: filius
David spem; filius Abrahae sidem. In his siquid been, quia nostrum non est,
agnoscite; si quid male quia nostrum est, ignoscite. Humanum enim (a^t Ethic.
lib. 4. cap. de liberal.
Aristoteles) imo regium (vti Bucan. praef. loc. com.
Plutarchus) imo Christianum (inquit Consolat. ad Pammachium.
Hieronymus) idest, vestrum est, (ornatissimi viri) m^gna liberaliter dare,
parua libenter accipere. Gratia Domini nostri Jesus Christi filij David, filij
Abraham sit cum omnibus vobis, nunc and in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Ad Clerum habita Cantabrigiae pro gradu Doctoratus: Anno 1605.

The Epistle. ROMANS 12.1. I beseech you brethren by the mercifulness of God,
that you make your bodies a quick sacrifice, etc.
IT is well observed by In 6. ad Romans
Chrysostom, that all the sacred Epistles of this Apostle stand upon two legs
especially; to wit; Explications: or doctrines of holy faith. Applications: or
exhortations to godly life.



The former Chapters are spent in dogmaticall conclusions appertaining to
belief. The Ambros. Theophylact. Melancthon. in loc.
residue contain moral instructions of honest conversation and love: wherein
our Apostle teaches, how we should behave our selves to God and man; and that
by Gorran. in loc.
precept and pattern. By precept, in the 12, 13, 14, 15. Chapters: by pattern,
in the 16. Chapter.

This scripture shows how we must demean our selves to Aquin. in loc.
God, in Body: verse. 1. Make your bodies a quick sacrifice, etc. Soul: verse.
2. Fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by the
renewing of your mind.

I beseech you brethren] Two things induce men especially to suffer the words
of exhortation: opportunity, and importunity: The worth of the matter, and
zealous affection of the speaker. Saint Paul makes his loving affection
manifest in these sweet terms; I beseech you brethren by the mercifulness of
God. He might have commanded, as he told Philemon. 8.9.
Philemon; but for loves sake, he does rather entreat.

God the Father appeared in a 1. King. 19.12.
still and soft voice: God the Son was not a tiger, but a Ioh. 1.29.
lamb: God the holy Ghost came down, not in the form of a vulture; but in
the shape of a Luke 3.22.
dove: signifying hereby, that Preachers ought to use gentle means in winning
men unto God; herein resembling the good mother which has Bernard.
vbera and verbera, a teat so well as a rod: a dug to restore such as feel
their sin with the spirit of meekness: Gal. 6.1. but a rod to whip the
careless and senseless, lest they grow too wanton. And therefore Saint Paul,
who does here beseech the Romans out of his love; does adjure them also by the
mercifulness of God: that is, as Aquin. in loc.
some construe it, I beseech you by mine Apostolical authority, committed unto
me by Gods especialll mercy, 1. Cor. 7.25. as himself expounds himself in the
third verse of this Chapter: I say through the grace that is given to me: where
the Greek verb Erasmus annot. in loc.
(...), may be translated, I command: or, By the mercifulness of God showed
unto you: for as God is more bountiful, so you must be more dutiful. We may
not sin, that grace may abound: but on the contrary, because the grace of
God, that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, it teaches us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this present world.

The mercies of God to me, the mercies of God to you, be many and manifest. I
beseech you therefore by the riches of his abundant mercy, make your bodies a
quick sacrifice, etc.

Thus you see the zealous earnestness of the speaker: I come now to the
worthiness of the matter; concerning the Romans, and in them our selves, as
much as the salvation of our souls. I beseech you therefore mark what the
Spirit writes, and first observe Paul's order: Martyr in loc.
After justification he speaks of sanctification: herein intimating that good
works, as Lib. de fide and operious.
Augustine said; Non praecedunt iustificandum, sed sequuntur iustificatum: Not
go before, but after justification. Church homily of good works.
As the wheel turns round, not to the end that it may be made round, but
because it is first made round, therefore it turns round: so men are
sanctified because first justified; not justified because first sanctified. As
Aulus Fuluius when he took his son in the conspiracy with Catiline, said:
Ego te non Catilinae genui sed patriae. So God has not begotten us in Christ,
that we should follow that archtraitor Satan; but serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life: making our selves a quick sacrifice,
etc.

There are two kinds of sacrifices: Expiatory, for sin; which we cannot
offer. See epist. Dom. 3. Quadragesimae. Gratulatory, of thanks and praise,
which we can and must offer: and,

hereof there are Aquin. in loc.
three kinds according to the three sorts of goods; of the World. hereof there
are Aquin. in loc.
three kinds according to the three sorts of goods; of the Mind. hereof there
are Aquin. in loc.
three kinds according to the three sorts of goods; of the Body.

1. We must offer our goods of the world: Heb. 13.16. To do good and
distribute forget not; for with such sacrifices is God pleased. Prou. 19.17.
He that has mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord.

2. We must offer to the Lord the goods of our mind, by devotion and
contrition: Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifice of God, is a troubled spirit; a broken
and contrite heart O God shall thou not despise. When by divine meditation and
deuote prayer, we beat down the proud conceits of our rebellious hearts, we
kill, and offer up as it were our son Isaac; that which is most near, most
dear to us.

3. We must offer to the Lord the goods of our body; which are done, Patiendo,
by dying for the Lord. Faciendo, by doing that which is acceptable to the Lord.



Martyrdom is such a pleasing sacrifice, that as Ambrose said of his sister;
Appellabo martyrem and praedicabo satis: I will call her Martyr, and then I
shall be sure to commend her enough. See Epist. on Saint Steuens day.

S. Paul here means a sacrifice by doing; Romans 6.13.
Give your members as weapons of righteousness to God. For as Christ offered
up himself for us; so we made conformable, should offer up our selves unto
him. Martyr in loc.
Interpreters observe a great Emphasis in the word hostia, derived, as Ovid
notes, ab hostibus.

Victima quae dextra cecidit victrice, vocatur;
Hostibus a domitis hostia nomen habet.
And therefore seeing Christ has delivered us from the hands of all our
enemies, it is our duty to sacrifice perpetually to him, our selves and our
souls, and so live to him who died for us.

Lest we should err in our offering, Saint Paul shows all the Gorran. in loc.
causes: Efficient: our selves. Material: our bodies. Formal: quick and
holy. Final: acceptable to God.

Or (as Aquin. and Martyr.
other observe) S. Paul sets down four properties of a sacrifice: 1. Sound
and quick. 2. Sanctified and holy. 3. Pleasing. 4. Reasonable.

First, our sacrifice must be sound and quick; not blind, not lame, not seeble,
Malach. 1.8. We must not offer to the devil our youthful years, and lay our
old bones upon Gods altar: his sacrifice must be the fattest, and the fairest;
he must have both head and hinderparts: hereby signifying that we must remember
our Creator in the days of our nonage, so well as in the days of our dotage:
for if we defer our offering till the last hour, when sickness the bailiffe
of death has arrested us, and pain sickness attendant dulled our senses; it
cannot be called a quick, but a sick; not a living, but a dead offering. That
our sacrifice therefore may be quick, let us, I beseech you, begin quickly to
dedicate our selves unto God.

Or quicke] That is, Martyr in l^c.
willing: for those things are said to be quick which move of themselves; and
those dead which do not move, but by some outward violence: we may not then be
stocks and blocks in Gods holy service, doing no good but upon constraint of
law, and penalty of statute: such oblations are not acceptable, because they
be not quick. The Lord loves a cheerful giver and thanksgiuer. Nothing is
done well, but that only which is done with our will, freely, readily, lively.

Or quicke] That is, quickened through faith: for as the soul is the life of
the body, so faith is ye life of the soul; without which he yt lives is dead:
Abacue. 2.4.
for the just does live by faith. H^e situs es^ Vacia. (said Seneca, when he
pass^d by the ground of that voluptuous Epicure) Vacia lies here dead and
buried: and 1. Tim. 5.6.
so Pa^l of a widow living in pleasure; She is dead even while she does live.
That our sacrifice therefore may be living it must proceed from a faith that
is lively.

Or liuing] That is, a Melanct. in l^^.
continual sacrifice. The sacrifices of the Jews have now their end* but the
sacrifices of Christians are without end. We must (...) Ephesians. 5.20.
give thanks, and Ephesians. 6.18.
al^aies pray. The fire on our altar must never go out, our sacrifice never
die.

In the Law beasts appointed for sacrifice were first slain, and then offered;
and that for two causes especially: first, (as In loc.
Ambrose notes) to put the sacrificer in mind what he deserved by sin:
namely, death: and secondly, because those bloody sacrifices were types of
Christ's death on the cross, which is the propitiation for our sins. In like
manner every Christian sacrifice must be dead to the world, that he may live
to God; Coloss. 3.5.
mortifying his earthly members, and Galat. 5.24.
crucifying his carnal affections, that he may become a Galat. 6.15.
new creature in Christ.

As death depriues a man of natural life, so mortification destroys the body
of sin, which is the sensual life: Moriatur ergo ne moriatur, mutetur homo
ne d^mnetur: (quoth Sermon. 141. de temp.
Augustine) We must die for a time in this life, lest we die for ever in the
next life. We must rise again with Christ, says Coloss. ^.1.
Paul. Now a man must be dead before he can rise again: first Romans 6.5.
grafted with Christ to the similitude of his death, and after to the
similitude of his resurrection. He that lived ill, and now demeanes himself
well, is risen again from the death of sin, to the life of grace; mortified,
and yet a living sacrifice; the Luther. post. mayor in loc.
more mortified, the more living. Romans 8.13. If ye mortify the deeds of the
body by the spirit, ye shall live.

This killing of our beastly desires is very fit, whether we consider our
selves, Fatius de mortificat. cap. 4.
as Men. This killing of our beastly desires is very fit, whether we consider
our selves, Fatius de mortificat. cap. 4.
as Civil men. This killing of our beastly desires is very fit, whether we
consider our selves, Fatius de mortificat. cap. 4.
as Christian men. This killing of our beastly desires is very fit, whether we
consider our selves, Fatius de mortificat. cap. 4.
as Eminent men.
As men; that we may lead our life not according to sense, but according to
reason: otherwise we should be rather sensual beasts, then reasonable men.

As civil men; that we may not live according to lust, but according to law;
though not according to conscience, yet according to custom, that we break
not the statutes and disturb not the commonwealth wherein we live. The
Philosophers in old time comprehended all points of mortification in these two
words, sustine and abstine.

As Christian men; Luke 9.23.
for he that will be Christ's disciple, must deny himself: abnegare suos, sua,
se. Matthew. 11.12.
The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force:
that is, by mortification and daily fighting against the lusts of the flesh; as
Consule Maldonat. in Mat. 11.12. and Fatium, vbi supra.
Basil, Chrysostom, Augustine, Hierome, Gregori^, Theophylact, Euthymius
expound it.

Last of all, yet most of all, mortification is necessary for eminent persons,
either in the Ministry or Magistracy. For great ones ought especially to be
good. Their sacrifice must be most quick, that they may be paternes unto
other; as it were walking statutes, and talking laws to the people.

Holy] The second thing required in our sacrifice: so we read, Leuit. 22. that
unhallowed and unclean persons ought not to touch the things of the Lord.
Leuit. 20 26.
Ye shall be holy for I the Lord am holy; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
this is the will of God, even our sanctification.

The word (...) is derived, as In Cra^ylo.
Plato notes, of the privative particle (...) and (...), signifying that holy
things are not infected with the corruptions and filth of the world; when our
throat is an open sepulcher: when our mouth is full of cursing and bitterness;
when our feet are swift to shed blood; when our bodies are sinkes of sin,
we cannot be an holy sacrifice: for the law is plain, Leu. 22.20.23.
Ye shall not offer any thing that has a blemish, not a beast that is
scabbed, not a bullock nor a sheep that has a member lacking: The drunkard
then, that is (...), without his head, (as Clemens Alexandrinus termed him) and
the coward who wants an heart, and the rotten adulterer whose body is neither
holy nor whole, is no sacrifice for the Lord.

The Latins have deduced the word sanctum of sancire, Vlpian. de verborum
significat.
quasi sancitum: hereby teaching us that our sacrifice must be constant and
continual. That byword, A young Saint, an old Devil, is a wrie word; for we
must be good in our youth, better in our manhood, best of all in our old age:
we must grow from grace to grace, till we be of full growth in Christ;
dedicating all that is within us, all that is without us, all that is about us
unto the service of God.

Seruius expounding the words of Aeneid. 12.
Virgil; Qui foedera numine sancit, affrmes that sanctum is sanguine
consecratum: and so must our sacrifice be consecrated and dipped in Christ's
blood, in whom only God is well pleased: and therefore, as it follows in the
text, if holy, then acceptable.

Now that it may be well accepted of God, Mela^ct^on. in loc.
two things are required especially: 1. That it be grounded upon his word. 2.
That it be performed in faith.



1. Sam. 15.22.
Obedience is better then sacrifice: no sacrifice then is pleasing to God,
except it be done according to his will: invocation of Saints, adoration of
the consecrated host, administration of the Sacraments under one kind, divine
service in an unknown tongue, praying to the dead, mumbling of Masses,
iumbling of beads, worshipping of Images, and other like trash; which are the
very Diana of the Romis^ religion, have no foundation in holy Scripture; not
built upon the rock Christ, but upon the sands of humane brains, and
therefore not acceptable, but abominable to the Lord. A new religion is no
religion: Hilarious in Psalm. 1.
To devise fantasies of God, is as bad as to say there is no God.

Again, courses of life not warranted by Gods own book, such as are rather
Perkins Treatise of Callings.
auocations from God and goodness, then vocations, as ordinary cheating,
brotheldrie, coniuring, and all other unlawful occupations or professions are
not a sweet favor to God, but altogether stinking in his nostrels: If we will
have our sacrifice acceptable they must be first holy. So divine In Eutyphrone.
Plato, Whatsoever is good and holy, that is accepted of God.

Secondly, sacrifice must be performed in faith, otherwise though it be
warra^ted by Gods own word, it is not acceptable: prayer, receiving of ye
Sacraments, hearing of the Scriptures, etc. are holy sacrifices, and yet not
pleasing God, if done without faith. As our Apostle, Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin; that is, whatsoever is against our Aquin. and Gloss. in
loc.
conscience: so when the Recusant comes to Church against his conscience, to
satisfy the law of man, not to certify his love to God, it is not an
acceptable sacrifice. If a man be a Lawyer, a Physician, a Merchant, a
Soldier, against his conscience, though his calling be never so good, yet his
oblation is bad.

Or as Melanct. and Calvin. in loc.
other expound that text more fitly; Whatsoever is not done in a good
assurance, that God for Christ's sake will accept of it and us, it is sin.
Christians are 1. Pet. 2.5.
Priests offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Church hom. of good works, part. 1.
All good works without faith in him, are like the course of an horse that
runs out of the way, which takes great labor but to no purpose. For
unbelieving Gentiles and misbeleeuing heretics, albeit they be never so
witty, never so virtuous, are no sweet favor to the Lord.

Reasonable] We read in the Leuit. 2.13.
Law, that every sacrifice was seasoned with salt: now s^lt mystically notes
discretion; as Coloss. 4.6. Let your speech be gracious always and powdered
with salt: that is, with wisdom and sobriety. When Paul then exhorts us to
give our bodies a reasonable sacrifice, Aquin. in loc.
his meaning is, that al things must be done in order, comely, discreetly. The
proverb is good, An ounce of discretion is worth a pound of learning: for as
zeal without knowledge is blind, quo vehementius irruit eo grauius corruit:
so knowledge without discretion is lame, like a sword in a mad man's hand able
to do much, apt to do nothing: Bernard. sermon. 49. in Cantic.
Toll hanc, and virtus vitium erit. He that will fast, must fast with
discretion, Gorran. in loc.
he must so mortify that he do not kill his own flesh. He that gives alms to
the poor must do it with discretion; omni petenti, non omnia petenti, quoth
Lib. 1. de. sermon. Dom. in Mont.
Augustine; to every one that does ask, but not every thing that he does ask:
so likewise pray with discretion, observing place and time; Matthew. 6.5.
place, left thou be reputed an hypocrite; time, lest accounted an heretic,
like the Augustine. haer^s. 57.
Psallianists and Euchitai.

L^ther. Melancthon. Erasmus, etc. in loc.
Other expound the word reasonable as opposite to the Jews oblations. As if
Paul should speak thus: In the Law dead beasts; but in the Gospel reasonable
living men are to be sacrificed unto God. Every Christian is a sacrificer,
every layman a priest; but the pastor is a priest of priests, one that
sacrifices his people by teaching and exhorting them to give up their bodies,
a quick and holy sacrifice to the Lord. Romans 15.16.
I am (says Paul) the minister of Jesus Christ toward the Gentiles, ministering
the Gospel of God* that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost.

Hitherto concerning the first general branch of Saint Paul's exhortation. Now
as Musicians do not only teach their scholars what they shall sing, but also
what they shall not sing, that they may follow that which is good, and eschew
that which is evil: so Paul does not only show what we must do, but also
what we must not do: Fashion not your selves like unto this world.

World used in the worse sense signifies either the wicked men of the world;
or else the vain things of the world: the wicked men, as Ioh. 12.31. the
devil is termed the prince of the world, that is, of the wicked in the world,
who make themselves his vassals, by yielding to his temptations, according to
that of Romans 6.16.
Paul: He is our master to whom we submit our selves as servants. It is not
Satan's power that he does thus dominere in the Church: for he was Apocal. 20.2.
bound and Apocal. 12.9.
cast out of the Church; but it is the weakness and wickedness of men, who loose
him and open the gate when he was shut out; admitting him as a lord of misrule,
ruling and ouerruling those who are children of disobedience: Ephesians. 2.2.

Secondly, the word World taken in a bad and more strict sense, signifies the
pomps and vanities of the world. As 1. Epist Ioh. 2.15. Love not the world,
neither the things of the world: that is, as himself construeth himself, the
lust of the flesh, and pride of life.

According to both acceptions it may be well expounded in this text; as if S.
Paul should say, Brethren I beseech you by the tender mercies of God, that ye
fashion not your selves, either according to the wicked men, or according to
the vain things of this world.

For ye first: 2. things occasion fashion in the world: Multitude: for as
Cyprian said; Incipit esse licitu^, quod solet esset publicum. Custom is not
only another nurture, but as it were another nature. And, as the Lawyers
speak: Quod est consuetum praesumitur esse iustum: That which is done by many,
is thought at length lawful in any. Greatness: for as Lib. 2.
Paterculus writes; Imperio maximus exemplo mayor: He that is highest, has
always most followers. Augustus, a learned Prince, filled the Empire with
scholars: Tiberius, with dissemblers: Canstantine, with Christians: Julian,
with Atheists.
So that Paul understanding how prone men are to follow fashions, advises us
here, not to conform our selves according to the world.

In complements of courtesies and common ciuilities, it is not amiss to follow
either the most or the best.

In matter of Church orders and Ceremonies, it is August. epist. 118. cap. 5.
insolent singularity, not to fashion our selves according to that which is
inioined by the best, and used by the most; yea even in the maine points of
holy religion: If the great be good, and the most, best, we may follow both.

But Saint Paul's meaning is, that we may not follow wicked men in their
wickedness, nor worldly men in their worldliness, nor good men but in that
they are good: as he says elsewhere, 1. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ: for as in imitation oratorie, there
are two sorts of examples; one necessary to be followed always in all things;
as Demosthenes among the Grecians, and Tully among the Latins; another to be
followed in some things, and at some times, as Poets and Historiographers: Even
so there are two sorts of examples in Christian imitation: the one necessary,
which is Christ the way, the truth, and the life: Bernard. ser. 2. in ascens.
Dom.
Via in exemplo, veritas in promisso, vita in praemio: The truth in his
learning, the way for his living; as the Basil. de spirit. sanct. cap. 8. Leo
s^rm. 2. de resarrect. Cyril. in loc.
Fathers usually gloss that place. The other are to be followed in some
things, and at some times: as Paul, Peter, Augustine, Chrysostom, Nazianzen,
and other blessed Saints of God, whose lives and lines are so far forth to
be followed, as they swerve not from our chief copy Christ. In sin we may not
follow the good; much less the wicked of the world, be they never so many,
never so mighty: we may not be drunken, because it is the fashion among the
most; nor live lasciuiously, because commonly great ones are wantons. In this
point the scriptures are plain and peremptory. Matthew. 7.13.
The gate is wide, and way broad, that leads to destruction, and many go in
thereat: Ergo, we must not follow the most. John 7.48.
Do any of the Rulers believe in Christ: Ergo, we must not fashion our selves
according to the greatest.

In the old world many were drowned, only Genesis 7.
Noah and his family saved: in Sodom many wicked beasts destroyed, only Genesis
19.
Lot and his house delivered: there were two malefactors hanged, one, Christ
crucified; two extremes, one virtue; many thorns, one lilie. Cantic. 2.2. Like
a lilie among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

It is said, Apoc. 20.12. that at the last day, the books shall be opened, and
another book which is the book of life. Where some note, that the book
wherein Gods elect are registered, is but one; but the books of the reprobate
are many. The number of fools is infinite; but Gods people, which are truly
w^se, a Luke 12.32.
little flock. Christendom is the least part of the world: they that prosesse
Christ aright, are the least part of Christendom; and of this little part,
many be called, but few chosen; Tit. 1.16.
professing they know God in their words, but denying him in their works:
arrant heretics, as one wittily, not disputing against religion; but living
contrary to religion, marching under Christ's colors, and yet fashioning
themselves according to the world.

Here some will object. If I fashion not my self like the world, I shall be
played upon, and made a very Job 17.6.
Tabret. I shall become the by word and song of the people.

First, according to the rules of reason, he is base that depends on vulgar
breath.

Scalig^r.
Qui pendet ab errore and opinione vulgi,
Pendet magis atque arbore quipendet ab alta.
Augustine, who reckoned out of Varro, De ciuit lib. 19. cap. 1.
288. diverse opinions concerning the chief good; Epist. 56.
affirms notwithstanding, that no man ever was so mad, as to place his
happiness in common fame, because that is but wind, and of wind it is said in
the John 3.8.
scripture; that no man knows whence it comes, and whither it goes. As the
childs love, so the peoples commendation is gotten, and forgotten in an hour.
Erasmus epist. praefix tom. 4. oper. Hieron.
Socrates in Plato suspected evermore that to be bad, which the vulgar extolled
for good. And Pliny gave this rule in the school; That he declamed worst,
who was applauded most.

Secondly, it is an axiom in the James 4.4.
Bible, that amity with the world, is enmity with God. Galat. 1.10.
He that is a parasite to men, is not the servant of Christ. It is an unhappy
thing to co^uerse with ungodly wretches in the tents Psalm. 120.4.
of Kedar; Job 30.29.
to be brother unto the Dragons, and companions to the Ostriches. Yet Noah must
not follow the fashions of the old world: Lot must not follow the fashions of
Sodom: Job must not follow the fashions of Vz: we must not follow the fashio^s
of our corrupt age; but, as Philip. 2.15.
Paul exhorts, in the midst of a crooked and naughty generation, we must be
pure and blameless, shining even as lights in the world, striving evermore to
walk in the narrow path, and enter in at the strait gate.

Again, we may not conform our selves according to the greatest: Ego and
rexmeus, is no good plea, when God shall reckon with us at the last and
dreadful day. Some men are so much at other men's service, that they neglect
altogether Gods service. That thou did follow such a Lord, and humor such a
Gentleman; that there were better men in the company, when thou did this
villainy; that vanity will not go for a current excuse: when Almighty God
shall come to judgment, then scepters and sepulchers shall be all one; Princes
and pesants shall be fellows.

As in Chesse play, so long as the game is in playing, all the men stand in
their order, and are respected according to their place: first, the king; then,
the queen; then, the bishops; after them, the knights; and last of all, the
common soldier: but when once the game is ended, and the table taken away,
then all are confusedly tumbled into a bag, and happily the king is lowest, and
the pawn vpmost. Even so it is with us in this life; ^^e world is a huge
theater or stage, wherein some play the parts of Kings; other, of Bishops;
some, Lords; many, Knights; other, Yeomen: but when our Lord shall come with
his Angels to judge the world, all are alike. For if great men and mean
persons are in the same sin, they shall be bound together, and cast as a
faggot into hell fire. And therefore let us not fashion our selves according to
the wicked, whether Prince or people.

Secondly, we must not fashion our selves according to the vanities of the
world, and that for two causes especially.

1. Because they be transitory: where note the worlds mortality.

2. Because they be not satisfactory: where note the souls immortality.

For the first, all the things of this world are of such a fashion, as that
either they will leave us, or else we must leave them. They leave us; All
riches have their Prou. 23.5.
wings, and make their flight like an Eagle. We leave them; As the Ier. 17.11.
Partridge gathers the young, which she has not brought forth: so he that
gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days,
and at his end shall be a fool.

The Partridge, as Ambrose writes in his 48. Epistle, makes a nest of eggs,
which she laid not; but so soon as the birds are hatched, the true mother
calls them all away from the stepmother. So it is, says Jeremy, with the
covetous man, incubat auro, like a brood goose, or as an hen that sits; incubo
(for so the Latins term him) he keeps his nest, and sits as it were
brooding, but when his chickens are hatched, he hears a voice from heaven; O
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee: and then, whose
shall these things be which thou have provided? Indeed many men reputed him
wise while he lived; but at his end, when by the finger of God, we see that
his goods are otherwise disposed, either excheated to the King, or restored to
the true masters; or else by some small error in his will, carried away by those
whom he never loved: at his end, when every Partridge shall call his young,
then those that are wise, shall account him a very fool: Psalm. 52.8.
Lo this is the man that took not God for his strength, but trusted in the
multitude of his uncertain riches, and strengthened himself in his
wickedness. And therefore love not the world, neither the things of the world;
for the world passes away, and the lust thereof, being only certain, in
being uncertain.

Secondly, things of this world are not satisfactory, they do not fill and
content the mind of man. Eccles. 1.8.
The eye cannot be satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing: all
things have an emptiness and extreme vanity, purchasing unto the possessors
nothing but anguish and vexation of spirit: and the reason hereof, as Ludo^icus
viua^dus de veritate contritionis, fol. 87.
Vi^aldus observes, is, because the heart of man is made like a triangle, and
the world round as a circle. Now a circle cannot fill a triangle, but there
will be some corner empty.

There is nothing can fill the mind of man, but the blessed Trinity, when God
the Father, the most ancient of days, shall fill our memory; God the Son,
who is wisdom it self, shall fill our understanding; God the holy Ghost, who
is contentation and love, shall sit in our will; then all the powers of our
mind will be at rest, when as they shall enjoy him who made them. But the
things of this world afford no perfect and absolute contentment; and therefore,
ne vos configurate seculo isto, fit not your selves according to the worlds
figure, which is a circle; but be ye renewed in your mind, which is a triangle,
representing the sacred Trinity.

Take a view with the Wise man of all worldly things: in brief, does any
pleasure satisfy? No: pleasure is like lightning: Plutarco.
Simul oritur and moritur; it is sweet but short; like hawking, much cost and
care for a little sport.

The prodigal child wasted both goods and body, yet could not have enough, at
the lest not enough Luke 15.16.
hogs meat.

-- Horace.
Virgo formosa superne
Desinit in turpem piscem malesuada voluptas.
Does learning, that incomparable treasure of the mind, satisfy? No: The more
a man knows, the more he knows that he does not know: so that as Eccles.
1.18.
Solomon said; He that increases knowledge, does increase sorrow.

Does honor content a man? No: The poor labourer would be written Yeoman; the
Yeoman after a few dear years is a Gentleman; the Gentleman must be Knight;
the Knight, a Lord; the Baron, an Earl; the Count, a Duke; the Duke, a King;
the King would Caesar be; and what then, is the worlds Emperor content? No.

Iuuenal.
Vnus Pellaeo iuueni non sufficit orbis,
Aestuat infoelix angusto limine munde.
One world is not enough for Alexander, and therefore he weeps, and is
Valerius Max. li. 8. c. 15.
discontent: as if he wanted elbow room.

In the state Ecclesiastical, the begging Friar would be Prior; the Prior, an
Abbat; the Lord Abbat, a Bishop; the Bishop, an Archbishop; the Metropolitan,
a Cardinal; the Cardinal, Pope; the Pope, a God: nay, that is not enough,
above all that is called God: 2. These. 2.4. This made Lib. ^. de considerat.
Bernard wonder, O ambitio ambientium crux: how do thou pain, yet pleasure
all men!

Do riches content? No: the more men have, the more men crave: and that which
is worst of all, they are the greatest beggars, when they have most of all.
Eccles 5.9.
He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. As the poor man
cries out, Quid faciam quia non habeo? so Theophylact. in 12. Luc.
the covetous wretch as fast complains, Quid faciam quia habeo? Luke 12.17.

Those drinks are best that soonest extinguish thirst; and those meats, which
in least quantity do longest resist hunger: but here the more a man does
drink, the more thirsty; so strange in some is this thirst, that it makes
them dig the pits, and painfully draw the water, and after, will not suffer them
to drink. This, says Eccl^s. 6.2.
Solomon, is an evil sickness, and a great vanity, when a man shall have
riches, and treasure, and honor, and want power and grace to joy in them.

Thus you see, the world is like a butterfly with painted wings; vel sequend^
lab^mur, vel assequendo laedimur: either we fail in pursuing it, or else when
we have caught it, it is so vain, that it gives no contentment. Aug. de doct.
Christ. lib. 1. cap. 38.
Herein is the true difference between earthly things and heavenly things: the
one are desired much, but being obtained, they content little: the other are
desired little, but once gained, satisfy much: and therefore, Lay not up
treasure upon earth, where the moth and canker corrupt, and where thieves dig
through and steal: for these things are neithe^ Bernard.
vera, nor vestra; but lay up treasure for your selves in heaven. If ye will
not hear the words of Scripture, behold the works of nature: man's heart is
broad above, narrow beneath; open at the top, close below: to signify, that we
should enlarge and spread our affections toward heaven and heavenly things, and
draw them to as narrow a point as possibly we can, concerning earth and earthly
things; and so by the fashion of our heart, we may learn not to follow the
fashion of the world.

Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind] We are formed by God, deformed by
Satan, transformed by grace:

1. Sacramentally, by baptism. 2. Morally, by newness of life; which our
Apostle means in this place. That which follows in the text, is expounded
Epist. for the next Sunday.
The Gospel. LVKE 2.42. The father and mother of Jesus went to Jerusalem after
the custom of the feast day, etc.
THis Gospel is a Iansen. Concord. cap. 12.
direction how parents ought to carry themselves toward their children, and
how children also should demean th^mselues toward their parents: the one, by
the practice of Joseph and Mary: the other, by the pattern of our Savior
Christ.

Parents care touching their children concerns their Soul. Body.

Their soul: that they be brought up in Ephesians. 6.4.
instruction and information of the Lord; Hemingius postil. Dom. 1. post
Epiphan.
that is, in godliness and civility: by the one they shall keep a good
conscience before God: by the other they shall obtain a good report among men:
the which two, conscience and credit, must chiefly be sought after in this life.

For the body: Parents ought to 1. Tim. 5.8.
provide competent sustenance and maintenance; guarding their persons, and
regarding their estates: all which is performed here by Joseph and Mary toward
Christ.

First, for the souls institution; they did instruct him by precept and
example: precept, bringing him to the Temple, that he might be taught; and that
not only this once, but often, as often as law did require. So Hist. Euang.
lib. 1. vt Maldonat. in loc.
Iuuencus expressly:

Ad Templum laetis puerum perducere festis,
Omnibus annorum vicibus de more solebant.
This should Culman. con. 1. Zepperus con. 2. in loc.
teach al parents, how to teach their children; especially, that they send them
unto the public Catechizing in the Church, and that according to Can. 59.
Canon and custom: for the common Catechism, which Authority commands, is
fit and full, as containing all the virtues necessary to salvation, and the
means whereby those virtues are received and conserved.

The principal virtues of a Christian, are Faith. Hope. Charity.

The Creed is necessary for faith; as teaching us what we have to believe.
The Pater noster is necessary for hope; teaching us what we are to desire. The
ten Commandments are necessary for charity, teaching us what we have to do.
The Sacraments are instruments of grace, by which those virtues are conveyed
unto us, and continued in us. As to build an house, it is requisite, first to
place the foundation, then to raise the walls, and last of al to cover it with
the roof: so says Vti Bellarm. praefat. Tom. 1. controue^s.
Augustine, to make in our souls the building of eternal salvation, we need
the foundation of faith, the walls of hope, the roof of charity. The tools
as it were wherewith all these be wrought, are the sacred Word and blessed
Sacraments; our Catechism then in brief, comprehending all these matters and
all these means; and standing upon the same legs especially, with the Cat.
Calvin. used in the French and Scottish Churches.
Geneuian and Bellarm Cat. written in Italian* englished by R. Haddock.
Roman Catechism cannot be distasted either of Accusant or R^cusant out of
devotion and piety, but out of saction and malice: well, or rather ill, each
may say with the Martial. l^^. 1. Epigram. 33.
Poet:

Non amo te Sabidi, nec possum dicere quaere:
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
The father and mother] Joseph was not the natural father of Christ, but father

In Opinion: Luke 3.23. Jesus, as men supposed, was the son of Joseph.
Theophylact. in loc.
Care: being his nurcing father appointed of God: for nurces are called
mothers, and patrons fathers. Law: Augustine. de cons^nsu Evangelist. lib. 2. c.
1.
being husband to Mary, and nigh of kin to Christ.

But Mary was the mother of Christ; not only in opinion and care, but in truth
and in deed. Matter a mat^ria, the very matter of Christ's body was of the
Virgin Mary: Galat. 4.4. God sent his son made of a woman: S^e Epist. Sunday
after Christmas.

Secondly, these parents instruct their child by their own example; for they
do not send, but bring him up to Jerusalem, after the custom of the feast
day. The which is the shortest cut of teaching: Longum iter per praecepta,
breue per exempla: The parents Hicro^. ^pist. ad Lae^am. tom. 1. sol. 57.
good life preuailes more with his child, then a good lesson.

Their devotion is seen, in Going up to Jerusalem, after the custom of the
feast. Tarying there, fulfilling the days.

S. Paul exhorts us to pray at all 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
times, and in all 1. Tim. 2.8.
places: for the whole world is Gods universal, and as it were Cathedral
Church; and every particular Christian is as it were his private Chapel, and
Temple; Daniel prayed in the Lions den^e, Jonas in the Whales belly, Job on
the dunghill, and the these on the cross; yet the Lord heard their prayers,
and granted their requests. It is lawful then in private to pray when and where
we shall judge most meet: but God for his public worship has in all ages
assigned certain times, and certain places. The most special time is his
Sabbath, and the most special place the Temple: so we find precept and
practice. Precept, Esaias 56.7.
My house shall be called the house of prayer; the which is repeated by Christ
in three Eua^gelists.

Practice: The Publican and the Pharisie went up into the Temple to pray, Luke
18. Anna prayed in the Temple, Luke 2. Peter and John went up into the Temple
at the hour of prayer, Act. 3. Christ himself daily teaching in the Temple,
Luke 19.

After Christ, by reason of the great persecution, the Christians assembl^d not
in the fittest, but in the safest places: in process of time they did erect
Oratories; not in any sumptuous or stately manner, Hooker. lib. 5. s^ct. 11.
which neither was possible by reason of the Churches poverty, nor plausible in
regard of the worlds envy: but at length when Almighty God stirred up
religions Kings and Queens, as Esaias 49.23.
nursing fathers and nursing mothers of the Church, that which the Christians
before either could not, or durst not do, was with all alacrity performed; in
all places Temples were built; no cost spared, nothing too dear which that way
should be spent: sacrilegious wretches are not now more desirous to pull down,
then those devout professors were to set up Churches.

Now one chief cause why God in all ages would be served in publ^ke Temples,
is, that his Church might be distinguished from the Conuenticles of Heretics
and Schismatikes, that all of us acknowledge one God, and one Christ, so all of
us might have Ephesians. 4.5.
one faith, and one baptism, an uniformity in doctrine, and a conformity in
outward ceremonies, for the better delivering of this doctrine.

The parents of Christ did therefore well in Melanct postil. in loc.
joining themselves unto the congregation, and observing the public ceremonies
of the Church. At that time the temple was made a den of thieves; and yet
Joseph and Mary join with the Church in the public worship of God: C^lu^n.
and Marl^ra^. in loc. Beauxamis harm. Tom. 1. fol. 76.
whose example does exceedingly cross the practice of Brownists, and all other
Recusants, who refuse to communicate with us in our Temples; because some
things, as they pretend, are amiss. Joseph and Mary took part with Gods
Priests and people in that which was good, and as for the rest they did not
meddle further then their place required. They went this long journey to
satisfy the law; as also by their good example to stir up other, to
reverence the public ceremonies and ministry.

By the Law, men only were bound to keep the general solemn feasts, as we
read, Exodus 23. and Deuteronomy. 16.16. Three times in the year shall all the males
app^are before the Lord thy God in the place where he shall choose: so that Mary
went not up to Jerusalem as compelled by law, but only carried with pure
devotion to God, and unfeigned love to her husband and child.

Here then is a notable relic for women to behold; Mary free by the letter of
the law, by the custom of the country, dwelling at Nazareth, a great way from
Jerusalem, did notwithstanding every year go with her husband unto the feast
of the Passover. In our time many women unlike this good Lady, will be
content ^uen on the Lords day, to toil at home about their own business, and
gad abroad to meddle with others business, rather then they will accompany
their good husband Joseph, and their towardly son Jesus unto Gods house.

And when they had fulfilled the daies] That is, whole Ex^d. 23.15.
seven days, according to the custom. They came with the first, and went home
with the last. Worldly men for their honor, will ride post to the Court, to be
knighted with the first; for their profit at mill and market first; for their
pleasure at the play first; at hunting first; first at any m^rrie meeting: but
as for the Church, they think they come too soon, and stay too long: winter
days are too short for hunting, summer days too short for hawking; yet one
hour of seven days is thought long that is spent in Gods holy worship: as
Ant^n. Gueu^ra. ^pist.
one wittily; Long Samons, and short sermons please best: and yet if we look
not with the spectacles of the world, but with the eyes of faith discerning all
things aright, we shall find that there is no such honor, as to be Gods
servant, no such gain as godliness, no such pleasure as a good conscience.

The congregation under the Law, was not dismissed without the Priests Number.
6.23.
benediction and Zepperus co^. 1. in loc.
valediction; the which custom is retained in the Christian Church, that no
man depart out of the Temple, before the divine prayers and sermon end: so the
Canon. 24. and Council. Agathen. cap. 47.
4. Council of Carthage decreed, exco^municating all such as offend in this
kind.

Thus you see Christ was instructed by good lessons and life: so that if Jesus
had not been Jesus, to be saved, and not a Savior; he might have said of his
mother M^r^, which Con^^ss. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Augustine writes of his mother Monica: M^^ori soll^citudi^e me parturiebat
spiritu, quam carne pepererat; Idem. c^^^ess. l^^ 9. cap. 8.
parturi^it carne, vt in hanc temp^ralem nascerer; cord vt in aeternam lucem
r^nascerer.

Now for his body; when he was missing, Joseph and Mary sought him instantly
with all diligence till h^e was found: Behold thy father and I have sought thee
weeping. Where literally note Mary's humble carriage toward her husband Joseph,
and the care of them both over Christ their child. The dutiful respect of
Mar^ toward Joseph is observed Ex Augustino Maldonat. in loc. and Iansen.
concord. cap. 12.
ex ordine verborum; in that she says, thy father and I, not, I and thy
father; as Cardinal Wolsees style, Ego and rex meus, I and my king, is
insupportable in the Polit^kes; so I and my husband insufferable in the
Oeconomicks. It was Ester 1.20.
Assuerus his edict, and it is Gods law that all women both great and small
shall give their husbands honor, and that every man shall be^re rule in his
own house: for the man is the wives E^hes. 5.23.
head, and the wife is her husbands subject: Subdita eris sub potestate viri:
Thou shall b^ subject to thine husband, and he shall rule over thee, G^n. 3.16.
So that a woman murdering her husband, is accounted by the L. 1. D. ad leg^m
P^mpeiam de paricidijs.
Civil laws a parricide, by the Ra^^al. coll^ct. stat. (...). ^r^ason.
statutes of our land a traitor.

The next remarkable point is the joint care of them both over Jesus: Thy
father and I have sought thee weeping. As Paul said to 1. Tim. 6.20.
Timothy so we to every father, ser^a deposi^um, keep that which is committed
to thee. Have a tender eye over thy child, which is a pledge of Gods
goodness, and that happily which may move thee more, flesh of thy flesh, and
bone of thy bone; not only a lively picture, but a living and walking image of
thy self. Barren S^ra was so glad of a child, that she called her only
son, Genesis 21.3.
Isack, that is, laughter. How wicked then is that parent, who neglects his
own flesh, his own child, which is a token from heaven, and ordinarily the
best monument of himself after death on earth?

As this example concerns the natural father, so likewise the civil and
ecclesiastical: for, incuria praepo^iti, iniuria deposit^; Hieron. epist. ad
Furiam. tom. 1. fol. 80.
detrimentum pecoris, ignominia pastoris, etc. Pastor and Prince must s^^ke the
good of such as are under them, as Joseph and Mary did Christ, with careful
hearts, etc. In a Jacob. de Vorag. ser. 3. Dom. in^ra octa. Epiphan.
mystical sense these words insinuate, when, where, and how Christ is to be
found of us.

1. When? On the third day. 2. Where? In the Temple. 3. How: Socialiter; in
unity; thy father and I. Desid^rabiliter; with an earnest desire to find.
Lachrym^biliter; with tears; have sought thee sorrowing.

First, Christ is to be found on the third day: verse 46. It came to pass three
days after, that they found him in the Temple. The first day was the time
before the law, in which, as Luke 10.24.
Christ told his Apostles, all the Patriarks and holy fathers desired to see
the things which they saw, and could not see them; and to hear the things
which they heard, and could not hear them.

The second day was the time under the law, when also the Priests and Prophets
expected Christ, but they could not find him: therefore the Prophet Esaias
cries out in his 64. Chapter, Oh that thou would bre^ke the heavens and
come down.

The third day is the present time; thi^ acceptable time of grace; wherein
Christ is to be found: John 4.23.
hora est n^nc; The hour is now. Therefore to day, while it is to day, se^ke
the Lord even while he may be found; call upon him while he is near; for the
next day, which is the fourth day, is the time after death, and Psalm. 6.5.
then he cannot be found or sought.

Joseph and Mary could not find Christ among their kinsfolk, etc. Iansen. vbi
supra.
Non humana cognatione, nec cognitione comprehenditur: He that will find
Christ, must forsake friends, Psalm. 45.11.
forget his own people, and his fathers house. They found him in Jerusalem,
Beauxamis har. tom. 1. f^l. 77.
that is, in the Church among the faithful: not among barbarous Heathens, or
blasphemous heretics; his dwelling is at Sion, there you may find him among
the Doctors in the Temple: Thom. in loc. ex Origin.
not in the market, not in the tavern, but in the Temple; Melanct. postil. in
loc. and Church Him. concerning the right use of the Church. part. 1.
for he is to be found in his word, in his sacraments, among the Doctors and
Preachers. If this lesson often taught, were once learned, it would make you to
frequent Gods house more diligently, thirst after his word more greedily,
respect Christ's ambassadors more reverently.

The third point to be considered is, how Christ is to be found: Socialiter, in
unity, pater tuus and ego. God is love, and his followers are the children of
peace, and his Ministers the messengers of peace, his doctrine the doctrine of
peace: and therefore if we will find him, we must follow the truth Ephesians 4.15.
in love.

God said to the serpent; Genesis 3.15
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. But if we seek Christ in contention, all the feud is among our selves,
and not between Satan and us. Nyssen. epist. ad Eustat. pe^ Casaubonum public.
Odium in nos ipsos conuertimus: all our fight is against our friends, and not
against our foes.

Again, we must seek Christ earnestly: Quaerebamus te and nihil extrate;
Jesus for Jesus: and lastly, we must seek Christ, lachrymabiliter, sorrowing.

Now Mary did fear for three causes, as Interpreters observe:

1. Them. in l^c.
Lest Christ should leave her, and ascend to his father in heaven. 2. Gloss.
Lest he should fall into the hands of persecutors. 3. Jacob de V^rag. vbi
supra.
Lest he should forsake the Jews, and go to some other nation.
So we must seek Christ with three sorts of tears: of Devotion; lest he
withdraw his gracious countenance from us. Contrition; when he does absent
himself for a time. Compassion, when any member of his is afflicted and
persecuted.

And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them]
As the former part of this Gospel is a pattern for parents, how they should
instruct their children; so this latter is a glass for children, how they
should obey their parents; Omnis enim actio Christi, instructio Christiani: For
every line of Christ is a copy for a Christian. In that therefore the Lord of
all, submitted himself to the government of his supposed father, and underling
mother; as Epist. de vitando sus^ect. contubern. Tom. 1. fol. 224.
Hierome notably; Venerabatur matrem, cuius ipse erat pater; colebat nutritium,
quem nutriuerat, and that for the space of thirty years, executing filial and
oeconomicall duties in their house; what does he but teach obedience to
superiors? especially that children should honor father and mother, albeit
they be never so mean; for this subjection is a Non infumitatis sed piet atis.
Ambros. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 2.
virtue, not a weakness.

If parents inioine things unlawful, and contrary to scripture, then, as
expositours upon this text commonly note, we must prefer our father in heaven,
before our fathers on earth; and say with Christ, How happened it that ye
sought me? wist ye not that I must go about Gods business? Otherwise we must
not offend them so much as with Vultu saepe laeditur pietas. Cicero. pro Sext.
Ros. orat. 2.
a very look. See decalog. com. 5.

The dutiful child shall Zepperus con. 2. in loc.
prosper as Christ, in favor with God and men: but graceless Genesis 9.25.
Cham shall be cursed; rebellious 2. Sam. 18.
Absolon, disobedient 1. Sam. 4.
Phinehas and Hophni shall not live out half their days. It was De^t. 21.21.
Gods law, that the stubborn child should be stoned to death openly, that all
might hear and fear. By the Ras^al. col. stat. tit. treason.
common laws, he that murders his parent, is reputed a petty traitor By the
Lege penult. D^ad legem Pompeiam de parricidijs.
Civil laws in old time, an offender in that kind, was sowed in a sack, with
a dog, a cock, a viper, and an ape, and so cast into some deep water, as
unworthy to reap the benefit of any element. For so Vbi supra.
Tully does excellently gloss that law. V^ qui eum necasset, vnde ipse natus
esset, careret ijs rebus omnibus, ex quibus omnia nata esse dicuntur. Etenim
quid est tam commune, quam spiritus viuis? terra mortuis? mare fluctuantibus?
littus eictis? Ita viuun^, dum possunt, vt ducere animam de coelo non possint:
ita moriuntur, vt eorum ossa terra non tangat: ita iactantur fluctibi^^, vt
nunquam abluantur: ita postremo eijciuntur, vt ne ad saxa quidem mortui
conquiescant.

It is Erasmus annot. in Mat. 13.5^. and Z^pperus con. 1. in loc.
probable, that Christ submitting himself to Joseph, used his occupation: but
what it was, I cannot show: you need not know. Saint Hilary thinks he was a
Smith; Hugo, that he was a Mason: most Divines, that he was a Carpenter. So In
dialog. cum Tryphon.
Justin Martyr, and other ancient Doctors have gathered out of Matthew. 13.55.
Mark 6.3. See Six. Sinen. biblioth^c. lib. 6, annot. 62. Baron. ^nnal. tom. 1.
an. 12. Iansen. concord. cap. 54. Maldonat. and Rhemisan Matthew. 13.55.

Now then in that Christ exercised a mechanical trade, we may Z^pper. vbi supra.
learn that a poor man may serve God, and often do much good in an honest
occupation: the text says; Jesus prospered in wisdom, and in favor with God
and men. He was a lamb, and therefore the bigger the better: but the wicked
are Mat. 25.33.
goats, and Diez con. 4. Them. 1. post. ^piphan.
therefore the longer they live, the worse they are.

Mary kept all these sayings together in her heart] It was well she laid them
up; better that she kept them; best of all that she kept them all. Let us also
lay these things up in our secret treasury, that being inwardly grafted in our
hearts, they may bring forth in us the fruit of good living.

This Gospel is well fitted to the day: for after the celebration of Christ's
birth, circumcision, Epiphanie; what should follow but his first manifestation
in the Temple, and then on the next dominical, his first miracle wrought in
Cana of Galile.

The Gospel and Epistle concord: Ferus, ser. 1. and 6. Dom. 1. post. Epiphan.
for what Christ does in the one, is a pattern of that Paul says in the other.
Paul does require; first, that we should offer our selves a quick sacrifice to
God; and then, according to the measure of grace, that we should become
serviceable to men, every one among our selves one another members: even so
Christ here, did first dedicate himself to God, in celebrating the Passover,
in hearing the Doctors, in disputing about religion, in neglecting his
acquaintance, to do the business of his Father in heaven: and then he went
with his parents, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them.

Or (as Postil. cum glossis and fi^uris Ep^st. Dom. infra octa. Epiph^n.
other observe) the Gospel and Epistle both insinuate, that two things are
requisite to salvation, humilitas mentis, munditia carnis.

For the first, Paul's precept is, that no man stand high in his own conceit,
but so judge of himself, that he be gentle and sober, as a member helping
other. And Christ's pattern is; he became subject to Joseph and Mary, though he
was Lord of all.

For the second, Paul's precept is; Offer your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy
and acceptable to God. And Christ's pattern is; he did the business of God in
the Temple, neglecting the pleasures of the flesh among his friends and
acquaintance. Sweet Jesus indow us plentifully with thy grace, that we may thus
preach and practice; that following thee, who art the way, we may come to thee
which art the life. Amen.

The Epistle. ROMANS 12.6. Seeing that we have diverse gifts according to the
grace that is given unto us, etc.
Postil. mayor. dom. 2. ab Epip^an.
LVther is of opinion, that this Epistle should be capite breuior, and sine
prolixior; shorter in the beginning, longer at the end. For the beginning
appertains unto the conclusion of the Epistle for Sunday before; and the end
to be the beginning of the Epistle for Sunday following: yet so, that it may be
both read and expounded, as a text absolute in it self. The sum whereof is,
that we must employ and improve the manifold gifts of God unto the glory of
his name, and good of his people.

This exhortation is inferred upon a familiar comparison used in the words
immediately before: for as we have many members in one body, and all members
have not one office; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every man
among our selves, one another members. In which, observe four instructions.

First, as the members are not made by their own virtue, but created by Gods
almighty power, before they could execute any function in the body; not members
because working, but on the contrary, working because members: In like sort,
Christians are not members of Christ through their own good works, but they
do good works because they be members, and inserted into Christ: as the tree
brings forth the fruit, and not the fruit the tree. The Papists then in their
works of congruitie, run too much upon the figure called (...); setting the
cart before the horse; merit before mercy. Potes a te de ficere (says In Psalm.
94.
Augustine) sed teipsum reficere non potes; ille reficit, qui te fecit.

Secondly, the members are well Zancbius in Ephesians. 4.16.
content with their several offices and place; the foot is not grieved at the
heads supremacy, neither does the nose malign the eye, nor eye covet to be
tongue, but every one performs his function without any faction: even so we
which are members of Christ's mystical body, must be content with our vocation
and calling, 1. Cor. 7.20.
neither envying such as are above, nor despising such are under us. 1. Cor.
12.4.
Although there be diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit: diversities of
administrations, yet but one Lord: diversities of operations, yet but one God,
who works all in all.

Are all Apostles? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? have all the
gift of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? It is God who
works all in all; communicating indifferently spiritual life to all his
members; insomuch as the least is a member of his body so well as the
greatest. In this respect all parts are peers.

Albeit (I say) there be diverse gifts, and diverse measures of gifts, and so by
consequence for fashion, and function an imparity; yet because they be
Sarcerius in loc.
donatiues, grants, and graces, as it is said here, the mighty may not scorn
the mean, nor the mean envy the mighty: no part must be p^rt. 1. ^or. 4.7.
For that have thou that thou have not received? He that appointed thee mouth
or eye, might have made thee foot or hand. Again, no member ought to mutter
against head or fellow; for the mystical body of Christ is all fa^re: Cant.
4.7.
Tota pulchra es amica mea: now beauty consists in variety of colors, and in a
concinne disposition of sundry different parts. 1. Cor. 12.17.
If all the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were
hearing, where were the smelling? But God has in a most sweet order, disposed
the members every one of them in the body: first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets;
thirdly, Teachers; then, workers of miracles; after that, the gifts of healing;
helpers, governors, diversities of tongues.

He then that affects in the Church an hotchpotch paritie, martyrs and marres
Christ's body, which is, (...), etc. a body fitly knit together by every joint:
Ephesians 4.16.

Thirdly, there is a sympathy between the members of the natural body; 1.
Cor. 12.26.
for if one suffer, all suffer with it; if one member be had in honor, all the
members rejoice with it. So Paul in this scripture: Be merry with them that be
merry; weep with them that weep. Pain is often lessened by pity; passion is
relieved in one by compassion of many. Augustine. epist. 133.
Minus fit quod patitur vnum membrum, si compatiantur alia membra: nec ipsa
mali releuatio fit per communionem cladis, sed per solatium charitatis, vt
quamuis alij ferendo patiuntur, alij cognoscendo compatiuntur: Communis fit
tamen tribulatio, quibus probatio, spes, dilectio, spiritusque communis est. He
that has not this fellow feeling, may suspect worthily that he is not a
lively member of Christ; for his body is coupled, and knit together throughout
every joint, wherewith one ministers to another. If then we do not Galat. 6.2
bear one another burden, and feel one another misery, we are not knit
together by the sinews of love; and if not knit to the body, no part of the
body.

Fourthly, there is no dead or idle member in the body, but every one helps
another, and is serviceable for the good of the whole: the eye does direct the
head, and the hand guard the eye; the nose smells for all, tongue speaks for
all, hand works for all. 1. Cor. 12.21.25.
The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the hand again to
the feet, I have no need of you: but every part seeks another and not his
own good.

In like sort, the wise Counselor must see for all; the tall Soldiers fight
for all; the judicious Clerk write for all: as Tritten^em. de Scriptor. in
vitam Ockam.
Occam said unto the Emperor Lewis; If you will defend me with your sword, I
will defend you with my pen. Seeing we have diverse gifts, according to the
grace given unto us; if a man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it, etc.

The duties here mentioned are, Luther. in loc.
partly Public; If a man have the gift of prophecy, etc. Private; If a man
show mercy, let him do it with cheerfulnes.

The public concern things Spiritual, for Doctrine Theoricall; as prophesying
and teaching. Practical; as exhortation.
Discipline; let him that rules do it with diligence.
Temporal; if any man give, let him do it with singlenes.

If any man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it agreeing to the faith]
A Prophet in old time foretold things to come: but under the Gospel a Aquin.
in loc.
Prophet is he that interprets the Prophets; he that shows Christ is come,
spoken of by ye mouth of al his holy Prophets ever since the world began. A
Preacher is a Prophet, as the word is used: 1. Cor. 14.1. and 1. Cor. 13. we
know in part, we prophecy in part. A Preacher then must teach agreeing to the
faith; Luther. and Calvin. in loc.
that is, according to the Scripture, which is a rule of faith: or according to
the D. Fulke in loc.
Creed, which is an abridgement of that rule; for 1. Cor. 3.11.
other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, Christ Jesus.

He that will edify Gods house must build upon Christ, and square al his
doctrines according to the rule of truth. 1. Pet. 4.11.
If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God. It is not said here that
a Prophet ought to use no book but the Bible; no Commentary but the Creed;
for that is too spiritual (as Praefa^. in exposit. N. Testament.
M^rlorate notes.) He that will preach agreeing to the Scripture, must read
the best expositors of the Scripture: for, as De domo interior. cap. ^^.
Bernard said, all books are written for the bettering of the conscience,
which is the book of the soul: so we must examine all books, especially
treatises of Divinity, for the better understanding of this one book, which
is (...) the Book.

Neither is it said here, that the Prophet in the pulpit must speak nothing
beside plain text, but only that he must exercise his gift according to
faiths analogy, (...) teaching the wholesome words of Christ; and 1. Tim. 6.3.
consenting to the doctrine which is agreeable to godliness: for whatsoever is
deduced out of Gods book by necessary consequence, must be received as his
word; let him that has the gift of prophecy, have it agreeing to the faith.

Or as Aquinas in loc.
other interpret; to beget and confirm faith in us evermore. For, if a Prophet
rise among you, saying, Let us go after other gods and serve them, etc. thou
shall not hearken unto the words of the Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13.1. The true Prophet
is he, Cuius in ore v^rbum vitae, cui^s in more vita verbi.

Or, as In loc.
Melanct. and D. Fulk. in loc.
most of the most ancient fathers, according to the proportion of faith and
grace given. As if he should say, Whosoever is called by the Church lawfully,
to preach the Word, let him abide therein according to the measure of his gift:
for God has given to some more, to some less, and often blesses him that
has less, more then him that has more. Let every man therefore exercise his
talent with faith and diligence, to the best edification of Gods people
committed to his charge: so likewise, let him that has an office ^aite on his
office; let him that teaches, take heed to his doctrine; let him that
exhorts, give attendance to his exhortation, according to the proportion of
grace. Let not any suffer his Matthew. 25.18.
talents to rust, but employ them and so multiply them unto the Donors glory;
Ephesians. 4.11.
who gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edificatio^ of the body of Christ.

If any gi^^, let him do it with singlenes] With an Gorran. in loc.
upright intention, not to be seen of men, Aquin. in loc.
or to gain much by giving a little; for that is not simplicity, but
duplicitie.

Or because Paul speaks of Deacons, public guardians of the poor, such as
we call Almoners and overseers; Martyr in loc.
he would not have them deal subtly for their own benefit, but simply for
the common good, distributing the Churches benevolence committed unto their
charge, without respect of persons, according to the several necessities of
the Saints.

Let him that rules, do it wi^^ diligence] The slothful and idle person is
the devils shop* there he works, ever busy when men are lasie. Wheref^re
Eccles. 9.10.
do that which is in thine hand with all thy power; especially, take heed that
thou do not the work of the Ierem. 48.10.
Lord negligently. That which Christ said of our redemption, every Christian
must say of his particular vocation: It is meat and drink for me to do my
fathers will. Unto diligence there are two maine motives.

1. In regard of God, who bestows his gifts for this end, that they may be
well employed in his holy service. 2. In respect of our selves: for Matthew.
25.29.
unto every one that has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance; and
from him that has not, even that he has, shall be taken away.
The private duties are General: Hate that which is evil, clean to that
which is good. Particular, concerning our Faith: Be fervent in spirit: continue
in prayer. Hope: Rejoice in hope, be patient in tribulation. Charity, in
Giving due respect to Superiors; In giving honor go one before another.
Equals: Be kind one to another with brotherly love. Inferiors: Distributing to
the necessity of ye saints: harboring the distressed: equalling our selue^ to
the^ of the lower sort.
Forgiving: Bless them that persecute you, etc.



All which offices are to be performed Freely. Fully. Fitly.

Freely, with cheerefulnes and compassion: Be merry with the merry; weep with
such as weep.

Fully, without sloth or dissimulation; Let love be without dissimulation.

Fitly: Apply your selves to the time: for there is a time for all things: and
(...), does Ambros. in loc.
fit the place better, then (...). See Luther. postil. Erasm. Martyr. in loc.

His meaning is not, that we should alter our manners and religion according to
the time; like the Polypus and Camelion: for in the beginning of this chapter
he does advise the contrary: Fashion not your selves according to to the
world. But that we should apprehend the best hint to do good in the Church,
evermore redeeming the time: Ephesians. 5.16. so shall we be sure to serve God in
observing the time.

The Gospel. JOHN 2.1. There was a marriage in Cana, etc.
Marriage is honorable (says Heb. 13.4.
Paul.) Honored of God the Father. Son. Holy Ghost.

Father, instituting it at the purest time, in the best place: for it was his
Genesis 2.28.
first ordinance in Paradise, when man was innocent.

Honored of God the Son by his presence and first miracle, wrought (as the
text says) at a wedding.

Honored of God the holy Ghost, who did ouershadow the betrothed virgin Mary
Christ's mother.

Honored of the whole blessed Trinity, both in Deed: for in the worlds
universal deluge, married persons and couples only were delivered: Genesis 7.
Word: comparing it to the kingdom of heaven; and holiness, to a Matthew. 22.12.
wedding garment: calling it a Ephesians. 5.32.
great mystery, representing the spiritual union between Christ and his
Church.

Honored by the primitive fathers as a fruitful seminary, which fills earth
with men, and heaven with Saints. Honored of Jews, honored of Gentiles;
honored of all, except Taciani: Augu^^^n. haer 25. Saturnini:^ren. l^b. 1.
ca^. 2.
heretics and Papists: herein appearing rather like devils, then Divines, as
Paul tells us, 1. Tim. 4.

The Papists in making mariag^ a sacrament, seem to commend it more then we:
but in affir^ing, that holy Pr^esthood is profaned by this holy sacrament,
Doctor Fulk, in Heb. 13.4.
is to honor it as the Jews honored Christ, in clothing him with a purple
robe.

Marriage is a sacrament, and yet a sacrilege. So Orat. habit. Romans Tom. 3.
c^ntrouers. in fine.
Bellarmin plainly, Coniugia post solennia vota, non co^nubia, sed sacrilegia:
so the rest of that unchaste generation generally, such as vow, first chastity,
then marry; begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh: mad men (says Com. in
Gal. 3.3.
Luther) not understanding what is the spirit, or what is the flesh. For in
single life to burn with lust, and when one concubine will not serve, to commit
villainy with many strumpets, are manifest works of the flesh: on the contrary,
for a man to love his own wife, to govern his family, to bring up his
children in instruction and information of the Lord, are fruits of the spirit.

We might rather say, that in heat of youth (as Confess. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Augustine speaks) inquieta adolescentia, to vow single life, were a sin:
for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. R^m. de rel^g. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Sed de talibus perpetuae virginitatis votis fides nulla, nulla in sacris
literis est litera.

In 2. Cor. 11.
Saint Ambrose writes peremptorily, that all the twelve Apostles had wives,
except Saint John: and almost all the Romish Postils observe, that John was the
bridegroom at this wedding. If this annotation be true, why do they condemn
marriage in Priests? If false, why do they suffer it for current, as well in
their Pontan. bibli^thec. con. t^m. ^. fol. 217. Diez con. 1. Coster. con. 2.
in loc.
accurate new writers, as in their old fustie Dormisecure in loc. Anton.
Be^o^tin. quast. 17* super. Euang. dominical.
Friars.

If any desire to be further satisfied in this curiosity, let him read
Maldonat upon the first of Saint John* in the preamble; and Cardinal. Baronius.
annal. Tom. 1. fol. 94.

In this history four things are regardable. 1. The occasion of the miracle;
want of wine at a wedding, described by circumstances of Time: the third day.
Place: in Cana, a town of Galile. Persons, Guests, invited, as Christ and his
disciples. Luther. mayor postil. in loc. and L^dol hus de vita Christ. part. 1.
cap. 25.
Gossips, coming of their own accord, to further and help the business:

2. Certain passages of speech upon this occasion, between Christ and his
mother: verse. 3.4. 3. The miracle it self. verse. 6.7.8.9. 4. The consequent
and effect of the miracle. verse. 11.

And the third day] These circumstances of time, place, persons, are set down
to confirm the truth of the miracle. The time was the third day: Thom. ex Beda
in loc.
mystically there are three days of the world: the first, before the law: the
second, under the law: the third, after the law. The world was instructed
before the law by the Patriarks example: by the writings of the Prophets under
the law: but in the third day, which is the gospels acceptable time, by Christ
and his miracles; or literally, the third day from his being in the wilderness,
as Euthymius; or, the third day after his conference with Nathaniel, as Haeres.
51.
Epiphanius; or, the third day after he came into Galile, as Iansenius. I like
the conceit of Com. in Johan. lib. 2.
Rupertus, affirming, that the conjunction And, does send the reader to that
which is said before, to wit, in the first Chapter, verse. 35. The next day John
stood, and two of his disciples, etc. This is the first day. The second day is
mentioned in the 43. verse; The day following Jesus would go into Galile. Now
the third day this mari^ge was in Cana. So Ia^sen.
soon then as Christ had called his disciples, he presently begins to manifest
himself, both in his words, and in his works: and because this was his first
miracle, we Calvin.
should give the greater attention to it.

There was a mariage] Beauxamis in loc.
This insinuates, it was a solemn meeting, not a clandestine marriage; done not
in a corner secretly, but after a public fashion, with consent of parents and
friends openly. Such was the custom in old time: Tobith. 7. Judges 14. where
Samsons marriage feast is said to continue seven days: and it is well retained
in our age; the Canon. 62.
Church appointing that al marriages ought to be performed with the good will
of friends in the most public ^ place, at the most public time, between
eight and twelve in the forenoone; the which is a renewed old canon of the
Council of Cap. 6. vt Pet. Crabbe, Tom. council. fol. 632.
Arls, and of Caus^. 3. quaest. 5. vt Crabbe vbi supra. fol. 66
Euaristus, Bishop of Rome, writing thus unto the Prelates of Africa: Non fieri
legitima matrimonia, nisi ab his qui super ipsam foeminam dominationem habent;
and a quibus custoditur, petatur; a parentibus autem sponsetur, legibus dotetur
suo tempore, sacerdotaliter cum precibus benedicatur: aliter praesumpta non
coniugia sed adulteria, etc.

In Cana a City of Galile] There were Hieron. in loc. Hebraic. Tom. 3. fol.
278.
two Canaes, one called Cana the greater, near the coasts of Tyrus and Sidon,
Joshua 19.28. from whence the good Cananite woman came: Matthew. 15.22. This other
was Cana the lesser, near Nazareth, from whence Simon the Cananite: Matthew.
10.4.

Cana signifies zeal; Galile, transmigration. Beda vbi supra.
Hereby signifying typically, that Christ delights in their company who be
fervent in devotion, and are willing to pass from things earthly, to things
heavenly: or insinuating, that matrimonial love shall only continue but in
this our pilgrimage; for in heaven, we shall neither marry wives, neither
have wives bestowed in marriage. Matthew. 22.30.

Some note that Galile signifies rotation: intimating the mutable changes and
chances in this estate. Concerning this, and the like, I send the reader to
Bibliothec. concion. Tom. 1. fol. 217.

If I durst venture upon any mystical exposition, it should be this; A marriage
ought to be made in Cana of Galile* that is, in an honest desire to fly
fornication, and to possess our vessels in chastity, to pass from Sodom to
Cana.

The mother of Iesus] Not as other writers usually, the virgin: or as other
Evangelists, Mary; but the mother of Jesus. Because the seeds of
Apollinarists, Valentinians and other heretics, denying Christ's humanity,
were sown in S. John's age.

Was there] Cana was near Nazareth, and it is thought probable by most
interpreters as well old as new, that either the bridegroom, or the bride, was
cosen to Mary; Chrysostom. hom. 20 ^uper Johan. and Bucer. apud Marlorat. in loc.
so that upon neighborhood and affinity she came to this wedding, as a
favorer, and furtherer of the business: Frequentius videri in pubco
displicebat. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 2.
otherwise Mary was no busy body, no prattling idle gossip 1. Tim. 5.13.
gadding from house to house. We read only that she visited her cosen Luke
1.40.
Elizabeth, and here was present at the marriage feast of another especall
friend, who was dear in blood, and near in place.

And Jesus was called also and his Disciples] Ferus ser. 7. in loc.
This example may teach all inuiters, especially parents, to bid such ghests
unto their childrens marriage dinner, as are modest and religious. At such
meetings usually wild wantons are best welcome. Grave persons are for a
funeral, mad merry people for a wedding: if Christ preach, or sober Mary be
present, all the sport is spilt. These are spots in your loue-feasts, as S.
Jude speaks: inuit such men, as Christ, such women as Mary, who may be
paternes unto the new married of lowly and lovely carriage.

Secondly, this example of Christ, of the Virgin, of the Disciples, is a
sufficient Musculus and Marlorat. in loc.
warrant for men to call, and for men to come unto neighbourly meetings, and
friendly feasts, as occasion is offered. It is written of Philip Camerarius in
eius vita, page 37
Melancthon that great Divine, that he was exceeding courteous in this kind;
often invited, often inuiting. Rejoice with them that rejoice, says Paul. We
may be merry (says Loc. com ^it. de pus conuiuijs.
Luther) at a feast, and recreate our selves with pleasant talk; which may
feed the mind, as meat does the maw. See Luther. postil. ^aior. in loc.

But we must avoid in our meriments all drunkenness and surfeiting. Acosta con.
2. in loc.
There was so little wine prepared for this feast, that the pots were empty,
before the pates were full: such a necessary want, as that Christ miraculously
supplied it.

Cap. 10.16.
Ecclesiastes has pronounced a woe to that land whose Princes eat in the
morning: Di^z con. 1. in loc.
that is, by surfeiting and riot devour their estate so soon as it comes into
their hands; even in the morn of their youth, and afterward live by base
courses in their afternoon. What a woe then hangs over that country, where
both Princes and people too rise up early to follow drunkenness? when a man of
mean quality will waste so much upon his wedding dinner, as might have fed him
and his all the year; and so much upon his wedding garment, as happily might
have clothed him all his life. Surely the devil danceth at such a marriage,
Christ is not present.

Christ is invited unto a wedding Coster. con. 2. in loc.
two ways: by Prayer. Good intentions in that enterprise.

First by prayer, as young Tobith and Sara, who being together in the bride
chamber, and, as the Tobith 8.
story says, in the bridebed, rose again to beg a blessing of God after this
sort: Blessed art thou O God of our fathers, etc. and she said with him, Amen.

Every regenerate man is Heb. 3.6.
Gods house; and Gods house is called the house of Esaias. 56.7.
prayer. I know that text is expounded by Mat. 21.13.
Christ of the Temple material; yet it may not unfitly be construed of the
Temple Bellarmin. de bonis operibus in particular. lib. 1. cap. 10.
mystical. If then every good man be a priest, as S. ^ Epist. 2.9.
Peter calls him; a Church, as S. 1. Cor. 3 16.
Paul terms him, it is meet he should undertake no business, especially
such a maine matter as marriage, without often and hearty prayer.

Secondly, Christ is called to our wedding by good intentions, in this
enterprise; which are principally three: 1. Avoiding of fornication: 1. Cor.
7.2. 2. Procreation of children: Genesis 1.28. to be brought up in instruction,
and information of the Lord: Ephesians. 4.6. 3. Mutual consolation and comfort:
Genesis 2.18.

If a man in the fear of God undertake this honorable estate, for these good
ends, he calls as it were Christ, and God to his wedding: but he that marries
unadvisedly, lightly, wantonly, like brute beasts having no understanding,
does inuit Satan and his reuellers, and then no marvel if that which was
ordained for his help, turn to his hurt. For in this the Philosopher truly:
Corr^ptio optimi pessima.

And his Disciples] Maldonat. in loc.
Christ was invited for his mothers sake, the Disciples for Christ. They went
but invited.

Here I might remember S. Epist. de vita clericorum. ^om. 1. fol. 15.
Hieromes advice to Nepotian: Conuiuia tib^ sunt vitanda secularium; and maxim
eorum qui honoribus tument. Facile co^temnitur clericus qui saepe vocatus ad
prandium, ire non recusat: nunquam petentes, raro accipiamus rogati.

Haeres. 78.
Epiphanius is of opinion that Joseph was dead before this time, because there
is no mention made of him in the Gospel, after his going up to Jerusalem at
the Passover, Luke 2. therefore no marvel, if he were not bid with Christ
and his Disciples.

Divines have rendered sundry reasons, why Christ and his company being
invited came to this wedding.

First (as our Com. Book, tit. Matrimony.
Church does speak) to beautify with his presence this holy calling:
Augustine. tract. 9. in ^^an.
Confirmare voluit, quod ^pse fecit, nuptias: Costerus vbi supra.
and it was exceeding fit that Christ should work his first miracle, for the
confirmation of Gods first ordinance.

Secondly, to manifest his Theophylact. in loc. and Augustine. ser. 41. de
temp^re.
humility, vouchsauing to visit the meanest.

Thirdly, to certify the spiritual marriage between the Church and himself:
Seuerus Antiochenus orat. 119. vt citatur in Graec. caten. and a Maldonat in
loc.

Fourthly, that he might act this miracle at this solemn celebritie: Cyril. in
loc.
Miraculi potius quod acturus erat, quam conuiuij gratia profectus.

We cannot now feast Christ in his person; but we may feed him in his
ministers, in his members. Inuit therefore the good man, and the poor man; as
Job 31.17.
Job says, If I have eaten my morsels alone, and the fatherless have not
eaten thereof. As Amos 6.
Amos complained of the rich gluttons in his time, devouring the lambs of the
flock, and calves out of the stall; drinking wine in bowls, and anointing
themselves with the chiefest ointments, and singing to the viole: but no man
(says the Prophet) is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. If thou will feast
Christ, inuit the Disciples, inuit Mary, the fatherless, the widow: for he
protests openly; Matthew. 25.40.
whatsoever is done unto the least of my brethren, is done unto me.

And when the wine failed] Want at a wedding, Acosta. con. 2. in loc.
does intimate the coffeehouse and vanity of earthly pleasure, that even in
laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is heaviness: Proverbs
14.13. Ecclesiastes 2.1.

We need not dispute curiously Marlorat. ex M^sculo. in loc.
whether this want was occasioned either by the poverty of the parties
inuiting, or by the riotous intemperance of the guests invited, or by the
lavish negligence of the seruitors, or by the multitude of acquaintance, who
came not called, as it is usual at such meetings: it is enough for us to know
that it came to pass by Gods all-seeing providence, that our Savior might
manifest his glory. For, as it is said of him that was borne blind, John 9.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God
should be she^ed on him: so neither the master of the feast, nor the guests,
nor the servants offended in that the wine failed; only this happened for our
good, and Christ's glory.

They have no wine] Iansen. concord. cap. 18.
This speech is grounded upon faith, hope and charity. Faith, in that she
believed Christ was able: hope, being thoroughly persuaded Christ was willing
miraculously to supply this want. Her words are but three: vinum non habent:
an indicative short narration; not an optatiue long oration. Hereby teaching
us, that albeit in regard of our misery, nothing can be said too much; yet in
respect of Christ's mercy, one word is enough, as being more willing to relieve
then we to request.

Lastly, this is a demonstration of her charity; Zepper. con. 1. in loc.
being solicitous for her good friends, accou^ting their want her woe. 1. Cor.
12.26.
For if one member of Christ's mystical body suffer, all suffer with it: and
therefore the good Virgin out of Calvin. in loc.
sympathy, perceiving the wine would fail, cried unto her son, they have no
wine.

She could not but be full of pity, who carried in her womb nine months the
God of compassion. If a man hold an apple in his hand all the forenoone, he
will smell of it all the afternoon. Mary did inwombe the father of mercies:
her bowels therefore must needs be very compassionate. Bernard. ser. 1. Dom.
1. post octau. Epiphan.
Nam and ant^ mentem repleuit quamventrem, and cum processit ex vtero, non
recessit ab animo. As Mary to Christ, they have no wine; so I to you, the poor
have no corn. For their supply (God be thanked) as yet we need no miracle,
but only your mercy. Acts. 3.6.
S. Peter said to the begging creple: Silver and gold have I none, but such as
I have, that give I thee. In the name of Jesus Christ, rise up and walk. But
our Hieron. epist. ^d Eustochium: tom. 1. fol. 146.
lives, if not our lips, utter the contrary; compassion and pity have we none;
but goods and corn which we have, give we not.

Augustine. epist. 5.
Julius Caesar gloried in nothing so much as in pardoning his enemies, and
gratifying his friends. He did believe as a Pagan, but work as a Christian:
but I fear Gueuara. epist.
many believe like Christians, but live like Pagans.

The subtle disputant presses his adversary with two premises, that he may
bring him to an absurd conclusion. Satan is the most cunning sophister, he does
praemittere d^o delicias and diuitias. Now we must deny the first proposition
flatly, and distinguish of the second. And this distinction must be a
division, and this division Christ division: Mtr. 10 21.
Divide pauperibus, Give to the poor.

Master In the life of Tyndall before his works.
Tyndal being a diligent Preacher, and a great student, allotted two days in
every week, monday, and saturday, to visit the sick and to relieve the poor,
which he termed his own days of pastime; a sweet recreation (as Orat. de
obitu Theodosy.
Ambrose speaks) in alieno remedio vulnera sua curare: To benefit our selves
in helping other. In our time we want such women as Mary, such men as Tyndal
etc.

If any shall demand how Mary came by this faith, hope, charity? how she
believed Christ to be God, and able to do wonders? Answer is made, first,
that she might understand this by Maldonat. in loc.
divine revelation: for Gabriel an harbinger of heaven told so much unto her:
Luke 1.32.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the most high: and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no
end.

Secondly, Theophylact. in loc.
by the preaching of John the Baptist, openly proclaming Christ to be the Lamb
of God who takes away the sins of the world.

Thirdly, by the diligent observation of Christ's doctrine both abroad and at
home: for the text says in the second of S. Luke, that Mary kept all those
sayings and pondred them in her heart. Where by the way note what an excellent
thing it is to mark the words of the Preacher, and safely to lay them up in
our heart as in a treasure house, that as occasion is offered at any time, they
may be ready for our use.

What have I to do with thee?] Rhemists and Maldonat in loc.
There is some difference between the Protestants and Papists about this
answer, which seems exceeding hard and harsh. I will therefore follow Saint
Tract. ^. in Joan. ac de fide and symb. cap. 4.
Augustines exposition, as an indifferent Judge between both: Operaturus facta
diuina non agnoscit viscera humana.

What have I to do with thee?] To wit, in this business. I had mine humane
weakness from thee: but to work miracles, is a divine power; and therefore
why should I respect my mother in matters appertaining to the commission of my
father? as it is in this days Epistle; Let him that has an office, wait on
his office. Hence we may learn, that respect of kindred ought not to be the
principal motion in doing our duty, but Gods glory; neglecting Luke 14.26.
father and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, and our own life,
to do the will of our heavenly father. Hieron. epist. Marcel. tom. 1. fol. 155.
Pietatis genus est impium esse pro domino.

Secondly, this does show that M^lanct. in loc.
God defers our suits until his good hour.

Thirdly, Christ answered roughly, lest we should account his mother our
mediatrix and advocate. For Zepper. in loc.
he foresaw the superstition of popery, making Mary the Queen of heaven, and
assigning greater dignity to the mother, then to the Son. For whereas Gods
kingdom consists of his justice and mercy, the Bi^l. exposit. can. missae.
lect. 80.^^ D. Reynold. idolat. lib. 1. cap. 1. and Cassander consult. art. 21.
Papists attribute the greatest part, which is mercy, to Mary, making her high
Chanceller, and Christ, as it were, chief Justice: so that a poor Client may
well Bernardin. in Mariali.
appeal from the tribunal of God, to the court of our Lady. The whole Church
does sing,

Cassander vbi supra.
^ube filio ^ foelix puerpera nostrapians scelera: iure matris impera
redemptori.

Behold their new Pater Noster, answerable to Bonauentures Psalter. It is their
own for the matter, albeit as yet they are in my debt for the manner.

Postil. cathol. con. 2. Dom. 3. post. nati^it.
Matter nostra quae es in coelis] O Ribe^a com. in 6. Michae. Number. 15.
veram matrem, quae semper monstrat se esse matrem: melior quamdecem matres,
itaque te matrem laudamus; vti Bonauentura in psalterio virginis ad hymnum
Ambrosij.

Sanctificetur nomen tuum] Nomen tantae virtutis (inquit D. Morton. apolog.
lib. 1. cap. 67. ex V^ga. co^. in. Apocalyp. 12.
Idiotus) vt ad eius inuocationem coelum rideat, infernus conturbetur:
ineffabile suo modo nomen, vt in nomine tuo flectatur omne genu, coelestium,
terrestrium, and infernorum.

Adueniat regnum tuum] Es enim regina coeli, and domina mundi, sicut in eo
doctorum paucitas, and indoctorum turba consentit.

Fiat voluntas tua] Nam tu potes iubere filium, quipotest omnia: sicut
Bonauentura dicit, and D. Fulk. i^ 1. Tim. 2.
Ecclesia docet: Psalter. virgin. Psalm. 127.
beati, qui timent dominam nostram, and beati omnes, quisciu^t facere
voluntatem suam. Panem nostrem quotidianum da nobis hodie.) Eras^us col. de
peregrinat. religio^is ergo
Nam ab vna matre petuntur omnia, quasi filius Christus semper infans esset.
Psalter. virgin.
Oculi nostri sperant in te domina, mitte nobis cibum and escam.

Dimitte nobis debita nostra] Es enim matter Bellarmin. de beatitudin. sanct.
cap. 17.
gratiae and misericordiae; regina misericordiae, etc. Bonauentura, ser. 2. de
Maria.

Et ne nos inducas in tentationem] Es enim Lexicon theolog. Altenstaig. in
verb. Maria.
exordium salutis nostr^, B^nauent. tom. 3. page 390.
quapropter in omnibus pressuris respice stellam maris: voca and clama Mariam.
Ipsa enim est anchora qua nauis in marifirmatur, and est nauis qua homo a
tentationum fluctibus liberatur.

Sed libera nos a malo] Tu nos ab host protege, ac hora mortis suscipe; vt
habet ecclesia Bellarmin. vbisupra.
cantus. Bonauent. s^cut Chemnitius 3. part. examine. page 149.
Ad eam venite omnes qui laboratis, and tribulatiestis, and refrigerium dabit
animabus vestris. Te Hortulus animae. page 163.
precor mitissima^ virginum gemmam, vt in tremendo and terribili iudicio me
liberes and protegas a poenis inferni.

Quia tuum est regnum, potentia, and gloria] Laus Deo virginique matri; sicut
communiter in librorum epilogo, papicolae, virginicolae.

Cum adulatorie quidam scripsisset de Papa Adriano: Traiectum plantauit,
Louanium rigauit, Caesar autem incrementum dedit: ^lter homo lepidus
subscripsit, Deus interim nihil fecit. Ita quidem ego, si Maria matter nostra,
domina nostra, regina nostra, mediatrix nostra, patrona nostra, saluatrix
nostra; Christus interim Consule Mela^cthon. apolog. confess. Augustan. T^t. de
sanct. inuocat.
vnicus mediator Dei and hominum nihil pro nobis fecit. Ille mediator est
mediatus, mediator dimidiatus; in illius locum Maria successit; illa, illa
vocata; inuocata velut aduocata.

O woman] Hence the Montanists and Valentinians absurdly gather, that Christ
was not the Son of Mary: yet (as Tract. 8. in Joan.
Augustine notes) even the same Evangelist in the same place, calls her again
and again, the mother of Jesus. Our Savior happily called her woman, not
mother, Marlor. in loc.
to signify that he was greater then her child; that his elect people might
acknowledge him to be the Son of God; as they knew he was the son of Mary: or
Maldonat. in loc.
woman, because then a widow.

Mine hour is not yet come] Greg. Nyss. bom. in Apost. verba, Tuncipse filius
subijcietur ei, etc.
Some read this clause with an interrogation; Is not mine hour yet come? am I
not yet of sufficient years and discretion to manage my business without your
direction? The hour is now come, wherein you must obey my commands, as I have
submitted my self heretofore to yours.

August. vbi supra. and Rupertus in loc.
Other interpret this of his passion, according to that of our Evangelist,
Chap. 7.30. No man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. As if
Christ's meaning were this: In miracles acted by the finger of God, I have
nothing to do with thee: but when my weak flesh, which I took from thee
shall be crucified, in that hour I will acknowledge you to be my mother. And
so we read, John 19.25. Then stood by the Cross of Jesus, his mother: and
when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he said
unto his mother; Woman, behold thy Son.

But it is expounded most aptly, that it was not as yet an Theophylact. in loc.
opportune time to work the miracle, Chrysostom. hom. 21. in Joan.
because the want of wine was not generally perceived and manifested. It is
Gods hour when we most need. Marlorat. ex Brent. in loc.
Cum omne carnale consilium and auxilium cessauerint: When all men and means
are wanting, Psalm. 46.1.
God is a present help in trouble.

This one clause then Pontanus in loc.
insinuates our Saviors Power. Providence. Wisdom. Pity. Piety.

Power] For no man has an hour. Act. 1.7.
Times and seasons are put in Gods own power only. Whereas therefore Christ
says, Mine hour; he does evidently demonstrate, that he is creator of years,
and eternal Dubartas 1. day. 1. week.
clock-keeper of time.

Prouidence] For it came not to pass by fate or fortune, but by disposition
divine; Act. 4.28.
determining from all eternity, both what, when, and where Christ should
suffer and do.

Wisdome] Performing this act of wonder in the right quand^, when it might
procure the greatest good to men, and glory to God.

Pitie] For hereby the new married conceived hope, that he would relieve their
want in his good hour.

Pietie] Toward his mother, not absolutely denying, but only deferring her
suit for a time. Nondum venit: It shall come, though as yet not come.

His mother said unto the ministers, whatsoever he says unto you, do it,] She
was not offended or discouraged with Christ's answer, but believed his word, and
submitted her self to his will: a notable president of Bullinger.
faith and Calvin.
obedience; teaching us in all afflictions of body and soul, wholly to stay
our selves upon his gracious promises. In a word, it is Zepp^rus.
a good rule to be followed in all things; hear him; in all the works of thy
calling, whatsoever he says unto thee, do it; not only believe, Pontanus.
but do.

And there were standing there six water pots of stone] The relation of the
miracle it self, contains in it a most lively Melan^. postil. in loc.
picture of the Church militant, subject even in her greatest happiness to
much want and woe: but Christ that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor
sleep; he knows her works, and in the midst of her wants, even when she
thinks her self forsaken, here is her prayers, and turns her water into wine,
giving her a garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

The Fathers and Friars abound with other allegories. He that list may read
August. tract. 9. in Joan. Bernard. ser. 2. post octau. Epiphan. Rupert.
comment. in Joan. lib. 2. Luther. postil. mayor. Dom. 2. ab Epiphan. Ferus.
ser. 9. Dom. 2. post Epiphan. Pontanus bibliothec. con. tom. 1. fol. 222. 223.
etc.

I did always think of glosses, as Desancta virginitat. cap. 46.
Augustine of graces: Alter aliquando fructuosus est donis paucioribus sed
potioribus, alter inferioribus sed pluribus: One man edifieth his hearers with
many, though mean notes; another, with few, but fit; short, but sweet. I pass
therefore from the miracle, to the consequent and effect.

The which is twofold: 1. The manifestation of Christ's glory. 2. The
confirmation of his Disciples faith.

Christ in his morals instructed us to live well; in his miracles to believe
well. And therefore this fact increasing the Disciples faith, and illustrating
his honor, Omne tulit punctum, quia miscuit vtile dulci.

The Epistle. ROMANS 12.16. Be not wise in your own opinion, etc.
SAint Paul exhorts us in this Epistle, not to hurt, but rather help our
enemies.

Not to hurt by Concealing that which is good; as, Wisdom: Be not wise in your
own opinion. Sanctimony: Provide things hon^st in the sight of all men.
Rendering that which is evil: verse. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil:
and verse. 19. Avenge not your selves, etc.

But to help by preserving Peace: verse. 18. If it be possible, live peaceably
with all men. Verse. 20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him. Patience: verse. 21.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

Be not wise] Not in your selves, nor only wise to your selves: not in your
selves and* Prou. 3.7. Esaias. 5.21.
own conceit: 1. Cor. 3.18.
If any man among you seem to be wise, let him be a fool, that he may be
wise. Pro^. 29.20.
See thou a man hasty in his matters an^ haughty; there is more hope of a
fool, then of him. It is See the life of Cominaeus before his works in English.
recorded as a great fault in Charles, Duke of Burgondie, that he seldom asked,
never followed the counsel of other. On the contrary, Moses, a man Acts 7.22.
learned in all wisdom of the Egyptians, and mighty both in words and deeds,
obeyed the voice of his father in law Iethro, doing according to his advice:
Exodus 18.24. Saul hearkened unto the counsel of his servant: 1. Sam. 9.
Agamemnon in Homer, wished for ten Nestors. Reusner. in symbo^is.
Alexander Seuerus never determined any thing of moment, without twelve or
twenty judicious Lawyers. It is a great part of wisdom, yea the first entry to
knowledge, Fulge^tius lib. 1. mytholog.
scire quod nescias; not to be too wise; or in our opinion so wise, that we
neglect others help. The Pope in this respect (as In s^ecul. vitae human. lib.
2. cap. 3. and Vignier answer to Baron. page 39.
Roderigo, Bishop of Zamora well observes) is most unfortunate. For though he
has all things at command, yet evermore stands in need of one thing, to wit, a
faithful counselor.

The Romans at this time being Lords of the world, were puffed up exceedingly
with the greatness of their gifts, and largeness of their Empire: Paul
therefore did often (as Chrysostom notes) inculcate this exhortation; in this
Chapter twice, that it might be remembered once.

The men of England, yea the women of England abusing the great light of the
Gospel, and long peace, are grown so wise, that many will take upon them to
teach even their most learned teachers: and therefore we must again and again
preach and press this one lesson: Be not wise in your own opinion. Let no man
presume to know more then is meet for him to know; but so judge of himself
that he be gentle and sober, according as God has dealth to every man the
measure of faith.

Or as Ambr^s. and Go^ran. in l^c.
other expound it; Be not wise to your selves: but as Proverbs 5.16.
Solomon speaks, Let thy fountains ^l^w forth, and the rivers of water in
the streets: according to the measure of grace, proceeding from the fountain
of goodness, communicate thy wisdom to other, hide not thy talent.

To one is given by the Spirit y^ word of wisdom, Augustine* conf^ss. lib. 13.
c. 18.
t^nqua^ luminare maius; unto another ye word of knowledge, t^nquam luminare
minus; unto another prophecy, unto another faith, unto another diversity of
language, tanq^a^ stell^e, as stars in the firmament of the Church. Our light
then must shine before men, and we must waste our s^lues for the good of such
as are in Gods house. The Matthew. 5.15.
candle must not be put under a b^shell, but on a candlestick. Scire tuum nihil
est, nisite scire hoc sciat alter. If thou will only be wise to thy self,
thou shall at last turn fool. For as water standing still is soon puddle:
Plutarch. de n^m lat^ndo.
so the gifts of the mind not employed are empaired. A ^. G^l. lib. 13. cap. 8.
Af^aniu^ said truly that use begat wisdom:

Vsus me genuit, m^ter peperit memori^.
Let not us then enclose truth and the knowledge thereof, it is common. If we
make it private, we shall be deprived of it. As Confess. lib. 12. cap 25.
Au^ustine sweetly: Non licet h^^ere priuatam, ne pri^emure^. Eph^s. 4.8.
When Christ as^ended up on high, he gave gifts to men, among other the gift of
1. Cor. 12.8.
wisdom, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the building up of his mystical body. Wisdom then is not
given only for thy self, but for other, among the rest Psalm. 68.18.
even for th^ne enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

Secondly, we may not conceal our sanctimonie. Provide things honest in the
sight of all m^n] as Pa^l expounds Paul. 1. Cor. 10.32.
Give none offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the Church
of God. Mar^orat.ex Calvin. ^n loc.
For as a man must have care of his conscience before God; so likewise of his
credit before men.

Some provide things honest Before men, but not before God, as the
vainglorious hypocrites, Herod within, John without, painted tombs, as
Christ aptly: Sepulchra quasi semipulchra, exterius nitida, interius foetida.
Before God, but not before men; as the malcontent and indiscreet professor,
by whose evil example the name of God is often Romans 2.24.
blasphemed. Neither before God nor men: as the shameless ruffins and Atheists
of the world, whose Philip. 3*19.
glory is their shame, Proverbs 2.14.
delighting in doing evil, and boasting of iniquity; reputing dishonestie no
dishonor; but the top of their gallantrie. So Saint Confess. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Augustine writes of himself before he was a saint: Vbi non suberat quo admisso
aequarer, perditis, fingebam me fecisse, quod non feceram, ne viderer abiector,
quo eram innocentior. Both before God and men; as Luke 1.6.
Elizabeth and Za^harie, who were just before God, and unreprovable before
men: so must every Christian abstain, so far as he can, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
from all appearance of evil: Theophylact. in loc.
yet this honest care of our carriage must not be to please men, but only to
praise God. As S. 1. Epist 2.12.
Peter interprets S. Paul: Have your conversation honest, that they which
spea^e evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works, which they
shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation. Let your light (says
Christ) shine before men; not only that they may see your good works, but
also that seeing, they may glorify your father which is in heaven. Augustine.
lib. 1 de ser. Dom. i^ mont.
Vt hoc ipsum, quod homo per bona opera placet hominibus, non ibi finem
constituat, vt hominibus placeat, sed referat hoc ad ^audem Dei, and propterea
placeat hominibus, vt in illo glorificetur Deus.

As we may not conceal from our enemy wisdom and knowledge which are good:
so much less render evil. Recompense to no man evil for euill] A Magistrate
may punish a malefactor, and so pro malo c^lpae, render malum poen^e. Aquin. in
loc.
But this is not to recompense evil for evil, but good for evil: because
corrections are directions as well to the seer as sufferer: 1. Cor. 5.5.
the flesh is destroyed, that the spirit may be saved. A Magistrate then may
render evil for evil: but a private man out of a private grudge, may not
avenge himself, but rather give place to wrath.

The which may be construed of our own wrath. The which may be construed of
adversaries anger. The which may be construed of Gods judgment.
Of our own wrath, as Os^ic. lib. 1. c. 21
Ambrose: Resist irae, ^i potes, cede si non potes. An hasty Bonauent. dieta
salutis, cap. 5.
choleric man is like one that dwells in a thatched house, who being rich in
the morn, through sudden fire is a beggar ere night. It is extreme folly to
do any thing in fury; but wisdom to give place and space to wrath. It was
an excellent decree of Reus^er* in symbolis, and Til^man. in loc.
Theodosius, enacted by the counsel of S. Ambrose, that execution after a
severe sentence should be deferred thirty days: vt ira decocta, durior
emendari possit sententia, that all heat of contention allaied, if need
require, the severity of the censure might be qualified and moderated.

Secondly, this may be construed of our Aut fugiendo aut permittendo: Hicron.
in loc.
adversaries anger: for as Martyr. in loc.
thunder and gunnes hurt not any thing which yields unto their fury, but only
that which is hard and stiff; so the raging and roaring of our foes are best
quelled by patience. Turn to the brauling curre, and he will be more fierce;
but ride on neglecting him, and he will soon be quiet. You may turn the
proverb:

Veterem iniuriam feres do vitas nouam.
Thirdly, this may be construed of Gods judgment, and that Theophylact.
Aquin. Luther. in loc.
most fitly: for to God only vengeance belongs, and he will avenge our cause.
The malicious man in reuiling thee, does Romans 2.5.
treasure up wrath against the day of wra^h, and therefore give place to Gods
wrath: 1. Pet. 5.7.
Cast all your care on him, ^or he ^^reth for you.

Y^a but may we not complain to the Magistrate for redress of injury? yes
sur^ly: for he i^ Gods lieutenant on earth, and therefore the vulg^r Latin
v^sm^tips^s d^fende^tes, is in^u^ficient, Whit^ker againts R^yno^ds the Papist.
as our Divines have well observed: and the Rhemist^ have well m^nded it*
r^ading as we do, revenge; or, (...) not ^our s^lue^. For we may be so wise as
serpents in defending our s^lues; howsoever so innocent as doue^ in ^ffending
other. A^uin. and Tileman. in loc.
He that commits his cause to the Magistrate, gives place to divine judgment:
for all superior powers are Romans 13.1.
Gods ordinance: but whosoever auengeth his own quarrel, steps into the
Princes chair of estate, yea Gods own seat dethroning both, and so disturbes
heaven and earth.

Here then is no place for duel; a fault (as it is used in England, the Low
Countries, especi^ll^ Where within ten years six thou^and gentle^e^ have been
slain, as it appears by the Kings pardons: vide lis ^mbres^ des de^uncts
sieuts de Vill^mor and de Fontaines, pa^. 46.
France, for eu^ry punctilio of honor falsely so called) against not only the
rules of reason and religion (as Exhortat ad milites Templ^, c^p. 2. ^. 401.
Bernard notably: Quis hic tam stupendus error? quis furor hic tam non
ferendus, nullis stipen^ijs militare ni^i aut mortis aut criminis? Nam occisor
leth^^^ter peccat: and occisus aetern^li^er perit) but even against the first
principles of that art.

As a Christian may war in A^g^stin. ^pist 5.
love, so a Christian must jar in love; so contend with his adversary before
the lawful Judge, that the party cast in the s^ite may be bettered, if not
in his money, yet in his manners, and Satan only conquer^d: Baron. (...) Tom.
9 ^ol. 5.
Vt qui vincitur (...) incat* and v^nus ta^tummo^o vincatur di^bolus. Ma^lorat
ex calvin. in ^oc.
Otherwise when we sue for our rig^t out of rancor and malice, we commit not
our case to God and his deputy the Prince, but make them both our de^uties,
our instruments of revenge; the which is such an horrible crime, that Paul
calls it a m^sterie of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. I say, this secret exalting
of our selves above all that is called God, using Sovereigns as servants in
our private quarrels, is to play the devil and the Pope.

We may not then dissemblingly, but simply give place to wrath. An hard saying,
and therefore Paul does Erasmus and Martyr in loc.
sweeten it with a loving term, (...), dearly beloved: as if he should
speak thus, It is my love, that I write so much against malice: not for your
hurt, but for your eternal good. If you will not believe me, believe God
himself, who says in his holy Deuteronomy. 3^.35. Heb. 10.30.
word, Vengeance is mine, I will repay* s^ith the Lord.

God does reu^nge the quarrel of his children upon the wicked in this, and in
the world to come. In this life, so the children who mocked his Prophet E^^^^^,
were rent in pieces with bears, 2. King. 2. So when Jerusalem had killed the
Prophets, and stoned such as preached unto her, Almighty God was w^oth, and
sent forth his warriers, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their
city: Matthew. 22.7.

Eusebius. histor. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Three shameless ruffins accused Narciss^s, a reverend and holy Bishop, of a
most heinous crime, confirming their accusation with imprecation: the first
wished if it were not so, that he were burnt: the second, that he might dye of
the iandise: the third, that he might lose his eyes. And afterward in process
of time, the first had his house set on fire in the night, and he with all his
family was burnt: the second had the iandise from the crown of his head, to
the sole of his foot, whereof he died uncomfortably: the third, seeing what
was befallen these twain, repented, and confessed the conspiracy; yet for all
that he lost his eyes.

Lanquet ^^^on. f^l. 196.
Earl Godwin swearing at table before the King, that he did not murder
A^fr^^, after many words in excusing himself, said; So might I safely swallow
this morsel of bread, as I am guiltless of the deed. But so soon as he had
received the bread, forthwith he was choked.

What need we look so far: the confounding of the Spanish Armado; the
defeating of so many cruel treasons against our late Queen of blessed memory;
the frustrating of that hellish Gunpowder Treason, are plain demonstrations
that vengeance is Gods, and that he will repay; that he does Psalm. 35.1.
plead the cause of his servants, against such as strive with them, and fight
against such as fight against them.

Again, God rewards the wicked in the world to come; Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink, etc.
Augustine. de fide and operibus. cap. 15.
If they shall be punished who did no good, how shall they be tormented who
render evil to the members of Christ? If negligent Dives be tortured in hell,
for omitting only the works of mercy, what shall become of violent Dives, for
committing the works of cruelty?

Theophylact. in Matthew. 12.
Some sins are punished only in this life; as poor Lazarus, and that
incestuous Corinthian. Other only in the life to come, as the rich Glutton, who
while he lived, had the world at will. Other are both tortured in this life,
and tormented in the next; as the filthy Sodomites, who for their burning lust,
had here sulphureum ignem, and shall have there, gehennalem ignem. Or as
Saluianus, lib. 1. de gubernat. Dei, God sent upon them in this life, Gehennam
e coelo.

Wherefore seeing Almighty God does revenge our quarrel, either immediately by
himself, or mediatly by his ministers, and wariers, even all his creatures in
heaven and earth; it is both faithless and fruitless for our selves to right
our selves. It is faithless not to believe that the Lord will deal with us
Luke 2.29.
according to his word, who promised by the mouth of his holy Psalm. 91.8.
Prophet: With thine eyes shall thou behold and see the reward of the ungodly.
Fruitless, for as much as it is a Heb. 10.31.
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, whose little finger
is heavier then our whole hand.

If it be possible, so much as in you is, live peaceably with all men] We must
seek peace, yet under these conditions; If it be possible, and as much as in
us is. For we cannot have peace with some men; and we may not have peace in
some matters. See Gospel on all Saints, and ser. on the first Lesson for the
next Sunday, joined to the Gospel and Epistle.

If thine enemy hunger, feed him] There are degrees of love; Galat. 6.10.
Do good to all men, especially to them which are of the household of faith.
Among the faithful, the nearest ought to be dearest unto us; a wife, father,
child, ally, neighbor, friend, is to be respected more ( caeteris paribus)
then a stranger or an enemy: yet in case of necessity, thou must feed thy foe,
blessing him that did curse thee. By the civil laws, he that bequeathes a man
nourishment, intends he should have bed and board, apparel and dwelling. Lege,
quos nos hosts. 234. de verb. signific.
Alimentis legatis, cibaria and vestitus and habitatio debentur. Martyr in loc.
In like sort, God inioining us in his Testament and last will, to feed our
enemies, includes also, that we must harbor them, and cloth them, and
according to their several necessities, every way relieve them.

In so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head] I find
Theophylact. Aquin. and Tileman. in loc.
two constructions of these words; one bad, another good. It is a senseless
sense to say by well doing, thine enemy not deserving it, thou shall he^pe
coals of fire upon his head; increase Gods heavy judgments against him. Our
Apostles intent is to move men unto charitable works even toward their enemies:
hereby to do them good, and to purpose the same. But if that were the meaning,
Paul should teach us how to be revenged; and in show of doing kindness, to work
mischief, pretending good, intending evil.

The better construction is; In so doing thou shall either confound, or convert
thine adversary. Calvin. in loc.
Confound him in his conscience, making him acknowledge, that thou art more
religious, and more nobly minded then himself. So when Saul understood of
David's honest and honorable carriage toward him, instantly brake forth into
this ingenuous confession; 1. Sam. 24.18.
Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rendered me good, and I have
rendered thee evil. Or else thou shall Hieron. in loc.
convert him to thy self. For Cant. 8.6.
love is strong as death, the coals thereof are ^iery coals, and a vehement
flame. There is no greater provocation to love, then prevention in love. Aquin.
ex Augustine. in loc.
Nimis enim durus animus, qui dilectionem, ersinolebat impendere, nolit
rependere. Kind respect to thy foe, shall blow the coals of his affection, and
inflame his love toward thee.

Be not overcome of euill] We must have patience, when we cannot have peace; so
we shall be Romans 8.37.
more then conquerours, ouercomming without resistance, which is the Martyr in
loc.
most noble kind of victory: or overcome evil with goodness; that is, make
the wicked good by thy good example. Theophylact. in loc.
Probum ex improbo read. For as Epist. 54.
Augustine from Seneca, diligendi sunt mali, vt non sint mali. We must manifest
our love to the wicked, in winning them to God, not in fostering or flattering
them in their folly.

The Gospel. MATTHEW. 8.1. When he was come down from the mountain, etc.
Down from the mountaine] Haymo apud Thom in loc.
From the mount of heaven, into this valley of earth; as a Physician to cure
our leprosies. Coster. con. 3. in loc.
Or from the mount of the law, to the plain of the Gospel. Ferus, ser. 4. in
loc.
Or from the mount of contemplation, unto the field of action. Origin. hom. 5.
in Mat.
Or he came down from the mountain, first instructing his disciples, and
after, descending to the capacities of the people. Ha^mo vbi sup. and A^^sta
con. 2. (...) loc.
Teaching all teachers hereby, to deliver high points unto the learned, and
plain principles to the simple. Doctores ascendunt in montem, vbi
perfectioribus excellentia praecepta; descendunt autem, cum in^erioribus
l^uiora demonstrant.

Behold a leper] In Christ, preaching and practice meet together. So soon as
he had said well, Chrysostom. and Hieron. in loc.
he proceeds for the confirmation of his doctrine to do well. Acting good works
and great works: good works of mercy; great works of miracle. Of mercy, in
helping; of miracle, in healing a leprous man present, and a palsy man absent.
Intimating hereby, that it is not enough to talk of Gods ways, except we
walk in his paths; and manifesting himself to the world, that he was the
Messiah of the world. As if he should argue thus; If you believe not my words,
John 5.36.
yet credit me for my wonders. Mat. 11.5.
I make the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to go. I cure all kind
of diseases, even with the least touch of my finger, and least breath of my
mouth. I heal the leper, I hear the Centurion.

The leper was a Jew, the Centurion a Gentile; the leper poor, the Centurion
rich; the leper a man of peace, the Centurion a man of war. Culman. and
Hemingius in loc.
Insinuating hereby, that God is no Acts 10.34.
accepter of persons; but that his benefits indifferently belong to men of all
nations and all fashions.

I^ Gal. 3.28.
Christ there is neither Jew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free] Yet Christ did
first cure the Jew, then the Gentile. For salvation was offered, Act. 13.46.
first, to the Jews; he touched the Jew, but cured the Gentile with his word.
Rupertus. in loc.
He visited Jerusalem in his own person, but healed other nations by the
Preachers of his Gospel.

In the leper, 2. things are remarkable: the Weakness of his body: sick, and
sick of a leprosy. Virtues of his mind: Faith. Adoration. Wisdom. Patience.
Confession.


In Christ also two things are to be considered: his Mercy; that would so
readily. Might; that could so easily cure this distressed Lazer.

Aleper] All weakness originally proceeds from John 5.14.
wickedness; T^om. 3. part. quaest. 4. art. 4.
either from some defect in our conception, or disorder in our conversation: as
Mephibos^eth had 2. Sam. 4.
his lamenesse by falling from his nurse; so every man his sickness by falling
from the Lord. Christ, who was free from sin, was also free from sickness:
but unto men, carrying about them bodies of sin, diseases are as it were a
Hemingius in loc.
sermon from heaven, wherein Almighty God accuses of sins, and shows his
wrath against sinners.

But the condition of a leper, as we read in the Leuit. 13.
law, was of all other sick, most insupportable. First, he must live alone,
separated from the fellowship of Gods people, as unworthy to come into clean
company. Secondly, he did wear four marks to be known by; his garments
torn, his head bare, his mouth covered, and he must cry; I am unclean, I am
unclean. For grief whereof, assuredly some pined away; being forlorn in
their sorrow, destitute of all good comfort and company. Yet this leper endued
with a lively faith, is not hopeless, howsoever hapless. For he comes, and
says unto the great Physician of the world; Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean: though he knew that his sickness in the worlds eye was
incurable, yet he did believe that unto God nothing is impossible. He felt his
own misery to be great, yet hoped Christ's mercy was more great: and therefore
comes unto him (as De vita Christi. part. 1. cap. 41.
Ludolphus aptly) Non tam passibus corporis quam fide cordis: If thou will,
thou can. A strong faith in a weak body.

Faith comes by Romans 10.17.
hearing* and the reason why this leper extraordinarily desired to hear
Christ, and hear of Christ, was his unclean disease: Ferus ser. 4. in loc.
so that the weakness of his body, brought him unto the Physician of his
soul. Note then here with Romans 8.28.
Paul, that all things happen for the good of such as are good. It was good for
David that he was in trouble; good for 2. King. 5.
Naaman that he was a leper; for his uncleanness brought him unto the Prophet,
and the Prophet brought him unto the saving knowledge of the true God. It was
good for Paul that he was buffeted by Satan, for otherwise peradventure through
abundance of revelations he would have buffeted God.

Of all herbs in the garden (as one wittily) Rue is the herb of grace. Many
times our woe does occasion our weal: for as pride does breed sores of salues,
so faith on the contrary does often make salues of sores, altogether
renouncing her own merit, and wholly relying upon Christ's mercy. Tanto
desiderantius ad Christum contendit, quod suam indignitatem and immunditiam
probe sentiret: as Postil. mayor. in loc.
Luther and Vbi supra.
Ferus accord in this; and that so truly, that as a Papist said; If Bonauentura
had not been a Romish saint, he would have been reputed an ass: So the
Protestant, if Ferus had not been a Romish ass, he might have proved in the
Church a renowned saint.

The second virtue to be considered as a fruit of his faith, is adoration;
Thomas ex Chrysostom. in loc.
a spiritual fee for a spiritual physician: as the bodily Doctor must be
paid, so the ghostly prayed. He therefore worships Christ, and that with all
humblenes of Thought. humblenes of Word. humblenes of Deed.


He comes to Christ as a vassal to his Lord: Domine, non tanquam ad dominum
titularem, sed tanquam ad dominum tutelarem: If thou will thou can. Out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and therefore believing in his
heart that Christ was the Lord, willing and able to help, confesses it also
with his mouth: If it be for my good, I am sure thou will: and I believe thou
can; attributing all to Christ's might and mercy, nothing to his own either
worth or woe.

Uttering this also with humble gesture. For, as S. Cap. 1.40.
Mark reports, he kneeled, and as S. Cap. 5.12.
Luke, he fell on his face: teaching us in prayer to fall down and kneel
before the Lord our maker. He that worships God irreuerently, shows himself
not a Christian but a Diez con. 1. in loc.
Manichee: Augustine. b^res. 46.
who thought God made the soul, but not the body.

Thirdly, note the lepers wisdom, who did observe Circumstances of
Chrysostom. and Th^^plylact. in loc.
Place: not pressing to Christ on the mount, but expecting him in the valley.
Circumstances of Time: not interrupting Christ in his sermon, or disturbing his
auditory. Circumstances of Person: speaking in a succinct style:
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Giving us to understand, that
in suing unto men which are wise, and in praying to God who is wisdom, we
need not use many but pithie words. See Gospel. Dom. 2. quadrages.

The fourth virtue is his patience, who was content, notwithstanding his
extreme misery, to stay Gods leisure, and Christ's pleasure. Matthew. 6.33.
First, seeking the kingdom of God, and then desiring that other things might
be cast upon him. Ferus ser. 5. in loc.
In ye first place giving God glory, Lord if thou will, thou can. In the
second, praying for his own good: Make me clean; not as I will, but as thou will O Lord: prescribing neither the time when, nor place where, nor manner
how, but referring all to Christ, possessing his soul with patience.

The last virtue to be regarded in this leper, is con^ession. He knew the
Pharisees hated and persecuted al such as confessed Christ: yet he calls him
Lord, and worships him as a Lord, and proclaims him in the presence of much
people to be the Lord. It is well Zepper. in loc.
observed, that Gods omnipotent power and infinite mercies are the two wings of
our devotion, whereby faith in the midst of all trouble mounts into heaven.
Here the leper acknowledges openly Christ's omnipotency: Chrysosto^. and
Theophylact. in loc.
for he says not, entreat God, to make me clean; but, if thou will, thou
thy self can; and therefore thou art the very Christ: neither does he
Ambros. l. b. 5. in Luc.
doubt of his mercy, Ludolphus v^i supra.
for he says not, make me clean, but, if thou will* make me clean. Coster.
explicat. in loc.
It is enough to show my need, I commit the rest to thy cure, to thy care. Thou
can do whatsoever thou will, and thou will do y^ which shall be most for my
good and thy glory.

This may teach us how to confess our wickedness to God, as also to profess
his goodness unto men. Our wickedness unto God: for as Seneca truly, Pr^ma
sanitatis pars est velle sanari: The first step unto health is to be desirous
of help. Augustine. epist. 1^8
Ipse sihi denegat curam, qui suam medico non publicat causam. Our sins are a
spiritual uncleanness and leprosy, defiling the whole body, making our eyes
to lust, our mouth to curse, our tongue to lie, our throat an open sepulcher,
our hands nimble to steal, our feet swift to shed blood. It is therefore
necessary we should manifest unto Christ our sores, that he may see them, and
search them, and salve them.

Again, by this example we may learn to profess the faith of Christ openly,
Though Psalm. 2.2.
the kings of ye earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel against the Lord,
and against his anointed. Other happily think so, but dare not say so. Some
peradventure say so, though they think not so: but I believe as I speak, and
speak as I believe: Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.

Hitherto concerning the patient: I come now to the physician, in whom two
things are obseruable:

1. His mercy, who would so readily. 2. His might, who could so easily cure
such an incurable leprosy.
And Jesus put forth his hand] He granted that cheerfully, which the leper
desired earnestly. The leper said, if thou will, and Christ answers, I will;
and as I will, I say, be thou clean; and as I say, I do. His leprosy was
immediately cleansed: he spoke the word and it was done; he commanded and it
was effected, even with a little moving of his lips, and touch of his finger.

Here then is comfort for the distressed soul: the leper calls, and Christ
heales him; the Centurion comes, and Christ helps him. Other Physicians are
deceived often themselves, and often deceive others; and therefore we venture
much, when we trust them a little. The best physic (as one said) is to take
no physic: but if we commit our cause to this heavenly Doctor, our venture
is without all peradventure: for he cures all that Psalm. 50.15.
call upon him, and Matthew. 11.28.
eases all that come unto him.

Jesus put forth his hand and touched him.] Ludolphus vbi svpra.
Extendens manum suam] quod fuit liberalitatis contra auaros: tetigit eum] quod
fuit humilitatis contra superbos: dicens volo] quod fuit pietatis contra
inuidos: mundare] quod fuit potestatis contra incredulos.

It was unlawful to touch a leper, as we find, Leu. 14. In that therefore
Christ touched here this leper, he shows himself to be greater then Moses
above the law. When Elisha cured Naaman, he did not put his hand on the place,
because he was subject unto the law; but Christ touched this leper as being
Sovereign of the law. So Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theophylact, Ludolphus: and
almost all other upon the place.

Secondly, note with Postil. in loc.
Melancthon, that moral duties are to be preferred before ceremonial offices:
and therefore Christ neglects a ceremony to save his brother, and that
according to Gods own commandment, Osee 6.6.
I will have mercy, not sacrifice. The best gloss upon the Gospel is faith:
and the best exposition of the law is love. Thomas ex Chrysostom. in loc.
Christ therefore did offend the sound of the law, but not the sense.

Thirdly, this intimates that Christ was homo verus, and yet not homo merus; a
very man in touching, but more then a mere man in healing with a touch. Lib.
5. in Luc. cap. 1.
Ambrose pithily: Volo dicit propter Fotinum, imperat propter Arium, tangit
propter Manichaeum: He did touch the leper to confute Manichaeus, denying him
to be very man; he did use the imperative mood, be thou clean, to confound
Arius, denying him to be very God.

Fourthly, observe with Maldonat. in loc.
Cyrillus of Alexandria, the preciousnes of Christ's humanity, the which united
unto the Godhead, is the sole salve of all our sores; his rags are our robes,
his crying our rejoicing, his death our life, his incarnation our salvation.

Fifthly, with Ex Chrysostom. and Iansen. concor. cap. 44.
Aquin, to demonstrate, that himself and none other cured him, because
himself and none other touched him.

Sixthly, with In loc.
Calvin and Marlorat, Christ's humility, who did vouchsafe not only to talk
with the leper, but also to touch the leper. Origin.
According to this example, we must learn not to loath any Lazarus, as the
rich Glutton in the Gospel, but rather (at it is reported of Postil. cathol.
con. 1. in loc.
Elizabeth, the Kings daughter of Hungary) to make medicines for his maladies,
and plasters for his wounds: in humanity to relieve the distressed; in
humility to kiss the very feet of the poor. As Christ stretched out his hand
to the leper, Prou. ^1.20.
so we should put forth our hand to the needy. Let not thine hand (says the
Eccles. 4.31.
Wise man) be stre^ched out to receive, and shut when thou should give.

Lastly, with Lib. 4. contra Marcion.
Tertullian and Thomas and Chrysostom. in loc. and Ludolphus vbi supra.
other, how Christ in this action respected not the letter, but the meaning,
which is the soul of the law. The scriptures are not Hieron. exposit prior. in
c. 1. ad Galatas.
in superficie, sed in medulla; non in verborum folijs, sed in radice rationis.

Now the reason of the law forbidding the clean to touch unclean, was, lest
hereby they should be polluted. But Christ could not be thus infected; he
therefore touched the leper, not to receive hurt, but to give help: so the
text of 2. Tim. 3.5.
Paul is to be construed; hos deuita.

The Nouice may not be familiar with an old subtle fox; but a judicious Divine
may confer with an heretic, not to pervert himself, but to convert his
adversary: Christ may touch a leper, if it be to heal him; and the Minister of
Christ may teach an heretic, if it be to win him, and not to wound the truth.

I will, be thou cleane] I will. ( James 4.15.
If God will) is the style of man: our will being subordinate to Gods eternal
decrees; in Act. 17.28.
whom we live, and move, and have our being. But, I will, is the style of God
only, who does whatsoever pleases him in heaven, in earth, in sea: Ps. 135.6.
The commanding term then, I will, and imperative mood, be thou clean,
(except we read the text with the spectacles of Arius) Justin. Martyr.
Athanas. and reliqui sere patres, vti Maldonat. in loc.
evidently prove, that Christ is God Almighty.

And immediately his leprosy was clensed] This amplifieth exceedingly Christ's
greatness and goodness: first, in that he cured this unclean person
thoroughly, then in that he cured him quickly; for in all our suits unto men, we
desire two things especially, that they deal soundly and roundly. Christ dealt
so soundly with this leper, as that he did expose his cure to the censures even
of his adversaries the Priests, of all, most ready to cavil at his carriage,
and mock his miracle: so roundly, so speedily, that whereas ordinary physic
must have time for operation; his extraordinary medicine wrought, as the text
says, immediately, instantly.

Jesus said unto him, tell no man] Saint Cap. 1.45.
Mark reports, that this leper instantly published the matter, and that in
such sort, that Jesus could not openly enter into the City, but was without in
desert places; and yet people came to him from every quarter. Here then a
question is made, whether it was a fault in the leper or no, thus to diuulge
the miracle? For Cap. 12.4.
Esaias would have men declare Gods works among the people. Psalm. 107.
David wished often, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness. And Christ himself said unto another, whom he cured, in the 5. of S.
Mark; Go thy way home to thy friends, and show them what great things the
Lord has done to thee. Vbi supra.
Ludolphus answers by distinction, affirming that there is, triplex praeceptum,
Cautelae. triplex praeceptum, Probationis. triplex praeceptum, Obedientiae.
Or as Helmetius in loc.
other Obligationis. Or as Helmetius in loc.
other Tentationis. Or as Helmetius in loc.
other Instructionis.


All the positive laws of God are obligatory; the commandments affirmative
bind semper; and the negative semper, and ad semper. The probatory precepts are
to try us only. So God Genesis 22.
commands Abraham to kill Isaac; intending hereby not to destroy the son, but
to try the father; admonitory precepts; as here, Christ commanded the leper to
tell no man: hereby teaching us in him to shun vain glory; for so most
interpreters expound it.

This distinction is insufficient; as having no firm ground in the Bible. For
when almighty God inioines a particular command, for the trial of his people,
contrary to the general scope of his law, he does at that instant Perkins
treat. of cons. cap. 2.
dispense with the general, and the particular only binds; as in the
sacrificing of Isaac; Offer thy son, was an exemption at that time from the
law, Thou s^alt not kill.

And as for admonitory precepts, how did this leper infallibly know, that
Christ's command, Tell no man, was rather an instruction for other, then a
prohibition unto himself? Wherefore seeing all Christ's injunctions bind, I
subscribe unto their opinion, Calvin. and Marlor. in loc.
who think this leper offended in publishing abroad Christ's benefit,
notwithstanding he did it affectionately, and zealously. For we must give
thanks unto God, not as we will, but as he will: Deuteronomy. 4.1. John 2.5.

Hence we may learn to temper our zeal with knowledge and obedience: for 1.
Sam. 15.22.
obedience is better then sacrifice.

If any demand, why Christ would have this miracle concealed: I answer with
Romans 9.20.
Paul; O man, who art thou which disputes against God? Job 9.3.
If thou dispute with him, thou can not answer one thing of a thousand: but
he can render a thousand answers unto this frivolous objection. As first, that
there is a time for all things; a time, wherein Christ would be thoroughly
known, and a time wherein he would not be known, because his hour was not
yet come.

Secondly, Hieron. in loc.
Non erat necesse, vt sermon iactaret, quod corpore praeferebat: It was
needless to publish the miracle, seeing his whole body made clean, was as it
were turned all tongue to tell it.

Thirdly, it was absurd, that the leper should boast he was clean, before he
was judged to be clean. Therefore Christ says in the next clause, Go and
show thy self unto the Priest: and then being adjudged clean, tell whom thou will.

Show thy self unto the Priest] Interpreters observe diverse reasons of this
command. First, to Marlorat. in loc.
confirm the truth of the miracle, when as the leper according to law, shall
be judged clean.

Secondly, that the leper might enjoy the Theophylact. in loc.
benefit of his cure: for he might not enter into the City, Leuit. 14.
before the Priest had pronounced him clean.

Thirdly, to Hieron. in loc.
condemn the Priests, who taught, that Christ was not an obseruer, but rather
a transgressor of the law.

Fourthly, that as the law does witness of Christ; and all the sacrifices are
types of Christ: Idem ibidem.
so likewise the Priests, expounders of the law, might also witness, that
Christ is the true Messiah of the world; that seeing this miracle, they might
believe; or in not believing, be left inexcusable.

Fifthly, to Melancthon. in loc. and Ludolphus vbi supra.
magnify the calling and office of the Priests, howsoever they were wicked
wretches. Hereby teaching us, not to vilify that holy profession for the
faults and infirmities of some Judas crept in among the twelve.

Lastly, by this example, instructing us to do the greatest right unto those
who do us the most wrong. Go to the Priests, albeit they be my mortal
enemies, and do that respect, which is incident to their places and persons.

Here the Gospel and Epistle meet. Christ did not render evil for evil, but
overcome evil with goodness: providing things honest, not only before God,
but also in the sight of all men; auenging not himself, but giving place to
wrath, having peace so far as might be with all men.

The Coster. con. 3. Acost. con. 2. in loc. etc.
Papists upon this clause build auricular particular confession unto the
Priest. The leper ought to show himself unto the Priest of the old Testament:
Ergo, the sinner infected with spiritual leprosy must confess himself unto
the Priest of the new Testament.

Answer is made, that an argument drawn from allegories and similitudes, is
of little or no force, except it be seconded by some other evident text, whose
natural and proper sense is agreeable thereunto: but there is no such place,
which e^ther expresses or implies auricular popish confession, and therefore
quod non lego, non credo.

Master Jewel defense of Apolog. fol. 151.
Harding says that auricular confession is Gods ordinance: but when he comes
unto the point, his only confirmation is his own bare affirmation. We tell
them that confession is an institution of God, and not of man: as if his tale
should stand for Gospel, in whom are found so many legends, and legions of lies.

Melanct. tom. 2 fol. 161.
Panormitan confesses honestly, that it is not a divine constitution, but an
humane tradition: and Sum. quaest. 18 art. 4. vide Merton. Apolog. part. 1.
cap. 64. Idem sere Peresius de tradit. part. 3. consid. 3. and Iansen. concord.
cap. 147.
Maldonate writes plainly, that many Catholics are of the same opinion, as
namely Scotus among the schoolmen; and the expounders of Gratian among the
Canonists.

If then a tradition, of what antiquity? Beatus Rhenanus a popish Doctor
auoweth in his Argument. in libel. Tertullian. de poenitent.
notes upon Tertullians book de Poenitentia, that this kind of confessing was
unknown in the days of Tertullian, who lived about three hundred years after
Christ: and it is noted in the gloss upon the De poenit. distinct. 1. Petrus
in glossa. Jewel. vbi supra, fol. 155.
Decrees; and by Senten. lib. 4. distinct. 17. cap. cum ergo.
Peter Lombard, that it was not used in S. Ambrose time, who lived four
hundred years after Christ. Schol. in epist. Hieron. ad Oceanum de obitu
Fabiolae, tom. 1. fol. 201.
Erasmus an indifferent man, affirms peremptorily, that this manner of
confessing to the Priest secretly, was not as yet ordained in Hieroms age. The
Greek Church, as Melancthon. and Jewel. vbi supra.
Theodorus writes, has no such custom. Master Idem ibidem, fol. 148.
Harding himself is constrained against his will, to confess that the terms
of auricular and secret conf^ssion are seldom mentioned in the Fathers;
Rhenanus vbi supra, and Erasmus annot. in A^t. 19. vti Bellarmin. fatetur de
poenit. lib 3. cap. 1.
a greater clerk the^ he, says never in old time.

We may then justify Caluins challenge, lib. 3. Institut. cap. 4 sect. 7. that
auricular popish Confession was not practiced in the Church until twelve
hundred years after Christ, instituted first in the Lateran Council, under
Innocentius the third.

We read that there was in the Communion book, tit. Commination.
Primitive Church a godly discipline, that such persons as were notorious
sinners, were put to open penance, and that by the direction of the Bishop or
Pastor: Rhenanus and Jewel, vbi supra.
and such as voluntarily desired to make public satisfaction for their
offenses, used to come unto the Bishops and Priests, as unto the mouth of the
congregation. But this confession was not constrained, but voluntary; not
private, but public: yet hence the priests abusing the peoples weakness took
their hint, to bring in auricular confession upon peril of damnation. A
cunning invention to discover the mysteries of all states, and all men, and to
enrich that covetous and ambitious sea: for Confessions evermore make work for
Indulgences, and Indulgences are a great supporter of the triple crown.

The Papists in this case, fly from the Scriptures unto the Councels, from the
Councels unto the Fathers, and from the Fathers unto their last starting hole,
miracles. Auricular Confession is Gods ordinance (says De Poenitent. lib. 3.
cap. 12.
Bellarmine) because God has wrought many miracles at auricular Confession. It
is answered aptly, that David says not thy wonder, but thy word is a lantern.
Scripture without miracles are a good warrant; but miracles without text, are
insufficient: for they were wrought by false prophets in Deuteronomy. 13.1.
old time, by false teachers in Matthew. 24.24.
our days.

It is observed by Tully, that bad Orators in stead of reasons use
exclamations: and so Bellarmine, for want of arguments is feign to tell a tale
or two related by Bonauentura, Antoninus, and our good countriman Alanus Copus;
all which is no more, but ask my fellow whether I be a thief.

That private confession, as it is used among the Papists, is neither
necessary nor Quod sine numero est, quomodo numerabo? Berna^d. ^^rm. de quad^u
lici debito.
possible; see Calum. Institut. lib. 3. cap. 4. Jewel. defense Apolog. part. 2.
cap. 7. division. 2. D. Morton, Apolog. catholic. part. 1. cap. 64. Master
White, way to the true Church, page 157.226.227.

Offer the gift] For the Luke 10.7.
labourer is worthy of his hire. This is a witness to the Priests,
Melancthon. com. in loc.
that is their right and due by law. Yea though the Priest do not labor, yet
we must give unto Caesar the things which belong unto Caesar, and unto God the
things which appertain to God: the public Ministry must be maintained,
although the Ministers be never so weak, never so wicked.

And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion]
This miracle does second the first.

In it observe the Fact of Christ, Performing that fully, which the Centurion
desired faithfully; his servant was healed in the same hour: verse. 13.
Promising further also* that other Gentiles, even from all the quarters of the
world, shall come unto him, and rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven: verse. 11.
Faith of the Centurion, Persuading Christ to cure his servant: verse. 5.6.
Dissuading Christ to come into his house, because it was unfit. unnecessary.



Unfit: I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof. Surely this
Captain was a man of great worth, a devout man, Luke 7.5.
for he builded a synagogue; a good man to the Commonweal wherein he lived,
one that loved the nation of the Jews, a man of such a faith, as that Christ
found none so great in all Israel, verse. 10. a loving master to his servants,
as this act declares a man of command and authority, verse. 9: yet this great
Worthy confesses himself unworthy; like the wheat ear, which hangs it head
down lowest, when it has most corn. By this example, learn lowlines of
mind. When the Sun is right over our heads, our shadows are most short;
even so when we have the greatest grace, we must make the least show.

Unnecessary; because Christ can help the distressed only with his word,
Maldonat. in loc.
even one word; which he proves a minori ad maius: Zepper. in. loc.
I am a man under the authority of another, etc. I am a man, but thou art God;
I am under another, but thou art Lord of all; I have soldiers obedient to me.
For albeit usually men of that profession are rude, yet I say to one, go, and
he goes; unto another, come, and he comes; and therefore Sickness, which is
thy Theophylact. in loc.
soldier, if thou speak the word only, will depart: say to the palsy, go,
and it will go; say to thy servant, Health, come, and it will come.

I have not found so great faith] He might have remembered in this noble
Captain, bounty, love, devotion, humility; but he commends faith most of
all, as being indeed the ground of all; without which one virtue the rest are
sin: Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.

The Epistle. ROMANS 13.1. Let every soul submit himself, etc.
THis Epistle consists of three parts; a Proposition: Let every soul submit
himself to the authority of the higher powers. Reason: for there is no power
but of God, etc. Conclusion: wherefore ye must needs obey, giving to every
man his duty; tribute to whom tribute, etc.

The proposition is peremptory, delivered not narratiuely, reporting what other
hold meet; but positiuely, importing what God would have done, not advised
only by Paul, but devised even by Christ, as a command, in imperative terms
expressly; Let every soul be subject. In which, observe the quality of this
duty, To submit our selves. observe the equality of this duty, Belonging
indifferently to all; Let every soul, etc.


First of the last, according to the words order in the text.

Let every soule] Aquin. and Gorran in loc.
That is, every man: putting the principal part for the whole. So Genesis 46.27.
All the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, are seventy: that
is, as Moses expounds himself, Deuteronomy. 10.22. seventy persons. If any demand,
why Paul said not; Let every body, but every soul; Gualter in loc.
Divines answer fitly, to signify, that we must obey, not in outward shows
only, but in truth and in deed: Omnis anima, quoniam ex animo: Colos. 3.22.
Not with eye service, but in singleness of heart.

This universal note confutes as well the seditious Papist, as the tumultuous
Anabaptist: The Papist exempting Clergy men from this obedience to secular
powers: a doctrine not heard in the Church a B. Bilson against the Jesuits,
page 128.
thousand years after Christ.

Epist. 42. ad archiepisc. Senon.
Bernard out of this place reasons thus with an Archbishop of France: Let
every soul be subject: if every, then yours: I pray, who does except you
Bishops? Si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere. So Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Theophylact, upon this text expressly: Clergy men a^e not excepted;
Ergo, not exempted.

Epist. lib. 2. epist. 100.
Gregory the Great, one of the most learned Popes, alleges this gloss; Power
(says he) over all men is given to my Lord Mauritius the Emperor, from
heaven: and lest any should imagine Priests exempted, he says in the same
place, to the same Prince; Sacerdotes meos tuae m^nui commisi: and epist. lib.
2. epist. 103. Christ has appointed Mauritius to be ruler, not over soldiers
only, but over Priests also.

Cod. lib. 1. tit. 3. Nullus. and in authent. de sanct. ^pisc. Sed neque pro
qualibet.
Justinian, who favored the Church, and of all other Emperors enlarged most
the privileges of Church men, inacted this law; Let no Bishop be brought or
presented against his will, before the Captain or civil Judge, unless the
Prince shall so command.

Our Savior Christ, the best Interpreter of Gods law, does show both by
precept and practice, that Clergy men owe subjection and loialty to the civil
Magistrate: so Vbi supra,
Bernard writes; Howsoever you Bishops hold your selves free, yet Christ,
aliter iussit, aliter gessit. He taught otherwise, Luke 20.25. speaking unto
Priests; Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's. He wrought otherwise; for
being a Priest and a Prophet, he submitted himself to the Roman Magistrate,
John 19 11.
confessing the Presidents power to be from heaven.

His Apostles did tread in their Masters steps: Acts 25. Paul appealed unto
Caesar, and appeared before Caesar, as his lawful governor. Saint Jude
detested them for false Prophets, who despised government, and spoke ill of
those that are in authority. 1. Epist. 2.13.
Saint Peter exhorted all men to submit themselves unto Gods ordinance, whether
it be to the King, as to the superior, or unto governors, as unto them that
are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well.

I will not write Iliads after Homer, nor dispute this point after those
reverend fathers of incomparable judgment and industry, Jewel, Bilson,
Andrews; in dispari genere par laus. Each of the^ has fought the battle of
the Lord valiantly: the first with a sword; the two latter have stabbed the
Popes supremacy with a dagger, even to death.

Secondly, Libertines and Anabaptists are confounded by this universality,
Bullinger aduersu^ Anabaptist. fol. 95.
who think themselves free from all laws. In Germany they would have framed a
politic body, like the body of Polyphemus, without his eye; or like the
confused Chaos in old time, when height and depth, light and darkness were
mingled together. Our Apostle teaches here, that some must be subject, other
sovereign; some low, some high; some rule, some obey. Popular equality is the
greatest inequality, void of all name, nurture, and nature of a common weal.

The ground on Rhemists annot. in Iam. 2.1.
which Anabaptists have framed their anarchie, is James 2.1. My brethren, have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus in respect of persons. If no respect of
persons, no distinction; if no distinction, why should there be difference
between bond and free, Prince and people? Answer is made, that Saint James
says not; Have no respect of persons; but, Have not the faith of Christ in
respect of persons; as he does interpret himself in the verse following; he
speaks of grace, not of place. All men are fellows in regard of the common
faith, and spiritual grace: but all men are not fellows in respect of
authority and place; for some be parents, other children; some masters, other
servants; some commoners, other commanders.

Beasts and Devils observe order. ^yprian. de vanitat. Idol.
Rex vnus est apibus, and dux vnus in gregibus. Among Bees there is one master;
among flocks of sheep, one belwether. The Cranes have their Captain; Hieron.
epist. ad Rusticum.
Quem ordine literato sequuntur. Albeit the Grasshopper has no king, Prou.
30.27.
yet go they forth all by bands. In hell, which is the kingdom of confusion,
there is distinction of persons and order; otherwise Luke 11.15.
Beelzebub could not be chief of devils.

The Libertines have wrested also that text of Paul, 1. Tim. 1.9. The law is
not given unto the just or righteous man: Ergo, good men are exempted from
obedience to laws. Theophylact. in 1. Tim. 1.
It is answered aptly, that the just man does well, not for fear of
punishment, as compelled by law, but of grace and mere love toward God and
goodness: Virtutis amore. Iusto lex non est posita, Melanct. in 1. Tim. 1.
neque ad condemnationem, neque ad coactionem: Albeit there were no king, nor
law to command him, he would be a king and a law to himself, obeying higher
powers of his own accord, with all his heart and soul. Thus every person, as
well Christian as heathen, ecclesiastical as laick, must submit himself to
superior powers.

Submit himselfe] To be subject, is to suffer the Princes will to be done, aut
a nobis, aut de nobis, either of us, or on us: of us, when he commands for
truth; on us, when he commands against the truth: either we must be patients,
or agents: agents, when he is good and godly; patients, when he is tyrannous
and wicked. We must use not a sword, but a buckler against a bad Prince. Saint
Paul here does not say; let every soul be subject to Christian and virtuous
governors, but Aquin. in loc.
indefinitly to Potentates, in that they be Potentates; as Saint 1. Epist.
2.18.
Peter expressly; not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward.

If Peter and Paul inioined all men in their time, to submit themselves unto
governors, albeit they were worshippers of devils, and cruel persecuters of
Christians; how much more should we now respect and honor religious kings,
which are defenders of the faith, and nursing fathers unto the Church? as
Praesat. tom. 11. annal.
Caesar Baronius has well observed against the bloody practices of turbulent
statizing Jesuits.

I have read and heard, that the Jesuits are desirous to purge Saint Paul's
Epistles, especially this to the Romans, as being herein more Lutheran then
Catholic. This text of all other, Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus
subdita sit, is so much against their humor and honor, that it is neither read
in their Missale, nor expounded in their Postils. How Pope In extrauagant. vnam
sanctam.
Boniface 8. and See Peter Martyr in loc.
other Papists have wronged this Scripture, both in their precepts and
practices, is seen of all Christian people, felt of all Protestant Princes.

Higher powers] Marlorat. ex Hyperio in loc.
Not highest only, for we must obey the 1. Pet. 2.14.
subordinate magistrate so well as the supreme. So that this proposition has
three large extensions; every soul, in every thing, must submit himself to
every superior. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: understand ye that are
Iu^ges of the earth, how the Church of Rome does lessen all this extent.

Clergy men are exempted; Ergo, not every soul. Causes ecclesiastical are
excepted; Ergo, not in every thing. The Pope may depose what higher powers he
list; Ergo, not to every superior, but only to those whom his Holiness does
not curse. Thus some Princes only may command some men only, in some matters
only: whereas Paul here; Let every soul submit himself to the authority of
the higher powers, etc.

For there is no power] The reason is threefold, drawn from the threefold good.

Ab honesto, which Paul shows, a Gorran. in loc.
bonitate ordinantis; there is no power but of God. ordinationis; the powers
are ordained, or ordered.
vtili, for, to resist, is evil: malum culpae; whosoever resists power,
resists the ordinance of God. poenae; they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation.
submit our selves is good, because the Magistrate is the minister of God for
our good, for the good of peace, protection, justice, religion, and the like.
For this cause we pay tribute, quia ministri Dei sunt in hoc ipsum seruientes.
iucundo, we must obey for conscience: the which unto the disobedient, is a
perpetual hell; but unto such as obey Gods ordinance, is a continual feast.

No power but of God] An argument from the Author of authority; all higher
powers are from the highest power, unto whom all creatures must be subject. It
happens often, that potens, the ruler, is not of God: Osea 8.4.
Ipsi regnauerunt and non per me: They have set up Kings, but not by me; they
have made Princes, and I knew it not. Aquin. in loc.
And the manner of getting kingdoms is not always of God. Balaeus in vila
Alex. 6.
Alexander 6. obtained the Popedom by giving himself to the devil. Tileman.
in loc.
Phocas by sedition got his Empire. Polydor. Virgil. hist. A^glic. lib. 25.
Richard 3. came to the crown of England by butchering his Nephews, and other
of the blood Royal; yet the power it self is ever from God: Prou. 8.15.
By me Kings reign. John 19.11.
Thou could have no power (says Christ to Pilate) except it were given thee
from above.

The powers that be are ordained of God.] Marlor. in loc.
Insinuating that the Magistrate is not from God, after any common manner as
all things are, but after a more special fashion ordained. The Lord is the God
of order, and order is the good of every creature, with whom it is better not
to be, then to be out of order.

Whosoever therefore resisteth] If there be no power but of God, and nothing
done by God but in order; he that resists authority, resists Gods
ordinance. So the Lord himself said to 1. Sam 8.7.
Samuel: They have not cast thee away, but they hau^ ^ast me away, that I
should not reign over them. And he might have said of Princes, as he does of
Preachers, Luke 10.16.
He that despises you, despises me. For he said of both; Psalm. 82.6.
Ego dixi, dij estis. As God is a great king, so a king is as it were a little
God. He therefore that resists the Prince, resists him that sent him,
almighty God the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: 1. Tim. 6.15.

There are Perkins Treat. of conscience. cap. 2.
two binders of the conscience: 1. Proper, Gods law. 2. Improper, man's law.

Gods holy word has absolute and sovereign power to bind the conscience, for
God is Lord of conscience, creating it, and governing it, and only knowing it.

The laws of men improperly bind conscience, not by their own virtue, but by
the power of Gods law, which here and elsewhere commands obedience to princes.
He therefore that willingly with a disloyal mind breaks any wholesome laws
of men, is guilty of sin before God: Calvin. in 1. Cor. 14. and Institut.
lib. 4. cap. 10.. 30.
Non enim habendae sunt pro traditionibus humanis, quandoquidem fundatae sunt
in generali mandato, and liquidam habent approbationem, quasi ex ore Christi.
So S. Epist. 166.
Augustine notably: Hoc iubent imperatores, quod iubet and Christus, quia cum
bonum iubent, per illos non iubet nisi Christus.

They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation] It may be construed
Aquin. and Gorr^n in loc.
either of temporal punishment, or eternal judgment. Of temporal, Prou.
20.2.
for the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a lion: he that provoke him
unto anger, sins against his own soul.

By the Stanford p^eas of the Crown^, lib. 3. cap. 19.
laws of England a traitor convicted and attainted, has his judgment to be
drawn from his prison to the place of execution, as being unworthy to tread
any more upon mother earth; and that backward with his head downward, for that
he has been retrograde to natural courses; after hanged up by the neck
between heaven and earth, as deemed unworthy of both: his privy parts are
cut off, as being unprofitably begotten, and unfit to leave any generation
after him; his bowels and intrals burned, which inwardly had conceived and
concealed such horrible treason; then his head cut off, which imagined the
mischief: last of all, his whole body quartred and made a prey for the birds
of the air, as one said of a Romish treacherous Jesuit:

Sic been pascit aues, qui male pauit oues.
How Rebels have ruinated utterly themselves, and their families, all histories
are full of Consule Tileman. and Martyr. in loc.
tragical examples: acquirunt sibi damnationem, as it is in the vulgar; they
do not only receive, but pull upon themselves heavy judgments.

Again, this may be construed of eternal damnation, as is manifest in Numb.
16.3^.
Chore, Dathan, and the rest of that conspiracy, who went down quick to
hell. If murder be fitly termed a crying sin, then treason may well be
called a roaring sin. For as he that robs a scholar, is said to rob many; so
the traitor that murders a Prince, kills many; sometime the whole State, the
which assuredly cries aloud to the Lord in such sort, that it awaketh him, and
often calls him to speedy judgment.

He is the minister of God for thy wealth] D. Buckeridge ser. upon the fist
verse of this chapter.
If he be a good Prince, causa est, he is the cause of thy good, temporal and
eternal; if an evil Prince, he is an o^casion of thine eternal good, by thy
temporal evil. Augustine. ser. 6 de verbis Dom. secundum Mat.
Si bonus, nutritor est tuus; si malus, tentator tuus est: If a good king, he
is thy nurse, receive thy nourishment with obedience; if evil, he is thy
tempter, receive thy trial with patience. So there is no resistance, either
thou must obey good governors willingly, or endure bad tyrants patiently.

Magistrates are Gods ministers: ergo, subordinate to God. If then higher
Powers enjoin things against him, Ecclesiast. 5.7.
who is higher then the highest, It is better Act. 4.19.
to obey God then men. Hic (says Vbi supra.
Augustine) contemn potestatem, timendo potestatem: In that thou fear Gods
power, fear not man's power: as Iulians soldiers would not worship Idols at
his command, yet when he led them against an enemy, they obeyed most readily:
Augustine. in Psalm. 124.
Distinguebant dominu^ temporale^ a domino aeterno, and tame^ subditi erant
propter dominum aeternum. As al power is from God, so for God: and therefore
when the Prince commands against truth, it is our duty to be patient, and not
agent.

For this cause pay ye tribute] Subsidies are the Kings stipend or pay: for he
is the minister of God, and great servant of the State. So S. Paul expressly,
Serving for the same purpose; not to take his own ease, Plutarch. com. ad
Principem indoctum.
but to wake when other sleep; taking such care, that al men else may live
without care. Magnaseruitus est magna fortuna: Seneca consolat. ad Polybiu^.
nam ipsi Caesaricui omnia licent, propter hoc ipsum multa non licent. Manlius
in loc. com.
Erasmus wittily: Miserosesse principes, si intelligant sua mala, miseriores si
non intelligant. A Prince must be like Job, Job 29.15.
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame. Psalm. 2.10.
Be ye wise therefore, ye Kings, Intellig^te Reges. Intelligere est intus
legere; they must not altogether hang upon the alms basket of their Counsel,
but understand of themselves in some measure those things which concern their
places: Erudimini qui, quia indicatis.

Wherefore ye must needs obey] Because all powers are of God; because they
bring with them the good of order; because it is a sin to disobey; because
judgment temporal and eternal accompany this sin; because government is
the mean of our weal; because Kings are hired by tribute to serve their
servants, and care for their subjects. It is necessary we should obey, both
ex necessitate finis and praecepti: for hereby we shall do that which is
acceptable to God, and profitable to our selves: acceptable to God, enioining
obedience; profitable to our selves, enjoying the good of government, 1. Tim.
2.2.
that we may le^de a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

Not only for fear of vengeance, but also because of conscience.] Thus all
must obey, bad men for fear, good men for love. The Kings Bench compels the
one, for he bears not the sword in vain; but the Chancerie moves the other:
and therefore the Papists and Schismatikes are not good men, in pretending
conscience for their disobedience to the Civil Magistrate. For as a learned
Tortura Torti. page 70.
father of our Church observes excellently: Tuta conscientia praestari possunt,
quae propter conscientiam praestanda sunt: A man may do that with a safe
conscience, which he must do for conscience.

Tribute to whom tribute.] Sovereign Sublimities on earth are Gods among men
in respect of their attributes and tributes. Customers Alphabet by Mr. Thomas
Milles.
Almighty God himself expects and receives at our hands his immediate rents,
as prayer and thanksgiving; the rest as tithes and tributes he does accept,
being faithfully paid unto his Stewards and Vicegerents. It is very
remarkable that our Savior never did any miracle about honor or money, Matthew.
17.27.
except that one for giving tribute to Caesar. Matthew. 22.21.
For ^e must give to Caesar, the things which appertain to Caesar, honor to
whom honor, tribute to whom tribute: but how much, is not defined by Christ or
Paul. They leave that (as Sermon. at Stanford.
Bishop Latymer observes) to Caesar's Counsel for to determine. Wherefore let
all such as are in Commission for the subsidy, remember that excellent speech
of Lib. 5. de gubernat. Dei.
Saluianus: Ill^d indignius and poenalius, quod omnium onus non omnes
sustinent, imo quod pauperculos homines tributa diuitum premunt, and
infirmiores ferunt sarcinas fortiorum, res di^ersissimas dissimilimasque
patiuntur inuidiam and egestatem; inuidia est enim in solutione, egestas in
facultate.

The Gospel. MATTHEW. 8.23. And when he entered into a ship, his Disciples
followed him, etc.
SAint Matthew reports in this scripture two miracles, one wrought by Christ in
the water, another on the land.

The first is both an History. The first is both an Mystery.
The word of God is a Heb. 4.12.
two edged sword; having one edge, says Lib. contra Praxeam.
Tertullian, in the sense of the matter; and an other in the sound of the
words; or (as In Augustine. lib. 14. de Ciuit. cap. 12.
Ludouicus Viues observes) being sharp in a literal exposition, and sharp in
an allegorical sense. Most Interpreters therefore note that the ship here
mentioned, is a type of the Consule Luther. Melancth. Latymer. Culman. in loc.
Church militant, tossed in the world, Vide Pontan. in loc.
which is most like the sea with storms of persecution, until Christ the
Master of the ship (who seems to sleep for a time) does awake by the prayers
of passengers, and makes a calm.

In the story two things are to be considered especially: the shipping of
Christ In the story two things are to be considered especially: the sailing of
Christ.
In his shipping two points obseruable: 1. That he entered himself. 2. That his
Disciples followed him.

In the sailing two principal occurrences are to be noted also: the raging of
a tempest. stilling of a tempest.

The tempest is said here to be Sudden; Behold there arose. The tempest is said
here to be Great: so that the ship was covered with waves; and Christ (who was
to comfort, and help all) was asleep.
In the stilling of the tempest, four things are regardable: 1. Christ
awaketh: His Disciples came, and awoke him, saying, Master save us, etc. 2. The
Disciples are rebuked: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? 3. The
tempest calmed: He rebuked the winds and the sea. 4. The beholders of this
miracle wondered, saying, What manner of man is this, etc.

Jesus entered into a ship.] As the superstitious D. Fulk in 1. Tim. 2.5.
Papists in latter days, assigned several Saints for several services; as
Apollonia for the toothach; for hogs, S. Anthony; for horses, S. Loy; for
Soldiers, S. Maurice; for Seamen, S. Nicholas, etc. so the gross idolatrous
Heathen in old time, marshalled their gods into several ranks, allotting
Heaven for Jupiter, Hell for Pluto, the Sea for Neptune.

Christ therefore to show their Gran^t. Dom. 3. post. octau. Epiphan. con. 2.
vanity, and to manifest himself to be the sole Commander of the world; so
soon as he had wrought miracles on the land in healing the leper, verse. 3. in
curing the Centurions servant, verse. 13. in casting out devils, verse. 16. in
helping all that were sick, verse. 17. he comes now (says Hom. 6. in di^^^
script. loc.
Origin) to show wonders on the sea.

We need not then exhibit supplications either unto the no gods of the
Gentiles, or more gods of the Papists, importuning the virgin Mary for every
thing, Erasmus colloq. de peregrinat. Religionis ergo.
as if her son Jesus were still a babe, not able to help. For if we be
scholars, he is our saint Gregory the God of Dan. 2.20.
wisdom; if soldiers, he is our Mars the God of Esaias. 3.1.
hosts: if we desire to live in quietness, he is the God of Heb. 13.20.
peace: if mariners, he is our Nicholas and Neptune, that enters into the ship,
and calmes the tempest. Psalm. 139.7.
If we ascend up into heaven, he is there; if we descend down into hell, he
is there also; if we take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the v^termost
parts of the sea, yet thither shall his hand lead us, and his right hand hold
us: having all power over all things in all places, and doing whatsoever he
will* in heaven, earth, sea. Psalm. 139.6.

Saint Mat. verse. 18. of this chapter, and saint Mark, cap. 4. verse. 36.
intimate another reason why Christ entered into the ship; namely, to shun the
multitudes of people; for as the sun, though a most glorious creature, Onid.
oculus mundi, the worlds eye, is regarded little, because it shines every
day; so ministers, the Matthew. 5.14.
light of the world, are eclipsed much by the gross interposition of earth. It
is true that familiarity breeds contempt, and as true, Bernard. ser. 2 de
Resurrectione Domini.
cuius persona despicitur, eius praedicatio contemnitur; and therefore Soarez
tract. 3. in 8. Matthew.
clergy men, as Christ here, must upon occasions often withdraw themselves a
turba turbulenta.

Bartholomaeus Ang^icus mentions a lake in Ireland, in which if a staff be
pight, De propri^tatibus ^erum, lib. 15. cap. 80.
and tarieth any long time therein, the part that is in the earth, is turned to
iron, and the part in the water to stone, only the part above the water
remains in his own kind. So it is with Aarons rod, and with the crozier
staff; if it stick long in the common puddle, it will not divide the waters
aright, but become so rusty as iron, so stony as flint; only that rod is like
it self which is above the waters, above the stream, above the people. The
vulgar is like tapestrie, the further, the fairer, but the nearer you come, the
worse they are. He that is pinned as a cognosance to the town coat, and
depends upon the common sleeue, Scaliger.
pendet magis, arbore quam qui pendet ab al^a, is as base as a sign that hangs
on a painted maypole. Paul then had good cause to desire that he might be
delivered from These. 3.2. (...).
unreasonable men; and Christ here to decline troublesome troops, entering into
a ship with his disciples.

Our Savior Christ could have walked on the water, as he did, Mat. 14. or else
dry up the water, as he did for the children of Israel, Exodus 14. but he did
neither, for if he should have used his omnipotent power in every thing, as
God, no body would have believed him to be man; he did therefore take this
course in the whole course of his life to manifest both. If he were not God,
whom did Luke 1.
Gabriel call Lord? If not man, whom did Mary bear in her womb? If not God,
whom did the Matthew. 2.
wisemen worship? If not man, whom did Luke 2.
Joseph circumcise? If not God, who promised Luke. 23.
Paradise to the thief? If not man, who hanged on the cross? Origin. vbi
supra, and Ludolphus de vita Christi, part. 1. cap. 46.
If not God, who rebuked the winds and the seas? If not man, who slept in the
ship? If not God, who raised the tempest? If not man, who went into this bark?

His disciples followed him. A ship, as In Matthew. cap. 13. and postil.
catholic. Dom. 5. post. ^at. co^. 1.
Hilary notes, does fitly resemble the Church of Christ; for as a ship is small
in the foredecke, broad in the middle, little in the stearne: so the Church in
her beginning and infancy, was very little; in her middle age flourishing,
but in her old age, her company shall be so small, and her belief so weak,
that when the son of God shall come to judge the sons of men, he shall
scarce find any faith on earth: Luke 18.8.

It is Pontan. in loc.
obseruable, that Christ and his Disciples failed all in one ship: he did enter
in first, and his Disciples followed. Athanagoras orat. pro Christianis.
Vnus mundus docet vnum esse Deum: The world being but one teaches us that
there is but one God; one God, that there is but one Church; one Church, one
truth: and therefore as the Church is called by 1. Tim. 3.15.
Paul, Columna veritatis; so by Solomon, Columba vnitatis. Cant. 6.8. My dove
is alone.

Noah's Ark represents the Ambros. ser. 11 and Cyprian. epist. lib. 1. ep. 6.
Church: all in the Arc were saved, all out of the Arc perished. All that
continue with Christ, in his ship are secure, though the Sea make a noise, and
the storms arise: but he that utterly forsakes the ship, and swims either in
the cockboate of heretics, or upon the windy bladders of his own conceits,
shall never touch the land of the living. As in Salomons Temple there were
three rooms, the porch, the body, the sanctum sanctorum; so likewise in
Christianity, we cannot enter into the holiest of holies, but by the Church,
nor into the Church, but by the porch of baptism. First, there must be
shipping; then, sailing; last of all, arriving. First, we must be shipped with
Christ in baptism; after, sail with him in the Pinnisse of the Church, or
else we shall never anchor in the haven of happiness.

Saint Matthe^ does use the word follow, signanter; insinuating, that all
Christ's disciples ought to follow him, as himself says: Matthew. 16.24.
If any will be my disciple, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me.

Some in their high towering thoughts and immoderate zeal, run before Christ,
as Luke 9.54.
James and John: other go cheek by iole with him, as Pelagians, and all such
as mingle their merit with Christ's mercy, making him but half a mediator,
mediatum dimidiatum mediatorem. Other follow Christ, but a far off, as Peter,
Matthew. 26.58. Other follow Christ near, but not for Christ, not for love, but
for loaves, as the people, John 6.26. Few follow him in a troublesome sea, as
the disciples here.

Diez. con. 1. in loc.
The people followed him in the plain, not up to the mountain, nor into the
sea: but Christ leaving the multitude, would have his company tossed in the
waves of affliction, Thomas ex Chrysostom. in loc.
lest they should be puffed up with presumption and pride.

In mirabilibus historys.
Apollonius writes of certain people that could see nothing in the day, but
all in the night. In like manner, many men are so blinded with the sunshine of
prosperity, that they see nothing belonging unto their good; but in the winter
night of misery, Zepper. in loc.
schola crucis, schola lucis; no such schoolehouse as the cross house. The
Mat. 9.
Palsiman lying in his bed, desired to be brought unto Christ. Alexander ab
Alexand^o, l. 1. cap. 2.
Ptolomaeus Philodelphus, being so sickly, that he could not follow worldly
delights as he was wont, gave himself to reading, and builded that his
renowned Library. The disciples here seeing the wonders of the deep, and
dangers of the sea, were humbled in fear, and raised up in faith.

And behold there arose a great tempest] Until Christ was in the ship, there
was no storm. While men have pillowes sowed under their elbowes, all is peace;
Luther. postil. ex Culman. con. 1. in loc.
but so soon as Christ rebukes the world of sin, Esaias. 57.20.
the wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
dirt and mire.

John Baptist raised such a storm by preaching against Herod, that it cost him
his head. When Paul preached at Athens, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. there followed
always tumults and vprores among the people. When Luther first preached the
Gospel, instantly there was great thundering from Rome, a great tempest in
Germany, France, England, Scotland, and in the whole Christian world, which all
the Popes Bulls and calves too, could not appease.

This storm was not by chance, but raised by Aquin. Ludolphus, Beauxamis in
loc.
Gods providence, who brings the winds out of his treasures, Psalm. 135.7. and
the tempest was Origin. in cat. Thom. in loc.
great, that the miracle might be great: the greater the tempest, the greater
was the trial of the disciples faith.

In so much that the ship was covered with waues] The Church is often in
danger, Ludolphus and Pontan. in loc.
but it cannot be drowned; Matthew. 16.18.
hell gates cannot overcome it. Tertu^ian.
Robur fidei concussum, non excussum. Albeit Satan go about daily like a
roa^ing lion, seeking whom he may devour, yet there shall be some still, whom
he shall not devour.

He was asleepe] Psalm. 121.4.
He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep. He did sleep as man,
but watch as God. Cant. 5.2.
I sleep, but mine heart waketh. Thomas ex Origin. in loc.
He seems only to sleep, that we might wake: Emissenus hom. in loc.
Nobis dormit Jesus, nobis surgit a somno. Ludolphus in loc.
Christus videtur non attendere, patientiam bonorum, poenitentiam impiorum
expectans. He does as it were neglect us for a time, for the greater
manifestation of his Z^pperus in loc.
power, and our patience.

His disciples came to him, and awoke him] Almighty God likes in our necessity
this importunity: Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble. Psalm. 91.15.
He shall call upon me, and I will hear him. And therefore learn by this
example, Luther. postil. mayor. in loc.
to come to Christ, to cry to Christ in all extremity, renouncing your selves,
and relying upon him only; Master, save us, or else we perish.

He said unto them; Why are ye fearful; O ye of little faith?] Culman. con.
1. in loc.
It was great faith in that they followed Christ into the ship; but little
faith in that they feared.

Theophylact. in loc. See B. ^atymer ser. in loc.
He says not, O ye of no faith, but O ye of little faith. It was impossible to
come unto God, and call upon Christ without faith; in saying, we perish, they
showed infidelity; but in praying, save us, they manifested faith.

Again, he does not say; Pontanus in loc.
ye of little courage, or ye of little charity; but ye of little faith:
because faith is the ground of all other virtues, and in Melancthon. in loc.
adversity most useful. If we believe that Christ is our Captain in the ship
with us, who can be against us? And therefore Paul, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all, put
on the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
devil.

Then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea] Christ reprehends the
disciples a little, but instantly grants their requests; his reprehensions had
not so much sting as Zepperus in loc.
honey, for a great calm followed a little chiding: Psalm. 107.25.
at his word the stormy wind arises, which lifts up the waves of the sea:
They are carried up to heaven, and down again to the deep: their soul melts
away because of the trouble. They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken
man, and are at their wits end. But when they cry to the Lord in their trouble,
he delivers them out of their distress: for he makes the storm to cease,
so that the waves thereof are still.

A great calm followed a great tempest; Thomas in loc.
Decet enim mag^um magna facere. Christ spoke but one word to the violent
winds and unruly seas, and they both obeyed his command. Heb. 1.1.
He does at sundry times, and in diverse manners speak to us, and yet we will
not hearken unto his voice. Origin. hom. 6. in di^ersos scripturae locos.
The spectators of this act might therefore wonder to see the senseless water
and weather obey more then man, endued with reason and religion.

The men marvelled:] Ludolphus ex Augustine.
Ideo premantur iusti, vt pressi clament; clamantes exaudiantur, exauditi
glorificent Deum; A great storm caused in the disciples a great fear; great
fear, great devotion, great devotion occasioned Christ to work this great
miracle; this great miracle moved this great admiration; What is this man that
commands as a God?

And when he was come to the other side.] Two points are to be considered in
this miracle principally; the Gratiousnesse of Christ, in curing two possessed
of devils. Ungraciousness of the Gergesites, preferring a piece of bacon
before the Gospel, hogs before Christ. Such as respect their tithe pig, more
then their Pastor, are Gergesites, and deserve that Christ should depart out of
their coasts.



I will not in particular examine these, but in stead thereof, insert a few
notes, upon the last verse of the first Chapter, appointed to be read at
morning prayer this Sunday; preached at Paul's Cross. Ian. 29. 1608.

ESAIAS 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.
This text is a proclamation of war against the wicked, enemies to God and
his Gospel, wherein, observe

the thing proclaimed: No peace to the wicked. An heavy doom, whether we
consider the time, the matter, or the men: for there is no time, no peace, no
wicked, if impenitent, excepted. person proclaiming: the Prophet, as Herald.
Lord, as chief Co^mander, able to make this war, because God. willing to
maintain this war, because my God.



This sentence would not be so grievous, if it were not so general, if any
wicked man at any time could enjoy any kind of peace: but the proposition is an
universal negative; non est pax impi^s.

Our and other translations have it not in the time past, non erat, there was
no peace; nor in the future, non erit, there shall be no peace; but in the
present, there is no peace. Or as it is in the original, indefinitely without
a verb, naming no time, that we might fear this judgment at all times:
Lipsius de consiantia. l. 2. cap. 13.
Cognatum, imo innatum omni sceleri sceleris supplicium. In the words of Saint
Romans 6.23.
Paul, the wages of sin is death; as the work is ready, so the pay present,
nec aufertur, nec defertur, if impiety, no impunity; When sin is Iam. 1.15.
finished, it has his hire; Seneca in Hippoly^o.
scelus aliquis tutum, nemo securum tulit.

If we consider a wicked man out of Hugo Cardinal. in loc.
Christ, he has neither here peace of grace, nor hereafter peace of glory; but
as he passes from sin to sin, he goes as it were from devil to devil,
even from hell to hell, from the flashes to the flame, from hell internal, to
hell eternal.

As this includes all time, so likewise excludes all peace. For albeit
Reioy^der. page 163.
Harding found a great difference between no bread, and not bread; yet
Interpreters here make no difference between not peace, and no peace. For the
wicked have no peace with man, no peace with God, no peace with themselves.
None with man: for as it is said in the verse before my text, The wicked are
like the raging sea, whose waters cast up dirt and mire. They are of their own
nature turbulent; but if we stir them a little, then they fume and some like
the sea, both active (says In loc.
Musculus) and passive, being neither peace makers, nor peace takers.

For nature and scripture tell us plainly, that righteousness is elder sister
to peace. So said Ethic. lib. 8. cap. 3.4.8.
Aristotle natures chief Secretary, that agreement in evil is not love, but
conspiracy. So David, a man after Gods own heart, and a penner of Gods own
will, Psalm. 85.10.
iustitia and pax osculatae sunt; righteousness and peace have kissed each
other. As Augustine upon the place, fiat iustitia, and habebis pacem, if thou will have peace, work righteousness; first eschew evil, and do good, then
seek peace, and ensue it: Psalm. 34.13. Nay, you need not seek it, for it will
find you; peace will come of it self to kiss righteousness. On the
contrary, no truth, no mercy; where there is no love of good, there can be no
good of love; no true friendship, except it be Hi^ron. epist. Paul. Tom. 3.
fol. 1.
Christi glutino copulata, glewed together in Christ; a man can hardly be true
friend to any, that is not first truly friend to truth it self.

It was an excellent speech of Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Constantius, how can they be faithful unto their Prince, who are persidious
and unfaithful unto their God? I tell thee, says Augustine to Martianus,
Epist. 155.
albeit you were mine old acquaintance, yet never my friend, until you were my
lover in Christ.

And therefore when 2 King. 9.
Iehoram said unto Iehu, Is it peace? Iehu replied; What peace, while the
whordomes of thy mother Iesabel, and her witchcrafts, are yet in great number?
Cor. 6.14.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion has
light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? As Ismael that was
borne after the flesh, persecuted Isaac that was borne after the spirit, even
so it is now, says Paul: Galat. 4.29. The Apoc. 12.7.
Dragon and his army, will fight against Michael and his Angels.

It is then an idle fantasy to dream of an unity with the Papists, of an
uniformity with the Schismatikes: for so long as the one is an enemy to truth,
and the other an enemy to peace; so long as both are set on mischief, combined
in faction, howsoever different in faith, I must tell you from Esaias, and Esaias
from the Lord, There is no peace to the wicked.

Paex nostra bellum contra Satanam (says Lib. ad Martyrs.
Tertullian) our peace is a continual warfare against Satan and his accomplices.
As Christ, so the Luther. loc. com. Tit. de conciliatoribus.
Church must suffer and overcome in medio inimicorum, in the midst of all our
enemies: Psalm. 110.2. The builder of Gods house must have a trowell in one
hand, and a sword in another. Nehe. 4.17.

And here let not the carnal Gospeller hold himself exempted, in being of no
side: for pax, (as the Thomas, 22. quaest. 29. art. 1.
school speaks) is tranquill^tas ordinata: Goodness is (...) wickedness,
(...): where there is no order, there can be no peace, but a Babell of
confusion: howsoever worldlings account the drunkard a good fellow, the
fornicator a kind man, the flatterer a loving soul; yet the truth is, there is
no peace in things that are wicked, and therefore no peace with men that are
wicked. And as they can have no peace with the godly, so but little agreement
among themselves: Esaias 9.21.
Ephraim is against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and both against
Judah. The Pharisees against the Sadduces, and the Sadduces against the Pharisees;
both against Christ. The Pelagians against the Manichees, and the Manichees
against the Pelagians; both against the Catholics. The Pope against the Turk,
the Turk against the Pope, and both against the truth.

All the vices are iarring in extremity, covetousness fighting against
prodigality, baseness against pride, rashness against dastardy; Esaias 19.2.
nay, many times, Egyptians are set against Egyptians; and birds of a fether
do not always fly together; for the Esaias 21.2.
transgressor is against the transgressor, and the destroier against the
destroier: a drunkard will stab a drunkard, a thief rob a thief, a traitor
prove false to a traitor, proditoris proditor, one wicked wretch is executioner
of another.

They be so far from the peace between man and man, as that they want the love
which is between beast and beast: for if one sheep be faint, the rest will
stand between it and the Sun, till it be comforted; if one hog hunted, the
whole heard will muster together to revenge it. Of Bees it is reported,
aegrotante vna lamentantur omnes, if one sick, all sorry: yea some beasts are
more kind to man then mankind. In humane story we read of grateful Lions, of
kind Eagles, of trusty dogs, qui mori pro dominis, and commori cum dominis
parati; says Ambrose in his Lib. 6. cap. 4.
Hexameron.

In holy Bible, we find that 1. King. 17.
Eliah was fed by ravens, and Dan. 6.22.
Daniel not hurt among hungry lions. ^yprian. ser. de orat. dominic.
O detestandam humanae malitiae crudelitatem! aues pascunt; ferae parcunt;
homines saeuiunt. O hateful cruelty! the birds feed, the beasts favor; but
one man is a woolfe, yea a devil to another. In this the wicked resemble Psalm.
121.4.
God, that they neither slumber nor sleep, but like the John 10.10.
devil, in that they watch as the thief to spoil and destroy, seeking whom
they may devour: 1. Pet. 5.8. For to render good for evil, is the part of a
Saint: to render good for good, the part of a man: to render evil for evil
the part of a beast, but to render evil for good only, the part of a devil.
And yet such is the fashion of the wicked, Psalm. 140.^.
imagining mischief in their hearts, and stirring up strife all the day long.
Their throat is an open sepulcher; the poison of Asps is under their lips.
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed
blood, their teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
More sharp (quoth Ser. de triplici custodia.
Bernard) then the spear which pierced our Saviors sweet side. For this does
not only wound Christ's mystical body, but also dismember it, in the
Commonweal making so many factions, as there are functions; in the Church, so
many Creeds, as heads: as the same Father sweetly; Non iam exanime fodit, sed
facit exanime fodiendo: Longius thrust through a body that was dead, but the
wicked a body that is quick. Psalm. 14.7.
Destruction and unhappiness is in all their ways, and the way of peace have
they not known: in their bed appointed for rest, they plot how to be
turbulent, (as the Psalm. 7.15.
Prophet speaks) they travel with mischief, and bring forth ungodliness. In
a word, these are the troublers of Israel, thorns in our eyes, pricks in our
sides, bellows and brands of sedition, hating the good, not loving the bad;
crossing themselves, at war with all: There is no peace to the wicked says my
God.

The second kind of peace is between God and man, our reconciliation to God by
the mediation of Christ, who is our Ephesians. 2.14.
peace. So the gloss interlin^al, and other expositors generally, there is no
peace, that is, no Christ to the wicked. The scripture tells us, how that we
were the sons of wrath, enemies of God; fire brands of hell, aliants from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise. But
Christ God and man; and therefore most fit to be the Mediator Augustine.
confess. lib. 10. cap. 43.
between the mortal sinner, and immortal Judge: dying for our sins, and
rising again for our justification, is peace to them that are far off, and
peace to them that are near, says the Lord in this Chapter. That is, as the
Fathers Hieron. in loc. ex Paul. Ephesians. 2.17.
expound it; peace to the Gentiles a far off, and peace to the Jews that are
near.

This one blessed Peacemaker has made atonement for both, and appears in
the sight of God daily, to plead our pardon as a faithful intercessor and
advocate, in whom only God is well pleased; and without whom, God is no
hearing God, no helping God, no saving God, no loving God to us at all.

And without faith the Gospel is no Gospel; the sacraments are no sacraments;
Christ is no Christ. Faith is Church hom. of salvation. part. 2.
John the Baptist, showing the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of
the world: yea Saint Thomas, first handling, then applying the wounds of
Christ; even the spiritual hand that puts on Christ's robe of righteousness.

The wicked then having no true faith, have no true Christ; and having no true
Christ, they can have no true peace with God; the grace of our Lord in
redeeming, the love of God in electing, the fellowship of the holy Ghost in
comforting is far from them; so long as they continue in their sins and
unbelief, so long they be traitors, enemies, rebels unto the King of all
Kings; he proclaims war, and they can have no peace.

Think on this, ye that forget God. Esaias 5.
Ye that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place
for other in the land: ye that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and are
mighty to power in strong drink. Ye that speak good of evil, and evil of
good; which put light for darkness, and darkness for light, etc. Matthew. 5.25.
Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are in the way: Esaias 55.6.
seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh.
Matthew. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee. Heb. 13.22.
Suffer the words of exhortation; Psalm. 95.8.
harden not your heart, but Luke 19.4^.
even in this day hear the voice of the John 1.23.
Crier; confess thy rebellion, and come in to the Lord thy God: Joel 2.13.
for he is gentle, patient, and of much mercy: desire of him to create in thee
a Psalm. 51.10.
new heart, and to give thee one drop of a lively faith, one dram of holy
devotion, a desire to Mat. 5.6.
hunger and thirst after righteousness. Suffer not thine eyes to sleep, nor
thine eye lids to take any rest, until thine Psalm. 32.1.
unrighteousness is forgiven, and sin covered; until thy peace be made with
God, and thy pardon sealed. O pray, pray, that thou may have this peace. O
pray, pray, that thou may feel this peace: for it is the third kind; the
peace of conscience between man and himself.

There are four kinds of conscience, as Lib. de conscientia, sect. 2. fol.
1784.
Bernard has well observed.

1. A good, but not a quiet. 2. A quiet, but not a good. 3. Both good and
quiet. 4. Neither good nor quiet.
The two good belong properly to the godly; the two bad unto the wicked, whose
conscience is either too too quiet, or else too too much unquiet; in neither
peace: non est gaudium impijs, as the Translators of the Septuagints read: non
est Em. Sa. notat. in loc.
gaudere impijs, There is no joy to the wicked. Sometime their conscience is too
too quiet, as 1. Tim. 4.^.
Paul speaks, even feared with an hot iron, when habit of sin takes away the
sense of sin, when as men are past feeling, in a reprobate sense, given over
to work all uncleanness even with greediness: Ephesians. 4.19.

This is no peace but a numnesse, yea a dumbness of conscience. For at the
first every man's conscience speaks unto him, as Matthew. 16.22.
Peter to Christ; Master look to thy self: Her prick-arrowes, as the shafts
of 1. Sam. ^0.
Jonathan forewarne David of the great Kings displeasure: but if we neglect
her call, and will not lend our ears while she does spend her tongue, this
good Cassandra will cry no more.

Now it fares with the maladies of the mind, as it is with the sickness of the
body. When the pulse does not beat, the body is in a most dangerous estate:
so if conscience never prick us for sin, it is a manifest sign our souls
are lulled in a deadly sleep. That school will soon decay, where the monitor
does not complain; that army must necessaril^e be subject to surprise, where
watches and alarums are not exactly kept; that town is dissolute, where no
clocks are used: ^o likewis^ ^ur little city is in great peril^, when our
conscience i^ ^ill and sleepie, quiet but not good; tunc maxim oppugnaris, si
t^ nescis oppug^ari, says Tom. 1. fol. 2.
Hier^me to Heliodore. None so desperately sick, as they who feel not their
disease. Saint Confess. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Augustine notably: Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum? and Epist. 2.
Bernard; Ideo dolet charitas mea, quod cum sis dole^dus, non doleas; and inde
ma is miseretur, quod cum miser sis, miserabilis tamen non es: and Tom. 1. fol.
231.
Hierome to Sabinian; Hoc plango, quod te non plangis.

Luke 11.21.
When the strong man armed keeps ^is hold, the things that are possessed are
in peace. Where Divines observe, that ungodly men already possessed with Satan,
are not a whit disquieted with his temptations. As God is at open war, so the
devil is at secret peace with the wicked: but yet, says Ad Heliodor. de vita
Eremet.
Hierome, tranquillitas ista tempestas est. This calm^ of conscience will one
day prove a storm. For as God said unto Genesis 4.7.
Cain; If thou do ill, sin lies at the door. Where wickedness is
compared to a wild beast, which dogs a man wheresoever he goes in this
wilderness. And albeit for a time it may seem harmless, for that it lies
asleep, yet at length except men unfeignedly repent, it will rise up and rent
out the very throat of their souls. A guilty conscience being once roused and
awaked thoroughly, will make them like those who lie on a bed that is too
strait, and the covering too short, who would with all their heart sleep, but
cannot; they seek for peace of mind, but there is no peace to the wicked,
s^i^h my God.

As the conscience was heretofore too too quiet, so now too too much unquiet.
As godly men have the first fruits of the Spirit, and certain ^asts of
heavenly joys in this life: so the wicked on the contrary feel certain
flashings of hell flames on earth. As there is heaven on earth, and heaven in
heaven; so hell on earth, and hell in hell: Cartbusian. in 3 sent. did. 22.
an outward hell, and an inward; outward, in outward darkness mentioned in
holy Scripture, where there shall be Matthew. 25.30.
weeping and gnashing of teeth; at this feast (as Bishop Scr. ad cl^rum to the
Convocation.
Latymer wittily) there can be no mirth where weeping is served in for the
first course, gnashing of teeth for the second.

Inward hell is an infernal tormenting of the soul, void of hope, faith and
love: this hell the devils have always in the^, and reprobate forlorn people
carry about the^, insomuch that they can neither disport themselves abroad,
nor please themselves at home; neither comforted in company, nor qui^ted
alone, but in all places and times, Erinnys conscie^tiae, (so Comment. in ^.
Cor. 11.
Melanc^hon calls it) hellish hags and infernal ^uries affright them.

Tom. 8. sol. 286
Au^ustine in his ^narration of the 45. Psalm, thus lively describes the woeful
estate of a despairing sinner: F^giet ab agro ad ciuitatem, a publico ad domum,
a domo in cubiculum: He runs as a mad man out of the field into the city,
out of the city into his house; from the common rooms in his house to his
chamber, from his chamber into his study, from his study to the secret closet
of his own heart: and ecce hoste^ suum inuenit, quo confugerat, seip sum quo
fugitur^s est: and then last of all, he is content least of all, himself being
greatest enemy to himself.

The blind man in the Mark 8.^4.
Gospel newly recovering his sight, imagined trees to be men; and the
Burgundians (as Lib. 1. cap. 11.
Comi^aeus reports) expecting a battle, supposed long thistles to be lances:
so the wicked in the dark, conceit every thistle to be a tree, every tree a
man, every man a devil, afraid of ^uery thing they see; yea many times of that
they do not see.

Anglican. histor. ab. 25.
Polydore Virgil writes that Richard the 3. had a most terrible dream, the
night before Bosworth field, in which he was slain: he thought all the
devils in hell halled and pulled him in hideous and ugly shapes. Id cred^ non
fuit somnium, sed conscientia scelerum: I suppose (says Polydore) that was not
a fained dream, but a true torture of his conscience, pr^saging a bloody day
both to himself, and all his followers.

The penner of the Latin Chronicle, de vitis Archiepiscoporum Cantuariensium,
in the life of Archbishop Hubert, records a will of a covetous oppressor in
this form. Lego omnia bona mea domino regi, corpus sepulturae, animam diabolo:
The godly man's will always runs in this style: Terram terra tegat, demon
peccata resumat,
Mundus res habeat, spiritus astra petat:
I bequeath my body that is earthly to the earth, my sins which are devilish
unto the devil, my goods that are worldly to the world, my soul that is
heavenly to heaven: but this unhappy wretch in great despair yielded up his
coin to the King, whom he had deceived, and his soul to the devil, whom he
had served.

It is written by Lanquet. chron. fol. 146.
Procopius that Theodoricus, as he was at supper imagined he saw in a fishes
head the visage of Symmachus a Noble man whom he had unjustly slain; with
which imagination he conceived such terror, as that he never after enjoyed one
good hour, but pining away ended his unfortunate days.

Cardinal Sleidan. com. lib. 23. in fine.
Crescentius the Popes Vicegerent in the Chapter of Trent, on a time writing
long letters unto Rome, full of mischief against the Protestants and cause of
Religion, had a sudden conceit that the devil in the likeness of a huge
dog, walked in his chamber, and couched under his table, the which affrighted
him so much, as that notwithstanding the counsel and comfort both of friends
and Physicians, he died a disconsolate death.

To conclude this argument, the devil Judas out of the hell of his conscience,
was Bailiffe, Tailor, witness, Jury, Judge, Sheriff, deaths-man in his own
execution.

Thus as you see, the wicked have no peace with man, no peace with God, no
peace with themselves. The very Clc.
name of peace between man and man is sweet, it self more sweet, Psalm. 133.
like the precious ointment upon the head of Aaron, that ran down unto his
beard, and from his beard to the skirts of his clothing. Yet the peace of
conscience is far sweeter, a Prou. 15.15.
continual feast, a daily Christmas unto the good man; as the rich Epicure,
Luke 16. so the godly fares deliciously every day. The man that trusts in
the Lord is fat, says Prou. 28.25.
Solomon, he feeds himself on the mercies of God, and merits of Christ. And
so the peace of God passes all these: for it passes all understanding,
without which one gift all other are rather curses then blessings unto us. As
Cyril. Alexand. in loc.
Cyril excellently, Domin^ priuante suo gaudio, quod esse potest gaudium? It is
the Luke 2.25.
consolation of Israel and solace of the Church: Zachar. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly o daughter Sion, shout for joy o daughter Jerusalem, for
behold thy King comes unto thee. That God is our God, that Christ is our
Christ, that the King of all Kings is our King, that he is reconciled unto us,
and we to him, is a joy surpassing all joys, a iubilation as the Scripture
terms it, which can neither be suppressed, nor yet expressed sufficiently.

How wretched then are the wicked in being debarred of all this sweet? of all
this exultation, of all these jubilees of joy? for if they can have no peace
abroad, no peace at home, no peace with themselves, no peace with other, no
peace with man, no peace with God; assuredly the proposition is most true,
There is no peace to the wicked.

Yea but you will say, Mark 10.18.
there is none good except God, all of us are gone astray, if we say we have
no sin, the truth of God is not in us. Of what kind of wicked is this then
understood? Answer is made, that this only concerns incorrigible, malicious,
impenitent, senseless sinners. For when once men feel their sins, and
repent for their sins, grieuing much because they can grieve no more; then in
such as Romans 5.20.
sin abounds, grace superaboundeth, Romans 8.28.
all things work for their good; even sin which is damnable to other, is
profitable to them, occasioning 2. Cor. 7.10.
repentance, never to be repented. Luth^r. loc. com. tit. d^ vulneribus
consci^ntiae.
Remember the speech of God to Rebecca; The greater shall serve the lesser.
Albeit our spiritual enemies are stronger, and our sins greater then we; yet
they shall serve for our good, the greater shall serve the less. God who can
bring sweet out of sower, and light out of darkness, shall likewise bring good
out of evil.

Such offenders have peace with men, so far Romans 12.18.
as is possible with all men, Ephesians. 4.3.
indeuoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

Secondly, being justified by faith, they have peace toward God in Christ: Romans
51.

Lastly, Christ dwelling in their heart, they want not peace of conscience, but
abound with joy in the holy Ghost: Romans 14.17.

When sinners are rather passive then active in sin; when it is rather done
on them, the^ of them; albeit their conscience accuse them of the fact, yet it
does not condemn them of the fault: and so there is all kind of peace to the
penitent; no kind of peace to the wicked imp^nitent, says my God.

Hitherto concerning the thing proclaimed. I come now to the person
proclaiming, in these words, says my God. The subordinate proclaimer is Esaias;
the principal, God himself.

As heretofore the Prophet, so now the Preacher is not only the mouth of God,
as Luther calls him: but as John 1.23.
John Baptist said of himself; The very voice of God. For albeit we speak,
yet it is Christ who by us, and in us calls unto you: 2. Cor. 5.20. See
Epist. dom. 3. and Gospel. dom. 1. and 4. in Aduent.

If then the Lord has said it, Bullinger. in loc.
let no man doubt of it; Heaven and earth shall pass, but not a jot of his
word shall pass: he is not like man, that he should lie, or like the Son of
man, that he should deceive. Yea, that we might the better observe it, Almighty
God has spoken once and twice, as it is in the 62. Psalm. For the Lord had
made this proclamation once before in the 48. chap^er, at the last verse. So
that as De adulterinis coniugijs ad Pollentium. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Augustine in the like case, verba toties inculcata, vera sunt, viua sunt, sana
sunt, plana sunt. One text repeated twice, pressed again and again, must
needs be plain and peremptory. And assuredly (beloved) if we further examine
the person of this Chief, we shall find him able to make this war, because
God, and willing to maintain this war, because My God. He is styled elsewhere
the Lord of hosts, and therefore all creatures as his warriors, are ready
pressed to revenge his quarrels, and to fight his battles. His soldiers
against the wicked, are either celestial, or terrestrial, all the Creatures
in heaven and on earth. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth,
Genesis 1. and all that therein is, Exodus 20. And in this acception, according to
the Bible, which is a lantern unto our feet, and a guide unto our paths, I
find three heavens, as Paul says, he was taken up into the 2. Cor. 1^.2.
third heaven: the 1. Airy. 2. Starry. 3. Glorious.



Airy heaven is all the space from us unto the firmament: so the birds which
fly between us and the stars, are called in holy writ; the fowls of G^n.
1.28.
heaven. In this heaven are meteors, hail, wind, rain, snow, thunder,
lightening, all which are at Gods absolute command, to serve such as serve him,
and to fight against them that fight against him. As when the wicked old world
was filled with cruelty; The windows of Genesis 7.
heaven were opened, and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty
nights; insomuch, that this one soldier of the Lord, destroyed all his
enemies, every thing that was upon the earth from man to beast; only Noah,
Gods holy servant, remained, and they that were with him in the Arc, whom the
rain did not hurt, but rather help: for the deeper the flood, the safer the
ship; the water had peace with Noah and his company, but open war with all
the rest of that old world.

So likewise the Lord out of heaven, rained fire and brimstone upon the Genesis 19.
Sodomites; and hailestones out of heaven upon the cursed Amorites at Bethoron,
and they were more, says the Joshua 10.
text, that died with the hail, then they whom the children of Israel slew
with the sword.

But what need we look so far? the great wind December 30.
this year, the From 2^. December, to lan. 15.
great frost the last year sensibly demonstrate this point. What a wrack on
the s^a, what a work on the earth occasioned by the one? what a dearth, and so
by consequence, what a death ensued upon the other? If God cast forth his ice
like morsels, who is able to abide his frost? Psalm. 147.17.

To step higher, the second heaven is the firmament, coelum quasi coelatum,
because it is engraven, and as it were enameled with glorious lights, as Moses
in the first of Genesis, God made two great lights, the greater to rule the
day, the lesser to govern the night: he made also the stars, and placed them
in the firmament of heaven.

Now this heaven Psalm. 19.1.
declares the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work: though
they want understanding and are dumb, yet they trumpet forth his worthy
praises in such sort, that there is neither speech nor language, but their
voice is heard among them. And as they speak for God, as scholars, so they
fight also for God as soldiers; for the stars in their course fought against
Sisera: Joshua 5.20. and when Duke Joshua fought against the wicked Amorites, he
said in the sight of Israel; Sun, stay thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the
valley of Aialon; and the Sun abode, and the Moon stood still, until the
people of God avenged themselves upon their enemies; the Sun abode, and
hasted not to go down for a whole day: Joshua 10.13.

Psalm. 8.1.
O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world! When I
consider the heavens, even the works of thy hands, the Sun and the Moon which
thou have ordained, what is man that thou art so mindful of him? or the son of
man that thou should thus regard and guard him? The third heaven is called by
Philosophers, empyreum: by Divines, the glorious heaven: by 1. King. ^.27.
scriptures, heaven of heavens, or heaven above the visible heavens. In this
heaven Almighty God has two sorts of tall wariours: Angels. Saints.



Angels are Luke 2.13.
heavenly soldiers, ministering spirits of God, instruments of his mercy toward
the good, executioners of his judgments upon the bad. When Joshua was about to
sack Jericho, an Joshua 5.
Angel appeared unto him as a Captain with a drawn sword to fight for his
people. When Zenacherib and his innumerous host came against Israel, the Angel
of the Lord in one night slew one hundred, eighty, and five thousand: 2. Kings
19. The first borne of Egypt, slain by an Angel: Exodus 12. blasphemous Herod
smitten with an Angel: Acts 12.23. To conclude this argument, Angels at the
last and dreadful day shall bind the Mat. 13.
tares, that is, make fagots of the wicked, and cast them into hell fire. As
they pitch their tents about Gods elect, being the Saints guard and nurses, as
it were, to Psalm. 91.12.
carry them in their arms, lest at any time they hurt their foot against a
stone: so contrariwise, speedy messengers and Ministers of Gods anger unto the
reprobate.

Now for Saints, albeit they be milites emeriti, (as the Consule com. Gods.
Stewchij. ad Veget. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Romans speak) soldiers discharged the field, past fighting, past sighing,
for all tears are wiped from their eyes; even so says the spirit, they rest
from their labors, and their good works follow them: Apocalyp. 14.13. The^ be
past warfare, and now live in eternal welfare, crowned as conquerors in
heaven, where there is neither militia, nor malit^a.

Though, I say, their fight be ended, and they rewarded with an immortal
crown of glory, yet for as much as there is a communion of Saints, a
fellowship between the triumphant Saints in heaven, and the militant Saints on
earth; the blessed souls departed and delivered out of the miseries of this
sinful world, howsoever they be secure for themselves, yet are they careful
for us: as D. Reynold de Idolat. lib. 1. cap. 1.
our Churches in their Harmony speak, de foelicitate sua securi, de nostra
salute soliciti: they wish well unto us, and pray still for us in general,
albeit they know not our wants in particular. Howsoever they fight not any
longer against Gods enemies with pen or pike, with paper or powder, yet they
continually fight against them with push of prayer, as Saint Apoc^l. 6.10.
John expressly; The souls of them that were killed for the word, cried with a
loud voice, saying; How long Lord, holy and true! do not thou judge and
revenge our blood on them that dwell on the ^arth? Albeit they contend not with
earthly weapons, yet they maintain Gods quarrel with heavenly wishes in
general against Satan and his kingdom, out of zeal and heat to Gods cause,
not out of any spleen or hate to any of the wicked in particular; I dare not
say so: for where the spirit has not a pen to write, the Pastor must not have
a tongue to speak, not the people an ear to hear; but that the blessed
souls in heaven pray for us, against our enemies in general, is an article of
faith, and an evident truth of the Bible.

I come from Gods selected band in heaven, to the common band, the host of his
creatures on earth, the which contains both sea and land, and all that is
therein, evermore willing to fight in this quarrel.

The E^od. 14.
red sea did ouerwhelme proud Pharaoh, and all his host, even all his horses,
his chariots, and horsemen. Anno 1588. the sea and fish in the sea fought
against the superstitious Spaniard, enemy to God and his true religion: a
wonderful work, which ought to be had in perpetual remembrance. I say, wind
and water overcame that invincible army, prepared for our destruction; in such
sort, that the Treat. to Mendoza.
popish Relator he^reof confessed ingenuously, that God in that sea fight,
showed himself a very Lutheran, and mere Protestant.

The floods and inundations which happened in diverse parts of this kingdom
within these few years, here should not be passed over with dry eyes. If the
Lord had not according to his infinite greatness and goodness, fettered the
waters of our seas, as Herodot.
Xerxes did the waters of Hellespontus. If God had not gathered the waters
together on an heap, and laid them up in the deep, as in a treasure house:
Psalm 33.7. If he had not spoken to the flood, Job 38.11.
IIitherto s^^lt thou go, but no further, and here shall it stay thy proud
waves, assuredly there had followed a great doomesday to this Island. Psalm.
77.16.
The waters saw thee, O Lord, the waters saw thee, and were afraid; Psalm. 72.18.
Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things; and bl^ssed be the n^me of his Majesty for ever* and let all the people
(...), Amen, Amen.

I pass to the shore, to dry land, Numb. 16.30.
which opened and swallowed up quick, Cor^^h, Dath^n, and Ab^ram.

In this one Province are sundry ranks of fighting soldiers, armies o^ fell
dragons, of hissing serpents, of roaring lions, of devouring wolves, of other
wild beasts in the forest, and cattle upon a thousand hills; all which named,
and all other not named, are ready with force and fury to crush the wicked,
and at Gods alarm to break them in pecces like a potters vessel.

Even the least of these creatures is strong enough, if God set them to fight;
an host of frogs, an army of grasshoppers, a swarm of flies, able to dismay
Pharao and all his people; a few rats troubled all the citizens of Munster.
Hamel; a few worms devoured Act. 12.23.
Herod; a little gnat choked a great man, yea the greatest monarch in his own
conceit, Adri^n the Pope.

The very senseless creatures have sense and feeling of the wrong done to God.
In Siloam (as we read in the Luke 13.4.
Gospel) a tower fell upon eighteen persons and slew them. In Lanquet. chro.
fol. 95.
Rome fifty thousand men were hurt and slain with the fall of a Theater, as
they were beholding the games of the Sword-players. Stow.
Anno 25. Reg. Eliz^b. the scaffold about Parisgarden upon a Sunday in the
afternoon fell down, which instantly killed eight persons, and hurt many more.
A fair warning to such as profane the Sabbath, and delight more in the
cruelty of beasts, then in the works of mercy, which are exercises of the
Lords day. The time will not suffer me to name, much less to mufter all the
rest of Gods war^iers on earth: I will only remember one, whom, I think, you
fear most, namely the plague, fitly called by the Canonists, bellum Dei contra
hom^es, the war of God against men, and by the Scripture, the 1. Chron. 21.30
sword of God, and Psalm. 91.5.
ar^o^r of his anger.

In the year 1006, there was such an universal plague thoroughout the whole
world, that the living were not able to bury the dead, as Sigisbertus and
Zuing^r. in Thea^ro. volum. 2. lib. 7. page 544.
other report. Anno 1342. there was in Sabellicus lib. 8 Ae^ead. 9.
Venice such a pestilence, that the hundredth person was scarsly l^ft alive,
insomuch that the State made a law, that whosoever would come and dwell at
Venice two years, he should instantly be made free.

About the ye^re 1522. there died of the plague in La^quet. chro. fol. 280.
Millaine fifty thousand within the space of four months. In Stowes
abridgement.
Norwich from the first of January to the first of July, 57104. In Idem.
Yarthmouth within the space of one ye^re 7052. In London and the liberties
thereof, from the 23. of December 1602. unto the 22. of December 1603. there
died of all diseases, as was accounted weekly, 38244. whereof of the plague
30578. and from that time to this day, the City not yet free. This last year
past, as appears in your own bills, there died 2262. Lay this heavy judgment
to your heart, hear this proclamation again and again, There is no peace to
the wicked.

As the Job 5.^^.
stones of the field are in league with the righteous, and the beasts at peace
with the godly, they may dwell safe in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods:
Ezech. 34.25. so contrariwise the stone shall cry ^ut of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber against the wicked: Habacuk 2.11.

Their sin begets their sorrow, their faults increase their foes, even their
tables are made snares, and their i^orie beds accus^rs, and their seeled houses
witnesses against them; all things which were given for blessings are become
curses unto them: and that which is most strange, beside these two great bands
of soldiers, one common in earth, another select in heaven; there is yet a
third of rebels, even of the very devils in hell; for albeit they be Jude
epist. v. 6.
reserved in everlasting chains until the judgment of the great day; yet God
infinite in his power and wisdom, who brings light out of darkness, does
make good use of these bad inst^uments.

It is said in the first of Sam. chap. 16. that the evil spirit of the Lord
vexed Saul; it was Gods spirit which came upon David, but it was a malignant
spirit which was on Saul; and yet this spirit is called s^^ri^us Domini, the
spirit of the Lord, because the Lord Immissus seu permissus a Domino. Em. Sa.
not. in loc.
sent that evil spirit, and suffered it to torment Saul, as Ad Simplician.
lib. 2. qu. 1.
Augustine and 2. Sen^. dis^. 44
Lombard have well expounded that place. So likewise w^e read in the Gospel,
that the foul spirits made some d^ase, some dumb, casting one into the water,
another into the fire; all which actions, as they were actions, proceeded from
God for the Scripture tells us plainly, Romans 13.1.
there is no power but of God.

Happily some will say, the devils assault the good so well as the bad. We
wrestle (says Ephesians. 6.12.
Paul) against principalities, against powers, against the prince of darkness:
for Satan goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Answer
is made, that God suffers Satan to tempt his children only to try them, but
suffers him to tempt the reprobate, so far, as to destroy them: the
temptations of the good are instruction; of the bad, destruction, utter ruin
of body and soul. In what a miserable case then is every wretch irrepentant?
Esaias 5.18.
drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with cartropes,
Romans 2.5.
heaping up wrath against the day of wrath. For the number of his enemies is
without number; the number of the blessed Saints is innumerable: Apocalyp. 7.9.
After these things, I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in
their hands. The number of Angels is infinite: Think thou (said Christ to
Peter, in the 26 of S. Matth^w) that I cannot now pray to my father, and he
will give me more then twelve legions of Angels?

A legion is Dionysius Hal. lib. 1.
3000. footmen, and 300. horsemen; or as Calvin upon the place, 5000. foot,
500. horsemen; as Lib. 2. de re militari cap 2. See the view of certain
military matters annexed to Tacitus in English.
Vegetius, 6000. in all; and ^uery particular Angel able in one night, to
kill, as is recorded in the story of Senn^cherib, one hundred, eighty and
five thousand. The number of stars in the sky, of fowls in the air, of
fish in the sea, of beasts in the field, of devils in hell are without number:
How infinitely infinite then is the number of all his enemies? in what a
f^arefull ^state does he stand, when as God and man, Angels and Devils, saints
and sinners, heaven and earth, fish and foul, beasts and birds, other and
himself; in a word, all that is within him, all that is without him, all that
is about him, combine themselves together to maintain Gods holy war against
him?

I know there are degrees of sinners, as there are degrees in sin; some be
fautores, some actores, a third sort authors. Of the first, Seneca wittily,
Nihil interest fa^eas ne sceleri an illud facias: It is in a manner all one to
commit and commend a villainy. Non caret scrupulo occultae societatis, qui
manifesto discrimini non occurrit, says Gregory: He is suspected to be an
abetter of evil, who does not endeavor to better the evil. A commoner then
that flattereth, a Commander that favors ungodly wretches in a city, lets
in so many strong foes, to cut your throtes, and ruin your estate.

Yet actors on the stage be worse then idle sp^ctators: for howsoever sin be
commendable, because common, as De gubernat. Dei, lib. 5.
S^lui^nus complained in his time; In h^c scelus res deuoluta, vt nisi quis
malus fuerit, saluus esse non possit: In plain English, except a man be first
bad, he cannot be reputed a good fellow: Yet horrible blasphemers, incorrigible
drunkards, shameless whoremongers, makebate pettifoggers, malcontent accusants
on the one side, recusants on the other, are the very men and means, which
bring and keep the dearth and plague so long among you.

But authors of evil and plotters of mischief are worst of all; as it
appears even by Gods own censure given of the first sin in Paradise, where
the serp^nt had three punishments inflicted upon him, as the original
contriuer; the woman two, being the mediate procurer; and Adam but one, as the
party seduced. Apply, for I can no further amplify.

When C^dren. hist. page 542.
Phocas had built a mighty wall about his palace, for his security, in the
night he heard a voice: O King, though thou build as high as the clouds, yet
the city might easily be taken, the sin within will mar all: Ser. 87.
as see Ambrose notably; Grauiores sunt ini^^ci mores praui, quam hosts
in^esti: Wicked manners are stronger then armed men. If God be with us, who can
be against us? if we stand against God, who can withstand him?

And as God is abl^, because God. so willing to maintain this war, because
my God: that is, the God of his people, whom the wicked persecute: for his
Grant is fair in letters patent to Genesis 12.3.
Abraham and his seed for ever: I will bless them that ble^^e thee, and curse
them that curse thee. Or, my God* that is, the God by whom I speak, who
deals always with his servants according to his word.

The gods of the Gentiles are lying gods, and dying gods: but my God is the
truth, and the life, who can neither deceive nor be deceived. Or, my God,
because we must not only believe the Mayor of the Gospel, but the Bucer.
Minor also, saying with Thomas my Lord; with Mary, my Savior; with Esaias, my
God. If we can gain this assumption, it will bring us to the most happy
conclusion; enjoying peace of conscience which is an heaven on earth, and peace
of glory, which is heaven in heaven. Unto which, he bring us that has made
peace for us, even Christ Jesus the righteous* to whom with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, as we are bound, so let us heartily yield all honor, etc. Amen.

The Epistle. COLOS. 3.12. Put upon you as the elect of God, tender mercy, etc.
THis Epistle consists of two parts: In the first, Saint Paul exhorts the
Colossians unto many special virtues, as tender mercy, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long suffering, etc. In the second, because it is infinite
to insist in every particular, he draws them, and all other duties, unto two
Zanchius in loc.
general admonitions in gross: whereof, the 1. concerns our theory; Let the
word of Christ d^ell in you plenteously, etc. 2. our practice; whatsoever ye
do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord, etc.



Put upon you] Christ had two sorts of garments, (as we read in the John 19.23.
Gospel:) one without seame, not divided at his death; and that was a Luther.
postil. mayor. in epist. Dom. 5. ab Epiphan.
figure of faith, which, maugre the Rupert. com. in Joan. lib. 13.
rents of all heretics and schismatikes in the Church, is Ephesians. 4.5.
but one.

Another with seames, parted among the soldiers, and that was a type of love,
1. Cor. 13.5.
which seeks not her own, but communicates it self to many.

Luther. vbi supra.
So the Christian must have two coats: one of faith, indivisible, by which he
puts on Christ: another of love, parted among many, by which one Christian
Idem. postil. in Epist. F^st. circumcis.
puts on another; Romans 12.15.
reioicing with them that rejoice, weeping with them that weep.

Upon the point, these two coats are but one; faith being inside; and love
outside; faith in respect of God, and love toward the world. This Epistle
speaks of the outside, put on tender mercy] Postillae maiores cum glossis and
figu^is. in loc.
quoad affectum; kindnesse] quoad effectum: meeknesse] been vtendo prosperis:
long suffering] been se habendo in aduersis, etc.

These virtues are both ornamenta, and munimenta, clothes and corslets. Ephesians.
6.11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil. Seeing we must every day sight, and every day be seen,
let us as well for armor as honor, put on ten^er mercy, kindness, etc. that
we may Prou. 10.9.
walk uprightly and confidently. See epist. dom. 21. post. Trinit. How love is
said to be the bond of perfectness, and chief virtue; See epist. dom.
quinquages.

As the elect of God] Saint Paul builds all these good exhortations upon one
argument, drawn ab Zanchius in loc.
hones^o se^ Sarcerius in loc.
debito: you are the elect of God, holy and beloved; chosen and beloved of God
before the world; through baptism consecrated solemnly to God in the world:
wherefore being thus, electi, selecti, dilecti, Ephesians. 2.10.
Gods own workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works; it is most
meet new men should use new manners; in stead of the works of darkness, put on
tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, which are weapons of light. It is
due debt that you should be followers of God, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, as Christ forgave you. See epist. dom. 3. quadrages.

The Defense for not subscrip. part. 1. cap. vlt.
Nouelists except against our Service Book, for omitting here two titles, holy
and beloved. Our answer is, that the word, elect. implies the rest; for if
elect, then beloved and holy. The Church omits not the greater, and infers the
lesser, as the Churches of Scotland and Middleburge, call Gods heavy judgments
upon the wicked, a little rap: Psalm. 74.12. and bread of affliction, bro^ne
bread: Psalm. 127.2. Contrary, not only to the Geneua Bible, but even C^luins
exposition of the place. If these frivolous objections be their aqua coelestis,
to keep life in their fainting cause, we may toll the passing bell, and ere
long ring out to the funeral.

Let the word of Christ] That is, the Scripture, the Gospel, especially so
called, in respect of three causes: Efficient: for he speaks in the Prophets
and Apostles: Esaias 52.6.
I am he that does speak; behold it is I. Material: for he is the contents
of all the Bible; shadowed in the Law, showed in the Gospel: August. in Psalm.
49.
vnam vocem habent duo Testamenta. The word of the Lord contains nothing, but
the word, which is the Lord. Final: as being the Romans 10.4.
end of the whole Law, and scope Luke 1.70.
of all the Prophets ever since the world began. Wherefore, seeing the
Scriptures have Christ for their author, Christ for their object, Christ for
their end, well may they be called the word of Christ.



Dwell] We must not entertain the word as a stranger, giving it a cold
complement, and so take our leave; but because it is Gods best friend, the
Kings best friend, and our best friend, we must use it as a Calvin. in loc.
familiar and domesticke; receiving it into the parlor of our heart, making it
our chamber fellow, study fellow, bed fellow. Things of l^sse moment are
without door, the staff behind the door, Erasmus.
sed quae pretiosa sunt, no^ vno seruantur ostio: things of worth are kept
under many locks and keys. It is fit then that the word, being more precious
Psalm. 119.117.
then gold, yea the most fine gold, Matthew. 13.46.
a peerlesse pearl, should not be laid up in the Porters lodge, only the
outward ear, but even in the cabinet of the mind: Deuteronomy. 11.18. Ye shall lay up
these my words in your heart, and in your soul: so the word that now does
plenteously dwell among you, may dwell plenteously in you.

Plenteously] Read, hear, meditate, with all attention exactly, with all
intention devoutly, with all diligence thoroughly. John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures. Esaias 8.20. to the law, to the testimony. Apocalypse 1.3. Blessed is
he that reads, and hears, and keeps the words of this prophecy: not only
read, nor only hear, nor only meditate; but all: sometime read to rectify
meditation, and sometime meditate to profit by reading. Lectio sine meditatione
arida, meditatio sine lectione erronea.

It is reported of Alphonso King of Spain, that he read over all the Bible
with Lyraes postil, fourteen times. And Prolog. in l. b. 1. de doctri^a
Christiana^.
Augustine writes of Antonius an Egyptian Monk, that having no learning, he
did by hearing the Scriptures often read, get them without book, and after by
serious and godly meditation, understand them.

This one word, plenteously, confutes plenteously, first, ignorant people, who
cannot: secondly, negligent people, who will not read and hear: thirdly,
delicate people, who loath the Scriptures as unpleasant, preferring the Poets
before the Prophets, admitting into their house the writings of men before the
word of God: fourthly, perfunctory students in the Bible, turning over not the
whole, but some part, and that so coldly, that as it is said of the Delphicke
Oracle, Ausonius.
quoties legitur, toties negligitur, a lesson is no sooner got, but it is
forgot: fifthly, covetous people, who will not give to their Pastor plenteously,
that the word may dwell in them plenteously. Nehem. 13.10.
Nehemia complained in his time, that the Levites for want of maintenance, were
feign to leave the Temple, and follow the plow. And Saint Augustine made the
like complaint in his age: Luther. postil. and Zanchius in loc.
whereupon in process of time, Clergy men invented such points of
superstition, as were most aduantageous unto them. Hence they ^aked heil, and
found out Purgatory, to make the Popes kitchen smoke: an invention not known
unto the Greek Church for the space of Rossensis art. 18. contra Lutherum, and
Alphonsus de haeresibus.
1500. years after Christ; and but of Polydor. de in^ent. lib. 8. cap. 1.
late known to the Latin. Hence prayer for the dead, indulgences, and other
new tricks of popery, which are more for the Priests belly, then the peoples
benefit. God of his infinite goodness forgive Britans ingratitude in this
kind, and grant that the burning lamps in our Temple, may be supplied with
sufficient oil, that the light of Israel go not out. Sixthly, this condemes
Enthusiasts, despising the word and ministry. Seventhly, the Marcionits and
Manichees, rejecting Moses and the Prophets. Last of all, and most of all, the
Papists, in denying the vulgar translations of Scripture to the common people.
Let the word of God dwell in you: Zanchius in loc.
that is, in all you, Priest and people: Non in nobis modo, sed in vobis: as
Saint Hi^ron. in loc.
Hierom peremptorily; Hic ostenditur verbum Christi, non sufficienter sed
abundanter etiam laicos habere debere, and docerese inuicem vel monere: The
word must dwell in us: Ergo, the Bible must be in our house. It must dwell
plenteously: Ergo, we must read daily; but, as it follows in the text,

With all wisdome] The Luther. postil. in loc.
Papists as well in the Church as in the street, chant scripture plenteously;
but because their hymns are not in a known tongue, it is without
understanding. The Brownists in their For articles 25. in their confession,
they quoted above 3000. texts.
books and sermons often cite scripture plenteously, but it is not in wisdom.
Learned In Romans 2.
Origin notes well, (and where he does well, none better) that heretics are
scripturarum fures, great lurchers of holy writ: but they so wrest it, that (as
Expositio. orior. in cap. ^. ad Galatas.
Hierom speaks) Euangelium Christi, fit euangelium hominis, aut quod peius est,
d^aboli.

Table Gospellers are full of text: It is ordinary to discuss divinity
problemes even at ordinaries; a custom very common, but by the censure of our
Church, no way commendable. For the 37. Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth.
Iniunction forbids all men to reason of divine scripture rashly; and the
greatest part of Archbishop Cranmers preface before the Church Bible, is spent
against idle brabling and brawling in matters of Theology. And a Master
Dearing. lect. 27. upon the Heb.
grave Divine, much esteemed in our days, held it better for venturous
discoursers of predestination, and sin against the holy Ghost, that they had
neither tongues in their heads, nor hearts in their breasts, then that they
should continue in this irreuerend usage.

In loc. com.
Manlius reports, how two meeting at a tavern, contended much to little
purpose about their faith. One said he was of Doctor Martins religion; and the
other swear he was of Doctor Luthers opinion; whereas Martin, and Luther, were
but one. So many men move many doubts in many matters, having neither will to
hear, nor skill to conceive the state of a controversy, and then, as Contra
literas (...) li^. ^. cap. 26.
Augustine said of Petilian the Donatist: Multa dicendo nihil dicunt: aut
potius, nihil dicendo multa dicunt.

The word of Christ must dwell in us plenteously, but in all wiidome, we must
hear it in all wisdom, read it in all wisdom, meditate on it in all
wisdom, speak of it in all wisdom, preach it in all wisdom; not only in
some, but in all wisdom; for all is little enough, considering the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, who takes his name in vain.

Teaching and exhorting] This clause may be referred either to that which went
before, or to that which follows after: to that which went before; Let the
word of Christ dwell in you so plenteously with all wisdom, Marlorat. and
Aquin. in loc.
that ye may both instruct and exhort your selves unto every good work; for
doctrine and exhortation are two principal uses of the Scripture: 2. Tim.
3.16. For doctrine, the Malanct. in loc.
law shows every man in his vocation, what actions are acceptable to God; and
the Gospel teaches how they be acceptable; namely, by faith in Christ. Let
the word of Christ therefore dwell in you so plenteously with all wisdom, that
it may be a lantern to your feet, and a light to your paths; a direction how
to serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of your life.

For exhortation; the word must so dwell in us, as that we may stir up one
another to godliness: Esaias 2.3. Heb. 3.13. Zanchiu^ in loc.
(...); est in (...); so to put it, and print it in our mind, that it may not
only be profitable to our selves, but useful also to other; Luther. post. in
loc.
in public, which is the Pastors office; in private, which is every Christians
duty.

This also may be referred unto the words following, as according to Ad
sequentia plerique referunt: vli Zanchius in loc.
most expositors our Church here; Teach and exhort your own selves in Psalms,
etc. where Saint Paul describes the Christians music, both for the matter;
Psalms, hymns, spiritual songs. the manner; sing with grace in your hearts to
the Lord.


Psalms and hymnes] Some distinguish these by their object, affirming that
hymns are laudatory: Chrysostom. and (...) s^^olia.
for the glorious Angels in heaven sing not Psalms, but hymns: Theophy lact.
Hymnus e^^ollit, Psa^mus laudat. Ambros^n loc.
Hominum est psallere, Deum hymnis efferre angelorum. Spiritual odes are
peculiar songs accuratelie framed by the Church, according to her several
exigence: Psalms are of sundry matters and arguments, exhortatory,
consolatory, precatory, deprecatory. But I follow that other distinction of In
loc.
Hierom and Luther, understanding by the first, the Dauidicall Psalms; by the
second, the songs of Moses, Debora, Zacharias, Mary, Simeon, mentioned in the
Bible; by the third, godly hymns invented by the Christians of that age,
called spiritual, respectu termini a quo, as proceeding from Gods spirit.
respectu terminiad quem, as edifying our spirit: containing spiritual matter
and melody for the comfort of our soul, not any carnal or wanton dittie, to
nourish the lust of our flesh. And therefore the Papisticall hymns in an
vnknowue language are not spiritual, respectus termini ad quem; in that they
neither instruct, nor exhort; much less ribald ballads, instructing in vanity,
exhorting to villainy.


Vbi supra.
Luther, In Ephesians. cap. 5.19.
Zanchius, In loc.
Marlorat construe this of singing in the Church, as well as in private: for
Gods holy people have used in Con. Toletan. 4. can. 12.
all ages, even from the primitive time, until this day, to sing in the
public congregation the Psalms of David; hymns of Zacharias, Simeon, Mary;
spiritual songs, composed by devout Doctors, according to the several
occasions of the Church; and therefore Come holy Ghost, sung at the
consecration of our Bishops: Te Deum of Saint Ambrose, the Creed of Athanasius,
used in our Liturgy, are warranted both by Gods precept, and his peoples
practice.

With grace] I find three constructions of this one clause: for grace. by
grace. with grace.

Sing to the Lord for grace received: as Paul Ephesians. 5. Speak to your selves
in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, making melody to the Lord, giving
thanks always for all things. And in the next verse following here; What soever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God the Father by him. Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down
from the father of lights. Ipsum Audax. apud August. epist. 139.
minus munus est: the least gift is a grace; the means to get and preserve
grace, proceeds altogether from grace: for if God withdraw his mercy, we
presently fall. As a staff, which if a man take and set upright upon the
ground, so long as he holds it with his hand, it stands upright; but so soon
as he withdrawes his help, though he never push it down, it will fall o^ it
self. Ascendat ergo gratia, vt descendat gratia: Let our thanks ascend up unto
God, that his grace may descend down to us.

Chrysostom. Theophylact. and schol. in loc.
By grace] Man is not only the Temple of God, as Paul speaks; but as Clemens
Alexandrinus, the timbrell of God. Now the timbrell cannot found, except it be
touched. It is then the Macarius, hom. 47.
spirit of God that makes our pipes to go. God, says Orat. pro Christianis.
Athenagoras, is the bellows, and we the organs. A man may sing to the devil,
to the world, to the flesh without this grace; but he cannot sing to the Lord,
but by the Lord. Our music may be songs, but not spiritual songs, except
they be guided by the spirit. This should teach us in our Psalms and hymns
to praise God for his grace when we feel it, and often to pray to God for it,
when we feel it not.

With grace] Theophylact. Luther. Calvin. in loc.
That is, with a gracious dexterity, with delight and profit, both unto our
selves and other. Unto our selves: for as it is a joy to the just to do
justice, Proverbs 21.15. so a grace to the godly to be joyful in the Lord: to
serve the Lord with gladness, and to come before his presence with a song: to
sing the Psalms of David with the spirit of David: the song of Mary with the
spirit of Mary; Te Deum of S. Ambrose with the spirit of S. Ambrose.

Again, with grace to other: Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth, but that which may minister grace, Calvin. and Marlorat. in
Ephesians. 4.
that is, instruction and consolation to the hearer, uttered in such manner and
method, that it may be well accepted even of the most untoward. We must not
sing our own crochets out of tune, without rule, witless and senseless songs;
All that we sing, all that we say, must be graceful: Et prodesse volunt, and
delectare poetae.
And if Poets, how much more Prophets? He that does preach and pray without a
grace, does the work of the Lord negligently, though he preach every day, and
pray every hour.

In your hearts] As our mouth must show forth his praise, so our soul must
magnify the Lord, and our spirit must rejoice in God our Savior. It is not
enough that we come near to God with our lips, in chanting hymns and psalms,
except we make melody to the Lord with the best member that we have. Bernard,
s^rm. super salve regina.
Plus valet consonantia voluntatum quam vocum. How we neglect this precept in
singing, when our hearts are on our harvest, and our minds on our meat, I
need not say; your domestical Chaplane does daily tell you.

To the Lord] Romans 11.36.
That as of him, and through him, and for him are all things, so unto him may
be glory for evermore.

Whatsoever ye do in word or deede] A general rule extended to all men, and
all actions in all places at al times, vno cumulo cuncta complectitur, as
Luther upon the place.

Do all] Not say ye, but do. Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 3.
Celsus and Antiphon writing against the truth, entitled their treatise, the
book of truth: and the Papists under the name of the Church, overthrow the
Church, L^o epist. 83.
Ecclesiae nomi^ee armamini, and contra ecclesiam dimicatis; Anabaptists are
most carnal, and yet they boast of the spirit. Unconscionable men in our time,
seem to be all for conscience: Justice and Conscience are the greatest martyrs
in the world. For a great man in doing mischief pretends justice, and a mean
man always conscience: so that as it is in the Proverb, Luther. in loc.
In nomine domini incipit omne malum. So soon as the malicious man had sown
his tares, he went his way. See the Gospel for this day.

In the name of the Lord Iesu] Not in our own name, for there is no good in
us: of our selves we cannot think so much as a good thought, much less speak
a good word, or do a good deed: nor in Theophylact. in loc.
Angels name, nor in any Saints name, for that is to mingle the blood of Thomas
with Christ's blood, as Luke 13.1.
Pilate did the blood of the Galileans with their own sacrifice. Christ is our
only Savior, and redeemer, our only mediator and advocate. This (says the
Eccles. 43.27.
Wiseman) is the sum of all, that he is all; yea 1. Cor. 15.28.
all in all; and therefore good reason all should be said, all should be done
in his name: that is, as our Church in the Collect, begun, continued and ended
in him: he is Alpha, therefore we must begin every work, Zanch. in loc.
by calling upon his name, and squaring it according to his word: he is Omega,
therefore all must be referred unto him, and end in him: 1. Cor. 10.31.

To God the Father] Erasmus annot. in loc.
Because God, and because a father: God for his greatness, Father for his
goodness.

By him] Otherwise, our spiritual sacrifices are not acceptable to God: 1.
Pet. 2.5.

The Gospel. MATTHEW. 13.24. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which
sowed good seed in his field, etc.
THis parable being explained by Christ, verse. 37. needs not any further
exposition, but our good disposition only to practice that he taught; it
requires application rather then explication.

For application then understand, that it makes against 4. principal enemies of
ye Church: Carnal Gospellers. Brownists. Papists. Atheists.

Against carnal Gospellers, in that they neither watch over the Church, nor
pray for the Church as they should. Satan is here called our enemy, both ab
affectu, and effectu: for his malice, 1. Pet. 5.8.
going about daily like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. For his
success, ouercomming many; for this cause called a man in 28. verse, (...);
Ludolphus de vita Christi, cap. 64.
as Scipio was called Africane, for that he conquered Africa: or as Coster. in
loc.
other observe, there is such affinity between Satan and the wicked, as that
mutually they be called one by another name. The wicked man is called a
devil: Ioh. 6.70. and 1. Tim. 4.1.
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? and the devil is
here termed a wicked man.

This envious adversary sows always tares among the wheat; where God has
his Church, he has his chapel. The devil has not any ground of his own,
but he sows in Gods field, upon Gods seed; and so the corruption of the good
is the generation of the bad; heresy being nothing else but an ouersowing. 1.
Tim. 1.3.
(...), an after teaching, or another teaching.

Almighty God has Pontan. in loc.
four principal fields: Heaven. Paradise. The Church. Man's heart.


In heaven Lucifer ouersowed pride, by which himself and his angels fell: in
Paradise Satan ouersowed disobedience, by which he deceived Adam and Eve: Genesis
2.17.
God said, in the day that thou eatest of the tree of knowledge, thou shall die
the death: Genesis 3.3.
Eua being corrupted by the Serpent, said, lest ye die; Satan himself, ye
shall not die: so Gods good seed, moriemini, was turned first to ne moriamini,
then unto non moriemini: Bernard. ser^s. de quadruplici debito.
Deus affirmat, mulier dubitat, diabolus negat.

In the Church (as it is here showed) he does ouersow schisms and heresies, in
such sort that tares ouertop the wheat, at least they be so mingled together,
as that the one cannot be rooted up without hurt to the other.

In man's heart (which is Gods especial enclosure) when the good seed is
sown, Satan enters, and endeavors to Matthew. 13.19.
catch it away, planting in stead thereof unlawful lust, pride of life,
covetous desires. He does labor to blast our good works, Gregor. moral. in
Job, lib. 1. cap. 38.
either in the act, or else in the end: and all this is done, says the text,
while men sleep. The which I find construed of Thomas ex Augustine. and
Hieron. in loc.
Priests especially, called in holy Bible, the Ezechiel 3.17 Hieremy 17.
Watchmen of Israel: but not only, for the Prince being a pastor of his
people, must watch also the flock; yea the shepherds, ouerseeing the Seers,
and watching the watchmen that they do not sleep.

This also concerns the people: for every master has charge of his house,
every man of his soul. The Ferus ser. 1. in loc.
master does sleep when he does not govern well his family; Hemingius in loc.
every man does sleep, when he neglects Gods seed sown in his heart. That
therefore which our Savior said unto his Disciples, he said unto all, Mark.
13.37.
Watch: and so the Hom. against idleness.
Church expounds it of all idle persons, insinuating, that it is the best time
for the devil to work his feate, when men are negligent in their calling.

It is not Gods fault then that tares are mingled among wheat, for he sowed
none but good seed: Genesis 1.31.
All that he made was good* yea very good. Neither can we justly condemn the
devil, for he does but his part, being a John 8.44.
murderer from the beginning; Ferus vbi sup.
all the blame belongs unto our selves, in that we sleep, when we should watch.

Here the Gospel and Epistle parallel: If the word of God dwell in us
plenteously with all wisdom, then Satan cannot sow tares in our soul. If
Ministers, Magistrates and M^sters, as Gods elect, put on tender mercy,
kindness, humblenes of mind, love toward their charge, their compassionate
bowels assuredly will pity the dangerou^, ^state of such as are tares under
their government, endeavoring to make them wheat against the great harvest.
For the servants here teach us by their example to be Ferus sermon. 2. in loc.
solicitous for the good of the corn, to come to Christ, and to pray that
Matthew. 9.38.
faithful laborers may be sent into Gods harvest.

Paul was grieved because some cockle grew in Philip. 3.18.
Philippi: Psalm 79.
David was grieved because the Heathen had broken into Gods inheritance: Christ
was grieved because Gods house was made a Matthew. 21.53.
den of thieves; and so Christians in our time should be grieved, because
Satan has sowed such offenses and scandals among the professors of the Gospel.

Secondly, this parable makes against the Brownists in their critical
doctrine. hypocritical co^uersatio^.


It condemns their doctrine; for there was, is, and ever shall be darnell in
Gods field, tares among wheat, bad among good, in the visible Church. I
confess, the Church militant may be called the Coster in loc.
suburbs of heaven; our Savior here terms it the kingdom of heaven, because
the King of heaven does heavenly govern it with his holy word, and blessed
Spirit: but it is not heaven in heaven; it is but heaven on earth: and
therefore in this heaven are many firebrarnds of hell; the children of the
Matthew. 13.38.
wicked, whose Philip. 3.19.
end is damnation, and utter confusion in unquenchable fire.

We may not therefore leave Gods flower, because there is some chafe; neither
break Gods net, because there are some baggage fish; neither depart out of his
house, because there be some vessels of wrath; neither run out of his field,
because there grows some cockle: but, as Epist. 48.
Augustine determined against the Donatists accurately: Non propter malos boni
deserendi, sed propter bonos mali tolerandi: We must not forsake the good for
the bad, but rather tolerate the bad for the good. Almighty God would have
spared a whole city for ten Genesis 18.32.
good men's sake; let us not then condemn a whole Church for ten wicked men's
company.

Augustine. lib. 3 contra Crescon. cap. 35.
Ecclesiam tenco ^lenam tritico and palea, em^ndo, quos possum, tolero quos
emendare non possum; fugio paleam, ne hoc sim; non aream, ne nihil sim: In 2.
Tim. 2.20.
Gods house there are not only vessels of gold, and vessels of silver, but
also of wood and of earth, and some to honor, and some to dishonor. Cyprian.
epist. lib. 3. epi^^. 3.
It is our duty to strive that we may be golden vessels, and as for earthen,
we must leave them to God, in whose hand is a rod of iron, to Psalm. 2.9.
break them in pieces like a potters vessel.

I will say to the Brownist as Lib. ^. contra Cr^scon. cap. 36. vide Tom. 7.
Psalm. contra part^m Donat. lib. contra epist. Parm^nian. contra literas ^
P^tilian and Cyprian^ by supra.
Augustine to the Donatist: Accusa quantis viribus potes; si innocents
fuerint, nihil eis tanquam frumentis oberit ventositas tua; si nocentes, non
debent propter zizania frumenta deseri: accusa quantum potes; vinco, si non
probas; vinco, si probas; si non probas, vinco, iudice te ipso; sin probas,
test Cypriano, qui docuit horreum non esse deserendum ob paleas. He might
have said, test Christo, commanding here, Let both grow together until the
harvest. We may not 1. cor. 4.5.
judge before the time, calling (out of our immoderate zeal) for fire from
heaven to consume the tares, but expect hell fire to burn them up; and that
for two reasons especially, that the bad may be converted, and the good
exercised.

Augustine. in Psalmum 54.
Omnis malus aut ideo vinit, vt corrigatur; aut ideo, vt per illum bonus
exerceatur: Thomas ex Hieron. and Augustine. in loc.
He that is now cockle, may prove by Gods especial grace corn: weed not the
field therefore presently, lest while ye gather the tares, ye pluck up also
the wheat.

Saint Peter was an apostate, S. Matthew a Publican, Zacheus an oppressor, Paul
a Saul, Justin Martyr was a Gentile, Saint Augustine a Manichee, Martin Luther
a Monk, Tremellius a Jew, Leo Africanus a Mahumetan: if all cockle had then
been rooted up at the first, Gods field would have wanted much good wheat, the
Church many good men, yea Pont^^. in loc.
all men; for Adam in Paradise was a tare, when he disobeied. Here the Gospel
and Epistle meet again. For if we may not root up the tares, it is very
requisite that we put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long sufferance, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,
etc.

Again, the cockle must grow for the corns exercise: 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies among you, that they which are approved among you might
be known. If Arius had not bin borne, Thom. 1. part. quaest. 31. art. 2.
qui posuit cum Trinitate personarum Trinitatem substantiarum: and Sabellius on
the contrary, qui posuit vnitatem personae cum vnitate essentiae: the questions
about the blessed Trinity would never have been determined so sufficiently by
those great lights of the Church, Athanasins, Augustine, Hilary, etc.

If superstition had not a long time grown in Gods field among the wheat,
principles of the true religion, especially the point of justification by faith
only, would never have been so well understood.

If Anabaptists and Brownists had not contended against the Church, it would
have gone worse with the Church; as Lib. 3. de ciu. Dei. cap. 21.
Augustine said of Rome: Maegis nocuit Romany Carthago tam cito euersa, quam
prius nocuerat tam diu aduersa. The counsel is good; Consule Plutarch com. d^
capienda ab bostibus vtilitate.
Sic viue tanquam inimici semper te videant: for the Church, as Christ, must
suffer and overcome, in medio inimicorum, in the midst among all her enemies:
Psalm. 110.2.

Secondly, this makes against the Brownists in their hypocritical
conversation. It is said here, that so soon a^ the malicious man had sown
tares among the wheat, he went his way. Hemingius in loc.
Not that he departs from hypocrites and heretics, but he puts on another
face: when he does a work of darkness, he transformes himself into an 2.
Cor. 11.14.
Angel of light. He is no more black, nor brown, but a white devil, says
In Galat. 1.
Luther. And therefore when it is objected against the conformable Clergy, that
heretics and schismatikes are grave men, and good men: our answer may be; that
the devil is now gone: Matthew. 7.15.
ravening wolves are in sheeps clothing. Tares are so like good corn, that
they cannot be discerned until the blade spring up and bring forth fruit.
Fitches have many fetches: hypocrites are like Goodwin sands, in dubio pelagi
terraeque, neither of both, and either of both, as occasion shall serve:
Hieron. ad C^lant. tom. 1. fol. 109.
Gentilem agunt vitam sub nomine Christiano: They play the Turks under the
names of Christians, oues visu, vulpes astu: there is no more devil appearing,
but all is now the spirit of God, and secret revelations even from heaven.

Thirdly, this parable makes against the Papists, in the question of their
religions antiquity. putting to death of heretics. Purgatory.


We protest, and that unfeignedly, that no Church ought further to depart from
the Church of Rome, then she is departed from her self in her flourishing
estate. Show then, say the D. Bishop. epist. to the King.. 13.
Papists, in what age the tares were sown among the wheat: When and where
purgatory, prayer for the dead, indulgences, auricular confession, and other
new tricks of Popery crept into the Church. Answer is made for us here by
Christ; While men slept, the malicious enemy sowed tares among the wheat. And
it was not discerned until the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth
fruit.

When I see the finger of the dial removed from one to two, shall I be so mad
as to think it stands still where it was, because I could not perceive the
stirring of it? In the Apocal. 17.5.
forehead of the whore of Babylon, is written a mystery: so Paul 2. Th^s. 2.7.
calls the working of Antichrist, a mystery of iniquity; because the man of
sin does covertly and cunningly wind his abominations into the Church of
Christ.

Politicians observe, that corruptions are bred in civil bodies, as diseases
in natural bodies: at the first they be not discerned easily, but in their
growth: insensibly they proceed often, till it come to pass, which Decad. 1.
l. 1.
Li^e said of the Roman State; Nec vitia nostra, nec remedia far possumus; We
can neither endure the malady, nor the medicin. D. Abbots answer to Bishops
epist. to the King. page 111.
Was it so in the Empire of Rome, and might it not be so in the Church of Rome?

The Preface to the Reader.. 22.
Rhemists acknowledge many barbarismes and incongruities in the vulgar Latin
text. Cardinal Caietan, Sanctes Pagninus, Franciscus Forerius, Hieronymus
Oleastrius, Bibliothec. l. 8. fol. vlt.
Sixtus Senensis, all learned Papists, ingenuously confess, that beside
solecismes in the vulgar translation of Rome, there are many gross faults,
additions, transpositions, omissions. E^ist. lectori. praefix. Bib. Venet. An.
1557. See D. Fulk des E^g. Trans. page 60.
Isidorus Clauius a Spanish Monk, professed that he found in it 8000. errors.
It is plain they were so manifest, and so manifold, as that the Council of
Sess. 4.
Trent; and after it, Pope Sixtus Qu^ntus, and Clement 8. took order for the
correcting of it. I would know then of a Papist, how this cockle was sown
among Gods seed? in what year this and that absurdity first crept into their
text? as Luke 15.8. domum e^ertit, for domum euerrit: and Exodus 34 29. Moses in
stead of a bright countenance, is said to have cornutam faciem, a face of
horn, whereupon the common painters among the Papists, usually paint Moses
with two horns, as a cuckold, to the great scandal of Christian religion, as
An^ot. in Exodus
Augustinus Steuchus, and ^^blioth^^. l. 5. annot. 116.
Sixtus Senensis observe.

The whole Rhemish College cannot tell in what age confusus est, in stead of
confessus est, entered in Mark 8.38. Pope Sixtus Quintus has sundry
conjectures, in the preface prefixed to his Bible, vel ^x ^niuria temporum, vel
ex librariorum in^uria, vel ex impressorum imperitia, vel ex temere emendantium
licentia, vel ex recenti^rum interpretum audacia; vel ex haere^icorum scholijs
ad marginem. If the Pope cannot tell in whose head and hands is all the
Churches treasure, both for wit and wealth; it is enough for the disciple to be
as his Master is, and the servant as his Lord.

The late Pope Clement 8. corrected the corrections of his predecessor Sixtus
Quintus, setting forth another Bible, which one called unhappily, The new
Transgression. In these reformed editions of Rome, there is such Consule bellum
papale ^^r Thom. James.
difference, that we may say with the Esaias 19.2.
Prophet; Egyptians are set against Egyptians, and the Esaias 21.2.
destroier against the destroier, one against another, and all against the
truth.

In the Consule praef. Pij 5. and Clem. 8 Breuiar. nuper reformat.
Roman M^ssals and Breuiaries, there were so many damnable blasphemies, and
superstitious errors, that the late Popes even for shame reformed them; and yet
they cannot tell in what year these corruptions first grew: and therefore what
need we tell them at what time this and that popish nouelty was first sown?
Is it not enough that we now discern the tares among the wheat? and prove to
the proudest of their side, that there was no such darnell in Gods field for
the space of Melancthon, Jewel, and all other ^ arned Protestants.
six hundred years after Christ? I say, no such stinking weeds, as the single
communion of the Priest, half communion of the people, worshipping of the
bread, creeping to the Cross, supremacy of the Pope, which are the most
essential points of all the Romish religion.

Secondly, this parable makes against the E^kius enchirid. tit. de comburend.
^aeret. and Roff^^sis contra Luther. a^t. 33.
Papists in the question of putting heretics to death. I confess the words,
sinite vtraque simul cresc^re; teach not the Magistrates duty, but rather show
Gods bounty toward heretics. It is the Chr^sost. hom. 47. in Man.
Princes office to banish, imprison, mulct, and by all means possible, to
suppress them, and in no sort to suffer them, as being so p^stilent as the
plague. For as the plague does instantly strike the heart, and by poisoning one
infects many, Bellarmin. praefat. Tom. 1. controuers.
^ic haeresis cor ipsum animae petit, and cum vnum in^erficit, centum alios
inficit: Heresy strikes at faith, and so takes away the life of the Christian;
for the just does live by faith, and then it fretteth as a 2. Tim. 2.17.
canker or gangren, corrupting all other members of Christ's mystical body: we
may cry mors in illa; as the children of the Prophets 2. King. 4.40.
mors in ^lla: such cockle then ought to be cropped and topt, but not utterly
rooted up and burnt until the great harvest. A murderer and a traitor endued
with faith and repentance, may pass from the cross to the crown; as the
blessed thief in the Gospel was instantly translated from his pain to
Paradise: but an heretic dying in his heresy, cannot be saved. He therefore
that puts an heretic to death, is a double murderer, as P^ still. ^ aior. in
loc.
Luther thinks, in destroying his body with death temporal, in slaying his
soul with death eternal. Excommunication, exile, loss of goods,
imprisonment, deprivation, have bin reputed evermore fit punishments for
heretics: but fire and faggot is not Gods law, but canon shot, Bullinger de
concilijs, lib. 2. cap. 12.
enacted first by Pope Lucius 3. An. 1184. and confirmed afterward by
Innocentius 3. and Gregory 9. as it appears in the Decretals: and it was
executed against the Waldenses, and in latter times against the Protestants
especially, martyring the The bones of Fagius and Bucer.
dead with the living, the wife with the husband, the newborn, yea M. Fox.
Acts and Mon. fol. 1765.
not borne infant with the mother, (whom they should have cherished by all
laws, and christened by their own laws) and that not for the denying of any
article of the Creed, but only for not believing Transubstantiation, and other
new quirkes of the School, which the most judicious among them, as yet cannot
explicate: for as one wittily, Corpore de Christi lis est, de s^nguine lis est,
deque modo lis est, non habitura modum.


In. 4 sent. did. 11. quaest. 3.
Scotus, Chemnitius examine. con. Trident. de Transubstant.
Cameracensis, and Andradius v^i Chem. vbi supr^.
other Papists of great note, confess plainly, that transubstantiation cannot
be enforced by the Gospel, nor by any testimonies of the ancient Church. And
De sacrament. e^^^arist. lib. 3. cap. 23.. Secund^ dicit.
Bell^rmin, Romes oracle, does acknowledge, that it may well be doubted whether
there be any place of scripture clearly to prove transubstantiation, otherwise
then that the Church has declared it so to be, because many learned and acute
men hold the contrary. What hellish cruelty then was it in the Bonners of
Queen Mary, to make bon^fires of silly women, for not understanding this
their ineffable mystery, wherein are nine miracles at the least, as Compendium
the^log. lib. 6. cap. 14.
Ioannes de Combis affirms? If these gunpowder Priests, and faggot Divines are
Saints, I wonder who are Scythians: if these be Catholics, who are Canibals?

In this question, as in all other, I submit my self to the judgment of our
Church, and practice of our Country. Which, as Whitaker. r^^p^n. ad epist.
Campian.
Divines and Execution of English justice.
Statesmen auow, never put any to death merely for the cause of religion. I
conclude with the gloss of Loc. com. tit. de zelo.
Luther; Hoc verbum, Sinite, non est confirmationis, aut approbationis
haereticorum, sed consolationis and exhortationis nostri ad patientiam: August.
in Psalm. 39.
Aperte saeuit persecutor paganus, vt leo; haereticus insidiatur, vt draco;
ille cogit negare Christum, iste docet: aduersus illum opus patientia, ad^ersus
hunc opus vigilantia. Consulas Augustinum, epist. 48.50.61.127.158.159.160.
Diligite homines, interficite errores, sine superbia de veritate praesumite,
sine saeuitia pro veritate certate. Contra literas Petilian. lib. 1. cap. 29.

Thirdly, this makes against Popish Purgatory, proving it to be superfluous and
idle: for whatsoever is in the Lords field, is either corn or cockle: a barn
is provided for the one, and unquenchable fire for the other. A third place for
a third sort of persons, is that Sir Edward Hoby to T.H. 5. and Sutliu. de
pu^gat. cap. 4.5.6. etc.
which neither God made, nor Christ mentioned, nor the Apostles believed, nor
the Primitive Church embraced. It is an heathenish fantasy founded by the
Poets, and not by the Prophets, by In Timaeo.
Plato and Ae^^ad. 6.
Virgil, not by Peter and Paul, and that upon so tickle ground, that the most
learned Papists can neither tell us where it is, nor what it is.

De pu^gatori^. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Bellarmine reports eight sundry different opinions about the place, confessing
honestly, that the Church as yet has not defined, vbi si^ purgatorium; it is
in so many places, as that it can be in no place, quod vbique, n^llibi. Sir
Contra Luther. See B. I^wel. defense Apolog. part. 2. cap. 16. and Sutliu. de
purgat. cap. 2.
Thomas More said, that in all purgatory there is no water, and that he would
prove by the words of Zach. 9.11. I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water. On the contrary, Cont^a Luther. art. ^7.
Roffensis affirmed, that there is great store of water, and this he proved by
David, Psalm 66.11. We went through fire and water. Consule Iew^l. v^isupra
division. ^.
Albertus and Roffe^sis are of opinion, that purgatories executioners are good
Angels. Other, as In 4. sentent. did. 20. q^aest. 2. ^o^sule Sut^u. ^bi supra.
Dio^y^ius Carthusianus, and Sir Thomas More make no doubt, but that they be
devils. Cardinal Bell^ermine is of both sides, and no side, concluding this
point; Lib. 2. d^ p^rgat. cap. 13.
Maneat hoc inter se^reta, qu^ suo tempore nobis aperientur. Happily this
uncertainty is a great certainty to the Pope, being Lord of Purgatory; for
he can Ioannes Angelus vti I^^^l. vbi supra d^^is. ^.
when he please make ga^le-deli^^rie, an^ avoid all the souls in Purgatory,
being ^is peculiar; the Pope may Clem. 6. in bulla.
command Gods Angels to fetch away from thence whom he list: and therefore this
imaginary fi^e may make his kitchen smoke, but it is altogether needless for
the people; because Christ (says Heb. 1.3.
Paul) has purged our sins: all our sins, says S. 1. Epist. 1.
John: as Lib 2. de actis cum Felice, c. 2^ tom. 6. fol. 362.
Augustine sweetly, Gods pity is man's purgatory.

Lastly, this makes against Atheists, imagining that either eternal judgment
shall have an end; or else that the world shall have no end: our Savior
confutes both in his exposition of this parable: verse. 39. The harvest is the
end of the world, and the reapers be the Angels, who shall gather the tares,
etc. but the wheat shall be gathered into Gods barn.

The glorious Angels at the great harvest, shall first gather the tares, Matthew.
25.32.
separating them from the wheat, which is poena damn^, privation of God, and
all that is good; Angels, Saints, friends; and then they shall bind them in
sheaues to be burnt, which is poena sensus, a possession of hell and all that
is evil; Ludolphus in loc.
they shall not be bound all in one, but in many fagots; an adulterer with an
adulteress shall make one faggot, a drunkard with a drunkard another faggot, a
traitor with a traitor another faggot: as there be several sins, so several
sheaues; all shall not be punished in the same degree, though in the same fire:
all shall be burnt, yet none consumed. In that unquenchable flame, Prosper.
poenae gehennales torquent, non extorquent: puniunt, non finiunt corpora:
Augustine. de spiritu and anima, cap. 56.
mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defectus sine defectu.

David said of his enemies in the 55. Psalm; Let them go down quick into
hell: in another sense we may wish so much unto our best friends, even our own
selves, (as Gueuara e^ist.
one fitly) let us often go to hell while we live, that we come not thither
when we be dead; let us every day descend into hell by meditation, that in the
last day we may not descend by condemnation.

Gather the wheat into my barne] In Gods field tares are among wheat, but in
Gods barn no tare, no care shall molest us: in the kingdom of grace bad are
mingled with the good, but in the ki^gdome of glory there shall be none but
good, enjoying nothing but good, good Angels, good Saints; above all, our good
God, in whose Psalm. 36.9.
light we shall see such light, 1. Cor. 2.9.
as the eye of man has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither heart
sufficiently can conceive, etc.

The Epistle. 1. COR. 9.24. Perceive ye not, how that they which run in a
course^ run all, but one receives the reward?
THere are Melanc^^on. o^at. ^e a^gu^ent. ^^st. praefix. tom. 5.
two ways of teaching; one by precept, and another by pattern. S. Paul uses
here both: a precept, so run that ye may obtain: a pattern, I therefore so
run, etc.

The precept is pressed by two similitudes: 1. From runners* in the 24 verse.
2. From wrastlers, in the 25.

The sum of both is: Rhe^. annot. in loc.
if such as run for a wager, and contend for a corruptible crown, suffer
great pains, and abstain from many pleasures to win the gole; what should
we do, what should we not do to gain the crown of glory, proposed and
promised only to such as run, travel and endeavor for it? So run
therefore that ye may obtain.

In which exhortation 4. points are regardable: the Men, ye. Matter, run.
Manner, so run. Mark, that ye may obtain.

Run ye] That is, all ye; for that is taken as granted here; Perceive ye
not? All men are viatores in this valley of tears, before they can be
comprehensores, ascended up to heaven, and resting on Gods holy hill, the
blessed Virgin not excepted, the most blessed of all the sons of men, Christ
Jesus himself not exempted, he first Luke 24.26.
suffered, and after entered into glory; first he did run, then obtain. God
has three houses, Heaven for joy, Hell for pain, Earth for labor: Man is
borne to travel, as the sparks fly upward: Job 5.7.

The matter then in the next place to be considered, is, that we must run,
Run ye.

Wherein observe Aquin. and Gorran. in loc.
2. things especially: 1. The labor of our life. 2. The shortness of our life.

The labor in that we must run, the shortness in that it is but a race.
Job 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of trouble:
Petrarcha.
Animal aeuibreuissimi, solicitudinis infinitae: Man's life is not short and
sweet, but sharp and short. Running is a violent exercise, therefore sharp;
a stage is but a little ground, therefore short.

God is good unto us in tempering these so fitly, that thinking on the
shortness of our life we may be content, because full of miseries; and
again, considering the miseries of our life we may be comforted, because it is
but of small continuance, not a long journey, but a short tie.

The word original is (...), a race of men or horse, whereof I find in
consul^ Cor^ucop. page 196. 197.
antiquity three kinds: Italicum. Olympicum. Pythicum.

One of Italy, containing 625. fecte, that is, 125. paces. The second, of
Olympus, containing 600. feet, that is, 120. paces. The third, containing
1000. feet, that is, 200 paces. It is probable that Paul writing this unto the
Corinthians, alluded to the Olympiack course which is the shortest, much like
the ties in Kent, some 30. or 40. rods. And as experience shows daily, some
give over at the first setting out, in the very cradle; some perish when they
have run two or three paces in their youth; other about the midst of their
race; most are out of breath before they can reach the stayed paces of
threescore years; if any live till eighty, we repute him exceeding old. Why
do I name rods or paces? our life is as it were a Psalm. 39.6.
span long, a very Psalm. 144.4.
nothing in respect of eternity: seeing then our course is small, and reward
great, a little pain, but an inestimable price; seeing our 2. Cor. 4.17.
light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far most
excellent and an eternal weight of glory; let us not faint in our course, but
so run that we may obtain.

So runne] Noting the manner and the means, Melanct^on. in loc. tom. 4. sol.
236.
a general rule necessary for the course of our whole life, teaching us in
all we say or do to foresee the right end, and to use the means for obtaining
that end.

Some look to the right end, but use not the right means, as Carolostadius in
Luthers age, who desired the Gospel might flourish, but he failed in the
means; he despised authority, neglected humane laws, and was altogether
transported with his own p^iuate humors of ambition and covetousness. And so
the Schismatikes in our time, especially those of the separation, embrace the
Gospel (as it should seem) so much as we, but they fail in their Sic, in
their so running; for they run out of the Church, without which none can be
safe, none can be saved and so the more they run, the further are they from
the prize.

Some use the right means, but not for the right end, as Matthew. 7.
hypocrites use to fast and give to the poor, not for Gods glory, but for
their own praise. So vainglorious Preachers and people seek the truth, but
not for the truth, and Augustine.
dum quaerunt eam, non quaerunt ipsam.

Some neither use the right means, nor aim at the right end, as Atheists, who
prefer their five senses before the four Evangelists, and panem nostrum in
the Pater noster, before sanctificetur nomen tuum.

Some look to the right end, and use the right means, as the holy Prophets
and Apostles, all their preaching tended to the glory of God, and they run
the right way, to propagat^ that his glory: So run therefore that ^e may
obtain.

Now yt we may run well, 2. things are required especially: a due preparation
before the race. right disposition in the race.

He that undertakes to run a tie, will first, if he be wise, English gloss
in loc.
diet himself, and not spend his time in drunkennes^e and gluttony; the text
says, he will abstain from all things, even those meats and pleasures which
he does most affect, only to make his body swift and fit for the race. So if
we will happily run our course in Gods way, we must not walk in surfeiting
and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, but as ^aul here, we must
tame our bodies, and bring them into subjection: We must not be filled with
Ephesians. 5.18.
wine, but with the holy Spirit: for fasting and voluntary chastising of our
bodies, as occasion is offered, are not works D. Fulk in loc.
either superfluous or superstitious. A full panch and heavy head is fitter to
lie then to go, to stand still then to run a swift race. The Gentiles live
to eat, but Cle^. Alex. paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Christians eat to live, and life consists in Vita non est vi^ere sed valere.
health and strength, and both are maintained especially by moderate fare.

Secondly, the runner uses to strip himself of all about him, except some
white garment to cover his nakedness: and so we must put off the works of
darkness, and every thing that Heb. 1^.1.
presses down: we must cast away the cares of this life, 1. Cor. 7.31.
vsi^g the world as if we used it not; having wives and children as if we had
neither wives nor children, accounting all things loss to win Christ. We
must strippe our selves of all that might hinder us in our course, leaving
nothing on us but the Apocal. 7.9.
long robe of Christ's righteousness to cover our nakedness, to Psalm. 32.1.
cover our wickedness, as our Apostle, Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord jesus
Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.

And as the runner must have due preparation before his race; so likewise a
right disposition in his course, that he begin well, continue well, and end
well.

First, he must be careful to begin well, to set out in the right and direct
passages: otherwise if he run in wrie ways and by-waies, the more his labor
the greater is his loss. We must take heed lest meta be Luther. pos^il. in
loc.
transpos^t^: such as will ob^aine Gods prize, must walk in Gods path, turning
neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Deuteronomy. 5.32.33. for there is danger
in both; and, as Com. in Gal 1. verse. 6.
Luther observes, often the gr^atest peril is on the right hand. For
Schismatikes hurt more under a color of reforming and building up the Church,
then heretics and open tyrants can do by persecuting and pulling down the
Church. Omnes ^mici omnes inimici (quoth Bernard). On the contrary, by the
Martyrs blood, the Church is not destroyed, but watered: Cyprian. epist. lib.
2. epist. 6.
Ante fuit in operibus fratrum candida, nunc in martyrum cruore purpurea. Eue^y
man must be sure to set forth aright, in the true profession of the Catholic
faith; otherwise when we run without Christ, who is the way, Luther. in
Galat. 1.4.
then our wisdom is double foolishness, our righteousness double sin;
when we are best, then are we worst. Again, we must walk in an honest
vocation warranted by Gods word, otherwise we shall not run to, but from the
prize.

Secondly, we must continue well; for many run, but one receives the crown:
we must therefore take heed that we do not slip; or if we slip, that we do
not fall; or if we fall, that we fall not backward but forward, so that we may
with speed rise again. The most just Prou. 24.16.
often slip, and sometime fall, but they fall not backward as 1. S^m. 4.
Eli, and the Ioh. 18.6.
Jews who took Christ, but forward, as Genesis 18.
Abraham in the valley of Mambre, and Ezech. 1.
Ezechiel by the river Chebar.

Lastly, we must end well; Death is our last enemy, which must be destroyed,
and therefore we must run well unto the end, and in the end. As good not to
run at all, as to run near the end, and then to lose the prize; to suffer
Satan at the last hour to snatch our reward from us. A runner will be sure to
stretch out his hand at the races end to take the mark; so when death
approaches, a Christian must stretch out the hand of faith apprehending Christ
and his righteousness.

Observe yet a great difference between the Christian and other races. In the
games of other runners, as it is here said, one only does win the gole;
Ambros. in loc.
but in the Christian course many receive the prize, so many as continue
steadfast unto the end, though they do not run so fast, though they do not
run from so far as other. So Christ shows in the parable of the vineyard,
allotted for the Gospel on this day; Such as came to work at the eleventh
hour had a penny, so well as they that came into the vineyard at the third
hour.

Secondly, in other races one hinders another; Marlorat. ex Calvin. in loc.
but in our journey to heaven one helps another. The more the merier, the
greater company the better encouragement, every good man being a spur to his
neighbor. As when Peter and John ran to Christ's sepulcher, John ouerrunne
Io^n 20.
Peter unto the grave, Peter outwent John into the grave.

Thirdly, runners and wrastlers contend for a crown that shall perish, but we
run to obtain an everlasting crown. They run for a little prize, for a
little praise; but we strive for no less then a kingdom that is at stake,
that is the mark, which being D. Fulk in loc.
infinitely above the value of all men's works, it cannot be deserved by merit,
but only given by grace. To propound a garland for the runner, and a crown
for the wrestler, proceeds altogether from Gods own mere mercy: to run, and
not to fall, to fall, and not finally to be cast down, comes also from his
especial grace. So that it is Romans 9.16.
neither in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy. Yet we must so run, that we may obtain. We must work well in
respect of the reward, as also for fear of punishment, due to such as work
not well, albeit not only, nor chiefly for these considerations, as slaves for
fear, or hirelings for reward; but principally out of loving obedience to God,
as becomes children unto so good a father. Holy conversation is a sign and
seal of our justification, by which our election is made 2. Pet. 1.10.
sure. Ambros. de Abraham. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Feramus ergo sidei fructum ab ipsa pueritia, augeamus in adolescentia,
coloremus in iuuentute, compleamus in se^ectute.

I therefore so run] Bocholzer. in chron. An. 1500.
One said of Erasmus his Enchiridion, that there was more devotion in the
book, then in the writer. But here Saint Paul's life does preach so much as his
letter; I so run, so fight, I Preachers, as it is well observed upon the
Gospel for this day, must be not only Ludolphus, de vita Christi. part. 2.
cap. 13.
verbarij, but operarij: fo that as Christ said to the Luke 10.37.
Lawyer; I say to thee, Go and do thou likewise.

Not as one that beats the aire] M^lanc. in loc.
Such as contend in the Church about things uncertain and unnecessary beat the
air.

I tame my body] The Gyrald. Cambren. in speculo Eccl^siae.
Monks of S. Swithin in Winchester, complained to Henry the second, that their
Bishop had taken away three of their dishes, and left them but ten: to whom the
King answered, that the Bishop should do well to take away ten, and to leave
them but three; for they were so many as he had in his Court. In England Monks
so tamed their body, that among us as yet, Friar and fat are Lubbers are heirs
apparent of Abbeys.
voces conuertibiles: and the new bastard Monk, though his habit resemble
love, covering a multitude of sins; yet himself is the pi^^re of envy. No
treason in old time without a Priest, no treason in our time without a Jesuit:
so that I may say with the Poem. de corrupto statu Eccles. per Illyricum.
Poet:

In vestimentis non est contritiomentis,
Ni men's sit pura, nil confert regula dura.
1. Tim 4.8.
Bodily exercise profits little; but godliness is profitable to all things.
As Hieron. ad Ex^perant. tom. ^. page 210.
to show the behavior of a Prophet in the robes of a cauiliere, is lovely: so
contrariwise, do the works of a ruffin in the weeds of a Priest, is no better
then hypo^risie.

Lest by any meanes] Our Apostle was assured of his salvation, as it is evident
Romans 8. Marlorat. and ^^za in loc.
This then is to be construed of reproof before men, not of reprobation before
God. Or if it be referred to damnation eternal, his D. Fulk in loc.
^^aning is, that we may not presume of the end, without the means and ways,
by which Almighty God brings us unto it. And so we August. apud Pet. Lombard in
loc.
lambs may tremble, seeing the belwether of the flock must so labor and
subject his flesh, lest perhaps he miss the mark.

Mat. 17.20.
Christ does assure that a little faith, even little as a grain of mustard
seed, is strong enough to cast all mountains into the sea, that shall rise up
to divide between God and us. It is true that the Ephesians. 6.16.
shield of faith is able to repel all the fiery darts of the wicked: but this
our faith is made Luther.
fat by good works. And if we will make our calling and election sure, we must
with all diligence 2. Pet. 1.5.
join virtue with faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge
temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godliness, and
with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness love, etc.

The Gospel. MAT. 20.1. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, etc.
Our Savior was delighted exceedingly with certain proue^biall speeches; as,
Luke 18.14.
Every man that exal^eth himself, shall be brought lo^; and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted. Mat. 25.29.
Unto every man that has, it shall be given, but from him that has not, even
that which he has shall be taken away. Many that are first shall be last, and
the last shall be first. The which saying is hard, and (as Ser. on the Gosp^ll
for Sept^^g^s.
Bishop Latymer speaks) it is no meat for mowers and ignorant people. Christ
therefore propounds here this parable for Ludolphus de vita Christi. part. 2.
cap. 13. Iansen. con. cap. 101. Marlorat. ex Bullinger. in loc. and rel^qui
fere omnes.
explanation thereof, as it is apparent by the 16. verse of this present
Chapter, as also by the last words of the former* Many that are first shall be
last, and the last shall be first: for the kingdom^ of heaven, etc.

In which, a lecture of meekness is read by the great August. de sancta
virginit. cap. 31.
Doctor of humility; Lu^^er. postil. mayor. in loc.
teaching all such as are forward in religion, not to be proud, because the
first may be last; and all such as are called late, not to despair, because
the last may be first.

In the whole parable, three points are to be noted: our calling. work. reward.

In our calling, observe the Author of our calling; God. diversity of our
calling, in respect of time, called a^ hour, 3.6.9.11. place: some called in
ye market, and other elsewhere.


God is termed here paeterfamilias, in respect of his Culma^. con. 2. in loc.
fatherly love and care, disposing of all things in the Catholic Church, with
greater providence and wisdom, then any discreet householder can manage the
private business of his particular family. So that all Atheists and Epicures
holding that either there is no God, or that he cares not for the things on
earth, are confuted by this one word, that God is an householder, a father of
his Church.

Went out] Whither can he go, that is every where? Po^t. in loc.
Liceat dicere, exijt a se, vt intret in te, imo vt te conuertat in se. God
went out from his majesty, which is unknown unto his mercy, which is
manifested in all his works, in governing the Church esp^cially, sending
laborers into his harvest, and workmen into his vineyard.

If then all laborers in the vineyard are called by God, Marlorat. ex Calvin.
in loc.
such as are busied in unlawful professions and occupations, not allowed by
his word, are not servants of the Lord, but hirelings of Satan.

The second point obseruable in our calling, is the diversity thereof in
respect of time and place. God calls in diverse hours of the day; Ludolphus and
Ia^sen. vbi sup. ex Chrysostom.
that is, in diverse ages of the world, and in diverse years of our age. In the
time before the law, God called Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and such like. In
the time under the law, Moses, David, Esaias, together with other Kings and
Prophets: in the time after the law, the blessed Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors.
Or as Hitron. in loc. and August. de verbis Dom. ser. 59.
other, God called some in the first hour, as Adam and the Patriarks until
Noah: some in the third hour, as all Noah's posterity to Abraham: some in the
sixth hour, as all his servants, who lived between Abraham and Moses: some in
the ninth hour, as Moses and the Prophets: some in the eleventh hour, as
Peter and Paul; and all other who lived since Christ's time, which is hora
nouissima, the last hour: John 1. epist. 2.18.1. Cor. 10.11. But I think with
Saint Hierom, that this difference is meant of our age, rather then of the
worlds age. For our great Master calls some to labor in his vineyard at the
first hour of the day, that is, in their childhood, as Samuel, Jeremy, John
the Baptist; each whereof might say with ^he Psalm. 22.9.
Psalmographer; O Lord, thou wast mine hope, when I hanged yet upon my mothers
breasts. Thou art my God even from my mothers womb. Other he calls in the third
hour, that is, in their youth, as Daniel the Prophet, and John the Evangelist;
of whom Saint Ad Heliodorum. ^om. 1. fol. 4.
Hierom, Discipulum minimum Jesus amauit plurimum. Other in the sixth hour,
that is, in their middle age, as Peter and Andrew. Other in the eleventh hour,
that is, in their old age, as Gamaliel, and Joseph of Arimathea; some not only
in the last hour of the day, but even in the last minute of the hour, as the
thief upon the Cross: Luke 23.

Again, this our calling is diverse in respect of the place: for God calls
some from their Mat. 4.19.
ships, and some from their Mat. 9.9.
shops, and some from under the Luke 14.23.
hedges, and some from the market; as it is here, verse. 3. Now this diverse
calling at diverse times, and in diverse places intimates a caveat, for such as
are called. intimates a comfort, for such as are not called.


A caveat for such as are called, that they neither magnify themselves, nor
vilify other. It proceeds not from our good works, but from Gods good will
that we be called; and he being infinitely rich in mercy, can call the most
wicked ruffin, even though he have denied Christ with Peter, or sold Christ
with Judas, or crucified Christ with Pilat. Mat. 7.1.
Judge not therefore, that ye be not judged: judge not maliciously, judge not
curiously. The counsel of Gods election is secret: Romans 8.30.
whom he did predestinate, them also he calls; and whom he calls, he
justifies; and whom he justifies, he sanctifies in his good time: and
therefore judge not before the time.

This also may Ferus. ser. 5. in. loc.
comfort such as feel not themselves as yet sufficiently called. Our good Lord
calls at all times, in all places: he called Paul in the midst of his fury,
Acts 9.1.
breathing out th^eatnings and slaughter against the professors of the faith.
He called Cardinal Petr^^ Paulus Ve^gerius, vti Lanquet chron. fol. 343.
Vergeriu^ as he was running away: for being suspected in the Court of Rome, to
favor the Gospellers, and purposing to clear himself of that suspicion,
intended to write a book against them; and for that purpose reading their
works, and examining their arguments exactly, was fully resolved that their
doctrine was good, and also persuaded his brother, the Bishop of Pola, to
receive the same. He called Henry 8. Wicklif, Luther, in their discontent.
Henry 8. of famous memory, displeased with the Pope for denying his divorce,
banished all foreign jurisdiction, and immediately made public profession of
the Gospel. D. Godwin in the life of Simon Langham.
John Wicklif, with other, being thrust out of Cante^burie College in Oxford,
and Monks placed in their room by the Popes edict, and Simon Langham
Archbishop of Canterburies power, at the last grew so disco^tent, that he
misliked Pope, Bishop, Monks and all* and afterward it pleased God to show him
the bright beams of his truth, in so much that Wicklif was a wicket, and a
door of entrance to many who lived in that time of ignorance.

Martin Luther at the first distasted in all popery but one point only, to
wit, the base prostitution of indulgences in Germany: but herein receiving no
satisfaction, he grew to be so great a laborer in the Lords, vineyard, that it
might have been written on his tomb: Stapleton. de magnitudine Romans Eccl^s.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
Pestis eram viuens, moriens ero mors tua papa.
Or as In epitaphijs.
learned Beza worthily and wittily:
Roma orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit,
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus iste suis.
Quanto isto mayor Lutherus, mayor and illa
Istum, illamque vno qui domuit calamo.


Hitherto concerning our calling into the vineyard. The next obseruable point
is our working. This vineyard, as the Esaias 5.7.
Prophet tells us, is the Church. Surely the vineyard of the Lord is the house
of Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant. All men are either
loiterers in the market of the world, or else laborers in the vineyard of the
Church. Of such as stand in the market idle there be four sorts: some sell
their souls. pawn their souls. lose their souls. give their souls.



Some sell: for as it is said of the Lawyer, that he has linguam venalem, a
tongue to be bought and sold; so it may be said of the covetous man, that he
has animam venalem, a soul to be Eccl^s. 10.9.
sold; so the Ludolphus in l^c.
voluptuous man does sell his soul for pleasures, as Esa^ did his birthright
for a mess of pottage; so the proud man does sell his soul for advancement,
^s Alexander the 6. is said to have done for his Po^edome. The Lord says, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me, neither in h^auen above, nor in earth beneath,
nor in the water under the earth: and yet as the Scripture does intimate, the
proud man makes honor his god, the covetous man gold his god, the voluptuous
man his belly his god. The first has his idol as it were in the air; the
second his idol in the earth; and the third his idol in the water, as Ioannes
de Combis compend. lib. 5. cap. 60.
one pithily notes upon the second Commandment.

Secondly, some pawn their souls, albeit they be not so desperate, so given
over to commit sin with greediness, as to sell their souls right out, yet
for their profit and pleasure they will be content to pawn their souls unto
the devil for a time: so David in committing adultery did as it were pawn
his soul; Noe when he was drunk did pawn his soul; Peter in denying Christ
did also pawn his soul: but these being all laborers in Gods vineyard
redeemed their souls again, with unfeigned and hearty repentance. But let us
take heed how we play the merchant venturers in this case: for our soul is
our best jewel, of greater value then the whole world, and the devil is the
craftiest usurer and greatest oppressor that ever was, if he can get never so
little advantage, if we keep not day with him, he will be sure at the judgment
day to call for justice, and to claim his own, speaking unto God as the King
of Sodom did unto Abraham; Genesis 14.21.
Da mihi animas, caetera toll tibi: Give me the souls which have been pawned
and forfetted unto me, the rest take to thy self.

There is another kind of pawning of souls, and that is unto God; for Princes
and Prelates, Ministers and Masters are bound to God as it were in goods and
body for all such as are under them: as the Prophet said unto King 1. King.
20.39.
Ahab; Keep this man, if he be lost, and want, thy life shall go for his
life. But if thou do thy best endeavor, though the wicked incorrigible sinner
die for his iniquity, thou shall Ezech. 33.9.
deliver thy soul, redeeeme thy pawn, and when evening is come, the Lord of
the vineyard shall give thee thy reward.

Thirdly, some lose their souls; as carnal and careless Gospellers, ignorant
negligent people, who though they come to Church either for fashion or fear;
yet, alas, they seldom or never think of their poor soul, from whence it
came, or whither it shall go, trifling away the time in the market, neither
buying nor selling, nor giving; but idly gaping and gazing upon other, a fit
pray for the cutpurse, betraying themselves and their souls unto that old
cunnicatcher Satan, who goes about daily, seeking whom he may deceive,
cunningly snatching and stealing such souls as are unguarded, unregarded. O
blockish stupiditie! will you keep your chicken from the kite, your lamb from
the wolf, your fa^ne from the hound, your conies and pigeons from the vermin;
and will not you keep your soul from the devil, but idly lose it without any
chopping or changing in the market?

Fourthly, some give their souls, as first the malicious and envious person:
for whereas an ambitious man has a little honor for his soul; a covetous man
a little profit for his soul; a voluptuous man a little pleasure for his
soul; the spiteful wretch has nothing for his soul, but fretting and
heart-griefe, like Cain, who said of himself, Genesis 4.14.
Whosoever finds me, shall slay me.

Secondly, such as finally despair, give their souls away; for the devil
bestows nothing in liew thereof, but horror and hell of conscience. The
Ferus, ser. 5. in loc.
distressed soul may comfort himself with the conclusion of this parable: The
first shall be last, and the last first. The Ludolphus in loc.
last in (...) own judgment, the first in Gods eye.

Thirdly, such as destroy their body, that the devil may have their soul,
give themselves away for nothing: in one word, this is the case of all such as
stand idle in the market, they serve the devils turn for nothing: for the
wages of sin (says Romans 6.23.
Paul) is death; and death is none of Gods works, a nothing in nature. Why
therefore do you stand idle in the market all the day? go into the vineyard,
says the Lord, and whatsoever is right I will give you.

Now there be diverse laborers in the vineyard, as there be diverse loiterers in
the world; one plants, another waters, some dig, some dung; the Hemingius in
loc.
householder gives unto one man a shredding hook, to another a spade, to a
third an hatchet: so there be Mil^s equis, piscator aquis, and clericus hymnis,
nauta fretis, pugiles Mart, poeta m^tris.
sundry vocations and offices in the Church, diversities of gifts, and
diversities of administrations, and diversities of operations, 1. Cor. 12. But
about the trimming of the material vine, there be Esaias 5.2.
three sorts of laborers especial^y: the first to proyne; the second to lay
abroad, and underprop it; the third, to dig away the old mould, and to lay
new to the root: al which are so necessary, that if any of them fail, the
vine will soon decay.

No less needful in Christ's Church are these three estates: Clergy.
Magistracy. Commonaltie.

It belongs to the Priest to cut away supers^uous branches with the sword of
the spirit. The Magistrate must protect, underset and hedge in the vine, lest
the wild Psalm. 80.13.
bore out of the wood root it v^, and the wild beasts of the field devour
it. The common labourer must dig and till the ground, that he may get
sustenance for himself and other. If no Priest, what would become of our
spiritual life? if no Prince what would become of our civil life? if no
common people, what would become of our natural life? We must al be laborers,
and that painful and profitable; painful, called in this our parable thrice,
workmen: Non otiandum in via, sed laborand^m in vinea: There is no room in ye
vineyard for sluggishnes: Jeremy 48* 10
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently.

But because Satan is the most B. Latymer ser. at Paul's.
diligent preacher in the world, and heretics Matthew. 23.15.
compass sea and land to make proselyts, and to draw disciples after them; it
is not enough that laborers in the vineyard be painful, except they be
profitable: for as one said of the schoolmen; A man may magno conatu nihil
agere, take great pain to little purpose; toil much, and yet not help, but
rather hurt the vineyard. The byword, Every man for himself, and God for us
all, is wicked, impugning directly the end of every vocation and honest kind of
life. That our pain may be profitable, we must labor in a lawful calling
lawfully, for the good of the vineyard, and then, as it follows in the last
point of the parable, we shall receive Gods penny for our pain.

When even was come, the Lord of the vineyard said unto his steward, Call the
laborers and give them their hire, beginning at the last until the first.]
Wherein observe two things especially: When? at evening. What? give the^ their
hire; the which is not a reward os merit, but of mercy; not of debt, but of
favor, as it appears here by the persons, Of whom, God the Father. Through
whom, the Steward, God the Son. To whom, to the laborers; yet so that the
last be paid first, and the first last.





When euen] All our time of laboring in the vineyard is termed in this and
other places of holy writ, a day: 2. Cor. 6.2.
Behold now the day of salvation: Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one another while it is called to day.

Now our whole pilgrimage on earth is called a day, in two respects especially:
1. For the shortness of our life. 2. For that after this our day is spent, we
shall no longer work.

All our time is but a day, and that a short day, a winters day; for our
eternal night is infinitely longer then our temporal day: and alas! it is but a
little part of this little day that we work. Seneca, epist. 1. Multos annos
transegi, paucos vixi. Cael. Calcagninus.
Multum temporis e^ipitur nobis, plus subducitur, plurimum eff^uit: exigua pars
est vitae quam nos vi^imus. It is the least part of our life that we truly
live; for we spend our youth, which is our morning, in toys and vanities; and
our old age, which is our afternoon, for the most part is lost in carking and
caring for things of this life, so that there remains only the noone of our
day. As Epaminondas aptly, we must salute young men with good morrow, or welcome
into the world; old men with good night, because they be leaving the world;
only those of middle age with good day.

Let us examine then how we spend our noone. Though honest men use not to
sleep at noone, yet all we being laborers in Gods harvest and vineyard
ordinarily sleep almost half our time. Other hours we waste in eating, other
in playing, and that which is worst of all, most of all in sinning: all which
time, we cannot properly be said to live; for as the scripture teaches us
plainly, bad works are not the works of light, but of night and darkness: a
day misspent is lost, Titus V^sp. vti Sucton. in ^ius vita.
amici, diem perdidi.

Similis Captain of the guard to the Emperor Adrian, after he had retired
himself, and lived privately seven years in the country, confessed that he
had lived only 7. years, and caused to be written upon his tomb: Xiphilinus in
vita Adriani.
Hic iacet Similis, cuius aetas
multorum annorum fuit, ipse
septem duntaxat annos vixit.
So, many religious men have numbered their years, not from the day of their
birth, but of their new birth, from their beginning of their regeneration and
repentance, reputing all that time lost, which was idly misspent in the market
of the world: so that whether we consider our life of nature, or life of grace,
our whole time may well be called a short day.

Secondly, a day in regard of our eternal night, in which we cannot work; for
there is no grace in the grave, nor health in hell. I must work the works of
him that sent me, (says John 9.4.
Christ) while it is day; the night comes when no man can work. When even is
come the Lord of the vineyard shall say to his steward, call the laborers, and
give them their hire. This even is either Soarez tract. 2 in Matthew. 20.
every man's end, or else the Theoph^lact. in loc.
worlds end; the particular hour of our death, or the general day of
judgment: at Culman. and Maldonat. in loc.
both which as well the loiterer as the labourer, shall receive his reward.

The next point to be discussed, is, what? Give them their hire] The word hire
does exceedingly trouble the Papists; for they cannot, or at least will not
understand how eternal life may be both a reward and a gift: whereas it is
demonstrated in holy Scripture, that the immortal crown of glory, is called
a reward secundum quid, only, but a gift simplicite^; if we compare life
everlasting to the work, and look no further, it is called a reward: Matthew.
5.12. Great is your reward in heaven: but examine the first original from
whence the work it self also proceeds, and all is merely and wholly gift:
eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord; whereas the
blessed Apostle said, the wages of sin is death. If there were any merits in
our works, the sequel of his speech Perkins resormed Catholic, tit merits.
should have been, The wages of righteousness is eternal life; he says not
so, but the gift of God is eternal life; and so by that which he does not say
as also by that which he does say, shows that there is no place for merit.
Romans 11.6.
If then it be of grace, it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no grace:
Augustine. contra P^lag. and Celestiu^, lib. 2. c. 24 tom. 7. fol. 541.
Gratia non erit gratia vllo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni^odo: Grace is not
grace in any sort, if it be not free in every sort.

In this controversy, the scriptures, and fathers, and many learned Papists
are on our side. God says in the Exodus 20.6.
law, that he will show mercy to such as keep his commandments: Ergo, rew^^^
is given of mercy to them that fulfill the law. Christ says in the Luke 12.^2.
Gospel; It is your fathers pleasure to give you^ kingdom. And Romans 8.18.
Paul; The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory in the life to
come.

The most judicious and the most indifferent for both parties among the fathers
is Augustine, who repeates in his Enarrat. Psalm. 102. and epist. 10^.
works often this one golden sentence; Deus coronat dona sua, non mer^a^^^^r^.
God crowns his own gifts, not our merits: according to that of Psalm. 103.4.
David; He crowns us with compassion and loving kindness. August. epist.
105.
Eternal life should be rendered as due unto thee, if of thy self thou had
the righteousness to which it is due. But of his fullness we receive, not
only grace, now to live justly in our labors unto the end, but also grace for
this grace, that afterward we may live in rest without end; I^^m. epist. 120
cap. 19.
Haec est gratia ^ratis d^^a* non meritis operantis, sed miseratione donax^i^.
In Romans c. 4.
Origin says, he can hardly be persuaded that there can be any work, which by
debt may require reward at Gods hand, in as much as it is by his gift, that we
are able to do, or think, or speak any thing thati^ good. De his qui putant
se ex operibus iustificari.
Mark* the Hermit, says; He that does good* (...) ^^ng reward thereby,
serves not God, but his own w^^^*

De vocat. G^nt. lib. 1. cap. 17. Non labori pretium s^luens, sed di^i^ias
bonitatis suae in c^s quos sine operibus clegit, (...).
(...) the words of my text: The Lord of the vineyard (...) hire, not as paying
a price to their labor, bu^ pow^ing forth the riches of his goodness to the^
(...) chos^ without works, that even they al^o who (...) with much labor, and
have received no m^re (...), may understand that they have received a (...),
not wages for their work. So Saint (...) in Rom 8. Greg. Magnus in Psalm.
(...) 1. d^ interpell. cap. 1. and in Luc. lib. 8. c. 17. Fulgentius ad
Monimum. lib. 1. Many learned Papists agree with us also both in their
positions and practice. Fol. 106.
Bernard in his sermon upon the Annunciation, said, that the merits of men are
not such as that life eternal by right is owing for them: his reason is this;
Omnia merita, Dei dona sunt, and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor est,
quam Deus homini. For, says he, all our merits are the gifts of God: and so
man is rather a debtor to God for them, then God to man. And in Ser. 61. in
cant.
another place; Meritum meum miseratio Domini, etc. my merit is Gods mercy, etc.

In Luke cap. 7.
Stella: God my protector look not upon me; but first look upon thine only
Son: place between me and thee, his cross, his blood, his passion, his
merit; that so thy justice passing through his blood, when it comes at the
last to me, it may be gentle and full of mercy.

Friar Ferus in his commentaries upon this plece, says, that the parable of
the vineyard teaches, that whatsoever God gives us, is of grace; not of debt.
And in his Ser. 8. dom. septuag^s.
Postil he professes openly, that if it were not for pride, this question
would soon be at an end.

Part. 1. quaest. 17. art. 2. fol. 77.78.
Gregorius Ariminensis upon Peter Lombard, defends at large, that no work done
by man, though coming from the greatest charity, meriteth of condignity,
either eternal life, or any other reward temporal; because every such work
is the gift of God. His own words are; Ex hoc infero, quod ne dum vitae
eternae, sed nec alius alterius praemij aeterni vel temporalis aliquis actus
hominis ex quantacunque charitate elicitus est de condigno meritorius apud
Deum, quia quilibet talis est donum Dei.

Cardinal De iustificat. lib. 5 cap. 7. sit tertia proposu^o.
Bellarmin, after he had a long time traveled and wearied himself in the
questions of justification, at the last holds it the safest course to repose
our whole trust in the only mercies of God: propter incertitudinem propriae
iustitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totamin sola
Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere.

Thus, as you see, Papists of the best note for learning, accord with us in the
pulpit and school. Now for their practice, that learned Clerk Loc. com. tit.
Iustificat.
Chemnitius has observed long since, that most of them in the question of
justification by works, have said one thing in their disputations, and another
in their meditations; otherwise behauing themselves at their death, then in
their life. For when once they see that they must appear before the bar of
Gods justice, they plead for the most part, guilty, craving a Psalm of mercy;
Miserere mei Deus, and secunudum, multitud^nem miserationum tuarum dele
iniquitatem meam.

Pope Moral. lib. 9. cap. 17.
Gregory counsels us, vt recta, quae agimus, sci^ndo nesciamus, in plain
English, to take no further notice of our good works, but to renounce them.

Chemnitius vbi supra, tit. de peccat. original.
Anselmus, Archbishop of Canterbury, confesses often in his meditations, that
all his life was either unprofitable or damnable. Whereupon he concludes at
last; Quidergo rest^t o peccator; nisi vt in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam
tuam? What remains to be done in our whole life, but to lament for the sins
of our whole life.

Abbot Ser. 68. in cant.
Bernard has this sweet saying; Sufficit ad ^eritum scire quod non sufficiant
merita. Penury of merit is a dangerous poverty, presumption deceitful riches.
I will therefore (says he) pray with Prou. 30.8.
Solomon, O Lord, give me neither poverty nor riches, neither want of merit,
neither abundance of presumption.

Sherwin, a Seminary Priest, An. 1581.
executed for treason with Edmund Campian at Tiborne, when he was in the cart,
ready to die, though he held himself a Martyr for the Catholic faith,
acknowledged notwithstanding ingennously, the miseries, imperfections, and
corruptions of his own vile nature, relying wholly upon Christ, and inuocating
no Saint but his Savior, ending his life with these words; O Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus be to me a Jesus.

But the truth of this doctrine does appear more plainly by the consideration
of the persons here mentioned, of whom, through whom, to whom. First, of whom,
the Lord of the vineyard, that is, God the Father, who says in the 15. verse,
that the eternal penny is his own, and that he may do with it what he list.
If it were debt, then not his own, neither could he dispose of it as he will.
In execution, the work goes before the reward; as here the labor before the
hire: but in Gods intention the reward is before the work. God therefore
gives us grace to work well, because formerly by his election he gives us
eternal life: Romans 8.30.
Whom he does predestinate, them he calls; and whom he calls, he
justifies; and whom he justifies, them he glorifieth. And so his mercy is
Psalm. 103.17.
from everlasting to everlasting, from everlasting predestination, to
everlasting glorification.

Happily some will say; pr^^ise is deb^ ^ut God promised and couenanted with
(...) ^^bourers in the second verse, to give them a penny. (...) made, that
this very promise is mercy on Gods part, not merit on our part: by promise he
binds himself, but by merit we bind him unto us. It is in his own power to
promise, and without promise he should be tied unto nothing* but whether there
be promise or not, he is tied in justice to reward desert. If a man deserve a
penny, he must have a penny; for God infinitely rich in mercy, does highly
scorn to owe any laborer a farthing: but if this penny be due not by any
performance of man, but only by the promise of God, it cannot truly be called
a reward of debt, but of favor; not purchase, but inheritance. Mat. 25.34.
Come (...) blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, etc.

Inheritance is a matter of birth, and not of industry. The younger brother
often is of bet^^^ (...) then the elder; yet that cannot make him his fat^^^^
heir. When therefore the Scripture sets ^orth unto us eternal life, under the
condition of inheritance; it teaches v^ plainly, that we cannot attain it by
merit; but that God electing us his childen, b^^^re any work, gives us freely
the state and prerogative thereof.

Christ is the Steward, by whom every labourer has his hire: for we receive
nothing from God the Father, but by God the Son; John 1.17.
grace by Jesus Christ.

The persons unto whom reward is given, are the first and the last laborers in
Gods vineyard, and the last has equal pay with the first. If then in our
spiritual warfare, any good work chance to leap over the wall, and challenge
to it self any prerogative of merit, and so the devil by his seeming retreat,
infect it with the bane of pride, as having obtained victory; we must use it as
Torqua^us did his oueruenturous son, cut it off with the impartial sword of
the spirit, for daring beyond his commission. I conclude with Epist. 105.
Augustine; It is true righteousness unto which eternal life is due; but if
it be true, it is not of thy self. It is from above, descending down from the
father of lights, that thou might have it: if at least thou have it, verily
thou have received it: for 1. Cor. 4.7.
what have thou that thou have not received? Wherefore, O man, if thou be to
receive eternal life, it is indeed the wages of righteousness; but to thee it
is grace, to whom righteousness it self is also grace.

That God calls, it is his mercy; that thou come at his call, it is his
mercy; that thou do labor when thou art come, it is his mercy; that thou art
rewarded for thy labor, it is his mercy. 1. Cor. 15.10.
By the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace which is in me, was not in
vain; but I labored more abundantly then them all; yet not I, but the grace of
God which is with me.

The Epistle. 2. COR. 11.19. Ye suffer fools gladly, etc.
SAint Paul was so modest in his own cause, that he calls himself the
greatest sinner, and the least Saint: but in Gods cause, perceiving that his
personal disgrace might tend to the general hurt of the Church, and scandal
of the Gospel, he does boast with the prowdest; In wh^^soeuer a^^^ t^an is
bold, I am bold also. Not out of vain glory, to commend himself, but out of a
Lu^^^r. and S^^^^^tus n^l^^. (...) ^oc.
just necessity to stop the mouths of other; especially to confound the false
teachers. He does therefore, Aq^^^^^ ^oc.
first confer, then prefer himself before them all.

He compares himself with them in that which is less commendable, namely, for
his birth and ancientry. (...) are Hebrews, even so ^m I: they are Israelites,
even so am ^ they are the seed of Abraham, even so am I: whereas they rejoice
after the flesh, I will rejoice also: verse. 18.

As he does equal himself with them in things carnal; so prefer himself
before them in things spiritual, in that which is more worthy praise, to wit,
in his Apostleship. First in general: They are the Ministers of Christ, (I
speak as a fool) I am more: Romans 1.1.
put apart to preach the Gospel of God, Galat. 1.1.
not by man, but by Jesus Christ.

In more particular, he does extol himself above them all, in two points
especially: 1. For that he suffered more troubles; as he shows in this
scripture. 2. For that he received mo graces; as he declares in the next
Chapter.

His troubles here mentioned, are partly, such as himself assumed of his own
accord: such as other imposed on him. In Acts 16.22.23.
stripes above measure. Aquin.
Supramodu^ virtutis huma^^* supra modum co^suetu^inis humanae. In pr^^^n more
plenteously: in Romans 8.36.
death of^: of the Ie^s s^ue times I received forty stripes save one. Thrice
was I beaten with rods: I was once Acts 14.19.
stoned: I suffered thrice shipwreck: night and day have I been in the deep
sea: in peril of wat^rs, in peril of robbers; in ieopardie of mine own
nation, in ieopard^ among the heathen: inperils in the Act. 18. and 19.
City in perils in wilderness, in perils among false brethren, etc. Outward:
Labor, watching, hunger, thirst, fasting, cold, nakedness. Inward: I am
cumbred daily, and take care for all the congregations, etc.



The natural man is comforted in three things especially: quiet rest. liberal
diet. good apparel.

For rest, Paul did labor much, Acts 20 34.
even with his own hands, 2. These. 3.8.
night and day, watching osten preaching sometime till midnight: Acts 20.7. For
diet, he sometime was in hunger and thirst, upon want: 1. Cor. 4.11. and often
he did fast for the ^aming of his body: 1 Cor. 9.27. For apparel, he was in
cold and 1. Cor. 4.11.
nakedness: the one hurtful to himself, the other hateful to the world. For
his inward affliction; he took care for the whole Church, exceeding solicitous
for their spiritual and temporal good: spiritual; who is weak in faith, or
good works, and I am not grieved? 1. Cor. 9.22.
insirmis factus sum infirmus: I became weak to the weak, that I may win the
weak. So the Jeremy 9.1.
Prophet: Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine cies a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night, for the slain of the daughter of my
people!

Concerning defects in temporal good, he says; Who is offended, that is,
afflicted, and I burn not, in heat of compassion? All this Saint Paul does
hedge in with a preface before; Ye su^^er fools, etc. And a protestation
after, verse. 31. The God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not.

In the preface, Saint Paul does Luther. ^^l^. S^^^^n l^c.
tax the Corinthians folly, for that they suffered, and that gladly, the false
teachers to tyrannise over their persons and purses, Go^^an. in loc.
eit^er secretly defrauding, or openly devouring their estate; whereas the good
Apostles in the mean while, (who preached liberty of conscience, and sought
not their own, but that which is Jesus Christ) were neglected and despised.

As it was in Corinth, it is in England; the crafty Jesuit, and dissembling
schismatike, prevail more with the people then the true Protestant Preacher.
Our popish Ladies are so wise, that they suffer the Jesuit to bring both their
credits and consciences into bondage, to devour their husbands estate, to take
what they list, inioyning penance to other, while they pamper themselves, and
exalt their order above all either Priest or people.

So the Schismatike gains by loss: as in familiar letters, it is the best
rhetoric to use no rhetoric: Politian. epist. lib. 1. epist. Pet. Me^^^.
carere figuris sigurat epistolam. And as Cic. offic. lib. 3.
Sci^io said; he was never less alone, then when he was alone: so the factious
have never so much living, as when they have no living. But the Protestant
Pastor is kept often from his own, (which all laws of God and men hold his
due) by prohibitions and unjust vexations; or else paid with insupportable
grudging and envy. Some will happily complain with Devil tate condit. human.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
Innocentius; Iustitia nisi venit, non prouenit, neque datur nisi vendatur. So
that (as See travels of Englishmen into far Countries. p. 62.63.
travelers observe) Divines are less regarded in England, then in any nation
of the world, either Christian or heathen.

Saint Paul in his protestation, Ambros. in loc.
calls to witness the most merciful and most mighty, that he speaks nothing
but the truth. He that knows all, knows I do not lie.

The Aquin. in loc.
Lord is to be feared, because God; to be loved, because the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to be praised, because blessed for evermore. By this great, good,
glorious Lord, whom I dare not abuse, because great; will not, because good;
may not, because glorious, I protest that all is true which I have said, or
shall say.

It appears then in his preface, that he dealt wisely in his protestation,
that he dealt truly. Some commend themselves truly, but not wisely, more
commend themselves wisely, but not truly. Paul here does both, approving
himself before God and men: before God in speaking so truly; before men, in
speaking so wisely.

The Gospel. Luke 8.4. When much people were gathered together, and were come
to him out of all cities, he spoke by a similitude: The sower went out to sow,
etc.
Our Savior Christ in this Scripture propounds a parable. expounds a
parable.

In the propounding, three points are regardable: the Occasion: When much
people, etc. verse. 4. Parable: The sower went out to sow: verse. 5.6. etc.
Conclusion: He y^ has ears to hear, let him hear: v. 8.

The peoples pressing Marlorat. ex Calu. in Mat. 13
occasioned Christ to deliver this parable: wherein observe, Culman. in loc.
the diligence of the people in hearing. care of Christ in instructing.



The peoples earnest desire to hear does appear, in that they were a
multitude: (...), a very great multitude; as it is in our vulgar English, much
people, gathered together; many srom many cities, in zeal so good, in number
so great, that pressing upon Christ by the sea side, he was feign to leap into
a ship, and make that his pulpit, as S. Matthew reports in his Matthew. 13.2.
Gospel.

This peoples pattern condemns our peoples practice, who will not run out of
the city into the country, nor out of the country into the city to hear
Christ, except it be upon hatred or curiosity, faction or affection.

Under the cruel persecution of Eusebius.
Dioclesian twenty thousand Christians in Nicomedia were burned in the Temple,
being all assembled to celebrate the birth of Christ. And Epist. ad Goront.
Hierom makes mention, how that at Ments in Germany, the city being taken,
many thousands were slain in the Church. And what massacres have lately been
in England, France, Flanders, is not unknown unto such as have had either open
eyes or ears. Happy then are the eyes which see the things that we may see:
for we living under the peaceable government of a most religious Prince, may
come to Church in peace, hear in peace, depart in peace: we may come in our
slippers and sit on our cushion^ If then Christ do not hold us by the cares,
as Plutarch. in vita Alcib.
Socrate^ did A^cibiades: if we do not press to hear him, as the people did
here, he will one day speak of us, as he did of Hi^rusalem: Matthew. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered you together, as the hen does her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not? Prou. 1.24.
I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand, and none would
regard: But because ye despised all my counsel, and would none of my
correction; I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes, etc.

Happily some will object: All the people whom ye commend, came not unto
Christ with a good mind and honest heart to be taught: it may be some came in
malice to carpe at him; other in curiosity to wonder at his miracles; other
upon covetousness to reap some temporal benefit by him, Ludel^hus ex Hieron.
and Di^z in l^c.
according to which several humors our Savior was occasioned to propound
this parable of the sower sowing his seed in diverse lands increasing diversely.

Well, how soever ye come, yet come unto Christ: if ye come with an intent to
carpe, come: for happily while ye think to catch the preacher, he may catch
you, as August. ^^ous. ^. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Ambrose did Augustine: if ye come with a mind to sl^epe at the Temple, yet
come; for it may be (says S^r. 6. before King Ed 6.
B. La^^^^) Almighty God will take you napping: if you come with a resolution
to steal, yet come; for peradventure the first word that ye shall hear, will
be, Thou shall not steal: or, Let him that has stolen, steal no more Psalm.
19.7.
The word of God is pure, and conuerteth the soul: perfect and pure formaliter
and effectiue, both in it self pure, and making other pure; Come then
howsoever ye stand affected, evermore press to Christ, out of all cities and
villages.

The care of Christ in instructing, is see^e 1. In that he went out of his
house (says Matthew. 13.1.
Matthew) to a more public, large, sit place for teaching. 2. For that he
spoke by a simili^^de.

By y^ former al^ Preacher^ may learn to take their best hint and opportunity
for the propagating of the Gospel, Musculus in Ma^^. 13. and ^auxami^ Har.
^^m. 2. sol. 282.
and instructi^g of Gods people, leaving sometime their own li^^l^ cure^ and
upon good occasion to preach unto much people, sowing their seed in a more
large field, and profiting even so many as they can.

For the second point, Divines have rendered sundry reasons, why Christ used to
speak by parables: as first, Hicron. Futhy^ius: Gene^rard. (...) ^sal. 77
that the Scripture might be fulfilled: I will open my mouth in a parable,
Psalm. 78.2.

Secondly, Beauxamis ^ by (...) and H^ming^us in locum.
that we might know that Christ spoke with the same spirit, by which all God^
holy Prophets in old time spoke, whose writings are full of parables.

Thirdly, F^rus s^r. 2. in loc.
that ^ee might descend unto the capacity of the most simple, who best
understand and remember ^omely comparisons; as the H^rat. art. poet.
Poet truly:

Seg^^s i^rit^nt ani^os d^^ss^^er ^ure^,
Quam q^^s^ns oc^lis sub^^ (...) ^idelibus.
Fourthly, Marlorat. ^x ^u^er^^. in l^c.
that his auditors might hereby take occasion to move doubts, and ask
questions, as the Disciples in the 9. verse, i^ h^t manner of ^^^litude is this?

Fifthly, that the mysteries of Gods heavenly kingdom might not be r^uealed
unto the scornful; as Christ himself teaches in the tenth verse: To you it
is given to know the secrets of the kingdom; but to other in parables, that
when they see* they should not see, etc.

Sixthly, that every man in his occupation and ordinary vocation, might be
taught those things which concern his souls health, as this parable may be
termed the ploughmans Gospel. The seed is the word of God, etc. He that
meditates on it, when he plougheth his ground, may have a Ferus vbi sup.
sermon always before him, every furrow being a line, every grain of corn a
lesson bringing forth some fruit.

The sower went out to sow his seede] S. In Psalm. 77.
Augustine writing upon the words: Aperiam in parabolis os meum, eloquar
propositiones ab initio, wishes; vtinam qui dixit aperiam os meum in
parabolis, ita aperiret etiam ipsas parabolas; and sicut eloquitur
propositiones, ita etiam eloqueretur earum expositiones. Here S. Augustines
prayer is heard: for Christ gives an exposition of his proposition; and
therefore we must Hieron. in Matthew. 13.
take heed, that we neither detract nor add any thing to it: Opus Culman. in
loc.
habet lectore, non interpret.

And as he said these things he cried, he that has eares] Hemingius in loc.
He cried to manifest his affection and our dullness: excepting this occasion
he did not cry above three or four times in all his life. He cried as he
taught in the Temple, Ioh. 7.28. He cried when he raised up Lazarus from the
dead, Ioh. 11.43. He cried, Ioh. 12.44. He cried on the Cross, Matthew. 27: at
all which times he delivered matter of great consequence. This sentence then,
He that has ears to hear, let him hear, being uttered upon a cry, must not
lightly be respected of us. All men for the most part have both their ears,
but not to hear. The Staplet^n. premptuar. moral. ser. d^m. sexages.
man sick of the gowt has both his feet, but not to walk: He that is
purblind, has both his eyes, but not to see clearly: he that is manicled by
the Magistrate for some fault, has both his hands; but so long as they are
bound, they cannot do their office. So most men have ears, but few men have
ears to hear, namely, to hear that which is good, and to hear y^ which is
good, well. Remigius apud Thom. in Mat. 13
Aures audiendi sunt aures me^tis. scilicet intellige^di, and facie^di quae
iussa sunt.

A good ear, says the Eccles. 3.31.
Wiseman, will gladly hearken unto wisdom: where note two lessons as
concerning hearing: first, that we hearken unto nothing but that which is
good, unto wisdom. Secondly, that we hearken unto it gladly, with a great
desire to learn: for in Scripture phrase, obaudire is obedire: so Christ in
the Gospel, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me: that is, he that obeys you, obeys me:
and he that despises you, despises me. Matthew. 18.1^
If thy brother hear thee, thou have won thy brother: that is, if thy
brother follow thy counsel, and will be content to be ruled by thee.

We read in the Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy. 15.17.
law, that if a bond servant will not be made free, but stay still with his
master, he shall be brought before the Judges, and set to the door or the
post, and his master shall boar his ear through with an aule, and so he shall
serve him for ever. Every sinner is the devils vassal: and therefore if he
refuse to be free, when liberty and free grace of the Gospel is offered, ere
it be long the devil will so boar his ears, as that they shall be made unfit
to hear, and then he shall serve his old master for ever. He may
peradventure come to Church and hear the sermon; but he shall be like the
man, James 1.23.
that beholds his face in a glass: for when he has considered himself he
goes his way, and forgets immediately what manner of one he was.

Wherefore, when ye come to Christ bring your ears with you, ears to hear;
so to hear, that ye may understand; so understand that ye may remember; so
remember that ye may practice; so practice that ye continue; so Gods seed
shall be sown in good ground, and bring forth fruit in some thirty, in some
sixty, in some an hundred fold, etc.

The parables exposition is occasioned by the Disciples question, verse 9. What
manner of similitude is this?

Where note their carfulness in asking. Christ's readiness in answering.

For the first, the Sabbath is aptly termed a Ramus dercligion. lib. 2. cap. 6
schole day, wherein all Gods people must come to the Temple, which is the
school, to learn his word their lesson. In this seminary Christ is the
chief seedman, styled in the beginning of this parable, (...), The sower. In
this University Christ is the prime Doctor: Matthew. 23.8.
Vnus est doctor vester; e cuius schola in terris, cathedra in coelis. His
Apostles sowed as vnder-bailiffes in his field; and his Preachers in our time
teach as vnder-vshers in his school.

As then in the schools of humane knowledge, so soon as the lecture is read,
it is the scholars duty to question among themselves how to parse and
construc it, and when they doubt, to have recourse to their Grammar rules, by
which all construction is examined: and when they do not understand an hard
rule, to come for a resolution unto their master, who is as it were a living
Grammar and a walking book.

So likewise in Gods Academy in the Divinity school, when either the lecture
of the Law is read, or sermon on the Gospel ended, it is your part to reason
among your selves as you walk abroad in the fields, or talk at home in your
house, how this and that may be construed; and when you cannot resolve one
another, with the men of Acts 17.11.
Beroea, to search the Scripture daily, whether those things are so, to try
the spirits of men by the spirit of God: for the Bible is our Divinity
Grammar, according to which all our lessons ought to be parsed and construed.
And if ye meet with a difficult place, repair to Gods Usher the Priest,
Malac. 2.7.
whose lips should pres^rue knowledge: Demand of your pastor, as the
Disciples of Christ here; What manner of parable is this?

It is apparent in the Gospel that the Disciples ever took this course: when
Christ had delivered any deep point, first they disputed among themselves, and
then after came to him, and asked his resolution: Mark. 9.11.
Why say the Scribes, that Elias must first come? How Io^. 3.9.
can these things be? Matthew. 13.36.
Declare unto us the parable of the tares.

In our days if the pastor be learned in the laws of the land, and well
acquainted with business of the world, his house shall be reputed oraculum
totius ciuitatis, (as Lib. 1. de orat.
Tully speaks) all his neighbors will haste unto him for advice in law, but
few for counsel in religion. Indeed they come to school, but like truants
only for fear of punishment, and when they come, they care n^^ how little
learning they have for their money. B^t let me tell them of another school
trick; at the worlds end there is a black friday, Dan. 7.10.
a general examination; at which time Conscience the monitor (...) her books
and bills of all our faults, and our (...) Schoolmaster in his own person shall
reward every (...) according to his work. It behooves every one therefore to
be diligent in coming to school, to be careful in hearing, painful in
examining, fruitful in practicing.

And he said] Christ's readiness in answering, teaches all Preachers his
Vshers and Curates, not only to preach in public, but also to catechize their
auditors, as occasion is offered, in private: especially such as hunger and
thirst after righteousness; for unto them it is given to know the secrets of
Gods kingdom. The which words contain Gods donation unto his elect, and it is
cum priuilegio and gratia; with privilege to you, but unto other in parables:
cum gratia, it is given. Consulas Augustine. de praedestinat. Sanctorum, cap. 8.
lib. de bono perseuerantiae, cap. 8.9 11. lib. de correp. and gratia, cap.
4.6.7.8

Saving knowledge of God is a gift and grace: for the 1. Cor. 2.14.
natural man understands not the things of God; he believes oculo magis quam
oraculo, trusting his five senses more then the four Gospels. It is a mystery
revealed unto you, but hidden unto many, whose eyes the 2. Cor. 4.4.
god of this world has darkened, that seeing they should not discern, and
hearing they should not understand. O father, says Christ, Matthew. 11.25.
thou have hid these things from the wise, and have opened them unto babes. It
is so, because thy good pleasure was such. As it is our fathers will alone to
give us a kingdom; so likewise his good will alone to make us know the secrets
of his kingdom.

There are mysteria regis, which may not be known, and there are mysteria
reg^i, which must be known: many mysteries of our heavenly king are known
only to himself. Can thou (says Job 11.7.
Job) find out God? can thou find out the Almighty to his perfection? The
heavens are high, what can thou do? it is deeper then the hell, how can
thou know it? The measure thereof is longer then the earth, and it is broader
then the sea. God therefore requires rather we should remember what he has
been to us, then curiously to seek what he is in himself.

But as for the secrets of his kingdom, he reueales them unto the heirs of his
kingdom; these mysteries may, yea must be known: and therefore Christ cried,
He that has ears, let him hear. Teaching hereby that in making our election
sure, we must not begin a priori, but a posteriori: such as with a good heart
hear the word and keep it, and bring forth fruit through patience, shall
inherit the kingdom of God; Matthew. 21.43
but the kingdom of God shall be taken away from such as are fruitless, from
such as are faithless.

This is the parable] Bare reading without understanding, is bare feeding; the
true meaning of the Scripture is the true Manna: Origin peri archon. lib. 4.
cap. 2
for as a man, so the Bible consists of a body and a soul. The sound of the
letter is the body, but the Cyril.
sense is the soul: this indeed is the scripture* this is the parable.

The seed is the word of God] The sower is Christ, who went out, Thomas ex
pa^ribus in Mat. 13. and B^auxami^, vbi supra.
ab occulto Patris in mundum, a Iudaea in Gentes, a profundo sapientiae in
publicum doctrinae. The Preacher is not properly the sower, Ludolphus vbi supra.
but the seedcod, at the most an vnderseed man.

The sower went out to sow] Not to reap. Pontan. in loc.
Now many go out into Gods field only to gather in harvest, Pl^tarch.
t^nquam Stratocles and Dromoclid^s, ad auream messem, intending to reap
things carnal, more then sowing things spiritual.

The sower sowed his seed; for the seed is the word of God, Hemingius and
Bea^xamis, etc.
not of Angel or man: and this seed has in it generatiue power in it self,
it is Heb. 4.12.
lively, yea the word of Phil. 2.16.
life. So that if it bring not forth fruit, the fault is not in the seed, but
in the ground, being either vnplowed, or stony, or thorny. The seed is the word
of God. And therefore such as corrupt it, as heretics; or choke it, as
hypocrites; or keep it down from growing by force, as tyrants; or thrust
other seed into it, as Papists do, shall one day feel the (...) wrath of God:
for as he gave pure seed, so will he requ^re pure c^rne.

He left this in the Church, even in the garners of the Prophets and Apostles;
and therefore whosoever adulterate i^ before it be sown, or nip it when it
does spring, or cut it down before the Lord, harvest, are not Gods husbandme^,
but Satan's hirelings* and you may know them, says Mat. 7.16.
Christ, by their fruit, Mela^ct. in Mat. 7.
that is, by their doctrine. For Gods husbandmen sow Gods seed; but the devils
factors, as Saint 1. Tim. 4.1.
Paul plainly, the doctrines of devils. As for example, this is pure seed; Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. But to worship
Angels and Saints, and to give the same kind of worship to the crucifix, which
is due to Christ, is sophisticate seed. This was not at the first sown by the
sower; but ouersowen after by the malicious enemy, while men slept.

Those that are b^^^de the way] Th^ophylact. in Matt^. 13.
Three parts of four are bad; Luther. in loc.
yea the most of such as hear the word, and confess Christ, are unprofitable.
Mat. 7.13.
Strive then to enter in at the strait gate. Remember that covetous cares and
voluptuous living, are the thorns which usually choke Gods seed in our heart:
riches unto the covetous are thorns, in this and the next life; their pricks
are threefold in this life; namely, Ludolphus.
pun^tura l^boris in acquisitione. timoris in possessione. doloris in amissione.



The true reason why so many men are delighted with them, is, Diez in loc.
because they put on wants or ti^ning gloves, and so their hearts and hands
being hardened, they feel not their pricking: but in the next world they will
be thorns again, when Christ shall say to the covetous; Hence from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I
thirsted, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Here pause good Reader, and pray with
De vita Christ. part. 1. cap. 64. in fine.
Ludolphus.

O Domine Iesufac me de veteri vita exire, ne semen verbi tui quod in meo
intellectu boni propositi, quod in meo affectu boni operis, quod in meo actu
seminasti, comedatur a volucribus inanis gloriae, ne conculcetur in via
assiduitatis, ne areat in petra durae obstinationis, and ne suffocetur in
spinis solicitudinis, sed potius in terra bona cordis humilimi centesimum
fructum edat in patientia: fac etiam me haec omnia intelligere and facere, ac
verbo vel saltem exemplo alios docere. Amen.

The Epistle. 1. COR. 13. Though I speak with tongues of men and Angels, etc.
THe Bible is the body of all holy religion; and this little Chapter is as it
were, an abridgement of all the Bible: for it is a tract of love, which is the
Romans 13.10.
complement of the law, and John 13.34.
supplement of the Gospel. All the scripture teaching nothing else (says De
doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Augustine) but that we must love our neighbor for God, and God for himself.
Ibidem. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Nihil praecipit nisi charitatem, nec culpat nisi cupiditatem: it forbids
nothing but lust, and inioines nothing but love: for without Galat. 5.6.
love, there is no true faith; and without faith, Romans 14.23.
all our righteousness is sin.

S. Paul therefore does extol in this Chapter above all other, this one
virtue: 1. largely, showing that it surpasses al other graces in Goran. and
Beza in loc.
two things: Use: verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Continuance: ver. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.
2. briefly, by way of Calu. Institut. lib. 3. c. 18.. 8.
recapitulation in the last verse. Now abides faith, hope, and love, even
these three; but the chief is love.

Charity does excel in use: for all other gifts without it are nothing
available to salvation, as Paul proves by this induction; If I speak with
tongues of men and Angels, etc.

All virtues are either Intellectual: in accurate speech: verse. 1. other
knowledge: verse. 2.
Moral: in doing: v. 3. Though I feed the poor with all my goods. suffering:
Though I give my body to be burned, etc.


Though I speak with the tongues of men] Aquin in loc.
That is, of all men. If I had understanding in all languages, and Art to parle
in them all: if a man could speak so many tongues as our late Sovereign of
blessed memory Queen Elizabeth, of whom the divine Du Bartas in his Babylon.
Poet, as a Divine truly; not as a Poet flatteringly:

That Rome, Rheine, Rhone, Greece, Spain and Italy,
Plead all for right in her nativity.
If a man could discourse in so many languages as Mythridates, of whom Comment.
lib. 17. page 522.
Volaterane reports, that he well understood 22. sundry tongues; or as Aul.
Gellius lib. 17. cap. 17.
other, 25. If a man could thunder in an Oration, as Aristophanes said of
Pericles; or tune his note so sweetly, that he could move mountains and stony
rocks with Orpheus; or fe^ch souls out of hell, as fabulous antiquity fained
of Mercury. Though a man could hold the people by the ^ares, and carry them up
and down the Country like pitchers, as Plutarch. in vita Alcib.
Socrates did Alcibiades; and steal away their hearts, as 2. Sam. 15.6.
Absolon did in Israel. If a man were so bewitching an Orator, that he could
Picus Miran. epist. Barbaro.
pro arbitrio tollere, extollere, ^mplificare, extenuare, magicis quasi viribus
eloquentiae in quam velit faciem habitumque transformare; so subtle a
disputer, as that he could make quidlibet ex quolibet, every thing of anything,
yet without love were he nothing.

Yea though a man could speak with the tongues of Angels, Aquin. and Gorran.
in loc.
that is, of the learned Priests and Prophets, who are Gods Mal. 2.7.
Angels and messengers. If a man had the silver Hieron. aduersus Ruffin. tom.
2. fol. 221.
trumpet of Hilary; or the golden mouth of Chrysostom; or the mellifluous
speech of Origin, Vincentius, vti Magdeburg. cent. 3. col. 269.
cuius ex ore non tam verba quam mella flu^re videntur. If a man were so
painful in preaching, that as Acts 2.41.
Saint Peter, he could add to the Church with one sermon, about three thousand
souls: or as it is Magdeburg. cent. 8. col. 852.
recorded of venerable Beda, fondly and falsely, that he could make the very
stones applaud his notes, and say, Amen.

Or as Calvin. and Beza in loc.
other expound it, hyperbolically: though a man should speak like the glorious
Angels, as Paul, Gal. 1.8. Though an Angel from heaven should preach unto you:
Hieron. in loc.
si quae sint Angelorum linguae. Give me leave to add one thing more to this
hyperbolicall supposition. If a man could speak like God, as antiquity reports
of Ficinus in vita Platonis.
Plato; that if Jupiter himself should speak Greek, he would use no other
phrase but his. And of Laert. in vita Chrysip.
Chrysippus, that if the gods should speak logic, they would have none but
his. Or as the people blasphemously of Herod, Act. 12. The voice of God, and
not of man. Though, I say, we could speak with tongues of men, of Angels, of
God, if it were possible, and have not love, we were but as a sounding brass,
or as a tinckling cymball: Gorran. in loc.
we might happily pleasure other, but not profit our selves unto salvation.
Herein Marlor. in loc.
resembling Bal^ams Ass, who by speaking, bettered her Master, not her self.

A plain piece of brass makes but a plain noise, Tinkers music; but a
tinckling cymball, in regard of the concauity, yields a various sound, a more
pleasant stroke. So rude speakers are like sounding brass; Aquin. in loc.
but the Curious and Judicious, adorned with multiplicity of distinctions, and
variety of good learning, are as a tinckling cymball, or more tickling delight
to their hearers: and yet if they preach without love, their sound is without
life. Qui non diligit fratrem, 1. Epist. 3.14.
man^^ in morte, says S. John. Such fitly resemble the sermon bell, which calls
other to the Church, but hears nothing it self; it wears out to his own
hurt, though others good.

Nay, when Auditors are persuaded thoroughly, that their Pastors instruct not
out of charity, their plain doctrines are but as sounding brass, tedious as
the Tinkers note; their accurate sermons as a tin^k^ing cy^ball, which only
pierce the ears, and enter not into their hearts: as the Ezekiel. 33.32.
Prophet aptly; Their admonitions are unto them: as a jesting song of one that
has a pleasant voice, and can sing well: for they hear their words, but they
do them not. Diez con. 4. d^^. 3. ad^ent.
As one that hears excellent music from out of the streets in the night,
will instantly leap out of his bed, and lend his care for a time; but when the
musicians are gone presently returns to sleep again: so many delight to hear
the sweet songs of S^on, but when the sermon is at an end, they sleep in their
old sins again, forgetting immedia^ly the good lesson, as if it were but the
drumming on a pan, or scraping on a ke^^le.

And though I (...) pr^ph^^ie] Prophecy then is nothing without love. Ambros.
in loc.
For Balaam, Ca^p^^, and S^ul propheci^d. Understanding of mysteries is nothing
without love: for Judas, and Nicolas, and Arius, were well acquainted with the
scriptures. All knowledge is nothing: for the Scribes had the Luke 11.52.
key of knowledge, yet entered not in themselves.

And all knowledge] Though a man were an Ocean of learning, as Plutarch is
called; in so much that Claudius Verd^rius cension. in Authors page 174.
Theodo^^ Gaza said, if he could read but one man's books, he would make
choice of him. Or if a man were so full as Pliny, whose works are Ibidem. p.
173.
instar mill voluminum: if a man were a treasure house of letters, as Picus
Mirandula writes of Hermolaus Barbarus: a library for a whole nation, as Tom.
9. fol. 338.
Baronius of Albinus: as Epist. 84.
Erasmus of Bishop Tonstal, a world of learning, mundus eruditionis, abounding
with skill in Margarita philosophica.
all Arts: theorical: real: metaphysical: inspired: as Divinity, contained in ye
Bible, acquired: of with Aristotle and Auicen write.
mathematical: as Arithmetike. Geometry. Music. Astronomy.
physical: concerning the Principles. Generation of natural things.

rational: Grammar. Rhetoric. Logic.

practical: active: Ethics. Oeconomicks. Politics.
factiue: as skill in Navigations. Husbandry. Hunting, etc.





If a man understand all mysteries in Scripture, all secrets in nature:
Imponere Pelion Ossae.
^f he had all faith, that he could remove mountains, in a literal sense,
move that which cannot be moved, high hills, Imponere Pelion Ossae: G^rran. in
loc.
in an allegorical exposition, cast out devils. If a man had all parts of all
knowledge, prophecy, sapience, prudence, and had not love, he were nothing.
Nothing Aquin. in loc.
in esse gratiae, though something in esse naturae; dead spiritually, though
something, some great thing in the natural and civil life. For great Clerks
have long life on earth. Albe^t Aquiras, Jewel, Picus Mirandula, Whitaker died
in the principal strength of their age: yet in respect of honor and fame,
they live with the longest.

Prudentius peristephan. him. 13.
Dum liber vllus erit, dum scrinia sacra literarum
Te leget omnis amans Christum, tua Cypriane discet.
Knowledge is a good stirrup also to get aloft, the hie way to much honor and
preferme^t in this world; but without love, nothing auailable to glory eternal
in the world to come. Knowledge 1. Cor. 8.1.
blows up, but charity builds up. Advancement of learning. l. 1. page 5.
and Greg. in Euangel. hom. 7. quod virtus scientiae congregat, ventus elationis
spargit.
If learning be taken without the true correctiue thereof, it has in it some
nature of poison, and some effects of that malignity, which is a swelling. If I
speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and had not charity, it were but as
a tinckling c^mball. Not but that it is an excellent thing to speak with
tongues of men and Angels, and a far more noble treasure to possess all
knowledge. For Christ said of his Apostles; that they were the light of the
world; and the worthy Doctors succeeding, were Baron. epist. Clem. 8. praefix.
tom. 4. annal.
luminaria magna, great stars in the firmament of the Church, by whose light,
descending from the father of lights, we find out the truth hidden in many
dark places of the scripture. But the meaning of P^^^ i^, if our knowledge be
severed from love, and not referred to the good of men* and glory of God; it
has rather a sounding glory, then a meriting virtue; though it seem to be
never so much, it is a very nothing.

The Rhem. in loc.
Papists out of these words; If I have all faith, so that I can remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing; gather two conclusions against
us: the first is, that true faith may be without love: the second, that faith
alone without good works is nothing worth in the business of our
justification.

To the first, answer is made, that the speech of Paul is not a categoricall
proposition, but an hypotheticall supposition; Luther. or ^^il. maio^. in l^c.
if it were possible that all faith should be without good works, it were
nothing.

Secondly, Paul here Gen^alius apud Occumenium in loc.
speaks not of a justifying says, of that faith of believers which is common
and general, but of the special gift of faith to work miracles, of which our
Savior in the Luke 17.6.
Gospel; If ye had faith, a^ much as a grain of mustard se^de, and should
say unto this mulbery tree, Pluck thy self up by the roots, and plant the
self in the sea, it should even obey you. This he said unto the believing
Apostles; and therefore cannot be construed of a saving faith, but of a
miraculous faith: and so S. Ambrose notes upon this text, to do wonders, and
to cast out devils by faith is nothing worth, except a man be an earnest
follower of good conversation.

Our Divines acknowledge that every kind of faith is not joined with love: for
there is James 2.10.
a dead ^aith, and there is a Galat. 2.10.
lively, whereby Christ lives in us, and we in Christ. There is a faith of
James 2 19.
diu^ls, and a faith of 1. Tit. 1.
Gods elect. There is a faith, whereby the believer shall never John 3.15.
perish; and there is a faith, whereby some Luke 8.13.
believe for a time, and in the day of temptation fall away. There is a faith,
which the world 1. Tim. 2.18.
destroys, and a faith which is our 1. John 5.4.
victory, by which a Christian ouercomes the world. There is a faith, whereby
we believe there is James 2.19.
a God; and there is a faith, whereby we believe John 14.1.
in God: according to these differences of faith in Scripture, there is a faith
without James 2.14.
works, and there is a faith which works by Galat. 5.6.
love.

We say then of the faith of Gods elect, whereby we believe in God, to which
the promise of justification and eternal salvation is made, that is a faith
which cannot be separated from charity, but wheresoever it is there is love
joined with it, Philip. 1.11.
bringing forth the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto
the glory and praise of God. Inseparabilis est bona vita a sid^. qua per d^^e
iionem operatur* imo vero ea i^s^ est bona v^^^, says De fide and operib. cap.
23.
A^gustine; according to that of Lib. 4. cap. 14.
Irenaeus, to believe is to do as God will: and therefore Beza translates here,
(...), not omnem fidem. but to^^m ^idem; implying not all kind of faith, but
all faith of this kind to work miracles; as if Paul should argue thus: If a
man could work never so many miracles, and fail in his morals, he should be
nequ^m, and nequam is nequi^quam, as our Apostle speaks, a nothing.

The second conclusion gathered out of these words against us is, that faith
alone without charity, nothing avails to justification. Our answer is, that
albeit faith is not solitaria, yet in our justification it is s^la; Perkins
reformed Cat. tit. I^ sti^i^at.
even as the eye in regard of being is never alone from the head, yet in
respect of seeing it is alone, for it is the eye only that does see. So says
subsists not without other graces of God, as hope, love, etc. yet in regard of
the act of justification it is alone without them all. For the further opening
of this hard point, you must understand, that separating of things one from
another, is either See D. Abbot against Bishop. page 482.
real in the subject, or mental in the understanding: real separation of faith
and charity we wholly deny. For D (...) lib. 4. cap. 1. Ac (...) con^^ss^o,
etc.
Bellarmine confesses expressly that Luth^r, Melan^thon, Chemnitius, Calvin,
and other learned Protestants have taught, that good works in some sort be
necessary to salvation, and that there is no true ^aith unless it bring forth
good works, and be conjoined with charity.

Separation mental in understanding and consideration is either negative or
privative. Negative, when in the understanding there is an affirming of one,
and denying of another. Privative, when of things that cannot be separated
indeed, yet a man understands the one, and omitteth to understand the other. As
for example, though light and heat cannot be sepa^ated in the fire, yet a man
may consider the light, and not the heat: so then in our justification, we
do not negatiuely separate other graces from faith, as if faith existed alone
without hope and love, but priuatiuely making them effects and consequents, not
concur^ing causes of our justification. Our assertion is, faith considered
without hope and charity, that is, hope and charity not considered with it,
does justify.

Christ Jesus is our husband, and we are his spouse: now the Luther. in 2.
Galat. 16.
Bridegroom must be ^lone with the Bride in his secret chamber, all the
servants and the family being put apart; afterward when the door is opened,
and he comes forth into the waiting room, then let all the servants and
handmaids attend, then let hope do her office, let love do the duties of
love; then, as S. 2. Pet. 1.5.
Peter exhorts, join virtue with faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with
knowledge temperance. etc. The Bellarmin. de Iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 4. and
Rhem. in Galat. 5.6.
Papists object that love is the life of faith. All faiths actiuitie proceeds
only from charity, and without which our ^aith is dead. So the Scripture
plainly, that in Christ neither is circumcision any thing, neither
uncircumcision: but faith which works by love. Cardinal Vbisup.. Distinctio
ve^o.
Bellarmine reads (...), passiuely, wrought by love: disagreeing herein from
all the Fathers, and that which becomes him worse, from the vulgar Latin, to
which all Papists are tied by the Council of Trent, as also from the Rhemish
translation in Enlish, which has as our Testament, wor^eth, actiuely: for they
foresaw this absurdity, that if they should have translated faith wrought by
love, then it would have followed, that love must needs be before faith,
whereas all of them acknowledge faith to be before love; according to that of
D^ praedestinati^ne sa^ctorum, cap. 7.
Augustine; Faith is given first, by which we obtain the rest: and sol. 109.
Altissiodorensis in his golden Sum says, that faith, hope and charity are
a created trinity, resembling the three divine persons vncreat. For the Son
is begotten of the Father, and the holy Ghost proceeds from both: so steadfast
hope is bred of faith, and love does issue from them both.

And Catechis. cap. 1. and ^raesat. tom. 1 co^t^^u^^s. and de Rem. ^ont. lib.
1. ca^. 10. d^inde ^ides.
Bellarmine cites often in his works out of Augustine: Domus Deicredendo
fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur: The foundation of Gods house
in our souls is faith, the walls hope, the roof charity. The Prophet in a
vision saw the transgressor against the transgressor, and the destroyer against
the des^royer. So the schoolmen oppose the schoolmen, and their Champion
Bellarmine fights against Bellarmine. For if faith be the foundation of all
other virtues, as himself writes, lib. 1. de Romans pont. cap. 10. then it is
not as he disputes in lib. 1. de Iustificat. cap. 4. wrought by charity: but
contrariwise charity does arise from faith.

It is then an idle dream to suppose that charity is enclosed in faith, as a
diamond is in a ring; for Luther. in Galat. 2.5.
Christ is the precious pearl, which gives life and luster to the ring. The
just live not by love, but by faith in him. It is an improper speech (as D.
Fulk in Galat. 5.6.
our Divines observe) to say that faith works by love, as the body by the
soul, the matter by the form; for the soul rather works by the body, then
the body by the soul. The matter is passive, the form active.

Secondly, we Lut^er. in Galat. 5.6. and Perkins ref^rm. Cathol. tit. Iustific.
say, that Paul in that text, faith which works by love, does not intend
justification, but ye whole course of a Christian aft^r his justification: he
shuts out of Gods kingdom nullifidians and meritmongers on the left hand,
nudifidians and carnal Gospellers on the right. In Christ neither circumcision
avails any thing, neither uncircumcision, that is to say, no merit, nor
worshipping. No religious order in the world, but faith alone without any trust
in works, avails before God. On the right hand he does exclude slothful and
idle persons, affirming that if faith only do justify, then let us work
nothing, but barely believe. Not so y^ careless generation, enemies of grace:
for faith is operative working by love. Paul therefore sets forth in that
excellent sentence the whole perfection of a Christian in this life, namely,
that inwardly it consists in faith toward God, and outwardly in good works and
love toward our neighbors: so that a man is a perfect Christian inwardly
through faith before God, who has Psalm. 16.2.
no need of our works; and outwardly before men, (whom our faith profits
nothing) by love.

Faith is the Christians hand. Now an hand has a property to reach out it
self and to receive a gift, but it can not cut a piece of wood without an
hatchet or saw, or some such like instrument, yet by help of them it can either
cut or divide. Such is the nature of faith, it does receive Christ into the
heart; but as for the duties of the first and second table, faith cannot of it
self bring them forth, no more then the hand can cut of it self: yet join
love to faith, and then (as our Apostle) ^^ith works through love, performing
all duties so well to man, as God.

The property of true faith is, to receive in to it self. The nature of true
love is to lay out it self unto other: faith then alone justifies,
apprehending and applying Christ's merits unto it self; but it cannot manifest
it self to other, except it be joined with love: Iam^s 2.16.
Show me thy ^^ith out of thy works. And thus, as you see, that inward work
of justification is ascribed in holy Scripture to faith only; but outward
works of sanct^fication, holin^sse and righteousness, to faith and love
jointly.

I ref^^re the distressed soul to the comfortable Commentaries of M^rtin
L^^^er upon the Galathians; and the curious Divine to Do^tor Abbot his Apology
for the reformed C^tholike. Ti^. I^^ti^ication. For I will ingenuously
confess, that my conscie^^e was never quieted more then in reading the one;
and my curiosity never satisfied more then in examining the other.

Though I besto^ all my goods to ^eed the poore^ M^rcifull works are Au^us^in.
de ^i^it. (...) 10.^.^.
pro sacri^ici^s, im^ prae sacri^ici^s, accepted of God as sacrifice, Heb.
13.16. yea more then sacrifice: Hosea 6.6. I will have mercy, not sacrifice.
To be merciful is the Synesius epist. 35.
sole work common to man with God.

It is then an higher step of perfection, to distribute goods unto the poor,
then to sp^ake with the tongues of men and Angels, or to be furnished with all
variety of knowledge: yet Paul says, If I bestow my goods, all my goods, not
upon the rich, but upon the poor, to feed, not to feast them, and had not
love, it profits me nothing. Where note five degrees of this amplification: the
first is to give; for most men, as it is in the proverb, are better at the
rake then at the pitchforke, readier to pull in, then to give out. The second
is to give, not another man's, but our own goods. If I bestow my goods.
According to that of Solomon, Ecclesiastes 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the
waters: Pa^is, si tuus, qui tuus. The third is, all our goods, not some small
portion, or great sum, but all; according to that of Matthew. 19.21.
Christ; If thou will be perfect, sell all that thou have, and give it to the
poor. The fourth is, to give not to the rich, but to the poor: Frange panem
esurienti, says the Esaias 58.7.
Prophet, Deal thy bread to the hungry. The last is to give to the poor, not
superfluously to feast, but necessarily to feed them. If a man perform this
and more then this out of vaineglorious ostentation, or idle prodigality, not
out of love to Christ and compassion of his members, it were but so much as
nothing.

Though I gave my body to be burned] Love is seen more in deeds then in
words, and in suffering more then in doing; and of all suffering death is most
terrible; and of all kinds of death, burning is most fearful. Here then are
many degrees in this one speech (as Aquin. in loc.
Interpreters observe): first, si tradidero, not, if I be forced, but if of
mine own accord, I give my body to be burned, as it is said of Christ, Eph^s.
5.2.
he gave himself for us a sacrifice. Secondly, si tradidero corpus, if I
suffer loss not of goods only, (though that be very commendable, Heb. 10.34.
Ye suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods] But affliction in body, which
is far dearer then our wealth, as the father of lies in this truly; Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has, will he give for his life.
Thirdly, S^tra^^dero corpus meum; if I give not only the body of my child,
(though a woman is highly magnified for such an act in the 2. of Maccabees, 7.)
but my hod; not only flesh of my flesh, but flesh which is my flesh; not
only to suffer a natural death, but a violent, and of all violent, the most
terrible, to be roasted, yea consumed in the fire.

If any suffer all this, and want charity to particular persons, esp^cially
toward the common body of the Church, it is no better, or rather indeed wor^e
then nothing. I beseech you therefore by the mercifulness of G^d, whatsoever
you speak, whatsoever you study, whatsoever you do, whatsoever you suffer, 1.
Cor. 16.14.
let all be done in love.

Vniuersa inutiliter habet, qui vnum illud, quo vniuersis vtatur non h^bet:
Unprofitably (quoth De verbis Do^. ser. 18. tom. 10. s^l. 57.
Augustine) has he all, who wants that one whereby he should use all. As the
Tract. 9. in loan.
same father in another place: Qua^ta est charitas? quae si desit, frustra
habentur caetera, si adsit, recte habentur omnia: How great is love; for if it
be wanting, all other graces lose their grace; but if present, all are
profitable. So the text here; Love suffers long, it is bountiful, etc.

In this encomiasticall passage, S. Paul sets down loves operation in Gorran.
in loc.
3. points: Embracing that which is good: Internal: it is patient. External:
it is courteous.
Eschewing that which is evil, against our Aquin. in loc.
neighbor, in thought: it enuieth not. deed: love does not frowardly.
selves, either out of passion: it swells not, deals not dishonestly,
se^keth not her own: it is not provoked to anger. election: it thinks no
evil; it r^ioyceth not in iniquity.

Perseuering in both: suffering, believing, hoping, enduring all things.

Love suffers long] Saint Paul does begin with patience, Melanct. ^ in loc.
because desire to revenge is a vice most opposite to charity. Malicious
impatient men are like the toad, no sooner moved, but they swell: or like
gunpowder; no sooner touched with an hot word, but instantly they are in your
face. Which accasioned Laert. in vita Bion.
Bion the Philosopher to say; Magnum est malum far non posse malum. For if
^hine enemy be little, Seneca.
parce illi the best course is to spare him; if great, parce tibi, the best
counsel is to spare thy self. Si turbet non perturbet; as Epist. 25.
B^^nara in the like case, Though he move thee, let him not remove th^e from
that which is good, from that which is thy good. The Prou. 19.11.
discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and his glory is to pass by an
offense. Better it is to suffer much and long, then by courses of impatience,
to run thy self out of all honest breath. It is reported of the
Philosophers, Loctantius de fa^a sapient. cap. 4.
that they had a sword, and wanted a buckler: but a buckler becomes a Christian
better then a sword. We must not beat every dog that barks at us in the way,
but run with patience the race that is set before us: Heb. 12.1.

Love is courteous: or as other read^, bountifull] Amor si est, operatur; si
non operatur, non est. As love is patient in wrong, so active in kindness,
doing good unto all, always performing liberal and courteous offices, even to
the greatest enemy. So S. Steven abounding with love, Greg Nyssen. orat. ^e
Stephan.
respected his accusers as brethren, and saluted them as fathers: Acts 7.2. So
Genesis 45.
Joseph used his brethren nobly, who sold him for a slave basely.

Love enuieth not] There are P^trarcha.
two parents of envy, highness. nighn^sse.

For it is nothing else but a repining grief for our neighbors happiness. An
envious man, says Lib. 5. de gub^^^at. De^.
Saluianus, esteems another good, his hurt; parum est si ipse sit f^elix nisi
alter fuerit inf^elix. And therefore when La^rtius in vita Bion.
Bion saw such an one very sorrowful, asked him; I pray thee whether has some
evil happened to thee, or good to thy neighbor? Hieron. ad Eus^ochium.
As high hills are most exposed to thunder, f^riunt summos fulmine montes: and
Plut. com. de odi^ and inuidia.
as the fairest flowers are soonest nipt by the venomous Cantharides; even so
the most eminent gifts in neighbors, are the greatest griefs of envious
wretches.

In neighbors, I say; for as the basiliske does kill none, but such as he does
see; so the malecontent envious eye malignes none that are far off. And this I
take to be the true reason why the schismatic Brownist, and other of the
like malicious humor, hate the conformable Protestant more then either Turk or
Pope: because that which eye sees not, heart grieueth not. But it has been
their hell to behold their neighbor Bishops, and fellow Ministers in b^tter
f^shion, and among the best of greater account for judicious preaching and
writing then themselves.

It is wittily noted by Diaeta salutis. cap. 4.
Bonauentura, that an envious man is like Came, who said of himself, Genesis 4.14.
Whosoever s^^deth me, s^all slay me. For either he sees in a man that which is
good, and then he repineth; or else that which is evil, and so reioiceth: and
both these slay the soul.

Things amiss in our Church, are the schismatikes may game; but her glory,
their grief; her weal, their woe. Let them read this Chapter often, and
mark this word especially. Love enuieth not; Love does not frowardly] Not
ouerthwartly, not insidiously, Melan. in loc.
quod est art alios pellere aut toll^re, by cunning to thrust men out of their
preferments and others love: so Baronius, tom. 4. ^ol. 355.
Maximus expelled Gregor^ Nazianzene, Ae^chines wronged De^osthenes, and M^rtin
Makebate the Whitgif^s of our Church.

Love swells not] As love does not abuse good things in other, Goran. in loc.
so it makes men use well their own graces. It swells not in any preferment
it has; it is not ambitious for any which it has not; it is not querulous for
any which it once had, and is now lost; it seeks not her own, Aquin. in loc.
that is, with others hinderance, so Esaias 5.8.
to join house to house, and field to field, till there be no place for other
in the land. It does not desire that Job 1.14.
oxen should labor, and asses feed; that one should take the pains, and
another reap the profit; but is content that preferment be conferred upon men
of worth, according to merit, with Melan. in loc.
equal proportion.

Or it seeks not her own principally, bu^ so far forth as shall be for the
Churches good, and Gods glory. So faith our Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. I seek not
mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved. And Philip.
2.21. he rebukes all such as seek their own, and not that which is Jesus
Christ's. Or it seeks no^ (...) Aquin. in loc.
that is, to recover her own by law, when it sha^^ be to the scandal of the
Gospel, as he shows in the ^ixt Chapter of this Epistle.

It is not provoked to anger] That is, rash and in^onsid^rate anger; otherwise
a man may be angry and sin not, as our Apostle Ephis. 4.26.
elsewhere; Hieron. epist. ad Antonium. tom. 1. ^ol. 219.
^rasci hominis, iniu^i^^ non facere Christiani: It is the part of a man to be
ang^y, but the duty of a Christian to do no wrong in anger. A loving man will
chide his friend sweetly; and a good man punish sin according to his place
s^uer^ly: Saluian. epist. 1.
Qu^^ te appellem am^r? nescio: bonum in malum? ^^or quippen^s facit nostros
amare, amor interdum cogit offen^^re: si^ v^gilet tolerantia, says Ser. 22. de
verbis Apost.
Augustine, vt non do^mi^t disciplin^. Saint Paul's meaning then is, that we
must not be transported with heat, so that we forget our friends, and lose our
selves; in such sort, that the ending of our anger prove the beginning of our
sorrow.

It thinks no euill] It is so far from doing wrong, that it does not so much as
think evil. M^lan. in loc.
A virtue compounded of truth and ingenuity. Truth belieues only that which is
certain: ingenuity construeth in the better part that which is doubtful:
whereas suspiciousnesse is misled often with false, always with uncertain
report. Ielous yoke-fellowes, and suspicious friends, are both uncharitable.
For such, as the Psalm. 7.15.
Prophet aptly, travel with mischief, and bring forth ungodliness; unquiet
as the Esaias 57.20.
raging sea; Psalm. 140.2.
stirring up strife all the day long.

It reioiceth not in iniquity] Not ^n her own fault, not in another fall. Not
in her own: for albeit the malicious incorrigible sinner reioiceth in doing
evil, and delights in frowardness, Prou. 2.14. yet the man of God does no
sin: 1. John 3.9. For it is rather done on him, then of him: according to
that of Romans 7.19.
Paul; I do not the good thing which I would; but the evil thing which I
would not, that do I. Not in another fall: for it does grieve when they
grieve: yea sometime because they do not grieve for their sins, as Tom. 1.
fol. 231
Hiero^e to Sabinian: Hoc plango, quod te non plangis. And Epist. 145.
A^gustin^ calls this a blessed unhappiness, when a man is a^fected, not
infected, with his neighbors iniquity: ^^^ta miseria vitijs alienis
tribulari, non implicari; d^lor^ (...) trabi, no^ amore attrahi.

I^ su^fereth all things; it believes all things] English gloss in loc.
It suffers not it self to be abused, but it judges other wi^h al^ love
and humanity. To believe all, were silliness; to b^^^^ue n^^e, ^ullenn^sse:
discreet love therefore does b^l^eue much, and hope the best of all. Enduring
all things: that is, all that it may without offense to Gods holy word: Luther.
in Galat. 2.6.
Nor p^titur ludum f^ma, fides, oculus: A (...) g^od n^me, faith, and eye will
not be dallied withal A Ch^^st^an as concerning his faith, cannot be too
ster^^^ ^oo^lour. I will ^ake upon me (says Luther) this ti^le: (...): I give
place to none.

lo^^ ^o^h not fall a^ay] Knowledge is not abolished in the ^orld to come, but
perfited, as Paul expounds himsel^e: We know in p^rt, we prophecy in part: but
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done
awa^. Melanct^on. in loc.
Ex abstractiua sit intuitiua notitia. Martyr. apud Marlorat. in loc.
As the light of a candle does vanish away when the bright Sun does shine.
The manner of teaching in the world to come shall c^a^e: for we shall need no
schools or tutors in heaven: all there shall see God face to face, but
knowledge it self shall not vanish, John 17.3.
for this is eternal li^e to know God.

S* Paul proves our knowledge and prophesying vnperf^ct by two familiar
ex^mpl^s: one taken from his own person, another from a looking glass: When I
was a child, I spa^e as a child, ^ understood as a child, I imagined as a
child. Speaking may be referred unto the gift of tongues, understanding to the
gift of prophecy, thinking to knowledge.

Now we see in a gl^ss^ dar^l^* but then shall we see face to face.] When a
man sees a map of Jerusalem, he can presently conceive what manner of city it
is imperfectly: but when he comes thither, and beholds all the streets, is
better satisfied. The Scripture is a glass, faith is an eye, by which all Gods
elect in part know the glorious building of Jerusalem above; they believe that
this 1. Cor. 15.54.
corruption shall put on incorruption, that this mortal shall put on
immortality; that the just shall shine Dan. 12.3.
like stars for ever: in heart conuersing with the Saints, and assured through
hope, that themselves are Philip. 3.20.
burgesses of that celestial Incorporation.

I am sure, says Job 19.25.
Job, that my redeemer is alive, who died for our sins, and rose again for
our justification, and now sits at the right hand of God as our aduo^ate.
But hereafter, when we shall sup with him in his kingdom, and sit with him in
his Apocal. 3.21.
throne, when al mists of ignorance and diffidence shall vanish away, when we
shall see God face to face, then we will say to him as the noble Queen of 1.
King. 10.7.
Sheba to Solomon; Lo, the one half of thy kingdom was not told us.

Now abides faith, hope and loue] The rest of the graces are reduced to these,
says Melancthon, and the chief of these is love, says Paul. There is so
great affinity between faith and hope, that (as Com. in Gal. 5.5
Luther observes) it is hard to find any difference, they cannot be well
separated, one having respect to the other, as the two Cherubins on the mercy
seat: Exodus 25.20.

Yet they differ much especially in their Object. Subject. Order. Office.

In their object: Faith has for her object the truth; Hope for her object the
goodness of God. Faith (as Enchirid. c. 8.
Augustine notes) is of good things and bad: but hope looks on good things
only. The Christian believes there is an hell as well as heaven; but he
fears the one, and hopes only for the other; as the Lucanus a^ud Augustine. vbi
supra.
Poet distinguishes aptly: -- liceat sperare timenti. Faith is of things Past:
for we believe that Christ is dead, buried, risen again, etc. Present: for
we believe that Christ now sits at the right hand of God. Future: for we
believe Christ shall come again to judge the quick and the dead.

But hope does expect and respect only things to come.

In their subject: Faith is in the Luther. vbi sup. and P^rkins exposit. Creed.
art. 1.
understanding, hope rests in the will: if they differ in place, this I take
to be the most probable separation.

In order: for H^b. 11.1.
faith is the ground of things hoped for. A steadfast hope proceeds out of a
lively faith: if the spark of faith should not give light to the will, it
could not be persuaded to lay hold upon hope. Faith always goes before, then
hope follows after.

In their office: for faith is our Luther. loc. com. tit. de tribus
charitatibus.
logic to conceive what we must believe; hope our rhetoric to persuade us in
tribulation unto patience. So S. Paul says: We are saved by hope, Romans 8.24.
Melanct. in Romans 8.
Sic liberati sumus, vt adhuc speranda sit haereditas, postea possidenda; nunc
habemus ius ad rem, nondum in re. Faith is a Doctor and a Judge, disputing
against error and heresy, judging spirits and doctrines; hope is a Captain
fighting against impatience, tribulation, heaviness of spirit, weakness,
desperation. In a word, the difference between faith and hope in Divinity, is
the same that is between fortitude and prudence in policy. Fortitude not
guided by prudence is rashness, and prudence not joined with fortitude is vain:
So faith without hope is nothing, and hope without faith a mere presumption
and tempting of God. And therefore we must join together all these graces, as
Paul here, faith, hope, charity: We wait for the hope of righteousness
through faith, and faith works through love.

First faith teaches us the truth, and then hope teaches us what to suffer;
and love what to do for the truth. Faith engenders hope; faith and hope love,
but the chief is lone, etc.

The Rhem. in loc. and D. Bishop. against the re^or^ed Cath. ^it. Iust^ficat.
Papists hence reason against us; If charity be greater then faith, it is
improbable that men are justified only by faith. Calum. apud Marlorat. i^ loc.
and D. Ab^^t against ^^shop, pa^. 478.
Our Divines answer, that the argument is not good: A Prince does excel a
pesant: Ergo, till the ground better. A man is better then a beast: Ergo, run
faster then a horse, carry more then an elephant, etc.

Secondly, Luther and Melanct. in loc.
that love is not greater in every respect absolutely, but only greater in
latitude of use and continu^nce: faith and hope are restrained within the
bounds of our private persons, as the just man does live by his own faith, and
the good man hopes only for himself: but love like Psalm. 80 10.11
David's vine does cou^r the mountains with her boughs, and stretches her
branches unto the sea, extending it self to God, Angels, men; in men, to our
selves and other; in other, Vide B^zam, aunot, mayor. in Ephesians. 3.18.
upward, to supe^iours, downward to inferiors; on the right hand to friends,
on the left to foes.

Love the^ in respect of other is of greater use: but if we consider a man in
himself priu^tly, faith is more needful then love, as wherein originally
stands our communion and fellowship with God, by which Christ Ephesians. 3.17.
dwells in our hearts, into which as an hand, Almighty God powers all the
riches of his grace for our salvation, and by which only, whatsoever else is in
us is accepted of God, as Epist. 1.
Salu^anus excellently: Omnibus semper ornatibus ornamento est, quiae sine hac
nihil tam ornatum quod ornare possit. See Epist. Dom. 17. post Trinit.

Again, charity is greater in latitude of continuance: faith apprehends the
Lords gracious promise concerning eternal salvation, and hope does expect it
with patience. When God then shall have fulfilled his word, and filled us with
unspeakable joy, when in that other life we shall see God face to face, faith
is at an end, hope is at an end, their use cease, but love shall continue
between God and us an everlasting bond. So the fathers expound it; only love
(says In 1. Cor. hom. 34.
Chrysostom) is eternal; in this respect the greatest is charity, because
they pass away, but charity continues always. So De doctrine. Christ. lib. 1.
cap. 39. tom. 3. fol. 14.
Saint Augustine; Love is the greatest of the three; because the other two
departing, it shall continue more increased, and better assured; and auctior
and certior permanebit. Primasius vti D. Fulk in loc.
In this p^esent life there are three; but in the life to come, love remains
only: therefore that is greater which is ever needful, then that which once
shall have an end. And so In loc.
Gorran and Postil. maiores cum figuris. epist. Dom. quinq^a.
other popish writers heretofore construed this text. I conclude, to save a
man, faith is greater; in a man saved, charity is the greater: until faith
have 1. Pet. 1.9.
finished our salvation, love must yield to faith; but when faith has fully
saved us, it shall have an end, and so must yield to love, which is without end.

The Gospel. LVKE 18.31. Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said unto them;
Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all shall be fulfilled, etc.
IN this Gospel, our Savior Christ, John 1.9.
the true light of the world, does illuminate two sorts of blind: the
disciples, who were spiritually blind; and a poor beggar, who was corporally
blind. The disciples Verse. 34.
understood not as yet the mysteries of our redemption, wrought by Christ's
humiliation and exaltation; by Thomas part. 3. qu^st. 53. art. 1.
the one taking from us all evil; and by the other, giving all that is good.
Romans 4.25.
He died for our sins, and rose again for our justification.

Christ therefore does open their eyes, and instruct them in these two points
exactly.

First, generally: verse. 31. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things, etc.

Secondly, more particularly, declaring the manner of his death and
resurrection, in the 32.33. verses.

Concerning his passion, five things are delivered. traditio, that he shall be
betrayed. illusio, that he shall be mocked. conspuitio, that he shall be
spitted on. fl^gellatio, that he shall be scourged. occisio, that he shall be
put to death.

For truth it self was betrayed, wisdom it self mocked, glory it self
spitted on, innocence it self scourged, and life it self killed.

Concerning his resurrection, he sets down two points especially: 1. that he
shall rise. 2. that he shall rise the third day.

Jesus took unto him the twelue] Revealing to them the secrets of his
kingdom, foretelling his passion Theophylact. in loc.
for two causes especially: 1. that they might bear it more patiently,
praemoniti, praemuniti. 2. to signify that he suffered willingly: Ioh. 10.18.
See Gosp. dom. 10. post. Trin.



Behold] This word of attention, is Pontan. in loc.
like the sounding of a trumpet before some weighty proclamation, or like the
ringing of a great bell before the sermon of a famous Preacher. And therefore
let us hear this doctrine with an especial care, which Christ has commended
unto us here by such a remarkable note.

We go vp] Christ's passion is called an John 3.14. and 12.32.
exaltation or ascending. For albeit he could not ascend higher, as God, yet he
was exalted by his humiliation, as man, and had a name given him above every
name: Phil. 2.8.9. Lucifer and Adam by climbing up, were cast down: but Christ
by casting himself down, went up.

Or, We go up: Coster. in loc.
insinuating that his journey was not easy. Facilis descensus Auerni: Men go
sooner down hill, then up hill; yet he that has a good horse, can ride faster
up hill then down hill. So the 2. Kin^. 2.12.
charets and horsemen of Israel, assisted by Gods especial grace, lifting them
up above the base valleys of the world, run faster, and are more delighted in
heavens up hill, then the wicked i^ hels down hill.

To Ierusalem] Interpreters have rendered Cost^r. in loc.
sundry reasons, why Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, especially Pontan. and
Di^z in loc.
two. First, because there was not enough malice in any other City to kill the
Lord of life; none but the holy could envy the most holy. The profane
Gentiles and ignorant Jews elsewhere, did not malign Christ in his words and
wonders; Jerusalem only the Mat. 23.37.
Prophet-killer could not endure John 1.21.
the Prophet. His holiness and wisdom was the fittest object for the Scribes
and Pharisees envy. Mat. 23.35.
That upon them might come all the righteous blood shed upon earth, even from
Abel the shadow, to Christ the substance, H^b. 12.24.
whose blood speaks better things unto us, and cries ^owder against them, then
that of Abel. Here note by the ^ay, that as the Son of God was crucified in
the City of God; so by good correspondence, the members of Christ are
persecuted most by the vicar of Christ.

Secondly, Christ suffered in that eminent place, that his passion and patience
might be renowned in the whole world. There was not another stage fit for his
tragedy, which is our comedy.

In a Acos^a, con. 1. in loc.
mystical sense, Christ and his Apostles ascend to Jerusalem, even to
Jerusalem Galat. 4.26.
above, the Apoc. 21.2.
new Jerusalem prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband: but the god of this
world, with his company, descend to Jericho, to the lowest hell. He that
follows not Christ in his course, goes from Jerusalem to Jericho; from
heavenly paths, unto the by-waies of destruction; and so he falls among
thieves, that is, as the August. Ambros. Chrysostom. apud Thom. in Luc. 10.
fathers expound it, among many devils and evils, who rob him, and wound him;
and in fine, will leave him dead, except Christ the true Samaritan relieve him,
and set him in his right way again.

And all shall be fulfilled that are written by the Prophets of the Son of
man] Pontan. in loc.
As the Painter at the first draws his picture with a coal roughly, then with
an accurate pensill, and or^ent colors exactly: so the holy Ghost in the
Prophets and old Testament, shadowed Christ's passion obscurely; but in the new,
paints it as it were to life perspicuously. The two Testaments are Luke 10.35.
two pence, Theophylact. in Luc. 10.
bearing the same Kings image, though not of the same stamp: for all things
being now fulfilled, written by the Prophets of the Son of man, our Saviors
picture engraven in the Gospel, is more full and clear then that imprinted in
the law. Now God has showed us the light of his countenance: Psalm. 67.1. Let
us therefore search the Scripture, for that is the way to Christ, and Christ is
the way to God.

For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles: and shall be mocked] He did
particularly foretell the manner of his suffering, Calvin. apud Marlorat. in
Mat. 10.19.
that his disciples might see, that as God he did foresee these things, and
that they might be strengthened at his Cross, when as they should understand
all things to be fulfilled as they were told by Christ, and foretold by the
Prophets.

That he should be betrayed, was foretold, Psalm. 41.9. mocked, was foretold,
Ps. 69. v. 7.12.22. spitted on, was foretold, Esaias 50.6. scourged, was
foretold, Esaias 53.5. put to death. was foretold, Psalm. 22.17.

Christ was delivered unto the Gentiles, as we read in the Gospel, especially
by three: Judas. the Jews. Pilat.



By Judas, out of covetousness, as the Mat. 26.15.
text expressly; What will ye give me, and I will deliver him to you? For a
little silver, and that not paid, but only promised, he sold his friend; yea
that which is worse, his Master; yea that which is worst of all, his Maker. See
the Gospel the Sunday before Easter.

By the Jews, out of malice. Matthew. 27.18. Pilat knew well that for envy they
delivered him.

By Pilat, through fear: for the Jews said unto him: John 19.12.
If thou set him free, thou art not Caesar's friend: for whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caesar. And therefore Pilat chose rather to
crucify the Lord eternal, then to displease Caesar, a Lord temporal.

In like sort, all covetous, all malicious, all cowardly professors betray
Christ daily. The covetous, who make their coin their Creed, and their penny
their Pater noster, and their bills their Bible, betray Christ with Judas. It is
but what will you give them, and they will deliver up the Gospel unto you.

Envious men, who persecute the Saints, and disgrace their graces, betray
Christ in his members with the Jews, even for mere malice, speaking to their
Christian brother as Antoninus Caracalla to his natural brother; To Gela.
Sit diuus, modo non vinus.

Cowardly prof^ssors use to betray Christ with Pilat. Matthew. 13.21.
For as soon as tribulation or persecution comes for the word, they fear
more the threats of Caesar an earthly Prince, who can kill only the body, then
the wrath of God, who being King of all Kings, is Matthew. 10.28.
able to destroy both body and soul in hell.

The second point touching Christ's passion, is illusio. Now Christ was mocked
in four places especially.

1. In Caiphas house, where the keepers Luke 22.64.
blindfolded him, and smote him on the face, and asked him, saying; Prophecy;
who is it that smot^ thee?

In Herod's company, Luke 23.11.
when as the soldiers arraied him in white.

In the Common hall, where they Matthew. 27.28
stripped him, and put upon him a scarlet robe.

In Golgotha, when he was crucified. First, as Saint Matthew in the 27. Chap.
by the passengers, wagging their heads, and saying; Thou that destroiest the
Temple, and buildest it in three days; save thy self, etc. Then by the
Scribes and Pharisees; He saved other, but he cannot save himself. Last of
all, some perverted his words, affirming that he called for Elias, when as he
prayed; Eli, Eli, etc.

The popish Clergy mock Christ with Caiphas, in that they blindfold the
people, by denying them the Scriptures, and then mock them for their
ignorance. Judges 16.25.
Samson having his ei^s out, was a laughing stock to the Philistines: and so
the blind laymen are the Priests pastime. Though a Jesuit or a Seminary buffet
them every day, yet can they not prophecy who smote them. Either Samson must
pull down the Colleges of these Philistines, or else he shall never see but
through their spectacles. They mock Christ with Herod, who retain foul
consciences in a white rochet, who conform themselves in habit, but reform
not themselves in heart.

The Babylonian whore mocks Christ with the soldiers, in putting on Apocal.
17.4.
skarlet, betokening zeal and charity, when her actions are cruel and bloody.

They mock Christ with the Jews in Golgotha, who distort the words of
Scripture for their advantage, making Elias of Eloi. Like the popish dolt, who
reading the subscription of Paul's 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians, in the
vulgar Latin; Missa fuit ex Athenis, instantly cried out, that he had found a
plain text for the Mass. Or like that foppish Anabaptist, who gathered out of
Christ's words in English; Mat. 28.19.
Go and teach all nations, and baptize, etc. that it is not lawful for a
Clergy man to ride on a fair palfrey; much less, as the Bishops, in a stately
coach. Or as that Fen-man, alias Fin-man, standing upon a marsh custom^,
justified his not payment of Tithes out of Paul; Romans 13.7.
Custom to whom custom: but his Pastor replied aptly; 1. Cor. 11.16.
the Churches of God have no such custom.

So the blasphemous mouth spits on Gods face; the tyrants openly crossing the
Gospels proceeding, scourge Christ: and all such as slide from the profession
of the faith, are said in H^b. 6.6.
scripture, to crucify again the Son of God. And therefore Feru^, s^r. 1.
and ^. in loc. Coster, Ditz. etc.
the Church has allotted this Gospel for this week most fitly. For at this
Carniual and gut tide, many deliver Christ unto ye Gentiles, in their
chambering and wantonness, drunkenness and gluttony, making such as are no
Christians to Romans 2.24.
blaspheme Christianity, seeing such uncomely behavior and mad meriments
among prof^ssors of holy religion.

As a loving wife which has her husband slain, to move compassion in the
Judges, and to make the fact most odious and hateful, tells of his deadly
wounds, and describes his ghastly look^s, and shows some garment of his embrued
in blood: Pontan. in loc.
so the Church at this time does offer unto our considerations how Christ her
dear Love, was betrayed, and mocked, and spitted on, and scourged, and put to
death; hereby recalling us from our horrible sins, which as another Judas
betray Christ, as another Herod mock Christ, as another Pilate condemn Christ,
as another Longinus wound Christ, as another band of Jews recrucifie Christ.

And the third day he shall rise againe] Diez in loc.
Christ is large in ^he report of his ignominy, but short in this of his
glo^ie: for he delivered five points as concerning his humiliation, but he
remembers only two, yea for the matter but one touching his exaltation. And
the third day he shall rise again. Yet this one is the lock and key of all
Christian faith, on which all other articles of holy belief depend. See before
the Creed, and after the Gospel on Easter and S. Thomas day.

The Prophets usually mingle the sweet of Christ's exaltation with the sower of
his humiliation; as Genesis 49.9. Esaias 53.7, 8. Psalm. 4.9. and Christ here
foretold the one so well as the other to Zepper. in loc.
strengthen his followers in affliction: for as he first suffered, and after
entered into glory; so such as bear with him the cross, shall be sure to
wear with him the crown. Romans 6.5.
If we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be
to the similitude of his resurrection.

And this saying was hid from them Men hardly conceive ill of those whom they
love well; and therefore the Disciples expecting better things of Christ, could
not understand this prophecy, but the Jews (as Apud Tho^am in loc.
Beda notes) hating Christ, and seeking how they might put him to death, easily
believed him upon his word, yea one word, and that not so perspicuous as this,
but obscure; for when he said, John 12.32.
If I were lift up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me; the Jews
answered him: We have heard out of the law, that Christ bideth for ever: and
how say thou that the Son of man must be lift up?

Hence we may note Melancthon. postil. in loc.
that the dearest Saints of God have their infirmities and errors; and lest we
should doubt of it, Saint Luke repeates it again: They perceived not the
things which were spoken. Calvin. apud Mar. orat. in loc.
Not that we should follow their ignorance, but praise God for our knowledge,
when we conceive these deep mysteries of our salvation.

Again, we may learn from hence Marlorat. in Matthew. 20.19.
not to be discouraged, if we do not at the first discern Gods holy word: for
the blessed Apostles after Christ's resurrection understood all these things, as
S. Luke reports in his last chapter, verse. 45. God at his good time, will open
our eyes, as he did the blindmans in this Gospel, and open our ears, as he did
of the Prophet, Esaias 50. and open our hearts, as he did of Lydia, Act. 16.

In that other part of this Gospel, concerning the bodily blind, we may behold
a miserable patient, and a merciful Physician.

In the patient two things are regardable: to wit, his Outward wants, Blindness.
Beggerie, v. 35.
Inward virtues: Faith. Gratefulnes.


In his faith observe the Beginning, it came by hearing, verse. 36. Continuance,
though he was rebuked, he ceased not to cry, Jesus thou son of David have
mercy on me, verse. 37, 38, 39. End and fruit, he received his sight, verse. 43.

His thankfulness appears in two things especially: 1. In following Christ. 2.
In praising God.

And his example caused other to do the like: All the people when they saw
this gave praise to God.

The mercifulnes of Christ the Physician toward this distressed patient, is
seen in his Gesture: verse. 40. He stood still and commanded the blind man to
be brought unto him. Speech: verse. 41. What will thou that I do unto thee?
Works: verse. 42. Receive thy sight, thy faith has made thee whole, and
immediately he received his sight.

And it came to pass, that as he was come nigh to Iericho] Christ's actions are
our instructions: as Christ then, Theophylact. in loc.
so we must do good in all places, as occasion is offered, even in the streets
and high ways, so well as in the Temple. There is nothing in the sheep but
good; his fell is good, his flesh is good, his entrals good, his dung good: so
the lambs of Christ must be profitable to all, hurtful to none.

A certain blind man sat by the high way side] Luther. Culman. Zepper. i^ loc.
Protestant Divines as well as the Fathers and Friars have construed this
mystically; for every man is blind by nature, not discerning the things of God;
he sits by the way, but he cannot walk in the way, till Christ open his eyes
and direct his paths. And it is most certain that the state of the spiritually
blind is more miserable then that of the other blind; for to want the eyes of
Angels, is worse then to want the eyes of beasts, as Granaten. in loc.
Antonius told that good blind man Didymus.

As the bodily blind is led either by his servant, or wife, or dog; so the
spiritually blind misled by the world, the flesh and the devil: the bodily
blind will be sure to get a seeing guide, but the spiritually blind follows
his own Eccles. 18.30.
lusts and the blind guides; and so the Matthew. 15.14.
blind leading the blind, both fall into the ditch.

The bodily blind feels and acknowledges his want of sight, but the
spiritually blind thinks he sees as well as any. So Christ in the Gospel:
John 9.41.
If ye were blind, ye should not have sin: but now ye say, we see,
therefore your sin remains* etc. The bodily blind supplieth his want of
sight often by feeling, as Genesis 27.21.
I sack when he could not see Jacob, said, Let me feel thee my son: but the
spiritually blind though he feel many times in his conscience the flashing,
yet n^uer auoides the flames of hell fire. The bodily blind account^ them
happy who see; but the spiritually blind does despise the Seers, and all such
as walk in the right way: Wisdom. 5.3.
This is he whom we sometime had in derision, and in a parable of reproach.

To conclude, the want of corporal eyes, is to many Passeratius ora^. de
caecit.
diuinum bonum, albeit humanum malum; but the want of faiths eyes, is the
greatest evil which can befall man in this life: for reason is our souls left
eye, ^onauent. diaet salut. c. 26.
faith our right eye, without which Heb. 11.6.
it is impossible to see the way to God. Come to me, says Matthew. 11.28.
Christ; credendo venimus, says Ser. 12 de ver bis Apostol.
Augustine, yea Christ John 14.23.
comes to us, and Ep ^s 3.17.
dwells in our heart by faith.

Begging] The Jews had a Deuteronomy. 15.4.
law, that there should be no beggar in Isra^l. England has statutes also to
correct impudent poor, and to provide for impotent poor: but as it is
observed, our laws have a better prologue then epilogue; they be well penned,
but ill kept: and so this good order is neglected among us, as it was about
Jericho, to the great scandal of Christian religion, and dishonor of our
English nation. It is written of the Church him. against idleness.
Athenians, that they punished idle persons as heinous offenders. And the
Egyptians had a law, that every man should bring his name to the chief ruler
of the Province, and show what trade of life he did use. The Aul. G^l. lib. ^.
ca^ 1^.
Romans enacted severe statutes against such as negligently suffered their
ground untilled. Among the Description of the world. page 64
Chinois, every man is ^et about somewhat, according to his strength and
years: one labors with his hand, another with his foot, some with their
eyes, and some must be doing with their tongue; and that which is most
admirable, they keep in Cantane, four thousand blind men, unfit for other
service, to grind corn and rice or the people. If either the law were
believed as Gospel, or the Gospel kept as law, such 2. These. 3.10.
as would not labor, should not eat. Loiterers and sturdie rogues, should be
sent either to the Galleys, or prisons, or Bridewell, or to some like place
where they might work well: and as for such as cannot labor, it is fit, we
that are strong, should help to bear the burdens of the weak, being I^b 29.15.
^ies to the blind, and feet to the lame.

And when he he^rd the people pass by] Culman. in loc.
We must appr^hend every fit occasion for our good: and when once we have begun
well, we must not faint in our course, but continue, Arboreus ^^m. in loc.
though the world r^buke us, as the people did the blind man here. Let v^ still
cry for mercy, manifesting a lively says in our words and wa^es. In our words,
I^ns^n. ^oncora. cap 105.
acknowledging Christ to be man: O Jesus* thou Son of David and God, have mercy
on me. By our ways i^ forsaking our old wicked courses, and following Christ,
that other seeing our good example, may likewise give praise to God.

The Gospel and Epistle Luther. in loc. and Post^l. cum (...) and figuris
ep^st. d^^. qu^nqu^^^s.
well agree. For i^ the Epistle, S. Paul above all other virtues, extolleth
love. Now John 15.13.
greater love then this has no man. then t^ b^stow his life for his fri^nds.
And yet Christ, as S. Luk^ ^e^orts in the Gospel, was betrayed and mocked, and
spitte^^^, and ^^ourged* and ^ut to death even for us Romans 5.10.
h^s e^emie^. Agai^e* Saint Paul in the Epistle, next to love commends in a
Christian, faith and hope; both which (as the Gospel i^tim^tes) are emine^t in
blind Bartimae^s, vnfai^edl^ b^lieuing, that Christ could: and in his greatest
d^scouragement* hoping against hope, that Christ would have ^^rcie on him; in
so much, that Truth it self gives this testimony; Rec^i^e thy sight, thy faith
has saved thee.

If Duke Ios^a be renowned in holy Bible, for that he made the natural Su^ne
to stand still at his prayer in Gibeon; O what omnipotent faith had this blind
man, to make the supernatural sun, the Sun of righteousness, the Sun
that made the sun to stay his course, and stand still in the way, till his
desire was fulfilled! O Lord increase our faith and love, making the one like
this in the Gospel; and the other according to thy precept in the Epistle,
that being mounted upon these two wings, we may soar to the place where thine
honor dwells, and there rest with thee for e^ermore.

Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 8. lin. 15. a fine, read ^^. p. 10. l. ^. read measurably. p. 24. l.
11. read are. p. 26. l. 12. a fine, read same. p. 68. l. 5. a fine, read a^.
p. 96. l. ^1. in the margin, read Acts 13. p. ^16. l. 10. a fine, read ^sti.
p. 127. l. 8. a fine, read w^y. p. 187. l. 7. read Psalm. 135. p. 190. l. 2.
in margin, read and. page 225. in margin, dele^tur ^eremy 17. page 230 l. ^9.
read Cl^rius. p. 24^. ^. 4. read picture. p. 25^. l. 15. a fine, read
haru^st.

Other faults are either so gross, that they correct themselves, or so small,
that they will be soon corrected of other.

I forbear prefaces and Indices until the whole be finished.

Assi^t me with thine hearty prayers unto the Father of merry, that it may be
for his glory and thy good.

FINIS

