FOUR LETTERS of Comforts, for the Deaths of the Earl of HADINGTOUN, and of
the Lord BOYD, with two Epitaphs.

1 Corinthians. 15. 55. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory?

GLASGOW, Printed by George Anderson, 1640.

An Epitaph upon the death of Robert Lord Boyd, who sleeped in CHRIST the 17.
of November 1640. the twenty one year of his age.
MY mourning Muse, no verses can express:
Her Well is dry, by reason of excess
Of pricking grief, which do constrain her heart
With tears of blood of sigh and weep apart.
Here ly's sweet love among the worms and slime,
Who godly, wise, meek stout, was in his time:
He spared no cost, no danger he did shun
At home* abroad, to end this work begun:
Though Moses law perm^ts a man a year
To sport like ^lack with his Lady dear,
Yet for the cause of Jesus Christ his Lord,
To leave such things he gladly did accord:
From Bed to Banners he religious
Went, though he was the Phoenix of his house:
O Passer by, who these things sees and hears,
Stand still, and pay due tribute with thy tears.
I have no words such sorrows to be wail;
Timantes come with Agamemnons veil.
M. Zachary Boyd*

To the right Noble, and religious Lady, D. Ieane Hamiltoun, Couutesse of
CASSILLIS, etc.
MADAME,
IN the commoun calamity of this Nation, the Public suffered a great wound in
the death of your Ladyships noble Brorher, the Earl of Hadintoun, with a
number of worthy Gentlemen, who had both Hearts and Hands for the Good Cause.
Your La. particular loss has been very great, both in his Lordship, and in
your other worthy Brethren, who were fearfully overwhelmed by the house of
Dunglasse, by treachery, blown up with powlder, for to spoil ^he Church of
God of such helpful ^nstruments, in such a time of need. Not^


Such a stroke made the victorious Laurels of Newburne to chan^^ th^i^
greenest Colors into black: If they had been safe, Scotland had been
overjoyed; our cup had overflowed; If our mirth had not been marred, hardly
could we have been kept within measure. So it pleased the Lord to temper that
Scottish victory, with that fearful tragedy, for to teach us all to rejoice
in trembling, and to look for perfect joy only in the heavens. As for you
Madame, whom the Lord has endowed with many Christian virtues: yea, with an
heroic courage to this Cause, I think, that your Brethrens death may be a
comfort, in that they died for the good Cause: their death in a manner was a
Martyredome, for they suffered for the cause of Christ; they were ready in
their life, at all occasions, both to do, and to die, for the maintenance of
Religion, and of the liberties of their native Country: 2 Samuel 1. 23.
of them might be said, as David said of Saul and Jonathan, They were swifter
then Eagles, they were stronger then Lions. Note
* Though their bodies be dead their Names shall live in all the memories of
good Men of this age, and in the Chronicles of time, for all ages to come. It
was a great honor among the Men of War in David's days, to be called David's
Worthies, but it is a greater honor to Be renowned The Worthies of Christ: to
have a heart or a hand for his honor, is a praise which no time shall be able
to deface: Let all these considerations, and many mo than I am able to
express, teach your La. in your deepest doole, both now and in all times to
come, Psalm. 13^. 2.
to behave and quiet your self like a child that is wained of his mother, who
stilled, is made silent, being simple and submissive, humble, meek, and modest;
what God has done, or permitted to be done, must not be said against.* Note
What ever the instruments have been, we must ever bless the Lord, Job did
so, after that Satan in a mighty wind, by the fall of an house, had smothered
all his children: * Note lob. 1, 19.
As for Jobs children, they were at a banquet, in dangers of blasphemy, but
your La. brethren at the very blast, were praising the LORD for a victory
granted unto Christ's army; and from that spiritual joy and singing of hearts
on the Lords day, they being Christ's Martyrs, went up to heaven, where they
shall sing Hallelujah for ever. This should be no small comfort to your La.
that God has preserved your worthy LORD, and Husband, whose zeal, vvisdome,
courage, and uprightness, not declining, but still increasing have most
oriently shined in our army, unto his everlasting praise. The LORD season your
La. sorrows with the joy of his Spirit, that his peace may be your portion,
and his Christ your advantage, both in life and death. Philip. 1* 21.


Your La. humble Servant, M. Zachary Boyd.

To the right Noble, and religious Lady, D. Margaret Livinstoun, Countess of
WIGIOVN.
MADAME,
DIverse and many distractions take up so our time, that we cannot, as we
would or should discharge these duties which we ow to those whom we honor.

The Lord knows, Madame, but I am sorry, both for your La. sorrow, and for
that which has been the cause, even the removing of that worthy noble Youth,
who was a dear One to your La.

We see here, Madame, that only heavenly joys are eternal: This mortality
that Adams sin has brought into the World, wounds many hearts: A separation
made by death, is very painful to those that remain behind: The balm for
this sore is only to be found in Christ's box: his word is a healing word,
Psalm. 107 20. Luke 4. 11.
he himself was sent to heal the broken hearted; he only can rightly bind up
ou^ wounds; his Salve is only fit for our Sores.

Your La. is one who has experience in the ways of God: I doubt not but you
will travel humbly to submit yourself to Gods will, and to reverence his
Majesty, as well in his taking, as in his giving: 1 King. 2. 2.
Death is a Way that he has prepared for all flesh* To great men he has said,
I have called you gods, Psalm. 82. 6.
but ye shall die like men: What man is he that lives, Psalm. 89. 48.
says the Psalmist, and shall not see death? The greatest Monarch is not
ex^emed, for as Job says. Job. 14. 5.
His days are determined, the number of his months are with God, he has
appointed his bounds that he can not pass.

As for his Lo. who is removed* he has been removed by God, and not by the
hand of man: * Note
In time of war he has died in peace; he walked with God in his life, God was
with him in his death, and now he is with God, with whom he shall remain for
evermore, in the company of Saints and Angels. * Note
We are like a ship on the sea he is in the harb^rie: We are here Pilgrims in
a strange land, he is at home; we are in the way, he is at his journeyes end,
where he rests with his LORD; for a thousand worlds he would not return but for
the space of a day, to enjoy all the pleasures of the earth.

See here, Madame, with the eye of faith what GOD has done to your Ladyships
Son, my dear LORD, and most loving Chief: We may lament him: it is permitted
by GODS word; but our grief must not be like these who have no hope of the
resurrection: * Note
We will never be happy, until we be where he is, never content, until we
see what he sees; never filled with joy, until we hear what he hears, the
songs of heaven, and most sweet sounding harpes of God, Revel. 14. 2.
in the presence of Christ Jesus, the chiefest among ten thousand; Cant. 5. 10.
To his special comforts I recommend your La. wounded heart, and so I rest,

Your La. humble Servant M. Zachary Boyd.

To the right Noble, and religious Lady, D. Christian Hamiltoun, Lady BOYD.
MADAME.
MAny reasons oblige me to wish your La. comforts, yea and to pray earnestly
for them: Note
your Lord whom you have faithfully served hitherto, will be to you a Husband,
a Son, and a Brother: He himself will fill the room of all those that he has
taken from you: By his doings he has been taking away your earthly roots and
tenons, which might have fastened your heart to the ground: When these whom ye
loved best on earth, are above with him whom ye love above all things, your
heart will the more freely mount up toward your true home: Who should not
desire to be with Christ, the chiefest among ten thousand? Cant. 5. 10.
This will help your desire, when ye remember, that these whom ye loved best,
are ever in his company; a few days will join all the godly together to
their head Christ in heaven; what have we here but toil and trouble? Wherefore
came we hither, Note
but to make a voyage to the Heavens? What is our life, Matthew. 20. 12.
but the heat of the day in a vineyard of pains' At death we receive the
ponnie: Our life is a warfare, at death we receive the pay: It is great
weakness of faith, to be too grieved for the death of Gods Servants, which is
the time they receive their rewards. If good education of children, a good
child living, and dying in the fear of God, beloved of all good men, honored
by the best; if all these things can bring comforts to an heart assaulted with
sorrows, your La. has such a measure, that I may say they overflow: We will
go to him, 2 Samuel* 22. 23.
but he will not come to us: The day of the resurrection will bring all friends
together: This is the chiefest Cordial the Apostle could find to comfort
these that mourned for the dead, that at the resurrection, 1 These. 4. 17.
we all together should meet the Lord in the air, and after that should be
with the Lord for ever.

What shall I say more? Can a mother forget her child? Isa. 49. 15. Note*
All earthly sorrows were they never so sharp, will at last grow blunt; and
will be meekned and skinned over by time: Now what time can do to a Pagan, let
grace do it to your La. a Christian, both by grace, profession, and name.

Your La. humble Servant, M. Zachary Boyd.

To the right Noble, and religious Lady, D. Anna Fleemin, Lady BOYD.
MADAME,
WHen God sends troubles to his Servants, it is to stir up their heart to
prayer, and also to try their patience: It is written of Aaron, that when God
had slain his two sons, Lev. 10. 3.
He held his peace: David likewise in his great grief said, I will not open
my mouth, Psalm. 39. 9.
because thou have done it: Exek. 24. 17.
God said likewise to Ezekiel in his sorrovv, Be silent. forbear to cry. Note
The Hebrews call a widow Almanah, from a word that signifies dumb, to
teach her to seal her mouth with a reverent silence, and to stoup humbly under
Gods hand. I confess that your La. grief must be great, for great was your
love: your flovvr has been cropped in the bud, ye got but a short sight one
of another, when God came, and made the separation: We must adore God in all
his doings, * Note
We must bless him as well when he takes, as when he gives, except we
would say, We love the gift better than the giver. The LORD has taken your
Lord, and of a Lord has made him a crowned King: He was but a Lord and
Colonnel at New castle; it was your comfort to hear that he was well there;
let your faith tell you where he is now, and what he is in that Jerusalem that
is above; his honors there are without hazard; his life there is eternal; his
company are Saints and Angels; his great General and King is Jesus Christ; he
is without the reach of all sorrows and sores; his joys can not be told; for
Picks, and Muskets, and Canons, he sees nothing but peace, and hears
nothing but harpes, sounding the praise of his Lord, and he with the rest is
singing Hallelujah; he enjoys that which we all should desire; Should we not
all rejoice to go to our rest? within a fevv years your Lord and your La.
will meet with greater joy in Heaven, than ye could be able to have on Earth:
Gods Spirit be your La. Comforter.

Your La. humble Servant, M. Zachary Boyd.

In obitum D. Roberti Bodii, Bodianae Familiae principis, qui diem suum obiit
17 November. Anno Dom. 1640 hora nona vespertina. postquam foeliciter in Anglia
magna cum laud Tribunatum gessisset.
TRistia Nasonis rident, dum tristia nostra
Nituntur tristes vultus; gemitusque ref^rre:
Multorum fletus risus, dum tristia nostra
Deplorant lachrymi^ privata and publica damna:
Candida sint aliis, nostri stant stamina nigrae
Fati. Proh cecidit praelustri in pulvere famae*
Spes Bodiae gentis, per acerba mor^e peremptus:
Seu pacem, s^u bella geras, Hic promptus ad omne
Sub Labato Christi minus, Sponsamque reliquit
Ante diem fixum per sacra volumina Mosis, Deuteronomy. 24. 5.

Dum patria and pietas illum ad graviora vocarent
Sumptibus immensis non parcens, mitis in omnes.
Et supra aetatem prudens, castusque, piusque,
S^bri^^; Hic paucas post se ad meliora reliquit
Spirantes animas: Magnus nune hospes Olympi
Part sui meliore viget, dum corpus in urna,
Dum membra in placida recubant resoluta quiet.
Haec Zacharias Bodius posuit moerens.

I live to die,
That I may die to live.

1 Chronicles. 29 15. We are strangers before thee, and sojourners as were all our
fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.
FINIS.

