A Preparation to THE RECEIVING of the Sacrament, of CHRIST'S Body and Blood.
Directing weak Christians how they may worthily receive the same. By W.
BRADSHAVV. With a profitable Treatise of the same Argument, written by another.
The fifth Edition corrected and enlarged.

depiction of the blindfold female personification of Justice, with a sword in
one hand, and scales in another

LONDON Printed by Io: Beale 1617.

depiction of the blindfold female personification of Justice, with a sword in
one hand, and scales in another, and of a second female figure holding a book
To the Virtuous and worthy Lady, GRACE DARCY.
MADAM,
THose notes which were lately vvritte forth for your private use, I am now
emboldned to make more common; not for any conceited worth in them, but to
avoid the trouble, of yielding satisfaction to other good friends, that desire
and expect the like office from me. I am sure herein I shall hurt none, but my
self; nor so much as offend any, excepting those for whose use the publishing
hereof was never intended.

Your Ladyships favorable acceptance of them in private, has made them the
bolder to come forth in public, and to grace themselves with the profession
of your favor, which is their greatest ornament.

I hope that you, who have given them some intertainment in your closet, will
not carelessly pass by them as unknown, now they present themselves unto you
in the street: the rather for that they come not alone, but accompanied,
assisted and countenanced with a most profitable Treatise of the same Argument,
written long since by one whom your Ladyship reuerenceth, and whose person and
labors in the work of Christ Jesus, are (and that deservedly) much esteemed of
the people of God.

I shall not need to admonish you of the use of either of these Treatises:
Themselves, how little soever, are in that point able to speak for themselves.
Only take ^^ed (good Madam) least (...) their withdrawing of you from the
damnable sin of profaning this holy Sacrament, you be not by misconstruction
brought unto any wicked and superstitious adoration thereof.

Thus unfeignedly praying the Lord, more and more to bless the worthy Knight
your husband, and your self, and from heaven to reward those many favors
received from you both, I humbly take my leave.

January 2. 1608. Your Ladyships much bounden, W. B

To the Reader.
LEt it not offend thee (good Reader) that in this Edition I have varied
somewhat from the former. When J first published this Treatise, I little
thought it should have been thus often called to the Press, which (as I
suppose) is not so much for any special worth in it, as for the worthiness of
the other Treatise of the same Argument, unto which it is adjoined; and which,
this was a means to bring into the light. How-euer, seeing by this means it
comes to pass that this of mine falls into the hands of many, that otherwise
(I assure my self) would never have looked after it, and those such, as (if it
had the Authors sense) it would blush to look in the face, being so meanly set
out and furnished as it is: I have deemed it fitting this once to review the
same, and to send it forth in this form thou see; wherein some defects in
the former are (as I think) supplied, though not so many as either thou or I
could wish. The old plainness thereof does still continue, which I esteem as
no disgrace thereunto, it being by that means fitter for the use of plain and
simple hearted Christians, for whose help and direction I first published it.

Farewell.
Faults amended.
Fol. 9. page 2. line 19. ordained the same. f. 24. p. 2. l. 24. plentiful
usually. fol 29. p. 1. l. 2. cannot. f. 29. p. 2. l. 20 ordinance. f. 101. p.
2. l. 6. joining. This is mended in the most.

A Preparation TO THE Receiving of Christ's Body and Blood. The first Part.
Showing what a dangerous sin, it is to receive this Sacrament unworthily.
CHAP. I. Of preparation in general: and the Apostles form thereof.
NO wise man uses, to set upon any difficult work, the well performance
whereof may be much beneficial, and the ill, very hurtful and dangerous:
(such as the receiving of the Sacrament, of the body and blood Christ, will
appear to be:) but first (if he can) he sets some time a part, to fit and
prepare himself thereunto; and to forecast that he may do it, in the best, and
most effectual manner. If we go but to an ordinary Feast, before we set
forth of our doors, we use to put on (if we have it) better then our ordinary
attire; or at least to brush, and make clean, and put more handsomely about
us, that which is upon us.

This Sacrament therefore, being the Lords Supper, and in that regard, more
then an ordinary Feast; how ought we to dress, and prepare our selves
thereunto, before we presume to sit down at that Table? Surely, if we should
bring our souls thereunto, in their ordinary habits and attire, we shall do
the Master of this Feast, a greater dishonor, then we should do to our
Prince, if we presumed to prease to his Table, in the filthiest habites of
Chimney sweepers or Scauingers.

If then we desire to reap fruit, and not hurt by this action; if we would
have the Lord of this Feast, to bid us truly welcome, and not to frown upon
us; let us before we presume to come thither, put on our wedding Garments; And
in that manner, fit and prepare our souls, (for the feeding of which
principally, this banquet is prepared) that in the same, he may behold, a
special honor done to him, for preparing such a Table: and what due account,
we make of that food, which is there set before us.

For the due performance of this work of preparation, we cannot follow a
better platform, then that which the Apostle Paul, with his own hand did
draw, for a preparation, to the Church of Corinth, in his first Epistle, Chap.
11.23-33.

Where for their better preparation to the receiving of this Sacrament, he
teaches them, (and us in them) these two points.

1. What a dangerous Sin it is, to abuse this Sacrament, v. 23-28.

2. By what means the Sin aforesaid, is to be avoided. v. 28-33.

If we can be assuredly persuaded of, and soundly affected with the first, and
with care and good conscience put in practice, that which the Apostle propounds
in the second; no doubt, but we shall then come fitted and prepared to this
holy Feast; and shall with exceeding comfort and delight, feed upon that which
is prepared therein.

What a dangerous sin it is to abuse this Sacrament, he shows unto us.

1. By propounding the doctrine of the Sacrament, v. 23-27.

2 By inferring therefrom, that special sin aforesaid, v. 27.

From which order of the Apostle, we may learn by the way; That ignorance, or
want of due consideration, of the Doctrine of this Sacrament, is, and ever has
been one principal cause, that so many have abused and profaned the same; and
that there is no hope or possibility, that those, who are grossly ignorant
herein, should ever with due reverence receive the same, and in that regard reap
any benefit thereby: But so often as in this estate, they partake thereof, they
run their souls upon a dangerous rock. Ignorance well may be the mother of
Popish devotion; but it is a stepdame, to all true Christian piety, and the
mother and nurse of al superstition, profanenes, and irreligious impieties in
Gods Church.

CHAP. II. Of the Author and Institutor of this Sacrament
THe Doctrine of this Sacrament (as it is propounded by the Apostle) is
General, or Special.

In the general he teaches us 1. The Institutor, and The first Administer
thereof.
2. The time when it was first instituted. And the religious manner of
instituting thereof.



This Sacrament was instituted and ordained by Christ Jesus himself. I have
(says the Apostle) received of the Lord, that which I have delivered unto you,
v. 23.

As if he should have said, if this Sacrament had been a device of man's
brain, or a humane tradition, having no other ground, but the will and pleasure
of man, your abuse and profanation thereof had been the less. But I would
have you to consider, that this Sacrament was ordained and instituted by Christ
Jesus himself, and that I delivered this ordinance unto you, by express
warrant and commission from him: And therefore great and damnable, must your
sin needs be, if you shall profane and abuse the same.

They cannot be free from blame, who shall contemptuously abuse the ordinances
of men, though they require but things indifferent, and merely unprofitable;
yea, such things, as unto the flesh, are burdensome and hurtful: Much more
blameworthy then, must they needs be, who shall contemn and basely use an
immediate ordinance of Christ, who never instituted any thing (which being
rightly used) is not exceeding profitable and good; yea, whose very ordaining
of it (though before it was unprofitable, or hurtful) makes it good and
profitable, to the worthy vser thereof, It must needs therefore argue, a base
and light estimation of Christ and his wisdom and authority, by rude and
vnreuerent behavior, to abuse any Order, or Constitution of his: And yet, what
is more ordinary, amongst professed christians, then to make a kind of
May Game, of the principal Ordinances of Christ? What palpable contempt is
generally offered to the Word, read, and preached, to prayer, to the
Sacraments, Sabbaths, and the Offices of the Ministry? How rudely and
profanely do many behave themselves in the very solemn worship of God, showing
apparent contempt and scorn of the same? As though these ordinances of Christ,
were but base and ridiculous matters, such as are not to be deemed fit for wise
men to perform, but in jest and scorn; or (at the best) but as if they were
acting and counterfaiting foam part upon a stage.

But hence we are to learn; That a special means to make us (if we be
true and sound hearted Christians,) to see what a foul sin this is, is to
consider throghly, and to meditate seriously of this; That in the receiving of
this Sacrament, we do not conform to the humors, conceits, and pleasures of
men, of Magistrates, or Ministers of Churches, or Fathers; no nor to the mere
ordinances of Prophets and Apostles, but to the express will and Commandment
of Christ. This is in the nature of man, that if they be enjoined, or
commanded any thing, by an inferior that has no authority, though the thing
required be honest and lawful, yea good and profitable; yet, they will either
scorn to do it, or do it in scorn. But if one in authority (whom in that
respect, they reverence) shall require the same thing, or that which is worse:
they will (if they be not very careless and desperate) yield obedience
thereunto, in fear and reverence.

Except therefore, we should be so impious, as to hold that our Savior has
no power to require this duty at our hand, or so shameless and impudent, as to
defend, that he does no where require it of us; or so blasphemous, as to say,
he has showed no wisdom therein; we must needs yield, that it must needs be
a shameful sin to profane this sacrament, which is enjoined to be received by
so awful and sovereign Authority.

When therefore men come so rudely and unprepared, to the receiving of these
holy Rites, as ordinarily they do; it is a sign they never think of that high
and sacred Authority, that has ordained them; but only conceit and esteem of
them, as of certain Formalities, which custom and long continuance, has made
a fashion: and which, men are to conform unto, more to avoid singularity, then
for any necessity or profit, or out of any duty that they owe to the
Institutor of them.

This then is, and ought to be the maine foundation of all true reverence, not
only in the use of this, but of al other parts of Gods worship. That Christ
Jesus requires this service at our hands. And would the Ministers of Christ)
who are by their Office to dispense these, and other the like Ordinances of
Christ) have their ministry not contemned, but truly reverenced, they should
make it appear, (as Paul does here) that they minister no other word, or
Sacraments, prescribe no other worship, preach no other doctrine, bind men's
consciences with no other laws, allure them with no other promises, fear them
with no other threatenings; then such as they can both say, and show, that they
have received from Christ himself.

CHAP. III. Of the first Administer of this Sacrament.
Our Savior Christ did not only himself institute this Sacrament, but did in
his own person, and with his own hand, first of all administer the same.

The Lord Jesus (says the Apostle) the night that he was betrayed, took bread,
etc. As though he should say: Jf but my self, or any other Apostle, or any
person inferior to an Apostle, had instituted this Sacrament, by Commission
from Christ, men should (notwithstanding) have feared, to lay impure hands, upon
a thing so holy. Much more, when Christ Jesus has not only immediately
instituted, but was himself in his own person, a Minister thereof, and the
first that did administer the same.

That service and worship, required by man's law, framed but by consequence from
the word, or according to the general rules thereof, is in a holy and
religious manner to be performed: Much more such a service, as Christ so
immediately and expressly instituted, not trusting to the discourse and wit of
man to appoint the same, and which himself did so religiously, in his own
person perform: So that it cannot but argue, great impiety in them, who shall
contemptuously, or but carelessly behave themselves in or about the same.

Hence we are to learn,

1. That albeit this Sacrament is administered unto us now, by the hands of
weak and sinful men; yet they being the lawful Ministers, and Substitutes of
Christ we are to receive it from their hands, as from the hands of Christ
himself, who though he be not bodily, yet is spiritually, and will be as
effectual present now, as at the first institution, and administration
thereof. And therefore great shall their shame be, and fearful there danger,
who shall presume to put forth profane hands, to receive such high mysteries,
from the holy and pure hands of Christ himself.

2 It being a great honor to this Sacrament, that Christ himself should in his
own person administer it. All good Christians should think, and esteem it as
an honor unto themselves to be admitted thereunto, and as a great indignity
and disgrace, to be excluded therefrom: Much more to exclude themselves from
the same, when they may be admitted thereunto.

3 The Ministers of the Word and Sacraments also, should hence learn, to take
heed how they presume to administer this Sacrament, to such persons as they
have cause to be persuaded, that christ himself would deny this Sacrament
unto; or how they deny it to such, as Christ himself (if he were in their
place) would administer it unto. The one is a great indignity to the Sacrament
it self, the other a more then barbarous wrong to their brethren.

CHAP. IIII. Of the time, when this Sacrament was instituted.
THe time that Christ, in his special wisdom, made choice of to institute
and administer this Sacrament, was, In the night in which he was betrayed, v.
23.

This Circumstance argues:

That this special ordinance, which at this time he instituted for his Church,
when he was preparing himself to the greatest work of love, that ever was
showed, even to lay down his life for it must needs proceed from his infinite
love and mercy. Gifts bequeathed by friends upon their deathbeds, use much to
be esteemed; and where they are contemned, there the love of the giver is
thought to be despised. If then the love of Christ, showed unto us when he was
dying; yea, even ready to be put to death for our sake, be dear and precious
unto us: This Sacrament, which at that very time was instituted by him, and as
a special Legacy bequeathed to his Church (for whom he thought not his own
precious blood too dear) it must needs deserve to be dear and precious to us,
and therefore a horrible indignity offered by us, to abuse and profane the same.

2 This was no time for Christ who was infinite in wisdom, to spend in
instituting needles and unprofitable ceremonies: The vainest men that are (if
not desperately wicked or distempered in their brain) do not use at such a
time, to abuse themselves about vanities; but their thoughts then use to be
taken up, with those matters which most necessarily concern themselves, and
their friends. Far then be it from us, that we should think, that our
blessed Savior, should at this time, find nothing else to do, but to busy
himself, in laying upon his Church idle and friuilous obseruances. If men, how
miserable soever in their lives past, at such times as this, use to bestow the
best things they have upon them they most love; we must needs conceive, (or
exceedingly dishonor our Savior Christ) That this Sacrament, which at this
time he bequeathed unto all his Churches, as a special Legacy, is of some
inestimable price and value: And therefore, that it must needs be intolerable
inhumanitie, and ingratitude, to despise and abuse the same.

3 Seeing that our Savior, at this time was undergoing the greatest, most
painful, and difficult work that ever was, or shall be performed; even to
offer up himself a sacrifice for his church, the zeal of which work had now,
more then ever eaten him up, and captiuated all the thoughts and affections of
his soul: so as it was not possible for him at this time to think of any thing
else, but what might further this work of our Redemption, and the salvation of
our souls. We must needs conclude, that this Sacrament, being at this time,
so deliberately both instituted and administered, must needs tend (after a
special manner) to the furtherance of our salvation, and to make the work of
our Redemption effectual unto us. So that, to set light by this Sacrament, is
to despise the great work of our Redemption, and the salvation of our souls,
purchased by the blood of Christ.

CHAP. V. Of the religious manner, of instituting and administering this
Sacrament.
Our Savior Christ, in the instituting and administering of this Sacrament, is
said by the Apostle, To give thanks. By the Evangelist Matthew, To bless,
that which he instituted and administered.

By this Blessing and Thanksgiving, he dedicated and consecrated the outward
elements in this Sacrament, unto that holy and mystical use, unto which they
are applied.

This Blessing, was an earnest and effectual calling upon God his Father, That
he would be pleased to make this Sacrament, (being duly administered and
received) fruitful and effectual to those holy and saving ends and uses, for
which they were ordained.

His Thanksgiving was (no doubt) a rendering of special glory and praise unto
God, for hearing his prayer, and therein for the great fruit and benefit, that
(through the blessing of God) shall certainly redound unto all those who are
worthy receivers of this Sacrament.

1 In that our Savior does in so special a manner, bless this sacrament: we
may be assured, that by this means, he has obtained from God, a special
blessing upon it. For in him the Father is so well pleased, that that may
truly and undoubtedly be verified of him, which Balac said of Balam, That
which he blesses, is blessed, and that which he curses, is cursed. Christ
Jesus therefore having, at his first institution and administration thereof,
blessed this Sacrament; that is, by Prayer, drawn down from heaven, a
special Blessing upon it; we must not so understand the same, as though this
blessing touched only that particular Supper, which then was celebrated at
that present: but we are (out of all doubt) to be persuaded, that the very
same Blessing, cleaues unseperably to this Sacrament, (as often as it shall be
administered and received, as it ought to be) to the end of the world. So that
it shall be a blessed Sacrament, to every worthy receiver thereof: That is, it
shall be an instrument of some great and special blessing unto them: and the
greater instrument of blessing it is to them, the greater curse it will be, to
those who shall profane, and irreverently abuse the same.

The special Thanks that our Savior gives, shows; that we cannot too
thankefully receive this Sacrament. And that if we receive it in that manner,
that we ought to do, that in the same we shall receive that, for which we shall
have cause to give thanks, and praise, and glory unto God as long as we breath.
And the more thanks-worthy gift, is presented unto us, in this Sacrament, the
more vngrarefull, and graceless we, that shall carelessly, and undutifully
receive the same.

CHAP. VI. Of the outward Signs and Elements of this Sacrament.
HItherto of that, which the Apostle teaches in general, concerning this
Sacrament.

That which he teaches in special, follows.

He teaches in special. 1. What are the parts of this Sacrament. 2. What is
the End.


For the better understanding of the parts of this Sacrament, something is to
be premised of a Sacrament in general

This word (Sacrament) was wont to signify that solemn oath, which the Roman
Soldiers were wont to take, whereby they bound themselves, to perform
faithful service to the Emperor in his wars; whence the Latin Divines have
borrowed it, and now by custom it be come (in these Western Churches) a proper
name, whereby those outward badges, and Ensigns of Christianity ( viz.
Baptism and the Lords Supper), are usually called: because that Christians in
the due receiving of them, do after a special manner bind themselves, (as it
were by solemn vows and oaths) to do their Lord and Master Jesus Christ
faithful service in his wars, against the world, the flesh, and the devil.

More especially, Sacraments are mystical Rites and Ceremonies, ordained by
Christ, to shadow and confirm to his church, the Covenant of Grace, or mystery
of Redemption.

Mystical Rites and Ceremonies, are certain outward bodily sensible signs
instituted, to shadow and represent in a secret and artificial manner, things
spiritual and internal.

In every Sacrament therefore, there are two things to be considered.

1 The outward bodily Sign.

2 The spiritual matter, which is mystically shaddowed and set forth by that
Sign, and yet after a sort hidden and locked up in the same.

The Apostle expresses both these.

The signs are:

1 Certain outward Elements.

2 Certain mystical Actions, in and about the Elements.

The Elements are Bread and Wine. He took Bread, v. 23. After the same manner
also he took the Cup, v. 25. Wine is not expressed here, but it is implied,
and the fruit of the vine is expressly mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 26. Mar.
14.

The Actions in and about the Elements are,

1 Breaking and eating of Bread.

2 Drinking of Wine.

These signs considered in themselves, are not of such force, to stir up any
great reverence in the receiving of them: there being no one thing more common
in the world, then eating of bread, and drinking of wine; yet there is no just
cause why, in regard of the commonnes of them, that this sacrament should be
despised, they being matters in themselves, both profitable and comfortable. If
Christ had not only ordained bread in general, for this Sacrament, but the
basest and hardest kind of bread that could be, such as is made of pulse, or
bran, or acornes: if in stead of wine, he had appointed us in this action,
vinegar mingled with gall to drink, such as himself (for our sakes) was
content to taste of; it would beseem the daintiest, and most queasie stomach,
(that looks to be saved by him) to receive the same thankfully, reverently,
and religiously. If he had required of us, in stead of eating bread, and
drinking wine, some service as painful (and in it self shameful) as
Circumcision, it had bin our duty, to have accounted it (as the Jews did) our
honor to perform the same. It is then intolerable insolency, to think it a
base and contemptible thing, upon Christ's special pleasure, to eat bread, and
drink wine at his Table, to that end for which he has the same.

There are many things, that in themselves are of no honor or respect, that in
regard of some special use and application, are matters of great honor, as the
white Wand carried before the Judge; the Cap of Maintenance, worn before the
Lord Mayor; the sword borne before the King. Though therefore, these outward
signs, be in themselves but common matters; yet in respect of that special
mystery that is in them, being applied to that use, unto which they are in this
Sacrament, and that by Christ's own ordinance, they must needs be both an
honor to Christ, and honorable to the due vser of them.

In that this eating of bread, and drinking of wine here required, was at the
first institution done after Supper, as the Apostle notes: It shows that
this bread and wine, and this eating and drinking, has more then an ordinary
use or end: viz. That we are to eat this bread, and to drink this wine, not so
much to satisfy hunger and quench thirst, or to nourish our bodies, and revive
and refresh our vital spirits; for then our Savior would not have administered
it immediately after supper, and that a festival supper, when they (who were to
receive it at his hands) were filled before with bread and wine. But we must
look herein, to another more high and special use, unto which it pleases
the wisdom and goodness of Christ in this action, to advance these common and
ordinary things. So that in this bread and wine, we must look after bread and
wine of another and higher nature; such whereby our souls are to be nourished
and refreshed to everlasting life.

CHAP. VII. Of the things signified, by the Signs aforesaid.
HItherto of the outward signs in this Sacrament. The mysteries contained, in
and under these signs, and expressed by thm, are the greatest that can be
imagined.

The breaking of the bread signifies, the breaking of Christ's body, that is,
all the unspeakable torments that he suffered in his humane nature for our
sins; which were greater, then if his living Body, had been rent and torn into
a thousand pieces, and all his bones broken and beaten to powder.

The eating of this bread, and drinking this wine signifies, that special
benefit (which the Receiver of this Sacrament shall reap by the death and
sufferings of Christ, if by a lively faith he apply unto himself the merits
thereof. This Bread (says our Savior, according to the Apostles relation) is
my body which was broken for you: And this Cup is the New Testament in my
blood, verse. 24.25. or, is my blood in the New Testament, that was shed for
many, for the remission of their sins; as it is more plainly related, by the
Evangelist Matthew. And therefore our Savior bids them, Take and eat the one,
and drink the other.

As though he should have said;

This bread, so broken as you see, shall be a sign and token unto you, and
unto al others that believe in my Name, of that which I have done, and suffered
in my flesh for you. This wine, more especially, shall be a sign even of that
blood, which hanging upon the Cross I shed, to purchase the pardon and
remission of your sins; which is not such blood, as was offered in the old
Testament; viz. The blood of Oxen, Goats, and Sheep: but is in very deed, the
blood of God and man, whereby the New Testament is sealed and ratified, which
offers salvation to all them who shall repent and believe in me, and rely
upon the merits of this my bloody passion.

Therefore, take and eat, this mystical bread, and drink this wine, and and
let them be as seals and pledges unto you, and unto all others (who shall
worthily receive the same; That as verily, as with your bodily mouths you eat
this bread, and drink this wine, and are comforted and refreshed by them; so
verily shall your souls taste of, and by the mouth of Faith, feed upon, and be
refreshed with my Body and Blood; yea, in and by the eating of this bread, and
the drinking of this wine (as you ought to do) you shall spiritually eat and
drink my Body and Blood: That is, the merits of my Passion shall (by means
thereof) be so effectually applied unto you, that thereby (as it were by daily
food) you shall live everlastingly. So that, that which you eat and drink in
this Sacrament, is not only bread and wine, but after a sort, my Body and
blood, which was sacrificed for you.

Is not then this Sacrament, a mystery to be trembled at? Is it not a brutish
sin, without any preparation to rush upon the same? If we did but eat and
drink ordinarily, for bodily necessity, or pleasure; it were brutish to run
unto the same, as a horse to the maunger, or a swine to the trough, not lifting
our hearts (at the least) to God in thankfulness for them. How much more
brutish is it, to eat this bread, and drink this wine, without due reverence
and regard of so high and heavenly a mystery? It were an indignity offered to
the great work of our Redemption, but occasionally to think or speak thereof
without reverence: But to be irreuerently affected then, when by such a special
ordinance it is so effectually represented and applied unto us, must needs be a
dreadful and damnable sin.

For the further confirmation whereof, let us consider some special
instructions, from the particulars, in regard of the special analogy between
the signs and the things signified.

1 In that our Savior represents his Body, in this Sacrament by bread; he
teaches us thereby, that his Body, is to the soul of man, as bread is to the
body. Bread is the very staff of a man's bodily life, the most general food of
poor and rich; that which of all other food can least be spared; that which
in hunger, men first and principally desire: that the scarcity whereof makes
famine; that which if it be plentifully, usual makes all other necessaries of
this life plentiful; that which we daily feed upon; that which men generally
take greatest pains for. Hence our Savior in the Lords Prayer, teaching to
crave all the needful co^forts in this life, comprehends all under daily
bread. And therefore by like proportion, his Body in that manner, that it is
here meant and propounded, is the very staff and stay of a Christian life.
That without which, neither poor nor rich, high nor low, shall live eternally.
That which, without all other means, can feed and nourish a man to everlasting
life; and which of all other means cannot be spared: That which uery true
christian soul, first and principally hungreth after: That, the want whereof
only, famisheth and starues the soul. That which they will take the greatest
pains and toil to get; and which without the greatest pain and travel cannot
be gotten. That which they will desire to feed upon every day, and every meal,
rellishing nothing else without it.

2 In that the bread is broken, to signify his Body broken for us, it teaches
us: that it is not simply the Body of Christ by which we are to be fed, but his
Body broken: that is, That which Christ did, and suffered for us, especially
upon the Cross. For (to speak properly) his Body was not broken. It is not
therefore properly, Christ glorified in heaven, or Christ simply God, or God
and man, which is the bread, that a Christian soul, humbled for sin, can
digest or relish; but Christ crucified, Christ hanging upon the Cross. It is
Christ's death, that is indeed, the life of a Christian. It is Christ and his
Cross both together, that is the bread of life: yea not the Cross only, but
the Thorns also wherewith he was crowned, the whippes wherewith he was
scourged, the nails with which he was fastened, the vinegar and gall which he
tasted, yea, and Judas who betrayed him, and Pilate that condemned him, and the
Scribes and Pharisees, that prosecuted against him, and all the people which
cried, crucify him. Christ considered with all these, is that spiritual bread,
that is typed by the material. And without these, he cannot be the bread of
life to a sinful soul. So that, if there be any Transubstantiation in this
Sacrament, either the bread is turned into all these, or all these into the
bread.

3 The use of wine, is well known, it does not only (as water) quench the
thirst, but also exceedingly comfort the heart, and refresh the spirits. Seeing
then it is the pleasure of our Savior in this Sacrament, to make wine the type
of his blood: It teaches us, what effects Christ's blood, and the shedding
thereof shall have in the souls of all true Christians, and worthy
Communicants. Their spiritual thirst after righteousness and salvation, shall
be quenched. In the midst of all the horrors and terrors of death and hell,
they shall by means thereof, be solaced and comforted. This blood, streaming
from the sides of Christ, shall in the midst of their sorrows and griefs, and
troubles, and vexations, be as a cup of the excellentest wine, to cheer them,
and revive their spirits, and to inflame their zeal. This wine has that
efficasie and force in it, that it will turn all the bitter potions (that Gods
children use to drink) into wine. The Apostles of our Savior, when they were
drinking deeply of the whippe, this wine mingled with that bitter potion,
turned it also into wine: insomuch as they rejoiced, that they were counted
worthy to suffer that which they did, for Christ's sake.

That Religion therefore, which locks from the people, the wine in this
Sacrament, does therein also as much, as lies in it, keep from them also that
wine, which is typed and shaddowed thereby, even the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, the only wine that can refresh and comfort the soul of an afflicted
sinner, which is enough to argue the same to be Antichristian, if there were
nothing else. And the more Antichristian, the more it maintains that the wine
in this Sacrament, is the very real blood of Christ. What is this but to
teach, that the true blood of Christ belongs not to them, that if they will be
saved, they must be saved by some other means; or only by gazing upon, and
adoring the painted blood of some painted or carved Crucifix.

4 This consecrated bread and wine, must also (by the precept of our Savior)
be eaten and drunken; and thereby we are taught: That those only shall live
eternally, by the virtue of Christ's Body and Blood, which feed upon the same,
as men's bodies feed upon bread and wine. For as bread and wine (if they be
only looked upon, and not taken and received into the stomach) can-feed,
nourish, or refresh the body of man, or preserve life in the same: No more
shall the Body and blood of Christ, comfort and refresh the soul of a sinner,
or be a means of spiritual and everlasting life unto him, except they be
received and spiritually applied to the soul, as bread and wine are to the
body, when they are eaten and drunken. Those therefore, who are the redeemed of
Christ, must be knit and united to Christ, and one with him, as the bread that
nourishes, and the wine that refreshes the body, is turned into our flesh,
and made one with it. This Sacrament then, which seals so great a mystery as
this is, cannot be profaned without great indignity to the mystery it self.

5 In that Christ says, that that which they take and eat, it is his Body, and
that which they drink, it is his blood, he teaches us. That this Sacrament
does not only, (as in a Table) picture and represent what Christ has suffered
for sinners; but which is a thousand times more, it is by the dinance of Christ
(to the worthy Receiver) a blessed instrument; by means whereof, Christ Jesus
and his merits, are applied and made effectual to their souls. So that such
is the union of the thing signified, and the sign, that in and through the
eating of this bread, and drinking this wine, the soul of the worthy Receiver,
does spiritually and by faith, eat the Body and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ, and always finds such strength, comfort, and life therein, as the
body finds ordinarily, in the eating of bread and drinking of wine. So that
this bread and this wine, are not only naked signs of Christ Body and blood,
as the garland and Iuybush are of wine, which only show that there is wine
there to be bought, but do not exhibit it: But the Body of Christ is in such
a manner in this sacramental bread, and the blood in this wine, that in the
eating of the one, the worthy Receiver eats the other, and in drinking the one,
drinks the other. Can there then a greater mystery be devised by man, in and
about which he ought to be reverently conversant, and religiously and holily
affected: And is it not a brutish sin, to behave our selves unworthily in
such an action?

Let us not here pass by, but once again enter into consideration, of that
execrable Religion of the Church of Rome, which keeps such a Cup, filled with
such wine (without any color in the world) from the people. They say, that the
blood of Christ, is in the body of Christ; and therefore the people in
receiving the one, receive therein the other. But this is an Antichristian
foppery: how can those be together, that Christ has so directly put asunder,
the one in a loaf, the other in a Cup? How can the blood be in a body broken,
and pierced? How can that blood be in the body, which is shed out of the body?
What blood of Christ can comfort a Christian soul, but that which was shed? or
what blood is offered in this Sacrament, but that which was shed? and though it
were in the body, as it is received in this Sacrament: yet it being Christ's
will, his blood should not only be eaten, but drunken; what a sacriligious
lewdnes is this, where Christ especially, and by name, requires the drinking of
his blood, that they should deny the people that, and make them take up, with
the eating of it only? And how does it appear, that the blood, as it is
eaten, is any part of the Sacrament, and if not, what benefit comes to the
Receiver thereby, in that regard? just nothing. It is the drinking, and not the
eating of Christ's blood in this Sacrament, that must refresh the soul of the
Communicant: and without this drinking thereof, the soul can no more be
refreshed with the blood of Christ, in this Sacrament, then the bodily thirst
can be quenched, by that water that is in bread. And a man, in eating the Body
of Christ broken, crucified, pierced with a spear, and sacrificed; so as it is
exhibited to a Christian, in this Sacrament, can no more be said, in and
thereby to drink the blood of Christ, then the Jews that did eat the flesh of
sheep and oxen, offered in sacrifice, after that the blood was separated, and
the parcels were roasted and broyled, could be said then, and therein to drink
the blood of sheep and oxen. And they might as well prove that wine was in the
bread, before the consecration, as that the blood of Christ, is in the body
after the consecration.

CHAP. VIII. Of the end and use of this Sacrament, in respect of the
Communicant.
HItherto of the parts of this Sacrament.

The maine and most general Ends and uses follow,

Which are two.

The 1. Respecting our selves especially. 2. Others also.


That which respects our selves, is, That we receive this Sacrament, to
solemnize thereby a special memorial of Christ, and of our Redemption by him.
This do (says our Savior) in remembrance of me.

One End then, why this Sacrament is to be used, and the use to be continued
in the Church of Christ, is, That in and by the due receiving thereof, we
might the more feelingly and effectually remember, what our Savior has done
and suffered for us.

When our special friends, upon their departure from us, do bestow upon us
any token of remembrance, they do it not only for that special good that
comes to us, by the ordinary use of the thing it self; but also that thereby,
so often as we look upon the same, or use it, we should moreover make this
use of it, to call to mind thereby, the many loves and favors they have
showed unto us. And this is written in our nature, that when any occasion is
but offered unto us, of remembering a dear friend departed from us, to be more
then ordinarily affected therewith. Hence superstitious persons, so heartily
(upon any occasion of remembrance) pray the Lord to have mercy on their souls
that are departed this life, whom they love and have been bound unto: but when
they behold any special memorial and token of their love, then they are often
(for the time) transported and ravished with extraordinary affection, which
they will show even to the token of remembrance it self, doing a kind of
honor unto it. Seeing therefore, this Sacrament, that is not only left unto
us, by the greatest friend that ever we had, but left of purpose to be a
special remembrance and pledge, of the greatest love that ever was showed to
mortal creatures, and which has the very effects and fruits of love written
upon it, yea engraven in it; yea, in some sort contained in it; Is it not
incredible, that any that love and believe in Jesus Christ, should lightly
regard and unworthily abuse this Sacrament?

But here by the way, we may observe how strangely forgetful, even the
faithful are, of the unspeakable love of Christ, that they should stand in
need of such a Remembrance: For unto them is this Sacrament given, as a help
thereunto. Is it possible that a man should be forgetful of such a Master, as
has with a great price redeemed him from the Galleys? Yea, who for to redeem
him, has made himself a slave; yea, who was content to purchase his servants
freedom, with his own death? Is it possible, such a servant should need any
special remembrance? would not one think he should rather need some means to
make him forget his love. Yet this is the strange disposition of all
Christians, even of the best: that though our condition was a thousand times
more miserable, then the condition of a Turks Gally-slaue can be: Though
christ Jesus has done ten thousand times more for our freedom therefrom, then
is possible for any one man to do for another: though whatsoever we enjoy, we
have it from his mercy and love: our souls, bodies, senses, wit, beauty,
wealth, life; so as all our senses are so compassed about, with memorialls of
his love, that we can see, hear, feel, nor taste any thing; but it may put
us in mind of his love; yea, of his death and passion, by which the free use
of these things have been purchased unto us; yet for all this, you see we
stand in need of a more special remembrance: Yea, and yet (sinful wretches
that we are) we are ready to abuse these Remembrances; And (which exceeds
wonder) we are prone, in the midst of them, most of all to forget Christ and
his love toward us, and then, and therein readiest to dishonor him.

We may hence further note.

That Christ our Savior, takes it most kindly when we remember and think upon
him, and that which he has done for us.

The institution of this Sacrament, to this end shows he much affects and
desires it. And the more he affects, and delights in our remembrance of him;
the more unkindly and offensiuely he will take our forgetfulness of him.

Hence also it appears, that then we specially eat the flesh of christ, and
drink his blood, when with a believing heart and mind, we effectually remember,
and in our remembrance, we seriously meditate of, and in our meditation are
religiously affected, and in our affections thoroughly inflamed with the love of
Christ, grounded upon that which Christ has done for us, and which is
represented and sealed unto us in this Sacrament.

CHAP. IX. Of the End and use of this Sacrament in respect of others.
THE end that respects others, is; The showing forth of his death till he
come, that is,

By eating this bread, and drinking this wine, Christians are to testify and
profess; and after a sort to preach to others, even unto the worlds end, the
mystery of the Gospel; the sum, substance, and accomplishment whereof, is in
the death of Christ, and the fruits that flow therefrom, all which are
represented in this Sacrament.

Therefore in our due receiving of this Sacrament, we do (as it were) lead men
by the hand, into the Garden of Gethsemane, and there show them Christ in
extreme horror, sweating blood, Judas traitorously kissing him, the Soldiers
binding him and leading him to judgment. We lead him to Caiphas Hall, and
Pilates Throne; and there show them Christ, most unjustly condemned, most
contumeliously buffetted and spet upon, scourged and crowned with thorns,
scorned and derided. We lead them to Mount Caluerie, and there show them him
nailed on the Cross, drinking vinegar mingled with gall, pierced with a
spear, forsaken of his Father, in the horror thereof crying out most bitterly,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. And all this for our sake, that
thereby he might free us from the curse of the Law, and purchase for us
everlasting life.

Can we in this mystery, see and behold all this? shall we (aftet a sort)
hereby point it out unto others, and shall we therewith be nothing affected
in our own souls, but come unto the receiving thereof, as so many senseless
blocks.

By this it appears, how forcible the doctrine of the Sacrament is, to
terrify all Christians from the profanation thereof, and consequently to the
fitting and preparing of them to the worthy receiving thereof.

Where (to conclude) note that the Apostle in all the former points, has
propounded nothing unto the Church of Corinth, but what they could not be
ignorant of before; which practice of the Apostle teaches us, of what
necessity continual teaching is in the Church of Christ, when Ministers must
be feign, not only to instruct the people of God in those points of doctrine
that they are ignorant of: but often also call to their mind and
consideration, those points which they know already well enough, upon such
particular occasions as they are to make special use of them. And verily,
though men could say all the Scriptures by heart, though they could understand
every hard and difficult place thereof; though they knew all the grounds and
principles of the Christian Faith; though they were able to answer all
oppositions against any divine truth: yet for all this, there would be use both
of reading the Word, and preaching also in the Church of God.

For let our knowledge be never so great, yet if we be not often put in mind
of it: if we be not taught how in such and such particular cases to apply it;
if by the power of Christ's Ordinance, it be not beaten out of our head, into
our heart, it will be as a dead letter unto us, yea, and most out of our head,
when we should most use it. For so was the particular knowledge of this
Sacrament in this Church of Corinth. And so will the knowledge of this, or of
any truth else be, if it be not revived and quickened in us, by daily teaching
and instruction.

CHAP. X. What it is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
HItherto of the Doctrine of this Sacrament.

The consequent of the Doctrine follows.

Whosoever therefore (says the Apostle) shall eat this Bread, and drink the
Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

We have in the consideration of every particular point of Doctrine concerning
this Sacrament, inferred generally; that it must needs be a fearful sin, to
profane and abuse the same, and not to receive it in that manner that we ought
to do. But the Apostle here from infers in special, a monstrous dangerous
sin indeed.

For the better understanding therefore of the Apostles consequent, and for our
further help in this preparation,

Let us consider First The sin it self. and, The means by which we are guilty
of the sin.
Secondly, the ground upon which such persons are guilty.

The sin is, A guiltines of the Body and Blood of Christ. To be guilty of his
body and blood, is to offer some special disgrace and indignity, unto the
Person and sufferings of Christ, and (in a special manner) to sin against
the great work of our Redemption; Yea, in some sort, to commit a sin of the
very same nature and quality which they did, who had their hands in crucifying
Christ. For to be guilty of blood, is in some sense or other, to be a murderer
and shedder of blood; and therefore to be guilty of Christ's blood, is (in some
degree or other) to have our hands in his death: And by consequent to be
partners with Judas in betraying him; with the wicked Jews, in crying,
crucify him; with Annas, Caiphas and Pilate, in condemning him, with the cruel
Soldiers, in whipping and scourging him, spetting in his face, crowning him
with thorns, and nailing him on the Cross, etc. The worst amongst Christians
abhor these persons, even for these sins committed against the Person of
Christ. Let us therefore learn, to abhor that practice, which will pull upon
our heads the guilt of the same sin. To be guilty of any blood, (though of
wicked and sinful blood) has bin a burden, that has made the stoutest heart
to ache and groan under it. But who is able, (when his conscience shall once be
awaked) to bear the guilt of innocent blood? And if the blood of innocent
Abel, did lie so heavy upon Cain, Genesis 4.13. How heavy shall the blood of the
innocent Lamb of God, lie upon them that are guilty thereof? We may remember
how heavy it was upon Judas, Mat. 27.25. and we may see at this day, how heavy
it lies upon the heads of the whole Nation of the Jews, according to their
own cursed wish. Mat. 27.25. This sin therefore, being a bloody sin, and by
consequent in it self, a most unsupportable sin; can we be too careful to
avoid it? It is not our ignorance, or good meaning, that in this case will
justify us. Many of the Jews, did in their ignorance crucify Christ, Luke
23.34. Acts 3.17. This Church of Corinth also (no doubt) had a good meaning in
receiving this Sacrament; yet, by not receiving it in that manner that they
ought, they were deeply guilty of this foul sin.

CHAP. XI. By what means in receiving this Sacrament, men become guilty of
the Body and blood of Christ.
THe means by which we become guilty of the Body and blood of Christ
aforesaid, is; By receiving this Sacrament unworthily.

To receive the Sacrament unworthily, is; To come to the Table of the Lord, and
there to presume to eat this bread, and drink this wine, without any due
reverence or respect of the Mystery that is contained in them; or of the End
why they were ordained; or of the Person, by whose Authority they were
ordained; or without taking any care, or thought before hand, to be such kind
of Persons, as this Sacrament was ordained and appointed for. The best of men,
cannot be said (in themselves) to be worthy to receive this Sacrament; Yet, how
unworthy soever we are in our selves, if Christ deem us as worthy, and we be
(in some measure) such persons, as he has ordained this Sacrament for; and if
we do our uttermost to receive it in that manner, with such hearts and
affections as he requires; we may be said (how unworthy soever otherwise we
be) to be worthy Receivers of this Sacrament.

The ordinary and most common causes, and means of unworthy receiving, are
these which follow.

The first (that which we noted in the beginning) is, Ignorance: when men will
presume to partake these Mysteries, before they understand, or have learned (in
any reasonable sort) the true meaning and use of them. Such must needs receive,
hand over head, they know not, nor care not what. And how then can they
possibly be worthy Receivers of so high and heavenly Mysteries?

The second is, Want of special Faith; when men partake of the outward
Elements, but yet do not believe, or expect any such special fruit or benefit,
from the receiving thereof, as is promised by the Word.

The third is Superstition; when one comes to the Sacrament, in a (...)
^^ceit and imagi^^^^ that he shall re^ (...) her manner of b^^^^ and benefits
by it, then is revealed in the Word, or promised, or intended by Christ.

The fourth is Sensuality; when men so satiate and pamper themselves with the
delight and pleasures of the world, and the flesh, as they cannot, nor care not
to taste of things spiritual. And therefore they bring no other hearts, nor
affections unto this Sacrament, then unto ordinary meat and drink; and
sometimes worse.

The 5. is Carelesnes and security; which is, when we come with such
affections and dispositions, unto this Sacrament, as to a matter, that we
neither look to receive any good by, or fear to receive any hurt by. And
therefore care not, so we receive it, how we receive it.

The sixth is Presumption; when we never care in what manner we receive; and
yet presume to receive (as much fruit and benefit by the Sacrament) as those
who are most careful to fit and prepare themselves thereunto.

The seventh is Uncharitableness; when our souls are so full of bitter hatred
and malice toward our neighbor, and by means thereof so vexed and disquieted,
with devilish perturbations, that they cannot receive, or taste the sweet
comforts represented and offered in this Sacrament.

The 8. is Temporizing; which is, when the only, or main ground, for which we come
to receive this Sacrament, is; The fashion and custom of the times and places
in which we live. And (when without any further examination) we think we
have done enough, if we have (in that outward form and manner) received that
others do.

The ninth is Inconsideration, or an unstaid and wandering mind; when either
we consider not what we are about, or have our thoughts (during that action)
busied about other matters.

The tenth is Profaneness; when we bring such hearts to the receiving of the
Sacraments, as (out of that acton at least) despise Religion, and make a scorn
of all true practice and profession of piety.

Other means and causes there are of this sin; but the consideration of these
may suffice. As therefore we desire to be worthy receivers of this Sacrament:
and so to have our hands free from the blood of Christ; let us with all care
and study, practice the contrary virtues.

CHAP. XII. Of the ground, why unworthy Receivers are guilty of the Body and
Blood of Christ.
THe ground and reason, why those who receive unworthily, are guilty of the
Body and blood of Christ, may be gathered from the former Doctrine of the
Sacrament. For from that does the Apostle infer and conclude the same.

1 Such persons in so doing, do plainly despise the sacred authority of
Christ, the Institutor and first Administer hereof. Now they that despise the
authority of Christ, do therein (in some sort) despise the Person of Christ,
and his sufferings, and by consequent show contempt unto his Body and blood; by
which principally his authority is ratified and confirmed. And to despise the
Person, sufferings, Body and blood of Christ; what is it (but in some sort) to
assent unto, and therein to join with them that crucified him, and shed his
blood.

2 They contemn a special token of his love, a special memorial of his Body
and blood, a special instrument, by means whereof, his Body and blood is
applied unto them. What is this but to offer an indignity, unto his sacred Body
and blood?

3 They offer herein contempt, to the principal Cognizances and Ensigns of
Christianity, to a special coin and picture of Christ crucified.

The like wrong offered to the Ensigns and picture of a Prince, is worthily
judged to be offered to the Prince himself; Yea, forasmuch as in this
Sacrament, the very Body and blood of Christ, and all the benefits depending
thereupon, are spiritually offered unto the Receiver, as lands are offered and
conuaied to men, by the sealing and delivering of Deeds and Indentures; he that
shall unworthily behave himself, in the receiving of this Sacrament, shall
therein as much despise the Body and blood of Christ, as he may be said to
despise, the gift of lands, which co^temneth the writings, Seals, and
Indentures, whereby they use to be conuaied, secured, and confirmed.

Hence from this consequent we may note.

1 That Christ receives damnable indignity, and contumely sometimes; not from
Jews and Infidels only: but often from Christians, such as look to be saved
by his bloud-shedding, and that when they are performing special worship and
service unto him. For what greater wrong can there be, then to be guilty of
that blood, which was shed to redeem us? which was the sin of this Church,
and is the sin of all such Persons, as are unworthy receivers of this
Sacrament.

2 The bare conformity unto the outward exercises of Religion, whether Word,
Prayer, or Sacraments, is not enough to make us good Christians; but we may be
the worse Christians for this, Romans 2.28. 1 Cor. 10.1-7. Many ignorant and
seduced souls, think they are Christians good enough, if their foreheads have
been sprinkled, with the water of Baptism; if sometimes they hear the Word,
and receive the outward elements of this Sacrament. But they may do all these
in such a manner, that by doing of them, they may crucify Christ, and trample
his blood under their feet. It were better for us, never to receive this
Sacrament, then in and by the very act thereof, to pull upon our heads the
guilt of Christ's body and blood.

3 Note the different and contrary effect, of this Sacrament in the receivers
thereof. It is the savor of death unto death, to some; to othersome, the
savor of life unto life. The worthy Receiver is fed, and refreshed, and
nourished, by the Body and blood of Christ received therein. Contrarily, the
unworthy Receiver, is polluted and defiled thereby; and the oftener he receives
it, the more he receives therein, the bane and poison of his own soul. Those
therefore, which in such a manner, receive the Body and blood of Christ, and
look for Grace thereby, are therein as fond, as if they that whipped Christ, and
nailed him on the Cross, and by means thereof, had their faces, hands, and
garments, besprinkled with his blood, should think by that means to be purged
and freed from their sins. Or as if he (who pierced christ's side with a
Spear) should have held a cup at the wound, and filled it, and drunk it off,
and have fancied by that means, to drink the blood of Christ, to the health
and eternal salvation of his own soul. And thus much of the first Part of
Preparation.

Wherein we have been plainly taught, by the Apostle, what a dangerous sin
it is, to abuse this holy Sacrament. God grant, that the consideration hereof
may deeply affects us; that we may with fear and trembling, take heed what
hands we lay upon so holy Mysteries, Amen.

A Preparation to THE Receiving of the Sacrament, of CHRIST'S Body and Blood.
The second Part. Directing weak Christians how they may worthily receive the
same. By W. BRADSHAVV.

LONDON Printed by John Beale, 1617.

The means to prevent the former sin co^sists in certain duties Propounded 1.
The trial of our selves, whereof the Trial it self In general, Cha. 1. In
special 1. Of our faith by the Ground Chapter 3. Subject. Chap. 4.
2. Of our Repentance. C. 5.

The Persons that are make it Chapter 7.
2. The continuance of the Tria Chap. 8.
Urged By the special curse that follow the neglect of the former duti Chap.
9. By the signs of that curse in t Church of Corinth, Chap. 10.


The ground of this second Part. 1 COR. 11.28-33. 28. LEt a man therefore
examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.

29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation, because he discerns not the Lords Body.

30. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep.

31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should
not be condemned with the world.

A Preparation TO THE Receiving of Christ's Body and Blood. The second Part.
Showing how to prevent the dangerous sin, of profaning this Sacrament.
CHAP. I. Of the method of this second Part.
THe Apostle (by whose line we draw the doctrine of Preparation, having set
forth the odiousness of that sin, whereby the holy Sacrament is abused, does
afterward in the words following, prescribe a special remedy how that sin
may be prevented. In the due conscionable practice whereof, does our second Part
of Preparation consist.

The means and remedy aforesaid, consists in certain special and necessary
duties, to be performed by every Christian, that will (to his comfort) partake
of this Sacrament.

The duties the Apostle 1. Propounds. 2. Urges.


The duties propounded are two:

First, That a man try, search, and examine himself, before he presume to
receive.

Secondly, That he give not over trial and examination of himself, till he
have found that which he seeks for.

In the first duty, we are to consider the trial it self: First, generally:
Secondly, more specially. And then the Persons that are to make this Trial.

CHAP. II. Of the trial of our selves in general.
THe trial and examination of our selves in general here required, is a
diligent search and inquisition to be made, within our souls and consciences,
whether we be such kind of persons as may be assured, that the Lord will bid
welcome to this Table.

And this trial is not to be slight and cursory, but most strict and
accurate; such as gold Smiths use, when not only by touch, but by fire and
hammer they try whether their Gold and Silver be pure or no. For such a manner
of trial the Apostles word signifies.

The Lord cannot bid any welcome to his Table, but such as he is actually
reconciled unto; and whose persons are acceptable and well pleasing unto him.

They who are such persons, have certain special gifts and graces bestowed
upon them, from which they may conclude infallibly, that God does love and
favor them: which for distinction sake, from other common gifts are called,
Saving Graces.

Herein then we must labor to search out in our selves, these Graces; and to
try whether they be in us or no. But before we come to particulars; hence we
may note in general,

1 That Gods special saving graces may be in us, and yet not always apparent
unto us; but may sometimes lie hidden in the soul, until by some special
search they be discovered; else such trials as these should be needless. As
therefore it is matter of humiliation, to all good Christians, that upon due
trial, they find more corruptions in themselves, then did before appear unto
them: So this may be a special comfort, that there are also in them (which by
diligent trial they shall find) greater graces then ever they imagined to be
in themselves. This therefore should encourage us, to search ourselves so much
the more narrowly: for if we shall (by a careful search) find in our souls,
but any one grace, or but any degree of a grace, more then we did perceive
before; it will bring more sound comfort and joy unto our hearts, then if we
had found a hidden treasure of silver or gold.

2 By this it appears, that a man (if so be he will carefully use the means)
may come to some certain knowledge and insight of the saving gifts and graces
of God, which are in his own soul: And therefore it must needs be a great
fault in him, to be careless in using the means. It is a sign he sets no
price upon Gods graces, that makes no inquiry, whether he has them in his
possession or no. Men use to make diligent inquiry, after hidden and concealed
lands and treasures; much more ought we to search out the concealed graces of
God, which lie hid in our own souls; and which we cannot employ (as we
ought) so long as we know not whether they be in us or no.

3 It is in this respect, very beneficial and profitable for us, to find out
and know, what gifts God has bestowed upon us, in that (as it appears by this
place) it is a means, not only to prevent fearful and dangerous sins, but
to make us more capable of greater graces, which otherwise shall be withheld
and detained from us. For we have no grounded hope to receive any new grace,
or blessing, from any ordinance of God, until by a diligent search of our
selves, we have first found some former grace in our selves, that may make us
(in some degree) fit and worthy receivers thereof. For to him that has (says
our Savior) shall be given, and from him that has not, shall be taken away,
even that which he has. The use of one grace, is to fit and prepare us for the
receiving of an other.

Those special gifts and graces which are in all them whose persons are
acceptable to God, are Faith and Repentance.

By Faith we are to understand a true, saving and justifying faith, which is a
supernatural gift of God, whereby a man (seeing the vileness of his sin)
relieth only upon the merits of Christ Jesus, for the pardon thereof.

From this Faith, do al other Christian graces proceed, and according to the
growth of it do they grow. Whatsoever is done by virtue of this Faith (how
simple soever the Action may seem to be) it is pleasing to God: Otherwise (how
glorious soever) it is odious to him. This grace entitles us to Christ and all
his merits. This effectually applies them unto us: This is the only mouth, by
which the Body and blood of the Lord is eaten and drunken; and therefore a
special argument of Gods favor, and a necessary quality to be in all worthy
Communicants. And therefore we are to make special search and trial of it.

CHAP. III. Of the trial of our Faith, by the grounds thereof.
We may try our Faith; first by the ground, then by the subject.

The ground of ture saving faith, is the word of God manifested unto our
consciences by the Spirit of God, to be the Word of GOD. That Faith which
rests upon any other groundwork, or foundation, can be no true saving Faith.

A good means to try whether our Faith be indeed grounded upon the Word of
God, is; To examine our consciences in these particulars.

1 Whether we believe indeed, and in truth, that the Writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, in the Old and New Testament, are the very Word of God? (For the
whole Word of God, so far as is needful to be believed unto salvation, is
contained therein) or at the least, whether we be exceedingly troubled and
grieved in our souls, and from our very hearts, when (through any temptation)
we are moved to doubt of the same: And whether we use al means we can, to come
to be fully persuaded thereof? For in such cases, God accepts the will and
endeavor for the deed. Mar. 9, 24 Romans 7, 18 Matt. 5.6


2 Whether we unfeignedly desire to be taught and instructed in the Word of God,
and to come to the true knowledge, and understanding, and belief thereof? And
whether we love and affect those means most, which are most powerful and
effectual to that end and purpose? For he (whose Faith is grounded upon Gods
Word, has his hope grounded upon the same Word; even all the hope that he
has of everlasting life. And therefore he must needs desire to be acquainted
therewith, by all means possible.

3 Whether our ignorance and dullness, in understanding of the word, and our
forgetfulness thereof, be grievous and troublesome unto us? For how can it
choose but grieve and trouble a man, when he knows not, or understands not, or
cannot remember, the Evidence of his own everlasting estate?

4 Whether our reading, Ps. 119, 92 97, 98, 103
or hearing the word read, or preached: our meditating, conference, and study
of it, do increase, or nourish our love and delight, and belief in it? or if
we cannot discern any such matter, whether we be not unfeignedly grieved and
humbled for it.

5 Whether we give credit and authority unto it, above all humane
Traditions, Ps. 119, 113
and Customs whatsoever? And whe-we do not deny credit and belief unto
whatsoever we know to be repugnant unto the same word?

6 Whether we find a lightness, and cheerfulness in our consciences, when we
have done any thing agreeable unto the Word of God? And whether we find a
trouble, or a dullness and heaviness in the same, when we have done any thing,
which we know to be repugnant unto the same Word?

7 Whether we unfeignedly hope in the promises, fear the threatenings, desire
the blessings, and endeavor to avoid the curses contained in this Word, and
whether we equally believe the one, as well as the other?

8 Whether we judge it a singular blessing of the Lord, that he has in this
manner revealed his will in the written Word; and that he vouchsafes us
liberty and means to come to the knowledge, understanding, and belief of it?
And whether we judge it to be, a great judgment and curse upon them, from
whom this Word is hid, and who want this liberty and means that we enjoy.

9 Lastly, whether we can prove, those points of Religion and Faith, which we
hold and believe, by the written Word of GOD? And whether we do therefore
believe them, because we know that they are affirmed in the Word of God? And
whether we misdoubt, and suspect all those points of Religion, that we cannot
see warranted by the Word of God?

If we can find these properties in our souls, then have we found in our
selves, so many infallible signs and tokens, that our Faith has a true and
sound ground.

CHAP. IIII. Of the trial of our Faith, by the Object or matter thereof.
SEcondly, we are to try and examine our Faith in Christ, whether it be true
and lively, no or yea, by the object and matter thereof.

The object and matter of true Faith, is, That divine truth, which God in his
Word has revealed unto us. For if the testimony of GOD in his Word, be the
ground of our Faith; then that truth (which is revealed in the Word) must
needs be the object and matter thereof. Now forasmuch, as there was never any
one man, that could ever atttaine unto the knowledge of all and every
particular truth, revealed in the word of God: the readiest means herein to
try our Faith, is, by such maine fundamental truths therein contained, and
plainly taught, upon which all other truths do in some sort depend, and unto
which they are to be reduced. And therefore let us examine our consciences in
these points.

1 Whether do we unfeignedly believe the the Mystery of the Trinity, the
Creation of the world, the fall of Adam, the Incarnation, death, resurrection,
and ascension of Jesus Christ? That there shall be a rising again of all
flesh from death to life; a general day of Judgment; that there is a heaven,
a hell, an everlasting life for some, and an eternal death for othersome,
after this life. And such other grounds of Religion, evidently contained in the
word of God, and collected, and proved by the same, in our ordinary confessions
of Faith, and Catechismes.

2 More specially, whether we believe that the Law of God, (the Mat. 22, 4
sum whereof is contained in the ten Commandments) is a To. 7.12 and 9, 14, 15
16
holy, perfect, and just Law? And such a Law, as God may justly bind every
man, to the obedience of every Commandment, therein contained. And Psalm. 19, 7
Deuteronomy. 6.2 4, 5
whether we believe, that he that perfectly keeps this Law, is Deuteronomy. 28 15
Gal. 3.10 Romans 6.23 2 These. 1.9
is a blessed and happy man.

3 Whether we believe, Thate the breach of this Law, deserves everlasting
death and condemnation. And that God in Romans 9 13, 14
his justice, may punish everlastingly in hell fire, the breakers thereof.

4 Whether we believe, That Romans 3 10, 11, 12, 20, 23, and 5 12 Prou. 20, 8
all men living upon earth, since the fall of Adam, have broken this Law, and
so are guilty of everlasting death, and that no man (by reason of the
corruption of his will) Ge^. 8.11 To. 7.7, 27
is now since the said fall, able to keep this Law.

5 Whether we believe, ps. 51.3, 4, 5 Neh. 1.7 Dan. 9.5 12 Psa. 40, 12 and
32, 4 Ezra. 9.6
That our selves in particular, are grievous sinners, and have deserved by our
sins, everlasting death and condemnation: And that it is a great misery to
be a sinner, and a happiness to be free from sin.

6 Whether we believe, Luke 19.23 and 12, 34 Mat. 7, 13 Romans 9, 27 Prou. 16.4
That God will punish everlastingly, in hell fire, a great part of the world,
for their sin; And that to the praise of his glorious Justice.

7 Whether we believe, That neither our selves, Romans 3, 23 and 5, 6, 12 and
7, 18, 19, 20
nor any man else, by his own power, strength, or merit, is able to free
himself from this condemnation: And therefore, if there be no means out of
our selves to save us, that we also shall be in the number of those, that
shall be everlastingly condemned.

8 Whether we believe, John 17, 9 Dan. 9, 7 To. 15, 14 and 9, 22, 23 Heb. 4, 6
that God will show grace and mercy to some sinners, freely saving, pardoning,
and forgiving them, without the least merit and desert on their part.

9 Whether we believe, that all that are saved and pardoned of their sins,
Romans 8.1 and 7, 24, 25 and 5, 1, 12 and 3, 28 Mat. 1.21
are partakers of this mercy, only through the merits of Jesus Christ God and
man; And that he merited the same, by his death and bloud-shedding upon the
Cross.

10 Whether we believe, John 1.12 and 6, 35 Mat. 9, 2 To. 7.24.25 Esa. 1.18
Heb. 9.4
that the merits of Christ, are sufficient for the pardon and forgiveness of
our own sins in particular.

11 Whether we believe, that all that are saved by Jesus Christ, To. 8.30.31
1 Cor. 1.30 Ioh. 15 19 and 17, 6, 20 21
shall in this life (if they live till they come to years of discretion) have
the Mystery of Redemption revealed unto them in the preaching of the Gospel,
by means whereof, they shall effectually be called out of the world, Ephesians.
5.30 John 15.1 Ez. 11.19 Acts 16, 14 John 1, 12 2 Pet. 1.5
to Faith and repentance; And that they shall testify the same, by sorrow
unfeigned for their sins past, and an endeavor carefully to lead a new life
ever after: and in a readiness to do Jesus Christ, faithful service in his
Church, according to his will revealed in his word. Mat. 29, 34 Revel. 22 1, 2,
3 2 Timothy 4, 8
And whether we believe, that after this life, all such shall reign with
Christ Jesus, in all bliss and glory in heaven, for ever and ever.

12 Whether we believe, that all such as do believe, and unfeignedly repent
them of their sins, and have a constant purpose to lead a new life, according
to the will and word of God, John 3.36 1 Ioh. 5, 10
are in the number of them that shall be saved everlastingly. And whether we
judge and believe, that it is a sin, for any such person, John 3, 18 36
to despair of the mercy of God, and not to repose trust and confidence
therein.

13 Whether we believe, that all those persons, are most vile and miserable,
that are not called to Faith and Repentance; and that they (most of all other)
are most vile and wicked persons, that contemn, and despise, Mat. 11.21 25
Heb. 2.3
or care not to use those means, that God has ordained, to bring them
thereunto.

14 Whether we believe, that we are bound to use all the means we can, Mat.
7.7, 8 and 21, 22 Mar. 11.24 2 Timothy 4, 7 8 Luke 2, 29 Job 19, 25
for attaining Faith and Repentance; And whether we believe, that in using the
means, we shall attain them. And lastly, Mar. 9, 24 Luke 17, 5 Mat. 5, 6
Reu. 21, 6
whether when we feel that we have in some measure obtained these graces; we
do believe, that our selves in particular, are of that number that shall be
saved. Or whether we do use all endeavor (at the least) and unfeignedly desire
to believe the same.

In these several points consists the substance and matter of the true
Christian Faith, every one of which, are evidently revealed in the word of God.
So that those who are conversant in the same, (if they do not wilfully shut
their eyes against the light,) cannot but see them plainly set down therein:
and upon these grounds and principles, do all other Truths in the word of God
(in some sort) depend, tending either to the confirmation, or illustration of
them. So that, if in the trial of our selves, we ca^ find assuredly, that we
believe all, and every of these points, and do our uttermost endeavor to
believe them more and more: then verily our Faith is sound, in regard of the
maine matter and substance thereof; though in diverse other particulars, (through
our ignorance and corruption) it may be weak and unsound.

CHAP. V. Of the trial of our repentance.
THE second maine grace, that is in all those that are in grace and favor with
God, is Repentance; the trial whereof, is also a trial of our faith. That
person, whose heart is destitute hereof, is as yet odious in Gods sight; and
therefore a most unworthy partaker of this Sacrament.

Repentance, is an unfeigned hatred of all sin, arising especially from faith.

As they that want faith, want a mouth to eat the Body and blood of Christ; So
they which want repentance, want an appetite and a stomach thereunto. For how
can they hunger and thirst, after the Lamb of God, which takes away the
sins of the world, who have not this grace to repent them of their sins? And
how can they thankfully and worthily eat the body, and drink the blood of that
Lamb, which was sacrificed for their sin, that have no desire nor appetite
thereunto?

The means then to try, whether this Repentance be in us or no, is; To make
inquisition after the special signs and effects thereof: As,

Psa. 51, 3, 4 Dan. 9.7 8 1 Cor. 11 31 Mat. 11.38
1 Whether we do feel and perceive, that we are grievous sinners, and accuse
and condemn our selves from our hearts for our sins, and acknowledge the just
merit and desert of our sin?

To. 3.20 and 4, 15 and 7, 7 Ps. 119, 18 143, 176
2 Whether we did come to the sense and feeling of our sin by the Law of God;
and whether we love the same Law the more, by how much the more it discovers
our sins. And whether also we love those means best, that are most
powerful and effectual, to bring us vn-the knowledge, sense, and feeling of
our sins.

3 Whether the more that we hear, Gal. 5.24 1 John 3, 9 Romans 6.2 3, 4, 5
and believe the Gospel, and in it, the love and mercy of Jesus Christ toward
sinners, the more we hate and forsake our sin.

4. Whether we hate a sin, as much, or more in our selves, then in another,
and whether we love another, because of conscience he forbeareth to sin.

5 Whether we hate and strive against that sin, that our nature is most
disposed unto, and which loves and haunteth us most.

6 Whether the more, that we have formerly sinned against God, Luke 7, 47
and by our sins dishonored God, the more now we desire and endeavor to
please God.

7 Whether we do strive against, not only great sins, Gal. 5.9 1 The. 5.22
such as are punished at Assizes and Sessions: but also small sins, such as
are not punished, nor never called in question, in the Courts and Consistories
of men.

8 Whether we hate and abhor in our selves, not only those sins, that are
hateful and detestable in the eyes of men: but even those also, Genesis 36.9
which men will account a grace and honor unto us to commit: And for which
they will recompense and reward us; when it shall be revealed to us, out of
Gods word, that they are sins.

9 Whether we hate sin principally, because God hates it, and forbids it; And
not only, and especially, in respect of the curse and punishment, or of the
laws of men.

10 Whether we do not repent, that we did no sooner repent: And whether we
would, for any worldly good be in that estate, Phil. 3.7, 8
that we were in before our Repentance.

11 Whether we can instance, in any special or particular sins, which
formerly we loved and delighted in, which now we hate and strive against.

12 Whether we do so much the more study and embrace the contrary virtues
unto such sins, as we now repent of, by how much the more we have been
formerly given unto them.

13 Whether we are not afraid, that something that we love and affect,
should (by the word of God) be discovered to be a sin; And whether we do not
desire and pray, that God would discover unto us, al our sins, to the end that
we may strive against them, and forsake them.

14 Whether we do rejoice and unfeignedly thank God, when any thing (that we
take pleasure and delight in) is discovered to be a sin.

15 Whether we esteem it, a singular blessing of God, that we have been,
and are crossed of God in those sins, which our nature thirsts after; And
that we have not had that opportunity and means of committing them, which our
corruption has desired.

16 Whether we do not hate, but rather love him, that dutifully lovingly,
and brotherly does admonish us of a manifest sin, especially if it be a
Minister of God.

CHAP. VI. Of new Obedience, and the trial thereof.
ONe maine and special effect, and fruit of true Repentance, and consequently
of Faith, (without which our persons cannot be acceptable unto God) is new
Obedience.

1 Pet. 4, 2 and 1.21 Romans 6, 15 Acts 13, 1 Dan. 3.18
New obedience, is a constant purpose to forsake all sin, and an endeavor to
obey God in all things for Christ's sake.

Every Article of our Faith, is an irresistable argument, to prove that we owe
this duty unto God: And if we believe them truly, they will move us, yea force
us unto the same in some measure or other.

The means to try whether this grace be in us, or no, is to examine our
consciences in these points following:

1 Whether we desire and endeavor, 1 The. 5.21 Act. 17.11 Ps. 119.15
to know the will, pleasure, and commandment of God, that we might thereby
frame our selves to please God: and whether we do (to this end) use the most
likely and approved means, to come to the knowledge thereof: and whether we
rejoice in the knowledge thereof, after we have attained unto it.

2 Whether we are content, Gal. 5, 24 1 Cor. 1, 18 19, 20 Mat 26, 39 Nu^. 22,
19
to subject our own wills, reason and affections unto Gods revealed will: and
do not exalt our own wisdom and will above his.

1 Pet. 4, 12 16 Matthew. 19 28, 29 1 Pet. 4, 17 18, 19 Phil. 1, 29 Ps. 119.71 1
Cor. 1, 4 Romans 5, 3 1 Pet. 4, 13
3 Whether we labor to persuade our selves, that we shall lose nothing, by
yielding obedience to Gods will: and that it shall be worse for us, for crossing
his will in any thing whatsoever; yea, that the more we lose, by our obedience
to God, the more we shall be sure to gain thereby.

To. 17, 24 2 Cor. 12, 8 Pr. 30, 8, 9
4 Whether we are not grieved, when we meet with any lets and hindrances: by
means whereof, we cannot do his will, as we ought and would do it: and
whether we are unfeignedly sorry, that we want strength and ability to do it,
as we would and should.

5 Whether we count it a grace, honor, Mat. 16, 24
and favor unto us, that God would vouchsafe to command us any service: and
whether we think nothing too base for us to do, that he requires at our
hands.

6 Whether it be grievous unto us, Ps. 119, 136
that others do not obey God: and whether it be hateful unto us, that another
man should displease God, to pleasure us.

7 Whether we think all the service and duties, that God requires of us, to
be performed either to himself, Romans 9.3. Ge. 22.1.2
or to our neighbor, to be less by many degrees, then he has deserved at
our hands: and whether, if he should desire greater matters at our hand, we
think our selves bound to yield obedience unto them.

8 Whether we account meanly and basely of our obedience, Lu. 18.13 Psalm. 51,
17 Esa. 66.2.
and of the best service we can perform, or at any time have performed to
God, as that which is of no value, to merit the least grace and favor of him.

9 Whether it be a tediousness and vexation unto our souls, to live in
those places, Psa. 120.5 Psa. 84.1, 2 3, 4 and 27.4
where we cannat have opportunity to serve and please God, as we would, and
ought to do: and whether we love those places most, where we have most means
and opportunity to serve and honor God.

10 Whether we love those persons most, 1 The. 5, 12
from whence we have most helps and encouragements to serve and please God:
and whethere of all other persons, we mislike them most, that cross and hinder
our obedience unto God, and will not suffer us to perform those duties unto
him, which we are able to do, and willingly would do; and which lay snares
and stumbling blocks in our ways, that we may not freely serve him as we
would.

11 Whether we desire to live no longer, Phil. 1, 9 10, 11
then that we may be able to do God some honor and service; and whether,
every day, more then other, the longer we live, we think our selves bound,
and endeavor to do better and better service unto God, and to make him amends
for our negligence past, all the days of our life before.

CHAP. VII. Of the Persons that are to make this trial.
HItherto of the trial it self.

The Persons that are to make this trial, are our selves, upon our selves: Let
a man therefore (says the Apostle) examine himself. The reason whereof is
evident: for it is not possible, that another man should by trial find out,
what is in our hearts and consciences. For though another should use never so
many experiments, and try never so many conclusions upon us; yet may we
through our hypocrisy, and cunning dissimulation cosen and delude him, though
he were the wisest man, and seuerest inquisitor in the world; Yea, our own
hearts are so full of fraud and guile, that if in this trial and examination
of our selves, we do not proceed by a sound and sincere rule, our selves shall
exceedingly cosen our selves; and we shall conceit, that that grace is in our
hearts, which was never in them indeed and truth.

Does not experience teach us, That some persons have made great shows of
piety, and more then an ordinary profession thereof, insomuch that they have
seemed, not only to others, (but out of doubt, even to themselves) to burn in
zeal, to some special Truths, and causes of Christ, who yet afterward have
proved detestable Apostates, and bloody and desperate persecutors of that in
others, which themselves have professed?

The Lord seldom leaves his Church without some notorious example or other of
this kind; that we might the more narrowly try and examine the sincerity of
our hearts, and take heed we be not deceived with shows and semblances of
grace, in stead of substances.

This trial of our selves, does not exclude the trial which others (as far
as they are able) are to make of us, especially our Governors, Teachers, and
Instructors, such as have the Cure and charge of our souls: but it rather
strengthens and confirms the same. For they who in singleness of heart
shall once set themselves to this work, shall find it of that difficulty,
that they will be glad of any furtherance and direction that they can get. For
those Trials and Examinations, that others use to make of us, are but helps
and directions, how we may (in the best manner) try and examine our selves.
Those therefore, who are so ready to conclude from hence, that others have
nothing to do to examine them, because they are here required to examine
themselves: might as well conclude, that no body else is to care for, or do
good to them; because they are to care for, provide for, and do good for
themselves.

But the truth is, such persons as are not willing that others should examine
them, do never purpose to examine themselves; but are guilty to themselves of
Ignorance and Gracelesnesse, and affect the same: And therefore had rather live
and rot therein, then discover it to others, though they might have help
thereby. Indeed, if this were the end of such trialls, to find out the
defects, wants and infirmities of our brethren, to the end that they may be
drawn forth to punishment, or that we might have matter of contempt or
dirision against them, it were somewhat to except against it. But seeing the
use and intent thereof, is to find out what spiritual grace the Examinant
wants, to the end that the best means might be used to supply the same: Is
it not strange, that any should be found unwilling to submit unto the same?
much more to judge it an injury and wrong? If a rich man should come to a poor
man, and in love and pity examine him of his estate, desiring to make known
unto him what he wants: whether money, corn, or other provision for himself,
his wife and children, promising to supply the same: Were he not a strange man,
if being in extreme want, himself, wife and children ready to starve with
hunger, he should murmr and grudge at this rich man, and ask what he had to
do to examine him? Verily, thus it is with many poor ignorant souls amongst
us: the more they stand in need of spiritual relief, the less they can
endure to be examined of their poverty and nakedness, by those who are
desirous, to help and relieve them the best they can.

But we may note hence.

1 That this is not sufficient to make a worthy Receiver, That upon trial and
examination made by others, he be found worthy. A man by wise and politic
carriage, may so demean himself that (even the best) and holiest, and
learned after that they have sifted him to the uttermost, shall find no just
matter of exception against him. And many bear this mind, that if they can so
behave themselves, as no man else can accuse them, though they be guilty to
their own conscience of never so many corruptions; that then they are worthy
enough of Christ, and this Sacrament, and all other prerogatives of Christians.
But the Apostle teaches us here, never to judge our selves tried enough, but
when we are approved to our own souls and consciences. For the strictest
Inquisitors, may free and acquit us, when our own consciences have a thousand
capital crimes to arraigne, convict, and condemn us of. Let us not therefore,
in the matter of our own worthiness, so much rely upon the judgment of
others, though it were of the best in the world, as of our own consciences,
which are better able to judge of our own inward estate, then all the world
besides. But most judge themselves christians worthy enough, if no man else be
able to lay any special unworthiness to their charge. But then the Apostle
would have sent us to others, (and not to our selves) to be tried and examined.

2 This duty of trying and examining a man's self, is of use to the best of
Christians: for many times none feel in themselves more want of graces then
they do, none are more dejected with the sense and feeling of their defects,
then they are: And many times they think they want those graces most, with
which their souls are most richly adorned.

And thus much of the first duty, which the Apostle propounds as a special
means, to prevent the profaning of this Sacrament.

CHAP. VIII. Of the continuance in trial, till we find that we seek for.
THe other duty propounded by the Apostle (but implicitly) is; That we give
not over trying and searching of our selves, until we find these graces in us.
For the Apostles requires of him that examineth himself, That he eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup.

What? Is he to do this, whether in this search and trial he shall find any
grace in himself or no? To what end then should a man make any such trial?
This case is clear, that a man is not to receive this Sacrament, except after
trial he find himself to be in the state of grace. But why does not the
Apostle, put in this caution and exception: First, Because he would thereby
teach all Christians, so long to continue the trial and examination of
themselves, until they have found in themselves (in some degree) the graces
above specified: Secondly, To show that a man has not tried and examined
himself, in that manner which the holy Ghost means, until he has found in
himself the graces aforesaid.

Thirdly, To teach, that he that has this grace, but to search seriously
within himself, shall in good time find these graces in himself.

It is the precise promise of our Savior, Seek and you shall find, Luke 11.5,
9.

What an encouragement then ought this to be unto every one of us, to rifle and
ransacke our own souls, searching every corner of them, as one would search
for a Mine of gold, seeing we are sure before hand to find the graces we seek
for, and in and with them (which will be of more worth to us then a thousand
worlds) a sealed pardon of the forgiveness of our sins; Yea, sure evidences
and Indentures of a firm title to the kingdom of heaven. If a condemned man
should be certified, that if he did make diligent search he should with out
fail find the Kings pardon; or if a needy beggar were informed, that if he
would seek and search narrowly in such a place, he should be sure to find
such treasures of gold and silver, as would make him a rich man as long as he
lived; would any man pity either the poverty of the one, or the death of the
other, if they should refuse in those cases to take pains to search? Much
less are such to be pitied, that may find saving grace, if they will seek
for it. Can there be a greater sign of a man that despises the grace of God,
then in such a case as this is, not to seek after it; when a man may be sure
to have it for the seeking after?

Here we may note by the way, that the Apostle does not only tie, the duty of
Examination to the receiving of this Sacrament; but also the receiving of this
Sacrament, to the duty of Examination: Not that we should never examine our
selves, but before the receiving of this Sacrament, or upon this occasion
only; but that doing it upon this occasion, we should then after the doing of
it receive, and not forsake the Table of the Lord. So that these points
following, are plainly taught unto us by the Apostle.

1 That the danger of receiving unworthily, must not withhold us from
receiving this Sacrament; but must make us so much the more studious, to use
the means of worthy receiving the same. For the Apostle does not say; Let a
man therefore forbear to receive; but, Let a man therefore try and examine
himself, and so let him eat, etc. So that the more dangerous it is to receive
unworthily, the more must we endeavor to be worthy Receivers. And hence the
Apostle inferres this duty, from the danger aforesaid, as if he should say;
Every Christians stands bound to receive this Sacrament; yet seeing the danger
of unworthy receiving is so great; our duty is the more carefully to study how
we may be worthy Receivers.

2 That all Christians which are bound to receive, are bound to make this
trial before they receive.

3 That after we have made this trial, it is a sin not to receive this
Sacrament.

CHAP. IX. Of the curse that follows, the neglect of the trial aforesaid.
THus much of the duties, necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.

The Apostle furthermore urges, and presses the Church of Corinth (and us in
them) to this duty.

And this 1 In general, by showing the curse that they incur, which without
this Trial do eat unworthily. 2 In special, by showing what signs and
tokens of that curse, was amongst the Corinthians themselves.


The curse he first propounds: and secondly affixeth the special ground and
reason thereof.

The curse propunded is this; That a man, not trying and examining himself,
eats and drinks unworthily, and therein and thereby, eats and drinks
his own damnation: That is, in stead of receiving any spiritual food, they
receive thereby (except the special mercy of God prevent it) that which will
be a bane and poison to their souls. The bread and wine received, shall be so
far from being to them the body and blood of Christ, that it shall be unto
them (as the sop was to Judas) a means, in and by which Satan shall enter
into them. They shall be so far from furthering their salvation thereby, that
if they had no other sin, that should be sin enough, to pull upon their
heads eternal condemnation.

If God should turn these Elements of bread and wine (being vnworworthily
received) unto a bodily bane and poison unto us, would it not make us fear and
tremble how we received them, and to try and examine our selves thoroughly,
before we presumed to receive the same?

Surely, if upon our unworthy receiving, our bowels and entrails should be in
danger to rot within us; yet, if no more evil then that should follow, it were
nothing so fearful a matter as this is, to eat and drink our own damnation.
As therefore we hate and abhor the damnation of our souls, we should hate
and abhor the unworthy receiving of this Sacrament, and love and embrace
those means, by which we may become worthy receivers thereof.

The ground of the curse, is, because such do not discern the Body of Christ,
that is, make no difference between that food, and those dainties which God
prepares and offers in this Sacrament, even the precious Body and blood of
our Savior Christ, and other ordinary meats and drinks, eating and devouring
the bread and wine, never looking after, nor regarding to eat and drink the
body and blood of Christ exhibited thereby. What is this but to contemn Christ
and his merits, and to offer a foul indignity to God, that prepares this
feast? And how can they but endanger themselves to perish eternally, that
discern not, nor look not after that food, by which they should live
eternally.

CHAP. X. Of the special signs and tokens, of the aforesaid curse in the
Church of Corinth.
THe Apostle more specially shows, the curse aforesaid, by certain special
signs and tokens thereof in the Church of Corinth, viz. Certain special
judgments of God, that at that time were inflicted upon diverse persons, in and
of that Church.

These judgments were bodily afflictions, of diverse sorts and degrees. Some
were smitten with one kind of infirmity, and some with another, and some with
death it self. For this cause (says the Apostle) many of you are weak, and
sick, and many sleep: verse 30.

Hence we learn,

1 That we ought in a special manner, to reverence and religiously use those
ordinances of God, the profanation whereof, he marks and brands with
particular visible judgments. Gods mere threatenings of death after this life,
should be enough to terrify Christians, from the abuse of any of his
ordinances: Much more then should they move us, when (as so many seals and
Sacraments thereof) he shall annex thereunto sensible plagues and punishments
in this life. We cannot but see, that many plagues and judgments are gone
forth, from the Throne of God into the world; yea; into the Church; yea, into
many of our houses, and upon our own persons: Neither do we see the
judgments only, but we might see also (if we did not wilfully shut our eyes)
for what particular sins GOD infflicteth many of them. Who is it that cannot
see, that so many and so many plagues and vengeances have fallen, and do yet
lie upon such and such men, for their murders, thefts, adulteries, treasons,
periuries, drunkenness, etc. And yet neither the sight of these judgments, no
nor the sense and feeling of some of them in our own persons, will serve to
restrain us from those sins; But in the midst of so many judgments these
sins abound, and as it were triumph over them.

2 We may learn, that the unworthy and profane receivers of this Sacrament,
do not only eat and drink therein a spiritual judgment (which hypocrites
and carnal men do not so much care for;) but even bodily judgments also, so
that it may prove in the end and effect no bette, rthen a very bane and poison
unto our bodies, and a means of many grieuousiseases, yea and of untimely
death. For so it proved (we see) to some of these Corinthians; and we can
plead no special privilege. The more therefore that we may love our bodily
lives and health the more; let us make conscience of the former duties. These
kind of judgments here mentioned, are no strangers amongst us; yea the hand of
God in this kind has lien a long time heavy upon us; and though we cannot
precisely say (as the Apostle here does,) That for this very cause, some of us
are afflicted, with this disease and some with that, and so many with the
pestilence, etc. yet having such a president set before us, in the Word of God,
of such a sin, punished with such judgments, it being too apparent, that not
only the same sin does reign amongst us, but that also the same judgments
lie in great weight and measure upon us; we have just cause to fear, that
amongst others, this very sin is one cause thereof. And therefore, in seeking
to remove these judgments, let us have a special care amongst other sins to
reform this.

3 So often as any of us are guilty unto our selves, of vnreuerent and unworthy
receiving of this Sacrament, and the more free we have been withal, from any
of these judgments, in the greater danger we should fear our selves to be.
For we are indebted, so many deaths and sicknesses to the Lord, which (except
we prevent betimes with true Repentance) we shall be sure to pay, with the
interest, either in this life, or in another. For the Lord as much hates this
sin in us, as in the Corinthians, and will be sure at some time or other, by
one means or other, to punish it severely; And the more he deferres to punish
it, the more severely he will do it, when he takes the rod once into his
hands. Let us then in the fear of God take heed, how in this case we too much
abuse the patience and long suffering of God; patience wounded becomes fury.

For the further enforcing of this, the Apostle shows,

First, the Justice of God in this curse of his: Secondly, his Mercy.

His Justice, in that he had not thus sharply judged them, if they had judged
themselves. For (says he) if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged, v. 31. As though he should say: We may thank our selves for these
and such like judgments that lie upon us, and can no way blame God for them.
For it is just with him, the best of us being so sinful as we are, that when
we will not judge and condemn our selves, we should be in such a manner
judged and condemned by him.

Hence we may learn,

1 That the best means to prevent any judgment of God, whether temporal or
eternal, is, to accuse, arraigne, judge and condemn our selves: and
contrarily, the surest way to pull down all sorts of judgments upon our
selves, is to justify our selves, and to glory in the merits of our own
righteousness.

Would we then in most effectual manner, prevent sickness, shame, death? Let
us examine our selves, and search what sins are in us, and pass the seuerest
sentence of condemnation against our selves that may be. The more (if it be
done unfeignedly) we shall condemn our selves, the more the Lord will justify
us.

2 The due trial and examination of a man's self, and the judging and
condemning of a man's self, do one necessarily follow upon another. Otherwise
there is no good coherence of these words with the former.

He the^, that shall carefully and conscionably examine himself, shall be sure
to find matter enough in himself, to judge and condemn himself for. So that
he does most worthily eat and drink this Sacrament, that shall discern in
himself most matter of judgment and condemnation: and none more unworthy
receivers thereof, then those which can find nothing in themselves to judge
and condemn themselves for.

He shows secondly, the Mercy of God toward them herein. That these
judgments (unto them that can make right use of them) are but fatherly and
loving chastisements and instructions, to keep them from the common
condemnation of the world. But (says he) whilst we are judged, we are
chastened (or nurtured and instructed) of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world.

As if he should have said: You are notwithstanding to behold Gods mercy
toward you, shining in this Justice of his. For he does not this out of any
hatred he bears to any of you, that are humbled under this hand of his, and
can make a good use thereof. But as a loving and dear father chasteneth and
corrects his child, when he sees him in any fault, not that he might be
avenged of him, but only thereby to terrify him and keep him from such
courses, as might bring him to the gibbet, or gallows, or any other such
shameful end: So God exercises you with these temporal chastisements, that
thereby he might keep, and restrain you from following such courses, as might
bring you (with the rest of the wicked world) to eternal damnation.

The consideration hereof, should not embolden us to be the less careful of
the former duties, but rather to make more conscience of them. For howsoever
those who receive this Sacrament unworthily, do not so eat and drink their
own damnation, that there is no means or hope of mercy left unto the^ being
fallen into this sin, and though these temporal judgments, which God
inflicts as signs and tokens, that therein they eat and drink their own
damnation, are to some persons the effects of Gods love, and the means to save
them from that damnation: Yet cursed and desperate must their state needs be,
that shall in such a manner abuse, so great a mercy and love of God; yea, these
temporary judgments, do so far forth only proceed from his love, as they
are sanctified unto us, and made holy instruments, in and through them, to see
and behold what an odious and damnable sin it is to receive unworthily; and so
they become a good means, to make us repent of it, and forsake that sin. In
others they are but the forerunners of eternal punishment.

Thus much for our help and direction, that we may be worthy and fruitful
receivers of this Sacrament.

The Lord for his mercy sake pardon our former wants herein; and move our
hearts to the careful performance of all these duties; that so we may not
only avoid the judgments, which unworthy receivers are in danger to fall
into; but that we receiving these Mysteries worthily, may in and by them,
receive the assurance of that grace and mercy, which is shadowed and
represented by them, even the full and perfect Redemption of our bodies and
souls, through the sacrifice of Christ's body, and his most precious blood shed
upon the Cross, Amen.

FINIS.
A Brief form of Examination. Containing occasionally the maine Principles of
Religion.
I.
Question.

WHat is a Sacrament?

A. A mystical sign ordained of God, to represent and seal to the worthy
receiver, salvation by Christ Jesus, Mat. 28.19, 1 Cor. 11, 23. Genesis 17, 7. To.
4, 11.

Q. Who is Christ Jesus?

A. The eternal and only begotten Son of God; and our only Savior, Matt. 3,
17. Romans 1, 3. John 1, 14. 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 2, 17.

The Questions thus marked with a star, may in thy Examination be used or
omitted, as time or ability of the Person requires.
* Q. What is God?

A. An infinite and eternal Majesty; the Creator and Governor of the world,
Psa. 139, 7 1 Kings 8, 27. Esa. 44, 6 Psalm. 90.2. Genesis 1.1. Psalm. 19. Zach. 9,
10. Prou. 15.3.

* Q. How many Gods are there?

A. Only one in three Persons, Ioh. 17 3. Ex. 20, 2. 1 Cor. 8, 32. 1 John 5.7.

* Q. Which be those three Persons?

A. God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, Matthew. 28, 19.

II.
Q. How is Christ our Savior?

A. By redeeming us from hell, and purchasing heaven for us, Mat. 20.28. John
3, 14, 15.

Q. What is heaven?

A. A place of everlasting joy and glory, Mat. 25, 34. Luke 16, 22. 1 Cor. 2,
9. Reu. 21, 23 and 22.1.2.

Q. What is hell?

A. A place of everlasting torment, Luke 16 23. Reu. 20.10. Matthew. 25.46. Esa.
30, 33.

III.
Q. How came we in danger of hell?

A. By sin, Romans 5.10. Genesis 2, 17. To. 5, 12.

Q. What is sin?

A. A breach of Gods Commandments, 1 Ioh. 3, 4. Romans 7, 7. Gal. 3, 10.

Q. What are those Commandments?

A. God spoke, etc.

Q. Have all men broken these Commandments?

A. Yea all without exception, Romans 3, 9, 10. Romans 3.23. Gal. 3.22.

Q. Does every breach of these Commandments deserve everlasting torment in
hell?

A. Yea verily, Romans 6.23. Gal. 3, 10. Deuteronomy. 27, 26.

IIII.
* Q. How many sorts of sin are there?

A. Two: Original and Actual.

* Q. What is Original sin?

A. A corruption of nature, whereby we are inclined to the breach of all GODs
Commandments, Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7, 18. and 8, 7. and 7, 14.

* Q. Is this corruption in all?

A. Yea: Genesis 8, 21. Romans 5, 12.

* Q. How came we to the same?

A. By the fall of Adam, our first father. Romans 5, 12. 1 Cor. 15, 22.

* Q. How did he fall?

A. By eating of the fruit of a tree, that God had forbidden upon pain of
death, Genesis 3, 6.

* Q. What is Actual sin?

A. A particular breach of Gods Commandments, in thought, word, and deed,
arising from Original corruption, Ge. 6, 5. Gal. 5, 19. Ephesians. 2, 3. Romans 3, 13.

V
Q. By what means has Christ redeemed us from hell, and purchased heaven for
us?

A. By fulfilling the Law, and dying for us, Phil. 2, 8. Mat. 5, 17. v. 3.15.
Revel. 5, 9, 1. Heb, 9, 15.

* Q. How could the Son of God, being God, perform this?

A. He took upon him our nature, and so became God and man in one Person.
Ioh. 1, 14. Romans 9, 5.

* Q. How did he take our nature upon him?

A. He was miraculously conceived by the holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin.
Esa. 7, 14. Matt. 1, 20. Luke 1, 35. John 1.14.

Q. What death did he die for us?

A. An accursed death upon the Cross, Matt. 27, 35. Gal. 3, 13.

Q. Was there no other means to save us?

A. No verily, Acts 4.12. Romans 7.23, 24.

* Q. Does our Savior Christ then continue still under death?

A. No: but he rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven, and there
sits in all glory, at the right hand of his Father, making intercession for
us, Ioh. 20 Mat. 28. Acts 1. Acts 2, 31. 1 Cor. 15. Mark. 16.19.

VI.
Q. Shall all men be saved by Christ?

A. No: but such only (if they be of years) as by Faith and Repentance become
new men. Ephesians. 3, 17. Col. 2, 12. Ioh. 3, 16. and 1, 12. Act. 13, 39. Mar. 1, 4,
15. Acts 20.21. Ioh. 6, 35.

Q. What is Faith?

A. A confidence in the merits of Christ only for salvation, Act. 16, 31. John
1, 12.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. An unfeigned hatred of all sin for Christ's sake, Acts 3, 19. 2 Cor. 7, 10,
11. Mat. 3, 7, 8, 10.

VII.
Q. By what means do we attain unto Faith and Repentance ordinarily?

A. By the preaching of Gods Word, Ephesians. 1.31. Romans 10.17.

Q. What is Gods Word?

Answ. His revealed will contained in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. 2 Pet. 1.20. Luke 24.27. 2 Pet. 3.2.

Q. What were those Prophets and Apostles?

A. Men that writ by divine inspiration, 2 Ti. 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21.

* Q. What be the parts of Gods Word?

A. The Law and the Gospel.

* Q. What is the Law?

A. That part of Gods word, which shows the cursed estate that all men are in
by reason of sin, Galath. 3.19. Romans 3.20.

* Q. What is the Gospel?

A. That part of Gods word which shows, how we are freed from that curse by
Jesus Christ Act. 16.30. John 3.16. Mar. 1.1.

VIII.
* Q. Where is Gods Word ordinarily preached?

A. In the Churches of Christ.

* Q. What are the Churches of Christ?

A. Holy Assemblies, ioining, ordinarily, and orderly together in the worship
of God, 1. Cor. 1.2, and 2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Tit. 1.5.

* Q. Wherein consists the worship of God?

A. In hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, and Prayer, Mat. 28.18. 9.
Act. 15.21. 1 Timothy 2.1. 1 Corin. 11.23.

IX.
* Q. By whom is the Word of God preached?

A. By the Ministers of Christ. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

* Q. Who are the Ministers of Christ?

A. Such as having gifts given them of God, are set a part by the Church, to
preach the Word, admininister the Sacraments, and to be the mouth of the
people unto God in prayer: Heb. 5.4. Romans 10.15. Romans 1.20.

X
* Q. Do all attain unto Faith and Repentance unto whom the Word is preached?

A. No: but those only in whom God of his special grace, works the same by
his own Spirit, Act. 16, 14. Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 10.17.

* Q. Who are those?

A. His Elect. Acts, 13, 48.

* Q. What are they?

A. Such as from all eternity he has purposed to save by Jesus Christ. Romans
9, 22.23. 1 These. 5, 9.

* Q. Is there any thing in them above others that moves God hereunto?

A. Nothing in the world, but his own mere good will and pleasure, Ephesians. 1.4,
5, 11. Romans 9.18-22.

* Q. Why does he vouchsafe this grace to some?

A. For the praise of his glorious Mercy, To. 9, 23.

* Q. Why does he deny this grace to other some?

A. For the praise of his glorious Justice, Romans 9.22.

XI.
* Q. What shall be the estate of those, that attain unto Faith and Repentance?

A. They shall in this life daily grow and increase therein. Psa. 1, 3.

* Q. by what special means shall they grow and increase therein?

A. By the due use of the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer.

* Q. But what shall their estate be after this life?

A. There sonles shall go to heaven, and there remain till the last day, and
then both body and soul shall be united again, and both shall continue with
Christ in all glory in heaven for ever and ever.

* Q. What is the last day?

A. A day of general Judgment, wherein all flesh shall be raised from death,
and receive final sentence from God, for that which they have done in this
life, Matthew. 25, 31, etc.

* Q. What sentence shall pass upon those that repent and believe in Christ?

A. They shall be acquit from all their sins, and received into everlasting
glory, Mat. 25, 24.

* Q. What sentence shall pass upon the rest?

A. All their sins shall be discovered and laid to their charges, and they
shall be cast body and soul into hell fire, Mat. 25.41, etc.

XII.
Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper, Mat. 28, 19. 1 Cor. 11, 23, etc.

* Q. What is Baptism?

A. A mystical washing with water, in the name of the Father Son, and holy
Ghost. Tit. 3, 5. Mat. 28, 1^.

* Q. What does water specially signify?

A. The blood of Christ, Ephesians. 5.25.

* Q. What does the washing signify?

A. That we are freed from the guilt of sin, and sanctified by the merits of
Christ; especially by his death and bloud-shedding, Ephesians. 5.26. Mar. 1.4. Act.
2.38. Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11.

* Q. Who are to be admitted to Baptism?

A. All that truly profess Faith and Repentance: and their Infants: Act.
2.38, 39. Act. 8.37. Genesis 17.7. 1. Cor. 7, 14.

* Q. Who are those?

A. Such as do nothing that is manifestly contrary thereunto in the knowledge
of men, or if they have done any thing, give good signs of special repentance
for the same.

* Q. How often are they to be baptized?

A. Only once.

* Q. When are they to be Baptized?

A. As Soon as they can be admitted thereto by the Church where they are called
to live, Act. 2.41, and. 8, 36. and. 10.7.

XIII.
Q. What is the Supper of the Lord?

A. A mystical communion in breaking and eating of bread, and drinking of wine
in special remembrance of Christ, Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q. What does the bread and wine signify?

A. The Body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q. What does the breaking of the bread signify?

A. Those pains he endured in soul and body for our salvation, especially
upon the Cross, 1 Cor. 11, 24.

Q. What does the eating of the bread, and drinking of the wine signify?

A. That by the virtue of his merits (especially of his death and
bloud-shedding) applied to us by Faith, we are not only freed from eternal
death in hell, but shall live with him in heaven for ever and ever.

Q. Who are to be admitted to the receiving of this Sacrament?

A. All, that having been baptized, continue in the true profession of Faith
and Repentance, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.

Q. How often are they to receive the same?

A. As often as it may conveniently be administered in that Church, in which they
have calling to live, Act. 2.42. and 20.7

XIIII.
Q. Who are worthy Receivers of this Sacrament?

A. Such as bring a holy appetite thereunto, Mat. 5.6.

Q. What is that appetite?

A. A spiritual hungring and thirsting after Christ Jesus and his merits.

Q. Whence does this appetite arise?

A. From a sense of the weakness of our Faith and Repentance, and a desire to
have them strengthened, Act. 2, 37, etc.

XV.
Q. How may we come to this true sense?

A. By preparing our selves before hand thereunto.

Q. How are we to prepare our selves?

A. By examining the sincerity of our Faith and Repentance, by the special
fruits thereof: 1 Cor. 11, 28.

Q. What are they?

A. A constant and conscionable care to use all means for the getting and
increasing of them, and a resolute purpose and endeavor to obey God in all
things for Christ's sake.

XVI.
Q. What if we be unworthy receivers of this Sacrament?

A. We shall then eat and drink our own Judgment, 1 Corin. 11.27, 29.

Q. What if we contemn or neglect to receive this Sacrament?

A. We therein declare that we contemn or neglect that which is signified
thereby and offered therein, 1 Corinthians. 11.29.

Q. What if we receive the same worthily?

A. We shall receive thereby Christ himself, and in him more and more
assurance of our salvation, 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q. What if we shall be unjustly put from this Communion?

A. God in this case will accept our will for the deed.

FINIS.
The Doctrine of Communicating worthily in the Lords SVPPER. Delivered by way
of Question and Answer, for the more familiar instruction of the simple. By A.
H. The fifth Edition, reviewed, and corrected by the Author.

LONDON Printed by John Beale for Joyce Macham Widow. 1617.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, after I had yielded to the publishing of mine own poor
meditations upon 1 Cor. 11.23. there came to my hands in writing, this ensuing
Treatise, written some years since by a godly and faithful Pastor, for the
direction of his own people, in the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, at what time he was first called unto them.

In the perusal whereof, I being in my self well persuaded of the fullness
and perspicuity of that doctrine of preparation, which it propounds to
entreat of, the orderly method of every part thereof, the plain and familiar
handling of the matter, and that it did supply many needful points of
instruction that are wanting in mine own Treatise; I was earnest with the
Author to give me leave to publish the same, and to adioyne it as an ornament
and help unto mine: which with much impportunitie at length I have obtained.

For the spiritual good that thou shall receive thereby, bless the Lord; and
pray for the Author, that God would restore him again, to that former liberty
in his Church, which heretofore to the glory of God, and the comfort of many a
Christian soul, he has enjoyed.

Thine in the Lord, W. B.

The Sum and Contents of the Doctrine following.
NOne can receive worthily, that prepares not himself carefully. Page 2 Three
reasons for the necessity of examination. page 3 The first use of this
doctrine. Page 8 Ministers bound to examine the communicants. Page 9 The people
ought willingly to yield to be examined, and the reasons why. Page 10 The
worthy receivers, are not deprived of the benefit of the Sacrament, in
communicating with them which are unworthy. Page 12 Yet it makes to the
comfort of the worthy receiver to communicate with the godly. Page 13 A second
use of the Doctrine, touching the necessity of preparation. Page 14 A sincere
desire to the Sacrament, necessary to the worthy receiving of it. Page 17 This
desire must rise from the consideration. Page 18 1. Of the necessity of this
Sacrament. Page 19 2. Of the benefits received thereby. Page 20 For thereby 1
we make solemn profession of our faith. Page 20 2. We bind our selves to
continue in the faith. Page 21 3 We receive confirmation and increase of faith.
Page 22 For it assures us, that through the merits of Christ, we shall
persevere in the state of grace. Page 23 1 By presenting most sensibly and
clearly Christ and his passion, and the benefits received thereby. Page 26 For
we have here not one element only to represent his body, but another to
represent his blood. Page 28 The bread is broken, and the wine poured out in
our sight. Page 30 We have here not meat alone, but meat and drink. Page 32
Yea, the elements we receive here, are bread and wine. Page 34 We eat the
bread, and drink the wine. Page 36 2 By offering unto us, and applying Christ
and the merit of his passion most particularly. Page 36 3 By exhibiting verily,
and giving Christ unto us, and the merit of his passion. Page 37 For Christ is
indeed present with this Sacrament, and truly given and received in it. Page
38 Yet is not Christ corporally present there. Page 39 Though the bread and
wine be called the body and blood of Christ. Page 43 4 By representing and
confirming to us our communion with all the faithful. Page 44 This Sacrament
is to be administered publicly Page 46 Reasons against private co^munions. Page
50 The benefit aforesaid, not to be received by any use of bread and wine, but
only in this Sacrament. Page 53 For only here they are consecrated Page 54 We
may receive the Sacrament from none, but the Minister of the Word. Page 56 How
far forth it is needful that the Word be preached at all times, when the
Sacrament is to be administered. Page 62 The elements being consecrated, are
not changed in their substance, but in their use only. Page 64 The use of the
Doctrine concerning that desire to the Sacrament, which is to be in every
communicant. Page 68 That we are bound to receive this Sacrament as often as it
is administered. Page 70 Want of charity, or other worldly distractions, no
sufficient excuse for not receiving. Page 73 The great fault of them which
receive this Sacrament, without any desire or sincere appetite. Page 76 How
far forth Magistrates may command, and compel their subjects to receive this
Sacrament. Page 77 Knowledge is necessary to the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament. Page 79 Reasons of this Doctrine. Page 81 Use of this Doctrine. Page
83 Faith is necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament. Page 85
Reasons of this Doctrine. Page 86 What motives there are in the Word to
persuade a man to believe. Page 88 Use of the Doctrine concerning the necessity
of faith. Page 90 Repentance is necessary for the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament. Page 93 Reasons of this Doctrine. Page 94 The use of this Doctrine.
Page 95 Newness of life necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.
Page 99 Reasons why it is necessary. Page 99 The use of the Doctrine. Page 101
Charity necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament. Page 102 Reasons
of the necessity thereof. Page 104 The use of the Doctrine. Page 106 Motives to
persuade to forgive wrongs. Page 106 How far forth a Christian is bound to
love and think well of all men. Page 111 How far forth we are bound to
forgive injuries. Page 113 Cautions and rules to be observed in going to law.
Page 116 How our faith is to be renewed before we come to the Lords table.
Page 120 How repentance is to be renewed before we come there. Page 121 How
our charity is to be renewed. Page 122 That weak Christians are not to
forbear communicating in the Lords Supper. Page 123 Prayer to be used before
we come to the Lords Supper. Page 127 That it is not necessarily required to
receive the Sacrament fasting. Page 128 What outward behavior and actions are
required of us, during the time of the administration of this Sacrament. Page
129 What inward affection and disposion of heart, is required whilst this holy
action is in hand. Page 133 Joy and cheerfulness required in communicating at
the Lords Table. Page 139 What things to be performed by us, after we have
received. Page 140
FINIS.
The Doctrine of Communicating worthily in the Lords SVPPER. Delivered by way
of Question and Answer, for the more familiar instruction of the simple.
Question.

HOw many things are required of them, that would receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper to their comfort?

Answ. Three; First, a diligent and careful preparation of themselves, before
they come to receive it.

Secondly, a reverent and attentive disposition of body and mind in the
receiving of it.

Thirdly, an unfeigned endeavor to feel, and find in themselves the fruit of
it, after they have received it.

None can receive worthily, that prepares not himself carefully.
Q. What is that preparation that is required of every one, that would receive
this Sacrament to his comfort?

A. Every one (even such as have made best proceedings in religion) before he
presume to come to the Lords supper, must fequester himself from al other
business, that might any way distract him, and carefully set his whole mind and
heart upon this work that he is to go about, taking some time to examine
himself, whether those things be in him, that may make him a worthy Receiver
of this holy Sacrament.

Q. 3 Reasons for the necessity of this preparation.
What reasons may be given to show the necessity of this so careful an
examination, and preparation of our selves before this sacrament?

A. First, 1 Our natural unfitness to serve God. 2 Gods strict commanding of
special preparation in this case.
such is the untowardness and corruption of our hearts, Ex. 19.10 1 Samuel 16.5
Joel. 2.15 16 Job 11.13 Psa. 108.1 Eccl. 5.1 Exo. 20.8 2. Chro. 12 14
that we are unfit to do any special service to God, till we have taken some
pains to prepare our selves thereunto.

Secondly, there is no part of his service, before which the Lord has so
straightly enjoined this preration, as before the receiving of this Sacrament.
Before the Passover (which was in substance the same with this Sacrament, and
in the place whereof this was ordained by Christ:) the Lord did not only Exodus
12 3, 6
command that the Lamb should be taken out of the flock three days before it
was to be sacrificed (that his people might thereby be admonished to employ
themselves, during that time, in fitting of themselves unto that service) 2
Chro. 35, 6
but also he enjoined the^ a special preparation before they came unto it: and
the Apostle affirms of this Sacrament, that even they that are believers, 1
Cor. 11 27.31
may and shall certainly receive it unworthily if they do not examine and judge
themselves before they com.

Thirdly, the extreme danger, that he casts himself into that receives it
unworthily, should make every man afraid to come rashly, irreverently, or
vnpreparedly unto it.

Q. 3 The danger of unworthy receiving.
How may their danger appear to be so great, that receive this Sacrament
unworthily?

A. In eating of this bread, and drinking of this wine, 1 Cor. 11 29.34
they shall eat and drink the judgment and curse of God.

Q. By what judgments has God bin wont to punish such as have profaned, or
irreverently used this, or any other of his Sacraments?

A. Sometimes by corporal and outward plagues; 1 Samuel 5.6 7.9.11.12 and 6. 19
as he did them that in the days of Samuel, used the Arc without due
reverence; and them, 2 Chr. 32 20
in the days of Hezechia, that went to the Passover, not being sanctified and
prepared thereunto, according to the Law; and them 1 Cor. 11 30
among the Corinthians, that went to the Lords table before they had examined
and judged themselves.

2 Sometimes he punishes them, as he Ioh. 13.27
did Judas (who with an evil and unpenitent heart presumed to receive the
Passover) by stripping them of those beginnings of grace they had received,
hardening them, and making them unable to repent; so as after they have
received, they become twofold more the children of hell, then they were before.

Q. What is the cause why the Lord is wont to be so severe, in punishing the
vnreuerent and unworthy receiving of this Sacrament?

A. Because the unworthy receiver, 1 Cor. 11 27
is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. How can that be, seeing he receives it not, but the outward signs only?

A. Because 1 Cor. 11 29
he discerns not the Lords Body, nor judges and esteems so highly and
reuere^tly of this his holy ordinance (whereby the same is represented and
offered unto us) as he ought; but accounts it as common bread and wine,
which the wicked as well as the godly have title unto. Which is far greater
dishonor and contempt done to God, then could be done to any King, if his
picture or arms, that hang up in some public place, should be spet upon, or
pulled down, or broken and trampled on by any of his Subjects.

The first use of this doctrine.
Q. What use are we to make of this that has been said, touching the necessity
of preparing our selves aright before we come to the Lords table?

A. First, that therefore 2 Chr. 23 19. and 35, 6 Ier. 15.19 Matt. 7.6 1 Cor.
5.2 7, 13
the Minister and Church must do that which in them lies, to keep from this
Sacrament all such as are unworthy and unprepared.

Q. Why so?

A. Because else, 1 Sa. 2.29
they consent to the great dishonor that the unworthy receiver does unto God;
and Leu. 19 17 Jude 23
unto the certain peril that he casts his own soul into; and so make
themselves liable to that plague, whereby God 1 Cor. 11 30. and 5.2.6
has bin wont to punish whole congregations, that have willingly tolerated so
great an abuse.

Q. Ministers are bound to examine the co^municants.
Is then the Minister also bound to examine such as he admits unto this
Sacrament, and not to receive indifferently all that shall offer themselves?

A. He is: for if at all other times Pr. 27.23 Ier. 6.27 Act. 20.28 Phil. 2.19
1 The. 3.5
he must be diligent to know the estate of his flock, that he may accordingly
be able 2 Ti. 2.15
to divide the Word of truth aright unto them, and Lu. 12.42
give them their portion of meat in due season; then much more must he be
careful to know then at that time, when he is to admit them to this holy
Sacrament.

The people should be willing to be examined, and why.
Q. Then the people must also be willing to have their lives looked into, and
their knowledge examined by their Pastor, and to make known unto him their
spiritual estate, that so with comfort and boldness he may admit them?

A. Yes verily: for first, seeing God required Mat. 3.6 Acts 8.37
of them that (being at the years of discretion) were to be baptized, that
they should first make known unto the congregation or Minister, their faith
and repentance; he does surely every whit as much require this of them that are
to come to the Lords supper.

Secondly, as every Christian is bound to acknowledge his Pastor, 1 Ti. 2.12
Heb. 7.7
his superior in all matters that belong to Gods worship, and to his own
soul, and therein Deuteronomy. 17 11.12 1 These. 5 12.13 Heb. 13.17
to obey him, and submit himself to his direction in the Lord: so is he then
especially to show his obedience to this ordinance of God, when he intends to
be partaker of this Sacrament, because their is no one actio^ of the ministry,
wherein the necessity and dignity of that function, is more set forth and
commended by the Lord unto his Church, the^ Matt. 3 14.15
in the administration of the Sacraments, that is committed unto them. Neither
is there any time wherein it more behooves his Pastor to inquire into his
estate, then when he is to admit him unto the Lords table.

The worthy receiver not deprived of the benefit of this Sacrament, by
communicating with the unworthy.
Q. But if they that are notoriously unworthy be (through the negligence of the
church and Pastor) admitted to the Sacrament; can that deprive the faithful
that receive with them of the benefit and comfort of the Sacrament; or ought
they for that cause, to keep themselves from it?

A. No: for first, no man's sin Eze. 18.20 Gal. 6.5.
can defile another or make Gods promise or sacrament of none effect unto him,
that is neither any way accessory unto it, nor has power and authority to
keep him from the Sacrament.

Secondly, Lu. 2.22 41. and 24.53 Act. 21.26
the holy Apostles, and our Savior himself, did communicate in the service of
God with those assemblies, wherein there were many notoriously wicked.

Thirdly, if it had been so, 1 Cor. 11 28
the Apostle would have required every man, not only to examine himself, but
all those also with whom he is to receive.

Q. Yet does it make to the comfort of the worthy receiver, to communicate with
the godly.
Makes it then nothing to our comfort, what they are with whom we do
communicate?

A. Yes: we should desire to receive with the^, of whose holy profession and
godly life we are well persuaded.

Q. Why so?

A. First, hecause in this Sacrament, we profess our selves to be fellow
members (as with the whole Church of Christ) so, 1 Cor. 10 17
especially with those Christians with whom we do receive; and that we seek
also and desire to be confirmed in that communion, and to become more and more
like unto them, both in faith and conversation.

Secondly, because both our love and zeal may be better kindled and stirred
up, by Matt. 18 19.20 Phil. 3.17 To. 1.11.12
the prayers and examples of such as we know to be godly, then either by the
wicked or such as we know not at all.

A seo^nd use of the doctrine touching the necessity of preparation.
Q. What other use is to be made of this doctrine, touching the necessity of
preparing our selves aright, before we come to this Sacrament?

A. That every one should be 1. Cor. 11 28 Gal. 4.6
careful to examine himself, and not rest in the approbation of the Minister
or Church.

Q. Why so?

A. First, because a man John 13.24, 28
may have a most wicked heart, and yet seem a good man to the Church, and be
guilty also of many gross crimes that are unknown to his Pastor.

Secondly, though a man live so, as his Pastor may discern just cause to doubt
that he is not worthy (and consequently cannot admit him without grief) Deuteronomy.
13 14, and 17.4
yet may not he refuse him till he be evidently able to convict him of some
such thing as may prove him unworthy.

Thirdly, it may so fall out, that though a man's crime be public and apparent,
Mat. 18 17
yet his Pastor may want power to keep him from the Sacrament.

Q As you have showed the necessity of preparation, and the danger of such as
receive unworthily, so tell me who may be accounted worthy to come to the
Lords table?

A. As no man can deserve to receive Christ and al his merits: so can none
deserve to be admitted to the Lords table, wherein the same are represented and
offered unto him; but all that through Gods free grace are made Luke 3.8 1 Th.
2.12 compared with Col. 1 12
meet and fit to receive it, and come with such hearts, as it beseems men to
bring to so holy and heavenly a banquet, Reu. 3.4 compared with Luke 20.35
are (in Gods gracious acceptatio^) accounted worthy to come unto it.

Q. Tell me then, which be those special graces which are necessarily
required, for the making of us fit to come to the Lords table, and which by
diligent examination we must labor to find in our selves?

A. They are six in number. First, a sincere and right desire of it: 2.
Knowledge: 3. Faith: 4. Repentance: 5. Newnes of life: 6. Love. A sincere desire
to the Sacrament, necessary to the worthy receuing of it.


Q. To handle these in order; tell me first, what mean you by this sincere and
right desire of the Sacrament, without which you say none can come worthily
unto it?

A. We must find in our selves 1 Chro. 28.9 Psa. 110.3 2 Cor. 8.10 12. and 9,
7 Mat. 3.13 15 Lu. 22.15 Acts 8.36 This desire must rise from the consideration.
an unfeigned and earnest desire unto it, and come unto it with a willing mind,
and an holy appetite and delight.

Q. How may this sincere and right desire of this Sacrament be discerned?

A. When it rises from the serious consideration of these three things (which
are the only reasons that should move us to come the Lords Supper) namely,

First, the necessity of this Sacrament.

Secondly, the great benefits that are to be received by it.

Thirdly, the present need that our selves do stand in, of all those helps
that the Lord in this Sacrament has provided for us.

Q How may the conscience of a man be persuaded of the necessity of this
Sacrament? 1 Of the necessity of this Sacrament.


A. By considering that this is a part of Gods 1 Cor. 11.24.25
worship, which was ordained by Christ himself, even r in the same night that
he was betrayed; and that he did not only ordain it, and first administer it
himself, but also gave commandment to his disciples (who did represent the
whole Church, of which they were to be the master builders) to take, to eat and
drink it, yea to do that often, which was done in the first institution
thereof, in remembrance of him. So that though there were no benefit or comfort
to be found in it; yet were we bound (in obedience to this ordinance and
commandment of Christ) to come unto it.

2. Of the benefits received thereby. For thereby 1. We make solemn profession
of our faith
Q. But seeing you have said, that the consideration of the benefits that are to
be received by it, is another reason whereby we should be moved to desire it;
tell me, what benefits are those which a Christian may receive by this
Sacrament?

A. First, whereas every Christian is bound, not only to believe, Esa. 44.5
Ps. 40.9, 10 Mat. 10.32 John 12 42, 44 To. 10.10
but also to take all good occasions of professing openly his Faith and
Religion, as being glad to wear the livery and badge of his heavenly Lord and
master; Ex. 13, 9 Genesis 17, 11 1 Cor. 10 16, 21 For this cause Ezekia so
earnestly exhorts all Gods people to come to the Passover, 2 Chr. 30.1, 5, and
calls this a turning to the Lord, and renewing their covenant with him, 2 Chr.
30.6, 8. For this cause it is said they kept it unto the Lord, 2 Chr. 30, 1,
and 35, 1. This one cause why Christ received the Sacraments, Matt 13, 15, Mar.
14, 12. Secondly, we bind our selves to continue in the faith.
the receiving of the Sacrament is one special means ordained of God, whereby
we are to make public profession, that we are true believers and servants of
God.

Secondly, whereas every Christian (out of the sense and experience he has of
his own pronenesse to apostasy) Deuteronomy 29.10, 12.2 Chr. 15, 12, 14. Neh. 9, 38,
and 10, 28, 29. Ps. 119, 106.
should by all good means bind himself, to continue in the faith and
obedience of Christ, Exo. 13, 9. Mat. 28 19. Gal. 5, 3. 1 Cor. 10, 2.
the receiving of this Sacrament is ordained of God, to be as a solemn seal
and vow, whereby we bind our selves (as strongly as by an oath) to continue in
the faith and obedience of Christ, and unity of his Church.

3 We receive confirmation and increase of faith.
Thirdly, whereas every Christian 1 Cor. 16, 13 1 These. 5 19.20 2 Pet. 3.18
is bound to use all good means, whereby his faith may be quickened, confirmed,
and increased in him, the receiving of this Sacrament, is a principal means
that God has ordained for the reviving, strengthening, and increasing of our
faith.

Q. How may that appear?

A. Because a singular promise of grace, and part of that covenant, which God
has made with us in Christ, is in a most comfortable manner taught and
applied, and confirmed to us by this Sacrament.

Q. What is that promise of grace, which is thus taught, applied and confirmed
to us by this Sacrament?

A. As by Baptism, It assures us, that through the merit of Christ, we shall
persevere in the state of grace.
we were taught and assured, that through the merit of Christ's passion, and of
it only, we were first received into Gods covenant and favor, united to him
and his Church, and so obtained remission of all our sins, and the grace of
regeneration; so by this Sacrament we are taught and assured, that through the
merit of Christ's passion, and of it only, we are and shall be kept in this
blessed estate, nourished and confirmed in it, revived and comforted in all
tentations.

Q. Declare this more particularly and fully: and first tell me why it was
necessary, that we should not only have a Sacrament of our first entrance into
Gods favor, and of our regeneration, but also another Sacrament of our
nourishment and perseverance in the state of grace?

A. First, 1 Pet. 1.23 1 John 3.9
though the graces confirmed by baptism can never totally be lost, Psalm.
51.10.12 1 The. 5, 19 Reu. 3.2
yet (through our natural corruption and daily tentations) the assurance,
strength and feeling of them will decay, unless they be nourished.

Secondly, the only thing that causes us to persevere in faith and obedience,
and gives us strength and comfort against all tentations, Gal. 6. 1 John 5.4
is the remembrance and faith we have in the merit of Christ's passion, whereby
Heb. 7.25 and 12.24
he makes continual intercession unto his Father for us; which it was
needful we should be taught and assured of by this Sacrament.

Q. What means and helps have we in this Sacrament to teach, apply, and
confirm to us this promise of grace, in so comfortable a manner as you have
said?

A. First, Christ and his passion, and this nourishment and grace of
perseverance, which we receive by the merit thereof, are most clearly and
sensibly represented to us in this Sacrament.

Secondly, Christ, and this benefit and merit of his passion, is more
particularly offered and applied to us in this Sacrament, then in any other
means.

Thirdly, Christ, and this benefit of his passion, is by this Sacrament
exhibited, given and confirmed to us most fully and effectually.

Fourthly, the communion that we have with the true Church of Christ, and the
mutual love that should be in all Christians one toward another, is more
clearly and full represented and confirmed to us by this Sacrament, then by
any other means. By representing to us most sensibly and clearly Christ and
his passion, and the nourishment we receive thereby.


Q. How may Christ be said to be so clearly and sensibly represented to us
in this Sacrament?

A. First, Lu. 22.19 1 Cor, 11 24, 25
this is one end that this Sacrament was ordained for, to put us in remembrance
of Christ.

Secondly, by earthly creatures and outward actions ordained by God, whereof
all our senses can judge and discern, and by that fit and near proportion
that is between them, and that which is represented by them; the Lord does in
this Sacrament teach Christ unto us by all our senses, and See how profitable
and necessary, such sensible and visible instructions (ordained of God) have
ever been esteemed. Genesis 9.13 Esa. 7.11 Ier. 19.10 11 Acts 12.11 John 3.12
Romans 4.11
consequently more plainly and familiarly them by the word alone.

Q. But why did you say, that in this Sacrament the passion of Christ is so
clearly and sensibly represented unto us?

A. Because Christ in this Sacrament is represented unto us, in Mat. 26 28 1
Cor. 11.24, 25
no other estate then that he was in when he was crucified; and the Apostle
says 1 Cor 11.26
that so often as we celebrate this sacrament, we show forth the Lords death till
he come.

Q. What helps have we here, to represent and put us in mind of the passion
of Christ?

For we have here not one element only to represent his body, but another to
represent his blood.
A. First, we have in this sacrament, not only bread, which signifies his body;
but wine, which signifies his blood: whereby it is evident that Christ is here
represented, offered and given unto us, as he was at that time when his blood
was separated from his body.

Q. But if the bread were dipped in the wine (as in some ancient Churches it was
wont to be, and is yet used to be in some places) were it not every whit as
sufficient to represent Christ unto us, as if they were given and received
severally and apart?

A. No verily: for first our faith in this Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.26
is specially directed to the passion of Christ, as we have already showed.

Secondly, Act 20.28 Ephe. 1.7 Heb 13.20 1. Pet. 1.19
the death of Christ was not natural, but violent and bloody, Lu. 22.44 Psa
22.16 Ioh. 20.25 and 19, 34
and in his passion his blood was separated from his body, and poured out and
shed abundantly.

Thirdly, it was necessary for our salvation, that Christ should not only die,
but in his passion shed his blood for us, Ex. 12.22 Heb. 11.28 Leuit. 16 14, 15
Numb. 19 3.5 Heb. 9.21
and so show himself that only true mean of the redemption of his Church,
which was shadowed and figured in all the sacrifices under the Law.

Q. What other help have we in this Sacrament, to represent and put us in
mind of the passion of Christ?

The bread is broken, and the wine powered forth in our sight,
A. The bread is solemnly in the sight of the congregation broken in sunder, and
the wine poured forth; and that by the ordinance and commandment of Christ.

Q. May not then whole cakes (as amongst the Papists) be delivered and
received in this Sacrament?

A. No verily?

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, because Matt. 26 26 Mar. 14.22 Lu. 22.19
in all those places of holy Scripture, where mention is made of this
Sacrament, this rite of the breaking of the bread is named: Act. 2.42 and 20, 7.
yea the whole action in this Sacrament is called breaking of bread: and 1 Cor.
11 26
the Apostle, repeating the words of institution, mentions this rite twice.

Secondly, because the inward action that is represented to us thereby, is most
necessary for us to be put in mind of.

Q. What is that?

A. The Esa. 53 5.6.
breaking of the body of Christ, and shedding of his blood; yea all those
infinite torments that he did endure both in body and soul for us.

Q. As you have showed how Christ and his bloody passion is represented to us
in this Sacrament; We have here not meat alone, but meat and drink.
so tell me what helps we have here, to represent to our souls the
nourishment and strength to persevere in the state of grace, which we receive
by the merit of his passion?

A. First, there is not one element only given and received here, but two;
John 16 54, 55, 35
to teach, that both meat and drink, that is sufficient nourishment for our
souls, is to be found in Christ.

Q. But if bread alone were given to Gods people in this Sacrament (as in the
church of Rome) were not that sufficient, seeing the blood of Christ (as of al
other living men) was, and is contained in his body?

A. No verily: that cannot be done without manifest sacrilege: for

First, Christ in the institution of this Sacrament, Matt. 26 28 Mar. 14.23
Luke 22 20
ordained and Matt. 26 26, 27 1 Cor. 11.25
commanded all his disciples (and in them the whole Church, which was, as I
have before said, represented by them) that they should as well take and drink
of the cup, as eat the bread. And 1 Cor. 11.26, 29
the Apostle by virtue of this ordinance and institution, enjoined to all the
Corinthians the use of the cup, as well as of the bread. Yea the Lord (as
foreseeing this sacrilege of the Papists) has Matt. 26 27, 28 Mark. 14.23, 24
more expressly commanded the use of the Cup to all, then he has done the use
of the Bread.

Secondly, it was necessary that we should in this Sacrament have two
elements, that might represent the full and sufficient nourishment and
refection that we have in Christ: 1 Cor. 10.3, 4
for else our state had been worse, then of the people of God under the Law,
and our sacraments less clear then theirs.

Thirdly, in that state wherein Christ is represented, and offered to us in this
Sacrament (namely in his passion) Lu 22.44 Ioh. 19.34 Yea the elements we
receive here, are bread and wine.
his blood was separated from his body.

Q. What other helps have we in this Sacrament to represent to our souls, the
nourishment and strength to persevere in the state of grace, which we receive
by the merit of Christ's passion?

A. First, bread and wine are given and received here, which are most
generally used throughout the world; Psa. 104 14, 5 Genesis 39.6 Matt. 6.11
the one for the strengthening and nourishment of the body; Psalm. 104.15. and
^.7 Pro. 31.6, 7 1 Ti. 5.23
the other for the quenching of the thirst, refreshing them that faint, and
cheering the heart of them that are in heaviness; and are therefore most fit
to represent to the soul, the Ioh. 6.35
strength and Pro. 9.2.5 Can. 1.2, 4 and 5, 1 and 7, 9 John 15.1 Mat. 11.28 We
eat the bread and drink the wine.
refreshing it receives by Christ.

Secondly, this Bread and Wine is not only received in this Sacrament, but Mat.
26 26, 27 Mar. 14.22 1 Cor. 11.24
every communicant does eat and drink it, and that by the commandment of
Christ. Which action, as it is of all other the chief mean of nourishment,
and makes our food of the same substance with us, so is it most fit to
represent the Ioh. 6.35 40, 51, 36 Ephesians. 5.30
sound nourishment and comfort that we have by Christ, and that we are by
faith made all one with him.

2. By offering to us, and applying Christ and the merit of his passion most
particularly.
Q. As you have showed how Christ and his passion, and this benefit we receive
by the merit thereof, is represented unto us, so tell me now how all this is
more particularly offered and applied unto us in this Sacrament, then by any
other means.

A. The Bread and Wine is Matt. 26 26, 27 Mar. 14.22 Luke 22 17, 19 1 Cor. 11
24, 25
particularly offered, and every communicant (according to the commandment
that is given in the Name of Christ) does receive, eat and drink the same;
which is most effectual to teach and persuade us, that the Lord does offer and
Ioh. 6 32 Romans 8, 32
give us the body and blood of his Son, and that (as it is the will of God 1
John 3 23
that every one of us should) so every one that comes worthily to this
Sacrament, does indeed receive and apply Christ to himself, for the
nourishment and comfort of his soul.

Q. 3. By exhibiting verily, and giving Christ unto us and the merit of his
passion.
Why was it said that Christ and this benefit of his passion, is not only
represented and offered, but verily exhibited and given unto us in this
Sacrament?

A. Because this Sacrament is not ordained to be a bare and naked sign, or as
a picture that puts us in mind of one that is absent, To. 4.11 1 Cor. 10 16
but to be a seal also, with and by which the Lord does verily convey and
bestow Christ upon us, and confirm and make sure to us this benefit of his
passion: as lands are passed and conveyed among men, by the sealing and
delivery of Deeds and Indentures. For Christ is indeed present with this
Sacrament, and truly given and received in it.


Q. Is Christ then indeed present with this Sacrament?

A. Yes verily: Christ himself is not only signified and represented, but
truly present, given and received in this Sacrament; yet present to the
believer, not to the Bread and Wine; not corporally, Ioh. 6.63
but spiritually and sacramentally present: not offered by the Minister unto
the body, but by the Lord, to the faith of the worthy Receiver.

Q. Yet is not Christ corporally present here.
How may it appear that Christ is not corporally present in this Sacrament?

A. First, 1 Cor. 10 3, 4
because the Sacraments which Gods people enjoyed under the Law, were in
substance the same with our sacraments; and in them Christ was not corporally
present, but only spiritually and sacramentally.

Secondly, we receive no other thing, nor in any other manner in the Sacrament,
then the Disciples did in the first institution thereof; and we are sure that
Christ's body and blood were not corporally received by them, but only
spiritually and Sacramentally.

Thirdly, Ioh. 13.1. and 14.2 19, 25, 28 and 16, 4, ^, 7 16, 28
as our Savior did often foretell his disciples that (in respect of his bodily
presence) he should leave the world and go unto his Father, Lu. 24.51 Act.
1.9.10 11
so he was indeed in the sight of them all taken up into heaven, and God (that
cannot lie) has Act. 3.21
told us that the heavens must contain him until the end of the world. Mat.
24.23
So that if any shall say unto us now, since the time of his ascension, here is
Christ, or there he is, we are straightly charged not to believe it.

Fourthly, we are sure Heb. 10.5
that Christ has but one body, and that his body even since his resurrection
is a true body, and Matt. 28 6, 7 Mar. 16.6.7
such as cannot be in many places at once, and Mar. 16.7 Luke 24.39 Ioh. 20.20
27
that it fills a place wheresoever it is, and may be both seen and felt, and
therefore it is not possible that he should be corporally present, wheresoever
this Sacrament is administered, nor corporally received by every one that
receives this Sacrament: and if it be impossible that his glorified body
should be in many places at once, or in any place where it can neither be
seen or felt, then much less can his crucified body (whereunto yet our faith
is directed in this Sacrament, and not unto his glorified body) be so.

Lastly, as it is not possible that he should be corporally present, or
corporally received in the Sacrament; so if it might be, yet were it no way
needful or profitable for us that it should be so. For as Ioh. 7.36 and 16.7.
and 20.17
all the benefits that the Church receives by Christ have been far more
plentifully communicated unto her since his ascension into heaven, then when he
was corporally present with her upon earth, in which respect it was profitable
for her to lose his bodily presence: so John 6.62.63
the spiritual presence of Christ, and our feeding on him by faith, is far
more effectual to the comfort and salvation of our souls, then any bodily
presence and feeding could possibly be.

Q. Though the bread and wine be called the body and blood of Christ.
Why then is the bread called the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of
Christ?

A. First, the Lord has Genesis 17 10, 11 Exo. 12.11 and 24.8 1 Cor. 10.4
ever been wont in speaking of his Sacraments, to give unto the outward sign,
the name of the thing signified thereby.

Secondly, the reason why the Lord so speaks of Sacraments, is to show how
certain and near that spiritual presence and union is, that by the power of
his spirit is made between the sign and the thing signified (how far soever
they be distant in place, the one from the other) and that as verily, as the
one is offered and given to the body, so certainly is the other offered and
given to the soul of the faithful Receiver.

Thirdly, this manner of speech is more plain and effectual, to lift up our
hearts from the earthly elements unto the consideration of the heavenly matter
represented by them, then if he should have called them only the signs of
his body and blood.

4 By representing and confirming to us, our communion with all the faithful.
Q. As you have showed me how Christ and his Passion, and the benefit we
receive thereby, is not only sensibly represented, but particularly offered and
applied, and verily exhibited also unto us; so tell me now how that Communion
which we have with all the faithful, and the mutual love that should be in
all Christians, one toward another, is represented and confirmed to us in this
Sacrament.

A. First, we are partakers of no other elements here, 1 Cor. 10 17
then all the rest (not only of the same congregation, where we receive without
respect of persons, but) of all the faithful throughout the world are partakers
of: which was one cause why our Savior made choice of bread and wine, which of
al other creatures are most universally used thorowout the world, for the
nourishment and comfort of the body.

Secondly, this Sacrament by the ordinance of Christ, is to be administered in
the most public congregation; This Sacrament is to be administered publicly.
and Matthew. 26 5 Mar. 14.22 Luke 22.19 1 Cor. 11 24
the sacramental actions to be performed by the Minister (as near as
conveniently they may be) but once for all that receive together.

Q. How may it appear that the Lord has ordained this Sacrament should be
administered publicly, and not in private?

A. First, Genesis 17.26, 27 Luke 1.59 2 Chro. 30 3.5.13. and 35.18. Matthew. 3 5,
6, 13 Luke 3.21 Acts 2.42 and 20.7 1 Cor. 11 18, 20
it has bin the practice of Gods Church, commended in the Word, to celebrate
the sacraments in solemn assemblies.

Secondly, Exodus 12 6, 47 Deu. 12.5.9 Leu. 17.34
the Lord has commanded his Sacraments should be so celebrated, and 1 Cor. 11
22, 33, 34
not otherwise.

Thirdly, the Sacraments are To. 4.11
seals of the covenant of grace; which is not appropriated to any few, but
Prou. 8 23. and 9, 3 Mar. 16.15 Acts 2.39 1 John 2.2 Mat. 26.28
is offered in common to the whole Church; and 1 Cor. 12.13 Ga. 3.27.28 Ephesians.
4.5 Jude 3
wherein all (how far soever they differ one from another in worldly
respects) have equal interest; and therefore as they do concern the public
privileges of all, they must needs be actions of a public nature, and should
be publicly administered.

Fourthly, in the use of the Sacraments, we Ge. 17.11 Exo. 13.9
make profession of our faith, and Ex. 12.14 1 Co. 11.26
celebrate with praise and thanksgiving, the remembrance of the great benefit
of our redemption; both which duties are then performed Ps. 22.22 and 40.9 10
and 149.1
in most acceptable manner unto God, when they are done in the most public and
solemn assemblies of his people.

Fifthly, the dignity and reverence due to the Sacrament, As 2 Sa^. 6.1, 2, 15
requires that they should be administered publicly in the assembly of all Gods
people, and with the prayers of all.

Lastly, it may appear that in this sacrament the Lord requires this
solemnity more then in any other he has given at any time to his Church; 1.
because in it he has instituted such elements, as might be common to the
whole Church; 2. and Matt. 26 26, 27 Luke 22.19 1 Cor. 11.24, 25
brake the bread, and poured forth the wine but once in the sight of all; 3.
and spoke the words of institution but once to them all together; 4. and
ordained it to this end (among others) to testify and confirm the mutual love
that should be in all the faithful one toward another.

Q. Do you then condemn all such as being unable to come to the congregation,
do desire this sacrament to be administered to the^ in private?

A. No: but

First, all Christians are to be taught, that they may not put off the
receiving of this sacrament till their sickness, but receive it when they may
with the rest of Gods people in the public congregation; and that it is their
ignorance and infirmity to desire it in private.

Secondly, if at any time (upon extraordinary occasion) the sacrament be
administered in a private house, yet ought a sufficient company of the faithful
to be present, and to communicate in it, and that not without the ministry
and preaching of the Word.

Q. Reasons against private Communions.
How are Christians to be dissuaded from the desire of the Sacraments in
private?

in the public assemblies.



they received so often as they might in the public congregation, when they were
in health, is not to be restrained to the time of receiving, but extends it
self to the whole time of their life afterward.

1 Samuel 4 3, 10 2 Sa. 25.25
folly and superstition to give that honor, or ascribe that necessity to the
sacrament, as to think it can do us good being received or used otherwise
then according to Gods ordinance; whereas on Ez. 11.16 Psalm. 141.2
the other side we are to assure our selves, that the Lord both can and will
help and comfort us without the outward means, when we cannot have them in
such sort as he has ordained, but are deprived of them, not by our own
negligence, but by the hand of God.

Q. The benefits aforesaid not to be received by any use of bread and wine, but
only in this Sacrament.
As you have showed at large, how our communion with Christ and his church, is
both represented and confirmed to us by the bread and wine, the breaking and
pouring forth, the giving and receiving of the same in this Sacrament; so tell
me now whether all bread and wine, that is broken and poured forth, given and
received, may not as well serve to represent and confirm these things unto us,
as these elements and actions that are used in this Sacrament.

A. No: for the bread and wine by nature serve only for the nourishment and
comfort of the body; neither are they at all effectual to yield this strength
or comfort to the soul, being used any where else but only in this Sacrament.

For here only they are consecrated, and how that is done.
Q. How are these elements and actions in the Sacrament made more effectual to
represent and confirm these spiritual and heavenly things, then the same
elements and actions used any where else?

A. By being consecrated and put apart from that use they served to by nature,
unto this holy and spiritual use.

Q. How are the elements and actions in this sacrament thus consecrated and put
apart, from that use they served to by nature, unto this holy and spiritual
use?

A. Partly Mat. 26.26 Mar. 14.22 1 Cor. 10 16
by that which Christ himself did in the first institution of this Sacrament,
and partly by that which the Minister of the Word of God and the congregation
do, whenever this Sacrament is administered according to the institution of
Christ.

Q. How did Christ himself consecrate these elements and actions unto this
holy and spiritual use?

A. First, by Matt. 26 26.27 Luke 22.19 1 Cor. 11.24
the thanksgiving and Prayer he made unto his Father, at that time when he
first instituted this sacrament: whereby it is said, he blessed these
elements; that is, obtained a special blessing from God upon them.

Secondly, by instituting and ordaining these elements and actions in this
Sacrament to serve unto this end; not only Matt. 26 26, 27
using them so himself, Lu. 32.19 1 Cor. 11.24, 25
but commanding his Church to do so also, and Mat. 26.26 This is my body: Mat.
26.28. this is my blood
promising unto us his gracious and effectual presence in the use of these
elements, according to his ordinance.

Q. How do the Minister of the Word of God, and the congregation consecrate
these elements and sacramental actions?

A. First, 1 Timothy 4 4, 5
by declaring the institution of this sacrament and how Christ did consecrate
and put apart these elements and actions to this end and use, and using them
according to this his institution.

Secondly, by 1 Timothy 4 4. according to Christ's example, Mat. 26.27 Mar. 14, 23
Lu. 22.19 1 Co. 11.24
giving public thanks unto God, both for the work of our redemption by the
blood of his Son, and also for making it known; offering and assuring it
unto us not only by his word, but most plainly and sensibly by this Sacrament.

Thirdly, 1 Ti. 4.5
by earnest prayer unto the Lord, that he would be present with, and bless
this his own ordinance, making it effectual to those ends that himself
appointed it for.

Q. We may receive the Sacrament from none, but from the minister of the word
But why do you mention the Minister of Christ, when you speak of the
consecrating of this Sacrament? Is it any matter who does consecrate it, or
deliver it, or at whose hands we do receive it?

A. Yes verily, for: first, as it is not lawful for any person without
commission and authority from the King, So when it was told John that Christ
baptized, he answered, none could do it, without authority given him from
heaven: Ioh. 3.26, 27.
to use and apply the Kings seal, to convey any assurance in worldly matters.
It is a heinous sin for any, having no calling and commission thereunto from
Christ, to take upon him to administer this sacrament, To. 4.11
being the public seal of the King of Kings, and of the commonwealth of
Israel.

Secondly, God 1 Chr. 13 10.11, and 15 12, 13 2 Chro. 26 16-20
has bin wont severely to punish such, as have taken upon them to deliver his
Sacraments without his calling and commission; and 2 Chro 13.9.12.15
has also been much offended with the people amongst whom this fault has bin
committed.

Q. How may this appear that only Ministers and Preachers of the Word of God,
have a calling and authority from Christ to administer this Sacrament?

A. First, because we find Genesis 6.14 compared with 2 Pet. 2.5 Ge. 17.23
compared with Genesis 20.7 Deu. 33 10 2 Chro. 35 3, 6 Mar. 1.4 Mat. 28.29
that all the sacraments which God has at any time instituted in his Church,
have been committed by him unto such as were Ministers and Preachers of the
Word, that by them they might be delivered unto the Church. Insomuch as we
read, the people of God 2 Chr. 30 3. and 5, 3-6 Ez. 6.19, 20
could not celebrate the Passover till such time as the Priests and Leuits
(who were appointed of God both to teach the people and to sacrifice, and
minister the other sacraments) were sanctified and prepared unto that service.

Secondly, only the Ministers and Preachers of the Word, are by reason of their
special office and function, 1 Cor. 4 1.2
called in the scriptures the Lords stewards, and disposers of his mysteries
unto his Church.

Thirdly, they only are said 2 Cor. 5 20 Exodus 4.16
to represent the Lord, and to bear his person, and to be in his stead unto us
in the matters of his worship; as the Magistrate does in the civil government
and affairs of this life: and so are both his mouth unto us to deliver us his
word, and his hand unto us to deliver us his sacraments. And Ioh. 4.1.1 Ephe.
2.17 Lu. 10.16
that which is done by the^ in these matters, according to his Word, is said to
be done by the Lord himself, because Matt. 28 20
he has promised to be present with them and to work with them, ratifying
from heaven his own ordinance in their Ministry.

Q. Does then the worthiness and efficacy of the Sacrament, depend upon the
goodness of the Minister that delivers unto us?

A. No: but it depends wholly upon the ordinance of God, and upon the truth
and power of Christ that did institute it. Yet must it needs make much for the
security and comfort of a Christian, to receive it from such a one as he
knows has authority and commission from Christ to deliver it unto him.

How far forth it is needful that the Word be preached at all times, when
the Sacrament is to be administered.
Q. As you have showed the necessity of a Minister and Preacher of the Word, in
the administration of this Sacrament; so tell me whether it be needful that
the Word should be always preached, at the same time when this Sacrament is
to be administered.

A. Yes verily: for though to them that have already believed, through the
preaching of the Gospel, it may be a true sacrament and seal of Gods
covenant, though the Word be not preached immediately before it being
administered by a true Minister of God; yet is the ordinance of God in some
degree transgressed, and the comfort that Gods people should receive by this
sacrament greatly hindered, if at any time the sacrament be administered and that
duty neglected.

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, Mar. 1.4 Acts 19.4 and 10, 37 Acts 8.12 35, 37, 38 and 10, 34, 47
and 16.14, 15 32, 33, and 2 41 Acts 2.42 and 20, 7
because we find that it has always been the practice of Gods Church,
commended to us in the holy scriptures, to have the Word preached at all times,
when they have been assembled to receive the sacraments of the new Testament.

Secondly, seeing the sacrament can never do us good, til we have attained
unto a true faith, which ordinarily is wrought by preaching; it must needs be
most fit and profitable, that whenever the people of God are to receive this
seal of the covenant of grace, they may have the covenant it self (whereupon
the force and efficacy of the seal depends) published, opened and applied
unto them; considering the great need we all stand in (at that time especially
to have our faith quickened and stirred up in us; and that no means can be so
effectual to quicken it, as that whereby it was first begotten.

Q. The elements being consecrated, are not changed in their substance, but in
their use only.
After that the bread and wine have bin thus consecrated by the Minister of
Christ, are they not then by virtue of this consecration changed from that
which they were before?

A. Yes: but they are changed only in their use, not in their nature; because
here they are not used to that end that other bread and wine are used for;
namely, to the nourishment and comfort of the body, but to a holy and spiritual
end; but the substance of the bread and wine remains the very same after the
consecration that it was before.

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, because the scripture 1 Cor. 10 16. and 11 27, 28 Mat. 26.29
calls them bread and wine even after they were consecrated.

Secondly, it can be no sacrament, unless such an outward sign remain as is
by good proportion fit to represent the nourishment and refreshing we have by
Christ; which the substance only of the bread and wine (and not the accidents
thereof) is able to do.

Thirdly, if the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the body and
blood of Christ, Act. 2.31
it were not possible that by long keeping they should putrify and corrupt.

Fourthly, if the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the very
body and blood of Christ, then the reprobate which receive this sacrament,
should also eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, John 6 54, 56 John 1.12
which is impossible, and contrary to the holy scriptures.

Q. If any of that bread and wine (that stood on the Lords table, when the
elements and the whole action was in this sort consecrated, as you have said)
do remain after the administration of the Sacrament is ended, does it then
differ from common bread and wine, or is it more holy by virtue of this
consecration?

A. No verily: for seeing the consecration (as we have heard) changes them
not in nature but in use only; and one part of the consecration stands in
using them according to Christ's institution; no more of the bread and wine can
be holy, then is given and received in this sacrament.

The use of the doctrine concerning the desire to the Sacrament, which is to be
in every communicant.
Q. As you have showed at large that none can receive this Sacrament worthily,
but such as find in themselves an unfeigned and earnest desire to it; and
declared also the reasons that should move us thus to desire it: so tell me
now what use is to be made of all this doctrine.

A. It serves principally for reproof of two sorts of people.

First, of them that (not being withheld by sickness or like necessary
impediments) do (either out of too base an estimation they have of this
sacrament, or out of a careless neglect to prepare themselves unto it) absent
themselves from it, when it is administered in the congregation whereof they are
members.

Secondly, of such as receive it sometimes, yet without a sincere and right
desire of it or any appetite unto it at all; but either for that they would
thereby escape the danger of laws; or because they would conform themselves
to the custom of the place where they live; or upon a superstitious persuasion
that it will purge them from all their sins, and infuse grace and holiness
into their souls.

That we are bound to receive this Sacrament, as often as it is administered.
Q. Is every Christian the^ bound to receive this sacrament, every time that it
is administered in that congregation whereof he is a member, unless he be by
sickness, or some such like necessary impediment kept from it?

A. Yes surely: for it is necessary to receive this sacrament when we may, as
it is 1 These. 5 19, 20 Heb. 2.3
to hear the word preached when we may; and as Act. 2.41 and 8, 12, 36 and 16,
33, and 22, 16
it is for them that are converted to the faith, and for Christian parents (the
one for themselves, the other for their children) to seek and desire the
sacrament of baptism, upon the first opportunity that God shall offer unto them.

Q. How may it appear to be a sin of such danger, to neglect thus the
receiving of this Sacrament?

A. First, the Number. 9.7 2 Chr. 30.1 5, 21, 26, and 35, 7, 18 Luke 2.41
zeal and desire that Gods people under the Law showed unto their sacraments,
and the pains and cost they were at to enjoy them, being by the holy Ghost
commended to us in the Word for our imitation, should make us ashamed of our
coldness, and careless neglect of this sacrament; which in respect Mat. 11.11
both of the cleerenesse of it, and Heb. 3.5 6, compared with Heb. 11.28
of the person that did first institute it, is far more great and excellent
then they were.

Secondly, the Ge. 17.14 Exo. 4.24 26 Number. 9.13
great severity of God in threatening and punishing the neglect of his
sacraments under the Law, is recorded in the scriptures to admonish us, and may
assure us, that he will much less bear with the neglect of this sacrament.

Thirdly, this neglect of coming to this sacrament when we may, argues our
shameful unthankfulness for the great benefit of our redemption by the death
of Christ, which in this 1 Cor. 11.26
sacrament (that has been therefore called the Eucharist) we are appointed
to celebrate the remembrance of, with solemn praise and thanksgiving.

Lastly, it argues a profane and open contempt both of the commandment of our
Savior Christ, 1 Cor. 11 24-26
who has charged us to come, and to come often to this sacrament; and of those
inestimable benefits which he offers us in it; and of the Church and people
of God, from whose fellowship we do thus divide and excommunicate our selves.

Esa. 7.12 13 Mat. 22.7 Luke 14.24 Heb. 2.3
Which sin we may be well assured the Lord must needs be highly offended
with.

Q. Want of Charity, or other worl^ly distract^ons, no sufficient excuse for
no^ receiving.
But if a man find himself through uncharitableness or worldly distractions,
unfit and unprepared, is it not then much better for him to abstain then to
come to this Sacrament?

A. Indeed, no man ought to come that finds himself unprepared: But this is no
excuse for them that do not so much the more carefully endeavor to prepare
themselves: For,

First, they that choose rather to deprive themselves of the benefit of this
sacrament, then they will freely forgive such as have wronged them, or seek
reconciliation, or take pains to prepare their hearts unto it; do show
manifest contempt of Gods mercy, and Act. 13 46
judge themselves unworthy of Christ and all his merits, and shall one day be
judged dispisers of their own salvation.

Secondly, while by uncharitableness and carelessnesse to prepare themselves,
they refuse this sacrament, they can have no hope that either James 1.20, 21 1
Pet. 2.1, 2
the Word or Mark. 11 25, 26
Prayer should do them good: and therefore by this reason, they may as well
abstain from hearing or reading the Word, and praying, as from this sacrament.

Thirdly, they that feel that they are not only void of malice themselves, but
also unfeignedly willing to use all means of reconciliation with such as do
malice them, 2 Cor. 8 12
ought not to suffer the hatred of others to keep them from this sacrament;
but 1 Samuel 30, 6
rather the more they are injured by men, the more need they have to seek
comfort in the Lord by this his holy ordinance.

The great fault of the^ which receive this Sacrament without any desire or
sincere appetite.
Q. As you have showed the sin of those that willingly absent themselves from
this Sacrament when they may receive it; so tell me how they may also appear to
be in great fault that use to receive it, but yet either without any desire and
appetite unto it, or without a sincere and right desire.

A. First, because as Deuteronomy. 28 47 1 chr. 28.9 Psalm. 2.11 2 Cor. 8.12 and 9, 7
Acts 2.41 To. 12.11
in all the service we do to God, it is required that we do it not
grudgingly, or as of necessity, but with cheerefulnes and feruency of spirit;
so is Deuteronomy. 12 12. and 16.15 1 Samuel 1.7
it especially required that we come to this heavenly banquet with appetite
and delight, because of the great benefits that we celebrate the remembrance
of, and which are offered and confirmed to us in it.

Secondly, if our desire do arise from any other ground, then from the
consideration of those reasons we have already mentioned (as first, either
from the commandment of our superiors, or secondly the desire we have to be
neighbour-like, or thirdly from this conceit, that the deed done, will purge us
from our sins) Zach. 7.5, 6 To. 14.6.20
we do not serve the Lord in coming to this sacrament, but men, and our own
selves: and so make our selves guilty of an heinous profanation of this
sacrament.

How far forth Magistrates may command and compel their subjects to receive
this Sacrament.
Q. May not then Magistrates and other superiors command and compel such as
live under their government, to receive this Sacrament, if they shall discern
them to be careless of it?

A. Every one that is in authority, may and must also Exodus 12 26 27 2 Chr. 17.7
use all means to persuade al such as are under him to a desire of this
sacrament, and Ge. 18.19 2 King. 23 21 2 Chr. 14.4 and 33.16 and 34, 33
command and compel them also to receive it: Yea, he must 2 Chro. 15.13
judge them unworthy to live in any Christian family or commonwealth, that
will not receive it: but he may not compel any to receive, whom he knows to
be altogether vninstructed and unwilling, because (besides the profanatio^ of
the Lords holy ordinance that is caused thereby) the man that receives
unwillingly, shall undoubtedly receive his own condemnation.

Q. Knowledge is necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.
Hitherto you have declared, how all that would come worthily to this
sacrament, must find in themselves a sincere and right desire unto it, which (as
you have said) is the first grace required in our preparation thereunto: tell
me now, what is that knowledge which you mentioned as the second grace that
every man must find in himself that would come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. First, every one must have that measure of 1. Ier. 3.13 Mat. 9.12 Romans 3.20
knowledge in the Law of God (the sum whereof is contained in the ten
Commandments) as may serve to discover unto him not only in general the
corruption of his nature, whereby he is quite fallen from that holiness and
righteousness which God requires of him, and become prone to all evil; but
also some special and particular sins he has committed, and the intolerable
curse of God, due to him for the same.

Secondly, every one must have that measure of knowledge in the Gospel, Ioh.
17.3 Mar. 16.18 1 Cor. 2.^2 Reu. 3.18
as may serve to make known unto him, and certainly to assure him of the
sufficiency both of that remedy that is to be found in Christ against al his
sins and the curse of God; and also of the means whereby that remedy is to be
made his own, namely, a lively faith.

Thirdly, every one must have that measure of knowledge Exodus 12 26.27. and 13,
8, 14
in the doctrine of this Sacrament, as may serve to make known to him those
helps which God has ordained in it, both for the representing and making
known of Christ and his merits to all that receive it, and also for the
applying and confirming of the^ unto himself. Reasons of this doctrine.


Q. How may it appear that this measure of knowledge, is necessarily required
of all that come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. First, because Pro. 19.2 1 Timothy 2.4. Act. 26.18
knowledge is the foundation and beginning of al saving graces: neither can any
man receive any comfort by Christ, or any of his ordinances, unless he be
first enlightened with the knowledge of the truth.

Secondly, because till a man To. 3.20 Mat 9.12 Gal. 3.24
by the knowledge of the Law have his sin, and the curse of God due to him for
sin, effectually discovered to him, and Ioh. 4.^0
by the knowledge of the gospel, the sufficiency of that remedy, that is to be
found in Christ against al his sins and the curse of God, he can never desire
nor esteem of Christ. And till a man by the knowledge of this Sacrament, can
discern the helps he may have in it for the quickening and increase of his
faith, he can never desire it, nor come with appetite unto it.

Thirdly, seeing 1 Cor. 11 28, 29
none can receive worthily, but he that is able to examine himself, and Iam.
1.23 24, and 2.12 Ioh. 12.48
the only rule whereby a man is to examine himself, is the word of God, which
consists of these two parts, the Law and the Gospel; it must needs follow,
that he which wants that competency of knowledge which I have spoken of,
cannot choose but be an unworthy receiver of the Lords Supper, if he presume to
come unto it.

Q. Use of this doctrine.
What use is to be made of this doctrine, concerning the necessity of
knowledge, in them that desire to come to the Lords table?

A. First, to teach us that before the Communion be administered to any people
or they urged to receive it, Mat 28.19
there should be care had, that they be first catechized and instructed; as we
never read that either John the Baptist, or any of the Apostles, did minister
the Sacraments to any people, who^ they had not first preached unto and
instructed.

Secondly, to discover the sin and fearful estate of the greatest part of
communicants in this Land, who though they be utterly ignorant in the
principles of religion, and want the means of knowledge, and be void of al
love and desire of knowledge or the means thereof: Eccl. 4.17
yet will by no means be kept from receiving this Sacrament, at Easter
especially. Which one sin, in so general a profanatio^ of this Sacrament, 1
Cor. 11 30.31
were sufficient to bring upon the land al those grievous iudgemnts that have
been, and are still upon it; though it were guilty of no other sin besides.

Q. Faith is necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.
As you have showed the necessity of a desire to this Sacrament, and of
knowledge also in every one that would come worthily unto it; so tell we now
what that faith is, which you said, was the third grace, that is necessarily
required to the preparing of us unto this Sacrament.

A. No man can receive this sacrament worthily, unless he have a true
justifying faith, and be undoubtedly assured, that Christ with all his merits
do belong unto himself.

Reasons of this doctrine.
Q. How may it appear that none can be worthy or fit to receive, but they that
have this faith?

A. First, because this was necessarily required Mar. 16.16 Act. 8.37 and
16.31.34
of all such as did desire to be baptized.

Secondly, this and al other the Sacraments are appointed of God, Romans 10 14, 17
not to begin, but to confirm faith where it is already begun, and To. 4.11
are therefore called seals of the righteousness that is by faith.

Thirdly, as Heb. 4.2
the word of God which we hear cannot profit us at all, unless it be mixed
with faith, so much less can any profit by this visible word that wants
faith; which Ioh. 3.14 15, and 8, 56
is both the only eye, whereby we may discern the Lords body, and the Ioh.
1.12 and 6, 35, 36 Ephe. 3.17
hand and mouth, whereby we receive it and feed upon it.

Lastly, it is not possible that any should have that right desire to this
Sacrament, which we have already showed, to be so necessary to our worthy
receiving of it, that is not by a lively faith assured, that Christ with all
his merits do belong unto him.

Q. But seeing it is evident by the Scriptures, that Ioh. 17.9
Christ with his merits do not belong unto al men, but to Luke 12 22
a little flock, and that Mat. 7.14
the greatest part of the world, and Matt. 22 14
even of those that live in the profession of the true Religion, shall receive
no benefit by him; how can any peore sinner (that knows himself to be as
unworthy to receive so great a gift from God as any other man) attain to this
undoubted assurance, that he is one of that little flock that Christ died for?

A. The faith of Gods elect is no vain fancy nor uncertain hope, but a
certain assurance; because it is To. 10.8
grounded upon the word of God, which is Ps. 19.7, 9
infallible, and wrought in the heart Gal. 5.22 Romans 8.16 Titus 1.2 Heb. 6.18
by the Spirit of God, s that cannot lie.

What motives there are in the word to persuade a man to believe.
Q. But how is any particular man able to ground this assurance of his own
salvation upon the word of God? Or, what motives may a man find in the word to
persuade him undoubtedly that he shall be saved, and that Christ with all his
merits do belong unto him?

First, that Christ Jesus has by his death and obedience Esa. 53.1 6, and 40,
2 Mat. 17.5
fully satisfied the justice of God and purchased eternal life for all that
can believe in him. Secondly, that Christ with all his merits, Mar. 16.15 Acts
2, 39
are by Gods ordinance in the ministry of the Word, offered indefinitely to
every one that hears the Gospel, and Esa. 61 1-3 Matt. 9.12 13
especially to every one that (out of the feeling of the burden and danger of
his sins) can thirst after him.

Thirdly, that every one that hears the Gospel (specially every Matt. 11 28
one that feeling the burden and danger of his sin, can thirst after Christ)
is straightly Mar. 1.15 Mat. 2.9. Luke 14.21.23. Mat. 11.24 compared with Mat.
6.12 1 Pet. 1.13 1 Ioh. 3.23
charged and commanded by the Lord in his Word, to believe that Christ and all
his merits do belong unto himself.

Lastly, that Ioh. 16.9 Mar. 16.66
no sin or rebellion that a man can possibly commit against God, is accounted
so heinous in his sight as infidelity, when a man will not believe that Christ
belongs to him; 1 John 5, 10.
because in this he makes God a liar, as if offering his Son to him in his
Gospel, and commanding him to believe, he should not mean as he speaks.
Use of the doctrine concerning the necessity of faith.


Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine, touching the necessity of a lively
faith for the receiving of this Sacrament worthily?

A First, to persuade eueryone that professes himself to be a Christian, to
labor for a lively faith: which, Ier. 9.24 Act. 16.34 To. 5.1, 3 Luke 2.29 30
as it is the root and foundation of all true comfort both in life and in
death, so without it Heb. 11.6 Ioh. 15.4 Act. 15.9 Tit. 1.15
it is impossible that either this or any other service we do unto God (seem
it otherwise never so good) should be acceptable unto him, or profitable to our
selves.

Secondly, to teach us, that (because this Ephesians. 2.8 John 6.44 Ephesians. 1.19 20
faith is the mighty and supernatural work of God, and we are of our selves by
nature every whit as unable (if not more) to believe in Christ aright, then to
keep all Gods Commandments) it stands us upon to make high account of the
ministry of the word preached, which is To. 1.16 and 10, 14 1 Pet. 1.23
the means that God has chosen and appointed to show his mighty power in, for
the begetting of faith in the hearts of his elect, and in the use of that holy
ordinance of God Psa. 119 33-36 Pr. 2.3-5
to cry earnestly unto him for his blessing upon it.

Thirdly, to discover the fearful condition of the^, that living altogether
with out the ministry of the word preached, and wanting it willingly, or
having never profited by it at all; do yet ordinarily receive this Sacrament:
whereas no man (without an extraordinary and miraculous work of God, and such
as Ios. 5.12
he has never bin wont to work, when the ordinary means might be had) can be
worthy and fit to receive the Lords Supper, Ecc. 4.17
till he have first enjoyed the ministry of the word, and been an ordinary
and fruit full hearer of the same.

Q. Repentance is necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.
You have showed the necessity of the three first graces, which you said were
required to make a man worthy and fit to come unto the Lords table; tell me
now what that repentance is, without which, you said, no man can receive
worthily.

A. No man can com worthily unto this Sacrament, unless he have first
unfeignedly repented: that is, Pr. 28.13 Esa. 55.5.6 Iona. 3.10
both cast off al his known sins (upon 1 co. 7.10
a hearty sorrow that he offended God by them, and an Eze. 18, 31 Romans 12.9
unfeigned detestation he bears to them) and 2 cor. 11.7 Psalm. 18.23
also fully purposed and resolved with himself never to return to them again.

Reasons of this doctrine.
Q. How may it appear, that none can be worthy or fit to come to the Lords
table, till he have thus repented?

A. First, because we find that under the Law none might be admitted to the
Passover, that had Ezr. 6.21
not separated themselves from the filthiness of the heathen, and Nu. 9.6 2
Chr. 23 19. and 35.15 Ioh. 11.55
cleansed themselves from all legal pollutions.

Secondly, because Hag. 2 13.14 Tit. 1.15 Heb. 10.22
the conscience defiled with any known sin, corrupts all the holy things of
God unto us.

Thirdly, because Mar. 1.15 Mat 21.32 Acts 3.26 and 5, 31.
it is not possible that any man should have a true and lively faith, and
assurance of the forgiveness of his sins, that has not thus unfeignedly
repented.

Q. The use of the doctrine
What use is to be made of this doctrine, concerning the necessity of
repentance?

A. To persuade every man to labor and take pains with his own heart, both to
find out and know his special sins, and to bring his heart to this unfeigned
repentance for the^, especially at that time when he prepares himself to
come to the Lords table. Because, as without this repentance it is not possible
that we should come worthily unto it; so it will make whatsoever service we do
unto God, Iam. 4.8 Ge^. 35.2.5 Iud. 10.16 1 Sa. 7.3.4 Iona. 3.8 10
far more acceptable unto him, and fruitful to our selves, when before such
time as we draw near unto God therein, we do first out of that child-like fear
and love we bear unto him) cast away such sins as we know by our selves.

Motives to repentance.
Q. What principal points are there in Gods Word, by the meditation whereof our
senseless and profane hearts may be moved unto this repentance?

A. It will be profitable for us to consider of these points following:

First, that for the transgressing of Gods commandment, even in a small thing,
not only Romans 5 14, 19
our first parents, and all the race of mankind, were deprived of eternal
happiness, and of all grace to do well, and became subject to everlasting
damnation in the life to come, and infinite miseries in this life, and unto
such a corruption of nature, as whereby they are made prone to all manner of
sin; but 2 Pet. 2.4
also an infinite number of Angels (the excellentest creatures that ever God
made) did not only lose their happiness, but became the most miserable and
accursed creatures of all the rest.

Secondly, To. 1.18 1 Cor. 10 5-15. 2 Pet. 2.6
the fearful plagues that for sin God has brought both upon sundry persons,
and parts of the world in old time, and Psa. 7.11 Zeph. 3.5 Ephesians. 5.6
does still every day; and also 2 Pet. 2.5
upon the whole world in the general flood, upon Romans 11 21, 22 1 The. 2 16
the Jews, whom of al other people he once loved best; and upon 2 Samuel 12
10-12 Psa. 51.8 Job 13.26
many of his most dear children: which all are 1 Cor. 10 11
recorded in the Word and executed in our sight and hearing, for us to consider
and profit by.

Thirdly, the Zach. 12 10 Esa. 53.3.5 Mat. 26.37 38 Luke 22 43.44 Mat. 27.46
Heb. 5.7
unspeakable and infinite torments which the Son of God in his passion endured
for us, as well in his soul as in his body, 1 Pet. 1.18.19. Gal. 3.13 1 John 1.7
without which we could never have been redeemed from the least of all our
sins, nor from the intolerable wrath of God due to us for the same.

Q. Newnes of life necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.
What mean you by that newnes of life, which you said was the 5. grace that is
required of them that would come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. No man can be fit to receive this Sacrament that does not unfeignedly love
the Lord and his holy word, and that is not only willing, but able also in
some measure to obey him in all things, being fruitful in all good works,
especially in the duties of his special calling.

Q. Reasons why it is necessary.
How may it appear that there is such necessity of this newnes of life which
you have spoken of?

A. First, because we find, that under the Law none might be admitted unto the
Passover Ex. 12.48
unless he were not only circumcised himself, but did circumcise also the
males that did belong unto him.

Secondly, because no man is within the covenant of grace (and consequently,
this sacrament which is the seal thereof, can belong to none) but Ier. 31.31
Eze. 36.26 27
such only as to whom God has given a new heart and a new spirit; and in whose
hearts he has written his Law, and put his spirit within the^, to cause them
to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments and do them.

Thirdly, because no man can say he has a true faith (without which, as we
have heard before, this Sacrament can do us no good) unless he feel it Gal. 5.6
working in him by love, Luke 1.6 Act. 24.16
a consci-of al Gods holy commandments; and not only a desire, but Mar. 1.10 2 Timothy 1.7 2 Cor. 5.17
some ability also and strength to do his will, Psa. 1.3
especially in the duties of his special calling.

Q. The use of the doctrine concerning the necessity of newness of life.
What use is to be made of this doctrine, concerning the necessity of newnes of
life in the^ that would come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. To show that the desire that most men have to this Sacrament, as also their
knowledge, faith, and repentance, is counterfeit and hypocritical, and
consequently their coming to this Sacrament dangerous and damnable; because
that howsoever they profess these things, yet are they altogether void of the
practice of piety and righteousness, and perform not any duty constantly and
holily, either unto God in the exercises of his religion public or private, or
unto man in the particular duties of their calling, or in the general duties
of justice and mercy.

Charity necessary to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament.
Q. What is that charity, which is the sixth and last of al those graces, which
you said were necessary for the preparing and making of us fit and worthy to
come to the Lords table?

A. No man can be worthy and fit to come unto the Lords table, that 1 does not
unfeignedly Col. 3.13 Mat. 18.35
forgive all that have any way offended him, TO. 12.19 1 The. 5.15
and cast off all purpose and desire of revenge: 2. that is not willing (in
love and obedience to God, and desire to win his neighbor unto peace) to Ps.
34.14 and 120, 7 Mat. 5.23 24
seek reconciliation with all such as he has been at variance with, yea Genesis
13.8 1 Pet. 5, 5
though they be his inferiors, and Matthew. 18.15
though the offense began on their part: 3. that does not 1 These. 3 12
love al men (even Mat. 5.44
his enemies) and that 1 Io. 3.18 Ephesians. 4.32 Romans 12.9
not in word only, but in deed and truth, being ready by all means to do them
good: 4. that does not bear an Mat. 12.50 1 Ioh. 3.14
entire and brotherly affection to all the godly, Psa. 16.3
abounding so much the more in love to them, as he sees the graces of God to
abound in them.

Reasons of the necessi- thereof.
Q. How may it appear that this charity you speak of, is so necessary, as that
without it none can receive this Sacrament worthily?

A. First, because it is Matt. 5 23, 24 1 Timothy 2 8 1 Pet. 3 7 1 Pet. 2.1.2 Iam.
1.20
often said in the holy scriptures, that no service we do to God, ca^ be
acceptable unto him or profitable to our selves, while we be out of charity
with our neighbors

Secondly, above all the parts of Gods service, charity is principally required
in the receiving of this sacrament; because as 1 Cor. 10 16, 17
we do herein make open profession of our union with Christ and with his
Church: so one principal end for which it was instituted, was to confirm and
increase our love one toward another. Yea, what benefit soever is offered
therein unto us, Ephesians. 3.6 and 4, 16
we can no other way be capable of, then as we are united and knit together,
as lively and feeling members to the whole body of Gods Church. Which also was
the cause why our Savior in the institution of this sacrament, and
administering it to his Disciples, John 13 14.34, 35
labored with the^ in nothing so much, as to confirm them in love and charity
one with another. Thirdly, it is not possible, that any man should 1 co. 13.2
have true faith that wants charity, or Mat. 6 12 14, 15, and 18, 35
be assured that God has pardoned his sins, that is not able to forgive them
that have offended him.

The use of the former doctrine.
Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine, concerning the necessity of charity
in all them that desire this Sacrament to their comfort?

A. To persuade every Christian (as at all other times) so especially then when
he prepares himself to com to the Lords table, to strive against his
uncharitableness, and seriously to labor to bring his heart unto this love
that has been described.

Motives to persuade to forgive wrongs.
Q. But seeing we are al by nature void of hearty love, even toward them that
neuur wronged us, and maruellously prone to suspect, backbite, and malice al
men: yea, we are unnatural, unkind, and unthankful, even toward them to
whom we are most nearly bound: tell me by what means we may be persuaded to
forgive, and bear this hearty love to them that are our enemies?

A. It shall be profitable for us to consider of these things following:

First, that that which we have to forgive the greatest enemy we can possibly
have, is Matt. 18 24, 28
nothing in comparison to that which we desire and hope the Lord will forgive
us. And that the Lord Mat. 6.15 and 18, 15
will never remit to us that were his enemies, the ten thousand talents we owe
to him, if we be not able to remit to our brother the hundred pence that he
owes us: and that if we did rightly believe and consider how merciful and
kind the Lord has bin unto us, and how much he has forgiven us, Mat. 18.33 1
Ioh. 4.11
we could not choose but readily and cheerfully forgive, and love our greatest
enemies because he will have us to do so.

Secondly, that the man, whom we so hate, Ge. 50.17 Mat. 18.33 and 24, 49
is our fellow servant, professor of the same Religion with us; yea, our
brother Ge. 13.8 Act. 7.26. Mal. 2.10 1 Pet. 3.7
that has the Lord to his father and the true Church for his mother, as well
as we; and is fellow heir with us of the grace of life. And, admit he be yet
uncalled, and a most wicked man, yet he is one whom we see the Lord our God
Mat. 5.45 Romans 2.4.
vouchsafes many favors unto, and whose conversion he seeks by all means;
Ioh. 3.16 1 Ioh. 2.2
yea whom he has so deerly and tenderly loved, that he spared not his own
Son, but sent him to endure infinite torments in soul and body even for him:
and that there is no grace in us, nor love unto God, 1 Ioh. 5.1
if we cannot love them that we see are so dear unto him.

Thirdly, that our enemy Esa. 10, 5 and 45, 7 Lam. 3.37 Job 1, 21 2 Sa. 16.10
is but the Lords instrument: and the wrongs he has done us, are not permitted
only, but sent from God; and that though our enemy has no just cause given him
to deal so with us, Ps. 39.9 and 119.75
yet the Lord has: and therefore when we can discern the Lords just hand in
the wrongs are done us, and receive that spiritual profit which Gods children
have always received by his corrections, 2 Samuel 16 10 Job 1.20.21
we shall have no just cause to rage against him, who^ the Lord uses as his
instrument to humble and reform us by.

Fourthly, that Eccl. 7 23.24 Gal 6 1
we our selves have either wro^ged others, as much as our enemy has done us,
or at least we have bin prone to do it; and 2 Chro. 28. 10
how can we so much abhor another, for that fault which we our selves are so
subject unto?

Lastly, that the hurt we have received from our enemy, or that we can do to
him by private revenge, is not comparable to that which we shall do to our
selves if we continue in malice. For besides that we do thereby make God our
enemy, and Pro. 24.17, 18, and 25, 21, 22 and 20, 22 Number. 12.3 9, 10 2 Sa. 16,
12
cut our selves from all hope that he should take our part, and revenge our
quarrel; we do also deprive our selves of all benefit by the word and
Sacraments, and prayer (as I have above showed) yea we cause them all to turn
into poison unto us. How far forth a Christian is bound to love and think well
of all men.


And what desperate folly were this in us, to kill our selves, that we might
hurt our enemies?

Q. Is it then the duty of a Christian, to love and think well of all men?

A. No verily: for he may and ought 2 Chro. 19 2 Ps. 139.21 Pro. 29.27
to hate the enemies of God; and Mat. 7 16.20 1 Cor. 5.12 Pro. 17.15 Psalm. 15.4
to censure and judge the tree by his fruit, disliking and thinking evil of al
such, as by their deeds declare themselves te be wicked men. Yea, he may not
only Ps. 26.4, 5 To. 16, 17 1 These. 3 14, 15
shun all voluntary familiarity with them, but also 2. chapter 19.2 Pro. 25.23 3
John 10 Job 8.20 Mark 3.5
by countenance and other means witness his dislike, and show himself strange
unto them: so that he be privy to himself in the vprightnes of his heart, Psa
69.9 and 139.21
that he misliketh them for their sins against God, not for the wrongs they
have done to himself; 1 Cor. 13.6
that Psa. 119 136, 139 138
he takes no pleasure to hear or speak of their sins; u but can mourn for
them: * Prou. 17.5, and 24, 17, 18 Job 31.29
and that he * rejoices not in, nor desires their hurt, but is Psa. 35 13.14
Ier. 18.20
able heartily to pray for them; and Mat. 5.44 Gal. 6.10 1 The. 4.15
both ready and desirous to show them kindness, when he can see any cause to
hope that he may do them good, and win them unto God.

Q. How far forth we are bound to forgive injuries.
But (because in describing that Charity that is required in all, that would
receive this Sacrament to their comfort, you said we must unfeignedly forgive
all that have any way offended us, and cast off all purpose and desire of
revenge) tell me how far forth we are bound to forgive the^ that have wronged
us, and whether it be utterly unlawful for us to seek our remedy against such
as have done us injury in our person, or goods, or good name?

A. First, as it is unlawful for a Christian, Pr. 16.32 and 19, 11 1 Cor. 13
4.5.7 Ga. 5.22.23
to be easily provoked unto wrath or dislike of his neighbor; so after that he
is justly provoked, Iam. 3.17 Romans 1.30
he must be easy to be appeased, and To. 12.18
desirous of reconciliatio^, Mat. 18.15 Luke 17.3
willing to use all good means whereby to win him; yea, he is bound in
whatsoever wrong he has received from any, so to forgive it, as he can love
the party, and think as well of him as he did before, Iu. 17.3.4
so soon as he shall show himself sorrowful and penitent for the wrong he has
don

Secondly, in case the party that has wronged him, will not be brought to see
his fault and show himself penitent, though he may justly dislike him, yet
Matt. 5 13, 44 To. 12.17
may he not hate or recompense evil for evil unto him, but Mat. 5.39 Job 31.30
rather endure this or more injury at his hands, than to do, or speak, or
desire ought against him in private revenge.

Thirdly, in case the wrong have bin such as whereby he is not only offended,
but hurt and endamaged also in his person, or goods, or good name, it may be
law full for him to seek his remedy against him that has done the wrong, at
the hands of the lawful Magistrate. For as the magistracy and law 2 Chro. 19.6
To. 13.1.4
are the ordinance of God, so it may be lawful for a Christian (in the
necessary defense or repair of his person, goods, or good name which God Ephesians.
5.29 1 Ti. 5.23 Prou. 6 6 -- 1. and 10 4. 1 Timothy 5.8 Job 27.5.6 Prou 22.1
has bound every man to maintain and have a care of) Exo. 22.1 15 Act. 16.37
and 22.25. and 23 17.24. and 25.10.11.
to take the benefit of it: provided that he observe those cautions and rules
which God has given in his word to direct us in this case.

Q. Which be those?

Cautions and rules to be observed in going to law
A. First, that we go not to law with any, but in case of necessity: that is,
not 1 Cor. 6.2
for trifles (but only when the wrong is so great, as if we be not righted by
law, we cannot conveniently serve God in our callings) 1 co. 6.5.7 Mat. 5.25
nor till such time as we have first assayed all other good means of peace and
agreement: for a Christian Prou. 20 3. and 19.11 Phil. 4.5
may not love contention, but account it his wisdom and glory to pass by
offenses.

Secondly, that before we seek remedy of our wrongs by the ordinary means, we 2
Chro 16.12. by proportion
seek first to the Lord, and Deuteronomy. 28 29 Lam. 3.39 40
so acknowledge his righteous hand in the wrong that is done us by our enemy,
as we may be moved to make peace with God, and to profit thereby.

Thirdly, that the end we aim at in going to law, be not the hurt of our
enemy, but 1. the glory of GOD which shines in the execution Psa. 3.3
the only mainetainer of our persons, goods and credit, and Ps. 94.1.2
auenger of all wrongs, and dare 1 Samuel 25 31, 33
not revenge our 2 cor. 12.14 Ephe. 4.28
the necessary defense and maintenance of our selves, To. 13.8 1 Timothy 5.8
and such as God has charged us to have care of; and 3. the Eccl. 8.11
reformation of the party himself, and of Deuteronomy. 13 11, and 17.13
others by his example.

Fourthly, that we both begin and follow our suits in law Heb 13 5
without covetousness, Ephesians. 4.31
using no bitterness 2 Chro. 28.9-11. Deuteronomy. 24.6 Esa. 58.3 Mat. 18.28
and extremity against the person of our adversary: nor laboring either Deuteronomy.
24 17 Pro. 17.2
by bribery, or by any other means to corrupt or hinder justice; but so seek
our own right, as it may appear we are not void of love and compassion, and
desire of reconciliation with our adversary.

Lastly, that when we have used these ordinary means that the Lord has given
us for the righting of our selves, and find no redress, we must rest Phil. 4.5
Iam. 5.9.9
with quietness and meeknes therein; without fretting, or desire to right our
selves by private revenge; knowing assuredly Psa. 39.9 2 Sa. 16.10
that the Lord has thus ordered the whole matter, either for our correction,
or for the exercise of our patience and charity; and that Psa. 94.1 20-23. and
37.5.6 1 Pet. 4.19
he will be revenged of such an enemy, and deal far better for us (if we can
commit our cause to him) then either our selves or any Magistrate could have
done.

Q. You have showed that none can be fit to receive this Sacrament, unless he
can find in himself those six graces that are mentioned by you: tell me now, is
this all that is required for our preparation to this Sacrament?

A. No; for those that are regenerated, and have both faith and repentance, and
true charity, 1 Cor. 11.30, 32
may receive this Sacrament unworthily, if they be not careful to renew and
stir up these graces in themselves, at such times as they intend to com unto
the Lords table.

How our faith is to be renewed ere we com to the Lords table
Q. How must we renew our faith when we prepare our selves to come to the Lords
Table?

A. First we must 2 cor. 13.5
diligently re-examine and try it by the causes and fruits thereof, that we may
be more assured it is indeed the lively and justifying faith of Gods elect

Secondly, we must take pains to bring our hearts both to Mar. 9.24
a sight and sense of our infidelity, and of the weakness of our faith, and Lu.
17.5
to a true care and desire to be confirmed in it by this sacrament: as also to
an unfeigned resolution, to use al To. 16.17
good means whereby to strengthen it, and to shun the means that may weaken
the same.

Q. How must we renew our repentance when we prepare our selves to come to the
Lords Table? How repentance is to be renewed before we come there.


A. We must labor to bring our hearts, first to Ier. 3.13
a sight and sense of our particular sins, especially those which we have
fallen into since we last renewed our covenant with GOD in this Sacrament.

Secondly, 2 Cor. 7.1
unto a true care to cleanse our selves from the^ by sincere repentance, and
desire to obtain both further assurance of the pardon of the^, and strength
against them by receiving of this Sacrament.

Thirdly, to Psa. 119 106. and 85.8
an unfeigned resolution not to fall into them again, but to shun all the
shows and occasions of them, and to serve God with more conscience and care
then heretofore we have done.

How our charity is to be renewed
Q. How must we renew our charity when we prepare our selves to come unto the
Lords Table?

A. We must endeavor to bring our hearts, first to a sight and sense Iam. 4.5
of our great want of true love, and pronenes unto malice and contention.

Secondly, to To. 12.18
a true care of reconciliation with all men, and willingness to seek it, and
desire to receive strength by this Sacrament against our uncharitableness, and
to be confirmed and increased by it in our unfeigned love to all men, specially
to the children of God.

Thirdly, to Psa. 119 57.112
an unfeigned resolution to continue in that unity and love, that we make show
of at our coming to this Sacrament. That weak Christians are not to forbear
communicating in the Lords Supper.


Q. You have showed what those graces be, which every one must find in himself,
that does desire to receive this sacrament with comfort; and that it is not
sufficient to have them, but that a man that has them, must also labor to
stir them up and renew them in himself, at every time when he prepares reth
himself to come to this Sacrament: tell me now what do you think of them, that
(though they do find those graces you have mentioned to be in them in some
measure, yet) do feel them to be so weak and imperfect, and the contrary
corruptions so strong, that they are much troubled with the sight and sense
thereof? may such presume to com to the lords supper, with any assurance that
they shall receive it worthily?

A. They may, if they can find Mar. 9.24
that those weak graces that are in them are joined with a desire to grow in
grace: and Mar. 9.24 Luke 24.17
that the imperfectio^s that they find in themselves be such, as they can
unfeignedly grieve for, and strive against: and 3. that the flesh and the
corruptions thereof are in them Ephesians. 4.22.
as the old man, dying and decaying continually, and the spirit with the fruits
thereof like Ephesians. 4.22
the new man, always growing and waxing stronger in them.

Yea, such as these (notwithstanding their wants and corruptions) are of all
others the fittest to come unto this Sacrament.

Q. How may that appear?

A. First, because the disciples, who^ our Savior himself admitted to this
Sacrament in the first instition thereof, Matt. 26.31, 34, 40 Mar. 14.40 Luke
22.49 50 Lu. 24.11 Mark 16 13, 14 Lu. 24.45 John 20.9
were at that time far from perfection, and full of infirmities.

Secondly, the Lords Supper is ordained To. 4.11
to co^firm our faith, and all the fruits of it (which we should have no need
of, if any grace were perfect in us) and to be the Sacrament of our spiritual
nourishment, which none ca^ be so fit to receive as they that (out of the sense
of their weakness and readiness to faint) do most feel the need they have of it

Thirdly, if none might receive it that feel corruption and want of grace in
themselves, then had it been instituted altogether in vain, seeing 1 Cor. 13
9.12 Gal. 5.17
the best of Gods children while they live in the flesh, are regenerated but in
part. And this does infallibly argue a man to be in the state of grace, Mat.
5.3 4.6 To. 7.15.25
when he so feels his corruptions and wants, that he can grieve for them, and
strive against them, and unfeignedly desire to grow in grace.

Q. You have showed what the points be wherein we must examine our selves before
we come to the Lords table: Prayer to be used before we come to the Lords
Supper.
but is this all that we must do in the preparing of our hearts unto this
Sacrament?

A. No: but we must also (both in secret, before we come unto the public
assembly, and when we come there, joining with the congregation) make humble,
faithful, and earnest prayer unto God, as for the pardon of al our sins
(specially our coming so often heretofore to his holy table with unprepared
hearts) so for his blessing upon that endeavor which we have now used for our
preparation, and for his gracious supply of whatsoever has bin wanting
therein, and for his assistance in this holy action that we are to take in hand

That it is not necessarily required to receive the Sacrament fasting.
Q. Is it also necessary to our preparation, that we come fasting to this
Sacrament? or do they sin, and make themselves unworthy receivers of it, that
do eat or drink any thing before they come unto it?

A. No verily: for though it be not unfit for such as may conveniently do it,
without hurt or danger to their health, to come fasting to this Sacrament: yet
seeing Deuteronomy. 4.1 Esa. 1.12
there is no commandment of God that does inioyne it; and 1. Cor. 11.25
both at the first institution, and long after in the Primitive Church, it was
wont to be received after other meat; and Romans 14.17.18
the kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink (for 1 Cor. 8
neither if we eat, have we the more, neither if we eat not, have we the less)
therefore to put holiness in this, or to esteem it necessary to the worthy
receiving of this Sacrament, is mere ignorance and superstition.

Q. Hitherto you have declared how we must prepare our selves before we com
unto it, What outward behavior and actions are required of us, during the time
of the administration of this Sacrament.
if we desire to receive this sacrament to our comfort: tell me now what is
required of us during the time of the administration thereof?

A. Some things that concern the outward behauior and actions of the body; and
some things that concern the inward affection and disposition of the heart and
mind.

Q. What be those outward things that you say are required of us, during the
time that this holy action is in hand?

A. First, (as Ez. 46.10
at all other times, when we are to join with the congregation in Gods
service, so specially) when we are to receive this Sacrament (which is 1 Cor.
10 16, 17
appointed of God to be a sign and seal, of that most near communion and
fellowship that we have with all Gods people) we must be careful 1 Cor. 11
17.18.20 33 Act. 20.7
to com altogether to the beginning of Gods public worship, and to tarry
altogether til the whole action be finished.

Secondly, as in all other the parts of Gods public worship, the congregation
Act. 1.14 and 2.1.46
must join together as one man; and none may (either by private devotion, or
any other way) withdraw themselves from that which is publicly done: so in
this part of Gods worship specially, every one must give diligent attention to
that that is done, not only when he himself is ready to receive, but during
the whole action; and even behold and look upon both the elements themselves,
and all the sacrame^tall actions which are by Christ's ordinance used in the
administration of this Sacrament, because Exo. 24.8
God has appointed that to be a mean to stir up and help our faith in this
actio^.

Thirdly, as in all the public worship of God ( Mat. 18.20
where the Lord is in a special sort present) much Leu. 19.30 Psa, 5.7 1 Cor.
11 10. and 14.40
outward reverence and seemly carriage of our selves is required; so in this
whole action (and then specially when our selves are to receive those holy
signs of the body and blood of Christ) we must use such behauior and gesture
of our body, as may be free from supetstition, and yet fit to stir up and
express that inward faith and thankfulness, which is required in the receiving
of that which God then does offer unto us.

Fourthly, as the works of mercy Neh. 8.10.12 1 Cor. 16 1.2
should always be joined with the works of piety, because they do much
further the fruit and comfort of all the parts of Gods worship; so especially
ought every one, when he has received from God such pledges of his love in
this Sacrament, according to his ability, and in testimony of his thankfulness
unto God, and love to men, Heb. 13 16
to offer unto God with cheerfulnes, the sacrifice of alms, for the relief of
the poor members of Jesus Christ.

Q. As you have showed what is required of us during the time of this holy
action, What inward affection and disposition of heart is required of us while
this holy action is in hand.
as touching the outward duty and behauior of our bodies; so tell me now what
should be the meditation and disposition of our hearts at that time?

A. First, when we see both bread and wine standing upon the Lords table, which
the Minister of Christ has consecrated and put apart to this holy use, then
must we with joy of heart, call to mind and consider, that Jesus Christ was
Ioh. 6.27 and 10.36. and 17.19.
sanctified and put apart to be the only and all-sufficient means of
nourishing and preserving us in the state of grace, of strengthening and
refreshing our souls in all temptations.

Secondly, when we see this bread broken, and this wine poured forth, by the
Minister of Christ; the^ must we think Zac. 12.10
seriously with grief and indignation of heart, of our own sins that pierced
Christ, and imposed such necessity upon him to suffer so infinite and
unspeakable torments; and withal of the infinite justice of God, and his anger
against sin, that could never have been appeased but by this means.

Thirdly, when we see the bread thus broken, and the wine thus poured forth to
be offered by the Minister of Christ unto us, and hear him in Christ's name
command us to take, eat and drink it; then must we with joy and thankfulness
of heart meditate of Ioh. 3.16 Romans 8.32
the the wonderful love of God toward us, not only in not sparing his own
Son, but giving him for us, but also 1 Io. 3.23
in offering him unto us in his word and Sacrament, and commanding us to
believe in him.

Fourthly, when we take the bread and the wine at the Ministers hand, and do
eat and drink the same; then Esa. 64.7 Psalm. 42.11
must we stir up our souls by faith to lay hold upon, and apply to our selves
all the merits of christ's passion; fully assuring our selves that by those
unspeakable torments of his own Son, the anger of God is fully appeased, and
his justice satisfied for all our sins: and so joyfully feed thereupon, that we
may feel our souls not only fully Ioh. 6.35
satisfied thereby, and Mat. 11.28 Ioh. 6.33 48 51
strengthened and refreshed against all tentations; but also Ioh. 15 4.5
quickened and enabled to walk in all holy obedience unto God.

Fifthly, when we behold all the rest of Gods people in the same congregation,
communicating with us in the same elements and sacramental actions, without al
difference or respect of persons; then must we call to mind and consider, how
great a corruption it has been in us 1 Cor. 11.21 Mat. 18.10
to despise the Church of God, or the least member thereof, and to have been so
unkind unto them, so prone to malice them, and hard to be reconciled unto them
To. 14.15 1 Cor. 8.11
who^ God our heavenly father, and Christ our blessed Savior, have so deerly
loved and done so much for: yea, we must stir up our hearts to bear a loving
and kind affection, as to all the people of God, so specially to them that we
do communicate withal.

Lastly, when after we have received, we give somewhat according to our
ability for the relief of the poor; and join with the whole congregation in
prayer and singing of Psalms; then must we stir up our selves to do all this
with feeling and joy, and thankfulness of heart, as unto God that 2 Co. 9.7
loves a cheeerfull giver, and John 4 23, 24
is a spirit, and will accept of no service but that which is done in spirit
and truth: so offering unto him the sacrifice not He. 13.16
of alms only and Hos. 14.3
of the calves of our lips, To. 12.1
but of our own bodies and souls, in thanksgiving for this inestimable
benefit of our redemption, and for his fatherly care (by ordaining this
Sacrament) to apply it unto us, and to confirm our faith in the same.

Q. What is the cause why in all the parts (almost) of that inward disposition
that is required of us in this holy action, Joy and cheerfulnes required in
communicating at the Lords table.
you make mention of joy? Can we not rightly celebrate this heavenly banquet,
without inward joy and gladness of heart?

A. No verily: for as in the 2 Chr. 30 21, 26
celebration of the Passover, and Deuteronomy. 12 12. and 16.15 Neh. 8 10 1 Samuel 1.7
of all those solemn feasts that were kept under the Law, the people of God
were commanded to rejoice, and to stir up themselves thereunto by all good
means, ( Psa. 27.6 and 126.2.3 and 92.1.4.
because no man can indeed be rightly thankful unto God for that blessing
wherein he does not rejoice) so in this Sacrament especially wherein 1 Cor. 11
24, 25
we are to celebrate with thanksgiving, the memory of a benefit that is
incomparably greater, then ever the Church received under the Law, this joy and
gladness of heart is necessarily required at our hand.

What things to be performed by us after we have received.
Q. You have showed how we must prepare our selves before we come to the Lords
table; and also what disposition of body and mind is required of us, at that
time when this holy action is in hand: tell me now what must we do after we
have received, to confirm and increase the comfort and fruit of it in our
selves.

A. First, so soon as we are come home from the public assembly, we ought in
secret to consider and bethink our selves seriously what we have done, and
how we have sped; what joy and comfort we have felt in this Sacrament, what
increase of faith and resolution to lead a holy life we have received thereby:
because we may be sure that no man has received this Sacrament worthily, nor
fed upon Christ in it ( Ioh. 6.55
whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed, and Mar. 5.28
30. and 6.56
whom none ever touched with a true faith, but they received virtue from him)
that has received no refreshing nor strength by it.

Secondly, if we can find no such comfort and fruit that we have received by
it, then must we examine diligently, whether we may not justly charge our
selves to be the cause thereof, because we came not unto it with that
preparation of heart, as has been described. And if we find the cause wholly
in our selves, then Lam. 3 39, 40 1 cor. 11.31
must we presently humble our souls before God, in fervent prayer and unfeigned
repentance for this our grievous sin; that so judging our selves for it, we
may not be judged of the Lord.

Thirdly, if (upon diligent examination of our hearts) we can find, that this
our want of comfort and fruit, which we are unfeignedly grieved for, arises
not thus from our own sin, but that we brought with us unto the Sacrament
(in truth and sincerity, though in much weakness) that preparation of heart
that has been described; then have we no just cause to 2 Chro. 30.18.19
be dismayed in our selves, but (after that we have humbled our souls before
God in prayer, for the sanctifying and removing of this his correction, which
for our trial, and other causes best known to himself, he sees good to
exercise us by) we may comfort our selves in this, that such Esa. 63 13
hardness and senselessnesse of heart, which we thus feel and bewail in our
selves, may be in them that are in the state of grace, and (our conscience
bearing witness with us, that we came rightly prepared unto the Sacrament) we
have undoubtedly received comfort and fruit by it, Ps. 97.11
which we shall also feel hereafter, though we do not for the present.

Fourthly, if (upon this examination of our own hearts) we can find, that
we have sped well at this feast, and that the Lord has so welcomed and
entertained us at it, that we are come from it well refreshed and strengthened
in our faith and love, and in our resolution to lead a holy life; then must we
presently in hearty prayer give thanks unto God for this his unspeakable
gift, 1 Chro. 29.18
and crave of him the continuance and pefecting of his own work which he
has wrought in us.

Lastly, the benefit we have received by this Sacrament, and comfort in the
sense of Gods love and favor to us in Christ, as it must provoke us to come
often to this ba^quet, so must it make us careful Ps. 116 14 18 Eccl. 5.3.4
to perform our vows we have now made unto God, in the presence of all his
people, by laboring to express the Ezr. 10 11 Psa. 50.23 Psa. 106 2, 3
truth of our thankefulnes, both in taking heed that we return not again (as
the dog to his vomit) unto any of our sins which we have professed repentance
of, as also in indeuouring to honor God, by a holy obedience to his will, in
our whole conversation, all the days of our life.

Soli Deo gloria

