Learned Tico Brahae his Astronomicall Coniectur of the new and much Admired
Which Appeared in the year 1572

Non Haberi Sed Esse

portrait of Tycho Brahe

EFFIGIES TYCHONIS BRAHE OTTONIDIS DAN^ DN^IDE KNVDSTRVP ET ARCIS VRANIENBVRG
IN INSVLA HELLISPONTI DANICI HVENNA* Aetatis suae 40 Ann^ DN^I. 1580

diagram of new star found in Cassiopeia

Printed at London by BA and T F for Michaell depiction of 'Spark(s)' and
Samuel Nealand 1632

TO The High and Mighty Emperor, RVDOLPHVS the II. The Preface of the Heirs
to TYCHO BRAHE.
AN Orphant Work (most mighty Emperor) we do now present unto the view of
your Sacred Majesty, and do dedicate it to your renowned name, being the
Astronomicall exercises of our Parent of late approved memory, which by the
leysurable studies of the Author are increased to so large a volume, that so
they may be more commodious to Posterity, than the bare title of Exercises does
promise. For if ever HORACES Law were observed, it is in this Book, which
comes forth after Three times nine years are expired. For when our Parent at
the first, had only purposed to treat in this Book of that wonderful new
Star, which was seen in the year of seventy two, and diligently to examine
the opinions of others concerning the same, and had begun to print it at
Vraniburg, (all things going forward according to his own desire) it happened
in the mean time, that he began to make a new and exact description of the
course of the Sun, and to assign and point out the several places of the
fixed Stars, even to half a minute, according to their Latitude and
Longitude, and lastly to search out the intricate motions of the Moon, all
which at length be performed, and hate here added to this Volume; so that we
may truly affirm, that this Book in respect of the worthiness of the matter,
deserves a more famous title, than to be called Astronomicall exercises. How
difficult it was to perform, in respect that things lay deeply hidden, and
therefore required the more labor to find out, having been before in pain
attempted by others in former ages, I leave to their consideration, that have
any the least knowledge in Astronomy. Now this incomparable labor, which is
above the envy of malevolent persons, seeing that our Parent in the last years
of his life, together with his other studies, has devoted to your sacred
Majesty, we therefore his surviving heirs, having Printed it after his
decease, do now most humbly offer it to your Highness: Which we have done to
the end, that we might give an account of his studies to the chief Monarch of
the Christian world, and might take away all occasion of detraction from the
envious, whom either their own malicious natures have stirred up against him,
or their evil dispositions and ignorance have so corrupted and blinded their
judgments, that they should think it all lost, which was bestowed on these
royal Sciences; which was very little, in respect of that which was necessary,
and in regard of the honor and glory which redoundeth from thence. But in this
Complaint, the most learned and excellent men of all ages, may bear us
company, who were envyed while they lived. Since no age has wanted some who
with ARISTIPPVS and EPICVRVS, have disdained Mathematical learning as vain
and idle, and have hated the Professors thereof with more than barbarous
malice. Nevertheless, most mighty Emperor, we being held up and sustained by
the authority of your Imperial Majesty, who are placed on the highest Pinnacle
of honor, have no reason to regard the envy of others. But have cause not to
despise such idle censures, and call to mind the examples of your Majesty's
Ancestors; namely, ALPHONSVS King of Aragon and Castle, ALBERTVS of Austria,
FREDERICK, CHARLES the fifth, and the like, who were all favorers of this
noble study, and did extend their munificence and bounty to the professors
thereof. For (that I may instance one of many) who could be more magnificent
than ALPHONSVS, who out of his own praiseworthy and memorable bounty, did
bestow upon the Tables of the Celestial motions, above fodre hundred thousand
Ducats. Notwithstanding the Aristippusses of our time, do think it might
better have been bestowed on sports and idle pleasures. But yet these men do
not consider that ALPHONSVS by this means has gotten to himself everlasting
glory, while the fame of other Kings is buried in obscurity. But yet how lame
and defective are these costly Tables! And not to be compared with the labors
of our Parent. Because they never made any observation from the Heavens, but by
comparing the observations of the ancients, and noting the Progress of the
Stars, they have pacthed up this bundle of Tables. This defect diverse learned
men have endeavored to supply, and especially the most famous COPERNICVS, who
yet was much hindered by wanting fit Instruments, so that he could not attain
to his desire, although he has more perfectly rectified the motions than any
of his Predecessors. Wherefore with consident modesty we dare affirm, that
our. Parene has excelled all the Astronomers of former ages, in the accurate
restoring of the motions, and that neither any King or Prince except ALPHONSVS,
has bestowed so much upon Astronomy, so that he did not only employ his whole
Revenewes, arising from his Lands and offices which he held under the King of
Denmark, but also of his own proper stock, he laid out above a hundred
thousand Thaleri. But when after the death of this praiseworthy King, the
charges grew so great, that he was almost tired therewith, being sent for out of
his Country by your Majesty's command, he endeavored to make the Tables of the
Celestial motions dedicated to RVDOLPHVS, to exceed the Tables of ALPHONSVS
and COPERNICVS, that so your Majesty (having promised to help him in the
charges thereof Astronomy might live by your Majesty's liberality, and your
Majesty's name might live eternally by Astronomy. When having thus intended to
do, God took him away both in the middle of his age and Work, to the great
hinderance of Learning, and the loss of us his heirs. Now therefore, that we
may benefit Posterity, whereof we ought to have especial regard, we beseech
your Majesty by the holy rites of Urania the heavenly Muse, that you would not
in these trouble some times of War, neglect the opportunity of gaining
eternal praise, by finishing those I ables, which albeit they require some
charge, yet it is a work that may well beseem your Imperial Majesty. For as
the Poet said, Sint Maejenates, non dierunt, Flacce, Marones. So we may say,
that if we could have such Patrons as ALBERTVS, FREDERICK, and CHARLES the
Great, there will not be wanting such, who will cheerfully undertake this
labor, and finish that which remains. Whereby we dare promise, that your
Majesty by rectifying the study of Astronomy, shall gain perpetual fame and
glory, which shall continue as long as the Stars endure. And so to conclude
this our Dedication, we commend your most sacred Majesty to the Protection of
Almighty God, and our selves as being the heirs of TYCHO BRAHE to your
Majesty's protection. From Prague the day before the Calends of August, in the
year of Christ, 1602.

Your Majesty's most obedient Servants The Heirs of TYCHO BRAHE.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO THE READER.
THis Books like to a Commet will appear
For to be gazed at in the following year,
Which though * in time perhaps it come behind, Tempore posterior.

Yet here the Reader shall most amply find
Renowned TYCHO's own Prognostication
Of the new Star in this same new Translation.
Whereof a Learned and most grave Divine
Has made some observations for this Time.
But we make TYCHO speak even word forword.
Yet with that leave which * HORACE does afford, Nec verbum verbo curabis
reddere, fidus Interpres.

Who thinks it merits a Translators name
To change the words, and yet the sense retain,
For this same Star it self before did shroud
Within the Latin, hid as in a Cloud,
But now it is unvayl'd, and here in sight
It shines forth again, as clear and bright
As when it first appeared in the Sky,
And was the object of each wandering Eye.
* Astrology is but the speech of Stars, Astrology is a word compounded of
(...) and (...) signifying; The speech of the Stars. Or Time.

Which do foretell us both of Peace and Wars,
And by this Star great TYCHO did intend
To show the World was coming to an end.
It was no nine days wonder, but, shall last
Until old * Cronos with his Sithe be past,
And all things be into a Chaos hurled,
And that an end do come upon the World:
The thought whereof, should still a motive be
To make us think on our Eternity.
Men's super astra valet.
Interp: V. V. S.

An Elogie made and written by JAMES the VI. King of Scots, in Commendation of
TYCHO BRAHE his Works, and worth.
QVam temere est ausus Phaeton, vel praestat Apollo
Qui regit ignivomos Aethere anhelus equos.
Plus TYCHO; cuncta astra regis: tibi cedit Apollo
Charus and Vraniae es hospes, alumnus, amor.
IACOBVS REX.

WHat Phaeton dared, was by Apollo done
Who ruled the fiery Horses of the Sun.
More Tycho does; he rules the Stars above
And is Vrania's Favorite, and Love.
LEARNED Ticho Brahe his Prophetical Conclusion of the New and much admired
Star of the North, 1572.
Translated according to his Original Astronomicall Prediction.
THat which I intended to deliver to posterity, concerning the New and
admirable Star which appeared in the year 1572. in the beginning of
November, and near unto the Constellation of Cassiopeae, I have now finished,
and by Gods assistance (from whom we acknowledge all things to be received)
brought it to a desired end. And I think that in those things which I have
propounded and explained, no material point is omitted, having taken such
pains in finding out the truth and clearing it from the pollutions of error,
that all those who understand the Mathematickes, and will consider of things
with a sincere judgment, shall find no occasion either to doubt or contradict.

But yet to the end that those things which I purposed to divulge concerning
this strange and wonderful Star, being written according to the Rules of
Astronomy, and compared with other men's opinions, might attain to the greater
perfection; I thought it meet in the former part of this Book, to entreat of
some things in general, thereby to lay a groundwork, not only to the
Explanation of this Star, but also to the whole Science of Astronomy.

Therefore in the first two Chapters, we have handled all matters appertaining
to the exact rectifying and renewing of the course of the Sun, and of the
Moon his Sister, according to their own motions in the Heavens. After this, I
have described no less than eight hundred of the fixed Stars, and have
assigned them their several places, according to their Longitude and Latitude.
For by that amiable bright morning and evening Star of Venus, we have set
forth by many approved trials, the limits of the fixed Stars, in respect of
the Aequinoctiall points and have added to these all the other chief Stars,
which do appear near the Zodiac: and so at last we descended to the
rectification of the Stars belonging to the Constellation of Cassiopea, the
knowledge whereof, we knew would avail much to our present purpose. And now
albeit, the performance hereof in due manner required more study and labor,
then the unexperienced can judge, who are ready to allege that I have took
more pains in searching out and declaring the nature of this Star according
to the fundamental Rules of Astronomy, then indeed was necessary. Yet to the
end, that some solid and certain truth might be known concerning this
unusual appearance, I thought fit to lay a sound and firm foundation to build
upon, which could not be performed without the rectification of the course of
the Sun, and the fixed Stars.

So that I doubt not, but I shall obtain pardon of those which will consider
things with an equal and favorable judgment; But if I seem to have heaped
diverse matters together, in more ample manner, than the proper attributes of
this Star did require, I have done it to that end, that so I might profit the
whole Art of Astronomy, and might vindicate it from diverse faults as occasion
was offered; for which I hope I shall rather deserve thanks, than the envy of
those which are studious of this Sublime Science. And moreover this Star, of
which I purposed chiefly to entreat, albeit it were ascitious and chanceable;
yet because it shined forth most miraculously, and contrary to the Laws of
Nature, even in the highest Firmament, like to the other Natural Stars, and
stood there fixed and immovable for the space of a whole year and more, it
seemed fit that some diligent pains should be taken, in considering and
unfolding the circumstances belonging thereunto.

Besides, we shall always gratefully acknowledge the labor of Hypparchus; who
with great diligence has noted out unto us, the places of all the Stars
which are seen in the Eight Sphaere, which he has left unto us by his Will,
by the occasion only of one new Star which was seen in his time, although
it is likely that it was not to be compared with that which appeared in our
days, neither in magnitude, nor shining brightness, not yet in the duration,
and continuance thereof.

For albeit, it shined without a tail or any scattered beams, (for then it
had been a Comet) yet nevertheless it might be likened to some of those
appearances, which are beheld in the form of obscure stars without any
streaming beard at all, and so do exercise some proper motion, as that did
which was seen in the year 1585. But howsoever, it does not repent us of our
labor which we have bestowed, according as our time and leisure would permit
us; in as much as we trust that those things which we have delivered will be
much availeable, not only to point out the due place and position of this
novell Star, but also of all the other stars in the firmament, and likewise
for the exact measuring of the course of the Planets. For if our Ancestors had
used that diligence which they ought to have done, in decyphering the motions
of the Sun, and in rectifying the true places of the fixed stars according
to their Longitude and Latitude, we might then have spared that labor, which
we bestowed in the two first Chapters, and might presently have declared those
things which concerned the Star it self, whose description we had
undertaken. Therefore, I thought it fit to prefixe some observations concerning
the Sun, the Moon, and the fixed stars; because we shall have occasion to
mention them hereafter.

Now in the other part of this Book, I have faithfully and accurately
exhibited out of our own observations, these things which properly appertain
to this new Star, and after that I had declared these observations which
could be gathered either by ocular animadversion, or by the extrinsecall
adjuncts thereunto belonging, I have also set down the form and use of those
Instruments, that so the certainty thereof might appear. After this, I
demonstrated the very place of the Star, in respect of the Eclipticke, and
Equator, and by working of the small divisions, at last reduced them into whole
numbers. And so passing to the unfolding of the Paralax, I have clearly
prooved by diverse invincible reasons that it had none at all, and that it was
exalted, not only above the Elementary Region, and the confines of the Moon,
but far beyond the Orbs of the Planets, even to the highest Sphere of the
fixed stars, and so at last I have measured his true magnitude, and that I
might the more truly compare it both to the Earth, and to the Celestial bodies,
I have also prescribed the orders, and quantities of the Planets, and fixed
stars, according as they are placed in the Heavens, though somewhat different
from my Predecessors in the same kind.

Lastly, in the third Partition, I have compared the opinions of other men
concerning this matter, and have examined them by the Touchstone of truth.

And first, I have showed their consents, who in this did agree with us, that
this Star did admit of no Particular; and next their assertions, who did
attribute unto it some diversity of aspect, yet not so great as to make it
sublunary. In the third place, I have searched out their suppositions, who have
determined nothing Mathematically concerning it, but have brought in some
absurd conjectures far differing from the truth; namely, that it was not a
new Star, but that it received an accidental light from some of the old
Stars, while some again indeavored to thrust it out of the Heavens, and to
place it nearer the Moon, have drawn it down to the Aethereall Element. And
so in the three last Chapters, I have weighed their opinions who have either
come near unto the truth, or wa^dred from it concerning this new Star, which
I have done, that so the truth might appear and shine forth, more clearly,
and not by flattery to obtain the favor of any one, by reciting their
opinions, who have judged somewhat near the matter, nor yet to enveigh against
those who have produced strange conceits very wide from the purpose; but I have
only took care, that the truth might not be violated in any thing, but have
endeavored to suppress their boasting endeavors, who either through
ignorance, or wilfulness have opposed themselves against it, and have openly
rejected and confuted their erroneous opinions. For so the truth shall be more
easily brought to light, not only by inducing probable conceits, but also by
removing contrary and erroneous supponsions.

But when I consider with my self, how many vain opinions there have been
concerning this Star, both in respect of his situation and distance from the
Earth (when yet they were more easy to be found out, in regard of the
immobilitie of the Star, and in that it appeared always above the Horizon,
than in Commets which are allotted some motion) I do not so much wonder at it,
seeing not only the motions of the Stars are not hitherto declared in such
an accurate manner as is fitting; but also, that there do so many questions
and controversies arise in Philosophy and Divinity.

For if that which plainly appeared to the sight, and might easily be measured
and demonstrated Geometrically by fit Instruments, was yet subject to so great
variety and difference of Judgments: how much more those things which are not
discernable by the senses, nor subject to human industry, but are so full of
doubts and perplexities, that truth (which is always but one, as the center in
the Circie) is very hardly or never found out. Hence arises so great a
confusion of opinions in every Science, and diverse several questions are
discussed, not only in natural Philosophy, but also in Divine and Moral
matters, that it is hard to find out, and firmly to establish any certainty,
which may be equal to Geometrical demonstrations, or which cannot be
contradicted. Such are the blind apprehension of man's nature, and in such a
darkness of error do we spend our days here on Earth. And therefore moved
by these considerations, I have illustrated and discovered whatsoever I thought
did belong to the consideration of the unusual Star, both by declaring the
true nature thereof, as also by detecting the errors of diverse and sundry
Writers: Now there remains yet two other questions to be unfolded, whereof
the one is Physical, concerning the matter and procreation of this Star; the
other Astrologicall, concerning the effects and signification thereof, whereof
I purposed not to entreat seriously, or by way of judicial divination to set
down any certainty in this present Work, in as much as they are not subject
to the senses nor to any Geometriall demonstration, but are only grounded upon
probable conjectures, and not on Mathematical Principles: Yet nevertheless,
because many do desire a Physical and Prognosticall explanation of this
Star, and are very desirous to see them set forth, especially, the latter:
therefore for the satisfaction of their minds, I will declare my opinion
concerning this Star, but yet with this caution; that those things which I
shall disclose are not to be compared in respect of their indubitable
certainty, with that which I have propounded demonstratively in the former part
of my Book; for these Prognostic matters are grounded only upon conjecturall
probability. Therefore I will not insist long upon them, but speak of them as
briefly as I may; and for this purpose I have reserved them to be handled here
in the conclusion of my whole Book, that so I might the more sparingly entreat
of them.

Therefore, concerning the matter of this adventitious Star, that I may first
give you my opinion, I think it was Celestial, not differing from the matter
of the other Stars, but yet in this it did admit of some diversity, that it
was not exalted to such a perfection, nor solid composition of the parts, as
appears in the everlasting and continuing Stars: and therefore it had no
perpetual duration, as these have, but was subject in process of time to
dissolution; forasmuch as this Star could not consist of any elementary
matter, since that cannot be carried into the highest part of the air, nor can
obtain there any firm place of abiding. Besides, this Star did at the first
in his magnitude exceed the whole Globe of the Earth, and was three hundred
times bigger then the whole circumference thereof, and therefore what sublunary
matter could be sufficient to the conformation of it?

But some may say, how or whence could it be framed of Celestial matter; I
answer that the Heavens did afford it themselves, in like manner as the Earth
the Sea, and the Air; if at any time they exhibit some strange sight, do
produce it out of their own proper substance. For although the Heaven it self
be thin and pervious, giving way to the motion of the Stars without any
hinderance, yet it is not altogether incorporeall, for then it should be
infinite and without place. Therefore the very matter of Heaven, though it be
subtle, and possible to the courses of the Planets, yet being compacted and
condens^ted into one Globe, and being illustrated by the light of the Sun,
might give form and fashion to this Star. Which because it had not his
beginning from the common order of nature, therefore it could not have a
continual duration equal to the rest; as in like manner, new and monstrous
generations arising and compounded out of the Elements cannot long endure. And
albeit the large vastness of the Celestial world may afford sufficient
matter for the conformation of any adventitious Star, yet there is no where
more plenty then near unto Vialactea or the Milkie way, which I suppose to be
a certain heavenly substance not differing from the matter of the other
Stars, but diffused, and spread abroad, yet not distinctly conglobated in one
body, as the Stars are: and hence I conjecture it came to pass, that this
Star appeared in the edge of the milkie way, and had the same substance as
the Galaxia has. Besides, there is discerned a certain mark or scarre as it
were in that part of the Galaxia, wherein this Star was seated, as in a
clear night when the milkie way is not veiled with clouds we may easily
perceive. Which mark or scarre I never saw before this Star did arise,
neither did I ever read of it. But howsoever, the substance of the milkie Zone
is able to supply matter for the framing of this Star, which because it had
not attained so excellent a consummation, and solid existence, as the genuine
and natural Stars have, therefore it was subject to dissolution and
dissipation, either by its own nature, or by the multiplicitie of the beams
of the Sun and other Stars.

Neither is Aristotle here to be allowed of, who disapproving of the opinions
of others, does himself bring in no less absurdities, while he makes the
Galaxia to be a certain sublunary concretion attracted and formed out of the
Stars which are above it; so that it becomes a Meteor, in the highest part
of the Air, not unlike to the Comets, which he (grounding one absurdity upon
another) supposes to be generated there. For if it were so, the Milkie way
would not have continued in the same form, place, and Magnitude, as it has
done from the beginning of the world. And besides, other Stars would attain
unto the like Luminous concretion; And moreover, this Galaxia of Aristotle,
would then admit of a Paralax, and according to the opticke consideration, by
the shining of the fixed Stars through it, it would beget a strange
refraction, differing from that which is occasioned by the vapors that are
seen about the Horizon, which seldom rises to the twentieth degree of
Altitude, when this proceeding from the Via lactea would reach to the greatest
height. All which, Aristotle rather guested at, grounding it upon conjecture
rather than on the doctrine of the Mathematics and optics; and therefore it
is no marvel, if he has endeavored, to banish those seldom appearing
Cornets out of the heaven, and to equal them to sublunary Meteors, whereby he
has thrust down the Galaxi^ beneath the Moon, and has made it participant
of a sublunary nature. Hence it is, that Aristotle and other Philosophers, have
joined the description and explication of the Galaxia, together with the
Commets, because they knew not, the affinity which is between, having only
learned by experience, or by the relation of ancient writers, that these beamy
Stars have their original and beginning near to the Milkie way. Neither can
it be a Solaecisine, in that I affirm, that this new Star was framed of
Celestial matter, being the same whereof the Galaxia and other Stars do
consist, yet not so well compacted; when we may discern the like productions
in the Earth, which brings forth metals and precious stones. Yet though all
metals and Iems have one and the same matter, yet all are not concocted and
brought to the same subtility, and maturity by the powerful working of nature;
hence it is, that some are sooner corrupted; others very hardly; so that pure
gold and silver, in respect of the homogemly and perfection of their parts, are
able to resist the violence of the fire, without any loss or detriment at all,
when more imperfect metals, as Lead and Tin, are soon calcinated into
ashes, or else vanish into smoke; In like manner, this Star might be framed
of Celestial marter, although it had not attained to such a perfect existence
as the natural Stars; and therefore, it could not with them be able to
endure the beams of the Sun and Stars, and the motion of the Heaven, and
with all it was subject to a successiue alteration, until at last it was quite
dissolved. But why this Star although it had the same matter with the
Galaxia, which is not obnoxious to corruption, yet was in time extinct, I will
declare some reasons hereafter. Wherefore having spoken sufficiently of the
first part, namely of the Physical nature of this Star, I will now descend
to give you my coniecturall opinion, concerning the signification of this
Star as it did betoken some thing that was to come.

I know there were some (otherwise learned men) who did hold, that these new
appearances which are sometimes seen in the Heavens, have no effectual
operation, or signification, being (it may be) led unto that opinion, because
those things which Astrologers foretell concerning the effects of such
adventitious Stars, are full of vanity, and do seldom come to pass, or
prove true in the end. Yet notwithstanding in my opinion, we should not take
away all power of Divination, from such admirable and strange appearances,
because Astrologers cannot by evident demonstration presage of their events.
But rather, such are to be taxed, who rashly deliver their uncertain
conjectures; and the weakness of man's judgment, which is ready to wander from
the truth is to be pardoned, but we ought not to imagine that God and Nature
does vainly mock us, with such new formed bodies, which do presage nothing
to the world. Yet truly the Prognostication and foreknowledge of and
concerning such strange appearances in the heavens, is very hard to find out,
and does oftentimes delude the understanding of man, seeing we do not
certainly know the influences of the other Stars. Whence it may come to
pass, that Astrology, which entreats of the effects of the Stars, may
deliver that which is true, as well as Astronomy, which only declares their
motions and appearances, since the cause cannot want an effect, whether it is
to be known or not. Neither has human industry been able to search out the
motions of the Stars, although they are most certain. So that it is less
marvel, that their effects which are not obvious to the sense should lie so
deeply hidden, and oftentimes deceive men's judgments.

For if there were ever any difficulty in discerning, and foretelling the
significations of the Stars, truly this new Star, which appeared in our age
for a whole year together, does require much labor and diligence, in
revealing the Portent thereof, and in showing what it might signify.

Especially, since there were never any apparitions like unto it, from whence
any knowledge might be gathered by the likeness of events, for Arts of
divination are not grounded on any Principles, but upon experimental
observation. But no apparition like this was ever testified by any monument of
antiquity, to have been seen and beheld of men, except that which Pliny
mentions to have been observed by Hypparchus, which in regard it had a
proper motion (as we may gather from the words of Pliny) cannot be compared
with this new Star, which always stood fixed in one place. Yet it is probable,
that as the Star which Hypparchus beheld, did foresignifie the declining of
the Grecian Monarchy, and the enlarging of the Roman Empire. So far, that
the whole world should be in subjection to this one City; so likewise, some
strange alteration in the public government of Estates and Commmon-weales,
shall ensue in the following years. For, as this was a rare and wonderful
Star, shining forth in the heavens unexpectedly, so it is likely and
probable, that it will produce strange, great, and wonderful effects, but what
they shall be in particular, I think no mortal man is able to guess, being
as far distant from our knowledge, as the rising of this Star was before it
did appear.

Yet the form of it, when it showed it self from the beginning, shining forth
with a joviall, clear, and bright luster, does seem to fore-shew a prosperous
and pe^c^able estate of humane affairs; but yet the Martial fiery glistering
thereof, does foresignifie that some violence and trouble shall be intermingled
with it. And besides, by this joviall figure, it seems to portend, a great
alteration, if not an utter subversio^ of Religion; so that those devices which
by outward shows and Pharisaicall Hypocrisy, have long time bewitched
ignorant people, shall now come to their full point and end: and even as this
new false Star shined forth at the beginning, with a clear and amiable
aspect, but yet at last did change in color, and lessen in proportion, until
at length it vanished quite away: So those false Planets, which by an outward
plausible appearance, do seduce and lead men from the light of the truth,
shall be quite extinguished. Also, it is worthy of consideration, that albeit
this Star was so near to the Semicircle of the Colure, that his beams
almost touched it, yet his whole body was seated toward the Vernall Quarter,
and in respect of the Poles of the world, in the middle of the first degree of
Aries, which may seem to declare, that some great Light is now at hand, which
shall enlighten and by degrees expel the former darkness; as the Sun having
passed the Vernall point of the Aequinoctiall, does make the day longer than
the night, which before had the advantage of the day. And as this Star
appeared in the highest heavens, to the view of the whole world, so it is
credible, that there shall happen a great Catastrophe and universal change
throughout all the chief Nations of the Earth, especially those which are
situated Northward from the Aequinoctiall.

Moreover, forasmuch as this Star was placed in the eight Sphere, above the
Orbs of the Planets, it seems that the predictions issuing from it, do not
only concern one peculiar tract of Land, but all the Nations of the world; and
therefore it will be the longer before the effects will be declared by
succeeding events. Which, as they shall not begin, until some years after the
apparition, so they shall continue for a long time afterward. And if we may
take leave to conjecture by Astrologicall computation of time, concerning the
first beginning of that which is portended, we may guess it will be nine
years after the great conjunction, whereof this Star was the Prodromus or
forerunner. If therefore we frame our Astrologicall direction by the place of
this Co^junction which was in the one and twentieth degree of Aquarius, the
events of this Star shall begin to show themselves, nine years after this
Conjunction. And when this is finished, in the year of Christ 1583. and in the
latter end of the Month of April, the confirmation and end of this
Equinoctial progression to the place of the new Star, will fall out in the
year 1592. when the third Septinary of years after the first appearing of the
Star shall be accomplished. And those Noble Heroes which shall happen to be
borne at the first rising of this Star, being ordained to be the Authors and
atchievers of those great mutations, shall about that time come to full
ripeness of age, that they may be fit and able for the performance of such
great enterprises, and for the reducing of these Predictions into act. And in
the fourth Septenary of years, when they have attained to their chief
strength, they shall make the truth of these conjectures appear most plainly*
But if we take our direction by comparing the place of this Conjunction from
the Zodiac, or the degrees of the Eclipticke, unto the place of this new
Star, then it is likely that the force and influence of this Star, will
chiefly show it self in the year of our Lord 1632. for all the significations
of this Star do depend on the Trigonall revolution and tansmutation of the
Planets. And therefore if this rbee the seventh revolution of the Planets, the
first whereof was in the days of Enoch, the second in Noah's time, and at the
Universal Deluge, the third in the days of Moses, when the people were freed
from the Egyptian servitude, the fourth in the days of the Kings of Israel,
the fifth in the time of Christ's Incarnation, when the Roman Empire was at the
highest, and the sixth in the days of Charles the Great, when the Empire was
translated to the Germans, this last and seventh, is as it were the Sabbath to
all the rest, and does foreshew something of greater consequence than all the
former, wherein it is worthy of observation, that all the trigonall
revolutions, as the first, third, and fifth, were very profitable and
advantageous to the world; and so it is not unlikely that this seventh
revolution being an unequal number, does point out and fore-signifie the happy
estate of things which is to come. Neither does this conjecture differ from the
Prophesies of wise men which were illuminated with divine knowledge, who have
foretold, that before the universal consummation and end of all things, there
shall be a peaceable and quiet age, wherein the diverse forms of Religions and
politic government, shall be changed and be made agreeable and conformable to
the will of God. Which assertion we may collect out of the Prophets, who did
foretell, that at last there should be a golden age; In which they shall
break their swords into Ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hookes,
Nation shall not life up a sword against Nation, neither shall they learn
War any more: But they shall sit every man under his Vine, and under his
Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid: As the Prophet Micah has it. Chap.
4. And Isaiah, Chap. 11. does foretell of it, in this manner: The Woolfe also
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and
the Calfe and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child
shall lead them, and the Cow and the Bear shall feed; their young ones shall
lie down together: and the Lion shall eat straw like an Ox. And the sucking
child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall put his
hand on the Cockatrice Den, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain: for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea.

Also, in the sixty Chapter of Isaiah, speaking of the mystical Jerusalem,
and perfect state of Christianity, he says, For brass I will bring gold, and
for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron* I will
also make thy Officers peace, and thine exactor* Righteousness: Violence shall
no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders, but
thou shall call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates praise; and at length he
concluded thus; for, I the Lord will hasten it in his time. Besides, many other
places are found both in the Prophets, and the Revelation, which do promise
this unexpected happiness. Therefore that this Prophecy may be fulfilled,
which was delivered by divine inspiration, it must needs come to pass, even
before the end and consummation of the world. But seeing the event of these
things shall come to pass in the new revolution of the Planets, before which
this Star appeared, some do suppose, that the light of Religion does now
shine out clearly having over come the darkness of Error; but if it were so,
whence are then those Controversies, and varieties of opinions which are
defended by Learned men; insomuch that the war of Pens, is more dangerous
than that of Swords. Truly, it is rather to be feared, least we take this
dawning and break of day, to be the clear noone-light. Therefore, I suppose
that this Star does signify, that there shall be a new change both in
Religion, and the estate of human affairs. Ventum ad supremum est patientur
summa^ ruinam, qui Deus in Coelis regit and reget omnia terris. That is to say,
We are come now to the highest perfection, the power of Antichrist and the
Pope shall decay and be brought to ruin, and GOD who rules in Heaven shall
rule all things on Earth.

But if any do object, that the end of the world is at hand, and that
therefore there will not be sufficient time to bring about a new Change. I
answer, that Saint Paul does assure us, that the Jews shall be engraffed into
the Church, before the final consummation of the world, which (by human
conjecture) must needs require some time before, they being scattered over the
whole face of the Earth, shall be gathered into one Nation. Yet I think it not
unnecessary to admonish and stir up the minds of men to think upon the end
of the world, that so they may remember the Eternity which shall follow after
it. But yet it is impossible to limit and set forth a certain time for the
consummation of the world, which only depends upon the good will and pleasure
of God, and is not revealed to the Angels, and therefore cannot be known by any
humain prescience* But if some do suppose, that the tract of Hand to which
this Star was vertical, is ominous above the rest, as if from thence the
occasion and author of so great mutations are to be expected, we must then
choose out those parts of the Earth, which had the new Star in their Meridian
at the time of the new Moon next following, which fell out, accounting the time
by our Meridian, upon the fifteenth of November, seven hours, thirteen
minutes. in the afternoon; to which if we apply, the latitude or distance from
the Equinoctial agreeable to the declination of the Star which was in 61..
so that the place on the Earth answerable thereunto, must needs be Russia or
Moschovia, especially that part thereof which is joined unto Finland; for in
that tract of Earth this new Star in the new Moon following, was in their
Zenith, and just over their heads, where it stood equally distant from the
Horizon, and with a right angled aspect beheld this Country. Therefore, if
this position of the Star do point out the place of the Earth, from whence
these events shall arise, Moschovia seems especially to be designed, before
any other Regions, which are situated toward the North, to whom this new
Star was every day Vertical. Whither therefore, the first occasions of so
great disturbances and mutations shall arise from hence which afterward shall
be sowed and dispersed into other parts of the world, I leave it to be decided
by others. Truly* that Gogus, whereof mention is made in the eight and
thirtieth Chapter of Ezekiel, and to whom Esaias Chapter 17. 56. and Micha Chap.
5. do allude, and with whom Magog is named in the Revelation, Chap. 20. may be
rightly understood of the Msochovite, as Castellio has interpreted it in the
38. and 39. of Ezekiel; That Gog should be the leader of the Moscovites and
Iberians, because the old translation reads it, that he should be the Prince
of Mosoch; and Thubal. For seeing the Hebrews read it Mesech, and the Greeks
and Latin interpreters do read it Mosoch, it is probable that the
Moschovites are signified hereby; or else by this name, the whole Northern
tract of Earth is included. Therefore it is very likely, that Moschovia is
principally denoted by this Star, and Gogus the leader of the Moschovites, of
whom it is foretold in the Prophets and the Revelation, who having made great
slaughters in Europe, he at last with his whole army shall be overthrown, and
so the Earth shall be disburthened of her wicked inhabitants. For it is
probable, that there must be a great clensing and extirpation of all Earthly
impurities, before that peaceable and happy age (whereof the Prophets have
spoken) shall come, but to show the particular manner thereof is above human
knowledge; we purpose only to make some conjectures in general, for the
event will show it self.

Moreover, because a certain ancient Prophecy of Sibylla Tiburtina, which was
found in the year 1520. in Switzerland, engraven in a Marble stone in old
latin Characters, which was discovered by the force of the water washing away
the earth, may be fitly applied to this Star, I will here insert it and
join it to our conjectures, for it is worthy of observation, being recited by
Cornelius Gemma in his Treatise of Supernatural Apparitions, in these words.

The Sybils Prophecy.
A Star shall arise in Europe over the Iberians, at the great house of the
North, whose beams shall vnexpectly inlighten the whole World. And this shall
be in a most desired time, when all Nations shall lay by their weapons and
embrace Peace; but they shall contend during the Interregnum, and strive to
obtain the reins of Government; yet the ancient House shall prevail, and
shall be prosperous in War, until contrary fates shall encounter one with
another. For in the same time after this Star is gone, another great Light
shall shine forth with Martial sparkling beams, and shall enlarge his Empire
even to the bounds of the Antipodes. After this there shall be bloody Comets,
and flashings of fire seen in the Heavens, so that there shall be no safety
any where. The firmament of Heaven shall be dissolved, the Planets shall
forget their courses, and the Spheres shall iustle one another, the fixed
Stars shall out-goe the Planets. The Heavens shall be leveld with the Seas,
and after these things come to pass, there shall be continual Night,
destruction, ruin, condemnation and eternal darkness.

G. S. G.
There were diverse expositions of this Prophecy, at that time when it was
first found out, some interpreting it of CHARLES the Fifth, others drew the
meaning of it to PHILIP King of Spain, and some thought that the King of
France was meant thereby; but I think, that it does rather point out those
Iberi, which inhabit Northward toward Moschovia. So that this Oracle of
Sibilla Tiburtina, did not denote the Spaniards, but those Iberians, which are
near unto the Moschovites; especially, when she uses these words; Supra
Iberos ad magnam Septentrionis domum: Over the Iberi at the great house of the
North. And truly Moschovia, Scythia, and Tartaria, do make a great part of
Europe, so that it may well be called the great house of the North. And
therefore, seeing we have formerly showed, that this unusual Star did cast
his perpendicular beams and influence on the Country of Moschovia, it is not
to be doubted but that this Star, together with that tract of Land, does
agree with the Sybilline Oracle. But concerning the other matters which are
mentioned, I will not touch upon them in particular, but leave them to other
men's judgments. Moreover, some of the other Sybils, have prophesied concerning
Gog and Magog, who should come in the latter times, and have expressly foretold
of the rising of this Star, and among the rest Sybilla Babilonica, thus says:

Then a great Sign, shall from above be given,
And a bright Star shall then arise in Heaven:
Which shall like to a glistring Crown appear,
And many days it shall stand fixed there.
What can be more evident, concerning this clear Star which was beheld in
our time, for that was more bright and shining than any of the rest, and was
round in form like unto a Crown, having no beams right shooting from it as
Comets have, besides it continued for a whole year and kept his Station in the
Firmament with the other Stars. And therefore, this Sybilline prediction,
does fitly describe the form, light, situation, duration, and consumption of
this Star, as if it had been then seen. Besides, she speaks, of that
great Commet, which immediately followed after this Star, in these word*

Within the West, a Blazing-Starre*
Shall rise, which named Comets are*
And in another place, thus*

After this Star within the fourth year*
A flaming Comet shall appear,
Which on the deepest Seas below,
His gloring beams abroad shall throw,
Behold, how justly we does limit out the time between the apparition of this
new Star, and the Comet following; for there were almost four years
between the vanishing of this new Star and the rising of the Comet which
followed. And by the Sea shore, means the Western Ocean, for in this part of
the world, presently after the setting of the Sun, this Comet was seen;
those who would know more concerning these predictions, let them read the
books of the Sybils, in which it does appear, that there shall bea
Catastrophe and change of things before the universal consummation of the
world. Yet in what order things shall come to pass, it is hard to guess,
either by the signification of this Star, or by the Sybilline Oracles, or by
Divine Prophesies. But yet is likely, that those happy times shall not preceed,
but follow after a more troublesome time; even as this Star at the first, did
shine with a bright and clear luster and with a Ioviall light, but afterward
did assume a Martial sparkling color, as may be gathered out of the words of
the same Sybilla.

And God who dwells in the Heavens shall then
Save the remainder of the Sons of men,
Then Peace and knowledge of the truth shall flourish
The Earth her plentious fruits shall likewise cherish
It shall not be divided as before
Nor to the plough be subject any more.
Which also, the holy Prophets do seem to intimate, who foretell that the
happy and peaceable estate of the Church, shall be after the destruction of
this Gogus. But I think it not fit, to proceed any further in unfolding these
mysteries, having promised to handle them sparingly; as also in regard, that
these Prophesies, are not to be declared by human conjecture, neither can be
Geometricially demonstrated, as those matters which belong to the knowledge of
Astronomy. And so leaving these my conjectures, to the consideration of the
Reader: I will here leave of to entreat any further concerning this Star.

FINIS.
LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Michael Spark, at the blue Bible in
Greene-Arbor. 1632.

Deus and Rex.
This King of Swed, Gustavus is by Name,
And both words do include an Anagram.
For SVVED is DEVS, GVSTAVVS, it does make
Augustus, showing that he does partake
Of Gods great power, and of Augustus Fame
Which both this Star, and Titles do proclaim,
Besides God-acre-field, which he did win
Where God did give the Victory to the King.
Deus and Rex.

