ESSAIES UPON THE FIVE SENSES, with a pithie one upon DETRACTION. Continued
With sundry Christian Resolves, full of passion and devotion, purposely
composed for the zealously-disposed.

By RICH: BRATHWAYT Esquire.

Mallem me esse quam viuere mortuum.
LONDON, Printed by E: G: for Richard Whittaker, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Kings head in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT EMINENT FAVOVRER and furtherer of all noble and freeborn
studies, Sr HENRY YELUERTON Attorney General, accomplished happiness.
SIR,
I Have long sought the expressio^ of my thoughts, which have ever with all
sincerity tendered them yours: but how infirm is conceit without further
demonstration? Love is a deep effect of the soul, which vndiscouer'd,
struggles, yea strangles herself till she be delivered. I have many times
purposed to offer some vows next to him, whose diurnall providence (if naught
else should induce) and his Majesty, whose Halcyon-raigne makes us happy, unto
your Self, to give argument of my love, the exquisite Idea of humane life; and
now have I seconded what I intended, though not in that perfection as my
intirest wishes aimed. It is a great defect (and I have noted it) not in will
but work, nor in purpose but power, to see so many extended desires limit
their issue to lean effects: which fares usually to best-affected
dispositions, where affectionatest thoughts are buried in silence for want of a
tongue to discover them. I will say nothing, for much speech rather argues
affectation, than intimacie of affection: here be certain Essaies or
Observations, or what you will, dilating upon the five Senses, whereto, as to
their proper Objects and Subjects they are limited: where you shall find (as
questionless you have found in your self) the ears choicest harmony to be
Gods glory, the eyes cleerest vision his contemplation, the noses sweetest
posie, the odours of his mercy; the tastes delightfull'st fullnes, meditation
of his goodness; the Touches mouingst action, the feeling of his Passion. Many
subjects I confess excellently composed, whose Title deriues their essence
from Essaies; but few restrained to these Objects, which the devout Father
terms those windows which open to all unbounded liberty; organs of weal or
woe, happy if rightly tempered, sinister, if without limit. For in what err
we and take not the occasion (as primitive source) from one of these? The
fable of the Sirens had allusion to the ear, of Ixion to the eye, of Atalanta
to the taste, of Mirrha to the smell, of Semele to the touch: where the ear
not temperately restrained was soon enchanted, the eye lightly affected was to
misery exposed, the taste for want of due relishing foiled her that was
vanquishing, the smell too rankly breathing brought it self to perishing, the
touch too highly aspiring, through her ambition fell to ruin. These were
excellent types, and not unbeseeming the purest and piercingst eye: now it
rests, that I draw in my sails, least my gate be too great for my work, only
thus much I may confidently say, If my Presumption err, my thoughts reply,
It is my love that errs, it is not I.
may I ever so direct my subject as to render you content, whose deserving
parts make me honor you, more then that title of honor which is conferred on
you, vowing to rest

Yours in duest observance, Rich: Brathwaite.

An advertisement to the devout Reader, upon the use of the five SENSES.
LEnd here thine ear of zealous atten^ion, fix here thine eye of inward
contemplation, that following the savor of thy Saviors ointments, and tasting
how sweet he is in goodness, thou may unfeignedly be touched with remorse of
conscience. Farewell.

THESES, OR General rules drawn by Art, from the line of Nature, tried by the
touchstone of infallible experience, and applied as obseruances to these
present times; having reference to the five Senses (proper subjects) to which
they are restrained.
Of Seeing. 1. ESSAY.
THough the eye of my body allude to the eye of my soul, Sense. Of Seeing.
yet is the eye of my soul darkened by the eye of my body; where sense
inclines to concupiscence, affection to affectation: and that part (the curious
model of the eye) which ought of it self to be a directrice to all other
Senses, becomes the principal organ of error to the affections: there is a
motive of thankfulness in the eye of man, more than in the eye of any other
creature; a muscle which lifts the eye upward, whereas others be more
depressed, bending downward. Why should man then fix the eye of his delight on
the creature, having his eye made to look up to his Creator? The eye of our
body, is like the orb of the world; it moves in the head, as the Sun in
the firmament; take away the Sun, and there is darkness; by the deprivation of
the eye, there ensues blindness. Conceits by nature ripest, are ever
wandringst: and the eye of all parts most eminent, is to objects of all kinds
most extended: though I gaze, till mine eye be dazzled, yet is the desire of
mine eye never satisfied: as the eye of all other Senses is most needful, so
of all others it is most hurtful: it finds an object of affection pretending
Love, when her aim is clean contrary, perverted by lust; there is no passage
more easy for the entry of vice than by the cranie of the eye: there she has
first acceptance, facilest entrance, and assuredst continuance. She has first
acceptance, because by the eye first entertained: facilest entrance, because of
all others easiest to be induced: and assuredst continuance, because once
persuaded, not to be by any motive afterward restrained. There is nothing so
little, that has such diversity of operations attending it; being moved by the
object that it looks upon, to love or hate. Passions of the mind receive
their greatest impression by the eye of the body; and soonest are they
allayed, when the eye is most temperate. If the eye chance to be restrained,
and want an object outwardly, it makes it self a mirror represented inwardly,
and sometimes Narcissus-like doates for want of a substance, on an imaginary
shadow: it is jealous, and that is the cause, it is ever prying into others
secrets. He is a wise man, that carries his eyes in his head, making them his
Sentinels: but he is foolish, that sends them out like spies, to betray his
soul to the objects of vanity. I have heard some wish, that some space before
their death, they might be deprived of their sight, inferring that the motions
of the Soul were aptest for inward contemplation, when the eye of the body
was least conversant in outward delectations. It is true; but why should the
principallst motive and organ of thanksgiving be an occasion to the mind of
erring? I have eyes to direct me by objects outwardly moving, to the affections
of the soul inwardly working. It is against reason, that the greater light
should be extinguished by the lesser; the eye of the soul, by the eye of the
body. A candle burns the darkest, when the Sun beams shut out the brightest:
so should the eye of the body subject her light to the souls beauty; that as
the Sun cheeres and renewes by his mild aspect, cleeres and purifies by his
more piercing reflex; so the eye of the soul might cheer the body (if
dejected) renew her (if decayed) and purify her maleuolent affections (if
corrupted.) Lastly, as the eye is the bodies guide, it should not be made a
blind guide; it should lead us, and not in our straitings, leave us: as it
chalkes us out our way here upon earth, so it should cheer us in our convoy
unto heaven.

Of Hearing. 2. ESSAY.
Sense. Of Hearing.
HEARING is the organ of understanding; by it we conceive, by the memory we
conserve, and by our judgment we revolue; as maine rivers have their
confluence, by small streams, so knowledge her essence by the accent of the
ear. As our ear can best judge of sounds, so has it a distinct power to
sound into the center of the heart. It is open to receive, ministering matter
sufficient for the mind to digest; some things it relisheth pleasantly,
apprehending them with a kind of enforced delight: some things it distastes,
and those it either egesteth, as frivolous, or as a subject of merriment merely
ridiculous. In affairs conferring delight, the voluptuous man has an
excellent ear; in matters of profit, the worldly-minded man is attentive; and
in state-deportments the Politician is retentiue. The ear is best delighted,
when any thing is treated on, which the mind fancieth: and it is as soon
cloyed, when the mind is not satisfied with the subject whereof it treats.
As a salve faithfully applied, oportunately ministered, and successively
continued, affords comfort to the Patient; so good instructions delivered by
the mouth, received by the ear, and applied to the heart, will in time prove
motives to the most impoenitent. They say, the object of the ear, to wit,
Melody, is the soueraing'st preservative against Melancholy; which opinion is
true, if grounded on the melody of the heart: for externally sounding accents,
though they allay the passion for an instant, the note leaves such an
impression, as the succeeding discontent takes away the mirth that was
conceived for the present. The ear is an edifying sense, conveying the fruit
of either moral or divine discourse to the imagination, and conferring with
judgment, whether that which it has heard, seem to deserve approbation. A
judicious and impartial ear observes not so much who speaks, as what is
spoken; it admires not the external habit with the garish vulgar, but the
force of reasons, with what likelihood produced. If Herod speak, having a
garment glittering like the sun, the lightheaded multitude will reverence
Herod, and make him a deity, not so much for his speech, for that is common,
as for his apparel, to them an especial motive of admiration. Such as these
(the common sort I mean) have their ears in their eyes: whatsoever they hear
spoken, if they approve not of the person, it skils not; such a near affinity
have the ear and the eye in the vulgar. A discreet ear seasons the
understanding, marshals the rest of the senses wandering, renewes the mind,
preparing her to all difficulties, cheeres the affections, fortifying them
against all oppositions* those be the best Forts, and impregnablest, whose
seats, most opposed to danger, stand in resistance against all hostile
incursions, bravely bearing themselves with honor, in the imminencie of
danger. Such be the ears, they are planted in the high-rode-street, and
exposed to a world of incursions; Scandal, than which nothing more swift,
nothing more frequent shoots her arrows, detracting by aspersion from the
excellentest model of perfection: yet a resolved ear (like an other
Antomedon) tempers the heat of her passion, by recourse had to herself and the
sincerity of her own reputation. There is no discord so harsh to a good ear,
as the discord of the affections; when they mutine one against another; for
she hears how a kingdom divided cannot stand. I hear many things I would
not hear, yet being enforced to hear them, I mean to make this use of them;
that hearing what moves detestation to me in an other, I may be cautioned not
to represent that to an other in my self. As the Martin will not build but in
fair houses: so a good ear will not entertain any thing with an approved
judgment, but what is fair in it self, and confers an equal benefit unto
others. As of all virtues none more eminent than Justice; so no sense of all
others more accommodate than Hearing unto Justice. It is an excellent
commendation, which the Historian gives to that princely Monarch and father to
the worlds sole Monarch, Philip of Macedon; that after hearing of the
Plaintffe, he would ever keep one ear open for the Defendant; a prerogative
princely and worthy the management of her affairs, that is princess of all
virtues. But as best things perverted, prove the worst; so fares it in
Attention; many have ears, who Mydas-like are depressed to earths objects:
erect them how can they, having their attention fixed on the basest of
subjects? with how prepared an ear come these to the prediction of a scarce
Summer? how apt these be to hear report of a young scape-thrift, ready to
vnstrip himself of a fair inheritance upon any terms? how unworthy tidings
these be for so divine an Herald? The Ear is one of the actiuest and
laborioust faculties of the soul: pity then it is that the soul should be by
her entangled, or by her means to such base subjects enthralled, being for the
succor of the soul principally ordained. I have thought long time with my
self, how I should employ this Sense best for my souls advantage: wherein I
took a survey of all those subjects, to which this peculiar sense of Hearing
was especiallest extended; and I found the Ear much delighted with Music;
but finding it but an aerie accent, breathed and expired in one instant, I
thought there was no abiding for my attentive Sense; fitter to be employed in a
delight more permanent. Presently I made recourse to the acts of Princes, and
gave my Ear to the discourse of fore-past exploits: Subjects I found well
deserving my attention, moving me to imitation, and eying my own weakness with
their puissance, forcing me to admiration. But retyring to my self with this
expostulatorie discourse; Where be those eminent and memorable Heroes, whose
acts I have heard recounted? where those victorious Princes, whose names yet
remain to posterity recorded? and hearing no other answer, save that they
once were, and now are not, I wayned my ear from such a subject, as only had
power to give unto the memorable a name, but no essential being. From hence
traversing my ground, I descended (a descent I may term it, being a study of
less height, though of more profit) to the discourse of the Laws: where I
found many things in their own nature worthily approved, by the Prescription
of time, and Proscription of conscience to be strangely depraved: here me
thought, I saw the Poets Arachne, spinning webs of so different a warpe, that
great Flies might easily break out, while little ones suffered, strange
unctions able to cast Justice on an Euphuus slumber; motions made to move
commotions twixt party and party. Here was no employment for my Sense, desiring
rather a direction in her way to eternity, than to have partiall-guilt
corruption her best Solicitor in this vale of misery. Whilst I was thus
roving, seeking for a Pylot to give free and safe waftage to my vnharbored
Sense, at last after many tempestuous occurrences, my afflicted minds
perturbations, I fixed anchor, and by the direction of Reason, got what I sought
for, a quiet harbor. And where may I limit or how confine the straying circle,
of many perplexed and confused thoughts wherewith I am surprised, within so
blessed a period? Not by the appetite, for that slaves the best of man to
unworthiest ends: nor by the obedience of my own proper will, for that I found
perverted by aiming at indirect objects: nor by ambition, which always (as
Pindarus defined her, was accompanied with danger in assaying, impatience in
prosecuting, and an opposition of expectance in atchieuing: nor by the Usurers
Calender, for there is Avarice, that decrepit infirmity of old age haling,
many a poore-prodigall Wittall cursing, and an inward corasiue, worse than any
outward affliction, tormenting: Nor by the Courtiers fawning, where times be
observed, fashions imitated, good-cloths admired, and the onely-generous
quality is to be phantasticall-idle: Nor by the country-Farmers engrossing,
where many a poor Orphans tear accusing, many a desolate widows complaint
contesting, and the hunger starved soul witnessing, make him of all others
most wretched, in that his Nabal-securitie makes him obdurate. These are not
guides to lead my directing Sense to her harbor; she is not for earth; her
Music is mixed with too many discords. The worlds harmony to a good Christian
ear, may be compared to that of Archabius the trumpeter, who had more given
him to cease than to sound: so harsh is the sound of this world in the ear of
a diuinely-affected soul. A good ear will not say, as the powerful auditor,
or incorrigible sinner, says to his Preacher; Speak to us pleasing things,
Esaias 30.
speak to us pleasing things: for these must have Orphuus melody, whom the
Cyconian women tore in pieces, because with his music he corrupted and
effeminated their men. These are not like those Devils, whereof Guydo
reports, that cannot abide Music: these are contrary Devils, for they
delight in nothing but the music of Flattery. These objects are not made to
harbor me; my pitch is higher, my thoughts more unbounded, my ear more
arrected, and the consideration of mine own imbecillitie more apparent: it is
heaven she aims at; the Angels, with which she would consort, and that
melody of the superior powers, which yields to her ear the absolutest
concord; she shall sound forth therefore (tuning her voice by her ear) the
unworthiness of earths affections, compared to that excellency of real
delights planted above. First, shall be that delight, which deprived the first
Angel of his eternal delight, to wit, Pride; whereby we become like
Cinnamon-tree, whose rind is better than all the body. Hence is it we desire
to reform the workmanship of God, becoming polishers of nature, garnishers of
corruption, and proud of our shame. And how should we think, that God will
respect us, who have disfigured his own similitude, and so disguised our
selves as he can hardly know us? There is no workman, that regards or
esteems his own workmanship after it is translated and transposed by others;
and we becoming creatures of our own making, shadowing native modesty with
a dissembling blush, seem to translate that amiable form and proportion,
which was given us by our Creator, to an ugly and promiscuous habit, extracted
like Flaccus crow, from the phantasticke invention of all countries. The
ancient law observed, that such as had a yellow lock upon their leprous parts,
were not to consort with other people; though we want that yellow lock, the
apparent token of leprosy, yet we have a yellow band, and other running sores
of vanity. Far be this vice from the mansion of my soul, lest her speedy
surprisall, deprive me of all: and ever may the consideration of my own
weakness, restrain me from the least conceit of aspiring arrogance. Next of
pleasure, shall be sensual delights, the vain obeying of our own affections,
the souls bane, the bodies ulcer, and the Devils watch bell. We are rocked
asleep, and sit dandled on the knee of an impudent strumpet; as Babels
subversion proceeded from the height of her sin; so this link of impiety,
by which death and ruin is haled along to us, promises subversion to the
possessor, the best reward her serpentine embraces, adulterate affections, and
obsequious delights can propose to her attendants. Shall my ear be entangled
with her souls stain? or prostitute her attention to so odious a subject?
shall my Sense of Direction tend to my subversion? or the bodies instructresse
(like a blind guide) throw her headlong to confusion? No, I will not engage so
excellent an hostage as my soul, for the bitter-sweet of a repenting pleasure.
Reason tells me, that pleasure merits only that title, when it is relished
with virtue; nor can sensuality satiate the delight of the intellectual part,
when it is confined to immerited respects. This I will make my position, in the
bent of my resolution; I mean only so far to obey my delights, as the
after-hope of my soul may not be abridged, the future joy in the expectance of
sovereign happiness, impaired: but that my Sense to reason subjected, may in
the sweet concord of an inward contemplation drawn from her creator, apprehend
an exceeding pleasure, to have done any thing pleasing to her maker. Can I
find in rich coffers (the misers idols) any true object to plant this
excellent organ? o no, the corruption of coin is the generation of an usurer,
or a lousy beggar. For the first, I love my soul too well, for so mean and
base a traffic to hazard a gem so incomparable: heaven is the Tabernacle I
desire to dwell in, but so far is that Mansion from the conceit of our English
Jew, or oppressing Usurer, as he chooses rather to live in the tents of Kedar
with the depraved issue of Dathan, than by having Lazarus scrip, to be carried
after to Abraham's bosom. Rightly was his experience grounded, who said; that
the multitude of Physicians and Lawyers are the signs of a distempered state;
but the number of Usurers and their factors, is the argument of a fatal
disease reigning: For the second, to wit, Beggary; I know not what to think
on it: It is a beneficial trade, where impudence marshals it: but a shamefast
beggar (says Homer) never yet could live on his profession. I could wish a
more temperate harbor; neither too rich, lest the fulness of my estate make me
insolent; nor too poor, lest the consideration of my want, force me to some
course exorbitant. Pauperis est (says the Poet) numerare pecus: but boni est
(says David) numerare dies: it shall be my arithmeticke, my golden number. But
stay, let me reduce my thoghts, and in the consideration of my distempred and
indisposed affections, propound to my self a form which I may observe, a line
by which I may direct my course, and a center, where I may end my distance;
than a Caveat which may restrain me, an observance to conduct me, and a reason
drawn from an inconvenience to divert me. and thus I expostulate; why would I
not be rich? why no extortioner? why no oppressor? why no biting usurer? Rich I
would not be, lest I should admire my own fortunes, and after admiration fall
to idolatrize, and then where should I plant my future expectance? it is hard
for a Cammell to go through the eye of a needle, and more difficult for a
gold-adoring Mammonist to enter heaven. Extort I would not, for I know there be
vialls of wrath ready to be powered down on the Extortioner: and though the
wicked for a while flourish like the green Bay Tree, time will come, when his
place is not to be found. Oppress I cannot, when I hear the Orphans tear,
the widows curse, the poor man's prayer, the hunger-strau'd soul: for I know
the orphans tears will be botled, the widows curse effected, the poor man's
prayer received, and the hunger-staru'd soul revenged. Use my money, but usure
it I will not: ten at hundred shall not deprive me of ten hundred times more
glory, to purchase here a little treasure subject to corruption, and
transitory. Quod foenorari, est homine^ occidere, to play Usurer, is to play
the murderer, says the Orator Cicero: ^. Ossic.
which may appear (if ever) even in the ruins of this time; where
Hospitality, which was the glory of England is vanished, and Seruing-men, who
by reason of their education and number, were the strength of the I Will, to
suppress the barbarous tumults of all turbulent heads, are turned to a few
guarded pages, colored like so many Butter-flies. Our Ancestors established by
their laws, Ibid: proper finem.
that the Thief should be censured to make restitution twofold, but the
Usurer fourfold; so odious was this trade to ancient times, when only the
light of nature shone upon them. Yea an Usurer by an old Canon, was denied
christian burial; and more profane, than allowed was his opinion, who
concluded in his own behalf, that no profession merited more exemption than
Usury: his reason was; it was impartial, and respected no degrees: his
conclusion was true, but his inference erroneous: for it takes fast hold of
Cities, Villages, Ports, and obscure Hamlets, and lays unhallowed fist on
persons of all quality, even from the Pere to the poor oyster-crying-wife.
Hence must I draw my caution, not to touch pitch, lest I be defiled; their
conversation is infectious, their conscience a very gulf or charuell-house, to
swallow and consume, devour and exhaust all at once. The Indian Anthrophagoi
are not half so ravenous: I will walk in a more modest path, both to cheer
my affections, with a satisfying desire of competence, and to bless my self
from such cankerwormes, as prune the virtuous blossoms of others, to feed a
posterity of prodigal rake-hels; my ear must be tuned to another note, that
my edifying Sense may discharge her peculiar office, not to affect novelties,
or choose varieties, but to dedicate her inward operation to the minds comfort
(to wit) the Melody of heaven.

Of Touching. 3. ESSAY.
THis faculty of all others is most indiuiduate; Sense. Of Touching
it inheres in the subsistence of man, and cannot be separated or taken away
without the detriment or utter decay rather, of the subject wherein it is: it
may therefore be called the living Sense, though in diverse diseases and
occurrences also oft-times befalling, the subject wherein it is, may be deprived
of it; as we read of Athenagoras of Argus, who never felt any pain, when stung
by a Scorpion. This Sense has a certain affinity with the essence of man,
and therefore should be employed in such things, as confer to the glory of that
Essence: many abuse it, who belulled with the lethargy of sin and security,
never turn their eye to a serious contemplation of the supreme glory, or a
consideration of their own frailty; they know not how Gods deferring is the
more to infer; how hells torments were no torments, if invention might conceit
them. These are they that are deprived of the spiritual use of this Sense;
crying with the sluggard, yet a little, and yet a little; turning in their bed
like a door on her hinges; their Delay like a pulley draws on them vengance,
like a mighty engine, razeth down the fortress of their soul, and like a
consuming wind, or violent tempest, breaks down that fair Cedar which was
planted for the heavenly Libanon. When neither the white flagg, nor the red,
which Tamberlaine advanced at the siege of any City, would be accepted of, the
black flagg was set up, which signified there was no mercy to be looked for.
It is strange that man endewed with reason, the ornament of the mind, should
become so blinded with a terrestrial rest (which indeed is no rest, but a
torment) as to forget his own composition; being made of no better temper than
clay, and as a vessel in the hand of the Potter. Far more wisely did
Agathocles that prince of Sicilie, who commanded his Image to be made with the
head, arms, and body of brass, but the legs of earth, to intimate of how
weak and infirm a ground, his imperial person subsisted. Weak indeed, and
of as weak accomplishment: for what can man do, wherein he may glory? or
attribute the least of so exquisite a work to his cunning? if we glory in any
thing, it is our shame, which is no glory, but a reproach; for who, but such as
have a forehead glazed with impudency, will triumph in their own defects, or
boast of their own imperfections? does the Peacocke glory in his foul feet?
does he not hang down the tail when he looks upon them? does the Bucke,
having befiltht himself with the female, lift up his horns, and walk proudly
to the lawnes? o no; he so hates himself, by reason of the stench of his
commixture, that all drooping and languishing into some solitary ditch, he with
draws himself and takes soil, and batheth till such time, as there fall a
great shower of rain, when, being thoroughly washed and cleansed, he posteth
back to his food. If such apprehension of shame appear in brute beasts, what
should his be, that is made Lord and governor of all beasts? is this living
sense, this vital faculty, this indiuiduate property made a rubb in our way
to immortality? Does that by which we live, cut from us all means of living
hereafter? miserable then is our Sense, when without all sense of sin, we
become deprived of the sense of glory. This Sense of Touch may be reduced to
those three objects, wherein our understanding is summarily employed: the
Intelligible, the Irascible, and the Concupiscible. The Intelligible, whereby
we apprehend the end of our creation, whereby we judge of causes and events,
touching with the apprehensiue hand of judgment, what may concern us, and the
state wherein we are interested. The Irascible, when stirred up with ire or
indignation, we prosecute revenge, not suffering the least disgrace without an
intended requital. The Concupiscible, when in an ambitious desire of honor or
estate, or lustful satisfaction of our own illimited affections, we covet
this or that, ardent in pursuing, and least contented, when obteining that we
have pursued the understanding if rightly seated, like a wise Pylot steres the
ship, saues her from splitting, mannaging all things with a provident respect
had, of what may come after. No Siren can tempt this wise and subtle Ulysses:
though the sea look never so fair, this wise and temperate mariner is
suspicious of it, knowing, Where the Sea looks the whitest, oftimes the
periloust rocks, and ineuitablest shelfs are seated. She sinks, plumms, and
tryes the shaldes, whether apt for navigations or not: in brief she does naught
without serious premeditation, and fore-thinks of the mean, ere she attain
the end. She affects not curiosity either in words, habit, or manners; yet
virtuously curious how to express herself truly honorable in all
deportments, without aspersion of scandal. She will not disguise herself in
an dishonest cover, but affecting Plainness, teaches the same rule and
precept to her followers, which Jesus the son of Syrach taught: Ne accipias
faciem aduersus faciem tuam: not to be dooble faced, but with sincere
plainness, such as thou art, such do thou seem. A rule far more accomodate
to the course of virtue, and more directly leading to the seat of glory, then
all the policies which ever Machauell yet invented, or the dissembling
appearances of all observing Timists. Though Numa Pompilius in Rome kept the
people in awe, and subjected them to what tirannous laws he pleased, under
pretense of conference with Aegeria; Minos in Athens, under color he was
inspired in a certain hollow cave by Jupiter; and Pallas in a counterfeite
habit, deceived Claudius, in the adoption of Nero. This divine essence of the
soul, (the understanding part) will assume no other form then as she is:
knowing her perfection cannot be made more accomplished by any borrowed
colors. She understands her self to be composed of a more divine element,
then to subject her will to unworthy ends; for she knows, that as the Sense is
conversant in outward things, she is seated in inward things, not directed by
the eye of the Body, which is many times deceued, but by the eye of the Soul,
which always aims at one certain scope, to wit, immortality, She
considers the ends, which mortality aims at; honor, ample territories,
great possessions, popular respect, and long life, to enjoy these without
disturbance, and she makes use of these with a penetrating judgment,
apprehending whereto the ends of these externallie-seeming goods confer. Honor
(says she) is quickly fading, and an aspiring spirit, like the lofty Cedar,
is ever subject to most danger; when like iacks in a virginal, or nails in a
wheel, the fall of one is the rising of another. ample teritories and great
possessions (says she) are more then nature requires; she is content with a
competent; and that competency reduced to a very narrow scantling, when of all
our dross, estate, tresure and possessions, going down into the earth,
nothing shall you take with you: you shall carry no more hence, Nisi parua
quod vrna capit, but a coffin, and a winding sheet. When Saladine that
puissant emperor of Persia, with many victorious and successiue battails, had
extended the limits of his Empire, and through the happiness of his wars
being never in any one pitched field vanquished, become the sole terror of the
Eastern part, at last fell mortally sick, and perceiving how there was no way
but one with him, called his Chiefetaine, and commanded him (having bin chief
Leader in all those prosperous wars, which the Emperor had achieved) to take
his shrowding-sheet, and to hang it upon a staff in manner of a banneret, and
with it, to proclaim in the streets of Damascus, This is all that Saladine,
the Emperor of Persia, has left of his many conquests, this is all he has
left of all his victories. Long life (says she) is not worth desiring, since
it gives but increase to a multitude of sorrows; she prefers a good life,
before a long life, and esteems that life best beyond all comparison, which is
exercised in the use of her creation. She concludes with the Philosopher,
Optimum est aut non omnino nasci, aut quam cito mori; making life the Theater
of shame if abused, but the eminent passage from a pilgrimage to a permanent
City, if rightly employed. To be brief, she meditates of naught, affects
naught, entertaineth naught with a free will, and a pure consecrated desire,
but what tastes of the spirit, having her ear barracadoed against the
insinuating desires of every seducing appetite; she is not of the world,
though in the world; nor can she love any thing within the worlds
circumference, in regard, the world has her limits, but she not to be
confined.

The Irascible is attended always upon by Revenge: for the object of the
wrathful faculty is honor and advantage, and if this cease, straight-waies
courage and stomach decay, so as the least argument of distaste, like another
Silla stirrs her blood, and makes up a Centaures banquet. This Faculty is
always as ready to apprehend an occasion of punishing (yea before it is
offered) as to observe the means of executing, when the occasion is ministered.
She will not say with that noble Venetian Duke; It is sufiicient for a discreet
Prince, to have power to revenge, that his enemies may have cause to fear him.
No, meditation upon revenge is the only prayer-booke, that this unbounded
passion uses. Yet may this part rightly tempered include in it an excellent
good: for Anger is not always unto sin: whence it is said, Be angry, but
sin not. We may be angry through zeal, and the feruencie we bear to the
Gospel: Christ was angry, when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple: he was angry, when his Disciples contended for prioritie; he was angry
at the incredulity of the Gentiles, the obduracie of the Jews; yea he was
angry at the barren fig tree, when it brought out no fruit, and therefore
cursed it, shadowing thereby the fruitless synagogue. O may my soul, if ever
she be angry, feel this passion in the fervent love she bears to her
Creator: may her anger be against her self, in the woeful remembrance of her
sins; that her anger may breed a detestation, detestation a reconciliation to
her Savior. But for such as with the Bear cannot drink, but they must bite
the water, far may my soul be divided from their dwelling: I will be angry,
but commit no sin, for the God of Sion has prescribed me a form, to be angry
for the zeal of Gods house, wherein is no sin.

The Concupiscible is as the rest, of it self indifferent; and as a line in a
circle, equally tending to either part of good or evil: yet so depraved is man
become, that Medea-like, he is ever more prompt to take the worse rather than
the better: here the covetous miser couets to engrosse an huge estate to
himself, making his purse the devils mouth, and with his hydroptick
conscience, though ever purchasing, yet ever coveting. Here the ambitious man
displaies his own humor to the eye of the world, of whom I may say, as was once
said of one puffed up with the like spirit: Quod habere non vult est valde
bonum, quod esse non vult, hoc est bonu^: that is good which he desires not to
have, that is good which he would not have come to pass; so exorbitant is the
desire of the ambitious, as what he desires is nothing less then virtuous:
here the Merchant aims at an exceeding gain in traffic; he sliceth the
seas, opposes himself to all dangers, all distempratures of wind and
weather, ever using this concupiscible part, desiring a happy fraught for his
adventure. Here the Warriors desire is confined, to gain by the spoil of an
other. even the basest mechanicke offices be conversant in this faculty,
aiming at some especial end, whereto their labors be directed. To covet things
temporary, planting our affections on them, is discrepant from the right use
of this excellent faculty: there is a good covetousness, and it is heavenly;
there is a good theft, and it is heavenly; there is a good ambition, and it is
heavenly: The good and godly covetous covet not with Demas, nor Magus, nor
Demetrius; they covet righteousness, sobriety, temperance, yea all virtues
which confer to humane perfection; there is but one pearl of esteem, and to
purchase it, they sell all that they have; this is a happy covetousness, a
glorious merchandise: the good and godly thief cares not for embezling earthly
treasure; for he knows mothes will corrupt it, rust will consume it, and
continuance of time will deface it; it is that immortal treasure which he
would steal, for he observes how it is subject to no alteration, but continues
in the same state ever. Again, he reads, the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and rather then he will loose it, with all violence he means to
pursue it. The good and godly ambitious aim not at worldly honor, but as a
subject incomparably above all external seeming happiness: for they consider
how it is better to be a doore-keeper in the Lords house, than to be conversant
with Princes. Happy thief, whose theft is heaven; blessed covetousness, to
covet heaven; glorious ambition to aspire to heaven; may this Theft be my
souls discipline; this Covetousness her exercise; this Ambition her prize: so
like the good Thief, may she be crowned, with the godly-couetous Zacheus
rewarded, and with the heauenly-aspiring soul exalted. How happy shall I be in
this Sense (the life of humane essence) if by using these three faculties of my
soul sincerely, I shall at last attain to the state of glory? yet how much is
this Sense, especially conversant in these three subjects, perverted, and
violently wrested from her own nature? where such as desire to touch the Arc,
make this Sense the instrument of their fall: others Gehezai-like, whose
beating pulse will not forgo the touch of gold, though they purchase it by a
leprosy. O how many fall by this Sense of life, making it their sense of
death? Sodoms apples were but touched, and to dust and ashes they were reduced:
the fairest of all our vanities be but Sodoms apples, they cannot endure the
touch, for they are painted and adulterate. Far be my Sense estranged from so
profane a subject: Virtue, as it needs no color to garnish it, so can it
endure the Touch, and near be changed. It is she that shall attend my Sense,
so as touching her intellectually, my soul by so sweet an apprehension, may be
incorporate in her indiuidually. Here is my living Sense well satisfied, and in
this harbor planted, she will never desire to be removed: for affliction is
ended, discontent cheered, and a perfect rest, without interruption, by her
that is the true essence of delight, proposed.

Of Tasting. 4. ESSAY.
THis Sense makes me weeppe ere I speak of her; Sense. Of Tasting.
since hence came our grief, hence our misery: when I represent her before my
eyes, my eyes become blinded with weeping, remembering my grandame Eve, how
soon she was induced to taste that she ought not. Hence do I imagine
(imagination is the end of man) how pure I had bin, if this one Sense had not
corrupted my pristine innocence: apples are suspicious to me, being the first
that depraved me. I will rather distaste mine own palate to give true relish
to my souls appetite, than by satisfying the first, corrupt the purity of the
latter. By the ministry of this Sense, I apprehend the universal delights of
this world, and as in the Palate, so find I in them a distinct operation. Many
things hot in the mouth, are cold in the stomach: such are wordly pleasures:
hot they are in the first pursuit or assault, and eagerly are they followed:
but in the stomach, that is, when digested and rightly pondered, how cold are
those Pleasures, being attended on by remorse, and observed by repentance.
Again, hence do I gather the frailty and breuity of all earthly pleasures?
Whatsoever ministers singular'st content unto our appetite, is no longer
satisfieing then in the palate; for after going into the stomach, that content
is done. So delights momentany, and limitarie to an instant, may for the
present yield a satisfaction, but how soon be these joys extinguished, how
soon forgotten? This Sense cautions me of two Sects, the Epicure and
Pithagorist, the first by too much exceeding, the latter by too much
restraining; the Epicure puts his money in his belly, as the Miser does his
belly in his purse: but the Pithagorist neither cares for belly nor purse,
scrupulously abstayning from that which was ordained for his use. The five
Senses (says one) be our greatest sleepers; yet I may affirm that this Sense
never sleeps; for there is nothing seemingly-sencelesse, which she apprehends
not either with free taste or distaste. Of all others, this Sense produces the
diuerst qualities: whence it is we say, Like lips, like lettice: where this
faculty, either by an indisposition of the body, or a distinct operation in
the subject, shows this pleasing and acceptable to one, which is noisome and
different to an other. This Sense must have the body and mind prepared,
before she can rightly show her own power; she admits of no distemper,
suffers no restraint: whence it is, that we find by experience, where the
body is not equally disposed, this faculty has much of her operation
impaired. The best taste is to distaste sin, and the worst taste is to affect
that, which confers to the soulea distaste of all tastes inherent in all
subjects, none less distinguishing than the hungry-mans taste: which may
appear in those miserable famines of Samaria and Jerusalem; ratts, mice,
weasels, and scorpions were no common men's iunkets; where motherly love
renounced her name, and became the ruin of that she should cherish; as the
Matron Myriam, who constrained for her lives supportance (though she had but
one son) killed and roasted him. Hence comes it, that necessity has no law,
nor hunger needs no sauce. Let my Taste be directed by reason, and not by
sense. Reason may enlighten her, and make her distinguish of desires; but Sense
perplexeth her, and subjects the better part to a slavish appetite. Many have
exceeded in the use of this Sense, but few restrained their desires with
moderation. More Cleopatra's than Cornelia's, more Vitellij than Vticae, more
Sileni than Salustij: ancient and modern replenish us with stories of this
nature; where violent ends ever attended the immoderation of Princes, but
healthful lives, and joyful periods summed up the days of the temperate. The
Venetians give us instance of these in themselves; amongst which there appears
one more memorable: Domenico Syluio his Duchess, was so delicate a woman, as
she would have dew gathered to make her Baine withal, with many other curious
perfumes and tricks; yet before her death her flesh did rot, so as no creature
could come near her. May my Taste be seasoned with no such delicacie: let my
affection rather disclaim herself, than undo my soul by intemperate
subjects. I will not care so much to taste what I love, as what I hate; for I
know my self more subject to surfeit in the one, than in the other. I have
tasted most of inferior delights, yet in a general survey of all my pleasures,
I cannot choose but weep, to remember how those delights which I affected,
produce no other fruit but Repentance. The taste of vice to a mortified
affection, is like sweet meats to him that is in an ague: she is distasteful,
and becomes more odious, in that she clothes delight with an habit of
wantonness. I will choose with holy Hierome, to build me a cell in the desert,
to live out of the heat of concupiscence, rather than by living in the eye of
the world, enthral my reasonable part to the appetite of Sense. Taste ingenders
delight: I will not taste every thing I like, lest late repentance force me to
distaste that which I liked. I will foresee the end, ere I approve of the
means, that grounding on a golden mean, I may attain a glorious end. No
tempting delight shall feed my appetite: for as prevention is the life of
policy; so temptation, if consented to, is the passage to misery. Fowls of
the air, though never so empty-stomackt, fly not for food into open
pit-falls:

Quae nimis apparent retia, vitat avis. My soul shall imitate the bird, that
she may escape (like the bird) out of the hand of the Fowler. How happy were I,
if I would taste nothing but what ministers content to the mind, sustayning
nature, but not oppressing her, feeding, but not pampering her, cheering, but
not cramming her. I have tasted many liquors, yet none like the brinie current
of mine eyes: tears are best extinguishers of sin, preparatiues to remorce,
motives to true contrition: precious Elixir may thou ever be my drink in the
time of my pilgrimage, and quench my thirst of sin with a desire of an heavenly
inheritance. As the Nurse lays wormwood or aloes on her pap, to waine her
child from sucking, so will I sprinkle some bitter thing upon such things as I
affect, that my delight may be restrained. How full of comfort am I, when my
taste is directed to a right end? and how directed, when it is besotted with
vanities? How far better were it, to live temperate, taste all things as
indifferent, and conclude our days in quiet, than to have Dives doom, Nabals
doale, or Balthazars fall? how far better were it to live like the Hermit in
the desert, then like the sensual Libertine in the world so dissolute? what is
it to feed lusciously, fare daintely, taste all things with full satiety, when
our fare shall be reduced to famine, our luscious feeding to Soule-staruing, and
our Satiety here on earth, to our penury for ever in hell? it is better to
distribute to those that crave, use temperance in what we have, and make our
posterity true heirs of what we leave, than to cry in midst of an eternal
flame, for one small drop to quench our thirst, and not be heard; for one crum,
and not be satisfied; for one minutes ease, and not released. Taste may my
soul no such dainties as may starve her; delighted be my soul, but with no
such vanities as may corrupt her; rejoice may my soul, but in no other
subject, no other object, yea her only maker. So in the taste of this life,
shall I remember my years with bitterness of heart: that my life which is
reckned not by years, but Hours, not how many, but how good, may be as the
Taste of sweet smelling odors, in the nose-thrills of her Savior; there is no
odor like it, no perfume to be compared to it; it is a saving savor; a
precious odor; and the Saints honor. Happy Sense that is thus saincted;
comfortable taste that is thus renewed; and blessed soul that is thus invited;
Taste and see how sweet the Lord is; sweet in his mercies, sweet in his
promises, and sweet in his performance. And such is the spiritual sweetness,
which every devout soul conceiueth in the contemplation of eternity, whose
joy is not in the tents of Kedar, but in the bowels of her Savior; not with
the inhabitants of Moloc, but the glorious seed of Isaac: these have their
taste in the green and flourishing pastures of Gods word; distasting the
slesh-pots of Egypt, and relishing only the manna of heavenly Canaan.
Pleasures which are earthly, they neither long for in expecting, nor love when
enjoying. They have found obstruction in the Senses corporal, but free passage
in the Senses spiritual. They compare worldly-tasting men to those wild
asses, which snift the wind; their desires extend only to be thought good,
dis-esteeming the excellency of real goodness, which makes man truly happy.
They observe four sorts of men in the world discovered by the eye of wisdom:
Some are wise, but seem not so; some seem so, but are not so; some neither
are nor seem; some both are and seem: the last, these only partake; for as
their essence concurrs with their appearance, so scorn they to express more
in semblance, than they are in essence; if there were no God, yet these men
would be good: and for sin, though they wist (to use Seneca's words) that
neither God nor man knew it, yet would they hate it. O my taste be thus
seasoned, my palate thus relished, my affections thus marshalled, my whole
pilgrim-course thus managed, that my Taste may distaste earth, relish heaven,
and after her dissolution from earth, enjoy her mansion in heaven.

Of Smelling. 5. ESSAY.
SO provident has that great workman bin of all his creatures, Sense. Of
Smelling.
as no delight even in this Tabernacle of earth, is wanting to make him more
accomplished: and though the five Senses (as that devout Barnard observes) be
those five gates, by which the world does besiege us, the Devil does tempt us,
and the flesh ensnare us; yet in every one of these, if rightly employed, is
there a peculiar good and benefit redounding to the comfort of the soul, no
less than to the avail and utility of the body. For even by the Smell, as
by the conduit, by which is conveyed unto us the dilated fountain of Gods
mercy, do we apprehend all varieties of flowers, sootes, sweetes: which moved
the Philosopher to term this Sense, the Harbinger of the Spring. Some are of
opinion, that this peculiar Sense, is an occasion of more danger to the body
than benefit, in that it receives crude and unwholesome vapors, foggie and
corrupt exhalations, being subject to any infection; it is true: but what
especial delights confers it for one of these inconveniences; cheering the
whole body with the sweetest odours, giving liberty to the vital powers,
which otherwise would be imprisoned, delight to her fellow-Sences, which else
would be dulled, and the sweet breathing air, which by her is reciued: all
these (as so many arguments of consequence) bring us to a more exact
acknowledgment of this Senses excellency. The Smelling is termed the
vnnecessariest of all other Senses, yet may it be employed in cases of
necessity; witness Democritus, who against the celebration of the feast
Buthysia, fasted nine days, sustayning nature only with the smell of hot
bread. This Sense of mine shall not be subjected to outward delicacies: Let the
Courtier smell of perfumes, the sleeke-fac'd Lady of her paintings, I will
follow the smell of my Saviors ointments: how should I be induced, following
the direction of reason, by such soule-bewitching vanities, which rather
pervert the refined luster of the mind, than add the least of perfection to
so excellent an essence? No, let Pigmalion dote on his own picture, Narcissus
on his shape, Niobe on her numerous progeny; my Taste, shall be to taste how
sweet the Lord is; my Touch, the apprehension of his love; my sight, the
contemplation of his glory; my ear, to accent his praise; my smell, to repose
in the fair and pleasant pastures of his word. O comfort truly styled one; in
that my soul transported above herself, unites her self to be joined to her
Redeemer. The Gardens of the Hesperides warded and guarded by those three
daughters of Atlas, were pleasant; the Gardens of Lucullus fragrant; the Grove
of Ida eminent; yet not comparable to those exquisite pleasures, which the
divine pastures comprehend; there is that hedged Garden, that sealed Well, that
Bethesda, that Eden, that Syloe; here may the delight of every Sense be
renewed; the thirsty satisfied, the hungry filled, the sick cured, the
labourer cheered, and the exquisite mirror of all perfection; torrent of
euer-flowing bounties, Iessaes branch, Aarons rod, and that flowrie garden of
Engaddi represented. There is mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilus in cord;
honey to the taste, melody to the ear, and harmony to the heart; honey which
breeds no loathing, melody which is never discording, harmony ever agreeing.
This it is to be joined to an heavenly spouse, sending from Paradise
pomgranats, with the fruits of apples; Cypress, Nard, Nard and Saffron,
Cantic. 4.
Fistula, and Cinnamon, with all the woods of Libanon, Mirrh and Aloes, with
the best ointments. What excellent delights be here proposed? what exquisite
comforts ministered? it is sufficient for me to admire them in this pilgrimage,
enjoying them by contemplation, which after many pilgrim days I shall possess
in fruition. There is no Pomander to smell at, like the ointment of my Savior:
he is all sweet, all comfort, all delight; sweet in his mercy, comfortable in
his promise, and delightful in his presence; in his mercy a father, in his
comfort a redeemer, and in his delight a replenisher; from his mercy and
compassion is derived abundantly fulness of consolation, from his comfort or
promise, an assured expectation, and from his delight, of himself a plenarie
possession. O would to God with happy Joseph, I had taken down my Savior from
the cross, embalmed him in the spices or graces of my soul, had layen him in
the new sepulcher of my heart, that at least attending or following my JESUS,
my obedience might have ministered something to so heavenly obsequies. For how
should I think but by the smell of his ointments, my sin-sicke and soul soiled
conscience should be cured, who had power to raise dead Lazarus stinking in his
grave, having been four days buried? O that I might go to the mountain of
Myrrh, Cant. 4.
to the hill of Frankincense, to be joined to him, whose ointments are above
all spices: how should I want any thing being so enriched? how should I fear
any thing being so armed? or how wish any thing, having whatsoever I desired?
Sweet Smelling perfume of selected virtues, pure stream of divine graces, and
amiable beauty never blemished; no delight shall withhold me, no affection
seduce me, no inordinate pleasure entice me, no sweet smell draw me; I have
tied my self to my spouse in all my Senses; being He, that ministers
refreshment to all my Senses. If I eye any thing, it shall be my Saviors
cross; if I hear any thing, it shall be my Saviors praise; if I touch any
thing, it shall be my Saviors wounds; if I taste any thing, it shall be my
Saviors comforts; if I smell any thing, it shall be my Saviors ointments:
Blessed eye, that has such an object; blessed ear, that hears such a
concord; blessed touch, that has such a subject; blessed taste, to have such a
relish; blessed smell, to have such a sweetness. As the Nose is the conduit,
by which we receive breath, so should it be the conduit, by which we receive
grace: by it we breath; may we rather not breath, then employ it not in
breathing praise to our maker? As the Taste and Smell have two distinct
offices, yet by an affinity united, for the obstruction of the one is the
annoyance of the other; so may they be linked in one consort, in the
contemplation of their Creator; that as the one is to be employed to taste and
see how sweet the Lord is; so the other by following the smell of her Saviors
ointments, may at last attain to the mountain of eternal spices.

FINIS.
ORNATISSIMO ET LECTISSIMO VIRO, I. B. de L: EQVITI AVRATO, PVBLICAE PACIS
IVRISQVE STVDIOSISSIMO.

Pariterque H. B. FILIO INTER SVPERSTITES ORTV MAXIMO, TALI PATRE NATO
DIGNISSIMO, INDOLIS OPTIMAE, SPEI AMPLISSIMAE, MENTIS TENACISSIMAE.

RICHARD BRATHWAYT HANC DETRACTIONIS NARRATIVN CVLAM, IN GRATAM ANIMI MEMORIAM
(INVITA QUORUNDAM INVIDIA:) candide, condite, intime, integre D. D. D.

DETRACTION.
DEtraction is a sin, derived from him, who first seduced woman to sin: she is
conversant in extenuating of virtues, detracting from the good, and spying
occasion how to derogate from his worth, which is most deseruingly eminent:
she is called by the sententious Lipsius, a privy guilefull wounding of the
name, by these two instruments, Pen and Tongue: she is termed by that divine
Philosopher, a secret undermining thief, that breaks into the precious
cabbinet of all moral virtues, not to possess them, but corrupt them, not to
enjoy them, but detract from them: she is harbored in malcontents,
respectively entertained by Nouelists, an inquisitiue obseruer of
state-affaires, and a serious agent in civil divisions: she is a great enemy
to peace, yet expects small benefit by war, never contented so long as she
sees deserving men honored: she is amongst men as pernicious, as to God
odious, being a professed foe to none more than such as be zealous of God.
Saturn is said to have predominancie over her, Idleness is the foster-mother
of her, and Envy claims an especial prerogative in her. It is strange to
see how her censures be ever grounded on ignorance in matters of knowledge,
where public or private imputation uses to be the maine scope of her
invention. Rightly was she compared to the venomous Tarantula bred in the
region of Apulia, whose stinging was not to be cured by ought but Music, to
wit, the melody of a sincere and patient mind, prepared to endure whatsoever
she shall inflict, yet able to wipe of, whatsoever she can asperse. As it is
the property of a friend to conceive well, to defend, and speak well of those
labors we compose, or actions we perform (says Lucilius): so is it the use
of a discontented and malignant nature, to deprave the best by misconstruction,
ever aiming at the worst: much like the Toade, that may not endure to smell the
sweet savor of the Vine, when it flourishes. Whence I may justly assume a
particular complaint, having got the name of a Detractor, which I never
merited. But well do I perceive whence I gained that title, traduced not
deserved, being by malice suggested, or on misconstruction (the indirectest
path to probable opinion) grounded. For Construction is the moulder of
Detraction: and impossible is it, that so many different minds should iumpe in
one censure; for particular vices enforce an application to our selves, what
was meant in generality. So as nothing can be writ in how temperate a style
soever, but some personal distaste may be occasioned contrary to the mind of
the Author, yet sorting with their own vicious humor: whereas it would
relish more of true wisdom, to reform that in our selves, which gives
occasion of reproof unto others, then publicly to discover our own defects,
by applying that to our selves, which perchance, had as near, if not nearer
affinity to others. And herein was Vespasian commendable, who apprehensiue
enough of offense, and powerful enough to revenge, could wisely forbear to be
captious in the one, or violent in the other. As for popular opinions, which
have their foundation on no other ground than erring Repentance, I appeal from
them to a firmer and faithfuller testimony, that is, my own conscience, which
can say thus much for me in lieu of so many objections: Non habeo in me, quod
testetur contra me: so sincere were my purposes from the beginning, as they
ever aimed at a more generous and glorious mark, than to stoop to such
baseness, as personal calumniation, the infallible note of an ignoble and
unworthy disposition. Albeit more apparent it is than light: vt Belluae sunt
humanae, ita homines belluini; whose depraved actions should be glanced at,
whereby shame might reclaim them, seeing themselves brought forth naked to the
world, or the examples of others deter them, whose fearful ends were
occasioned upon like means. And such as these be as necessary fautors and
supporters of virtue, and her declining sovereignty, as those cherishers and
professors of vice be principal causes of virtues decrease: yea those be they,
which that regal patron and pattern of justice, Aristides, termed the
Sentinels of his kingdom, because they rowsed and raised his people from the
secure sleep of riot and excess, persuading them to employments more generous
and manly, than to expose so precious a treasure as Time to sensual
effeminacie. Amongst these (I confess it) I may be ranked, nor is this Rank
unworthy the approbation of the best: for my aim has ever bin (so far as
the small portion of my ability extended) to propose a way as accommodate, to
the course of virtue in a general observance, as particular practice:
endeavoring to instance in my self by example, what my Works proposed by
instruction. Wherein, if at any time I failed, (as what man living may not at
sometimes fail, if not fall) so unsained and urgent was my desire of redeeming
the time I lost, as I surceased not to labor till I regained what I lost. Yea,
so far have my thoughts ever been from excusing or extenuating my
imperfections (which have been ever before mine eyes) as I made that
diuinely-morall instruction of Epictetus, my entirest Counselor: who wills me
to deny the sins mine enemy taxes me with, but to reprove his ignorance, in
that, being unacquainted with the infinity of my crimes (which minister no
less occasion of fears then tears) he lays only two or three to my charge,
whereas, indeed I am guilty of a million. But for that other rank, whose oily
tongues can smooth the errors of the vicious, as well as smother the deserving
parts of the virtuous, I as much loath the gain of their traffic, as I hate
their trade. For the world shall not hire me to utter one word to their praise,
which deprave the world, nor the eminentst rewards force me to detract, where
virtue bids me commend. For so small is the content I reap on earth, as I see
nothing in it of that worth, which might move me to Flattery: or of that
daring command, to force me to dispraise what is good, having a prepared soul
within me. Briefly, as I detest these base creepers, so will I seek to avoid
the dangerous company of detractours, since the former, as they imply spirits
ignoble and depressed, so the latter infer troubled minds, and such as are
discontented. Long time therefore have I resolved to sconce my self betwixt
these two, for who so observes not a mean is in danger of being split by one
of these two. But to return to the nature of these Detractors, which Pindarus
calls men of vncurbed mouths, they are ever itching after news, which by an
uncharitable gloss, they labor so to pervert, as they may redound to the
imputation of some personal agent interrested in those affairs. They are
subtle interpreters to the worst sense: for (Spider-like) they suck poison
out of the holesomest flowers. As every age is infected with their poison, so
no age from them, can plead exemption. Where nature her self shall be reviled
by them, being she that first produced them. One finds fault with nature, and
taxes her of indiscretion, for setting the Bulls horns rather on his head
then his back, being the stronger part. An other, that she should place both
the eyes before, whereas providence would have set one behind, and an other
before, to arm man against danger as well behind, as before. Yea, even those
Orators, and Pleaders for the prerogative of nature, have been oftimes seen
to detract from her Sovereignty: as the sensual Epicure, whose absurd opinion
was, that there was indeed a Superior power, which had command over the
inferior Creatures: Yet was that Power but an idle God, loving his rest and
quiet, and retyring himself from the care of man or his affairs; giving him
free scope and liberty to do what he list, and reposing the Supreme
happiness of a Deity in rest. To confirm which palpable opinion, some
irreligious Epicures of our time, for the better establishing their doctrine of
security, have produced, or rather most impiously traduced that portion of
sacred Scripture, Requieuit Dominus in septimo die super omnia quae patrarat.
So generally pernicious is this poison of the world, as it aims not only at
inferior Subjects, but even at the transcendent power of the Almighty,
piercing (that I may use Homers words) the sphere of Heaven, and wounding
Jupiter himself. These be those Aspes tongs, which poison our good names;
Those Spiders, which with an art full of secret admiration, bring webs out of
their bodies to entangle us poor Flies in their snares; Those spreading
tetters which eat into our reputation; Those Suck-blouds which exhaust the
pith and marrow of our Souls; They are those Cankerwormes, which ever browze
on the tenderest and sweetest blossoms of our virtues. In brief, whatsoever
is opposed to good, that are they, aspersing the foulest blemishes, on men of
approuedst deseruings. True it is, that nothing is more swift than Calumny,
for she is ever flying; more eager, for she is ever assailing; more cautelous,
being ever prying; more tyrannous, being ever raging, or more remorcelesse,
being ever devouring. In a well-gouerned state, this Axiom holds ever
impregnable; Eadem est foelicitas vnius hominis and totius ciuitatis: but how
far she is estranged from that felicity, may appear by the hate she bears
to every good man within the City; professing for faith, fraud; mixing deceit
with fairest pretenses of affection; conversing with purpose to traduce,
importunate in the pursuit of acquaintance, which she makes as notorious by her
report, as if they were Prodigies in nature, by their life. She cannot endure
to entertain such into the lists of her discourse, as affect a reserved
silence: for those cannot yield her argument of talk, because they are not
talkers. Those which Catiline-like, will promise much and do little, relish
better in her palate, than such, as Iugurth-like, will speak little but do
much. Thus far in expression of her nature, I will now touch the place of her
abode. For the place of her abode, it is harder to find where she is not, than
where she is; in diverse villages, as obscure, as time could make them, have I
lived, and I have ever noted one Mother Trattles, newes-carrier to all her
neighbor-gossips within the parish: One that had art to tell a tale with winks
and nods: yea so excellent were these old-trots in invention, as they could
make one and the selfsame tale, told in disgrace of one neighbor to another,
with a little alteration, as pleasing to the latter, as the former. It pleased
therefore the Spartan Orator, to call them brands, because raisers of civil
differences and heart-burnes one with another. Brands indeed, as well to
public states as private families; whose many ruins will witness, that
though the wound be healed, the scar remains still, harboring that Viper
within them, that preyed on them; so miserable was their fate to cherish her
which occasioned their fall. Rightly did he say, that termed them Antipodes to
all good men, because they walk always in a path opposite to the trace of
virtue, being as indirect in their courses, as uncharitable in their censures.
For judgment, they as much disclaim it, as those that are professed enemies unto
it; so much for conceit they think only requisite, as may detract from merit,
and add to disgrace. The Athenian termed them Owls, haters of light, Bats,
recreants to their own, Scarabees, ever feeding on vlcerous flesh; aptly
displaying their natures, by these borrowed names. But for their place of
being, as they ever love to insinuate into the acquaintance of the eminentst
persons, so they make them the vsualst subjects of their discourse: wherein
they use to compare their Actions and parts with their Progenitors, whose
virtues they make as transcendent, as they disvalue the commendable qualities
of those now present: and which is more remarkable, though they be altogether
ignorant of what their Ancestors did, yet express they their actions, in
dispraise of their successors, as by ocular experience they knew what they
did. Far be my thoughts estraunged from conuersing or commercing with these
men; yea, may I rather not speak, then detract from the virtues of the least
eminent by speaking. I have ever wished, that my speeches might tend rather to
edification of some, then imputation to any. For so free have my intentions
been from public or private Calumny, as my invention (ever grounded on a
probable truth) has ever seated and settled it self, on the serious commending
of goodness, with a modest improuing of what was vicious. Yea, I may safely
auow (out of a sincere confidence within me) that I near saw the man, who
could worthily tax me in this kind: indeed Poesy, which one of the Fathers
is pleased to term vinum daemonum, not because it cheeres but charms Sin,
may seem sometimes to Satyrize, when it is personal application, not the
Authors intention which makes his Poem a Satyr: rightly therefore was that
resolve of the Greek Poet grounded: At him my Satyr aims,
Whose application claims,
That it to him was sent
Howseuer it was meant.
and that again of the golden Moralist: Satyrs are like to Images in wax,
Taxing such men whose guilt themselves does tax.
for my part, I have bin ever so religious an obseruant of my friend, as I wish
rather not to live, than by my lines to loose any man's love: especially when I
esteem (with that divine Sage) my friends life, my best of humane glory, and
his good name the essentiallst part of his life; but wonder I cannot choose (for
else should I wonder at my own stupiditie) how any should harbor the least
conceit of an intended Detraction by me or by my Labors, unless my title of
Devil imply so much, which may seem to have affinity with that which the
Greeks term (...), Detraction: but I hope, the judicious, whose censures have
not their dependence on titles but essences, types but truths, are resolved of
the remoteness of my thoughts from such an vngenerous condition; mean time,
as the intentions of my soul are grounded on a more settled foundation, than
the opinion of that monster-multitude, so shall my studies ever be directed for
the satisfactorie delight and profit of the generous. I am now drawing from the
world, heavens forbid, that I should prove such a servile obseruer of the
world, as to prize her Favors before my fortunes in an other world. In brief,
as I am now learning how to number my days, so will I take a strict account of
the expense of my hours, that my days well numbered, may bring me to the
length of days never to be summed; that my hours well expended, may bring me
to joys in that last hour, never to be ended: so shall those virtues which I
have in others admired move me to imitation, those vices which I have observed
in others, enforce in me a detestation.

Male de me loquuntur sed mali, mouerer si de me M. Cato, si Lelius sapiens, si
duo Scipiones ista loquerentur, nunc malis displicere laudari est.

Seneca ad Galion: de remed: fortuit:

FINIS.
RESOLVES.
I Offered before the sacrifice of my tears; now remains the prosecution of
my Resolves: that as the first were symbols and signalls of my conversion and
contrition, so the latter might be persuasiue motives of my firmer resolution.
Dry be those tears of repentance, which are not seconded by a zealous
continuance; since the perfection of virtue is perseverance; and fruitless is
that zeal, which like the seed in the parable, is either by the thornie cares
of the world choked, by the heat of persecution parched, or by stony
impenitencie and obduracie withered: I will therefore by the power of him that
made me, so form my Resolution, that I may find a comfortable friend in the
day of my dissolution; so shall the hour of my death be my convoy to life, my
Exit a conduct to a more glorious intrat, my farewell on earth to my welfare in
heaven; reaping for what I sowed in tears, in a plenteous harvest of joys.
Thus therefore I address my Resolves, which I wish may be with like feruor
received, as they were composed, ministering no less matter of consolation to
the devout Reader, then they did of mortification to the penitent Author.

I resolve to fix mine eye (more intentiuely) upon my image, that my form may
put me in mind of my former.

I have conversed too long with the world: I will fall from discourse to
contemplation; from talking with the world, to contemplate him that made the
world.

I will no longer put my candle under a bushel, shrowding my souls luster
with my bodies cover, but will display the eminence of the one, by the baseness
of the other.

Since it is not granted to man to love and to be wise, willingly will I
incur the opinion of unwise, to gain the love of him, that is solely wise.

The most precious things have ever the most pernicious keepers; which I found
too true, when I made my body my souls guardian: I will henceforth esteem
more highly of such a treasure, than to commit it to the trust of a Traitor.

I have observed two Solstices in the Suns motion, but none in times
revolution; I will redeem therefore my time while opportunity is offered, for
being past she is not to be recalled.

I have seen young men's love end in lust, old men's in dotage; if ere I plant
my affection, I will so waine my self from the first, that my chaste youth may
exempt me from the latter.

Elegantly expressed was that conceit of the Emperor: Fortune has somewhat of
the nature of a woman, that if she be too much wooed, she is the farther of: I
will think it therefore the best of fortune, neither to be allured by her
fawn, nor dejected by her frown: for our indifferency toward fortune makes
us most fortunate.

Excellent was that sovereignty or regencie of Fortune, attributed by Liuie to
Cato Mayor: In whom (says he) there appeared such ability both for constancy
of mind, and maturitie of wit, as in what place soever he bore himself, he
seemed to be the moulder and maker of his own fortune: but I desire no such
transcendencie; more have fallen through the height of success, than for the
want of means: This is my wish, to enjoy no other means, than my Savior, who
makes means for me to his Father.

I have wondered at the strict accounts betwixt man and man, while Man the image
of his Creator, forgets his accounts due to God by man: I resolve therefore to
make the Evening the summer up of the day and morning; that my daily
Memorandums may direct me in my reckning, when I shall come to be accomptant
for my dispensing.

In my childhood I wished time after time to please my waggish fancy; now is
my wish extended to the length of time, resolving to live to my fathers glory.

It grieves me when I call to mind, how those many hours of vanity, which
did once delight me, shall be produced as so many witnesses, to condemn me;
yet am I cheered with this Resolve, that He, who moved me to this remorce for
my sin, will not suffer me to make relapse into sin, nor will pronounce the
judgment of death on me for my former sin.

Grievous sins require grievous sighs; I will pass therefore the remainder
of my time, in lamenting, as I spent the prime of my time in transgressing; so
shall my tears witness my contrition, my retire from the world my conversion,
that in both, I may add to my souls glory, by wayning my body from the
conceit of her beauty.

Each thing we see in her kind and nature; yet man by sin a priuitiue,
degenerates from his nature primitive; opposing himself, by transgressing his
law that made him for himself.

I have heard many call this life a Pilgrimage; yet did they live in it, as if
it had bin the sole hope of their inheritance: I resolve therefore to take in
hand the active part, and leave the discursiue; do before I speak, practice
mortification before I prattle of it: so shall my discourse be powerful,
subsisting in the work not word, not external or for fashion, but in essence
and operation.

I have oftentimes entered into discourse with my self, making the scope
thereof venite and abite: I contemplated withal, the happiness of those five
Virgins received, the misery of those five rejected: reasoning with my self
what this should mean; and I found that no entry was admitted, where the oil
of grace was not infused, and that the heavenly Bridegroom will be by us
watchfully attended, ere we be by him gloriously received. I resolved
therefore, to prepare a Wedding garment to adorn me, a Lamp full of oil to
lighten me, and a trusty friend to direct me; the garment of humility, the
oil of charity, and my friendly conscience within me.

I have wondered at some men's humors, whose chiefest discourse was ever bent on
their own commendations; for my part, the knowledge of mine own imperfections
inioynes me silence, considering how far I am short of that I should be, how
exceeding in that which is not required of me; I have resolved therefore by the
scale of humility, to ascend to the throne of glory, making the acknowledgment
of my defects, my directest path for the attayning of perfection.

As the completest folly appears in too much complement, so the best of
wisdom is to be least popularly wise; where opinion makes us proud, whilst
priuacie in knowledge makes us only known to our selves, and no otherwise.

I have found oft-times the excellentest parts shrouded in the meanest and
vnhansomest couers; which I can instance in nothing better, than in the divine
essence of the soul, covered with the garment of flesh.

Honor is a fair bait, but a sincere disposition will not assume it before
she deserve it.

The best of honor is to acknowledge our selves unworthy of Him, to whom is
ascribed all honor; nor can we better express our worth, than by confessing
our own shame.

Purposes and Resolves may be compared to Paul's planting and Apollo's watering,
but their disposes to the blessing of God.

I have resolved in reflection to my houre-glasse, considering times preciousnes
with his swiftnes, to vie tears with her grains of sand; that my tears might
(in some measure) wash away the heap of those sins, which are multiplied like
the sands.

Earth as a globe in the air, the soul as a Diamond in lead, reason as a
queen in her throne; in the first we move and are moved; in the second we
shine, yet is our splendour by our bodies cover, obscured, by the last we are
distinguished from beasts, yet by her abuse we become worse than beasts.

If Caesar (says Machauell) had been overthrown, he would have been more
odious then ever was Catiline; so strangely does the event make indirectest
actions glorious: but success does not ever argue a direct cause; for the
morning-flourish of the wicked shuts up their Evening in a sullen discontent; I
will therefore so direct the mean that I may attain the end: that an equal
relation of one to the other, may produce a necessary success in both.

I have wondered why the Thracian being a Pagan should lament his birth like a
Christian; when we that are Christians laugh at our birth, but pule at our
death, like Pagans.

As we enter the world with a shrike, so we leave it with a sigh; the first
implies what place of misery we are entering; the other shows with what
grief we leave the world in our departing.

I have considered with what tranquillity and peace of conscience, a soul
sequestered from the world takes her farewell of earth; she finds no objects to
distract her, she sees no friends that can with-drawe her from her approaching
dissolution; all seem as in a calm sea; whilst a soul plunged in worldly
cares, grieves to leave what she did so exceedingly love. O may my soul so
contemn the world, as she may address her self for a future world: so extend
her hopes above earth, as she may reign with her Savior after Earth.

As the vale best discovers the hill; so a humble outside best displaieth a
glorious soul; Vanity becomes not a wiseman, much-lesse him that should be
only wise to salvation.

I had never the fate to admire titles, nor hope to rise by fauning on
greatness; Heaven grant I may so follow him that is only great, that the
choice of his attendance may purchase me a place of perpetual residence.

Age cannot alter habit, nor aer condition; I do wish my age may be so well
tempered, that I may get that habit of virtue, which cannot be depraved, those
internally-beautifying qualities of the mind, which may not be corrupted.

That is the choycest pleasure, which has only relation to virtue; others may
have appearance but no essence: for bitter is the fruit of that pleasure,
which is attended on by Repentance.

There is no Bulwark so impregnable as a spotless soul; for she can oppose
all hostility inward, where the other is only for outward: as there is a
continual feast to him that enjoys her, so there is security to him that is
attended by her.

Length of days is not in this vale of tears, for few be they and full of
misery; but in the Tabernacle of Syon there is length of time without
transition, and accomplished years without conclusion.

I have collected that there is a Reward for the good, as revenge for the
wicked, after this life; because the Sun shines as well on the wicked as the
good in this life. I have resolved therefore, that as the temporary Sun
cheeres me with his heat, so to dispose of my Actions, that by his operation
which works in me, I may be exalted by the Sun of righteousness, being
made pertaker of his glory.

When I behold the Dew fall on the grass, by which it is nourished; I
presently recollect how happy that soul is, which is watered by the Dew of
Gods grace, by which it is only renewed, and in her affliction comforted.

It is strange that Man in his travail, should so often measure his grave, yet
be forgetful of his end; seven foot is his dimension, yet man lives in that
security, as if that small scantling had a perpetual extension.

Making each day an abstract of my life, I find by bitter experience (yet
hopeful repentance) that I have spent my morning in wantonness; now my
resolve is, to redeem my morning idling with my middayes laboring, that I may
receive my penny in the evening.

As the Sun shines the brightest at his setting, so should man at his
departing; it is the evening crowns the day; happy Soul that shall be
crowned, when her Evening is approached.

Flattery is not always to praise in presence, for incur we may that name
by praising in absence; that is, when either the virtue is absent, or the
occasion; as for virtue, she can neither be ouer-prizd, nor ouerpraisd: I will
hate therefore to insinuate, where Virtue is not resident; nor can he be a
Parasite, that is her attendant.

I find several perturbations, to which I am exposed, diverse infirmities, to
which naturally I am subjected; I would not follow the indiscretion of
Empyricks, which minister the same medicines to all Patients: as my griefs be
sundry, proceeding from diverse means, so must my receipts be sundry, if I mean
to cure the effects. I will use therefore corrasiues to eat away the hard and
dead skin of impenitence, Lenitiues to renew and cherish my tender skin, lest I
fall to despair, through too much weakness.

I am almost of Copernicus opinion, who in his Theorie supposed, that the Earth
did move; it moves man indeed to move unlike himself, becoming in his motion
forgetful of his first Mouer: I resolve therefore, as many lines tend to one
Center, so to aim all my souls motions to the glory of my maker; that earths
motion may by no means draw me from him, who first gave me motion to serve him.

I have sometimes wished an end of my misery, lest misery should cause my
end; but I found how foolish I was to wish for an end of that, which can no way
possible, have an end before my end; for misery is an inseparable companion to
man, so long as he is man, for ceasing to be miserable he becomes an Angel
and no man.

He that falls from divine contemplation, to take content in the world, is as
he, that after he has bin fed with meat of Angels, falls afterward to delight
in Swines meat: sensual desires shall not captiuate my reason to the
sovereignty of Sense: I resolve so to live, that dying I may live; for this
life as it is a death, so death to the good is an advantage of life.

True it is, which Democritus says: Truth lies hid in certain deep mines or
caves; yet being daughter to time, she will be at last discovered, after she
has bin so long depressed: never, never; Truth loves to be retired from the
world, because she sees that her favorites be few in the world; and rather
will she live a stale virgin, than bestow herself of such as will but make a
stale of her.

Man's life is a globe of examples, a shadow of imitation, where the latter day
is ever scholar to the former: I wish no further knowledge than to be a perfect
scholar in Christ-crosse row; for there (as in a mirror) shall I behold Gods
mercy, man's misery; his misery in falling, Gods mercy in raising; matter of
thanksgiving in man to God, argument of affection in God to man.

Long is it since I purposed my conversion; but yet a little and then a little,
makes to morrow as far from conversion as was yesterday: I collect hence, how
powerfullst Resolves produce oft-times the poorest effects: henceforth
therefore I intend not to put off till to morrow by idling to day, lest I never
live to repent on to morrow, being called on to day.

I have run a great part of my race, and am out-stripped by all in the course
of virtue; what remains, but that I should now strip my self of this heavy
garment with which I am ouer-loaded, that I may put on the heavenly garment,
with which those happy runners (the Saints) are adorned.

He that fails in his course, cannot obtain the goal; and soon brethlesse
am I, unless the Lord infuse his divine breath in me: I will therefore run and
pray; run that I may obtain, pray that I cease not to run till I obtain.

I have found how soon affliction alters the countenance of adulterate
friendship; I have a little taste of it, and experience bids me make this use of
it: Though one Swallow make no summer, yet one man's summer makes many
Swallows: I will seek therefore to gain friends after time, since most of
these worldly friends are but obseruers of time.

Pity it is, I hear some say, such a brave spirit should want; but what a
wittall was he, that through his own folly should enforce his own want with
others pity? Envy is better than pity, in estate not in honor: for the
decrease of honor as she is envied before her fall, yields argument of pity,
so is she ofttimes restored by being generally pitied, where estate, as she
was an object of envy, so piteously complaining she remains the same poor,
without altering.

I will not, like another Herodicus, do nothing all my life long, but intend
my health; for why should I bestow more care on the case than on the instrument
within the case, on the body, than the soul? No, I will reserve that moderate
care for the health of my body, that like a good instrument, it may ever yield
cheerful music to the ear of my soul; so shall my soul, by the ministry
of my body, conform her-selfe in obedience to him, that made the soul to
enlighten the body.

It is strange to know what an impression of love, absence breeds in the Lover;
I wish the like effect in the absence of my soul from her Creator: she is here
divided by the veil of her flesh, may she be more firmly united to him in
spirit; she is here a prisoner, may her desires pierce through these walls of
earth, and express their feruencie to the God of heaven: she is here a
pilgrim, may her skrip be humility, her weed sanctity, her staff charity,
and her food the nourishing milk of the word: she is an exile, may she
hasten to her native country, cherefully leaving this vale of misery: she is
an Orphan, may she address her-selfe thither, where reigns the Widows
judge, and Orphans father. Abide here (o my soul) let this be thy retreit;
cheer thy spirit (o my soul) with this eternal receipt; he it is that from
perils past has preserved thee, in perils present has armed thee, against
perils to come has forewarned thee. He it is invites thee fore-slowing,
expects thee opposing, recalls thee straying, and embraces thee returning. He
it is that protects thee resting, assists thee laboring, exhorts thee
fighting, and crowns thee vanquishing: fore-slow not therefore since he invites
thee, oppose him not since he expects thee, stray no farther since he recalls
thee, but return with speed, that he may embrace thee. Rest thou may with
joy being so protected, labor in hope being so assisted, fight with courage
being so excited, and vanquish with comfort being to be crowned.

We must pass through a wilderness to Canaan; this wilderness is the wide
world: o may my soul never murmur, though hunger should annoy her, thirst
afflict her, all perturbations enclose her: yea, let her rather say with Job; I
believe that my Redeemer lives, and that with these eyes I shall see him:
happy eyes that are made contemplators of such exceeding glory; o may my eyes
grow dim with weeping, to be afterward partakers of so glorious a vision!

I resolve now to bid farewell to the world, before I leave it, that being in
it, I may not be of it: there is no affinity between the citizens of Mammon
and Syon, I will fall by a loathing of the one, to an unfeigned loving of the
other, that in contempt of this world, I may make my account more free in the
world to come.

I will make the worlds folly my chiefest policy; soule-wise without desire
of sole-wise or self-wise: may humility henceforth conduct me; for conceit of
knowledge through an opinionate arrogance, has made me (many times) glory in
my own ignorance.

I had rather be imprisoned in the flesh, then by the flesh; for so I be freed
in mind I little care though I be imprisoned in body: since restraint of the
one, enlarges the Liberty of the other; whether therefore at freedom or
restrained, I resolve so to live, that my conscience may be a Testimony how I
have lived; making in Prison better use of my grace, then the Curtezan of her
Glass: for there will I note the blemishes of my soul, while she the spots
and moles in her face; there shall I learn how to live, how to die for my
Creator; while she how to love, how to dye her color different, from what was
given her by her Maker.

He that seeks to prevent that which cannot be avoided, flies into Adams grove
to sconce himself from Gods judgment: I find this approved, when I labor to
be exempted from the stroke of Death, which can by no means be prevented,
whose doom as it is certain, so is his date uncertain; knock he will, but
at what time I know not: I will therefore so set all things in order before he
come, that he may find me provided when he comes. I would be loath to be taken
napping, I will therefore so address my self every hour, that I may
cheerfully embrace death in my last hour; receiving him not with fear, as a
guest that will be of necessity harbored, but with a friendly welcome, as
one, by whom I shall be to a secure harbor conducted. Death, as he is
importunate, so is he iminent; fearful to the rich, but cheerful to the
poor: for affliction breeds a loathing in living, an accomplished content in
dying; knowing that there is an end of misery apportioned by Death, which was
not granted to man during life. I wish so to live, that my life may be an
argument that I did live; since life without employment (the essence of man's
life) has more affinity with death than life.

As my God is Alpha and Omega, being my Alpha begun in the kingdom of grace,
so he will be my Omega, accomplished in the kingdom of glory: the last day of
my living, the first day of my reigning, the hour of my bodies discention into
earth, the hour of my souls ascension into heaven.

FINIS.
The heavenly Exercise of the five Senses couched in a divine Poem.
LEt eye, ear, touch, taste, smell, let every Sense,
Employ it self to praise his providence,
Who gave an eye to see; but why was it given?
To guide our feet on earth, our souls to heaven.
An Ear to hear; but what? not jests of the time,
Vain or profane, but melody divine.
A touch to feel; but what? griefs of our brother,
And to have a fellow feeling one of other.
A taste to relish; what? man's sovereign bliss,
"Come taste and see the Lord how sweet he is!
A smell to breath; and what? flowers that afford
All choice content, the odours of his word.
" If our Alluding to that sacred-secret mystery of his five wounds, curing
and crowning our five Senses.
five Senses thus employed be,
" We may our Savior smell, taste, touch, hear, see.
Upon his Resolves.
MAy I resolve, so my resolves express,
That the world may see I am what I profess.
May Earth be my least care, my heart on him,
Whose crosse's my crown, whose Son did salve my sin.
THE AVTHORS OPINION OF MARRIAGE: Delivered in a satisfying Character to his
friend.
SIR, Character
as I am no Timon, so am I no marriage-affecting Libertine: I will labor
therefore to satisfy your demands exactly, making experience my directresse,
whose late familiarity has instructed me in this positive Doctrine. As it
repents me not to know it now, so it little repents me not to have known it
before now: for as the present estate adds to my content, so my former want
perhaps kept me from discontent: I perceive no such thing as bondage in
marriage, only a restraint from Batchler-sensualitie, which merits not the
name of servitude but liberty. Upon consideration had of two estates, I
account marriage concurring nearer with perfection, and I ground my opinion upon
no worse probability, than the Arithmeticians maxim, Numbers have their
beginning but not perfection from unities; yet exclude I not these two
indiuidually united, from that incomparable effect of marriage, unity. Content
I find more accomplished where minds are consorting; for singleness includes
rather the condition of an Anchorite, than of one affecting society: This
better for procreation, That for contemplation. There is no felicity (if earth
may be said to enjoy it) like a fellow-helper, and no fellow-helper equal to a
faithful bosom-friend: I am neither for committing secrets nor concealing
them, till I find an aptness to conceal, or faith to reserve. I find
Mysogenes opinion gross and erroneous, touching the secrecy of a woman, a
faithful wife cannot choose but be a good Secretary. She makes her husbands
reputation her principal subject, and chooses rather to dye, than it should
dye. Her acquaintance is not popular, nor craves she rather to be seen what
she wears, than to be known what she is. Virtue is her best habit, and her
garnish is beholden more to Nature than Art: she affects no colors, doing
well without pretense of glory, affecting what is good without desire of
applause. I have bin in a strange error, and it much repents me of it, where
imagination suggested to me, wedlock could not be without some aspersion of
lust; for I perceive the sanctity and purity of the rite, adds more to
content than the outward delight; it relisheth more of the Spirit than the
flesh; he that feels an other effect in marriage, he is more brutish than
reasonable. The best purchase is a good wife, and the worst is her contrary: I
have commended Arminius opinion, and have long embraced it, whose conceit was
so much removed from the affection of marriage, as he censured him dead to
earths-comforts, that took himself to any other bedfellow, than his own
mind to converse with; but I exclaim now upon that heresy: I find my mind
strengthened by conference, and that proceeds with best grace and consonance
from a faithful mate: I will not trust her with my body, whom I dare not make
partner of my mind? and though the excellency of the one, surpass the
frailty of the other, yet will I not commend the one where I dare not commit
the other. For frailty of Sexes, I conceive how apt man is to judge sinisterly
of the weaker vessel, and I impute it either to a want of Brains, in that
they cannot diue into the excellency of so pure and exquisite a composition,
or some hard hap they have had in making choice of such infirm creatures. I
have found one, though weak by condition, yet firm in her affection; making
her resolves so undoubtedly approved by him she loves, as she has vowed to
engrosse her love to none save him she only loves: her content is so settled,
as she scorns to have it divided, for she knows that a heart divided cannot
live. She professes her self to be, not where she lives but where she loves,
and the Adamant which draws her to affection, is the persuaded ground she
intertaines of her husbands disposition, which is too choice to be popular, and
too relenting not to be won; as mere protestations were not of force to
win her, so flattery was too palpable a suter to woe her. Content is worth a
kingdom, and my kingdom is my own family, where I make every day my
account, casting up in the evening what I did in the day: I think my day well
bestowed, if employed in the service of my Creator, and my conclusion is this:
I will be none of that family, which is not careful of promoting Gods glory.
Marriage-melodie should have no concurrence with divisions; though Music be
graced by it, marriage distasts it: I have wondered how two distinct bodies can
be so inseparably united, and I perceive the strange and indeed unsearchable
effects of marriage, which consists not so much in the joining hands, as
hearts. There is a sympathy equally working, equally moving in the parties
loving; nor is it beauty, or any external motive so much enchaineth, as a
sacred-secret infusion, conceived by an holy and heavenly influence induces. I
have heard how that, Lycosthen: in Apotheg:
When the Hawthorne springs, and the Cuckoo sings, Actaeons head with hornets
rings: it is true indeed, jealousy is such a self-consuming vermin, as it never
rests day nor night, from feeding her suspicious head with fruitless and
frivolous doubts; but I would not have one subject to this miserable frenzy,
betake himself to such fuel of Jealousy as a woman: for my part as I was
never capable of such vain suspect, so conclude I ever, I had rather be one
and think me none, than be none and think me one, contenting my self with a
general fate, rather than incur disquiet by my own default: which, that
glory of Graece, Homer in Telemach: in Odiss.
the everliving Homer seems wittily to glance at in the person of Telemachus:
Babe says my Dade, but he may say amiss,
For ought that I know, I am none of his;
Yet I reply with Dade, but that is all one,
I may mistake my Sire, and he his Son.
There is no order so ancient nor more maligned: honor has many times
correspondence with her, and foreign Merchants may be confident, their Pinnace
is entitled to many Factors; Stratta Iulia had never more Brothels in her, then
she has clamorous Suitors attending on her: yet what cannot resolved patience
bear? my Advice is to him, whose suspicion has already pronounced him
horne-mad, to make use of Ithacus counsel to Andromache, in behalf of her
tender infant Astyanax. Conceal him, that is the best means to save him.
Oft-times jealousy publishes man's shame, more then the occasion of his shame.
A wiseman will rather conceive and conceal, then disclose his conceit to
others report: The best of reputation is grounded on opinion free from
Suspicion, and he is an egregious Wittall, that loves to watch opportunity to
add to his discontent: my eyes are no such Sentinalls: charity bids me judge
the best, and I will rather expound my Wives secret parley some instructions of
huswifery, then motives of perverted Liberty; I have sometimes wondered at the
folly of Hans Caruiles dream, applying to my self the use, that I might
better avoid the end, where every fained and imagainarie conceit argues an
Apparancie of act, but I doubt not such Bugbeares, they are terrors to
Suspicious heads, Scarcrowes to addle Brains: Beauty shall never be such an
Idol as to enforce my Adoration, or so bewitching a Hagge as to enthrall me to
Suspicion; As a safe conscience is a perpetual friend to stick near us, a
continual feast to cheer us, and a Brazen wall to shield us: so is a
faithful Bosome-friend the Louingst companion, the dearest minion, and the
indiuidualst Union; a Companion to refresh us, a Minion to delight us, and such
an Union as will inseparably join us. I little weigh the Woman-haters of our
Age, whose subject is ever in dispraise of woman, they show the unworthiness
of their Nature in Satyrizing upon the weaker. As chastity is rare and
incomparable, Marriage-state has been ever deemed honorable. He that will
not marry and will not withdraw his eyes from vanity, let him burn; Such
objects are either Subjects of love or lust; if of Love, then happy is the
Lover, if of lust, miserable is the beholder. I remember that noble Matrons
Motto, Where thou art Caius, I am Caia: and I make no question of the like
choice. I have read of diverse women, who as they were delightful to their
Husbands in bed and board, so added they delight to the laboring Inventions of
their brain. Such a one enjoyed Cato in his Portia, Seneca in his Paulina,
Mar. Antonie in his Octauia: yea, the best labors have been illustrated, if
not originally composed by married women, witness those divine Poems reduced
to Centons by Theodosia daughter to the Emperor Theodosius, the royal
compositions of Lucane, the sententious measures of Ennius, the tragic odes
of Aristobulus, which labors (though they retain the names of these Authors)
were reuised and refined by Women.

I perceive the wisest may err, and Solomon himself may fail in his
judgment, making this Interrogation, But as for a good women where is she to
be found? but his question imported rather a difficulty then an Impossibility:
which he had some cause to speak, seeing women were the cause of his
Idolatry; A Goodman must of necessity make his wife of like quality: She is
casten in his mould, let him blame himself then if she be not good. Beauty is
one of the least motives to fancy, who more admires a smooth skin than a sound
mind, may gain content in his wives prime, but shall loose it in her age: I
care not how poor her outside be, so her inside be pure. I never set my
affection on Marriage to strengthen me with friendship, my aim was the woman,
and the grounds of my love were her minds indowments: I sought not in her what
the Gallant seeks in his, a minced speech, a ginger pace, or a drawing eye; I
found her speech able to deliver her meaning, her pace quick enough in her
employing, and her eye too modest to love gadding. A good wife is the best
portion; nor consists this her goodness only in proportion: she that is only
outward fair, deserves more to be loathed than loved, despised than preased: A
case beautifies the instrument, but adds nothing to her accent; and goodness
is more continuate than beauty. I could never approve of that shape which
deriues her beauty from the shop; there is an innate decency that better
becomes us, and above all comparison does better grace us: It is not toys,
tyres, dressings, but a personal comeliness adds honor to our clothing. I
have much admired at man's folly, whose commendations only extend to what they
wear, not what they are. I will never tie my self to such impertinences, nor
can with judgment esteem the rind for comely, where the pith relisheth
corruptly: It is not worth our praise, to say, such an one is fair, that is no
quality but an adiunct; give me one good, I much weigh not any other
attribute, for Good is a better attribute than Fair. As I have chosen, so I
repent me not of my choice: I have planted my resolution thus, nor hope I to
alter it: The strange woman shall not allure me, nor the Courts-idol, a painted
face inveagle me; I am now for one, and that one is all: me thinks Marriage, as
it is a type betwixt Christ and his Church, the state politic and her head; so
it is a nearer combining of the body to the soul: The Soul has promised for
the body, that she shall not make her self a Cage of unclean birds, nor
prostitute her-self to many; and the Body has so tied her by plighting her
faith by her hand, that she will inviolably perform what her Soul has
promised,

Sr, God send you joy.
A Shrow
Character.
IS a continual dropping, whose actiuitie consists principally in the
volubilitie of an infatigable tongue; her father was a common Barretter, and
her mothers sole note (being the voice of her vocation) eccoed, New wainflete
Oysters; in her sleep when she is barred from scolding, she falls to a
terrible vain of snoring, and fomes at mouth, as if she were possessed, or
shrudely rid by the Nightmare: she is most out of her element, when most at
quiet, and concludes jointly with the Arithmetician, that unities are to be
excluded from numbers: Her progeny is but small, yet all hopeful to be
interested in some clamorous offices; for her eldest itcheth after Bellman, her
next after Crier, and her daughters scorn to degenerate, vowing to bring the
aunciently-erected Cuckstoole into request: she frets like gum'd Grogram, but
for wear she is Sempiternum. She goes weekly a catterwauling, where she
spoils their spice-cup'd gossiping with her tarttongued calletting: she is a
Be in a box, for she is ever buzzing: her eyes, though they be no matches, for
she squints hatefully, are more firing than any matches: she is a hot shot, for
she goes ever charged: she has an excellent gift for memory, and can run
division upon relation of injuries. In some thing she is praiseworthy, for
she hates complement, and grins when she hears any one commended, much more
flattered: all the phrensies in Bedlam cannot put her down for humors. If she
be married, she makes her husbands patience a fit subject to work upon, where
his miserable ears are deafed with her incessant clamor. she is never pleased,
for being pleased she were not her self, whose choysest Music is ever to be
out a tune: a nest of wasps and hornets are not comparable to her for spite,
nor may equal her in spleen; and in this they principally differ, she has her
sting in her tongue, they in their tail. she is monstrously unsociable, and
grounds the reason of her distaste upon others approbation. when she has none
to exercise her fury on, she mumbles over some dogged Paternoster to her
self, as if she were conjuring: her sign is ever in Cancer, and hates Patience
left it should bastardize her blood. she is ever suspicious of others
thoughts, and therefore answers for her self before she needs. were she as
strong in power as will, she would commit more insolences with her tongue,
than ever Nero did tyrannies with his sword. Silence she hates as her sexes
scandal, and reprou'd for her distemper, her answer is, The worm will turn
again. Happy were her husband if she were wormes-meat, but her hope is to
out-weare her winding-sheete: when she comes in company, all cry God bless
them, as if they heard thunder; she omits no time, spares no person, observes
no state, but wounds with her tongue, terming it her sole defensive instrument.
Great ones she as much disvalues, as she contemnes inferiors, yet neither
shall slip her, for she never saw that creature, which might not give her
argument to vent her impatience; her reading is but small, yet when she hears
of Stentors tongue, she would give her Dowry for such a cimball. she sometimes
counterfeits gravity, but her ferret eyes and hook nose display her for an
hypocrite. Her tongue never finds vacation but in Church, which time gives her
occasion to commence some new brawle. Her tongue is as glibberie as an Eele,
all the Posts in the Kings high road cannot equal her for speed; marie truth
is, she enterfears dangerously. she wears her clothes negligently, of set
purpose to move her husband to tax her for her sluttishnes, whose reproof she
retorts with haile-shot, and pellets him with words as disgraceful as she is
fulsom. By this time she has formald a pair of high cork shoes to heighten
her dwarfish proportion, purposely intended to beard her husband. In her
infancy she was tongue-tyed, but by an expert Artist, the string being cut,
she ever after vowed never to loose the faculty of her utterance by
discontinuance. she has seriously protested to make her husband run mad, but
he is a fool then. she claims some privilege in his Bretches, and that is
th'efficient cause of a breach betwixt them. It may be she is honest, but if
her dogd humor would give her leave, I am persuaded she would enter parlie
with a knave in a corner: being (as she is) a very Crab, if she affect any
pleasures, they must be backward. she resembles the Rail, and her name
concurrs with her nature. she condemns no act so much, as that of
Hypemnestra, who procured her husbands safety, while all the rest practiced
their deaths. she approues of no ancient sovereignty, but that of Amazon,
where the government was feminine: and for the Salique law, she has already
repeald it, as expressly prejudicial to their sex. Her tongue-feuer is
quotidian, for it is ever shaking: her nature is so far out of temper, as she
has vowed to be phrenticke ever. she maintains this, that fancy is a
frenzy, and Love such a painted Idol, as she will rather burn, than tie her
self to such a fopperie. I would see that Saint, which she would not incense,
a man of that temper, whom she will not nettle. There is no bird which she
less resembles than the Dove, for she is all gall. Saturn has sole
predominance over her, dis-affecting nothing more than affability. she can be
merry by times, but then especially, when her husband is malecontent. she lives
of little sleep, and seldom sleeps but dreams, and awakes laughing, relating
how in her sleep she beat her husband. The Crocodyles tears are not by half
so mortally dangerous, making ever her hateful tears assured harbingers of
revenge. she weeps because she may not effect what she would, tuning all the
day a hellish discord, best sorting with her serpentine subtlety. she
willingly entertaines her own dislike, to infer her husbands distaste; which
she apprehends with joy, and observes with a continuate delight. she rewards
the Sexton liberally in her husbands presence, only adding, a day will come.
she presses him to make his will, persuading him he cannot live long, albeit
he find no such fault with himself. she would make an excellent Hawke, for
she is ever sharp. she vows Temperance is none of the cardinal virtues; and
that too much sufferance may make the bleare-eyed world esteem such an on a
Saint, whose recreant Patience deserves rather the title of Sot. she may seem
to have some allusion to the Pismire, wheresoever she is, she brings smarting,
and in Providence too, for the shrow is ever scraping. Her tongue would make a
singular Scarcrow, for it is ever rattling: in her discontent (as when is she
out of that humor?) her only doleful song is Lachrimae, which she usually
sings in any consort. Her complexion is sallow, of constitution strong, yet is
her body incomparably weak to her will, which can find no period, till death
be her Herald, to whose comfortable arrest I bequeath her.

FINIS.
TO MY LOVING friends, my Country-Cottoneeres.
DRoupe not, though dead, you may reviue again
By the cheerful beams of such a Sovereign;
Who can discern what painful men deserve,
And would be loath, your families should starve,
Or want the staff of bread, but by command
Will see your case redressed out a hand;
Mean time read my Resolves, where you shall find
In state-distresse, some solace to your mind:
Which found, build on this ground, and be as I,
Who am resolved, hows'ere I live, or die.
Yours, or not his own. R. B.

For the Book I Will say, if there be errors in it,
The world had not known them, but for the Print,

Errata.
Page 5. lin: vlt: for strailings, read strayings. Page 15. lin: vlt: for
passions, read (in some copies) fashions. Page: 26. lin: 9. for charuell-house,
read charnell-house. Page: 54. lin: 3. for yea, read then. Page 58. lin: 20. for
reciued, read received. Page: 71. lin: 3. for repentance, read (in some copies)
report. Page 73. lin: 16. for, to deny, read, not to deny. Page 113. lin: 14.
for grace, read (in some copies) grate.


