NATVRES EMBASSY: OR, THE WILDE-MANS MEASVRES:

Danced naked by twelve Satyrs, with sundry others continued in the next
Section.

Wild men (...) dance wise measur^; Come then (...), Though I (...) wild, my
measures are not so.

Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1611



TO THE ACCOMPLISHED MIRROR OF TRVE worth, Sr. T. H. the elder, knight,
professed fauorer and furtherer of all freeborne studies: continuance of all
happiness.
WHen the natures of men are clear perverted, then it is high time for the
Satyrist to pen something which may divert them from their impiety, and direct
them in the course and progress of Virtue; upon which consideration, I, (as
the meanest Menalchas that is able to play upon an oaten pipe) began presently
to describe the nature of Men, made so far good by observation, as my weak
and immature judgment could attain unto; meaning to make the Poets verse an
Axiom: Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim. This thus discussed and
weyed, I was long in doubt to whom I should dedicate this unfruitful vintage,
rather gleanings, or who^ I should fly unto for sanctuary, if the sinister
Reade^ (as who ever wrote without his Detractour) should carpe at my labors.
Wherefore standing longer in suspense then the matter required, (...) picked
forth your self, most able to weaue an Apology for your friends defects. Let
not therefore the maleuolent censures of such men whose chiefest eye-sores be
other men's works, and whose choicest content is to blemish them with
imperfections, receive the least countenance from you, whose judgment by
giving these my labors approbation, shall be a greater argument of their merit,
then their partial censures shall argue their want. Hiparchion was graced as
well as Musaeus, though the best of his measures was but piping to the Muses.
For the pains of well-affected Authors never fail of patrons (at least
amongst ingenuous men) to protect the^, of favorites to second them, or
guardians during their minority to foster them. And such is your integrity
and true love to learning, that the meanest shepherd if the fly for refuge
under your shelter, shall be accepted above the measure of his deserts, or
means of his hopes. For without question, if your acceptance did not far
exceed the height and weight of my Discourse, Quid hic nisi vota supersunt?
there would nothing remain for me, but to fall to my prayers, in beseeching
the kind and unkind Reader (like our penurious pamphlet Orator) to commiserate
my Treatise, and in stead of a narration, to make a public supplication: but
being protected by the singular care and providing eye of your favors; --
Mayor sum quam cui potuit fortuna nocere.

I have penned this short Discourse, interwouen with history as well as poesy,
for two things summarily, and especially for the first thereof. The first is
the iniquity of this present time wherein we live: so that Nature had either
time now to send an Embassage or never: since

Atque homines prodigia reru^ maxima.
Mulier formosa superne desinit in piscem -- Such is the course of degenerate
Nature, that in a conceit of her self she thinks she can mend her self by
being adorned with vnnaturalized ornaments, which Nature never apparelled her
with. The second reason is the motion of a private friend of mine, whose
pleasure may command my whole means, yea my self to the uttermost of my
ability. These reasons have I alleged, lest my Preface should seem naked of
Reason, which were ridiculous to the reasonable Reader, and to you especially,
whose maturitie in arguments of this Quality, has gained you a deserved
Opinion, enabled by Judgment, of power to counteruaile the censures of others
less judicious. Thus tendering you the fruits of m^ Reading compiled, and in
manner digested, no^ out of self-conceit, but aim to public goo^ intended,
Irest. From my study. May 24.

Yours to dispose Richard Brathwayt.

The distinct ^ubihct of every Satyr, contained in either Section: with an
exact survey or display of all such Poems, as are couched or compiled within
this Book.
1. DEgeneration, personated in Nature. 2. Pleasure, in Pandora. 3. Ambition,
in the Giants. 4. Vainglory, in Craesus. 5. Cruelty, in Astiages. 6.
Adultery, in Clytemnestra. 7. Incest, in Tereus. 8. Blaspemie, in Caligula. 9.
Beggarie, in Hippias. 10. Misery, in Taurus. 11. Hypocrisy, in Claudius. 12.
Excess, in Philoxenus; with three funeral Epicedes, or Elegiack Sestiads.
The second Section.
1. Sloth, in Elpenor. 2. Corruption, in Cornelia. 3. Atheism, in Lucian. 4.
Singularity, in Steichorus. 5. Dotage, in Pigmalion. 6. Partiality, in
Pytheas. 7. Ingratitude, in Periander. 8. Flattery, in Terpnus. 9. Epicurisme,
in Epicurus. 10. Briberie, in Diagoras. 11. Invention, in Triptolemus. 12.
Disdain, in Melonomus. 13. Idolatry, in Protagoras. 14. Tyranny, in
Eurysteus. 15. Security, in Alcibiades. 16. Revenge, in Perillus. 17.
Mortality, in Agathocles. 18. In Nasonem Iuridicum. Mythologia. Two short
modern Satyrs. Pastoral tales, or Eglogues. Omphale, or the inconstant
shepherdess.
ODES.
1. The Trauellour. 2. The Nightingale. 3. The Lapwing. 4. The Owl. 5. The
Merlin. 6. The Swallow. 7. The fall of the leaf. With two conclusiue Poems,
entitled Brittans Bliss. And an Encomion to the Common Law: or, Aretenomia.
The first Argument.
NAture the common mother (to use an Ethnicke induction) breeds diverse
effects, according to the constitution of each particular body, being composed
and compacted of that Matter whereto we shall return, being Earth. Now though
Nature (as with the Moral Philosopher I may say) never is deceived, as she is
considered in her own frame, bringing forth always men able to the performing
of humane functions, fair in proportion and state of their bodies, apt for the
atchiuing of any matter either public or private: yet notwithstanding, many
times by events and accidents, diverse deformities and blemishes appear, which
by Nature were not decreed to be: and like are the maleuolent affections
arising from the distempered quality of the mind. And whereas many in the
corruption of their erring opinions and reasonlesse arguments, have auerred how
Nature is the primarie mouer, conseruer and preserver, yet Seneca will tell
you, that it is God that works these things which we ascribe to a fained
Deity; and that Nature differs no more from God or God from Nature, then
Annaeus from Vide Epist. ad Lucil.
Seneca: as he speaks in his natural Questions, and in his books of
Benefiting. But this was the opinion of such as had not the supreme light of
divine knowledge to them revealed, but such as worshipped whatsoever they
thought was a guider or director of them, or by custom (how ridiculous soever)
was traduced to them. So we may Vide Episto. Alex and* de situ and statu Indiae.
read in the ancient historians, of the Egyptians who adored whatsoever they
thought comely, as the Sun, the Moon, the stars and inferior lights.
Others worshipped trees, stocks, stones, and venomous serpents. Thus did the
brutish affections of unnatural men show their Gods by deciphering an heavenly
power or influence, in Branches and such works of Nature. But these though in
no wise excusable, may admit some reasonable defense, forasmuch as their
conceit could reach no further. For as Zenophanes says, If Zenophanes.
beasts could paint, they would pourtray God to their own shape and feature,
because they could conceive no further. And this is the cause why the Heathen
adored their plants, stars, and such creatures, inasmuch as they could not
reach nor attain to the knowledge of an higher Deity. But to confer them,
that is, the Heathen and profane people with the now-being Christians, it will
seem wonderful, if I make manifest by relation had to their lives, how the
depraved conditions of our Christians now adays (whose knowledge gives them
assurance of Eternity) walk in as great blindness and palpable darkness as
ever the Heathen The occasion of this Treatise.
did. And since the matter is most apparent, high time it is for Nature to send
her Embassy to this Age for her Reformation.

THE FIRST SATYR.
THou wicked lump in a deformed guise,
Tripping like Hymen on his wedding day,
Nature thy former Insolence defies,
Saying thou errest from her native way:
For all thy foolish ways are baits to Prima est qu^ si tittillato de^
lectationis in^ cord, secund^ confensio, te^ tium factum e^ consuetudo. Aug.
Sermon. 44.
sin,
Where virtue droupes, and vice comes dancing in.
Does not thy habit show thy wanton mind,
Forward to all things but to virtuous life:
Passing those bounds which Nature has assigned,
Twixt Art and Nature by commencing strife?
I tell thee, Nature sends me to repress
Thy foolish toys, thy inbred wantonness.
But thou will say, Nature has made me fair,
Should I rob Beauty of her proper due?
Should I not deck her with (...) a nature corrumpitur a^ art.
embroidred hair,
And garnish her with Flora's vernant hue?
I must, I will, or else should I disgrace
With a rent mask the beauty of my face.
But I will answer thee for all thy beauty:
If thou will be an Ape in gay attire,
Thou do not execute that form of duty,
Which Nature at thy hand seems to require:
Which not redrest, for all thy goodly port,
Thou must be stripped, and whipped, and chastisd for it.
Nature has sent me to forewar^e thy we,
Lest thou secure of thy distress, rejoice:
If thou wax Sequitur superbos vltor a ^ergo Deus.
proud, then where so ere thou go
Thou shall decline: this rests in thy choice,
Whether to die branded by Infamy,
Or to preserve thy life in memory.
This thus observed, will thou yet be proud?
And grow ambitious, bearing in thy brow
The stamp of honor, as if thou had vowed
No grace on thy inferiors to bestow?
Proud minikin let fall thy plumes, and cry
Nature, I honor will thy Embassy.
It was a good time when Eve spun her thread,
And Adam Pastinatio deuinum opus. Hesiod.
dug to earne his food thereby:
But in this time Eues do their panches feed,
With dainty dishes moving luxury.
That was the golden age, but this is lead,
Where vice does flourish, virtue lies Damnosa quid non imminuet dies? aetas
parentis peior est ^uis, etc.
dead.
This therefore is my message pend by Truth,
Erected in the honor of Dame Nature,
Inueying against Pride, whose aspiring grouth
Disfigureth the beautis of the creature:
Thus have I spoken that which Nature moved me,
Directed to thee, for Dame Nature loved thee.
The Argument.
HEsiod reports how Pandora was sent from Jupiter to deceive mankind, at
least to make trial of his frailty, by the free proffers of her bounty,
sending her full fraught with all Pleasures, to the end some thereof might
ensnare and insensate the minds and affections of the then living and
inhabiting Arcadians, to whom her message was principally addressed, as
appears in the first book of his Opera and dies.

This Pandora is voluptuous, (though her name signify munificence, or an
universal exhibitresse of all gifts) sent to enthrall and captiuate the
appetites and affections of men, to the intent they might yield themselves
vassals and bondslaues to all sensual desires, foments of impiety, or agents
of immodestie. And Pandora seems to make this speech or oration unto them, as
an introduction formally handled, for their pleasure and delectation. Loving
Arcadians, if this spacious world now so specious (whilome an indigested chaos)
were first ordained for a place of liberty, do not you make it a cage of
restraint. It was the will of Nature, who not only founded but disposed of
this universe as you see, that Men the hope of her loins and joy of her life,
should live deliciously, and not be enfeebled by strict and rigorous abstinence
the Mother of diseases, ^ng and nourishing many gross, and maleuolent humors,
whereby the health uses to be empaired, and the whole state of your bodies
dissolved. Wherefore Jupiter as your common prouider, foreseeing those miseries
which were incident before my coming to all mankind, has now appointed Me as
Deputy to bring this message unto you, that from henceforth you should wallow
in pleasures and delights according to your own desires and affections. Let
not fruitless Abstinence be a means to restrain you, or Te^perance a chain
to withhold you, but like Talassioes companions bid continency adieu, and make
haste to lascivious meetings: for to make recourse to the principal delight of
a knowing man, Contemplation, is it not tedious to spend a man's time in study
or endless speculation? Yes certainly, nothing can be worse then to waste man's
life like Epictetus lamp; nothing better then to consume man's days in
Polixenus cell. And though Epictetus may say, - Semper aliquid discens senesco,
always learning I grow aged, yet Polixenus may auerre a matter though of less
consequence, yet a practice of more self-forgetting cheerfulness, -- Semper
aliquid bibens, nihil extimesco, always drinking I am cheered. So that nothing
can abash Polixenus, nothing can dismay him: for his daily practice exempts him
from meditation of grief, being as remote from danger as he stands secure for
honor, making every day his own prouider, and standing as respectlesse of
posterity as he is careless in hoording Treasure. He is happy, and free from
dangers menacing abroad, or aspiring thoughts (Ambitions subtilest trains)
undermining at home. But Epictetus fear proceeds from the height of his
knowledge, fearing Death the abridgement of knowledge: yet fearelesse of Death
it self, for it is nothing; but the issue of Death making his knowledge
nothing. Polixenus none can disturb; for his mind is fixed on that object
which is placed before him; since Nature has allotted him meat, drink and
apparel, he respects no more. Yet as rich as Bias, for he can sing, -- Omnia
mea mecum porto. But simple Epictetus, who reposeth so great trust in his
Contemplative part, whereto auailes his study? whereto tends this
Speculation? since Art has made him no wiser then to make no difference
betwixt wine and water. Neither has Art made him any thing the richer: for his
Lantern is of more value then all the rest of his substance. Then as you will
have regard to your estate or to the health of your delicate bodies, ponder the
effect of my Oration, and reap those sensible delights made yours by fruition,
in contempt of Stoicke and strict contemplation.

When Pandora had made this plausiue Oration, man's mind (by an inbred appetite
to what is pleasant) was soon addicted and inclined to the premises;
exclaiming with Herodian, that it was a difficult thing to subdue a man's
affections. Wherefore no sooner was Pandora gone, but presently they Subsideba^
autem in imo vase, sp^s.
began to cast off the reins of discipline, exposing themselves to folly and
all recreancie.

Now see into the Moral hereof, how Man is most addicted to that which in it
own nature is most depraved, always saying with Medaea in the Tragedy, --
video melior a proboque

Deteriora sequor.

Such is the crookedness of man's nature, that he is prone to the worse part,
and consequently like foolish Epimetheus ready to receive Argicida's rewards,
subjects of impiety and lascivious desires, as Ad Epymethea Jupiter misit
inclytum Argicidam, munera ferentem deoru^ celerem nuncium, etc.
Hesiod reports of him. Jupiter sent cunning Argicidas to Epimetheus, with
intent to ensnare his affections with the fair show of such pleasant
Floremiuuentutis non deciduum.
rewards as he brought with him; namely tempting objects like Athalantaes
apples, whereby she was deluded, her speed fore-slowed, becoming a prey to
Pomoeis that subtle courser as he himself wished.

Such are the gifts of Nature, which often bewitch the mind of the receiver. So
that Elpenor was never more deformed (whose feature became the prodigy of
Nature) then He who suffers his mind (the light of his body) to be by these
gifts besotted. For first he takes a view of them; then he desires them, and
after the desire he entertaines them. Which receipt is no sooner made, then
Cyrces with her Cup, or the Sirens with their voice, inchant these poor
eompanions of Ulisses: but he who Ulisses-like stands firm, and not to be
removed by any fond allureme^t, carrying with him that Homerus in Odiss.
Moli or herb of grace by which all charms are frustrated, shall be a
spectator of his Companions misery, in himself secured while they are
splitted, which I, in this second Satyr briefly and compendiously collected
(as well by reading as observation seconded) have by a moral inference in some
sort declared.

THE SECOND SATYR.
Pandora the inchantresse.
PAndora, shall she so besot thy mind,
That nothing may remain for good instruction?
Shall she thy mind in chains and fetters bind,
Drawing thee onward to thy own destruction?
Be not so foolish, lest thou be oretaken,
And in thy shipwreck live as one forsaken.
For though that Nature which first framed thee,
Seem to wink at thy crimes a day or two,
Yea many years, yet she has blamed thee
For thy offenses, therefore act no more.
Though she delay assure thee she will call,
And thou must pay both use and principal.
She smileth at thy locks brayded with gold,
And in derision of thy selfe-made shape,
Who would believe (says Bella es nouimus and puella, veru^ est: and diuos:
Quis enim potest negare^ Sed dum te nimium fabulla laudas, nec dives, neque
bella, nec puella es. Martial. in Epigram.
she) this is but mold,
Who trips the streets like to a golden Ape?
Nature concludes, that Art has got the prize,
And she must yield unto her trumperies.
For I have seen (says Nature) what a grace
Art puts upon me, with her painted color:
How she Nonne vulgatuin est bonas formas corussa deuenustare^ Pic. Miran. in
Epist.
Vermillions ore my Maiden-face,
Now naught so fair, though naught before was fouler;
Indeed I am indebted to her love,
That can give mouelesse Nature e me^nes to move.
Thou black-fac'd Trull, how dare thou be so bold,
As to create thy self another face?
How dare thou Natures feature to control,
Seeking by Art thy former to disgrace?
By heavens I loath thee for thy Panthers skin,
Since what is fair without is foul within.
Indeed thou art ashamed of thy form:
And why? because of beauty thou have none;
Nay rather grace, by which thou may adorn
Thy inward part, which chiefly graceth one;
"Complain of Nature (graceless) and despair,
"Since she has made thee foul, but others fair.
But yet thou will be fair, if Talis ornatus non est Dei.
painting may
Afford thee grace and beauty in thy brow:
Yet what auailes this fondling? for one day
Painting will cease: though painting flourish now;
"Itch not then after fashions in request,
"But those that comeliest are, esteem them best.
Yet for all this, I pity thee poor soul,
In that Dame Nature has not given thee beauty:
Hang down thy head like to a desert Owl,
Perform in no case to her shrine thy duty:
Unto her altar vow no sacrifice,
Nor to her deity erect thine eyes.
Thou have good cause for to lament thy birth;
For none will court thee smiling at thy feature,
But prize thee as the refuse upon earth,
Since on my faith thou art an ugly creature,
Yet ill wine's good when it is in the caske,
And thy face fair oreshadow'd with a mask.
O be contented, with thy form, thy feature,
Since it is good enough for worms repast,
Yielding thy due unto the shrine of Nature,
The fairest fair must yield to death at last!
Think on thy mould, and thou will seriously
Receive the charge of Natures Embassy.
The Argument.
IF I should entreat of such affairs as rather confer unto a warlike
discourse, then reforming of the multiplicity of errors raging and reigning in
this Age, strangely depraved, and in the universal state of her body
distempred, I might seem to make an unprofitable messenger in this weighty
Embassy: but to that end have I chosen such matter as may be a motive for the
furtherance of this mine assay. When this -- indigesta moles, this unseasoned
piece of matter had first received some form or fashion, then presently as it
increased in years, so it began to adorn it self with a comely presence,
attired modestly without affectatio^, seemly without curiosity, simply
without the vanity of Art, knowing, what was shame without an artificial
blush.

So that those days well deserved the name of -- golden Age: for -- redeunt
Saturniaregna. But afterward by a degenerate, rather unnatural course (as what
is not corrupted in time, if we consider her original purity) A certain kind
of people, The Giants. Caeus, Iapetus, Typhaeus.
as extraordinary in proportion for their greatness, so of unbounded mind for
their ambition and boldness, began first to wage battle with the gods
immortal: till the gods perceiving their stout and aspiring natures, overthrew
them in their own practices: for they did -- Imponere Pelion Ossae. Tumble
mount Pelion upon Ossa, whereby they might reach even unto heaven: but the gods
made those mountains the Giants sepulchers; where they lie (under those vast
hills) and every seventh year, as the Poets feign -- Sub tanti oneris immensa
mole corpora subleuantes, and eorum opera perperam aggressa execrantes, they
lie under the weight of so great a burden to give them a sensible touch of
their former ambition. Not without an excellent moral inclusiuely shadowed,
and fitly applied to such ambitious heads who are always aspiring high, till
with the Giants they be cast down, leaving no other monument to posterity,
save dishonor, the due guerdon of their impiety. And surely who shall but
consider the diverse singular ends and purposes whereto those pregnant fictions
of the Poets were addressed, wittily and emphatically expressing their severe
and impartial judgments, justly inflicted on offenders, shall see in them a
wonderful invention, and a continual discourse, proceeding forward without
any alteration, tedious digression, or material difference in the relation.
Again, to observe the reverence which even the Pagan Authors used toward their
gods, beginning no work of what consequence soever, without invocation of
their fained deities, would move in us a more serious admiration. So that as
Valerius Maximus says, -- Ab love optimo maximo orsi sunt prisci oratores: The
ancient Orators used always to begin their works in their form of pleading,
with an auspicious Jupiter, whereby their works might have good success and
proceeding. So may I say, by a present application had to these times, that as
our best-promising labors become fruitless, unless the Almighty prosper and
give them success: so by necessary consequence, whosoever falls into
contempt and despising of God immortal, shall have his purposes defeated, and
utterly vanquished with the forenamed Giants. Wherefore my third Satyr shall
inueigh against such as in contempt of God (giantlike) practice not only to
pull him from his throne by violence, but blaspheme him through a forlorn and
godless insolence, and as though God had not the power to revenge, will
extenuate his power and lessen his majesty.

THE THIRD SATYR.
THou wicked Caitiffe proud of being naught,
Will thou provoke thy God to strike thee down
Since he with care and labor has thee sought,
And diverse favors in his mercy shown?
Do not draw down the viols of his ire,
Lest he reward thy sin with quenchlesse fire.
Thou silly worm compact of slimie mud,
Which shall return to earth from whence thou can
Thou which conceived was of corrupt blood,
Thou wormlin, how dare thou revile his name?
Farewell thou graceless Impe, thou saplesse branch,
Borne to contemn thy God, to cram thy panch.
Thou Epicure, that live in living ill,
Living by loving to stretch forth thy gut,
Taking more pleasure thy deep panch to fill,
Then in thy maker confidence to put:
Thou f^ thy feeding shall receive thy food,
Amongst such vipers as shall suck thy blood.
It is the nature of the viperous brood,
To be the ^athor of their parents death;
Like an Horse-leach.
Hyrudo they do sueke their blood,
And take away that breath, which gave them brea^
Thou Vipera viperae mortem adfert. Plin. in nature. Hist. dum pario, perio.
ibidem. Praemorso Maris capite parit vipera.
viperlike d^sel aun^s thy parents name,
As though to utter him thou thought it shame.
Shame on thy naming, if thou will deny
Him, who first gave thee breath and vit all spirit,
Him, who can give thee true tranquillity,
Him, who will show thee means how to inherit;
Leave off thy foolish fantasies, be wise,
Lift up thy eyes to him who gave thee eyes.
But if (ungrateful wretch) thou feel his grace,
Yet wilt not yield him thanks for all his love,
Be sure he will auert his divine face,
And all his wonted mercies clean remove;
So thou the swine that breaks the acorne-shell,
Regardest not the tree from whence they fell.
Be warned by Gaeus, who with Giants power,
Thought with his fellows to Saying with Tiridates in Tacitus: Sua retinere,
priuatae domus, de alienis certare regia laus est.
clime up to heaven,
But vanquished by his power does all devour,
Under the ruggie mount aines are laid even,
Therefore beware, aspire thou not so high,
Lest thou lie low, where those same Giants ly.
Thou art a shadow, God the substance is, Auicen. Tho^. in quest. Aug. in Pelag.

Yet insubstantiate, whose Deity
Does comprehend all things, for all are his,
Yet he is not Continet omnia tamen non continetur ab aliquo.
contained most certainly,
For he is infinite in quality,
Endless in love, boundless in quantity.
As for his presence, it is every where,
On Terrae Marique Deus est, nec terrae Mariue homo est, qui nouit vbi Deus non
ost.
sea, on land, and in the depth of depths,
His providence in each place does appear,
His meroie is for generations kept,
Will thou (fond fool) contemn his heavenly power,
Who gouernes thee, point, moment, minute, hour.
What though so many will entice to evil,
And in plain terms deny the Deity?
Let them remain as fuel for the devil,
Confess thou still his power effectually:
Look in the Planets, and the stars, whose light,
Gives record of his power, signs of his might.
If thou look upward, bodies there be many,
Yet trouble they not one another motion,
If thou look downward, there the Threatening earth with inundations, yet
bounded in with her banks as with a girdle.
Sea does move thee
Beating the shores, while shores beat back the Ocean
Look to the earth, and thou will wonder there,
To see a Ball so firmly hang in Air.
But if these motives limit not thy will,
Then I Will endorse this in thy forlorn brow,
How with thine own hand, thou thy blood do spill,
The fruits whereof thy punishment shall show.
Deny not him who never did deny,
For thy default upon the Cross to die.
The Argument.
IT is reported of Croesus, that he sent for Solon, well perceiving that he was
esteemed the wisest in Greece: to the intent he might see him placed in his
majesty, pomp, and great solemnity. When Solon was come, he demanded of him,
whom he thought to be the happiest man in the world; not doubting but he would
conclude him to be the happiest, considering the magnificence of himself, the
admiration of his attendants, and the security of his state, grounded on such
powerful alliance. Solon (contrary to his expectance) replied, He could judge
none truly happy before his death, -- Neminem ante obitum faelicem esse
arbitror. Yet Croesus would not let him go so, but demanded further: whom he
thought then living to be the happiest; whereto answered Solon, Tellus; and who
next says Croesus? Next to Tellus do I esteem Cleobis and Biton (who died in
the very performance of parentall obedience:) and so forward without the least
mention made of Croesus felicity. Whereby it seemed that Croesus was much
offended, though he co^cealde his anger for that present time, lest the foolish
conceit of his selfe-esteemed happiness should become palpable. But within
short time afterward He found Solons saying most true: for being taken prisoner
by Cyrus the Persian king, he was grievously punished, and restrained by
strait severe imprisonment, till such time as a day was appointed for Croesus
death: and being to be set upon the faggot, and ready to suffer death, he cried
forth: O Solon, Solon, vera sunt quae dixisti neminem ante obitum faelicem:
Cyrus hearing these words, and enquiring the meaning of them, presently
delivered him, answering: and ea quoque mihi euenire possunt. Considering the
state of man's life to be uncertain, and that none ought to plant his hopes
upon that stabilitie of fortune in terrene affairs, as to promise himself
security in his state, or continuance of success for one victory achieved:
seeing her wings are not clipped, that her flight should be restrained, nor to
any Prince so particularly engaged, that he only should be by her attended. In
brief, as the only hope of the vanquished consists in the expectance of all
extremity: so is it the principal glory of the Conqueror, to moderate his
fortune by a mild and tempreate bearing of himself to the conquered. Hence
also have we sufficient argument of reproof, toward such as take pleasure or
delight in their abundance, as Croesus did, so as their minds become drowned,
having no respect to the eternity promised. The reason is, they repose their
beatitude and felicity in things transitory and uncertain, not looking up to
the Author of all bliss and happiness, who is the director and protector of
all men, disposing them to the line and level of his blessed will, by
expecting them foreslowing, inuiting them resisting, recalling them wandering,
and embracing them returning: without whose aid our strength is weakness,
without whose light our sight is blindness, and without whose grace our
endeavors are fruitless. For alas, what is man's direction but distraction,
what is his knowledge but imperfection, and what is the best of his resolution
but confusion, wanting his gracious prevention that gives to each work a
happy period and conclusion? Especially in this curious and intricate Labyrinth
of man's life, wherein many Cymmerian windings (to wit, private seducements) are
framed and cunningly contrived by that subtil-winged Dedalus. So as miserably
are we forced to err and stray, unless by Ariadnes thread, that is, the
heavenly light of Gods illuminating Spirit, we be directed and conducted in
this vast Theater of intricacy, to the flowrie Eden of endless felicity. For
without that all working power, we are overwhelmed with darkness, not able to
attain to the comfort of our souls, to enjoy the fruition of eternal
consolation in the life to come.

To show you the worthy intendments and resolutions of the Ancient, would but
make a flourish without effect: as by way of illustration examplefide in
mortification, to show you how Origin made himself an Eunuch, Democritus put
out his own eyes, Crates cast his money into the sea, Thracius cut down all
his vines. Seeing then that to examplifie a man's writings in these days, is
but to beat the air, unless inuection or a bitter Satyr move it, I will
make haste to run into my former reprehension, since with Iuuenall I may well
conclude,

Spite of our teeth when vice appears in sight,
We must the Satyrs play, and tartly write:
Where a good Poets greatest difficulty, is to restrain himself from
Satyricall poesy; for impiety like a tetter universally spreading, is such, as
no man but he will either be a gamester or a spectator in gaming: either wanton
or a favorite of wantonness: therefore now or never:

-- Rumpantur Ilia Codri, Inuidia. Now to our Satyr.

THE FOVRTH SATYR.
THou happy Croesus in thy heaps of gold,
Erect thy self a God upon thy throne,
Let it be framed of a purer mold,
Then of the Pumice, or the marble stone:
Let it be honored even in Croesus name,
Since golden Croesus did erect the same.
Will thou indeed, be honored for a god,
And with the stars array thy Princely head?
Be sure ere long to feel an iron rod:
To crush thee down, and thy accursed seed.
For if thou do deny Qui in Deum delinquit, eum relinquit.
thy God his right,
He will deprive thy power, abridge thy might.
Art thou a crauling worm, a feeble creature,
And yet do think thy self a god on earth?
Can thou so easily transform thy nature:
Changed to immortal, from a mortal birth?
Poor simple gull, a cockhorse for this god,
No god but Homines cum hominibus sanguinem and genus miscent.
man, whose sins deserve Gods rod.
Star-staring earthling, puffed with insolence,
Conceipted of thy self without desert,
Comparing with the Divine excellence,
For which thy folly, thou shall feel the smart;
Do not Quicquid a vobis minor extimescet, Mayor hoc vobis dominus minatur.
think God will suffer thee to reign,
That sleights his works, and takes his name in vain.
And as for Croesus, if he live for aye,
Then will I think he is a god indeed:
But he ere long shall have a dying day,
And be enclosed in an earthly weed.
Therefore fond Croesus, think but of thy gold,
As rusticke people of the vilest mold.
Yet thou may The different betwixt the poor wanting, and rich not using, by
these two expressed, the one carendo, the there non fruendo.
use it Croesus, to thy good,
So thou repose no confidence therein,
So thou abuse it not, it is allowed,
Abuse, not use, is Author of the sin.
Be not deceived through any false pretense,
To hoord up coin, and hurt thy conscience.
This is a simple train, a net for fools,
Not able to deceive the Sapiens ipse fingit fortunat sibi.
wiser men.
Fishes be sooner caught, in glistring pooles,
Then in a troubled creuise, marsh or fen,
But wisest fishes, never will appear, Lucan. in bell. Phar.

Where they perceive the smallest cause of fear.
Thus is the form of wisdom well explaned,
Even in a Crystal glass most eminent,
Wherein our distinct natures are contained,
As in a Table aptly pertinent,
How that bewitched we are in seeming good,
And that proves poison which we took for food.
This is my Satyr, Croesus which I send thee,
To the end thou may admonished be of this;
I hope my Satyr will in time amend thee,
And draw thy mind from earth-opinion'd bliss.
Wherefore farewell, and if thou will be blessed,
Fly from this rust, by it thy mind's oppressed.
The Argument.
TRogus Pompeius relates in his general History, how Astyages dreamed that
there sprung a vine forth of the womb of his daughter Mandanes, whose
broad-spreading branches ouershadowed all Asia, wherefore to take away the
ground and foundation of his fear, having understood by the Magi, that by the
vine was intimated Cyrus, who should ouershadow all Asia with his victorious
and conquering hand, he commanded Harpagus one of his privy Counsel to take
the babe and slay it, that whatsoever his dream imported, might by this means
be prevented: but Harpagus more co^passionate then Astiages (though too
remorcelesse) exposed it to the cruelty of savage beasts, where (so careful
is nature of her own) it found more pity in the wild forest, then in his
grandfathers Palace, being for some days nourished by a she-wolfe or bitch,
(whence Nurses to this day reserve the name of Spacon,) and after found by one
Faustulus a shepherd, was delivered to his wife to be brought up and nursed:
which she, delighted with the cheerful countenance of the child, did
accordingly, till in tract of time Cyrus came to the unexpected height of an
Empire, and fullfilled those predictions and Prophecies which were formerly
spoken of him. This Argument have I culled, to the end my Satyr, using the
liberty of so material an Argument, may inueigh against such as seek by all
ways to dilate and propagate the borders and bounders of their kingdom, (not
respecting the means, so they may attain the end) or strengthen the
continuance of their unjust claim by sinister He siod. in open ri: and die.
means: not unlike to Polynices and Eteocles in the Tragedy; who though they
were brethren, even the hapless children of woeful Oedipus, yet could they not
content themselves with their peculiar Polynices and Eteocles mono machia de
regno decertantes mutuis vulneri bus conciderunt, ibid.
shares severally limited, and mutually allotted, but must cry: -- Aut Coesar,
aut nullus: wherefore they enjoyed the fruits of seldom prospering division,
a short reign, attended on with perpetual infamy after death. Wherefore that
is the best labor or travel, where they do Vide Ethico rum axiomata and eorum
prae cipua ratiocinandi argume^ ta, quorum cer tissimis principijs fundamen ta
virtutum innixa sunt.
-- Proponere laborem vt cum virtute and iustitia coniungant. This is the best
strife, the best contention, which (in a glorious emulation) is conversant
about virtue, not entertaining an unjust practice to gain a kingdom, but ever
to conclude with Aurelius Sextus: -- Ex pessimo generene catulum: Man that is
wicked in his proceedings, getting an Empire by blood (without regard of
election or descent) may live, and for a while flourish, but he shall die
without an Heir: therefore this Satyr is purposely directed to such, (with an
equal reflex from superior to inferior) as respect not the means how to
obtain a kingdom, so they may have a kingdom, agreeing with that in the
Poet; Regam, modum regnandi non quaeram. I will govern, though I seek not the
means how to govern well: or thus: I will govern, though I regard not the
means whereby I come to govern. Thus much for a wicked Amulius, who will
govern though it be by the death or deposing of his brother Numitor, or an
impious Pigmalion, who will murder Sychaeus his brother to be enioyer of his
treasure, or a faith-infringing* Polymnestor, who betrays the trust of a
Protector, in praying upon the Orphane Polidorum obtruncat and auro vi potitur.
3. Ae^ead.
Polydore. Of these my Satyr shall entreat, and brand them with the mark of
an injurious possession.

THE FIFTH SATYR.
THou hellish Et satu terra ^efando.
brood, borne to thine own offense,
Thou that wilt run into a stream of blood,
Yet cries again; It Is in mine own defense,
Having no care of vow-linckt brotherhood;
Be thou thine own destroyer, thine own foe,
And may thy conscience fret where ere thou go:
What do thou get, by getting of a crown,
Deposing him, that is the lawful heir?
But cares and fears, and sorrows of thine own,
With As it is written of August: that he had broken sleeps and vse^ to send
for some to pass the night away in telling tales or holding him with talk.
Tit. Liu. dec. 3.
ghastly visions, motives to despair?
Lament thy reign, dominions got by wrong,
May flower awhile, but last they cannot long.
Though Numitor deposed be by his brother,
Fate has her stroke, some Romulus will spring,
Or if not Romulus, there will some other
Depose his greatness, make himself a king.
Thus as he got his kingdom, shedding As Mitbrid^ tes was said to plant his
kingdom on an indirect foundati on, Blood. Ap- pian. Alexan,
blood,
He of his bloody purchase reapes small good.
Where Jurisdiction is obtained by might,
Without apparent right unto the crown,
Shall soon extinguish all her former light,
And change her form like to the waining Moon.
For such usurping kings as aim at all,
Shall miss their aim, and with their Scepter fall.
And thou Pigmalion, who art never filled, De caede fraterna vberiori modo
exarat^ vid. Virgil. 1. Lib. AEnead.

But ever gapes for riches and for gold,
Till thou with might thy Brothers blood have spil'd,
Or till thy yauning mouth be stopped with mold,
Either repent thy wrong, or thou shall hear,
A thousand A Tergo Ne me^is.
Furies buzzing in thine ear.
Foolish Astyages that means to reign,
And plant thy throne on earth eternally,
I tell thee (doting King) though thou disdain,
Cyrus should reign, he will part stakes with thee:
No, he will have all, thou art his subject made,
And with his vine all Asia's shadowed.
Though thou do marry, and assure to wife,
Thy fair Mandanes, to a country C^byses.
squire,
That her mean marriage might secure thy life,
A king shall spring from such an homely sire.
It is in vain to plot, when gods resist,
Who can defeat our proiects as they list.
What Polynices, will thou fight, with whom?
With thine own brother dear Eteocles;
Will you contend, fince you be both as one?
2 Brothers.
Cleon will never fight with Pericles;
Then why will you, the children of one sire,
Against each other mutually conspire?
Fie on you both, what savage cruelty,
Has thus possessed you in your tender age,
Brother against brother most inhumanely,
To show your selves as Men in beastly rage?
Farewell ungodly Twins, borne for debate,
When Ruin knocks, Repentance comes too late.
Farewell Astyages, that reigns for aye,
And thou Pigmalion, who do gape for wealth,
Amulius too, who learning to obey,
Perceiues how Realms decline that is got by stealth.
Farewell, and if my tart lines chance to spite ye,
My Satyr says, A dead dog cannot bite me.
The Argument.
CLytemnestra Agamemnons wife, forsaking her own husband Agamemnon, ran to the
unchaste bed of Aegistus, where she prostituted her self, regardlesse of her
birth, and neglectfull of her honor. This Agamemnon perceived, but through the
exceeding love he bore her, seemingly covered this her apparent dishonor,
laboring to reclaim her rather by clemency then rigor: but she persisting
in her hateful lust and unlawful affection, persuaded Aegistus by urgent
soliciting to continue in his former adultery, without regard to Agamemnons
love, or the infamy of her own life. And having not as yet spun the web of
her mischief, she seconds her lascivious attempt with a secret practice,
conspiring with her favorite Aegistus her husbands death, which was afterward
effected, but not unrevenged. This instance shall be the first subject unto my
Satyr; wherein I mean to display the impudency of such, as out of a godless
security, usually avouch and justify their wicked and sensual pleasures with
Phaedra in the Poet, writing to her son in law Hyppolytus after this manner:

One house has held, one house shall hold us twain, once did we kiss, and we
will kiss again.
Vt tenuit domus vna duos, domus vna tenebit,
Oscula apertadabas, oscula apertadabis.
For such incestuous Phaedraes, let them divert their eyes to the ensuing
Satyr, and then answer me* whether they do not blush at their decyphered
folly, which more apparent then light will show it self to every eye: for the
retiredst angle or corner cannot give vice a cover, whose memory may be
darkened, but not extinguished: nor can the wide womb of the earth find her a
grave wherein to interre her, being like Pasyphaes issue, The Min^taure.
eue^ a shame to the Parent. And as Hecubaes son, portending Per somnum
ardentem facem se peperisse sentiens.
destruction to the Trojan City, was thought fit to be casten forth, lest the
event thereof should be answerable to the Prophecy: so shall this accursed
issue, this execrable Progeny show it self, and be fitter for casting forth
then preserving, since Clytemnestra shall feel the edge of cruelty, and the
scourge of divine fury.

THE SIXTH SATYR.
WHat Clytemnestra, com'd so soon abroad,
Forth of Aegistus bed thy husbands foe!
What is the cause thou make so short abode,
Is it because thy husband wills thee so?
No it is because Quaeritur AEgistus quare sit factus adulter in promptu causa
est, desidiosus erat. Ovid.
he is weary of thy sin,
Which he once sought, but now is cloyedin.
What Is that thou wears about thy downie neck?
O it is a painted heart, a Jewel fit,
For wanton Minions who their beauties deck,
With garish toys, new Suitors to begit:
Thou have a painted heart for chastity,
But a true heart for thy adultery.
Speak on Adultresse, let me hear thy tongue,
Can varnish ore thy sin with Insipiens eloquentia, vti gladius in furentls
manu, no^ obesse maxim non potest. Mirand. in laud. Herra.
eloquence?
Silence; such sins should make the sinner dumb,
And force his speech to teare-swolne penitence;
Do not then shadow thy lascivious deeds,
For which the heart of Agamemnon bleeds.
Leave of (foul strumpet: keep thy husband^ bed,
Thou have no interest in Aegistus sheets:
Infamous acts, though closely done are spread,
And will be blazed and rumored in the streets.
Fly from this scandal, lest it soil thy name,
Which blemished once, is nere made good again.
Is not thy husband worthy of thy love?
Too worthy husband of a worthless whore,
Then rather choose to die then to remove:
Thy chast-vowd steps from Agamemnons boore?
He Is thine, thou his, O Using the word^ of that chaste Roman Matron: where
thou art Caius, I am Caia.
may it then appear,
Where ere he is, that thou art only there.
But for Hyppolitus to be incited
By his stepmother, O incestuous!
And to his Theseu^.
fathers bed to be invited:
What fact was ever heard more odious?
But see (chaste youth) though she persuade him to it,
Nature forbids, and he is ashamed to do it.
The Application of the Moral.
You Quis fucum in proba virgin non damnet? Quis in vestal^ non detesteturi
Pic Mirand. (...) Epist.
painted Monkies that will nere restrain,
Your hot desires from lusts-pursuing chase,
Shall be consumed in a quenchlesse flame,
Not reft of grief, though you were reft of grace,
Bereft of grace, and buried in shame,
Regardlesse of your honor, birth, or name.
I can discern you by your wanton toys,
Your strutting like Dame Juno in her throne,
Casting concealed favors unto boys:
These common things are into habits grown,
And when you have no favors to bestow,
Looks are the lures which draw affections bow.
Trust me I blush, to see your impudence,
Sure you no women Si puellam viderimus moribus lepidam atque dicaculam,
laudabimus, exos^ulabimus: haec in matrona damnabimus and persequemur. ibid.
are, whose brazen face,
Shows modesty has there no residence,
Incarnate devils that are past all grace;
Yet sometimes wheat grows with the fruitless tares,
You have fallne often, now fall unto your prayers.
The Argument.
Whosoever will but consider the fortune, or rather misfortune of Tereus for
his wickedness, shall behold as in a glass or transparent mirror, the fruit
of adulterous beds. For his licencious and inordinate lust contained within no
bounds, but continuing in all prohibited desires, and now pursuing with an
incestuous heat Phylomele his wives sister, has transformed himself into a
reasonlesse creature; for now Tereus in Vpubam changes his former nature and
condition, becoming in shape as odious, as his life was impious, as the Poet
testifies:

Uertitur in volucrem, cuistant pro vertice cristae. Thus may adulterous
want-graces look into Tereus fall, and then apply his ruin to their present
state. I gather these Arguments out of fictions and Poetical inventions, yet
are not these fables without their divine Morals; for such men as are touched
with this crime or the like, ought to be ashamed of their folly, since the
very heathen Poets, whose best of sacred knowledge was the light of Nature,
could exclaim against them, and pourtray the form of their lives in a fained
invention. For to exemplify special punishments inflicted on particular
sins, The H^pyes.
Those birds which still frequented Phineus army, and annoyed him with such a
filthy sent, that even upon shipboord they would come flocking to his Navy,
and bring a loathsome stench, whereby they used to infect his meat, never
departing from him either morn or night, but would -- Escopulis exire, and
vniuersam ^lassem teterrimo faetore inficere. Wherefore was this, but forasmuch
as by the persuasion of his second wife Idaea, he put forth the eyes of his
children had by his Cleopatr^*
first wife? of which in the latter part of this Satyr I mean especially to
insist, declaring by way of aggrauation the wickedness of such Iniustae
Nouercae, who will tyrannise over their stepchildren, respectlesse of Phineus
punishment or Idaeas vexation. And though some object, that these Arguments be
but fruitless inventions hatched forth of Poets braine^ yet must they of force
confess ingenuously, that their Morals confer no less benefit, then if de^
riued from a truer subject: for whosoever will not beware of Id^as fact, shall
undergo Idaeas Quem fecere parem crimina, fa^a parem. Ibid.
punishment; let them therefore avoid the fact precedent, or let them expect
the punishment subsequent. * Par tibi culpa fuit, par tibi paena subit. alib.
Nec culpa est leuior, nec tibi paena minor.


THE SEVENTH SATYR.
HOw now fond Tereus, whither rid'st so fast,
To Progne or to Itis? O, it is true,
Thou go unto thy sister, made unchaste,
By thy enforced rape, for she nere knew
What lusts-embraces meant, till thou had taught her,
Which gave her cause of sorrowing ever after.
Come back again, go to thy chaste wives bed,
Wrong not the honor of a spotless wife,
What fruit yields lust when thou have surfeted,
But wretched death, drawn from a wicked life?
Return fond lustful man, do not dishonor
Poor Phylomele, for heavens eyes look on her.
It may be thou alledg'st, Forfitan and narres quam sit tibi rustica coniux.
rusticity
Appears in the fashions of thy Dear;
Is this a cloak to live licentiously?
No, if her breeding more uncivil were,
These should not be occasions of thy shame,
For in discretion thou should cover them.
Thou art that Rusticke, she the modest flower,
Not seeking for to grow with other plants
Then with thy self, though thou for every boore,
Suites thy affection, yet affection wants:
She loves, thou lusts, thine is a borrowed name, Amor perenni^ coniugis castae
manet. Sen^n Octau.

For shame-fast love need^ never blush for shame.
How now Prince Phineus, where is thy childrens eyes,
Are they put out, who moved thee to offend?
Was it Idaea, whom the gods defies?
Whom neither heaven nor earth can well commend.
It was Idaea, she the Step-dame cries,
Haste Phineus haste, pull out thy childrens eyes.
He Will do it for thee, there is no question why,
To fair Idaea, chaste Queen to his bed,
He should the murdring of his soul deny,
Much less to cause his childrens blood be shed;
See step-dames see, how hateful is your guilt*
When to raise yours, another blood is spilt!
Murder thy children, put out Orphans eyes,
God cannot salve their extreme heaviness:
He cannot hear them when they make their cries,
Nor can he comfort them in their distress.
Yes, he can hear and see, and though he come
With a slow pace, he will at last strik^ home.
Then grieve, but let not grief drive to despair;
Trust, but let Trust breed no security,
For crying sins when they presuming are,
Often wound so deep they find no remedy.
Farewell Idaea, may my Satyr hear,
For each bloud-drop thou have shed, thou shedst a tear.
The Argument.
THe Argument of this Satyr shall be against all wicked Iulians, all godless
Apostates. And though in the third Satyr I have touched this Argument briefly:
yet now more amply mean I to deblazon the forlorn condition of these
unnatural monsters. For to produce the Authorities and Opinions of the very
heathen Philosophers, they have generally concluded, not only a God, but a
Trinity, Three in-beings or persons coessentiall. As first the Platonists, who
have concluded a Minder, Minding, and a Minded, but the chief hereof the
Minder. From the Platonists let us descend to the Pythagorians, amongst whom
Numenius most The Pythag. Numenius.
worthy for his learning (insomuch as Porphyrie a man of ripe judgment and
pregnant conceit, albeit a professed enemy of Christ, wrote many several
Commentaries upon him) speaks thus: Touching the Indiuiduate essence of God,
it is compact of it self in one, subsisting of none, in and of himself alone,
not to be contained or circumscribed within any limits or bounds, being ever
during in time, before time, and without time; incomprehensible in his works,
indivisible, in his substance insubstantiate. The Academicks The Academ.
in like sort conclude the same, yielding to an omnipotent power, working
according to the divine will of the worker; wherein they give excellent
instances and similitudes in the The Sun, beams, and heat alluding to the
bl^ssed. Trinity. Stoics.
Sun, and the heat proceeding from the Sun, drawing from thence a singular
argument to prove the divine Trinity. Zeno the father of the Stoics,
acknowledged the Word to be God, and also the spirit of Jupiter. Thus
Academicks of later times, Stoics, Pythagorians, and Platonists, confess this
heavenly power* and shall we who are borne in Hermes his de^ of the diverse
workings.
the days of light and truth deny the same? Hermes can conclude, how -- Radij
deuini sunt eius oporationes mirae, Radi^ mundani sunt nature and rerum
similitudines variae, Radij humani s^nt arts and scientiae. And shall we
confess the later, but not the first, from whence the later be derived? Plato
in his 13. Epistle to King Dennis writes thus. When I 13. Epist. to King
Dennis. vid. Seen. in Epist. ad Lucil.
write in earnest, you shall know hereby, that I begin with one God; but when I
write otherwise, then I begin with many gods. Aristotle like wise that serious
inquisitor in the secrets of Nature, could say: -- Ens entium miserer^mei. Thus
are out God was not made at any time, in a^ much as he is euerlalastingly vnbe.
gotten. Galen.
Atheists convinced by Pagans; for neither Orphuus whose invention gave that
opinion of plu^ ralitie of gods first footing, nor D^agoras the Athenian, who
denied that there was any God, were exempted from seuerest censure, the one
having his opinions publicly refelled, the other for his contempt of the gods,
expulsed. For such novel opinions as Antiquity had not traduced unto them, but
seemed repugnant to what they believed touching their gods, were esteemed
perilous, and the founders of them worthy due punishment. And how much more
ought we reverently to observe and carefully retain what Sacred authority,
grounded on better warrant then Pagan Antiquity, has commended to us, where
every clause, every syllable, sentence and title are full of sententious
sweetness, and divine fullness? As for the palpable blindness of such as see
not, or wilful ignorance of such as see but will not, the time will come when
He, whom they deny shall reveal himself in fury, and those gross opinions
which with such asseuerance they maintained shall be testimonies against them
to convince them. And though, as Suetonius witnesses, there be some, who like
Caligula will threaten the a^re, that she shall not rain upon his public
games or (...) spectacles, showing himself so peremptory, as though he would
cope with the i^ortall Gods, yet would he -- ad minima tonitrua, Vid. Sueton.
Tranq. in vit. Calig.
and (...) a conniuere, caput obuoluere, ad ver^ maiora proripere se e strato,
sub lectumque condere solebat: at the noise of thunder or lightning wink hard,
cover his head, and (...) his ears, to take away the (...) of his fear: yea
more then this, he would leap out of his bed and hide himself under it. Thus
did he contemn him whose works made him tremble, derogating from his power,
yet astonished (...) the voice of his thunder: and though in (...) ^me and his
predecessor Tiberius there flourished a Phylo the ^ew.
worthy Philosopher, who allbeit a Jew by nation, yet frequent amongst the
Romans, had great judgment in matters divine, and spoke profoundly of the
things which belonged unto the expectation of Nations: Notwithstanding all
this, they continued without the lea^t acknowledgement of a Deity, and in
contempt of the divine power, threatening the heavens if they scouled or frowned
upon the Roman gamesters, as I have before mentioned. Whereby it seems they
reposed such confidence in the height of their present estate, as they imagined
so firm a foundation could be shaken by no Superior power; for indeed worldly
pomp makes men for the most part forgetful of their duty toward their
Creator, thinking (as men in a fools Paradise) that this present Sunshine of
their seeming felicity shall never set. Yet no sooner shall hoarie age draw
near, then -- friget aestus honoris, and their former cheerfulness enfeebled
with all infirmities, shall with lame limbs and a queasie voice cry out, --
Non eadem est aetas: then shall the curelesse itch of honor by the brine of age
be allayed, youthful sports abandoned, and a quiet life rather Petitur ha^
caelum via.
desired then magnificence of estate. Concluding with Seneca the Philosopher,
inueying against the tyranny of Nero to this effect:

Well did I live, when I from envy rid,
Was pent up amongst the Rocks of th'Corsian sea,
Where if I still had lived as once I did, In the Tragedi^ of Agrip.

Well had it gone both with my state and me.
For whosoever shall but seriously consider the state and course of man's life,
which is entangled with so sundry and manifold perils, shall call it with the
Poet, -- mundum vitro similantem, where life is an exile, the passage a peril,
and the end doubtful. Thus far of those who either with success of fortune
puffed, or height of honor transported, or through a carnal liberty
benumbed, trust so much in the arm of flesh, as they wholly deny the power
and majesty of the only God (or sovereign good) preferring a momentanie
delight before a celestial reward. Now to my Satyr.

THE EIGHT SATYR.
NOw stout Caligula that dare the gods,
Saying, they must not frown upon thy pleasure,
Thou and immortal powers are still at odds,
Whose Modo auaritiae singulos increpa^, and quod puderet eos locupletiores
esse, qua^ se. in vit. Calig.
gold's thy god, whose deitie's thy treasure.
Thou Wilt feel the smart hereof, when thy estate,
Founded on frail^ie shall be ruinate.
Thou will not fear him while thou lives on earth,
Though life and power, and all be in his hand,
Thou Wilt fight with him (poor worm) that gives the^ breath,
And with the breath of flesh check Jove's command.
Unhappie Prince, though thou the happiest seem,
This reign of thine is but a golden dream.
And when this dream is past, and thou awake,
From thy soule-charming slumber thou must on,
Taking thy journey to the Sperent te tartara regem.
Stygian lake,
Or flame exhaling quenchlesse Phlegeton,
Where poisoned Adders shall infect thy tongue,
Which did so impiously her maker wrong.
Fly from the horror of thy damned soul,
For sure ere long thou shall be punished.
See how thy soul deformed is and foul,
Soiled with sin, with errors blemished.
O Christus lauacru^ est animae, canalis gratiae: Lauacrum, in quo anima
immergitur and lauatur, Canalis, a qua omnis gratia animae deriuatur.
wash them then, some hope does yet remain,
But now unwashed they will nere be white again!
Art not ashamed for to deny his power,
Who gives life unto each living thing?
To heaven, to earth, to sea, and to each flower,
He gives means, for by him all things spring.
Who will not then, and knowing this, account
The earth's the Lords, and he is Lord Paramount?
Do thou not see the fabric of this earth,
And all the plants which flourish in their kind,
How by his power each creature brings forth,
As if indeed they knew their makers mind:
Where th'very earth-worme that is endu'd with sense,
Is not excluded from his The very hedghog is not excluded from his preuid^nce.
Aug.
providence?
Then leave this damned opinion, Julian,
Be not too confident of earthly rule:
Remember still thou art a mortal man,
And in his power who can the seas control.
It Is he can make this earths foundation shudder,
Whose Empires reach from one Sea to another.
Yet thou Caligula can threat the gods,
If they descend but in a winters shower,
And say in scorn, Thou Wilt beat them with thy rods,
If they hold on, upon thy games to lowre.
Yet cowardice constraines thee for to fly,
At every flash, and like a Babe to cry.
Thou Wilt menace death unto Eternity,
If they obey not thy imperious pleasure:
Thus gods themselves must feel thy tyranny,
Enioynd to dance attendance at thy leisure:
Yet for all this, if thou but Thunder hears,
Thou pulls thy cap down ore thy frighted ears.
So every false Apostate will be stout,
Before he feel the Uiols of Gods wrath:
But when he tastes thereof he gins to doubt,
And calls to mind how he But see, being in the way of doing well, shame holds
him from the faith from which he fell.
forsook his faith.
His fall from which, confessing with his tongue,
His tongue is speaking, but his heart is dombe.
Dumb shall thou be, for heaven will have it so,
Since thou appliest thy tongue to wickedness,
Abusing that, against him who did bestow
All that thou have, this's thy unthankfulness.
Yet but relent, and doubt not to obtain,
That heavenly grace, which else thou can not gain.
Graceless beware, and fear the power of heaven,
Who can destroy thee in a minutes space,
He who can make, the Excelsa humiliando and humilia exaltando.
steepest mountains even,
Whose footstoole's earth, and heaven his dwelling place.
Fear, graceless fear, and thou shall live for ever,
For fear gives life to death, health to the liver.
Live thou shall never, if thou do not care
To show respect to th'supreme Majesty,
He whom we fear, who tenders our welfare,
And guides us in this vale of misery.
Pagan thou art, unless thou do amend,
Whose endless sins expect a Julian and Foelix had both miserable ends:
while Julian that impious Apostate continued in his blasphemy: Ecce quam
sumptuosis vasis filio Mariae ministratus! vid. Venerab. Bed. 3. lib.
woeful end.
Therefore as thou regardst thy sweet souls health,
Or honor of thy Maker, now reclaim
Thy breach of faith stained with the worlds filth,
If thou a son of Syon means to reign.
Fare well or ill; if well thou means to fare,
Unto the Temple of thy God repair.
The Argument.
HYppeas that worthy Grecian, who strove for the games in the Olympiads, wore
no other apparel save what with his own hands (being a general Artist) he
had framed, having not so much as the ring of his finger, or bracelet about his
arm, but were made by him, yea and the shoes of his feet, which with his
own skill he made likewise. This Hyppeas having gained the chiefest prizes by
means of his actiuitie; and now returning in the triumph of a Conqueror with
a Coronet of flowers empaled, to receive the proposed reward: the public
Notarie of these games came (according to the wonted custom usually observed)
to demand the best raiment or choycest particular ornament the Conqueror had
about him. Now this fellow, whom continuance of time had made impudent, seeing
the bounty of the conquering Hippeas, according to the manner, received the
best raiment the Victor wore: and scarce contented therewith, (like an
infatigable suitor) begged farther his stockings, and Hyppeas denied him
nothing. So long he continued in begging, and he in giving, till Hyppeas went
naked forth of the Olympiads, having nothing wherewith he might show his
friends any semblance of conquest or victory, save his naked body, which he
presented unto them, using these words unto the Notarie: -- What I have given
thee, I would have bestowed on my professedst enemy, for such motives of
vaineglory should rather move me to loath them then love them, leave them, then
live with them, remembering, how

The sage Eutrapelus expressly bad,
His foes should have the choycest robes he had,
Wherein he found by proof this special good,
To make himself more humble, them more proud.
The name of this beggar was Mynthos, who having thus polled and spoiled this
worthy Conqueror of all his apparel through his importunacie in demanding,
presently thus answered one by whom he was sharply taxed: Nemo est quin aliqua
in art praeclarus est, ego autem in praemia and vestimenta comparando, palmam
and gloriam adeptus sum, meque diuitem ex aliorum paupertate feci. This shall
be the Argument of this ninth Satyr, touching impudent crauers: These -- Iri
egentes, of whom the Poet speaks, who make themselves rich by their servile
baseness, and as Vultures feed best upon the stinkingst carrion, so they upon
others riot, prodigality, and dissolution, sucking like the Sangui-sugae, who
feed themselves with blood till they burst. Reason have I to inuey against
them, since Israel the elect and select people of God were not to receive them
-- Let there be no beggar in Israel. Time was not then for Parasites to currie
favor, when none was to have relief but by his labor; so expressly was every
one enjoined to apply his vocation, that he who would not Genesis 3. 19. 2. These.
3. 10. Prou. 5. 15. 1. These. 4. 11.
labor should not eat. And may these insatiable Mynthes taste the like fare,
being derived from as base beginnings as they are oftimes advanced without
merit to great means and possessions, yea composed of as ignoble and
degenerate minds, as they are sprung of ingenerous blood.

THE NINTH SATYR.
HYppeas, your cloak I crave, that is my due,
Your stockings too, and such like toys as these,
Free to bestow a Bounty were in you,
And yet a debt, for you do know my fee's.
But Debt to mention I do think it unfit,
When Bounty is so near to answer it.
And yet I want, and yet what can I want,
When He of whom I craue's so prone to give?
When store by Jove is sent, there is no scant,
All famine leave, and all in plenty live.
See what thou wants then Mi^thos, and but crave it,
Hyppeus is stored, and thou art sure to have it.
Belt, Beuer, Buskin, view from top to toe,
See what thou wants his Wardrope will supply,
And laugh at him when thou have used him so,
And bid him triumph in his victory.
Let him go naked, and boast what he has done,
Whilst thou enioyes the Booties he has won.
Yet term him Prince of bounty, and requite The true description of a
Parasite.

In seeming Protestations, and in vows,
Yet care not for him when he is out of sight;
For those thrive best who can make fairest shows:
In speaking much, but little as they mean,
And being such, but not the same they seem.
I would I could, thus may Satis domi talium salutatorum habeo. Plut. in vit.
Tiber.
thou bring him o^,
I could extend my wealth unto my will,
I would erect to show what you have done,
Some Time-out living Monument, to fill
The world with amazement, when they hear
What you have been, and what your actions were.
And then impart thy want, how fortunes are
Unequally divided, yet to such
As He whose Bounty gives to each his share,
Though much he has, yet has he not too much:
And then with cap in hand beseech his worth,
Be good to thee, that is borne of obscure birth.
Indeed thou seems to be an obscure Ass,
Aspacious Beggar, begging every where, Vid. Persi. in Satyr.

Who wilt not suffer a patcht boot to pass,
But thou will beg it for thy leg that is bare.
Indeed too bare thou art, too impudent,
That with thy own state can not be content.
Pesant like Bastard, hate thy Beggarie,
Live on thy own, not on another state;
Thou that descendest from base penury,
Wilt by thy Begging live at higher rate? Vid. Iuuenal. Saty.

Numbered thou art amongst such men as begs,
The smoke of Chimmes, snuffes, and Vintners dregs.
Thou art defamed, for all deride thy kneeling,
Thy capping, cringing, and thy temporizing,
As if thou had of modesty no feeling,
But from another razing drew thy rising.
Well, for thy begging we will beg for thee,
The Pattent of disgrace and infamy.
So with thy wallet as a beggar should, Qualis es, talis appare.

Be not ashamed to seem that which thou art,
Sow patch on patch, to keep thee from the cold,
And show thy want in each seame-rented part:
But do not rere thy fortunes on men's fall,
For such base Beggars are the worst of all.
I write not to thee in a sublime style, Vul^um verba decent. Horat.

Such is unfit thy errors to convince;
Satyrs though rough, are plain and must revile A Satyrs na^iue Rhetoric.

Uice with a Cynicke bluntness, as long since
E^olis, Aristobulus, Ariste^, etc.
Those grave judicious Satyrists did use,
Who did not tax the time, but times abuse.
And yet I wish my pen were made of steel,
And every leaf, a leaf of lasting brass,
Which might bear record to this Commonweal,
When this Age's past, to Ages that shall pass.
But these as others must, shall lose their name, Debemur morti nos nostraque.

And we their Authors too must die with them.
Yet well I know, I shall Characterd be,
In living letters, proving what I write,
To be a^thenticke to posterity,
To whom this Ages vices I recite.
Which, much I doubt, as they are successiue still,
By course of years, so they will succeed in ill.
For vice nere dies intestate, but does leave,
Something behind, to show what it has been;
Yea canting knaves that hang on others sleeue,
Can charge their heirs still to pursue the stream,
Where John a style bequeathes to John a noke,
His Beggars rags, his dish, his scrip, his poke.
With which I Will beg; no, with my soul I scorn it,
He rather carry tankaras on my back;
Yet th'^rade is thri^ing, true, but I Have forsworn it,
Nor would I beg, though competent I lack.
Before I should make congies to aswayne,
I would for swear to take my legs again.
I am but poor, and yet I scorn to beg*
To be a Bastard to my Progeny,
Yea I will rather with Poison. Sycites fig* a Proverb.
Sycites feg,
Receive my death, then get me infamy.
I Will be a galley-slaue in Turkish ship,
Rather then scrape my crumbs out of a scrip.
Bias was poor, and yet his wealth increased,
All that he had he carried still about him;
Bias is dead, his goods by death are seized, Vid. dict. Cretensium.

Mydas is poor, his goods were all without him.
Bias and Mydas both agree in this,
Earths bliss when we are in earth quite vanished is.
Candaules in primo libro Iustini, Qui ostendens eam Gigi (depositaveste)
tantae insaniae paenas luit, a Gige ^im con^ditur mira virtu^ ^nuli
coopertoVnde Poeta; coniugis vt nudam speciem monstraffet amico: Dilectam
speciem perdit, amicus habet. Quasi silentium damnum pulchritudinis esset.
ibid. Uid. Ci^. de off. 3. Lib. Plato. de leg. l. 1.
Candaules he was rich, yet he was poor,
Rich in his coffers rammed down with gold,
Yet poor in this, his wife did prove a whore,
Shown naked unto Gyges to behold.
Collatine poor, yet rich, his wife is chaste.
Both these agree in this, by death embra'st.
Irus, qui in domo Vlissis post reditum suum, ab Vlisse, pugna nimirum eius,
peremptus est; Irus qui Scrinio suo and Obba in plataeis Greciae mendicare
solebat, superbia quadam (aut spe suauioris lucri) affectus, in Penelopem,
inter Penelopis socios, (vt ^uncius potius quam procus) accedere ^usus est; --
Dignum supplicium pertulit, quia tanta animi audacia (more procacis mendici) in
lares consularis dig^itatis viri procedere ausit. Vid. Hom. Ili. interp. Calab.
Irus was poor, but Croesus passing rich,
Irus his scrip differs from Croesus board,
Yet now compare them and I know not which,
Is better furnished or the worser stored:
For see their fates, they both in one agree,
Since by pale Death they both arrested be.
Priscillaes purse, Demosthenes ^n Orator of Athens.
Demosthenes his hand,
Do differ much, the one is always shut,
The other open, for rewards does stand;
Yet if we measure either by his foot,
That close-shut purse, and that receiving hand,
Have equal shares made by the Virga sepulchralis. Varr.
Sextons wand.
Yet Beggar, thou that begs, and hopes to gain
Store of rewards, for to relieve thy need.
Or surfeit rather, tell me what is thy aim,
When those Pascentur a nobis quae pas^untur in nobis. Vermes.
thou feeds, shall on thy car kasse feed?
For then where is the Beggar now become,
Whose shame's too great, to hide with shroud or tomb?
Take these rude Satyrs as composed by him
Who loves his state far better then thy trade,
For Exp^'d to ^ame, and in^ie betrayed.
Beggars lose more then they seem to win,
Since their esteem for euer's blemished:
Live at a lower rate, and beg the less.
I Will live to write, if thou thy fault redress.
Amicus non Mendicus.
The Argument.
TAurus Raptus abit media quod ad aethera Taurus arena, non fuit hoc artis sed
pietatis op^s. Martial. in Epi. in Amphythe. Caesa.
a rich Justice, seemed to carry great port and state in his country where he
lived, though more feared then loved: for the proud miser seldom lives to be
inheritour of a friend: but afterward his misery was most apparently known by
his desolate house, as unacquainted with hospitality as an usurers heir with
frugalitie, having only a case for a man, a blew-coat^ I mean without a man,
a shadow without a substance. In this Satyr next ensuing is described the
miserable nature of such, as notwithstanding their outward port, glorying of
more then ever their unworthy minds could reach to, be the very pictures It is
a great shame for a man to have a poor heart and a rich purse.
and Idaeas of misery, as I may well call them: where desire of having so much
ouerswayes them, as care of reputation lightly moves them. This Argument is
short, for the Satyr will show her own meaning without any further
illustration.

THE TENTH SATYR.
TAurus Cornua Vibrando, nescit sua cornua Taurus; Whereto it was shrewdly
answered: Cornua dum cernit, (...) sua cornua Taurus.
a Justice rich, but poor in mind,
(Riches make rich-men poor through misery,)
Had long time lived as one in hold confined,
With gates close-shut from hospitality:
Means without men he had him to attend,
Lest what he spared his Retinue should spend.
One time a Traveler chanced to repair
To Taurus house, to quench his vehement thirst,
But he poor man could find no comfort there:
Drink could he get none, if his heart should burst;
Men he saw none, nor ought to cheer his want,
Save a Signa dat Hospitis, sed habentur in Hospitis vm* bram.
Blew-coate without a cognisant.
The Traveler conceited in distress,
Straight thus discoursed, his As quick conceits will passions best allay.
passion to allay:
This Justice is a Seruing-man I guess,
Who leaves his coat at home when he is away:
Therefore I was deceived and did amiss,
To seek a Justice where a blew-coate is.
But as the Traveler went on his way,
He met the Justice in a ragged suite,
Who in a Bench-like fashion bad him stay,
Saying -- He ought a Justice to salute:
The man at first perplexed, and now awake,
Took heart of grace, and did this answer make.
Sir, if I have forgotten my regard
Unto your place, forgive my ignorance,
My eye could not discern you, till I heard
Your self report your own preeminence,
Whose name is Terror, and whose awful breath,
Is messenger of fury, and of death.
And great I beare's endowments you possess,
But worthy greater then you do enjoy,
Witness your open house, which does express
The care you have your fortunes to employ
In bounties (...): your good beer does show it,
Being kept so well, as none can come unto it.
Taurus he stamped, called his attendants knaves,
And so he might, for none could be offended,
Where art thou Tom (quoth he) Jack, George, out slaves,
Faining their voices* All shall be amended.
Then answers he himself, Let none depart,
But entertain all with a cheerful heart.
The Traveler though he conceived all,
Seemed to admire the bounty of the place,
Till th'badge-lesse coat thas hung within the hall,
Forced him to laugh the Justice in the face.
Why do thou laugh (quoth he?) I laugh to note,
For want of men, what seruic's in a coat.
The Argument.
Claudius a Roman, for his approved honesty respected for the most part,
gained no less good opinion with the Conscript fathers in the Senate House,
then popular love in the Citie^ for his gravity was such, as none could detect
him of the least imputation, having always in the whole course of his pleading
such pithie, sententious, and select discourse, that it yielded no less
admiration to the hearers, then a general estimation to himself, at that time
reputed one of the hopefullest young Orators: but most especially for his
devotion and religion to the gods, then, amongst the Romans adored and
worshipped. This Claudius after this general report and good liking which all
had of him, upon a solemn night appointed for the sacrifizing to Et festa
solennia Martis. vid. Varr. and Ovid. de fast.
Mars in behalf of a battle which was to be made against a Prince of Numidia,
(in which holy rites there were appointed Augurs for the coniecturing of these
things) seeing the opportunity of the Augures absence, renewed the
familiarity which he of long time had with one of the Augures wives. Now the
Augur having left behind him his Oscines or Prophesing birds (a neglect of such
importance as it discovered his own shame,) came to his house where he
detected Claudius, who had long The fish Sepia is betrayed by a black color
which she casts out to cover her, so these counterfets by the cloud of a
pretended holiness, which shall be as a cloud of witness against them.
time counterfeited purity.

THE ELEVENTH SATYR.
Claudius is pure, abiuring profane things,
Nor will he company with wickedness:
He hates the source whence lewd affections springs,
He Will not consent with deeds of naughtiness:
Yet he will deal, so none do see his sin,
Yea though heavens eyes he cares not look on him.
He will not speak unto a Maid in th'streete,
Left his repute should fall unto decay:
Yet if they two in private chance to meet,
He in a pure embrace will bid her stay.
Saying: I will instruct thee pretty Nan,
How thou shall be a formal Puritan.
Then draws he forth to move the Maids affection,
The forced description of their purity,
How he and she be children of election,
And must be saved what ere the wicked be.
For vices are termed virtues, where we make
Lust but an Act for Procreation sake.
What then are Maids, thus he induces her,
But Uirgins still that do impart their love,
To such an Vt prurit v^it
One as is their furtherer
In holy zeal, and can the spirit move?
Naught less but more, for there is a heavy vae,
Or curse denounced on them that barren be.
Cloze then in silence, eyes of men are shut,
None can detect us, but the eyes of heaven,
And when we act, those lights are sealed up,
For unto us more liberty is given
Then unto others, since the very name,
Of lust is changed when the righteous use the same.
Thou hypocrite, whose counterfeited zeal, Hypocrisis dulex est malum,
issimulatio and eccatum.

Makes thee seem godly to the worelds eye,
Yet do the golden fruits of Vesta steal,
When thou perceiues no man thy sins does spy.
Leave this dissembled zeal, for thou art known
The wickedst sinner, when thy inside's shown.
The Argument.
THe History of Phyloxenus is most amply related in the diverse writings of
sundry authenticke Authors, being infamous for his greedy desire unto meat
and drink, and therefore as is testified of him, Aristotle mocking the
Epicures, said, that upon a time they went all to a Temple together, beseeching
the gods that they would give them necks as long as Cranes and Hernes, that the
pleasure and taste of meat might be more longin relishing: complaining against
Nature for making their necks too short.
Gruis collum sibi dari optabat, vt cibum potumque maiori cum delectatione
caperet. This Phyloxenus and that ravenous Heliogabalus shall be the subjects
of this ensuing Satyr, touching or rather concluding the condition of all
Epicures in these two. If thou that read me be touched, as tainted with this
particular sin, blush, but do not show thy passion toward the poor Satyr,
for Bee-like she has no sooner stung thee, then she loses her power of being
further revenged of thee. Wage not war against a dead Monument, since Pliny
warnes thee: Cum mortuis nil nisi laruas luctari. Take therefore this Satyr in
good part, and rather fret against thy self, in that thou have matter in thee
fit for a Satyrists subject, then vent thy spleen toward him, who makes thy
defects the effects of his subject.

THE TWELFTH SATYR.
PHyloxenus looks lanke with abstinence:
Poor man I pity him, I think he is sick;
No, this his seeming is a false pretense,
The greedy Cormorant will each thing lick:
Whose drum-stretch'd case can scarce his guts contain
Since he has got the gullet of a Crane.
Thou thinks there is no pleasure but in feeding,
Making thy self, Like those ^ satiable glutt^ Uitellius and Appius, to wh^
Cormorants (...) there land, wat^ nor a^re mig^ be sufficient. And Camblet^ the
gluttonous king of Lydi^ devoured in (...) dream his wi^ while she lay^
sleeping toget^ in the same b^ and finding h^ hand between^ his teeth when he
awaked, (...) slew himself, fearing disho^ nour.
slave to thy appetite;
Yet whilst thou crams thy self, thy soul is bleeding,
And Turtle-like mournes, that thou should delight,
In such excess as causes infamy,
Starues soul, spoils health, and ends with beggarie.
Remember (thou besott'd) for I must talk,
And that with serious passion, thou that Well descri^ by that Motto^ Non
citius e^ quam excedi pascit and pos^ Elpenors vi^ vid. Geor. Vi Silenus in A^
tro.
tastes
The choycest wines, and do to Tauernes walk,
Where thou consumes the night in late repasts.
Confusion now, draws near thee where thou kneeles,
Drinking deep healthes, but no contrition feels.
It may be, He that teaches may be taught,
And Socraticum speculum no chalibaeum (...) materiale. vid. Brasiuo. (...)
praefatione.
Socrates of Sostenes may learn,
Even He, that for thy good these precepts brought,
To public light, may in himself discern
Something blameworthie, true, and heaven he could,
Reform his errors rightly as He would.
But harder is it by much for to perform,
Then to prescribe, where many seem to urge,
The present times abuse, but n'ere reform
Those, crimes in them which they in others scourge:
But where the Author makes use of his pains,
As well as Reader, there is a double gains.
And these are th'gaines which I do sue to have,
Seeking no less thy benefit herein,
Then my peculiar good: where all I crave,
Is but thy prayer to purge me of my sin.
I do not write, as I my pains would sell,
To every Broker, use them and farewell.
Nam inepto risu res nulla ineptior est. Catull.
Finis Satyrarum. An end of the Satyrs composed by the foresaid Author in the
discharge of Natures Embassy: purposely penned to reclaim man, whose vicious
life promising an unhappy end, must now be taxed more sharply, since vice
comes to greatest growth through impunitie.
A CONCLVSIVE ADMONITION TO THE READER.
IF any man shall read, and making use
Of these my Satyrs, grow distemperate,
By making of a good intent abuse,
In that I seem his life to personate;
Let him content himself, be it good or ill,
Galled horses winch, and I must gall him still.
A Satyrist ought to be most secure,
Who takes exception at his cancred style,
And he that most repines, let him be sure,
That he is the man whom Satyrs most revile.
Therefore who would be free from Satyrs pen,
Ought to be Mirrors in the sight of men.
These two months travel like the Almond rod,
May bring forth more when opportunity
Gives fit time, wherein vice loathed by God,
May be displaide, and curbed more bitterly.
Till which edition, take these in good part,
Or take them ill, how-ere, they glad my heart.
HERE FOLLOWS SOME EPYCEDES or funeral Elegies, concerning sundry exquisite
Mirrours of true love.
The Argument.
TWo lovely lovers so divided be,
As one to other hardly can repair,
In Sestos she, and in Abydos he,
He swims, she waits and weeps, both drowned are
Waves cut off Heroes words, the Sea-nimphs moan,
One heart in two desires, no grave but one.
I. ELEGY.
HEro was willing to Leanders suite,
But yet Leanders opportunity
Could not be so, as answers his repute:
Lust sometime wears the robe of modesty:
Silent he woes, as bashful youths must do,
By sighs, by tears, and kissing comfits too.
But what are these where fancy seated is,
But lures to loose desires, sin-sugred baits,
That draw men onward to fools paradise,
Whose best of promises are but deceits?
And such Leanders were, mere golden dreams,
That leave the waking senses in extremes.
But love flame-like, though it restrained be,
Will still ascend, and so it fared with him:
For now he cries, Hero I come to thee,
And though I cannot run, yet I will swim,
Where, while I swim, send thy sweet breath but hither,
And Zephire-like it will soon waft me thither.
Hero remains on the floting shore,
Waiting the blessed arrival of her friend,
But she (poor she) must never see him more,
Seeing him end before his journey end:
In whose hard fate a double death appears,
Drowned in the sea, and in his Heroes tears.
Still she laments, and tears her forlorn hair,
Exclaming'gainst the fates, whose cruelty
Had changed her hope-refi fortune to despair,
Abridging love, true lovers liberty;
But since its so (quoth she) the waves shall have,
More then by right or justice they can crave.
With that she leapt into the curled flood,
And as she leapt, she spoke unto the wave,
Remorcelesse thou (quoth she) that stained his blood,
Shall now receive two lovers in one grave.
For fit it is, who living had one heart,
Should have one grave, and not interred apart.
Yet in my death I do inuoke the Powers,
Which do frequent this woeful River side,
That they adore and deck our Tomb with flowers,
Where ere our loue-exposed corpse abide.
And if they ask where they shall find our graves,
Let them look down into these surging waves.
And I entreat my friends they do not weep,
In that we are departed to our rest,
Sweet rest, may Hero say, when in her sleep
She clips Leander whom she loved best:
She loved him best indeed, for she did crave
To be enhearsed with him in one wave.
This was no sooner spoke, but raging streams,
Cut off poor Heroes speech, and with their force,
Closed her in silence, while each Nymph complains,
And chides the River for his small remorse.
Thus ended they, their ends were their content,
Since for to die in Love, their minds were bent.
Let not fond love so fondly thee embrace,
Lest like the Iuie or the Misselto,
It wind about thee to thy own disgrace,
And make thee slave to brutish passions too.
Be constant in thy love, as chaste not spotted,
Love well and long, but not in love besotted.
The Argument.
Lovers consent finds fit place of recourse,
For Loves content changed into discontent,
King Ninus tomb their sconce or sorrows source,
To which a dreadful Lioness is sent:
Which Thisbe spies and flies: her bloody tire,
Bereaues her Love of life, and both expire.
II. ELEGY.
WEll then we will repair unto that place,
Where we shall have fruition of our joy,
By Ninus tomb, far from our parents face,
Where mutual Love needs little to be coy:
Where met, we may enjoy that long-sought pleasure,
Which Love affoords, when Love unlocks her treasure.
Thisbe was mute, in being mute she yielded,
Who knows not Maids, by silence give consent?
So on her silence her assent was builded,
Since in his love she placed her sole content;
Onward he goes most forward to obtain,
That which she wished, but Parents did restrain.
And coming nigh unto king Ninus Tomb,
Erected near a Christ all riueling,
There as she mused a Lion fierce did come
Forth of the grove, whence he his prey did bring.
Who all embrude with slaughter and with blood,
Came for to quench his thirst at that same flood.
Thisbe perceiving this enraged beast,
Fled for her refuge to a hollow tree,
Yet she for have, what she suspected least,
Let fall her Tire, and to her shelfe did flee;
Where in the shade while she affrighted stood,
The Lion tinct her virgine-tire with blood.
And having now well drenched his bloody jaws,
Making (...) unto his shadie den,
Young Pyramus for to observe loves laws,
(Loves laws must needs be kept) did thither tend,
And coming near, her could he not epsy,
But her unhappy Tire di'd bloudily.
Which he no sooner with his eyes beheld,
Then he exclaimed against his destiny,
Since Thisbe was by his request compeld,
To be a pray to Lions cruelty:
And taking up the blood besmeared Tire,
Amyntas. like his end he does conspire.
Yet fore his end in dismal sort he cried,
Fie on the fates, that did poor Thisbe kill,
Fie on those ruthlesse gods that have decreed,
Wild savage beasts her crimson blood to spill;
But why do I stand arguing with fate,
Lamenting ore her breathless corpse too late?
For if thou loved her, show thy love in this
Lost, to regaine her presence by thy death;
Death, which has left thee this poor Tire to kiss,
On which I Will breath and kiss, and kiss and brea^
Farewell my love, if Piramus did love thee,
He Will show his love, his love shall be above thee.
Strike home (fond man) and do not fear grim death,
But meet him in the midway to thy grave;
For Thisbes love I gladly lose my breath,
And that is all that Thisbe now can have:
And with this speech, deep grief cut off his word,
He slew himself with his own dismal sword.
Thisbe long trembling in her hollow Cave,
Came forth at last to meet her dearest love.
How apt is love the chastest to deprave,
Making a ravenous Uultur of a Dove;
Wherefore in haste she hies her to the spring,
Where she might hear a doleful Syluane sing.
And to receive the sorrow more at large,
Nigher she drew unto that mournful tune,
Where like a merchant in a splitted barge,
She stood amazed, and standing listened one.
Sorting his grief unto her dear friends grief,
Whom she sought out, to yield her some relief.
Good Siluane say (thus spoke she) having found him,
Did see a youth coast near this darkesome way?
For much I fear, some savage beast has wound him,
If thou can guide me to him, pray thee say:
Here is the Tomb where he appointed me,
To stay for him, yet him I cannot see.
Uirgin (quoth he) that youth you seek is gone;
Whither (kind Siluane?) I will after him,
He shall not leave me in this wood alone,
For trust me Siluane I have frighted bin,
And by a dreadful Lion so beset,
As I am hardly my own woman yet.
See Lady, see; with that he vanished,
To wail the loss of Nais he had kept,
Who by a Centaure lately ravished,
Was quite conveyed away while the Siluane slept.
She turns her eye, yet scarce will trust her eye,
No, nor the place where she does see him lie.
Dead! why it cannot be, thus she began,
Who could harm thee that nere did any harm,
No not in thought to any living man?
With that she felt his pulse if it were warm,
But breathless he, key-cold as any stone,
She looks and weeps, and bathes him looking on.
Yet long it was ere she could shed a tear,
For greatest grieves are not by tears expressed,
Deepe-rooted sorrows greatest burden bear,
Kept most in heart, but shown in eye the least.
For lesser grieves have eyes to bring them forth,
But greatest still are strangled in their birth.
Grief therefore does rebound, and with rebound
She shakes her Piramus and strokes his cheek:
Love was all ears, for he did hear her sound,
And moved his head from ground, but could not speak;
Yet did he hold her hand, as if her hand
Staid Deaths arrest, and could him countermand.
And as a man who ship-wrack'd on the Sea,
Not able to endure unto the Port,
Takes hold on wrack, which He as constantly
Keeps in his hand, as he did labor for it:
From which, no danger whatsoere beside him,
Nor death it self can any way divide him.
Even so did Piramus keep in his arms,
The choicest body of his chastest love,
Whereby he thinks himself so free from harms,
As die he cannot till he thence remove:
Yet though it is death to him, since Thisbe would,
He is contented to let go his hold.
This seen, (says Thisbe) since thy love is such,
That to divide thy self from thine own love,
To thee's a second death or harder much,
And moved by me thy hold thou do remove;
Ere long will Thisbe show her self to thee,
An equal Mirror of loves constancy.
Yet do I pray those friends who are conjoined
To us in Blood, to take of us compassion,
That as our Loves, our corpse may be combined,
With funeral rites after our country fashion:
And when to ashes they our corpse shall burn,
Let both our drearie ashes have one vrne.
Let both our graves (poor graves) be joined in one,
As both our hearts were linked in one twist:
And let our corpse be covered with one stone,
So may our bones so nearly joined be blist;
For gods this privilege to lovers give,
When others die by death, in death they live.
By this young Thisbes speech was finished,
Who was as weary to enjoy her life,
As a loose Matron of her husbands bed,
Or a young spend-thrift of his long-liu'd wife:
Even so was Thisbe, whom death did afford,
Though not same hand to kill, yet selfsame sword.
But yet some Plant is still affectionate,
Unto a Lovers death, whose constancy
Never does alter from her wonted state,
But perseueres in steadfast certainty:
For the Mulberrie, seeing them Mourners lack,
Milke-white before put on a sable black.
Morus thus altered in her former hue,
Changing her color for the death of Love,
Has to this day her mourning-weed to show;
Well might they move us then, when they did move
The senseless trees, who did so truly grieve,
As for their sake they would their color leave.
The Argument.
THe loss of Didoes honor and her love,
Are both bemon'd: Anna but all in vain,
Seeks to recomfort her: she seems to prove
No faith in strangers: she dissolues her train:
Incense is burned; a fire she does devise,
Wherein she makes her self the sacrifice.
III. ELEGY.
DIdo lamenting, that Aeneas should
So soon convert his love to bitter hate,
The thought whereof surpast a thousand fold,
The loss of Scepter, honor, or estate:
Curses the hap she had to entertain,
Or give such harbor to a thanklesse Swain.
Yet do not so (quoth she,) he is generous,
Sprung from the Trojan stock and Progeny:
Curse him not Dido, it were ominous
To his proceedings and his dignity;
He did requite thy love, thou know devoutly,
And did perform his Tournaments as stoutly.
Sweet was the Pleasure, though the fruit be sower,
Dear his embraces, kind his favors too,
Witness that Bower (aye me) that rosy Bower,
In which heaven knows, and few but heaven do know,
I gagged my heart to him, he his to me,
Which makes me tied in faith how ere he be.
And he protested, Simple woman, thou
To credit what a stranger had protested*
For what is he that lives, and will not do
As much or more, till he has fully feasted
His eager Appetite, which being allaid,
He straight forgets the promise he has made?
And so did he, respectlesse of his vow,
Or (breach of faith) which whatsoere he think,
Will be revenged by Heaven* and sharply too,
Gods do not ever sleep when they do wink.
For though they spare, They will at last strike home,
And send Revenge to the infant in my womb.
Poor Orphane Infant, whose injurious birth,
As closely done, shall closely be suppressed,
And have a double Mother, Me and Earth,
And for thy Fathers sake a double chest:
Whose Tomb shall be my womb, whose drerie shroud,
Shall be my self, that gave it life and food.
This as she spoke her Sister she came in,
Aduising her unto a milder course,
Then to afflict her self with thought of him
Whose heart was (...) of pity and remorse;
Wherefore (said she) since sorrow is in vain,
Forget his absence, that will salve your pain.
Will salve my pain (quoth she!) and then she gro^'d,
Cures to apply is easier then to cure:
No, no, my sorrows may be well bemon'd,
But nere redrest: for the eye of (...) too pure,
To view my sin, my soil* my guilt, my stain,
Whose die's so deep 'twill nere be white again.
Yet to prevent the scandal would ensue,
If fame should know what has in private been,
I Will lop this Branch, lest Time should say, it grew
(Adulterate Issue) from the Carthage Queen:
Which ere I do* lest I incur heavens hate,
With Incense burned, their wrath I Will expiate.
Wherewith I Will purge (if such may purged be)
The fact I did, which grieves me that I did,
Staining my honor with his perjury,
Which gods do see, though it from man be hid:
For this (dear sister) build me here a fire,
To sacrifice my shame, appease heavens ire.
Anna, for so her Sister hight, does rere
This fatal pile, preparing all things meet
For such a sacrifice, as Juniper,
Spicknarde, and Mirrhe, to make the Incense sweet,
Unknown to what her Sister did intend,
Whose fair pretense came to a timelesse end.
Sister (quoth Dido) now you may be gone,
Sweet is Devotion that is most retired,
Go you aside, and leave me here alone,
Which Anna did as Dido had required:
Who now alone with heauen-erected eyes,
Her woeful self she makes the sacrifice.
Anna retired, did hear her Sister shrike,
With which at first affrighted, she made haste,
To see the event, the sight whereof did strike
Such a distraction in her, as it past
The bounds of Nature, where experience tries,
More sorrow's in the heart then in the eyes.
At last her eyes long shut unsealed were,
To eye that mournful Object, now half turned
To mouldred ashes, for it did appear,
As half were scorched, the other half were burned:
Which seen, she cries, and turns away her sight,
Black woe betide them that such guests inuit.
Anna thus left alone, yet mindful too,
Of Didoes honor, reares a Princely shrine,
The like whereof that Age could never show,
Nor any Age, till Artemisias time: Wi^e to Maulus king of Ca* a. vid. Plutar.
^ Apotheg.

On which was this engraven: Love was my loss,
Rich was my Crown, yet could not cure my cross.
Thus Dido di'd, who was not much unlike
Unto the Countriman who nourished
The dead-staru'd Uiper, that ungrateful snake, Latet Anguis ^ herba.

Who reft him life, that it had cherished:
So Dido she, whose fall my Muse recites, ^ec Hospes ab lospite tutus.

Lies slain by him, whom she in love inuites.
AN ELEGY UPON THESE ELEGIES.
LEt fond Leander warn thee, to remain
Upon the River bank in safety:
Let Piramus rash fact thy hand restrain,
Too dear costs Love, mixed with such cruelty:
Lastly, let Dido warn thee by her end,
To try that Guest thou makes thy bosom friend.
Venit amor grauius quo serius vrimur intus, Vrimur, and caecum pectora vulnus
habent.
THE SECOND SECTION OF DIVINE AND MORAL SATYRS:

With AN ADIVNCT UPON THE PRECEDENT; WHEREBY THE Argument with the first cause
of publishing these Satyrs, be evidently related.

Disce and doce.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD WHITAKER. 1621.

TO THE WORTHY CHERISHER AND NOVRISHER OF ALL GENErous studies, S. W. C.
Knight, R. B. His affectionate Countryman wishes the increase of all honor,
health, and happiness.
SIR,

When I had composed these ragged lines,
Much like the Bear who brings her young ones forth,
In no one part well featured, she repines,
That such a lump of flesh should have a birth:
Which to reform, she is said to undertake
A second task, and licks them into shape.
So I producing these vnriper seeds,
Scarce grown to their perfection, knew not how,
(Since different humor, different censure breeds)
How they should come to ripeness, but by you:
Whose fair acceptance may such countenance show,
As you may others move to grace them too.
Nor do I doubt but these shall purchase grace,
Amongst such as honor virtue, for how low
So'ere the style be, Subject is not base,
But full of Divine matter; and I know,
The Sun gives life, as well to simple weeds,
As unto flowers or other fruitful seeds.
Yours in all faithful Observance, Richard Brathwayte, Musophylus.

Upon the Dedicatorie.
THough he (and happy he) bereft by fate,
To whom I meant this work to dedicate,
This shall find shelter in his living name,
He Is changed indeed, but I am still the same.
The Argument. of Elpenor an Epicure, living sensually in a Cave, respectlesse
of the souls eternity.
ELpenor, who long time living (as the Dormouse) in the cave of sensuality and
security, rested careless of a future blessing, as one ravished with the
present delight of carnal liberty, became at last restrained by the virtuous
edict of a gracious Emperor, by whom he was exiled and banished, not only
from the Princes Court, but from the utmost coasts of Arcadia wherein he lived.
Now it chanced, that during such time as he remained in Cadmos a Satyrist of no
less respect then approved gravity, well observing the impiety of Elpenor,
as also the deserved censure which his Epicureall life had incurred; endeavored
to describe his condign fall, with no less pregnancie of wit, and maturitie
of judgment, then a settled severity in reprehension of his godless opinions:
which Description he fixed (as may be imagined) upon the Portall gate, where he
might of necessity see his own impiety as in a glass transparent,
perspicuously demonstrated. What discontent he conceived in the displaying of
his own shame, may be coniectured by the subject of this Inuection, taxing him
of his infamous life, the only occasion of his obscure end: whose fortunes
were aforetime most eminent, now most dejected.

Et quanta est infaelicitas, fuisse faelicem, etc? Boaethiu^

THE FIRST SATYR.
ELpenor groueling in his duskie cave,
Secure of God or Gods high providence,
Naught but luxurious dishes seems to crave,
To satisfy the appetite of sense.
He spurns at heaven, contemnes all supreme power,
Priding in that will perish in an hour.
God is of no respect with Epicures,
Senseless of of heaven or minds tranquillity,
Senseless of Hell, which evermore endures,
Glad to receive earths joys satietie:
Where rapt with Objects of deceiving Pleasure,
They live to sin, but to repent at leisure.
Is not that Statue (say Elpenor) thine,
With eyes-inflam'd and palsie-shaking hand,
Upon whose fore-head's writ, Abuse of time?
I know it is, for I do see it stand
Near Baccus shrine, where either drinks to other,
Healths to Eryca, their lascivious Mother.
Where Siren voices so apply the ear,
With an affected melody, that earth
Might a phantasticke Paradise appear,
Through consort of an universal mirth,
Which these enchanting harmonists did use,
To th'wofull friends of wandering Ithacus.
But who is He that seems to challenge thee,
Yet staggers in his challenge? O I know him,
It Is Hans the Dutch man, new arrived from Sea,
Stand fast Elpenor, if thou wilt overthrow him.
But why enjoin I that thou can not do,
Half of a stand were well betwixt you two.
And much I doubt, lest Cripple-like you grow,
So long it is, as it is out of mind,
Since you were seen by any man to go,
Which makes me hear your legs are hard to find:
For use brings on Perfection, and I fear
Your dropfie-legs are out of use to bear.
See thou unwieldy wretch, that fatal shelfe,
To which thou art declining, being grown
A heavy vselesse burden to thy self,
In whom no glimpse of virtue may be shown:
A Barmie leaking vessel (which in troth)
For want of reason is filled up with froth.
Aged Turpilio groans at misspent time,
Wishing he had his youth to pass again:
For then He would not vse't as thou do thine,
But moan the hours which He has spent in vain.
But Time runs on, and will not make return,
When Death succeeds, whom no man can adiourne.
And see thou this, and will thou not provide
For Deaths arrest, whose sad approach will be
So full of horror, as thou scarce shall bide,
So grim he is, that He should look on thee?
And yet He will, for he no diffrence makes,
Twixt rich and poor, but whom He likes he takes.
Thy Prince thou see, whose virtues are so pure
He cannot breath on vice, has thee exiled,
Forth of his royal confines, to secure
His Realm the more, lest it should be defiled
By thy deprau'd example, which once stained,
(So rank is vice) would hardly be reclaimed.
Trunk of Confusion, which deriues thy being
From no supernall essence for with it,
Thy works, words, motions have but small agreeing,
But from security, where thou do sit;
Feeding thy vast-insatiate appetite,
With every day new dishes of delight.
O rouse thy self from that obscurest vale,
And sing a thankful Hymn unto thy Maker,
Creep not upon thy belly like the Snaile,
But like the Lark mount up to thy Creator;
Adorning thee with reason, sense and form,
All lost in thee, through want of Grace forlorn.
Honor does ill become the slothful man,
Who Zanie- like becomes a slave to pleasure,
For He, when urgent causes move Him, than
Neglects Occasion, and reserues that leisure,
Which might have been employed in cares of state,
For his delights, bought at too high a rate.
This thy experience tells thee, whose estate
Once high, now low, made subject to disgrace,
Shows thou art changed from what thou was of late,
Yet to my judgment in a better case:
So thou consider th'state from whence thou came,
And leave that vice which did procure the same.
But doubt I must, (o that my doubts were vain)
Such great expense is made of precious time,
As 'twill be much to do to wash the stain
Of that enormious loathsome life of thine.
Yet Sicut nullus est locus in quo malum no^ perpetratur, ita nullus sit locus
in quo de malo poenitentia non agatur.
Tears have power, and they are sovereign too,
And may do more then any else can do.
Then comfort take, yet comfort mix with tears,
Thou Cadmos a hi^ by Laodicea out of which issues the River Lycus, it takes
this name from Cadmus son to Agenor king of Phaenicia.
Cadmos leaves, and it is thy native soil;
Suppose it be, each coast or clime appears
The good-mans wished Country, which blessed style,
Exceeds all worldly comfort, which thou had,
For this is passing good, that passing bad.
I do not speak, as those whose gilded breath,
Trains on the vicious with deceiptfull hope;
For I have set before thee life and death,
And this I aimed to make my chiefest scope:
That if reward of life could no way gain thee,
The fear of death and vengeance might reclaim thee.
Life as a Crown or Diadem is due,
To such whose ways are not in Error led,
Death as a guerdon does to such accrue,
Whose carnal hearts with pleasures captiued,
Think not on Death, till Death his flag display,
And now secure shall take their life away.
Turn then unto the coast of Arcadie,
From whence thou wast exiled, and there survey
The virtues of that Prince did banish thee,
And weigh the cause why there thou might not stay:
Which done, seek to regaine thy Princes love,
But chiefly His, that is thy Prince above.
The Argument.
COrnelia wife to Pompey, surnamed the Great, after her husbands overthrow in
Pharsalia, slain within short time after by the procurement of Septimius in
the kingdom of Egypt; became much distressed with the discomfort of her loss,
and the sorrowful issue of his death. Which is as passionately expressed by
Lucan in Pompeies expostulation with Cornelia his beloved Lady, -- Quid perdis
tempora luctu? Cornelia thus deprived of all assistants save Tears (sorrows
hereditarie treasures) for the better relief of her estate (the poor
remainder of her fortunes) sued out a petition unto the Emperor Caesar, whose
royal clemency (as she thought) could not choose but take pity on the wife,
whose husband was become a booty to his Conquest. But how reasonable soever
her demands were, it skilled not, for by the corrupt and indirect dealing of
Caelius and Tuberculus she was resisted. The Satyrist therefore in deploring of
Cornelia's misery, and inueying against the two Courtiers corruption, morally
dilateth on the desolate estate of a forlorn widow, and the sinister
practices of corrupt Advocates.

THE SECOND SATYR.
POmpey the Great no sooner was interred,
But poor Cornelia his distressed wife,
To her deceassed Lords estate preferred,
Was drawn by Consul Asper into strife:
And so oppressed by hot pursuit of foes,
That she deuoid of friends was fraught with woes.
She, woeful she, lest she should lose her state,
Makes means to A prodigal Courtier, but in great favor with Caesar.
Caelius to prefer her suite,
Which he is content to do, but at such rate,
As 'twill cost dear to bring the cause about:
Yet she remediless, to work her peace,
Stood not much on it, but did the Courtier please.
Caelius possessed of his injurious fee,
Which he consumed in riotous expense,
Forgot the widows cause dishonestlie,
Without remorse or touch of conscience:
For under hand (as Courtiers use to do)
He takes a private bribe of Asper too.
Cornelia now in hope of good success,
Comes unto Caelius as her purchased friend,
And humbly craves to know what is her redress,
Or in what sort her suite is like to end:
Where He as strangely answers her demand,
And says, her suite came never to his hand.
No suite! (thus did this Matron straight reply)
O Rome where is thy Justice may be ^ptly compared to the Celedonie stone,
which retains her ver^ue no longer then it is rubbed with gold.
Justice now enthroned,
Thou that did use to hear a widow cry,
And right her cause as thou her wrongs bemon'd!
But spare Cornelia, what relief can come
From corrupt Courts, where gold makes Consuls dumb?
If my much-honor'd Lord, whose Country love
Reft him of breath, should see this present time,
How gif^s can limit Justice, would't not move
His Royal spirit, seeing me and mine,
Whose only comfort's this, we may repose,
And joy in this, we have no more to lose?
Whilst wronged Cornelia sat thus pensiuely,
One of especial esteem with Pompey before (...) overthrow.
Tuberculus a Courtier past that way,
Who in compassion of her misery,
Known to her self not to her grieves, did stay;
For generous minds are never more expressed,
Then in applying comfort to the distressed.
Lady (quoth he) if I could ease your grief,
The love I owe unto your family,
Me thinks might promise to your self relief,
Impart them then, what ere your sorrows be:
Cures have been wrought where little was expected,
For where the mind is willing, ought's effected.
She hearing him so virtuously inclined,
Prone unto pity, sighing did declare,
How that her son young Pompey was confined, Sext. Pomp.

Which was the greatest subject of her care:
Whom if He would make means for to release,
The current of her sorrows soon would cease.
Another suite I have, which Asper moves,
To force me from my right of widdowhood,
Wherein his worser cause the better proves,
For Inimieiti^ potentum violentae. Senec.
mighty men can hardly be withstood:
In these I must entreat your Lordships care,
In lieu whereof I Will gratify with prayer.
Tuberculus did answer her demands,
But he expected Like Verconiu^ in the time of Alexander Seuerus, who
pretending familiarity with the Emperor, took^ men's money for preferring their
suites, abused them, and did them no good at all: a^ last conuented before the
Emperor, he wa^ judged to be hanged up in a chimney, and s^ perish with smoke,
for that he sold smoke t^ the people. Lamp^id. in Seu. Verco.
ointment, and delaying,
To give her further comfort, there He stands,
He for his fee, she for her cause stood praying.
Cornelia well perceiving what He would,
Good gods (quoth she) is Justice wholly sold?
How do you mean (quoth he) it is our means,
Could we be thus enameld every day,
Or in such port maintain our fauning friends,
If we received not profit by delay?
No Lady, no, who in these days do live,
And would have Justice, must not stick to give.
Thus was Cornelia crossed, her means prevented,
No comfort now remaining save despair;
Wherefore (perforce) she rests hope-reft, contented
To lose the sight of her confined heir,
Who lives restrained: Asper her state has got,
And poor Cornelia with her cause forgot.
The Argument of Lucian.
LVcian a professed enemy to Christ, detracting much from the divine and
sole-healthfull Mysteries of our Redemption, whereby he became odious to the
all-seeing verity; chanced to travel for delight, (as one of general
observation) into foreign places: where (as heavens just doom would have it)
he was worried by dogs, as a just reward for his impious and egregious contempt
toward God; reuiling that all-seeing Majesty of Christ with the sacred office
of his Ministers, and like a snarling or biting Curre, barking at the admirable
and ineffable works which were wrought by Gods omnipotency: for which cause
God accordingly punished him. A remarkable spectacle to all ensuing ages,
concluding emphatically with the Satyrist.

Ingeniosus erat, superum sed acerrimus hostis,
At canis est superum tempore praeda canum.
Witty, but foe to God, who long in vain,
Barking at God, by barking currs was slain.
The Satyr follows, Morally applied.

THE THIRD SATYR.
INgenious Lucian, ripe in poesy,
Apt to compose, and pregnant to invent,
Well read in secrets of Phylosophie, In vit. Luci.

And in all Moral knowledge excellent;
For all these rarer parts unto him given,
Ceass'd not to Isti latrant non mordent, non noceut: August.
bark against the power of heaven.
This snarling Curre, for he detracted God,
As professed enemy to piety,
Chanced to travel, where Gods irefull rod
Made him a witness to posterity;
For this same Thus as he ba^ k'd against the God of heaven, To barking curr he
for a prey w^ given.
wretch who barked against heavens power,
Did barking currs (such was heavens doom) de^ure.
Soil to his soul, and so to Christ's profession,
For He no Christ professed, but thought't a scorn
That God made man, from God should have commission,
Without man's help to be of Uirgin borne:
Yet see his fall, who did himself deceive,
Unpitied dies, and dying has no grave.
What Is Sions peace (says He) there is no such place; The Atheists ^pinion.

Earth has her Sion, if we aim our care
At any other Mansion, it is a chase
So fruitless, as if we should beat the air,
Or plant our hope in things which cannot be,
And such's our trust in fained Deity.
Thou ugly visard, that with fair pretense
Of Moral discipline shadows thy sin,
Reclaim thy self by timely penitence,
And loath that horrid Cave thou wallowest in:
Thy sin's deepe-dide, yet not of that deep stain,
But Tears and Prayers may make them white again. Lach^ymae erbis, suspiria
o^is immiscentur.

Have thou no Anchor to rely upon? Anchora cui ^pes est innixa, Angularis
lapis ^ quem funda^.

No Refuge nor no Recluse for thy hope?
Behold thy Jesus he is thy corner stone,
Make him thy aim, thy succor, shelter, scope,
And he will receive thee in the Throne of bless, (...).

The boundless Ocean of all happiness.
Return thou wicked Lucian, make thy verse
Thy Retractation, be not ouerbold, Vt medicus, ^erite tractat ^ulnera, Q^i
o^era retractat (...) edia.

Lest when good-men shall view thy forlorn hearse,
In thy reproach they cause this to be told
To after-ages: Here he lies intert'd,
Who erring knew, and in his knowledge erred. Errando dis^o.

Sweet and delightful Poems can thou make, Qualis ergo ^st ista, quae am
multa de ^aeteris nouit, ^ se qualiter acta sit prorus ignorat^ August.

Of Hymen rites, or Venus dalliance,
And pleasant seems the labor thou do take,
While to thy Pipe deluded Lovers dance:
But in such sacred measures thou art slow,
As teach men how to live, and what to know.
Mirrha the wanton mother of a wanton,
Gamesome the Mother and the Daughter too,
Gives a fit subject for thy Muse to chant on,
Relating what a Lover ought to do;
In which lascivious strain, fond Love is brought
To hate what is good, but to affect what is naught.
Thou can report how Romans joined were, Vid. Tit. Liu. in Dec. 1. and 3.
Ovid. in fast.

First with the Sabines, and what strange delights
Took their invention from those feasts were there,
Duly solemnized on their nuptial nights;
Of Sphinx, Charybdis, Scilla, Ctesiphon,
With Proetus letters against Who slew the two monsters Chymera and Solymos in
Lycia.
Bellerophon.
These thou can feature as Apelles, He
The Prince of painters could not better show
Their forms, then thou their natures, which may be
Portrayers of thy wit and learning too:
But what are these but shadows, if thou move
Thy eye to those blessed objects are above?
Lend but thy ear to aerie warbling Birds,
Which day by day sing pleasant madrigals;
And thou shall hear what praise the Lark affoords, Lark.

Whilst with sweet Hymns she on her maker calls, A lauds ^icendo dicitur
Alauda.

Where each repayes their due in their degree,
And much abashd do rest ashamed of thee.
The flower which has no sense, nor has no feeling,
Nor apprehends the difference of things,
Performs her office in delight of smelling,
Likewise the tree most fruitful blossoms brings:
The Serpent, Adder, and each crauling worm,
Have mutual duties given them with their form.
The Basiliske the The Pismire and Locust (of all other creatures) have no king
nor leader. vid. AElian, and Plin. in nature. Hist.
king of Serpents is,
The Lion of all beasts, the Cedar tree
Is chief of Trees, Leuiathan of fish,
And man ore these has sole supremacy:
Thus every Creature in her several kind,
Has several Lords and limits her assigned.
Thou Lucian art endu'd (...) at these want,
And can distinguish betwixt good and ill,
Yet thou denies what other Creatures grant,
And which is worse, thou so continuest still:
Thou laughs at Adams fall, and thinks't ashame,
Man should avouch an Apple caused the same.
Woe worth that fruit that had so bitter taste,
Bringing Perdition to the soul of man,
That freeborn Creature, which so far surpast
Man's frail condition when it first began;
That was an Apple that too dearly cost,
Which made so many souls for ever lost.
If I should Catechize thee Lucian,
And tell the virtue of each several thing;
How reason first was distribute to man,
And how the earth globe-like in air does hing,
The secret grouth of Plants which daily grow,
Yet Spicas ereuisse cernimus, eas autem quando c^euerunt non cernimus.
how or when no humane sense can know.
The That starrie Gallerie embos^ with gold, fretted with orbs of Crystal,
siluer'd over, with pearl pau'd, roofed with an Agget cover.
Fabric of the heaven, whose eminence
Shows admiration to us that behold
Her glorious Bodies sacred influence,
Whose distinct Motion, who is it can unfold?
None but the Author and the founder can,
For it exceedes the reach of any man.
If I should question thee, whence these derive
Their proper Motion, it would thee behooue
To yield, that some to these do Motion give,
Since what se're moves does by another move:
Which thou confirms and adds, naught under Sun
Is done in these, but is by Nature done.
So thou Holding with Albumazar tha^ his leading the children of Israel over
the Red sea, was n^ more but observing the influence of Stars, and waining
season of the Moon that withdraws the tides; and that miraculous issuing of
water ou^ of the rock, by the stroke of a rod was no more, but noting those
spring-heads, whereto the wild asses resorted to quench their thirst.
referrs that wonderful Creation,
After the Deluge to a mortal wight,
Discoursing vainly how Deucalion,
Refurnish'd earth which was unpeopled quite;
But thou deceived art, it is nothing so,
For it was God that gave increase to Noe.
We are his clay, we must confess his power,
He is our Potter, whose divine command
Can dash us earthen vessels in one Whom the morning sees so proudly go, ere
evening come may lie full low, Senec.
hour,
Subject unto the judgment of his hand;
For he no sooner shall withdraw his breath,
Then Man leaves to be Man, and welcomes death.
Heavens power to which no Mortal can extend,
(Not to be argued or disputed on,)
Because it is not in Man to comprehend,
The radiant Splendour of the glorious Sun:
Much less profounder secrets, which were framed,
For admiration, not to be profaned.
We have heard of diverse, exemplarily punished even in that wherein they
co^^emptuously profaned; as Julian, Herodias, Bal^hasar, and Thymelicus the
enterlude-plaier; who dancing upon the scaffold in a Cope (a (...) of the
Church) fell down dead. Thymelico s^ltatori, etc. Vid. Val. Maxi. lib. 1. cap.
2.
Profaned, if named without due reverence,
To that Supreme all-working Majesty,
Whose Palm contains this Earths circumference,
Whose praise takes accent from heavens Hierarchy.
Let not, O let not him who gave man tongue,
To yield him praise, for silence make it dumb.
Thou can compose a song of Shepherds lives,
Spent in a pleasant vein of Recreation,
How they sit chatting with their wanton wives,
Tricking and toying in a Shepherds fashion:
This thou can do, and it is done pretily,
For it shows wit, yet spent vnfittingly.
O if thou would confine thy self in reason,
And leave fond Poems of a doting Lover,
Observing Natures tone, tune, time, and season,
How well would these seem to that powerful mouer;
Whose eyes are pure, and of that piercing sight,
As they love light, but hate such works are light.
But O too vaine's the current of thy vain,
Soild with the Motives of untamed lust,
Which lays upon thy Name that endless shame,
As shall survive, when thou returned to dust,
Shall much lament those Poems thou have writ,
Through th'light conceit of thy licentious wit.
Nor is it gain mou's thee to prostitute,
That precious talent which thou do possess;
No, it is delight thou have to gain repute,
Amongst men made Sicut Bellu^ sunt humanae, ita homine^ sunt belluini.
beasts through their voluptuousnes
O hate that affectation, lest this shelfe,
Of vain applause do ruinate thy self!
For such esteem, what honor will it afford,
What comfort in the grave, where thou lies dead;
When thy lascivious By those st^dies, which I affected, am I condemned, by
those I praised, am I disparraged. Aug.
works shall bear record,
Of what was by thee writ or published?
Nay 'twill prejudice thee, it cannot choose,
Vaine's that opinion ill-men have of us.
Thus thou sustaines the height of misery,
To see a Two brothers, sons to Argi^ a Prophe^esse i^ the temple of Juno.
Cleobes and Biton graced,
With honor, fame, desertfull dignity,
Thy glory pruned, thy laurell-wreath defaced:
The triumphs of thy wit so quite forgot,
As if (so fickle's fame) thou flourished not.
Nor can we say those slourish, whose renown
Consists in praise of vice, for though they seem^
Unto the worlds eye so fully known,
Yet they shall be as if they had not been;
When vice, which to advance was their desire,
Shall melt away as wax before the fire.
Rest not, but labor Lucian to prefer
The sage contents of sacred Mysteries,
Before such Rithms as teach men how to err,
Whose best instructions are but vanities;
Which if thou do, wits Treasure shall increase,
And crown thee Laureat in the Land of peace.
Yet read not so, as not to understand
The grave remainders of Times ancient Book;
For what a folly is it to have in hand
Books nere red over! This, that In Demosthene magna pars Demosthenis abest,
^um legitur and non auditur.
Sage for sooke,
When in his course of reading He did use,
The choycest flowers in every work to choose.
Thus Lucian have I warned thee to forbear,
That snarling humor, of detracting such
Whose virtues shine as Stars in highest Sphaere,
Whose worthy Lives can well abide the tutch;
Defame not Ea sola neque datur dono neque accipitur. Salus^.
virtue, rather emulate,
Good-mens example, that is a virtuous hate.
The Argument of Stesichorus.
STesichorus is fained to have lost his eyes for dispraising Helen of Greece,
and afterward to have recovered the same by praising her. The Moral alludeth
to such, who ouerborne with the unbounded height of their own conceit,
distaste the opinion of a multitude, to make their own irregular judgment
pass for current. These (as we say) use ever to swim against the stream,
affecting that least, which seems approved by the most: scorning to guide
their ship by another Card, measure their life by another line, or walk in a
common path. Some other application may this Moral make, as One upon this
fable would have Stesi^horus to shadow a Malecontent, by whom things generally
esteemed use to be most disualued, delighting in nothing more then opposition.
Others by way of similitude compare him to One, who by much gazing on the Sun
becomes di^-sighted; so He, by too intentive fixing his eye upon beauty,
became blinded: the divine application whereof I leave to every man's peculiar
conceit, not loving to press these further, then their own native sense will
bear. The subject, where of this Satyr entreats, more particularly applied,
may chance to glance at some whose singularity gains them Opinion above
reason; but silence is their best salve, laboring rather to redeem the time,
then reveal their own shame. Let them be of more humble nature, and I will
spare to prosecute any further. Nihil tam volucre est quam maledictum, the
poison whereof is as strong as the passage swift; the unworthiness of which
condition as I have ever loathed, so a mild and temperate reproof for virtues
sake have I ever loved: not ignorant, how some vices (as other sores) are
better cured by lenitiues then corasiues, lest the Patient cry out -- Grauiora
sunt, haud feram. Judge of the Satyr.

THE FOVRTH SATYR.
STesichorus A lyrick Poet, famous for his sweet and pleasing vein.
like Zeuxes cannot paint,
Nor like Lysippus can delineate;
For then He would give that accomplishment
To Hellens beauty, as might propagate
Her fame to following times, when Ages pass,
Which by Record might show what Hellen was.
Blind Byard now, see how thy judgment erred,
By gazing long ^n beauty thou art blind,
Recanting all too late what thou auerr'd,
So diffrent is the opinion of that mind,
Where only self-conceit draws men to show
Their private judgment, given they care not how.
Was she not fair that made all Troy to burn,
That made Prince Paris wander to and fro,
That made Queen Hecuba so sore to mourn,
Both for her self and for her Issue too?
Yes she was fair, how ere thy eye esteem her,
Nor can conceit of one make beauty meaner.
What made stout Menelaus pass the Sea?
What Telamon to rig his well-mann'd ship,
What Ajax, what Achylles? It was she,
Whose sweet ambrosiacke breath and cherri-lip,
Relished of Nectar, and infused a spirit,
In Cowards breasts, to gain true fame by merit.
Old subtle Sinon can prepare assault,
Against the strongest battlements of Troy,
Whilst armed Grecians in that ribbed vault,
Pressed for encounter, purposed to destroy,
Issue from Pallas horse, so aptly It was made by Phereclus, who was after
slain by Merion in the siege of Troy.
made,
As Troy had cause to curse the cunning Jade.
Art thou persuaded yet to praise her beauty,
Since Nature has surpast Her self in skill,
As one engaged in some respect of duty,
Unto her sex, to make them honored still?
O be persuaded, to her shrine repair,
For howsoere thou says, thou thinks Her fair!
Fair in proportion, motive in her pace,
An eye as cheerful as the morning-Sunne,
Her hair, her smile, her well-beseeming grace,
By which so many Trojans were undone:
In brief, examine Her from top to toe,
And then admire each part accomplished so.
Such admiration as like Linceus eyes,
Transparent Brightness seems to penetrate:
For if Apollo seeing Daphnes thighs,
Wau'd by the Eastern wind, forgot his state,
Himself and all, Proportion well may move,
Since gods themselves were tossed by gusts of love.
Did not fair Phyllis dote upon a Swain,
She passing fair, and he a witherd lad,
Whence we may reason, none can love restrain,
Nor set it limits which it never had:
For when we have done all that we can do,
It will have th'course and ready passage too.
Yet Love's so pure it can endure no stain,
Stained Love is lust, which is not in her breast:
Spotless content she seeks, which if she gain,
She freely lives, and fairly takes her rest:
But barred of this, without repose she lies,
And dying lives, and living loathed dies.
It is not Venus Naeuus erat veneri species* Helenaeque cicatrix gloria, quae
Paridem fecit amore parem.
mole nor Hellens scarre,
Adds fuel to affection, for though these
Gave beauty summons to commence Loves war,
Yet outward graces do but only please,
As Objects do the eye; where Loves best part
Consists not in the eye, but in the Heart.
But now to thee, who did dispraise that fair,
Whose beauty ruined Cities, now disclaim
Thy purblind judgment, and withal compare
Hellen with Hero, or some choicer Dame:
And then it may be Lumi^e qui semper proditur ipse suo.
Cupid will restore
Thine eyes to thee, which He put out before.
The Argument of Pigmalion.
PIgmalion, whom no surpassing beauty in all Cyprus could captiuate, at last
having made a curious Image or Picture of an amiable woman, was so ravished
with the accomplished proportion of his own work, that enamoured therewith,
He entreated Uenus to put life in his Image, which with such Artfull
delineature he had composed. Venus taking commiseration upon his prayers and
tears, infused life in his Picture, whereof He begat a beautiful daughter
called Papho, from whom (or from Mount Paphos) Venus is said to have taken her
name, styled sometimes by the Poets Eryca, sometimes Paphia: whose feasts with
all ceremonial rites usually performed in the honor of an immortal goddess,
were originally solemnized and celebrated only by the Shepherds of those
Mountains, but afterward more generally observed. The Moral includes Note
this you painted faces, whose native Country (once white Albion) is become
reddish, with blushing at your vanities.
the vain and foolish Loves of such as are besotted on every idle picture or
painted Image, whose selfe-conceited vanity makes beauty their Idol, becoming
Creatures of their own making, as if they dis-esteemed the creation of their
Maker. The Satyr though compendious, compriseth much matter. Read it, and
make use of the sequel.

THE FIFTH SATYR.
PIgmalion rare, in rare Proportions making,
Yet not in quickening that which He had framed,
So exquisite in artfull curious shaping,
In naught (if Zeuxes iudgd) could He be blamed:
Yet skillfull though He were in forms contriuing,
Yet not so skillful in those forms reviving.
Revived! I wrote amiss, they never lived:
Improper then to say, they were revived.
He builds him Like those Pul^inaria erected by the heathen for their Pagan
images.
Temples for his Image-gods,
And much be^otted with their fair aspect,
In admiration of his work, He nods,
And shakes his Head, and tenders them respect;
I cannot tell (quoth He) what passion moves me,
But sure I am (quoth He) fair Saint I love thee,
Thou art my handie-worke, I wish my wife,
If to thy fair Proportion thou had life.
Can thou Pigmalion dote so on shrines,
On liuelesse Pictures, that was never rapt
With any beauty Cyprus I Will confines?
These (foolish man) be for thy Love unapt;
They cannot answer Love for Love again,
Then fond Pigmalion do thy Love restrain;
Such ^enslesse creatures as have only being,
Have with embraces but an harsh agreeing.
They have no moisture in their key cold lips,
No pleasure in their smile, their color stands;
Whilst y^uthfull Ladies on the pauement trips,
They stand as Pictures Quid agunt in corpore casto cerussa and minium,
centumque venena coloru^^ Victor. ad Sal^onem.
should, with saplesse hands;
And well thou knows, if Passive be not moving,
The Active part can yield small fruits of loving:
Why art thou so besotted ^till with woing,
Since there is no comfort when it comes to doing?
Can any idle Idol without breath,
Give thee a graceful answer to thy suite?
Nay rather like dead corpse surpised by death,
It answers silence when thou speaks vnto't.
Desist then (fond Pigmalion) and restrain
To love that Creature cannot love again;
What will it pleasure thee a shrine to wed,
That can afford no pleasure in thy bed?
Thou art not so -- Si^e coniuge Caelebs Viuebat, thala mique diu consorte
(...). Metam. 10. lib.
bewitched with any beauty,
How fair so^re w^thin thy Native I Will,
No Nymph can move thy Love, or force thy duty,
As does this Picture, whose art-forcing smile
Can give thee small content, and wherefore then
Should painted Statues so entangle men?
It Is love thou say, Pigmalion, that does move thee,
But thou loves such as cannot say they love thee.
Turn thee unto lewd Pasyphaes lust,
Wife to a brave and valiant Minos king of Crete.
Champion,
Who on a Bull (see how affection must
Pass Reasons limit) fondly dotes upon;
Non frustra dictus Bos ouis Imb^r Olor, Whence our English Poet as properly
annexed this Disticke, imitating the former in matter and manner: In vain Jove
was not styled right sure I am, From th'shape (...) took of Bull, sheep,
shower, and swan. vid. Ovid. in Metamorph.
Jove on a Heifer, Danae of a shower,
Such is the virtue of loues-working power:
No time, place, object, subject, circumstance,
Can still Loves pipe, when Cupid leads the dance.
Then who will ask the reason of thy Love,
Which shows most strength when she can show least reason,
And cannot Proteus-like with each blast move,
Nor free her self from soule-deluding treason!
She like the Moon is not each month in waine,
For th'obiect of her love is of that strain,
Nor land, nor sea, nor tempests though they thwart her
Can from her Sphere by Opposition part her.
Do but torment Her with the sight of woe,
Uexe her with anguish and with discontent,
She will not make her friend in heart, her foe;
No, if she were with depth of sorrows spent;
Yet like Which is elegantly expressed by our modern Poet.
Anthaeus, when she is most cast down,
She gathers strength, and is not overthrown:
She cannot break her vow, her legal oath, Whose fall (Anthaeus-like)
prouok'd him more, And made him stronger then he was before.

But means (if life permit) to keep them both.
Then (honored Picture) let me thee embrace;
With that He hugd it in his lustful arms,
And now and then He smeer'd the Pictures face,
Praying the gods to keep it from all harms:
And prayed (a senseless prayer) Jove to defend,
His Picture from diseases to the end;
So to enjoy her dalliance with more pleasure,
Whose presence He esteemed the precious't Treasure.
Each even he used to dress it for his bed,
For in a gown of Tissue was it clothed,
And put a night-tyre on it is iuorie head,
And when night came He made it be unclothed;
Where, lest He should his lustful favors hide,
He used to lay the Picture by his side,
Where He drew to it as He saw it lie,
But when it would not be, He wished to die.
Ungrateful Creature (would Pigmalion say)
That never do afford one smile on me,
That dallies thus with thee, each night, each day;
Fair Saint, what needs this curiosity?
While with a Oscula dat^ reddique putat^ ^oquiturque (...) netque. Met^ 10.
lib.
kiss He often his speech would break,
By threats or fair entreats to make it speak:
And when He had his fruitl^sse prattling done,
He would in rage call it an Idol dumb.
But angry with himself, He straight would blame
His too rash fury, craving pardon too,
That he should style it with so harsh a Name,
And wished him power to die, or it to do,
Swearing by heaven, if sheet did chance to m^ue,
It was the nimble action of his Love.
Coy-toying Girl (quoth He) what means this,
Is it your modesty, you will not kiss?
Naught though it answered, he would prosecute
His wooing task, as if it stood denying,
And thus would urge it; Dear accept my suite,
Be not so fearful, fear thou not espying,
I have excuses store, then listen me;
For I will vow I was enam'ling thee:
Then sport thee wench, securely frolic it,
That I on thee a Niobe may get.
Thus whilst He vainly pratled to his Shrine,
Aurora with her radiant beams appeared,
And blushing red, as if she taxed the time,
For such licentious motions, slilie peered
In at a chinke, whereby she did discover
An idol courted by an idle Lover:
And scarce Aurora now had time to show her,
But fond Pigmalion made this speech unto her:
What have I done (thou jealous light) said He,
That I should thus deprived be of loving?
What could thou do, to add more misery,
Then in thy speedy rising, hasty moving?
Thou might have spared one day, and hid thy light,
Enioyning Earth to have a Vt geminata duos nox inclyta iungat amo^es.
double night,
Where ghastly furies in oblivion sit,
For dark misdeeds for darkness be most fit.
But He cut off his speech with many groan,
Hastening to rise, yet went to bed again,
And as He goes, He sees the darkness gone,
And Phoebus coursers galloping amain:
Which seen, at last He rose with much ado,
And being up, began afresh to woe;
Yet having so much sense as to perceive,
How he had erred, He ceasseth now to crave.
For He intends to work another way,
By Invocation on some heavenly power,
The only means his passion to allay;
Which to perform, retiring to his bower,
He made these Orisons: Venus fair Queen,
Then whom in heaven or earth nere like was seen,
Be thou propitious to my prayers, my tears,
Which at thy Throne and Pedestall appears.
I whom nor Swain nor Nymph could ere inchant,
Am now besotted with a senseless creature,
Whom though I do possess, yet do I want,
Wanting life breathing in her comely feature,
Which by infusing life if thou supply,
I Will live to By offering sacrifice to Venus in the I Will of Cyprus.
honor thee, if not, I die;
For what is life where discontent does reign,
But such a farm as we would feign disclaim?
Venus much moved with his obsequious prayers,
And liquid tears, his suite did satisfy,
Infusing breath into her senseless veins,
Now full of juice, life, and agilitie;
Which being done, the Picture moved, not missing
To lure Pigmalion to her lips with kissing,
Reaping great joy and comfort in their toying,
Deprived before of bliss, blessed now enjoying.
Blessed in enjoying and possessing that,
Which does include true Loves felicity,
Where two are made joint owners of one state,
And though distinct, made one by unity;
Happy then I, ( Pigmalion did reply,)
That have possession of this Deity,
No humane creature but a Parragon,
Whose liuelesse form once Nimphs admired on.
This said, she straight retires unto the place,
Where she her moulding had, by whom she now
(I mean Pigmalion) obtained such grace,
As He her maker and her husband too,
Took such content in his now-breathing wife,
As they scaree differed once in all their life,
But this was then: Let this suffice for praise,
Few wives be of her temper now adays.
The fair and fruitful daughter He begat, De sobole ^igmalionis.

Of this same lively Image had to name,
Papho the fair, a wench of Princely state,
From whence Illa Paphum genuit, de quo tenet insula nomen. Ibidem.
I Will Paphos appellation came,
Consecrate unto Venus, beauties Queen,
By whose aspect that I Will is ever green;
Wherein there is a pleasant Mirtle-groue,
Where a shrine stands to show Pigmalions love.
The Argument of Pytheas.
PYtheas an Athenian Orator much delighted with good clothes, and proud of his
own tongue: when law began to grow out of request (for the Athenians
endeavored to bring in Pla^oes commonweal) whereby the Court of the
Areopagitae became much weakened, and the frequencie of Clyents discontinued;
Acolytus a bitter Satyrist, chancing to meet with Pytheas this spruce Lawyer
in rent clothes, at a^bare Ordinary, living upon Pythagoras diet, viz. roots;
observed this unexpected mutation, and with Democritus ready to laugh at
others misery, compiled this short Satyr, to add new fuel to Pytheas
discontent.

THE SIXTH SATYR.
PYtheas a Lawyer of no small respect,
Guarded, regarded, dips his tongue in g^ld,
And culls his phrase, the better to effect
What He and his penurious Client would;
Upon his back for all his anticke shows,
More clothes He wears then how to pay He knows.
And what is the reason; he has Law at will,
Making a good face of an evil matter,
And every day his thirsty purse can fill;
With gold thou lie; with naught but wind and water:
I Will tell thee why, Platoes new Commonweal,
Makes Pytheas leave off pleading, and go Siste latrare foris, and promoue
coepta latronis.
steal.
What Pytheas, steal? is it possible, that He
That had a Pomander still at his nose,
That was perfumed with balls so fragrantly,
Should now another trade of living choose?
He must and will, nor dare He show his face
Half casement-wide, that opened many a case.
The other day but walking on the street,
I saw his velvet gerkin laid to pawn, Si^ toga, sic crines, pignor^ iuris
^rant.

His grave Gregorian, for his head more meet,
Then Brokers shop, and his best pleading gown;
Nay which was more, mark Pytheas conscience,
There lay to pawn his Clients evidence.
But it is no marvel, Pride must have a fall,
Who was on Cockhorse borne through Fortunes stream,
Is now cashiered from the Areopagites Hall,
And on each bulk becomes a common theme:
O blessed vacation, may thou never cease,
But still have power to silence such as these!
Well, farewell Law* if Lawyers can be poor,
For I esteemed them only blessed in this,
That Danaes lap with gold-distilling shower,
Had made them line all heirs to earthly bliss:
But since these conscript fathers we adore,
Feel want of wealth, we will worship them no more.
The Argument of Periander.
PEriander that wise Prince of Corinth, elected one of the Sages of Greece,
fell in his old age to poverty; whereby, though his Axioms were no less
esteemed, his divine Aphorisms no less regarded, (as held for the very Vid.
Laer. de vit. Phyloso.
Oracles of some superior power) yet the respect which former time had of him
grew lessened, through the decrease of his friends and fortunes: which was no
sooner perceived, then the distressed Sage lamenting the worlds blindness,
that uses to be taken sooner with a vain shadow then any solid substance,
wrote this Satyricall Elegy in a pensive mood, inueying against the
uncertain and inconstant affections of men, who measure happiness not by the
inward but outward possessing. Whereby He infers, that howsoever the wiseman
may seem miserable, He is not so, but is more rich in possessing nothing, then
the covetous fool in enjoying all things: for his estimation is without him,
whereas the other has his within Him, which is to be more preferred, (I mean
the minds treasure, before the rubbish of this world,) then light before
darkness, the radiant beams of the Sun before thick and duskie clouds, or
pure and temporate air before foggie and contagious vapors.

THE SEVENTH SATYR.
Ungrateful Greece, that scorns a man made poor
Respecting not the treasure of his mind,
Whose want of wealth must shut him out of door;
The world's no friend to him that cannot find Virtus post nummos.

A mass of gold within their mouldred cell,
No matter how they get it, ill or well.
This I experienced of, may well perceive,
Even Whose fathers was Cypselus, descending from the Heraclyd family.
Periander I, of late a Sage
Of stately Greece, whom now she will not receive,
Because oppressed with want, surpised with age;
Even I, that of the Ephorus was among the Lacedaemonians as Tribunus among the
Romans.
Ephori was one,
One of the chief'st, but now retires alone.
Yet not alone, though none resort to me,
For wisdom will have sociats to frequent her:
And though proud Greece from hence should banish thee,
Friends thou have store, will knock and knocking enter:
And firm Amicis and faelicibus and infaelicibus eundem te prebe. Laert. in
senten. Periand.
friends too, whose virtues are so pure,
Uice may assay, but cannot them allure.
With what respect was I once graced by you,
You gorgeous outsides, Fortunes painted wall,
When rich; but poor, you bid my rags adue,
Which did at first my troubled mind appall;
But noting well the Be not afraid (says Petrarch) though the house (the body
be shaken) so the soul, (the guest of the body) fare well. Petrarch. de Remed.
vtriusque fortunae.
worlds inconstant course,
I thought her scorn could make me little worse.
Remorcelesse Greece, were thou of marble made,
Thou might shed tears to see thy Sage dismaide,
By whose direction thou have often been stayed,
When both thy hope decreast, and fame decaid;
Both which restored by Him, got that report,
To Him and his, as thou admired him for it.
Yet can thou not discern, twixt wisdoms strain,
And those discording tones of vanity,
For all thy aim is benefit and gain,
And these are they thou makes thy Deity;
To second which, this caution thou do give,
Who know not to dissemble, cannot live.
I know thy follies, and will brute them too,
For thou have moved my spleen, and I must speak,
Since thou applies no salve to cure my woe, Demadis saying ^as, that Dra^oes
laws were ^ritten with ^loud and not ^ith ink.

I must complain perforce, or heart strings break;
Justice is turned to wormwood in your land,
And corrupt dealing gets the upper hand.
You itch (and out of measure) with desire
Of hearing novelties, and strange devices,
And scorched with heat of lusts-enraged fire,
Set marks of Love, make sale of Venus prizes:
Broad-spreading vice, how dear so'ere it cost,
To purchase it, you will vye with who bids most.
You Hydra-headed monsters full of poison,
Infecting every place with stinking breath, Plin. in not. hist. Alcyat. in
Emblem.

What ere proceeds from you is very noisome,
And like the Basiliske procuring death:
I care not for your hatred, if your love
Like Tritons ball, with such inconstance move.
These fleering flies which flicker to and fro,
And beat the vain air with their rusling wings,
Be their own foes, and they profess them so,
When they their wings with flames of fury cinge;
For they whose hate pursues a guiltless one,
With Ixions wheel, Tantalus apples, and Sysiphus stone: peculiar punishments
inflicted on these persons for their lust, avarice, and cruelty, as the Poets
feign.
Sysiphus do role his restless stone.
You cannot grieve me with your enmity,
Nor much offend me with your hateful breath,
For ill men's love and hate, are equally
Prized by the good, whose chiefest aim is death,
And how to die: for much it does not skill,
What ill-men speak of us, or good or ill.
What golden promises did I receive,
Yet see their issue; base contempt and scorn
Ore my dejected state triumphed have:
So as proud Greece unmindful to perform
What merit craves, and what she is bound to do,
Neglects my want, and glories in it too.
Bias my Brother-sage I now remember,
Shipwrack'd in Priene I Will, whose woeful case
Seems to resemble fate*crost Periander,
Like Ianus statue, showing face to face;
Let Us then, since equal fortune frowns on either,
(Kind Bias) sound our woeful plaints together.
Let Priene I Will relate thy hard mischance,
Let Or Corinth in Greece.
Greece bewail my fall, my ruined state,
Thou while on Sea thy exiled ship does lance,
Thou lightly weighes th'inconstancie of fate:
Rouse Periander then, that't may be said,
Thy Infaelicem dicebat, qui far nequiret infaelicitatem. in vit. By.
patience has thy fortune conquered.
Get thee to Schools, where pure Phylosophie
In public places is sincerely taught,
And thou shall hear, there is no calamity,
Can dant a spirit resolved to droupe with naught
That want or woe can menace, for though woe,
Make Omnia aduersa exercitationes accidentibus bonis esse puta^. vid. Bo^t. in
lib de malis. Potest dici miser, non potest less. ibid.
good-men wretched seem, they are not so.
Well may misfortunes fall on our estate,
Yet they are no blemish to our inward worth,
For these are but the gifts of purblind fate,
That domineers sole soueraignesse on earth;
But we are placed in an higher seat,
Then to lie prostrate at Dame Fortunes feet.
Her palsy hand wherewith she holds her ball,
Moves with each blast of mutabilitie,
And in whose lap she lists, she lets it fall,
Thus mocks she man with her inconstancy;
Then who is he (if wise) esteems her treasure,
No sooner given, then taken when we displease her.
She faunes, she frowns, she lasts not out a Moon,
But waines each month, and waining does decrease:
Those whom she did advance, she now throws down,
And those which liked Her once, do now displease:
Thou reeling wheel, that moves so often a day,
That weaues thy Sic licium texit, sic telae stamina soluit
weft, and takes thy web away.
Titus that Prince so much admired by men,
Styled Man's Darling for his curtuous mind, Sueton. Tran^ in vit. Tit.

Did think all powers by fate to have their reign,
As if she had no limits Her assigned,
But (though deuinely-learn'd) did err in this,
For fates be ruled by supreme Quicquid bon egeris in Deos refer.
Deities.
Then why should I (fond man) so much depend, Laert. in. vit. Phil.

Upon a Creature, which has her existing
In a Superior power, and does extend
No further then heavens please? for her subsisting,
Essence, power, Empire, sovereign command*
Has her direction from Iehouahs hand.
Rest thee then Periander, and despise
Uulgar opinion swaide by multitude,
Thou was esteemed once for to be wise,
Show it in public; let lives enter lude
Vniuersus mundus exercet Histrionem.
Acted by thee upon this worlds stage,
Contemn that Greece which scorns distressed age.
The Historical Argument of Terpnus Musician unto Nero; with a Satyr annexed
to it as follows.
TErpnus a Roman Lyrick, or as some will have him, a common Cytharede, with
whom Nero, yt president to Tyrants used to consort, and with whose admirable
skill he was exceedingly delighted: in process of time fell into Neroes
disgrace, for playing to him at Agrippina his mothers funerals: where he sung
the dismal and incestuous bed of Orestes, the cruelty of Sphinx, reuiling at
their tyranny; which so greatly displeased Nero, that he banished him his
Court and royal Palace, inioyning him withal never to frequent the Muses
Temple.

The Moral imports Such, as laying aside Time-obseruing, do not sew pillowes
to their Princes elbowes, but with bold and resolved spirit, will with
Calistenes tell Alexander of his drunkenness, with Canius tell Tyberius of his
cruelty, with Brutus tell Caesar of his usurping, with Cato Censorius will
reprehend the Commonweal for her ryoting. And true it is, that a Commonwealth
is better governed (if of necessity it must be governed by either) by Cynickes
then Epicures, more offenses for most part arising by alluring and inducing men
to sensual pleasures, then by Spartas Damasymbrotos, his restraining of youth.
The Laconians never lived so securely, as when they lived barely; nor ever did
Romes Commonwealth dilate her bounders more then by the practice of legal
austeritie, nor decrease more then by introduction of lawless liberty. And
yet I find it more rare to hear any admonitions but Placentia in the Courts
presence; then to see a grave and demure seeming, cover an hypocrites rank
dissembling. We have more Aiming no less at privy glo^ers and deluders, then
a^ aspiring plotters, and stateintruders.
Seiani (which I wish had Seians fall) then Vticani to provide for a
Commonweals safety. There were many could greet Caesar with an Aue, but there
were few would put him in mind of his Memento mori. Many could persuade Phaeton
that he could guide the Suns chariot in better order then his gray-hair'd
father, but by assenting to their persuasions, he was like to make a flame of
the world. Nothing more dangerous to the state of a well-gouerned Commonweal,
then Parasites, the tame beasts of the City (as Diogenes calls them). If the
persuading sycophancie of Times-obseruancie had not besotted Candaules with his
wives beauty, he had prevented that miserable event which by his own Gyges
was practiced and performed. Dicit Varius, negat Scanrus, v^ri creditis? Varius
affirms it, Scaurus denies it, whether believe you? The one sincerely void of
dissembling flattery: the other glosingly void of truth and verity. By the
one we are subject to the ruin of our state: by the other advanced to a firmer
constancy then such as may be any way subject to mutabilitie. Nero in the
beginning of Quin quenniu^ ero.
his time banished all the Spintriae, Inuento^s of beastly pleasures out of his
kingdom; I would he had banished time-obseruing flatterers, and that he had
retained such as Terpnus, that would reprehend him in his enormities. Julius
Caesar was too much addicted to his Parasites, but his successor Augustus was
-- ad accipiendas amicitias rarissimus, ad retinendas vero constantissimus. It
was long ere he would entertain a friend, but being retained, he was most
constant in his favor toward him. The old approbation of friendship comes
into my mind, to eat a bushel of salt ere we be acquainted. We may try our
friends as Pilades did his Orestes, Damon his Pythias, Aeneas his Achates, but
it will be long I fear me, ere any of us possess such impregnable Assistants,
such Presidents of true friendship. The skillful Painter when he depictures an
unthankful man, because he cannot well delineate him in his colors, without
some proper Motto better to explain him, represents him in the Picture of a
Viper, that kills her feeder. There be many such Vipers, which appear in
external show as true hearted as Turtles, I fear them more then the open
force of mine enemy: for these sugared kisses bring destruction to the
receiver. Boaethius defining a good man, says: He may be thus defined: he is a
good man -- cui nullum bonum malumue sit, nisi bonus malusue animus: to whom
nothing is esteemed either good or evil, but a good or an evil mind; and what
effectually makes this evil mind, but either an inbred evil disposition,
which arises from the crookedness of his nature, or from the evil
persuasions of depraved time-obseruers: for the best natures be (for the most
part) soonest perverted and seduced. Then how necessary is it to ^oote out so
noisome and pestilent a weed as flattery, which corrupts the affections of
the worthiest and most pregnant wits, as daily example has well instructed us?
How hateful was it to that worthy Thebane Prince, Agesilaus, that memorable
mirror of justice (and no less hateful to our renowned Prince, whose
exquisite endowments make him as eminent abroad, as us blessed at home) to see
a flatterer in his Palace? nay so much contemning popular applause, that he
would not suffer his Statue to be erected, lest thereby the vain and profane
adorations of his subjects should grieve the gods, disdaining that veneration
of any mundane power, should be confusedly mixed with adoration and worship of
the gods immortal: well remembering Hesiods caveat -- (...), we must not mix
profane worships with divine. That Court-gate in Rome The Parasitegate.
called Quadrigemina, I would have it demolished in Troinouant, lest her estate
second Roms slavery. Cicero thinks that no vice can be more pernicious then
assentation, the very helper and furtherer of all vices. She can give life and
being to the aspiring thoughts of man, when He soars too ambitiously, to the
perch of preferment, honor, or the like. That wicked Catiline who conspired
against Rome, and aspired to the Diadem, seeking to reduce the Empire from a
government Aristocraticke, to a Catilines Monarchy; was egged and instigated
thereto by accomplices fit for that purpose, and well sorting with such an agent,
such a cruel practitioner -- Incredibilia, immoderata and nimis alta semper
cupiendo, in desiring things incredible, immoderate, and too high above
ordinary reach. The like befell upon Carba, and those who sought to dissolve
the Roman Monarchy, and to make it an Oligarchie or some other government,
which was uncertain, because their intendments never came to their
accomplished ends. These things thus considered in their natures, I have here
described Terpnus* sincerity in reprehending Neroes cruelty, concluding with
Flaccus Dysti^h.

-- Hic murus ahaeneus esto, Nil conscire sibi nulla, pallescere culpa. What
hard mischance so ere to thee befall, Let thy pure conscience be the brazen
wall.

The Satyr ensues, which most especially aymeth at Time-obseruers, some
whereof in particular I have instanced, as Seianus, Perennius, Sycites; the
dismal events whereof with their Tragic ends, I have amply described.

THE EIGHTH SATYR.
TErpnus Terpnum tha^aedum gentem tur praeter alio accersijt. in Nero.
Musician to a tyrant Prince,
Nero by name, did in the f^neralls
Which were solemnized on his mothers hearse,
Sing on his Lute these woeful tragicalls:
Where every strain he struck upon his string,
Did vex the conscience of the tyrant king.
Incestuous Inter caet cantauit Ca^ cem parturi^ tem, Oreste^ matricidam^
Oedipodem^ excaecatum, Herculem in number, etc. S^ in vit. Ner.
Oedipus who slew his father,
Married his mother, and did violate
The law of nature, which advised him rather
Single to live, then take to such a state,
Becomes a subject fit, for this sad hearse,
Where ink gives place to blood to write her verse.
Cruel Orestes bathed his ruthlesse sword,
Estranged from strangers, in his mothers blood,
So little pity did the child afford
To Her, that was the parent of the brood;
Yet some excuse for this Orestes had,
Mad men exemption have, and He was mad.
Sphinx subtle Giant, who did riddles put
Unto each passenger He met withal,
Which, who could not resolve He peece-meale cut,
Throwing them from steep rocks whence they should fall,
Whereby their members broke and crushed in pieces,
Remained as food in Sea to silly fishes.
Yet this he did upon mature advice,
For who so'ere He were assoil'd this question,
Was not oppressed by him in any wise,
But might with safest conduct travel on;
Where thou foul Matricide do infants vex,
Without respect of person, state, or sex.
There is no sex which may exempted be,
From thy insatiate hand embrew'd in blood, ^iuis gaudet ^ma cruore. (...).

But waxing proud in others misery,
Do tyrannize upon poor womanhood:
Blood-thirsty Tyrant there is prepared a doom,
To startle thee that ripped thy mothers womb.
Rauing Orestes heard a furious cry,
Which did attend his frenzy to his grave,
And did disturb his restless sleep thereby,
So as save troubled dreams He naught could have:
With many broken sleeps, to show his guilt,
Of his dear mothers blood, which He had spilt.
Which poor Orestes had no sooner heard, ^git ab agro (...) ciuitatem, a
^blico ad do^m, a domo (...) cubiculum. ^ugust. in e^ar. (...). 45. Psalm.

Then to his pillow in a dismal sort,
Straight He retired, and being much afeard,
Lest hell and horror should convent him for it,
With hands lift up to heaven and hideous cry,
He often would curse himself, and wish to die.
Turn me (ye gods) quoth he, to some wild beast, ^estes (...).

Some savage Lion, or some Tiger fierce,
Since I delight so much in blood to feast,
For who can with remorse my deeds rehearses
Which if time should with her oblivion smother,
Blood cries revenge, revenge me cries my mother.
Worse then the beasts thou art, they cherish them,
And bring their parents food when they grow old:
Who then can daigne to look on thee for shame,
That have defaced that form that gave thee mold?
The tender Storke that sees her parents lack, Basilius (...) 8. 9.

Will bring them food, and bear them on her back.
But thou a mirror of impiety,
Depriues thy parent of her vital breath,
And makes her subject to thy cruelty,
Thus she that gave thee life, thou gives her death:
A sweet reward; O then ashamed be,
Thou stain of Greece, that Greece should harbor thee.
Thus would Orestes frame his sad discourse,
With words as vile as were his actions foul,
To move his phrenticke passions to remorse,
Which long (too long) had triumphed ore his soul;
Nor could he find unto his woes relief,
Till He was so vexed with furies (the reuengers of his mothers blood) that he
wandered mad up and down till he came to Taurica, where he foun^ an end of his
troubles. (...). (...).
death did end his life, and cure his grief.
If all his tears and ruthful miseries,
Could never expiate his mothers death,
To what extent shall thy calamities
Grow to in time, that stops thy mothers breath,
Even A grippinaes breath, whose cursed birth,
Maks her to curse the womb that brought thee forth?
This Nero notes, and noting shows his ire,
By outward passions, yet concealeth it,
Resolved ere long to pay the minstrels hire,
When time and opportunity should fit;
For tyrants have this property above other,
They mean revenge, yet their revenge ca^ smothe^
And so did Nero, whose perplexed mind,
Guilty of what was ill, seemed to admire
His Art in Music, rather then to find
Any distaste, lest He should show the fire,
Which lay raked up in ashes, and display
What time might slight, but could not take away.
Yet he began to scoule and shake the head,
With eyes as fierie-red as Aetnaes hill,
Willing him straight to other acts proceed,
And silence them that parents blood did spill:
Sing to thy Lute (quoth he) strains of delight,
To cheer th'attendants of this woeful Agrippinaes funerals.
sight.
Terpnus did pass unto another theme,
Yet still relates He in the end of all,
The facts of Oedipus, Orestes shame,
How and by what effects succeed'd their fall;
Whereby (as well it was by all perceived)
Nero the tyrant inwardly was grieved.
Terpnus continued in his Lyricke ode,
So long as Nero in his throne remained,
But now impatient longer of abode,
Wearied with audience (for so he feined)
Terpnus left off from prosecuting further,
The sad relation of this cruel For which no law amongst the Pagans was
enacted: imagining, none could be so brutish as commit such vn^turall cruelty.
murder.
But see the Tyrant, who before delighted
More with the music of good Terpnus lyre,
Then any thing which ere his soul affected,
Never more strains of Terpnus did require;
For being grieved, each day his grieves increased,
Till Terpnus exile made his grieves appeased.
Yet not For having slain his mother, he saw in his sleep a ship, the rudder
whereof was wrested from him guiding it, whence he was haled by Octau. to most
hideous darkness. ibid.
appeased, for each day each night,
He heard the hideous cries of Furies shriking:
Often would He turn himself before daylight,
But got no rest, his body out of liking,
Yet tyrannized in spilling blood apace,
Act upon act as one bereft of grace.
Sometimes He saw his mother haling him,
With womb new-rip'd; there In vit. Ner.
Sporus who^ He sought,
To make of man a woman drag him in;
Here sundry Matrons whom he forced to naught, Like the vision appeared to
Tiberius crying (...) -- Read Germanicum.

And slew defiled, which fixed on Him their eye,
Which seen, He fled, but flying could not fly.
O conscience, what a witnesses thou brings,
Against Him that iniures thee, where no content
Can give hours respite to the state of kings,
Thou of thy self art sole-sufficient,
To hale or heal, to hale from life to death,
Or heal the wound of which he languisheth?
Behold here Terpnus courage, to correct
The great abuses of his Princes mind,
Whose pomp, port, power, He lightly does respect,
To tax those crimes to which He is inclined:
He Is no Court-Adder that will wind him in,
To Princes grace by praising of his sin.
O I could wish we had such Terpni many,
Who would not sooth nor flatter, but auo^ch,
Black to be black: but there is I fear not any,
Too few at least, I doubt me rightly such;
And yet me thinks such Phoenix's might build here,
Within this I Will, as well as other where. Vid. Cornel. Tacit. and Sueto. Tranq.
in vit. Tib.

Seianus, let him bloome in other coasts,
And purchase honor with his flattery,
Let his aspiring thoughts make private boasts,
To raise his Fortunes to a monar^hie,
He cannot prosper here* for w^y, we kno^,
State-ruine from Court-parasites may grow.
So Seian thought (what have not Traitors thought)
To currie favor with the Senators,
The better to atchieue what He had wrought,
By secret plots with his conspirators;
Faire-tong'd, false-heart, whose deepe-co^triuing brai^
Gave way to ruin, where He thought to reign.
But He Is well gone, Rome is dispatched of one
That would have made combustion in the state,
Whose death made Hers rejoice, but His to moan*
Who on his fall built their unhappy fate;
For Treason like a linked chain does show,
Which broke in one, does bre^ke in others too.
Next whom Perennius, whose affected grace,
Italian-like, seemed as composed by art,
May for his smoothing humor take the place,
Who sole-possessor of a Princes heart,
The youthful Commodus, did so allure him,
As his advice seems only to secure him.
Fair Prince (quoth he) if any worldly wight, A (...) dor.

May solace those fair corpse framed curiously,
Express Her only when she comes in sight,
And I your pleasure soon will satisfy;
Your Uncle he is too strict, he is too severe, -- Exeat aul^ Qui vult esse
pius. Lucan. ^. (...).

To coupe you up in ^ilence always here.
What privilege have Princes more then we,
If they deprived be of open air?
What comfort reap they in their Empirie,
If Nestor-like, they still sit in their chair?
No, no, dear Prince, you know a Prince is borne
To be his subjects terror, not their scorn.
No. Theater reared in your royal Court,
Turney, lust, Barrier, should solemnized be,
To which a Roman Prince should not resort,
Amazing Ladies with his majesty;
O then it is a shame for your estate,
To seem in ought for to degenerate!
How gorgeously did Rome demean her then,
When young Vitellius did Banketti^g ^uer three times, and n^w and then four
tim^s aday. in vit. Vit^ll.
banquet it,
Serving at table miriads of men,
With lusty Ladies which did revel it?
Yet you more high in state, more ripe in wit,
Must Hermit-like in cell retired sit.
Shake off these Sages which do now attend you,
For they like fetters do restrain your pace;
Give lustful youth in every part his due, Nec fuge me (f^giebat enim) iam
pascua Lernae, etc. Lib. 1. Meta.

Let sprightly gallants take the Sages place,
By which enthroned secure, you may command,
As* Jove erst did, with Io in his hand.
This did Perennius move, and took effect,
Green thoughts receive too aptly wanton seed,
Remaining with the Prince in chief respect,
As they are wont, who Princes humors feed;
Till He conspiring to usurp the crown, Vid. Aur^l. Sex. in epit. Herod. in
vit. Commod.

Amidst his honors was cast headlong down.
Where he received a doom that served for all,
(Like doom still breath on such infectious breath)
For soring thoughts must have as low a fall,
Whose fauning lives play prologue to their death:
For well I k^ow no bane on earth can be
Worse to the State then rust of Vid. Ciceronem in Laelio prope finem, etc.
flattery.
Then should these last-ensuing times beware,
Lest they commit offenses of like kind,
Which in the common wealth procure that jar,
As by their proiects we subversion find:
For they deprave the virtues of the best,
And in the highest Cedars build their nest.
Sycites, he whose sycophants pretense,
Made woeful havoc of his Common weal,
Abusing much his Princes innocence,
At last by time (as time will all reveal)
Became displeasde, who as He was afo
Unto the state, the state adiudg'd him so.
AN ADMONITION.
BE thou a Terpnus to restrain abuse,
Sin-training pleasures fraught with vanity;
Be thou no Seian, no Perennius,
To humor vice to gain a Monarchy;
Be not Sycites, let examples move thee,
And thou will cause the Commonweal to love thee.
The Argument of Epicurus, as in the first Satyr familiarly expressed, so now
in his miserable end with lively colors described.
EPicurus, who first invented that sect of Epicurisme, delighting in nothing
save voluptuous pleasures and delights, in the end being grievously vexed with
the stopping of his urine, and an intolerable pain and extremity of his
belly exulcerated, became mightily tormented; yet besotted with the fruition
of his former pleasure, (so violent are customarie delights) thus concluded: O
quam f^lici exitu fi^em expectatum vitae (...) imposui? With how happy an end
do I limit (...) course and progress of my life? The moral (...)* cludes
such, as have lived in security, and ca^* lesnesse, respectlesse of God or his
judgment; an^ even now ready to make an end of so haple^ and fruitless a
race, close up the date of their life (...) securely as they lived carnally.
The second (...) tire in the former Section comprehends the lik^ subject,
though the one seem more general v^ der the name of Pandora, implying a
gouerne^ and directresse in all pleasures, or exhibitresse o^ all gifts: The
other more particular, containing one private and peculiar Sect, even the
Epicures, who thought that the chief good consi^ted in a voluptuous and
sensual life, expecting no future doom after the term and end of this life.

Here consider the momentanie and frail course of this short and unconstant
life, tossed and turmoiled with many turbulent billows, exposed to sundry
s^lfs of perilous assaults, many homebred and foreign commotions; in which it
behooves us (like expert Pilots) to be circumspect i^ so dangerous a voyage,
lest sailing betwixt Scyll^ and Charybdis, presumption and despair, by
encountering either we rest shipwracked: where if any (which is rare to find)
pass on untroubled, yet must He of necessity conclude with Senec^* No^
tempestate vexor, sed nausea. So slow is every one to proceed graduate in
virtues Academi^* -- it a vt non facile est reputare, vtrum inhonestioribus
corporis partibus rem qaeusierit, an amiserit: (...) Cicero well observes in
his Declamation against Salust. For who is he of so pure and equal temper,
whose man-like resolution holds him from being drawn and allured by the vain
baits and deceits of worldly suggestions? where there be more of Penelopes
companions in every stew, in every brothell of sin and wantonness, then ever
in any age before. Every one vt Lutulentus sus -- as a hog wallowing in the
mire of their vain conceits, roue from the mark of piety and sobriety* into
the broad sea of intemperance and sensuality: but none more of any Sect then
Epicurisme, which like a noisome and spreading Canker, eats into the body and
soul of the professor, making them both prostitute to pleasure, and a very
sink of sin. The Satyr will explane their defects more exactly, which
follows.

THE NINTH SATYR.
THat Epicurus who of late remained
Subject to every foul impiety,
Now with distempers and night-surfets pained,
Bids mirth adue, his sole felicity:
His urine stopped wants passage from his veins,
Which gives increase to hi^ incessant pains.
Yet feels He not his soules-afflicted woe,
Unmindfull (wretched man) of her distress,
But pampers that which is his greatest foe,
And first procured his souls unhappiness:
He cannot weep, He cannot shed a tear,
But dying laughs, as when He lived here.
His Bon-companions drinking healths in wine,
Carousing flagons to his health receiving,
Whose sparkling noses taper-like do shine,
Offer him drink whose Resembling ^ne Elderton, on whom this inscription was
writ: here lies ^runken Elder^on, in earth now ^hrust: what said (...) thrust?
nay ^ather here lies ^hirst. ^n Rem. of a greater work.
thirsty mind is craving:
For though He cannot drink, yet his desire*
Is to see others wallow in the mire.
Turn him to heaven He cannot, for He knows not
Where heavens blessed mansion has her situation:
Tell him of heavens fruition, and he shows not
The least desire to such a contemplation:
His sphere inferior i^, whose vanity
Will suite no court so well as Orcus vobis ducit pedes.
Tartarie.
He has no comfort while He lives here,
For He Is orewhelmed with a sea of grief,
And in his death as little joy appears,
For death will yield him small or no relief:
He thought no pleasure after life was ended,
Which past, his fading comforts be extended.
Horror appears even in his ghastly face,
And summons (woeful summons) troops of devils,
Whilst He benumn'd with sin rejects grace,
The best receipt to cure soule-wounding evils:
Forlorn He lives, and lives because He breaths,
But in his death sustaines a thousand deaths.
Ungrateful viper, borne of vipers brood,
That hates thy parent, braues ore thy Protector,
Whose servile life did never any good,
But hugging vice, and spurn Him did correct her;
See how each plant renewes and gives increase,
By him, whom stones would praise, if man should cease.
Nor plant, nor worm, nor any senseless creature,
Will derogate from Gods high Majesty,
Since they from him, as from the supreme Nature,
Receive their vigor, grouth, maturitie,
Substance, subsistence, essence, all in one,
From Angels form unto the senseless stone.
But time has hardn'd thy depraved thoughts,
Custom of sin has made thy sin, no sin;
Thus have thou reaped the fruit thy labors sought, The Epic^ Cau^.

And dig'd a cave in which thou wallowest in;
The Porter of which cave, sreproch and shame,
Which lays a lasting scandal on thy name.
Aswine in mind, though Angell-like in form,
Pr^posterous end to such afaire beginning,
That Thou, whom such a feature does adorn
As Gods own Image, should be soild with sinning;
Who well may say of it thus drowned in pleasures*
This Superscription is not mine but Caesar's.
T^ want grace, and wanting, never call,
Nessled in mischief and in discontent;
Thou who from light to darkness headlong fallest*
Having the platform of thy life misspent,
Rouse thee Thou can not, for security
Has brought thy long sleep to a Lethargy.
Dull Dormouse, s^eeping all the winter time, ^ic faciu^t hyenem decipiendo,
glires.

Cannot e^dure the breath of air or wind,
But ever loves to make the Sun to shine
Upon her rural Cabin; that same mind
Art Thou endew'd withal, All winter keeping
Thy drunken cell, spends half thy life in sleeping*
Thou when thou read'st in stories of the Ant,
The painful Be, the early-mounting Lark,
Thou calls them fools, for Thou had rather want,
Pine, droupe, and die in poverty then carke:
Thou thinks there is no According to that of the Poet. -- No pleasure but to
swill, And full, to ^mptie, and being* emp^ie, ^ill.
pleasure, but to dwell
In that vast Tophet Epicurean cell.
Art thou so sotted with earths worldly we^lth,
That thou expects no life when this is ended?
Do thou conceive no happiness in health,
If health in healths be not profanely spended?
Well there is small hope of thee, and thou shall fi^d,
Sin goes before, but vengeance dogs behi^d.
Thou can not tell by thy Philosophy,
Where the glorious Synod of the Angels sit,
Nor can thou think souls immortality,
Should any mortal creature well befit:
Unfit thou art for such a prize as this,
Which Saints have wished to gain, and gained t^ wish.
Thou fings strange Hymns of love of shepeard-swains,
How Amarillis and Pelargus woed,
Where in love measures thou employes some pains,
To make thy works by wanton ears allowed;
For loves encounter loose wits can express it,
But for diui^e power they will scarce confess it.
Thus should each sin of thine unmasked be,
Each crime deblazon'd in her native color:
There would appear such a deformity,
As th'Greeke Thersites shape was never fowler; Homer. in Iliad: and alib^.

Which if compared to th'powerfull works of grace,
Would look aghast, ashamed to show their face.
If I should move thee, rectify thy cares,
I know twere fruitless, all thy care's to sin*
Whose barren harvest intersowne with tares,
Ends far worse then when it did begin;
A rank indurate vlcerous hardened ill,
Can ill be bett'red till it have her fill.
And yet when as this phrenticke mood shall leave thee, Ad poenas tardus Deus
est, ad praemia velox.

There is some hope of gaine-recouerie,
When thy offensive life misspent shall grieve thee;
Thy wound's not mortal, look for remedy;
But if like Epicure thou still do lie,
As thou lives ill, so doubt I thou must die.
The Argument of Diagoras Orator of Athens.
D^agoras a corrupt Orator using to receive bribes, was exiled, and this Satyr
to gall him the more, engraven upon his shipboord: As follows.

THE TENTH SATYR.
DIagoras was once to plead a cause,
Which th'aduerse party having well observed,
Claps me a gilded goblet in his claws,
Which He as privately (for sooth) reserved;
Speak (quoth this client) either naught at all,
Or else absent you from the sessions hall.
Absent He would not be, and yet as good,
For his mute tongue was absent in the cause,
Saying, the cause he had not understood,
And therefore wished that he a while might pause;
But having pau^'d too long, through his delay
The Court dismissed, the Senate went away.
Seeing the Senate gone, good gods (quoth he)
Can we not have our causes heard, whose truth
Is manifest as light? o thus we see
Our Clients wronged, whose wrongs afford much ^uth:
I would not answer this before Jove's throne,
If I thereby might make the world mine own.
Naught to a conscience pure and void of blame,
Which ( Jove be praised) is i^ this spotless breast,
For no foul act could blemish ere my name,
No corrupt bribe did ere enrich my chest;
Yes one (the Clyent answered) you know when:
It Is true indeed (my friend) and nere but then.
Yes once you know ( another answered) more,
When you protested the Angina pained you,
For which cor^uption, you had gold in store,
That silent speech of yours abundance gained you:
It Is true indeed, yet there is none can convict me,
That ere my conscience for these did afflict me.
Nay that He swear (quoth one) I never knew
Remorce of conscience or rele^ting tear:
That heart of yours aid nere repentance show,
But could take more, if that you did not fear
^ou should detected be, and your offense,
As There were certain image of Judges (by re port) set up at Athens, hauin^
neither hands nor eyes: implying that Ruler^ and Magistrate should neither be
infected wit^ bribes, nor any o therway drawn^ from that which was lawful an^
right. But most happi^ were those daye^ wherein Basil the Emperor of
Constantinople lived, tha^ whenever h^ came to his judge meant seat, he found
neither party to accuse, nor defendan^ t^ answer.
justice craves, should give you recompense.
Thus as they talked, thus as they did discourse,
In came a Senator, which did reveal,
His corrupt dealings, for He did enforce
Himself to publish what He did conceal:
Whose crimes diuulg'd, He presently was led
To Coos haven, whence He was banished.
Thus was a corrupt Orator convicted,
Pressing himself with his own obloquie,
Whose selfe-detection made his state afflicted,
His hands the weauers of his tragedy;
Which I could wish to all of like desert,
Whose good professio^'s made a guilefull art.
The Argument.
TRiptolemu^ is reported to have invented Tillage the first of any, and to have
taught the art of sowing corn: whereupon the grateful husbandman, to repay
the thankfulness of his wellwilling mind, renders this Elegy, as in part of
payment for so rare invention: Satyrically withal inueying against such, who
eat the fruit of others labors, live on the sweat of others brow^, and
muzling the mouth of the ox that treads* o^ the corn, reap what they never
sowed, drink o^ the vine they never planted, and eat at the Alt^ of which
they never partaked.

THE ELEVENTH SATYR ELEGIACK.
AGed Triptolemus father of our field,
That teaches us thy children rare effects;
We do unto thy sacred Temple yield
The fruits we reap, and tender all respects
To thee, that have this rare Dona fero Cereris -- M^. lib. 5.
invention found,
And gave first light of tillage to our ground.
Describe we cannot in exact discourse,
Those rarer secrets which proceed from thee,
For polished words with us have little force,
That are inured to Rusticitie;
But what we can we will do, and to that end,
To thee (as Patron) we our fields commend.
By thee we till the wild untempered soil,
Make rising hillocks champion and plain;
Where though with early labor we do toil,
Yet labor's light where there is Spes alet agricolas.
hope of gain:
We think no hurt, but travel all the day,
And take our rest, our travels to allay.
No project we intend against the State,
But cuts the bosom of our Mother earth;
We give no way to passion or debate;
By labor we prevent our Countries dearth:
Yet this ascribe we not to our own part,
But unto thee, that did invent this art.
Those glorious Trophies which Menander set,
In honor of the sacred Deities,
Would be too long a subject to repeat,
Reared in such state with such solemnities;
Yet these to ours, inferior be in worth,
Those were of earth, these tell us use of earth.
We open the closet of our mothers breast,
And till the sedgie ground with crooked plough,
And in the evening take our quiet rest,
When we the heat of day have passed through:
Thus do we sow, thus reap, and reaping we
Do consecrate our first fruits unto thee.
And with our fruits our wonted Orisons,
With solemn vows to thy obsequious shrine,
Whose Of the dedication of Pagan Temples, vid. Var. de Ant. and Macrob.
dedication merits heavenly songs,
Will we protest what is ours is ever thine;
For what we have came from thy divine wit,
Or from His power that first infused it.
By thee we plant the -- Ex nitido fit rusticus, atque Sulcos and vineta crepat
mera, praeparatvlmos. Hor.
Uine and Olive tree,
Contriue cool harbors to repose and lie:
By thee our Vina generofissima, Massica, Cecub^, Falerna. Hipp. de coll.
Uine sends grapes forth fruitfully,
The Almond, Chestnut, and the Mulberrie;
Thus Saturns golden age approaches near,
And ( Flora-like) makes springtime all the year.
The pleasant banks of fair Parnassus mount,
With trees rank-set and branchie arms broad-spred,
The Mirtle-trees hard by Castalias fount,
With flowrie wreaths thy shrine have honored;
Amongst which, no Iland's more obliged to thee,
Then this same I Will of famous Britannie.
As in some parts of Egypt, which (though elsewhere exceeding fruitful)
through extremity of heat become to the people inhabit^ ble.
Others intemporate through parching heat,
Have their fruits blasted ere they come to light,
As in S^ythia, which region in most places is so cold, as fruits can come so
no ripeness. For as the Astrologers are of opi^ion, there is a ^ertaine
breadth in the heaven, ^n earth from North to South, bounded out by some of the
principal Circles, of the which ar^ 5. in all: one fiery between the two
Tropicks which is called Zona Torrida: two extreme cold, between the Polare
circles and the Poles of the would: and two temporate betwe^ne either of ^he
Polare circles and his next Tropicke.
Others are planted in a colder seat,
Whereby the Sunbeams seldom show their might*
But we (and therein blessed) inhabit one,
Which as it is fruitful, it is a temperate Zone.
How can we then if we do ought, do less
Then labor to requite as we receive?
For such a burning wind's vnt hankefulnesse,
As by it we do lose that which we have:
Let each then in his rank observe his measure,
And give Him thanks that gave Him such a treasure.
How many regions have their fruits devoured,
By th'Caterpiller, Canker, Palmerworme?
Whilst by thy grace so richly on us powered,
Our fields rejoice, and yield increase of corn;
O then admire we this great work of thine,
Whereby all Barbarus i^ uidit -- Met. l. ^
regions at our state repine!
Repine they may, for we surpass their state,
In power, in ri^hes, sinews of sharp war;
They led in blindness attribute to fate,
What ere befall, we to the morning star,
By which we are directed every day,
Or else like wandering sheep might loose our way.
Hesiod relates seven fortunate reposes, Canariae -- fortunatae insulae. vid*
Hesiod. i^ li. de oper: and die. page 15. (...) in be atorum insuli^.

Islands, which Fortune favors for their seat,
Adorned with fruitful plants sent-chafing roses;
Where there breaths ever a soile-cherishiag heat,
By which the plants receive their budding power,
And needs no other dew, no other shower.
These fruitful Islands which this Poet shows, ^les in the ocean four hundred
mil^s fro Spai^e

Were seated far within the Ocean,
And never warred as other Islands use,
Being in peaceful league with every man:
Confer now these together, and then see
If this blessed Island be not Brittannie.
Blessed were those Ilanders that did possess
The fertile borders of those healthful Isles,
And we as blessed have no less happiness,
In this our I Will, not stretched to many miles;
Though when those The two vni^ersities.
streams of Hellicon appears,
It doubles fruits in doubling of her years.
Thames full as pleasant as Euphrates flood,
Though she contain not in her precious navel,
The Tagus, Ganges, and Pacteolus ^hree rivers famous for their golden oar or
gravel.
golden oar of Ganges, yet as good
As any gold or any golden gravel,
Transporting hence, and bringing here again,
Gain to the City by their fraught of grain.
Thus water, air, and earth, and all unite
Their powers in one, to benefit our state,
So as conferring profit with delight,
Well may we term this Island fortunate;
For we more blessed then other Isles have bin,
Enjoy both peace without and peace within.
Unto his altar let us then repair,
That has conferd these blessings on our land,
And sure we are to find him present there,
Apt to accept this offering at our hand;
Where, as He has remembered us in peace,
We Will yield him fruits of souls and soiles increase.
To thee then (blessed Deity) is meant, The true explanation of the Elegi^.

This vot all sacrifice, how ere we speak,
Of old Triptolemus thy instrument;
For midst ^nuentions we will ever seek
To raise thy praise, who have thy Throne above us,
And daily shows that thou do dearly love us.
The Argument.
MElon^mus a shepherd of Arcadia, who having frequented the plains there long
time, with great husbandry used to exercise his pastures* receiving no small
profit from his fruitful flock: in the end fell in love with Cynthia Queen
of the forest adjoining: whom having woed with many loue-inducing tokens, and
shepherds madrigals, a^ spent the profit of his flock in gifts (with too
lavish a bounty bestowed upon her) and yet could no way prevail, being posted
off with many tri^ling delays; in the end wrote this short Satyr in a Cynick
mood, reuiling at the cou^tousnesse and in^atiable desire of women, who will
prostitute their favor for lucre sake unto the meanest swain, till they have
consumed the fruit of his stock, and then will turn him over shipboord.

THE TWELFTH SATYR.
MElonomus a worthy shepherd swain,
Besotted with fair Cynthia's amorous face*
Beseeched Her to love for love again,
And take compassion on his woeful case;
Which she halfe-yeelding to, dissembling too,
Did move the swain more eagerly to woo.
And that with Non sumus ingratae, poscunt pulche^rima pulchrae; Mu^era si
refe^as, oscula gra^a feres.
g^fts most powerful to ensnare
The minds of maids, whose curious appetite,
Desires as they be fair to have things fair,
To add fresh fuel unto loves delight;
Which to effect, each morn a flowrie wreath,
Composed the sw^ne, to breath on Cynthia's breath.
Fine comely bra^lets of refined Rupibus extractum Calibaeis mit^it electrum,
etc. Whence it is said comes the ^urest Amber.
Amber,
Used this Shepherd swai^e to tender her,
And every morn resorting to he^ chamber,
Would there appear ere Phoebus could appear,
Where tell^g tales as shepherds use to tell,
She forced a smile, as though ^he ^k'd Him well.
Thus poor Melonomus continued long,
Thus at Loves ^arre this Client ^oubtfull stands, And weeps, and wipes, and
wring^ and wreathes his ^ands.
Hoping for resolution a^ her (...),
Whilst with delays He mixed gifts among,
Which (as He thought) were fancies strongest b^ds;
And still He craves dispatch of his request,
And to perform what she in (...) professed.
B^t she, from day to day puts off, replying,
She scarce resolved was to marry yet:
But when his Instat aman^, tamen odit amans, sic munera quaerit, Queis tamen
acceptis, nescit amare magis.
gifts surceast, she flat denying,
Answered, A swain was for a Queen unfit;
He rural, homely, bred of mean descent,
She royall-borne, of purer Element.
Melonomus thus answered, wisely framed
Th^s grave reply: And is it so indeed?
Be all those gifts I gave (all which He named) A sudden resolution requiting
her sudden disdain.

To no effect? why then return and feed
Thy want on flock, surceasse thy bootlesse suite,
Since she consumed thy flock with all their fruit.
Aged Alomaenon who my father was, I cannot trull is I, nor fancy all I see,
if she be fair, wise and an heir, that girl likes me.

And as I guess knew well the shepherds guise,
Thought scorn to set his love on every less,
Aye me v^appie, of a sire so wise;
But this disdain that lowres on beauties brow,
Shall teach me, swains with swains know best to do.
The skipping Rams that butt with ragged horns,
And brou^ upon each bank with sweet repast,
Shall not my ^lous head with wreathes adorn,
(But heaven forgive my folly that is past;)
I will not fancy Cynthia, since she
In my distress scorns to converse with me.
The Argument of Protagoras.
PRotagoras adored the stones of the altar, conceiving them to be happy, as
the Philosopher Aristotle witnesses: Lapides, ex quibus ar^ struebantur,
faelices esse putabat, quod honorentur. H^ thought the very stones themselves
to be happy, of which the altars were builded, because (says he) they might
be honored. In this Argument, be such men shadowed, as most impiously worship
the creature for the Creator, the work for the worker. Therefore have I
subins^rted this Satyr, to inueigh against the senseless Gentiles and Painims,
who in the foolishness of their hearts, used to adore stocks, stones, plants,
and senseless creatures, Nunc deorum causam agam; I will now Ci^. de not. deor.
plead the cause of God, so injuriously dealt withal by his own workmanship.
Alexander himself being but a mortal man as we our selves be, commanded
Callistenes his Scholemaister to be slain, because He would not worship H^ for
a god: much more above comparison, may God who is immortal and only to be
feared, punish Alan. de conquest. not.
yea and destroy them that in contempt of his infinite power and all-working
majesty, adore the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Isis and Osyris, with many other
vain, idolatrous, and profane venerations, derogating from the power and
incomprehensible essence of God. When a King beholds his subjects to reserve
their allegiance to any Monarch save himself, He makes them to be proclaimed
Traitors to his Crown and person: Even so the King of heaven, when He sees
any subject of his (as we be all and happy if so we be, and not slaves to the
captivity and thraldom of sin,) presently proscribeth him, or will punish
him with death, lest others by his impunitie should attempt the like. Wherefore
then should any profane man, so ouershadowed with the duskie clouds of error
and impiety, transgress the divine precepts, Laws, and Ordinances of the
Almighty; those eternal decrees established and enacted in the glorious Synod
of heaven, by relinquishing the sweet promises of God, and communicating the
worship of the Creator with the creature, as if there were a distribution to be
made unto either? But I will refer them to this following Satyr.

THE THIRTEENTH SATYR.
PRotagoras both wicked and profane,
Wicked in life, profane in worshipping,
Adored stones: (see Paga^s, see your shame)
And thought them worthy too of reuerencing;
For if the gods be honored, said He,
Needs must the stones whereof their Temples be.
The like conceit He had of altars too,
And of the stones whereof they were erected,
To which He often would solemn worship do,
And tax such men by whom they were neglected;
Wishing sometime He were an altar stone,
That to himself like honor might be done.
Thou senseless man deprived of reasons lore, A just reproof to all Idolaters.

What grace art thou (forlorn) endewd withal,
That thou should shrines and se^slesse stones adore,
That have no ears to he^re when thou do call?
Thou deemes these relikes happy, when god wot,
If they were happy, yet they know it not.
The Altar is the shrine thou offrest to,
Thy incense, sacrifice, and fat of beasts,
Which on the altar thou art wont to do,
Not to the altar where thou makes request;
For it is enioynd thee by express command,
To k^eele to nothing fashioned by man's hand.
The Manual artist sets up Ing^tes (...) erigit, ^c (...) cutat quo erigi^,
qua^ curiose disponere quod art con^icit, etc.
heaps of stones,
Erecting curious Statues to adore,
But what are these, can they attend our mones?
No, they have ears to hear, but hear no more
Then ru^bish, clay, or stone, whereof they are said,
(And such were Pagan Idols) to be made.
Turn thee unto the East, from whence the Sun
Has his arising, whence He does proceed,
As Bridegroom from his chamber, and does run Stadium solis.

His spacious course with such a passing speed,
As twenty four hours He does only borrow,
To post the world from end to end quite through.
Each plant on earth, each creature in the sea,
From whence have they their grouth, I pray thee say*
Do they deriue't from stones or imagerie?
Nay, I must tell thee, thou art by the way,
It Is no inferior power brings this to pass,
But his, who is, shall be, and ever was.
And he it is who notes thy errors past,
And can revenge, though He the time adiourne,
Whose love unto his sheep does ever last, Deus (...) maxim iratus, no^
iratus, cum iratus propitius, etc. Qui fecit te sine te, non saluabit te sine
te. August.

And still expects and waits for thy return;
But how can He to thee in kindness show him,
That gives thee hands, yet will not lift them to him?
Ungrateful thou to have that ill conceit,
Of his all-being and all-seeing power,
Whose blessed tuition guards us and our state,
Whose surest hold is like a fading flower,
That springs and dies, such is the pomp of man,
As there He ends in earth where He began.
Horror of men, contempt to thy beginning,
Shame to the world, wherein thou do survive*
Whose best religion is an act of sinning, Exorto tremore, erubescet
conscientia, obstupescet conscia mentis scientia, and dicendi facultates
penitus amittent organa, etc.

In which thou means to die, and loves to live;
What shall these shrines afford thee after death,
The breath of life? no, for they have no breath.
Then here I Will leave thee, yet with sorrow too,
Thy Image moves compassion, though it may be,
Thou Wilt ask the reason why I should do so,
Since sorrows source has lost her course in thee;
To which I may in reason thus reply,
My eyes are wet, because thy eyes are dry.
Yet will I to the altar, not to adore it,
But offer incense to assoile thy sin;
Where full of tears I Will weep, and weeping ore it,
Wish thy return, that thou may honor him,
Whose worship thou profaned (as was unfit)
Entitling any creature unto it. Numen si diuidis, perdis.

Three other Satyrs composed by the same Author, treating of these three
distinct subjects.
1. Tyranny, personated in Eurystheus. 2. Security, in Alcibiades. 3.
Revenge, in Perillus.
With an Emblem of Mortality, in Agathocles.

The Argument.
EVrystheus a potent and puissant Prince of Greece, by the instigation of Juno
imposed Hercules most difficult labors, to the end to have him dispatched. But
of such invincible patience was Hercules in suffering, and of such resolution
i^ performing, as to his succeeding glory he purchased himself honor through
their hate, gaining to himself renown, where his foe intended inevitable
revenge. Whence we may collect two remarkable things, no less fruitful in
observing, then delightful in perusing. The one is, to note how prompt and
prepared men of depraved or vicious disposition are, to put in execution the
pleasure of great ones, how indirect or unlawful soever their pleasures be:
directing and addressing their employments to the bent of their command, be it
wrong or right. And these are such who account it good saving policy, to keep
ever correspondence with greatness, esteeming no supportance firmer, no
protection safer, then to hold one course with those high-mounting Cedars, from
whose grouth the lower shrubs receive shadow and shelter. The second which I
note, is to observe what glorious and prosperous success many have, who
pursued and injuriously persecuted (like Zenocrates Sparrow) either find some
compassionate bosom to cheer and receive them, or by the assistance of an
vnconfined ^ower, attain a noble issue in midst of all occurrences. To insist
on instances, were to enlarge an Argument above his bounds: few or none there
are who have not or may not, have instance in the one, as well as personal
exp^ience in the other. Especially when we recall to mind how many instant and
imminent dang^rs have been threatened us, and how many gracious and glorious
deliuera^ces tendered us. Some other excellent observations might be culled or
selected from the flowrie border of this subject, but my purpose is rather to
shadow at some, then amply to dilate on all. For I have ever observed, how
Arguments of this nature are to most profit composed, when they are not so
amply as aptly compiled: Long and tedious discourses being like long services,
tending more to surfeit then solace; whereas the pleasure of variety, draws
on a new appetite in midst of satietie. Now to our proposed task: where you
shall s^ how harmless innocence shuffels out of the hands of boundless
cruelty.

THE SATYR.
HOe Euristheus, I am hither sent,
From Iunoes Princely palace to thy Court,
To tell thee, thou must be her instrument,
(And to that purpose she has chus'd thee for it)
To chastise Hercules, grown eminent
By his renowned conque^ts: do not show
Thy self remiss, Juno will have it so.
And Juno shall; I will such taskes impose,
That earth shall wonder how they were invented,
So as his life he shall be sure to lose,
What do I care, so Juno be contented,
Darkness shall not my secresies disclose?
Her will is my command, n^ must I ask
Whence's her distaste; come young man hear your task
A fruitful Hesperidum (...) in custoles, pe^uigiles ^tinent soro^s.
garden, full of choice delights,
Enricht with sprayes of gold and apples too,
Which by three sisters watched both days and nights,
Yield no access unto th'inuading foe,
Is thy first progress; where with doubtful fight,
Thou must perform thy task: this is the first,
Which if it prove too easy, next is worst.
For in this first thou art to deal with women,
And reap a glorious prize when thou have done;
And such an enterprise (I know) is common,
Crowning us great by th'triumph we have won:
Aurifer^ n^mora ^eretem ferentia corticem, (...) pomum.
Gold is so strange a bait, as there is no man,
But he will hazard life to gain that prize,
Which makes men fools that are supposed wise.
But next task shall be of another kind,
No golden apples pluck^ from Hesperie:
For in this work thou naught but dong shall find,
Augei stabul^ etc.
Augean stables must thy labor be,
Which if thou clear not, as I have assigned,
Death shall attend thee: it is in vain to come,
By prayers or tears to change my fatal doom.
The third, that hideous Hydra, which does breed Abscisso capi te, caput renas
citur al^erum.

Increase of heads, for one being cut away,
Another springs up straight way in her stead:
Hence then away, and make me no delay,
Delay breeds danger, do what I have said,
Which done thou lives, ^ich vnperform'd thou dies, He coucheth ^ his labors
(inf^ nite in number and nature) i^ ^hese thre^.

This said; Alcydes to his labor hies.
Alas (poor man) how well it may be said,
So many are the perils he must pass,
That he with dangers is environed?
So hopeless and so hapless is his case,
As he by death is so encompassed,
That howsoere his power he means to try,
Poor is his power, he must be forced to die.
Imper^ous tyrant, could thou wreak^ thy rage
On none but such whose valor has been shown,
As a victorious Mirror to this age,
And has been blazed where thou were never known?
Must thou his person to such taskes engage,
As flesh and blood did never yet sustain?
Well, he must try, although he try in vain.
Yes, he will try, and act what he does try,
He Will tug and tew, and strive and stoop to ought,
Yea Non terret mors sapientem.
die, if so with honor he may d^e,
Yet know, that those who have his life thus sought,
Are but insulting types of Thales milesius inte^oganti quid difficile; senem
(inquit) videre tyrannum.
tyranny,
Whose boundless spleen, when He has past these shelues,
Will be disgorg'd, and f^ll upon themselves.
For see, thou cruel savage, whose desire
Extends to blood, how this aduentr'ous Knight,
Gains him renown, and scorneth to retire,
Till he has got a conqu^st by his fight:
So high heroic thoughts use to asp^re,
As when extremest danger (...) enclose them,
They slight those foes that labor to oppose them.
Here see those taskes which thy imperious power,
Imposed this Noble champion, finished;
The Serpent, Pro telo gerit quae fudit, armatus venit Leone and Hydra. Se^c.
Hydra, which of heads had store,
Now headless lies by valor conquered,
The stables purged from th'filth they had before,
The golden Apples Trophies of his glory,
Dilate their ends unto an endless story.
Here see the event where virtue is the aim,
Here see the issue of a glorious mind,
Here see how martial honor makes her claim,
Here see the crown to diligence assigned,
Here see what all may see, a soldiers fame,
Not tipped with fruitless titles, but made great,
More by true worth, then by a glorious seat.
For such, whose native merit has attained
Renown amongst men, should Si sola nob^ adsunt prospera, soluimur: a^
virtutem vero melius per aduersa solidamu^ Greg.
adverse gusts assail the^
In such an Orb rest their resolves contained,
As well they may invade but not appall them,
For from esteem of earth they are wholly wain'd,
Planting their mounting thoughts upon that sphere,
Which frees such minds as are infranchis'd there.
Hence learn ye Great-ones, who esteem it good
Sufficient to be great, and thinke't well done,
Be It right or wrong, what is done in heat of blood,
Hence learn your state, lest ye decline too soon,
For few ere firmly stood, that proudly stood.
But specially ye men that (...) in Locum virtu^ habet. Se^.
place,
Judge others as your selves were in same case.
Here have you had a mirror to direct
Your ways, and form your acti^ns all the better,
Which president if careless, ye neglect,
And walk not by this line, live by this letter,
Hows' ere the world may tender you respect,
Ye are but gorgeous paintings daubed over,
Clothing your vice with some more precious cover.
Hence likewise learn ye whom the frown of fate,
Has so deprest, as not one beam does shine
Upon the forlorn mansion of your state,
To bear with patience and give way to time,
So shall vie with Fortune in her hate;
And prize all earths contents as bitter-sweete,
Which arms you against all fortunes ye can meet.
This great Alcydes did, who did with ease
(For what is uneasy to a mind prepared)
Discomfit Has Hydra ensit, his ia^ent Stympha^ides. Ibid.
the Hydra and the Stymphalides,
With whom he cop'd, encountered long and warred*
And gained him glory by such acts as these.
Observe this Moral (for right sure I am)
The imitation shows a perfect man.
The last not least, which may observed be, -- Nessus hos ^truxit dolos. Ictus
sagittis qui tuis vitam ^xpulit. Cruore tincta ^st Palla semi^eri, pater.
Nessusque nunc ^as exigit pae^as sibi. ^n Herc. O^t.

Is to suppesse spleen or conceived hate,
Which in perfidious Nessus you may see,
Fully portraid, who merely through deceit,
Practiced Alcydes woeful Tragedy:
For of all passions, there is (...) that has
More souera^gnty ore man, then boundless wrath.
Which to restrain, (for wherein may man show
Himself more manly, then in this restraint)
That there is naught more generou^, you should kno^,
Then true compassion to the indigent,
Which even humanity says, that we owe Flete Here^leos numina casus. ibid.

One to another, while we use to tender
Love to our Maker, in him to each member.
Thus if ye do, how low soere ye be,
Your actions make you noble, and shall live
After your summons of Mortality,
And from your ashes such a perfume give,
As shall eternize your blessed memory:
If otherwise ye live, ye are at best
But gilded gulls, and by opinion blessed.
The Argument.
ALcibiades a noble Athenian, whose glorious and renowned actions gained him
due esteem in Others are of opinion that he was drawn fr^ sensual affections
to the practice of virtue, by the grave instruction of Socrates: but it
appears otherwise by his much frequenting Timandraes company. Vid. Plut. in
vit. Alcib.
his Country: at last by retiring himself from arms, gave his mind to
sensuality; which so effeminated his once imparallel'd spirit, as he became no
less remarkable for sensual liberty, then he was be fore memorable for
ennobled exploits of martial chivalry. From hence the Satyr deriues his
subject, inueying against the remissness of such as waine their affections from
employment, exposing their minds (those glorious or resplendent images of their
Maker) to security, rightly termed the devils opportunity. How perilous
vacancie from affairs has ever been, may appear by ancient and modern
examples, whose Tragical catastroph^ would crave tears immix'd with lines. Let
this suffice, there is no one motive more effectually moving, no Rhetoric
more mouingly persuading, no Oratorie more perswasiuely inducing, then what we
daily feel or apprehend in our selves. Where every Quot horae (si male
expensae) tot itae. Quot horae, tot ^brae.
hour not well employed, begets some argument or other to move our corrupt
natures to be depraved. Let us then admit of no vacation, save only vacation
from vice. Our lives are too short to be fruitlesly employed, or remisly
pa^sed. O then how well spent is that oil which consumes it self in actions
of virtue

Whose precious selfe's a glory to her self! May nothing so much be estranged
from us as vice, which, of all others, most disfigures us; Though our feet be
on earth, may our minds be in heaven: where we shall find more true glory then
earth can afford us, or the light promises of fruitless vanity assure us.
Expect then what may merit your attention; a rough-hew'd Satyr shall speak
his mind boldly without partiality, taxing such who retire from action, wherein
virtue consists, and lie sleeping in security, whereby the spirit, or inward
motion of the soul woefully droupeth.

THE SATYR.
AWake, thou noble Greek! how should desire,
Of sensual shame (souls stain) so dull thy wit,
Or cloud those glorious thoughts which did aspire,
Once to exploits which greatness might befit?
Where now the beamlins of that sacred fire,
Lie raked in ashes, and of late do seem
(So rank is vice) as if they had not been.
Can a faith-breaking leering Illa pictura (...) est. Ambr^ ^exam. l. 6. ^. 8.
Curtizan,
Whose face is glazed with frontlesse impudence,
Depresse the spirit of a Noble man,
And make him lose his reason for his sense?
O span thy life (for life is but a span)
And thou shall find the scantling is so small,
For vain delights there is no Sicut capillu^ non peribit de capite, ita ne^
momentum d^ tempore. Ber^
time at all!
Shall azur'd breast, sleeke skin, or painted cheek,
All (...) attire is the attire of sin.
Gorgeous attire, locks braided, wandering eye,
Gain thee delight, when thou delights should seek
In a more glorious object? O rely
On a more firm foundation, lest thou break,
Credit with Him who long has given thee trust,
Which thou must pay be sure, for he is just.
O do not then admire, what thy desire
Should most contemn, if reason were thy guide;
Let thy erected thoughts extend far higher,
Then to these wormelins that like Sunt i^ta poae matis vmbrae.
shadows glide,
Whose borrowed be^tutie melts with heat of fire.
Their shape from Quarum v^icum est offici^, ab officina elicere formam.
Lecythum habet in malis. vid. vi^t, ad Sa^
shop is bought and brought; o art
What can thou promise to a knowing heart!
A knowing heart, which plants her choicest bliss
In what it sees not, but does comprehend
By eye of faith! not what terrestrial is,
But what affoordeth Ea vita beata est, quando quod optimum est, amatur and
habetur. Sola eius visio, vera mentis nostrae refectio est. Greg. in Mor. Expo.
in Job.
comfort without end,
Where we enjoy what is ever we did wish;
Who then, if he partake but common sense,
Will ere rejoice, till he depart from hence?
Yet see the blindness of distracted man,
How he prefers one moment of delight,
(Which cheares not much when it does all it can)
Before delights in nature infinite,
Whose juice (yields perfect fullness, sure I am:)
O times! when men love that they should neglect,
Disualuing that which they should most respect.
For note how many have adventured
Their lives (and happy they if that were all)
And for a Quanta ame^tia est effigiem mutare naturae, picturam quaerere*
Cypri. de discip. and hab. ^irg.
painted trunk have perished;
O England, I thy self to witness call,
For many hopeful plants have withered
Within thy bosom, cause whereof did spring,
Mearely from lust, and from no other thing!
How many promising youths, whose precious blood
Shed by too resolute hazard, might have done
Their gracious Prince and native Country good,
In heat of blood have to their ruin gone, Inanis gloriae ^uccum propriae
^aluti praepo^entes.

While they on terms of reputation stood,
Preferring titles (see the heat of strife)
Before the love and safet^e of their life?
O Gentlemen, know that those eyes of yours,
Which should be piercing like the Cunctarum quippe a^ium visum acies aquilae
superat: ita vt solis radios fixos in se eius oculos nulla lu^is suae
coruscatione reuerberans, claudat. Greg* in Mor. Expos. in Job.
Eagles eyes,
Are not to view these Dalilahs of ours,
But to eye heaven and sullen earth despise,
And so increase in honors as in hours.
O ye should find more happiness in this,
Then spend the day in courting for a kiss!
Were time as easy purchased as is land,
Ye better might dispense with loss of time;
Or 'twere in you to make the Sun to stand,
So many points t'ascend or to decline,
^' de say ye had the world at command:
But as time Quicquid de illo praeteritum est, iam non est^ quicquid de illo
futurum est, nondum est. Aug.
past, is none of yours, once gone,
So that time is not yours, which is to come.
Address yours selves then to that glorious place,
Where there is no time, no limit to confine,
No alteration: but where such a grace,
Or perfect luster beautifies the clime,
Where ye'r to live, as th'choisest chearefullst face,
Ye ere beheld on earth, were it nere Vide^do pulchra, cogita haec omnia, and
pulchriora, esse in coelo: videndo horribilia, cogita haec omnia, and
horribiliora, esse in inferno. Lansperg.
so fair,
Shall seem deformity to beauty there.
But this shall serve for you! now in a word,
Hear me In Timandrae gremio paululu^ recumbens, perimitur. Plut* i^ vit.
Alcib.
Timandra (for I must be heard;)
Thou whose light shop all vanities afford,
Reclaim thy sensual life, which has appeared
As odious and offensive to thy Lord,
As those lascivious robes (robes suiting night)
Are in disgrace, when good men are in sight.
More to enlarge my self were not so good,
Perhaps this litle's more then thou will read:
But if thou read, I wished may stir thy blood,
And move thee henceforth to take better heed,
Then to transgress the bounds of womanhood:
Whose chiefest essence in these four appear,
In gate, look, speech, and in the robes you wear.
The Argument.
PErillus an excellent Artificer (being then famous for excellent inventions)
to satisfy the inhumane disposition of the tyrant Phalaris, as also in hope to
be highly rewarded for his ingenious device: made a bull of brass for a new
kind of torment, presenting it to Phalaris, who made, trial thereof by
tormenting Perillus first therein. From this Argument or subject of revenge, we
may observe two special motives of Moral instruction or humane Caution. The
first is, to deter us from humoring or soothing such, on whom we have
dependence, in irregular or sinister respects. For the virtuous, whose comfort
is the testimony of a good conscience, scorn to hold correspondence with
vicious men, whose commands ever tend to depraved and enormious ends. The
second is, a notable example of revenge in Perillus suffering, and in Phalaris
inflicting. Much was it that this curious Artizan expected, but with equal and
deserved censure was he rewarded: for inglorious seconded by like ends. Hence
the Satyr displayeth such in their native colors, who rather then they will
lose the least esteem with men of high rank or quality, use to dispense with
faith, friend, and all, to plant them firmer in the affection of their Patron.
But observe the conclusion, as their means were indirect, so their ends sorted
ever with the means. They seldom extend their temporizing hours to an
accomplished age, but have their hopes ever blasted, ere they be well bloomed:
their injurious aims discovered, ere they be rightly leuelled: and their
wishes to a tragical period exposed, as their desires were to all goodness
opposed. May all proiectors or stateforragers sustain like censure, having
their natures so reluctant or opposite to all correspondence with honor.
Longer I will not dilate on this subject, but recollect my spirits, to add
more spirit to my ouer-tyred Satyr, who has been so long employed in the
Embassy of Nature, and wearied in dancing the Wild man's measure, that after
Perillus censure she must repose ere she proceed any further; and take some
breath ere I dance any longer.

THE SATYR.
Brave Enginer, you whose more curious hand
Has framed a Bull of brass by choycest art,
That as a Trophie it might ever stand,
And be an Emblem of thy cruel heart:
Hark what is thy tyrant Phalaris command,
Whose will's a law; and having heard it well,
Thy censure to succeeding ages tell.
Thou must (as it is just) be first presented
A sacrifice unto the brazen Bull,
And feel that torture which thy art invented,
That thou may be rewarded to the full;
No remedy, it cannot be prevented.
Thus, thus revenge appears which long did smother,
He must be caught, that aims to catch another.
Just was thy judgment, Princely Phalaris,
Thy censure most impartial; that he
Whose artfull hand that first contrived this,
To torture others, and to humor thee,
Should in himself feel what this torture is.
Which great or small, he must be forced to go,
May such For so Diogenes the Cynicke terms all hi^mering Timists or
temporizing sycophants. Laert.
tame-beasts be ever used so.
Like fate befell unhappy Who built Pallas horse, and after perished in the
siege of Troy. Homer. in ^iad.
Phereclus,
Who first contrived by cunning more then force,
To make once glorious Troy as ruinous
As spoil could make it: therefore reared a Horse,
Framed by Pallas art, as curious,
As art could form, or cunning could invent,
To weaue his end, which art could not prevent.
See ye brave state-proiectors, what is the gain
Ye reap by courses that are indirect:
See these, who first contrived, and first were slain,
May mirrors be of what ye most affect!
These labored much, yet labored they in vain;
For there is no wit how quick soere can do it,
If powers divine shall make Witness the matchless Po^ der plor, no les^
miraculously (...) uealed, then mi^ chieuously con^ triued, no les^ happily
preue^ ted, then hatefully practiced. Of which cruel^ Agents (being his own
subjects) our grace ous Sovereign might iusty tak^ up the complain of that
Princely Prophet David My familiar friends, who^ I trusted, which did eat of
my bread, have lifted up their heels against me. Psalm. 51. and 55. Si non
parcet, perdet.
resistance to it.
And can ye think that heaven, whose glorious eye
Surueyes this Uniuerse, will daigne to view
Men that are given to all impiety?
You say, he will; he will indeed, it is true;
But this is to your further misery.
For that same eye which viewes what you commit,
Has sight to see, and power to Vbi non est per gratiam, adest per vindictam.
Aug.
punish it.
To punish it, if hoording sin on sin,
Ye loath Repentance, and bestow your labor,
Only to gain esteem, or else to win
By your pernicious plots some great man's favor;
O I do see the state that you are in,
Which cannot be redeemed, unless betime
With Qui non gemit peregrimus, non gaudebit ciuis. Aug.
sighs for sins, you wipe away your crime!
For show me one, (if one to show you have)
Who built his fortunes on this sandy ground,
That ever went gray headed to his grave,
Or near his end was not distressed found,
Or put not trust in that which did deceive!
Sure few there be, if any such there be,
But show me one, and it suffices me.
I grant indeed, that for a time these may
Flourish like to a Bay tree, and increase,
Like Olive branches, but this lasts not aye,
Their Halcyonci dies ab Halcyoni^s anibus dicti: neque boni maliue ominis aues
hos esse arbitror; quantum tamen a Propheta dicitur, tantum a me afferendum
asserendumque esse puto. Etiam Ciconia in coelo no^it stata tempora sua, and
Turtur, grusque, and Hirundo obseruant tempus aduentus sui. Ierem. 8. 7.
Halcyon days shall in a moment cease,
When night (sad night) shall take their souls away.
Then will they tune their strings to this sad song,
Short was our sunshine, but our nightshade long
Ye then, I say, whose youth-deceiuing prime,
Promise success, beleeue't from me, that this,
When time shall come (as what more swift then time)
Shall be converted to a painted bliss,
Whose gilded outside beautifide your crime;
Which once displaide, clear shall it show as light,
Your Sommer-day's become a winter night.
Beware then ye, who practice and invent,
To humor greatness; for there is one more great,
Who has pronounced, like sin, like punishment; Pa^iculpa, ari poena.

Whom at that day ye hardly may entreat,
When death and horror shall be eminent:
Then will ye say unto the Mountains thus,
And shadie groves, Come down and cover us.
But were ye great as earthly pomp could make ye,
Weak is the arm of flesh, or The privilege of greatness, must be no
sub^erfuge for guil^inesse.
mightiness,
For all these feeble hopes shall then forsake ye,
With the false flourish of your happiness,
When ye unto your field-bed must betake ye;
Where ye for all your shapes and glozed forms,
Might deceive men, but cannot deceive worms.
The Statue of Agathocles.
The Argument.
AGathocles a tyrant of Syracusa, caused his Statue to be composed in this
manner. The Caput de a^ to innuendo (...) gis dignitatem brachia de eb^ re
intimando eius venustatem, caetera linimenta de aer^ denota^do st^e nuitatem,
pedes vero de terra, indicando eius fragilitatem. vid. Plut* Apotheg.
head of gold, arms of iuory, and other of the liniments of purest brass, but
the feet of earth: intimating, of what weak and infirm subsistence this
littleworld, Man, was builded. Whence we may collect, what divine
considerations the Pagans themselves observed and usually applied to rectify
their moral life: where instructions of nature directed them, not only in the
course of humane society, but even in principles above the reach and pitch of
Nature, as may appear in many Philosophical Axioms, and divinely inserted
sentences in the Works of Plato, Plutarch, Socrates; and amongst the Latins
in the inimitable labors of Seneca, Boaethius, Tacitus, and Plinius Secundus.
Upon the Moral of this Statue of Agathocles insists the Author in this Poem,
concluding with this undoubted position: That as foundations on sand are by
every tempest shaken, so man standing on feet of earth, has no firmer
foundation then mutabilitie to ground on.

THE EMBLEM.
A Gathocles, me thinks I might compare thee,
(So rare thou art) to some choice statuarie,
Who does portray with Pencile he does take,
Himself to the image which he is wont to make;
How artfull thou, and graceful too by birth,
A King, yet shows that thou art made of earth,
Not glorying in thy greatness, but would seem,
Made of the same mould other men have been!
A head of gold, as thou art chief of men,
So chief of mettalls makes thy Diadem;
Uictorious arms of purest iuorie,
Which intimates the persons purity;
The other liniments composed of brass,
Imply th'vndaunted strength of which thou was;
But feet of earth, show the ground whereon we stand,
That we are cast down in turning of a hand.
Of which, that we might make the better use,
Me thinks I could dilate the Moral thus.
Man made of earth, no surer footing can
Presume upon, then earth from whence be came,
Where firmness is infirmenesse, and the stay
On which he builds his strongest hopes, is clay.
And yet how strangely confident he grows,
In heauen-confronting boldness and in shows,
Bearing a Giants spirit, when in length,
Height, breadth, and pitch he is of Pigmeis strength.
Yea I have known a very Dwarf in sight,
Conceit himself a Pyramid in height,
Ietting so stately, as't were in his power
To mount alof^ unto the airie tower.
But when Man's proud, I should esteeme't more meet
Not to presume on's strength, but look on's feet:
Which nature (we observe) has taught the In euius atrio^ res pedes lum^ non
citius figitur, quam in se^ ipso statim de ijcitur. Vid. Plin^ in not. Hist.
Aelian. ibid. Sambuc. in Emblem. Alciat. ibid.
Swan,
And ought in reason to be done in Man.
Weak are foundations that are rer'd on sand,
And on as weak grounds may we seem to stand,
Both subject to be ruined, split and raz't,
One billow shakes the first, one grief the last.
Whence then or how subsists this earthly frame,
That merits in it self no other name,
Then O quam contempta res est homo, nisi supra humana se (...)!
shell of base corruption! it is not brass,
Marble, or iuory, which when times pass,
And our expired fates surceasse to be,
Reserve in them our living memory.
No, no, this metal is not of that proof,
We live as those under a shaking roof,
Where every moment makes apparent show,
For want of props of final overthrow.
Thus then, me thinks you may (if so you please)
Apply this Statue of Agathocles;
As he composed his royal Head of gold,
The pur'st of metals, you are thereby told,
That the Head whence reason and right judgment springs,
Should not be pesterd with inferior things;
And as his active sinnewes, arms are said,
To show their pureness, to be iuored,
Like Pelops milke-white shoulders; we are given
To understand, our arms should be to heaven,
As to their proper orb enlarged, that we
Might there be made the Saints of purity;
By rest of the parts which were composed of brass,
(Being of bigger bone then others was)
We may collect, men made of selfsame clay,
May in their strength do more then others may.
Lastly o^ earth, as men subsistence have,
Their earthly Pes in terris, nens sit in coeis.
feet do hasten to their grave.
A short Satyr of a corrupt Lawyer.
THE XIIII. SATYR.
NAso is sick of late, but how can tell? (...).

He has a swelling in his throat I fear;
^ judged as much, me thought He spoke not well,
In his poor clients cause: nay more I hear,
His tumour's grown so dangerous, as some say,
He was absolved but the the other day.
And what confessed He? not a sin I trow,
Those He reserved within a leatherne bag,
And that is his conscience; did He mercy show
Unto the po^re? not one old rotten rag
Would he ^ffoord them, or with tears bemone them,
Saying, that -- forma pauperis had undone them.
Did He not wish to be dissolved from hence?
No, when you talked of final Dissolution,
He with a sea of tears his face would drench,
Wishing He might but make another motion,
And He would be dissolved when He had done:
But His forged motion each term day begun.
Had He some matter laid upon his heart?
Abundance of corruption, foul infection.
Did He no secret treasure there impart? Oleum grati^ (...).

Naught but a box containing his complexion.
What was it Sir, some precious oil of grace?
No, but an oil to smeere his brazen face.
I have heard much of his attractiue nose,
How He could draw white Riols with his breath; Auru^ palpabil^ and aurum
potabile; Aurum obrizum and aurum adulterinum.

It Is true indeed, and therefore did He choose
To drink Aurum potabile at his death,
Nor cared He greatly if He were to lose
His soul, so that He might enjoy his nose.
It was a wonder in his greatest p^ine,
How He should have remorse; for well I know,
In his successiue fortunes naught could strain
His hardened conscience, which He would not do
For hope of gain, so as in time no sin
So great, but grew familiar with him.
O Sir, the many fees He had received,
And hood-winck'd bribes which at his death oppressed him,
The forged deeds his wicked brain contri^'d,
And that black buckram bag which did arrest him,
Commencing suite in one, surcharged Him so,
That He was plu^g'd into a gulf ofwo.
O what a smoke of powder there appeared
At the dissoluing of his ugly soul;
All that were present there to see Him feared,
His case vncas'd did show so grim, so foul:
Yet there were some had hope He would do well,
Make but one motion, and come out of hell.
But others feared that motion would be long,
If it should answer motions He made here:
Besides, that place of motions is so throng,
That one will scarce have end a thousand year.
Then Naso fare thee well, for I do see,
Earth sends to hell thy mittimus with thee.
Two short modern Satyrs.
Pseudophilia.
In Ambulantem.

Hypocritam.

A Walking Hypocrite there was, whose pace,
Trunkhose, small ruff, deminutiue in form,
Showed to each man He was the child of grace,
Such were the virtues did his life adorn;
Naught could He hear that did of lightness come,
But He would stop his ears, or leave the room.
Discourse (thus would He say) of things divine,
Soil not your souls with such lasciviousness:
Your vessels should with precious virtues shine,
As lamps of grace and lights of godliness;
But less for woe, sin's such a fruitful weed,
Still as one dies another does succeed.
Here one does beat his brain 'bo^t practices,
There is another plotting wickedness;
O how long Lord will thou blindfold their eyes,
In suffering them to work unrighteousness?
Well, I will pray for them, and Syons peace,
The prayers of Saints can no way choose but please
Thus did this mirror of devotion walk,
Inspired it seemed with some Angelicke gift,
So holy was his life, so pure his talk,
As if the spirit of zeal had Ely left,
And lodged within his breast, it could not be,
Fuller of godly feruor then was He,
But see what end these false pretenses have,
Where zeal is made a cloak to cover sin,
This whited wall to the eye so seeming grave,
Like varnished tombs had ^ought but filth within,
For though of zeal He made a formal show,
In Fortune Alley was his Rendeuow.
There He reposed there He his solace took,
Shrin'd near his Saint, his female-puritan,
In place so private as no eye could look,
To what they did, to manifest their shame:
But see heavens will, those eyes they least suspected,
First eyed their shame, whereby they were detected.
Thus did his speech and practice disagree
In one exemplar, formal, regular,
In the other loose through carnal liberty,
Which two when they do meet, so different are,
As there is no discord worse in any song,
Then twixt a hollow heart and holy tongue.
For He that does pretend, and think it enough,
To make a show of what He le^st intends,
Shall ere the period of his days run through,
Beshrew himself for his mischievous ends;
For he that is not good but would be thought,
Is worse by odds then this plain dealing nough^
Poligonia.
In Drusum meretricium A^iutorem.

DRusus, what makes thee take no trade in hand,
But like. Hermaphrodite, half man half woman
Pandors thy self, and stands at whoores command,
To play the bolt for every Haxter common?
Spend not thy hours with whoores, lest thou confess,
There is no life to thy obdurateness.
Obdurate villain hardened in ill,
That takes delight in seeing Nature naked,
Whose pleasure drawn from selfe-licentious will,
Makes thee of God, of men, and all forsaked;
Shame is thy chain, thy fetters linkes of sin,
Whence to escape is hard, being once locked in.
What news from Babell, where that p^rple whore,
With seared marrow charms deluded man,
So lulled a sleep, as He forgets heavens power,
And serves that hireling-Neapolitan?
I Will tell the^ Drusus, sad and heavy news,
Death unto Drusus while he hants the stews.
An Admonition to the Reader upon the precedent Satyrs.
WHo will not be reprou'd, it is to be feared,
Scorns to amend, or to redeem the time;
For spotless Virtue never there appeared,
Where true Humility, that frui^full vine
Has no plantation, for it cannot be,
Grace should have growth but by Humility.
Let each man then into his errors look,
And with a free acknowledgement confess;
That there are more Errataes in his book,
Then th'crabbedst Satyr can in lines express:
For this will better Him, and make Him grow
In grace with Virtue, whom He knows not now.
These my vnpolish'd Satyr: I commend,
To thy protection, not that I do fear
Thy censure other wise then as a friend,
For I am secure of cens^re I may swear,
But for form sake: if shou't accept them do,
If not, I care not how the world go.
Thine if thine own, Musophilus.

Silentio culpa crescit.
THE SHEPHERDS TALES.

Too true poor shepherds do this Proverb find,
No sooner out of sight then out of mind.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1621.

HIS PASTORALLS ARE HERE CONTINVED WITH THREE OTHER TALES; having relation to a
former part, as yet obscured: and divided into certain Pastoral Eglogues,
shadowing much delight under a rural subject.
The Argument.
HEre Corydon proves,
That nothing can be sent,
To cross love more,
The^ friends unkind restraint.
The second Argument.
COrydon coy Celia woes,
And his love by tokens shows,
Tokens are those lures, that find
Best access to woman kind.
Long he woes ere he can win;
Yet at last she fancieth him:
And so firm, as you shall hear,
Each to other troth-plight were;
But alas, where love is most,
There it oft-times most is crossed.
For these two are closly pent,
Each from other by restraint;
He, unto the plain must go,
Loue-sicke, heart-sicke, full of woe,
Where he sings such cheerful lays,
In his chaste choice, Celias praise,
That steep mountains, rocks and plains,
Seem entranced with his strains:
But alas, while he does keep,
Helpless shepherd, hapless sheep,
Celia for to seek her make,
From her keeper makes escape,
And unto the mountain goes,
Where her self, her self does lose;
While one of Lauerna'es crew,
Seizes on her as his dew,
Where by force, by awe, by fear,
She was long detained there,
And in the end affianc'd so,
As she ends her life in woe.
THE SHEPHERDS TALES.
The shepherds.
Technis. Dymnus. Dorycles. Corydon. Sapphus. Linus.
THE FIRST EGLOGVE.
Corydons tale. NAy shepherds stay, there is no have but good,
We three are shepherds, and have understood
Both of your follies and your fancies too;

Dor. Why tell us Corydon, what thou would do!


Cor. Show my misfortune Swains, as you have done,


^ech. Defer it till to morrow Corydon.


Cor. No, Technis no, I cannot if I would,
You'ue told your griefs, and now mine must be told:
What though the Sun be drawing to the West,
Where he intends to take his wonted rest,
It Is Moone-light (lads) and if it were not light,
Welcome you are to lodge with me all night.

Dor. Thanks Corydon.


Cor. Why thank you Corydon?
Simple and meane's the cottage where I won,
Yet well I wot, for chestnuts, cakes, and cream,
If you will accept my welcome as I mean,
You shall not want, but have sufficient store,
With hearty welcome swains, what would ye more?

Dym. More Corydon! it is all that we can wish,
But to thy tale, let us hear now what it is.

Dor. Yes, do good Corydon; and we will stay;


Cor. Attend then shepherds, hear what I shall say.


Sap. And when you'ue done, I will begin with mine;


Lin. Which I Will continue in the evening time.


Cor. Well said, good shepherds, we are justly three,
To answer their three tales, and here for me.
There was a Maid, and well might she be said,
So chaste, so choice she was, to be a Maid,
Where lilly white mixed with a cherrie red,
Such admiration in the shepherds bred,
As well was he that might but have a sight
Of her rare beauty mirror of delight.
Often would she come unto a silver spring,
Which near her fathers house was neighboring,
Where she would eye her self as she did pass,
For shepherds use no other looking-glass.

Tech. Tru^ Corydon.


Cor. But which may seem more rare,
This Maid she was as wise as she was fair;
So as discretion did so moderate
The safe condition of her low estate,
As envy never wronged her spotless name,
Or soild her matchless honor with defame.

Dor. Under a happy Planet she was borne,


Cor. She was indeed; nor did she ever scorn,
The company of any country maid,
How mean soere or sluttishly araid:
But she would be their play-fare, to make choose,
Of such poor simple sports as wenches use.
Yea in their wakes, shroues, wassel-cups, or tides,
Or Whitson-ales, or where the country brides
Choose out their bride-maids, as the custom is,
She seld or near was seen to do amiss:
But so respective of her name and fame,
That though she blushed, she never blushed for shame
Of any act immodest, but retained
That good opinion which her virtues gained.

Dym. Sure Corydon this was a Saintly woman;


Cor. Indeed such Saints amongst women are not common:
But to my story; her did many swain,
By fruitless suite endeavor to obtain,
As young Spudippus, rich Archymorus,
Active Aminta^, youthful Hirsius.

Dor. It seems sh'ad choice.


Cor. Yes Dorycles, she had:
And some of these were good, and some as bad,
But neither good nor bad, nor rich nor poor,
Could her content, though she had d^ily store.
Yet from Pandoras box did nere proceed,
More hateful poison upon humane seed,
Then from these for lorne lovers, whose repor^,
(But just is heaven, for they were plagued for it,)
Aspersed this scandal on fair Celia,
That she had made her choice some other way.

Tech. Unworthy lovers.


Cor. True indeed, they be
Unworthy th'loue of such an one as she;
For Linus you do know them;

Lin. Yes, I do,
But specially Spudippus, whom I know,
To be the notedst cot-queane that is about him.

Tec. Sure Linus the^ she could not choose but flout him.


Cor. Perhaps she did, yet with that modesty,
As she did shadow it so covertly,
That he could scarce discover what she meant.

Lin. How ere Spudippus would be patient.


Dor. Then he is some gull.


Lin. No he is a wealthy man,
And such an one as rightly, sure I am,
Knows how much milk crummock his cow wi^ gi^e,
And can discern a riddle from a sieve.

Cor. Linus, it seems thou knows him passing well.


Lin. Las if I would, some stories I could tell,
Would make you laugh: for as it ^hanc'd one day,
Some with my self did take his house by the way,
Where we an hour or two meant to remain,
To try how he his friends would entertain.

Dor. And pray thee how?


Lin. I Will tell thee Dorycles:
Having an hour or two taken our ease,
And ready to depart (I pray thee hear)
He sent one of his Sculletie for sc^e bear,
Which though long first, came in an earthen cup,
Which being given to me, I drunk it up;
Which drunk.

Cor. How then good Linus, pray thee say?


Lin. The rest were forced to go a thirst away.


Dor. Had he no more?


Cor. Thou used him in his kind.


Lin. May all be used so that have his mind.
But much I fear me, ^ ue disturbed thee,
Now Corydon show what the event may be!

Cor. Long did these woe, but Celia could approve
Of nothing less then of these swainlings love,
Yet would she feign to fancy one of these,
Whereby she might her bedrid father please.

Tech. Had she a father?


Cor. Yes, as^rly Lout,
Who long had lain decrepit with the gout,
And lived for all the world, and so did die
Like to a hog, that is pent up in a stie.

Dor. Some cancred erwig.


Cor. True a very elfe,
Who cared not who starved; so he fed himself.
He, as the want of one sense is expressed,
By giving more perfection to the rest,
For even his sense of feeling did decline,
Though he had been a nigglar in his time,
Y^ all those moving, active faculties,
Which in the heat of youth are wont to rise,
Gave way unto suspicion, lest his daughter
Through those loue-luring gifts which many brought her,
Should set her Maiden honor at whole sale.

Tech. Age h'as an ear indeed for every tale.


Cor. True, Technis true, for no affection can
Have more predominance ore any man,
Then jealousy a selfe-consuming rage,
Is said to have ore men of doting age.

Dor. Thy reason Corydon?


Cor. That disesteeme
Of being now more weak then they have been,
Makes them repine at others now that may,
And are as able to beget as they.

Tech. It Is rightly noted Corydon.


Lin. Yes, he
Knows by observance whence these humors be.

Cor. Linus I do, and better had I been,
If I had never known what these things mean;
But shepherds you shall hear the reason, why
I should this Dotards humor thus descrie.

Sap. Yes, do good Swain.


Cor. It chanced upon a night,
A Moone-light night, when Moon and stars shi^ bright,
That I with other shepherds did repair
To the old-mans house, and found fair Celia there,
Whom I in (...) with a kind salute,
Kissed, and with speaking heart though tongue was mut^,
Wished; o what wishes do possess a mind,
That dare (...) utter how his heart's inclind!
She might be mine, thrice blessed in being mine.

Dor. Why did not woe her S^aine, for to be thine?


Cor. Yes. Do^ycles I woed her, though not then,
For Maidens they are bashful amongst men,
And (...) not (...) ^odestie impart,
What they could (...) consent to with their heart;
So as to tell (...), truly Dorycles,
We past that night in making purposes,
Singing of catches; with such known delights,
As young folk use to pass ore winter nights.
And at that time, I may be bold to tell thee,
For such conceits I thought none could excel me.
For well you know, I was in Hyble bred,
And by the (...) sisters nourished,
So as being st^r'd by Nature, helped by art,
There was ^o strain ^ bore not in some part:
Which gave fair Celia such entire content,
As she discouerd after, what she meant.
Though I may ^eare, for five months I came to her,
And with some terms of art assaid to woe her:
During which time, all the answer I could get,
Was this; she did not mean to marry yet.

Tech. Th^t's all the answer these young women have,
While they reject what after they receive.

Cor. Technis, indeed I did perceive as much,
Though all young wenches humors be not such:
But th'greatest cause of Celias distaste,
Which made me many times the lesser graced,
Proceeded from that chrone her dogged father,
As after by conjectures I did gather:
Persuading her, that she should plant her love
On such whose hopeful means might best approve
Her discreet choice: and that was not to be
Affianced to such an one as me.

Dor. Alas poor Swain; it is true what th'Prouerbe says,
We ask not what he is, but what he has.

Cor. And yet persuasions which her father used,
Could not prevail with her, for she had chus'd,
In heart I mean.

Tech. Whom did she ^ote upon?


Cor. Will ye believe me!


Tech. Yes.


Cor. It Was Corydon.


Lin. Thrice happy swain.


Cor. Thrice happy had I been,
If I had slept still in this golden dream;
But afterward occurrences there were,
Which thus abridg'd my hopes, as you shall hear.
Such deep impression had affection made,
As there remained nothing vnassaid,
To consummate our wishes, but the rite.

Tech. Yes something else.


Cor. What Technis!


Tech. Marriage night.


Sap. They had enjoyed that, you may suppose.


Cor. No, Sapphus no, she was not one of those:
So modest, chaste, respective of her name,
Pure and demure, as th'sweetnesse of her fame,
Above the choicest odors that are sent
From spicie Tmolus flowrie continent,
Sent forth that fragrant and delightful savor,
As none ere heard, and did not seek to have her.
For sundry choice discourses have we had,
And I nere knew that ought could make her glad,
Which had least taste of lightness.

Tech. Sure thou art,
So much thy praises relish true desert,
Worthy such virtuous beauty.

Cor. Technis no,
Albeit Celia ^steem'd me so,
As long and tedious seemed that day to be,
Which did divide her from my company.
So as in silent groves and shady launes,
Where Siluans, water-nimphs, fairies, and faunes,
Use to frequent, there would we sit and sing,
Eying our beauties in a neighbor spring,
Whose silver streamlings with soft murmring noise,
To make our consort perfect, gave their voice.
And long did we observe this custom too,
Though her consent did bid me cease to woe:
For now I was no woer, but her love,
And that so firmly linkt, as naught could move,
Alter or sunder our united hearts,
But meagre death, which all true lovers parts.

Tech. Then Corydon, to me it does appear,
That you were troth-plight.

Cor. Technis so we were.
But see (good shepherds) what succeeded hence:
This love she bore me did her sire incense,
So as discurteously he pent his daughter
In such a vault, I could not see her after.
Which when my friends perceived, they grieved were,
That th'loue which I his Celia did bear,
Should be rewarded with contempt and scorn,
Being for parentage equally borne,
With best of his, as most of you can tell.

Lin. Proceed good Corydon, we know it well.


Cor. For was I not of Polyarchus line,
A noble shepherd!

Sap. True, who in his time
Solemnized many wakes on this our down,
And ere he did was to that honor grown,
As all our plains resounded with his lays,
Sung by our Swains in Polyarchus praise.

Cor. It seems thou knew him Sapphus: but attend
For now my story draws near an end.
My friends distasting this repulse of mine,
Forced me from th'course whereto I did incline:
So as my hopes confined, I Am driven to go
From Adons vale unto a mount of woe.

Lin. Unhappy shepherd.


Cor. And unhappy sheep,
For ill could I my herds from worrying keep,
Though to that charge my friends enjoined me,
When I could scarcely keep my own hands free,
From doing violence upon my self:
So as one day upon a ragged shelfe,
Wreathed round with Iuie, as I ^ate alone,
Descanting Odes of sorrow and of moan,
I chanced on my mishap to meditate,
Celias restraint, and my forlorn estate;
Which done, I vowed if speedy remedy
Gave no relief unto my malady,
That very cliff where I reposed that day,
Should be the means to take my life away.

Tech. O Corydon this sounds of despair.


Cor. It does indeed: but such a watchful care,
Had gracious Pan of me, that in short time,
These motives to despair 'gan to decline,
And lose their force: so as when griefs grew ripe,
I used to take me to my oaten pipe.

Dor. But ere thou proceed further, tell us Swain,
Where all this time thou used to remain.

Cor. A broad-spread oak with aged arms and old,
Directs the passenger the way he would,
Near Cadmus rising hillocks, where the spring
Of golden Tagus uses often to bring
Such precious traffic to the neighbor shore,
As former times through blindness did adore
Those ^urled streams, wherein they did descry
Their love to gold, by their Idolatry:
That shady oak I say, and that blessed spring,
In my distress, gave me such harboring;
As night and day I did not thence remove,
But waking mused, and sleeping dreamed of l^ue.

Tech. Who ever heard the like!


Dor. How did thou live?


Cor. On hope.


Tech. Weak food.


Cor. Yet did it comfort give,
To my afflicted mind, which did desire,
Ever to singe her wings in fancies fire.
For many weeks in this distressed estate,
Wretched, forlorn, helpless and desolate,
Sat I dejected, musing on despair,
And when those drerie clouds would once grow fair:
But las the more I did expect relief,
The less hope had I to allay my grief,
So as in the end, as you shall after hear,
All means for my redress abridged were.
But that you may perceive what love can do,
And how effectually her passions show,
I who before I lovely Celia kent,
Knew not what the Heliconian Muses meant,
Addressed my self;

Lin. To what good Corydon?


Cor. To write of love, and thus my Muse begun.


Tech. Pray thee kind Swain let us hear what thou did write.


Dor. Yes do: for well I know it will delight
Sepheards to hear, of shepherds amorous toys;

Sap. On then good Corydon.


Cor. Have at ye Boys.
Celia speak, or I am dombe,
Here I Will soiorne till thou come,
Seek I will till I grow blind,
Till I may my Celia find.
For if tongue-tide, string would break,
If I heard but Celia speak;
And if blind, I soon should see,
Had I but a sight of thee;
Or if lame, love would find feet,
Might I once with Celia meet;
Or if deaf, should I but hear
Loves sweet accents from thy ear:
Thy choice notes would me restore,
That I should be deaf no more.
Thus though dombe, blind, deaf, and lame,
Heard I but my Celias name,
I should speak, see, hear, and go,
Vowing, Celia made me so.

Tech. Beshrow me Corydon, if I had thought,
That love such strange effects could ere have wrought,

Cor. Yes Technis, yes, love's such a wondrous thing,
That it will make one plungd in sorrow sing,
And singing weep, for grief is wont to borrow
Some strains of joy, that joy might end in sorrow.
For what is woe (as we must needs confess it)
Having both tongue and tears for to express it,
But a beguiling grief, whose nature's such,
It can forget, lest it should grieve too much.

Dor. Indeed such sorrow seldom lasts long,
But say good Swain, heard Celia of thy song?

Cor. I know not, Dorycles: but it was her lot,
That from her keeper afterward she got.

Tech. Happy escape.


Cor. Ah Technis, say not so,
For this escape gave new increase to woe;

Lin. How could that be?


Cor. Hear but what did ensue,
She was prevented by a ruffin-crue,
As she upon the mountains rom'd about,
Through desert caves to find her shepherd out.

Tech. Alas poor wench; what were they Corydon?


Cor. Such as did haunt there, and did live upon
Rapine and violence, triumphing in
Impunitie, sole motive unto sin.
In brief, they were, for so they did profess,
Of brave Lauerna'es crew, that patroness
Of all disorder, and each evening time
Offered stolen booties to her godless shrine.

Tech. Mishap above mishaps.


Cor. True, so it was;
My less she lost her lad, the lad his less.
And sundry days, this rout did her detain,
While hapless, helpless she did sore complain
Of their inhumane usage, but her grief,
Sighs, sobs, tears, throbs, could yield her small relief:
For in the end one of this forlorn crew,
Seized on my long-lou'd Celia as his dew,
To whom espousd whether she would or no,
She ends her life, her tedious life, in woe.

Lin. A sad event: but can she not be freed?


Cor. To what end Linus, she is dishonored!


Tech. Unhappie fate.


Cor. Besides, she now is tide,
And by enforcement, made another Bride.
Come shepherds come, and say if ever time,
Made heardmens woes so ripe, as't has done mine.

Sap. Yes Corydon, though thou thy griefs have shown,
Which makes thee think none equal to thine own,
I have a Tale will move compassion too,
If Swains have any pity.

Dym. Pray thee how?


Sap. Nay I will not be dainty; but attend,
And then compare our stories to the end,
And you will conclude that never any Swain
Did lone so well, and reap so small a gain.

The Argument.
SApphus woes Siluia,
Yet he thinks it ill,
To take to that,
Which he did never till.
The second Argument.
SHe, whose sweet and graceful speech,
Might all other shepherds teach:
She, whom countries did admire,
For her presence and attire:
She, whose choice perfections moved,
Those that knew her to be loved.
She, even Siluia, for save she,
None so fair, and firm could be;
When she should be Sapphus Bride,
And their hands were to be tide
With their hearts in marriage knot,
Sapphus hears of Siluias blot.
Whereby Sapphus does collect,
How hard it is for to affect,
Such an one as will rejoice,
And content her in her choice;
He concludes, since all things be
Certain in uncertainty,
Who would trust what women say,
Who can do but what they may.
Forts are won by foes assault,
If Maids yield, it is Man's fault.
THE SECOND EGLOGVE.
Sapphus tale. I Had a Love as well as any you,
And such an one, as had she but her due,
Deserved the service of the worthiest swain
That ere fed sheep upon the Western plain.

Dym. Good Sapphus say, what was thy lasses name?
Was it not Siluia?

Sap. The very same;
It seems thou knew her.

Dym. Yes exceeding well,
And might have known her, but I would not mell,
In more familiar sort.

Sap. Unworthy Swain,
Did her affection merit such astaine?
Suppose she threw some looser looks upon thee,
And thou collected thence she would have won thee,
Is this th'requit all of the love she bore?

Dym. Nay on good Sapphus, I Will do so no more.


Sap. No more! why now I swear, and may be bold
That Dymnus would have done it if he could.
Why sir, what parts were ever in you yet,
That she on you such fancy should have set?

Tech. Fie, shepherds fie, we come not here to scold:
Come Sapphus, tell thy tale as we have told.

Sap. Dymnus does interrupt me.


Lin. Dymnus cease.


Dym. Nay I have done, so he will hold his peace.
But to vpbraid me, that I had no part
To gain her love, I scorn it with my heart:
For I Will avouch.

Tech. Nay then the strife's begun.


Dor. Dymnus for shame.


Dym. Nay shepherds, I have done.


Dor. Pray then proceed good Sapphus.


Sap. Willingly:
Though I can hardly brook this injury.

Dym. Why Sapphus, I am sure thou know all this,
That she was light.

Sap. I know she did amiss,
Yet I must tell you Dymnus,'t had been fit,
That rather I then you had noted it:
For it concerned me most.

Dym. Pray let it rest,
I did not know so much, I may protest.

Sap. Dymnus, enough: and thus I do proceed;
Upon a time when I my flocks did feed,
Her father Thyrsis chanced to come that way,
And to observe me more, a while made stay
Upon the Down, where I did feed my sheep:
Who eying^me, how duly I did keep
My woollse store (as I had care) from worrien,
Scab, sought, the r^t or any kind of murren:
Took such a liking on me, as to say
The very truth, upon next holy day,
He did inuit me to his house, where I
Found what was love in lovely Siluia's eye.
In brief, I loved her, I may boldly tell,
And this her father notes, and likes it well:
For often used he to say, right sure I am,
A penny in a man then with a man,
He did esteem more of, which he applide
Unto that care which he in me descride.

Dym. A jolly Swain he was.


Sap He was indeed,
And on these Downs more frolic rams did breed,
Then any Swainling that did dwell about him,
And truth to say, they would do naught without him.

Dor. It Is said that Thirsk from Thirsis took her name,
Who thither with his herds a grazing came,
And played upon his pipe such pleasant strains,
As he yet lives upon the neighbor plains.

Sap. This know I Dorycles, that in my hearing,
He pip'd so sweet, that many shepherds fearing
Th'melodious strains which issued from his reed,
Would so amaze their flocks they could not feed:
Jointly together in a secret cave,
Where Palms and Mirtles their increasing have,
They so contrived an harbor for the nonst,
That he might from the scorching Sun be sconst,
And sing at pleasure, while his accents raising,
Heardsmen were hearing, and their herds were grazing.
For curious seats hewne from the solid stone,
Were aptly framed for Swains to sit upon,
Who in his voice conceived such choice delight,
As a whole Summer day from morn to night,
Seemed but an hour, so sweetly did he sing,
While every day he found out some new spring.
But all too long digression have I made;
Falling in love with Siluia as I said,
I saw and perishd, perishd, for it cost
My liberty, which I by seeing lost.

Dor. Dear was that sight.


Sap. Yet dearer may I swear,
Was she to me, then any senses were:
For other objects I did wholly shon,
Choosing her self for me to look upon.
Neither was I hope-reft, for she did seem
To fancy me, hows'euer she did mean;
And I deserved it, as I thought that day,
For clothed in my suite of shepherds gray,
With buttond cap and buskins all of one,
I may assure you (heardsmen) I thought none
On all our Down more neat or handsome was,
Or did deserve more kindness from his less.

Dym. A good conceit does well.


Sap. And truth was this,
She showed me all respect that I could wish,
And undissembled too, I am persuaded,
Though afterward all that affection faded.
For on a day, (this I thought good to tell,
That you may thence perceive she loved me well)
In a green shadie harbor I reposed,
With Sycamours and Iu^ipers enclosed,
She privately into the harbor crept,
Which seen, I fatn'd a sleep, but never slept.

Tech. A fair occasion!


Lin How did she reveal
Her love?

Sap. If you had felt, what I did feel,
You never would awakt, but wished do die,
In such a soule-beguiling fantasy.
For first she eyed me, nor contented so,
With nimble pace she to my lips did go:
And calls, and clings, and clips me round about,
Using a soft-sweete dalliance with her foot,
Not to awake me from my cheer full dream,
But to impart what she in heart did mean;
Wherewith I seemed to wake.

Tech. Why did thou so?


Sap. Technis, I thought she trod upon my toe,
But as I waked, she without further stay,
Dying her cheeks with blushes, stole away.

Dym. This showed she loved thee.


Sap. So I know she did,
But who can perfect what the fates forbid?
For long we lived thus, and loved too,
With vows as firm as faith and troth could do,
That naught should ere infringe that nuptial band,
Confirmed betwixt us two with heart and hand.
So as with Thirsis knowledge and consent,
After so many weeks in loue-toyes spent,
It was agreed upon by either side,
That I should be her Bridegroom, she my Bride.
And th'day of Solemnization was set down,
So as the choicest youths in all the town,
Addressed themselves, for I was valued then
Amongst the chiefest Swains, to be my men.

Lin. I know it Sapphus, both thy wealth and worth,
Were both of power enough to set thee forth.

Sap. In brief, for I your patience might wrong,
To stand upon these marriage rites too long;
To th'Church we went, suspecting I may swear,
No such events as after did appear.

Tech. What sad events, good Sapphus?


Sap. Being now
Come to do that which we could nere vnde,
The Priest pronounced a charge, whereby was meant,
If either of us knew impediment,
Why we should not be joined, then to speak,
That we in time might such a wedlock break;
Or any one there present should show cause,
Why we might not be married by the laws:
There to declare, in public one of these,
Or else for ever after hold their peace.
God speed them well, said all, save only one,
Who sto^d from thence some distance all alone,
Crying, aloud in open audience,
Sapphus for bear, there is no conscience,
That thou should join thy hand to one defiled;
At least provide a father for her child,
Which she kind pregnant wench is great withal.
And, who ere got it, will thee father call.

Tech. This was a strange prevention.


Sap. I confess it,
But ify'ad heard how Meuus did express it,
(For so his name was) you would have admired
His frontlesse impudence.

Dym. Sure he was hired,
To frustrate these solemnities.

Sap. A^ no,
Believe me Dymnus it was nothing so:
For she was fruitful long before her time,
But th'fault was hers, it was no fact of mine:
So as her neighbors judged and censurd on her,
That she begun by time to take upon her.
But this shall be in silence past for me,
Only she is shadowed in my A Poem ent^ tled Omphale.
Omphale,
And so charactred, as the time may come,
Siluia shall be as Flora was in Rome.

Dor. But what succeeded hence?


Sap. Upon this voice
There straight arose a strange confused noise,
Some Meuus taxed, and said he was to blame,
To blemish any modest Maidens name;
Others were doubtful, left it should be true,
And thus they thought, and thus it did ensue.
I now suspicious of this foul dishonor,
Which Meuus publicly had laid upon her:
Resolved those solemn spousals to delay,
And put them off until another day:
Mean while, (attend me Swains) when th'day came on
That I should marry, Siluia had a son.

Cor. God bless the boy.


Dym. Who might the child be git?


Sap. Nay Dymnus sure, who ever fatherd it.


Dym. Who I!


Sap. Nay blush not man for you have told,
You might oft-times have done it if you would;
But I do wish her all the good I can,
And praise her choice, though I be not the man.

Tech. Unhappy choice!


Dor. Hard fate!
It Is nothing so,
You Will hear a choice more fatal ere you go.
These were but toys to entertain the time,
Prepare your handkerchers if you will have mine.

All. What, must we weep?


Lin. Shepherds a while forbear,
And if there be no cause, judge when you hear.

The Argument.
LInus does Lesbia love,
And woe, and win,
And after by her
Lightness wrongeth him.
The second Argument.
Lovely Lesbia, who might be,
For birth, beauty, quality,
Styled Natures Paragon,
Framed for Swains to dote upon;
In a word for to express,
Feature of this Shepherdess,
If you would her stature know,
She was neither high nor low;
But of such a middle size,
As if Nature did devise,
(For as't seems so she meant)
To make her, her president;
With a Sun-reflecting eye,
Skin more smooth then iuory;
Cherrie lip, a dimple chin,
Made for love to lodge him in;
A sweet chearing-chafing sent,
Which perfumed ground where she went;
A perswasiue speech, whose tongue
Struck deep admiration dombe.
She, even she, whom all approved,
Is by lively Linus loved,
And at last (what would ye more)
Though she was betrothed before
To Palemon, that brave Swain,
Who quite droupes through her disdain,
Is with rites solemnized,
Unto Linus married;
Whom he finds (as heaven is just)
After, staind with boundless lust,
So as he laments his state,
Of all most unfortunate,
That he should in hope of pelf,
Wrong both others and himself.
THE THIRD EGLOGVE.
Linus tale. I Loved a less, alas that ere I loved,
Who as she seemed to be, if she had proved,
A worthier Swain the country nere had bred,
And her I woing won, and winning wed.

Tech. I like thee Linus, thy preamble's short;


Lin. Technis, indeed I (...) not of that sort,
Who for a thing of naught will pule and cry,
And childishly put finger in the eye;
The burden of my grief is great to bear.

Dor. What is it Linus, pray thee let us hear?


Lin. The Maid I got, and Lesbia was her name,
Was to another troth-plight ere I came.

Cor. How should she Linus then be got by thee?


Lin. It was my fate, or her inconstancy.
Hows'ere I have her, and possess her now,
And would be glad to give her one of you.

Tech. Art weary of thy choice?


Lin. Technis, I am,
For I Am persuaded fhe'd weary any man.
So seeming smooth she is and ever was,
As if she hardly could say Michaelmas:
But privately so violently fierce,
As I Am afraid her name will spoil my verse.

Cor. This is some hornet sure.


Lin. A very waspe,
Whose forked tongue who ever should vnelaspe,
Would find't a task to charm it.

Dym. Is It so tart;


Lin. O Dymnus, that thou did but feel a part
Of my affliction, thou would surely moan,
And pity me, that is matched to such an one;
For tell me shepherds was there ere so rare,
A crime, wherein my Lesbia does not share?
Proud, (though before as humble to the eye
As ere was Maid) so as one may descrie,
Even by her outward habit what she is,
And by her wanton gesture gather this:
If thou be chaste, thy body wrongs thee much,
For thy light carriage says, thou art none such.

Sap. Some fashion-monger I durst pawn my life.


Lin. Sapphus it is true, such is poor Linus wife,
Though ill it seems a country Shepherdess,
Such harsh fantastic fashions to profess:
One day unto a Barber she'de repair,
And for what end but this, to cut her hair,
So as like to a Boy she did appear,
Having her hair round cut unto her ear.

Cor. Good Linus say, how looked that Minx of thine?


Lin. Like to a fleecelesse Ewe at shearing time.
So cowd she was, as next day she did show her
Upon the Downs, but not a Swain could know her;
So strangely clipped she seemed, and in disguise,
So monstrous ougly, as none could devise
To see one clad in lothsomer attire:
And this she knew was far from my desire,
For I did ever hate it.

Tech. Pray thee Lad
Tell us in earnest how she might be clad!

Lin. There is a fashion now brought up of late,
Which here our country Blouzes imitate,
The cause whereof I do not think it fit,
If I did know it, for to discover it,
But sure I judge, some rot's in woman's joints,
Which makes them feign to tie them up with points.

Dym. With points!


Lin. Yes Dymnus, that is the fashion now,
Whereof I have a tale, right well I know,
Will make you laugh.

Dor. Let Us hear that tale of thiue.


Lin. Shepherds you shall; it chanced upon a time,
That Lesbia, whose spirit ever would
Observe the fashion, do I what I could,
Bearing a port far higher in a word,
Then my ability could well afford:
That she I say into this fashion got,
(As what was th'fashion she affected not)
Of tying on with points her looser waste;
Now I observing how her points were plast,
The Even before she to a wake should go,
I all her points did secretly undo,
Yet therewith all such easy knots did make,
That they might held till she got to the wake,
Which she not minding.

Cor. On good Linus, on.


Lin. She hyes her to the wake (my Corydon.)
Where she no sooner came, then she is taken in,
And nimbly, falls unto her reuelling,
But see the luck on it, while she scuds and skips,
Her vnderbody falls from off her hips,
Whereat some laughed, while others took some ruth,
That she vncas'd, should show the naked truth.
But hear what happened hence, ere th'setting Sun
Lodged in the West, she heard what I had done;
So as resolved to quite me in my kind,
Next morn betime, she Hylus chanced to find.

Sap. Who, Clytus boy!


Lin. Yes Sapphus, selfsame Lad,
Who was a good boy, ere she made him bad.

Tech. Pray Linus how?


Lin. Through her immodestie,
She him allured for to dishonor me.

Tech. Difloy all Lesbia; but pray the show,
Did Hylus (harmless youth) consent thereto?

Lin. Technis, he did;


Dor. How should thou know as much?


Lin. She did display't her self.


Dor. Is her shame such?


Lin. Yes, and withal defide me to my face,
With such injurious speeches of disgrace,
As patience could not bear.

Tech. And did thou bear them?


Lin. Yes, Technis yes, and smild when I did hear them
For this is my conceit, it seems no man,
To show his violence unto a woman.

Dym. Linus says well, but woman's nature's such,
They will presume if men do bear too much.
For if the tongue upon defiance stand,
The tongue should be revenged by the hand.

Lin. Some would have done it Dymnus, but I thought
If I revenge by such base means had sought,
The woreld would condemn me; she could blind
Most men with an opinion, she was kind,
But in a modest sort: for on a time,
Rich Amphybaeus offering to the shrine
Of Panaretus (as there went report)
Sought for her love in a dishonest sort,
With price, with prayer, yet nere attained his aim,
To soil her honor, or her virtues stain;

Sap. Women are nice when simple heard-men crave it,
And will say na^y, when they the fainst would have it.

Lin. It Is right; and now good shapheards tell me true,
Have I not cause, for I Will be judged by you,
To moan my hard mishap?

Tech. Thou have indeed.


Cor. Thy woes, friend Linus, make my heart strings bleed;


Lin. I thank you all; but will you hear a song,
Penned in the meditation of my wrong!

Dor. For loues-sake do!


Lin. Judge if the descant fit
The burden of my grief, for this is it;
As for the note before I further go,
My tune is this, and who can blame my woe?
If Marriage life yield such content,
What heavy hap have I,
Whose life with grief and sorrow spent,
Wish death, yet cannot die:
She Is bent to smile when I do storm,
When I am cheerful too,
She seems to loure, then who can cure,
Or counterpoize my woe?
My marriage day chased you away,
For I have found it true,
That bed which did all joys display,
Became a bed of rue;
Where aspes do brouze on fancies flower,
And beauties blossom too:
Then where is that power on earth may cure,
Or counterpoize my woe?
I thought love was the lamp of life,
No life without' en love,
No love like to a faithful wife:
Which when I sought to prove,
I found her birth was not on earth,
For ought that I could know;
Of good ones I perceived a dearth,
Then who can cure my woe?
Zantippe was a jealous shrow,
And Menalippe too,
Faustina had a stormy brow,
Corinna'es like did show;
Yet these were Saints compared to mine,
For mirth and mildlesse too:
Who runs division all her time,
Then who can cure my woe?
My board no dishes can afford,
But chafing dishes all,
Where self-will domineres as Lord,
To keep poor me in thrall;
My discontent gives her content,
My friend she vows her foe:
How should I then my sorrows vent,
Or cure my endless woe?
No cure to care, farewell all joy,
Retire poor soul and die,
Yet ere thou die, thy self employ,
That thou may (...) the sky;
Where thou may move commanding Jove,
That Pluto he might go
To wed thy wife, who end't thy life,
For this will cure thy woe!

Dym. I judge by this, that thou would feign for sake her,
And freely give her any that would take her.

Lin. Dymnus I would, but I my cross must bear,
As I have done before this many year;
But since our griefs are equally expressed,
Let Us now compare which is the heauiest!

Tech. I lost my Amarillid^;


Dor. But she
Was nothing to Bellina.

Dym. No, nor she
Like to my fair Palmira.

Cor. Nor all three
Equal to Celia;

Sap. Let Siluia be
The only fair.

Lin. Admit, they all were fair,
Your griefs with me, may have no equal share,
For you are free, so as perhaps you may
Make choice of some, may be as fair as they;
But I am bound, and that in such a knot,
As only death may it unloose, or not.

Tech. To Linus must we yield; but who are these?


Dor. Two iollie shepherds, that do hither prese,
With ribbon favors, and rosemary sprigs,
Chanting along our Downs their rural ijg^,
As to some wedding boun;

Sap. You may presume,
For John unto the May Pole is their tune,
And that is their bridal note.

Lin. Let us draw near them,
Close to this shadie Beech, where we may hear them.

The shepherds holy day, reduced in apt measures to Hobbinalls Forth of a
curious Spinet graced with the best rarities of Art and Nature, Mopsus a
shepherd, and Marina a shepherdess, singing a Nuptial hy^ne in the way ^o
the Bridal.
Galliard, or John to the May Pole.
MOpso. Come Marina let us away,
For both Bride and Bridegroom stay,
Fie for shame are Swains so long,
Pinning of their head-geare on?
Pray thee see,
None but we,
Among the Swains are left unready,
Fie, make have,
Bride is past,
Follow me and I will lead thee.

Mar. On my lovely Mopsus, on,
I am ready, all is done,
From my head unto my foot,
I am fitted each way to it;
Buskins gay,
Gown of gray,
Best that all our flocks do render,
Hat of stroe,
Platted through,
Cherrie lip and middle slender.

Mop. And I think you will not find
Mopsus any whit behind,
For he loves as well to go,
As most part of shepherds do.
Cap of brown,
Bottle-crowne,
With the leg I won at dancing,
And a pumpe
Fit to iumpe,
When we shepherds fall a prancing.
And I know there is a sort,
Will be well provided for it,
For I hear, there will be there
Liueliest Swains within the Shere:
Ietting Gill,
Iumping Will,
Ore the floor will have their measure:
Kit and Kate,
There will wait,
Tib and Tom will take their pleasure.

Mar. But I fear;


Mop. What do thou fear?


Mar. Crowd the fiddler is not there:
And my mind delighted is,
With no stroke so much as his.

Mop. If not he,
There will be
Drone the piper that will trounce it.

Mar. But if Crowd,
Struck aloud,
Lord me thinks how I could bounce it!

Mop. Bounce it Mall, I hope thou will,
For I know that thou have skill,
And I am sure thou there shall find,
Measures store to please thy mind;
Roundelayes,
Irish-hayes,
Cogs and rongs and Peggie Ramsie,
Spanilet to,
The Uenetto,
John come kiss me, Wilsons fancy.

Mar. But of all there is none so sprightly
To my ear, as tutch me lightly:
For it is this we shepherds love,
Being that which most does mo^;
There, there, there,
To a hair,
O Tim Crowd, me ^hinks I hear thee,
Young nor old,
Nere could hold,
But must leake if they come nere thee.

Mop. Blush Marina, fie for shame,
Blemish not a shepherds name;

Mar. Mopsus why, is it such a matter,
Maids to show their yielding nature?
O what then,
Be ye men,
That will bear your selves so froward,
When you find
Us inclined,
To your bed and board so toward?

Mop. True indeed, the fault is ours,
Though we term it oft-times yours;

Mar. What would shepherds have us do,
But to yield when they do woe?
And we yield
Them the field,
And endow them with our riches.

Mop. Yet we know,
Oft-times too,
You Will not stick to wear the breches.

Mar. Fools they will deem them, that do hear them
Say, their wives are wont to wear them:
For I know there is none has wit,
Can endure or suffer it;
But if they
Have no stay,
Nor discretion (as it is common)
Then they may
Give the sway,
As is fitting to the woman.

Mop. All too long (dear love) I ween,
Have we stood upon this theme:
Let each less, as once it was,
Love her Swain, and Swain his less:
So shall we
Honored be,
In our mating, in our meeting,
While we stand
Hand in hand,
Honest Swainling, with his Sweeting.

Dor. How say you shepherds, shall we all repair
Unto this wedding, to allay our care?

Dym. Agreed for me.


Tech. And I am well content.


Cor. On then, let us make our life a merriment.


Sap. See where they come!
May Hymen aye defend them.

Lin. And far more joy then I have had God send them.


FINIS.
OMPHALE, OR, THE INCONSTANT SHEPHERDESS.

Perijssem, nisi perijssem.



LONDON, Printed for RICHARD WHITAKER. 1621.

To her in whose chaste breast choicest virtues, as in their Abstract, are
seated:

The accomplishd Lady P. W. wife to the Nobly-descended S. T. W. Knight: and
daughter to the much honored, S. R. C.

All correspondence to her worthiest wishes.

OMPHALE, OR, THE INCONSANT SHEPHERDESS.

IN bondage free, in freedom bound I am,

A hopeless, hapless, loue-sicke, life-sicke man;

When I write ought, straight love preuenteth me,

And bids me write of naught but Omphale:
When I ride East, my heart is in the West,
Lodged in the center of her virgin-breast.
The homeliest cell would cheerful seem to me,
If I in it might live with Omphale.
My youth grows aged, for though I Am in my prime,
Love has made furrows in this face of mine;
So as last day (aye me unhappy elfe)
Looking in th'glasse, I scarce could know my self.
And I, from whom these sharp extremes did grow,
Was not content, but I must tell her too,
Which made her proud, for few or none there are,
(If women) but they are proud if they be fair.
All this last Summer has it been my hap,
To sport, toy, play, and want on in her lap,
And ever th'more I played, if so I could,
Or strength admitted means, the more I would:
For truth confirms that Maxim, where we find
A loving, loyal, well-disposed mind,
Pressed for encounter, there we love to plant,
Feeding on Loves delights in midst of want;
For Love contemnes all want, and counts't a gain,
To purchase one hours joy with two years pain.
Alas how often (too often thou well may say)
Have I in private spent with her the day,
Inuoking th'Sunne, plants, heaven, and earth and all,
If fall I should, she did procure my fall?
And still she vowed, and bit her lip, and stepped
Apart from me, and wiped her eyes and wept,
And stood and chid, and called me most unjust,
To harbor in my bosom such distrust.
And I (too credulous I) as one dismayed,
Was forced to recant what I had said,
Swearing I was resolved that th'constancie,
Of Or Hypermnestra, one of the fisue daughters of D^naus, who out of a tender
^uptiall ^ffectio^, saved her husband Lynceus from that great slaughter which
was committed by her sisters, in ^ying their husbands.
Hypemnestra matched not Omphale.
Thus did I gull my self to sooth my love,
Who proved a Serpent, though she seemed a Dove:
For vows, protests, and all that she had spoken,
Were by her light affection quickly broken.
And whence came this? not from me, heaven thou knows,
But from my love who triumphs in my woes;
My love; raze out that name: she was indeed,
When thou and she your lanbkins used to feed
On Arnus flowrie banks, being wont to make
Posies and nosegaies for her shepherds sake,
And bind them to his hook; but let that pass,
She is not she, nor time the same it was.
For then (o then) suspicious eyes were free,
And none but heavenly bodies looked on thee;
(Too fair spectators,) though we now and then
Dispense with Gods sight rather then with men.
And can she think on this and not relent,
Or thinking not of this, can she consent
To leave Admetus? Yes, why can she not!
Now loves she Cloris, and I fear his lot
Will prove as fatal, for her very eye
Tells me she means to tread her shoe awry.
And this I saw before, and durst not see,
For th'loue I bore to her, persuaded me
She could not be so thankelesse, as requite
My faithful service with such strange despite:
Yet I perceived, not by suspicious fear,
But by the Organs both of eye and ear,
That love was fained which to me she bore,
Reserving others to supply her store.
And I confess in the end I jealous grew,
For some had many favors, I but few;
Others had smiles, I frowns, so as I say,
I found her former fancy fall away,
Which gave increase to grief, cause to my eye
To look into her steps more narrowly;
So as poor fool (so vainly did I err)
I thought each bush did play th'Adulterer,
So violent was this passion; which to show,
Though of Actaeons there be store enough,
I briefly mean, (and let all others pass)
To tell you how my jealous humor was.
Each thing I eyed, did represent to me,
The lovely feature of my Omphale,
Yet so, as still that precious form I saw,
Did by attractiue power another draw,
To make her form more complete, for we know,
Number can never consist of less then two.
Straight did I see, (suspicion made me see)
My self made cuckold in a fantasy,
Which in my thoughts such deep impression took,
As now and then I threw away my book,
Calling my self an Ass, to pore on that
Which gave my wench time to cornute my pate;
And to confirm the height of my disgrace,
Suffer the rifling of her common place.
Sometimes in silent nights, when hoarie care
Is charmed asleep, and men exempted are
From day-bred passions, would I start from bed,
And swear, the night had me dishonored;
While she (sleepe-lulled soul) did think no harm,
But lay entwining me with arm in arm:
Yet hearing me she wakt, and chid me too,
For doing (humerous fool) what I did do,
And as she chid I wept, yet inward feign,
My dreams proved false, I went to bed again.
If I but found her in discourse with any,
I straight renounced her love, and swore too many
Were factors in my Pinnace, yet one frown
Sent from her brow, subdude me as her own.
If she received a letter from a friend,
I straight coniectur'd what it did intend;
Supposing (vain suppose) where th'place should be,
That witness might the shame of Omphale:
To which I vowed revenge, though nothing were,
But my own thoughts that ministered this fear.
Often would I feign (for what were all my thoughts,
But fictions merely) that she played naught
With her own shadow, and Narcissus-like,
That in her form she took such quaint delight,
As forced now to surfeit on her store,
She proved this true: Much plenty made her poor.
Thus did her presence cause me to admire her,
Her absence like occasion to desire her;
Without whose presence, though the Sunneshone fair,
All seemed dark, because she was not there.
Last time we parted with teare-trickling eye,
Hand joined in hand right ceremonially,
I called the heavens and sacred powers above,
To witness with me my unfeigned love,
And vowed withal, if ere it should appear,
I broke the faith which I had plight to her,
Or entered any bed lasciuiously,
Intending to play false with Omphale,
Or entertained least thought of disrespect
To her or hers in nature of neglect,
Or ever cancelled the deed, which (heavens you know,
Was sealed and was delivered twixt us two)
Or ever changed my fancy, to divide
My shared love unto another Bride,
Or ere disclaimed what I in secret vowed,
Or disallow what Hymen had allowed;
If this or that, or any of these all,
Should censure me of lightness, that my fall
Might recompense my shame (which heavens forbid)
And this I vowed to do, and this I did.
Nor did she spare to second me in this,
But wished if ere she chanced to do amiss,
With an intent of ill, or violate
Those solemn hests our loves had consummate,
Or ftain'd that spousall rest, that blessed repose,
Where two encountered, yet were neither foes;
Or disesteem'd my love, or prized it
Less then a constant lover did befit,
Or let one day or night pass carelessly,
Without recalling me to memory,
Or give occasion to the world to say,
She loves another when her love's away,
Or entertain a favor, or descry
Least of affection by alluring eye,
Or riot in my absence, or consort
With any that might blemish her report,
Or frequent public presence, which might move
A subject for variety of love:
If this or that, or any should begin
To tax her life, might vengeance plague her sin.
Thus we both vowed, and thus we parted too,
But hear how soon my love infringed her vow;
No sooner had the region of the West,
Removed me from my love, and reft me rest,
Where steepie mountains ragged and uneven,
Ossa and Pelion-like do menace heaven,
Where scalpie hills and sandy vales imply,
The ploughmans toile's requited slenderly;
Where their course feeding and their homely fare,
Makes their wits lumpish, and their bodies spare:
Then she (inconstant she) forgot me clean,
And all her vows, as if I had not been.
Distance of place, made distance in our love,
And as my body moved, her love did move
From her first center: thus even in my Prime,
Did my love change, when I did change my clime.
Thus like blind Cupids ball (by fancy crossed)
Was I to every hazard strangely tossed;
Thus was my service guerdon'd with disgrace,
While Cloris crept into Admetus place:
And can her height of sin be thus forgot?
No, wanton no, who is it knows it not?
So as thy crime thy nature will display,
And make thy story worse then Cressida,
Who in contempt of faith, (as we do read)
Rejected Troilus for Diomede!
Can thou make show of love to me or any,
That art exposed to loving of so many?
Can thou have heart to vow, when thou forsook,
And did infringe the oath which thou first took?
Can thou have face to come in open light,
That have incurred revenge in his pure sight,
Whose vengeance thou inuok't? can thou repair
Unto thy sex, or taste the common air,
Having, (by making of thy faith so common)
Infected the air, impeached the Sex of women?
Can thou look on that faithless hand of thine,
And give it to another being mine?
Can thou, and see that face, not blush to see
Those tears thou shed, and vows thou made to me?
Or can embrace another in thy bed,
Hearing thy first espoused friend not dead?
Suppose I should surprise thee, could I long
Restrain my hand, and not revenge my wrong?
Could I allay my passion vnexprest,
Or see the Adulterer sleep within thy breast?
Could I endure my bed should be abused,
Or see her strumpeted, whom I had chus'd?
Could I content my self to see my shame,
And coward-like, not to redress the same?
No, no insatiate thou, sooner could time
Leave his gradation, or the Sun to shine,
Light bodies to ascend and leave their center,
Rivers their downward course, then I should venture
My patience on that odds: but foolish I,
That gave no credit to mine ear or eye,
But made my senses all Cassandra'es, where
Mine ear presaged, yet l'de not trust mine ear:
Such strange distempers does this Circe breed,
This phrensie-fancie in a lovers head,
That though he hear, see, taste, and touch, and smell
His loves unkindness, yet he dare not tell,
But must renounce th'instruction of all these,
Yea, (even himself) that he his wench may please.
O why should man term woman th'weaker kind,
Since they are stronger, as we daily find,
In will, and head, although their husbands brows,
Often to a harder kind of temper grows?
So as for all that we do style them weaker,
They often become to be their husbands maker!
But now Admetus, will thou pine and die,
And ^aste thy self for her inconstancy?
Will thou lament the loss of such an one,
As has resolved to keep her faith with none?
Or can thou dote on her, that longs to be
Affected of each youth that she does see?
No, no Admetus, since she proves untrue,
Shed not one tear nor sigh, for none is due,
But offer Pan the chief of all thy flock,
That thou art rid of such a weathercocke.
Now may thou pipe upon thy oaten reed,
Whilst thy Mug-sheepe on Arnus pastures feed:
Where bonnie Clytus will attend on thee,
And Mopsus too will keep thee company.
There the late-freed Capnus will repair,
And joy to taste the freedom of the air;
Where he will descant on no rural theme,
But on Ambitions curb, the golden mean.
And joy he may, for who did ever hear
Such alterations as in him appear?
Where long restraint has labored to restore
That love to him, which he had lost before.
With whom Admetus may in consort join,
Comparing of your fortunes one by one;
He to regaine the love which he had lost,
Thou to forget her love that wronged thee most.
And well would this beseem Admetus strain,
* For shepherds should not laugh at others pain,
But in compassion of their grieves and them,
To imitate their passions in the same.
And this's a better course, and safer too,
Then to do that which thou so late did do,
Pining and puling, wishing death appear,
Which for thy wishes was no whit the near.
"For death (when we are happy) will come nie us, Io^e in Oet. Her.

"But if we wretched be, then death will fly us.
How often has my experience made this good,
When wishing death, I was by death withstood?
For still I thought my woes would have an end
If Mors sola portus, dabitut aerumnis locus. ibid. Deian.
Death arrived, afflictions welcome friend.
But th'more I sought, the more he fled from me,
To make me riper in my misery:
"For grief is of that nature, as it grows
"In age, so new effects it daily shows.
Yet now thou lives (and thanks to th'powers above)
Have near by this, suppressed the thoughts of love.
Now can thou feed, and sleep, and laugh, and talk,
Sport, and tell tales, refresh thy self, and walk
In flowrie Meedes, whilst thou see Cloris hing
His jealous head to hear the Cuckoo sing,
Alas (poor man) what bondage is he in,
To serve a Swain that is cauteriz'd in sin,
Exposed to shame, and prostitute to lust,
In whom nor's grace, nor faith, nor love, nor trust?
And heaven I wish, she may in time reclaim
Her former course, and rectify the same:
But the Pumice stone will hardly water yield,
Or grace appear in such a barren field:
For such light mates encompasse her about,
As Virtue's choked before it can take root.
O Cloris, if thou knew Admetus mind,
And th'hard conceit he h'as of womankind,
Whose fairest looks, are lures, affections, baits,
Words, wind, vows, vain, and their protests deceits,
Songs, charms, tears, trains to trace us to our end,
Smiles, snares, frowns, fears, which to our ruin tend:
Then would thou (Cloris) censure Omphale,
The pregnant mirror of inconstancy,
And curb thy fancy, ere it have least part
In one can vow so often with one heart.
For hear me (Cloris) she did never show
More love to thee, then she to others too:
Yet what art thou (if man) may build thee more
Upon her faith then others did before?
What art thou can persuade thy self of this,
She Will not tread right, h'as trod so long amiss,
Or that she will now prove constant, that h'as proved,
So faithless to the most, that she has loved?
No, Cloris no, the Proverb it is true,
And is confirmed in her whom thou do sue;
"To wash the Moore, is laboring in vain,
"For th'colour that he h'as, is di'd in grain.
So th'more thou strives to make her blacknes white,
Thou draws heavens curtain to display her night.
Her night indeed, save that no stars appear,
(No lights of grace) within her hemi-spheare,
But th'changing Moon, whose lightness does express
That light-inconstant mind of Omphales:
"Where Virtue seems at Nature to complain,
"That vice should be at full, and she at waine.
Yet Nature answers, she h'as done her part,
And that the fault is rather in her heart,
That is so spacious, to entertain
The wavering love of every wanton Swain.
And I assent to Nature, for it is shown,
By her rare workmanship, what she h'as done,
In giving beauty luster, her content;
In forming her, her self to represent.
And reason good; for when I think upon,
That Zeuxes, Phydias, and Pigmalion,
(Those native artists) who indeed did strive
To make their curious statues seem alive,
Reducing art to Nature; then I find,
Nature had cause to satisfy her mind
In something above art, that after-time
Might move her to rejoice, art to repine.
And what more moving pattern could there be,
Then the admired form of Omphale,
Whose feature equaled Nature, and did show
The very Spring whence fancie's said to flow?
For first her stature's seemly, which I call,
Neither too dwarfish low, nor giant-tall;
Her front a rising mount, her eyes two lamps,
Which, wheresoere she looks impression stamps;
Her cheek twixt rosy red and snowie white,
Attracts an admiration with delight;
Her nose nor long nor short, nor high nor low,
Nor flat, nor sharp, the token of a shrow;
Her mouth nor ferret-straite, nor callet-broade,
But of an apt proportion, as it should;
Her breath the fragrant odor, which love sips
From these two cherrie portels of her lips;
Where those two iuory pales or rows of teeth,
Accent her speech, perfumed by her breath;
Her chin th'inclining vale, divided is,
By th'daintie dimple of loves choicest bliss,
Which, as maine floods from smallest currents flow,
Deriues her sweets to th'riuelings below;
Her neck arocke enazur'd with pure veins
Of orient pearl, which with amorous chains
Of lou's desired embraces, charms the eye,
And ties it to her object, when she is by;
Her breasts two Orbs or Mounts, or what you will
That may include perfection, which to fill
The world with admiration, are laydout,
To work the feate her lightness goes about;
Two pretty nipples, one opposed against the other,
Challenge the name of Nurse as well as Mother:
Though some (for state makes love to children worse)
Scorn, being mothers to become their nurse.
In brief her all, (because I Will not descend,
In praise of that, where praises have no end)
Is beauties fair Idaea, which implies
Height of content, to loves amazed eyes.
And yet this she, the model of delight,
Though outward fair, seems to my inward sight,
As spotted as the Ermine, whose smooth skin,
Though it be fair without, is foul within.
For what more foul then vice? but chiefly that
Which makes a woman to degenerate,
From her more shamefast Sex, where modesty
Should sit upon her cheek, to verisie
What the Comic said: Errant, nee sedem repetunt serenam Quae petulanti cord
resurgunt, etc.
straid thoughts find never rest,
"But shamefast looks become a woman best.
Indeed they do; for there is greater sense,
That shame should move man more then impudence;
For bashful looks add fuel to loves fire,
While the spirit of lust does with her flame expire.
Which makes me wonder, that th'interiour light
Whence man resembles God, should lose his sight,
By doting on an Idol, that can take
To charm loves dazzled eyes a Sirens shape,
Making Art vye with Nature for the best,
And soiling that which should surpass the rest.
For what is fair, if that be all there is,
But an eye-pleasing thing, that yields no bliss,
Wanting that inward fair, which who enioyes,
Esteems all outward ornaments as toys,
Compared to that beauty, which no Art
Could ever equal, or express in part?
Indeed the grace of virtue is more rare,
And exquisite, when she that is good is fair,
For she becomes most complete well we know,
That Is graced with virtue and with beauty too.
Whence that experienst Moral used to reach Socrates.

A looking glass to such as he did teach;
Wherein, if such were fair themselves did eye,
He would exhort them rather to apply
Their minds to virtue, for great pity twere,
Foul souls (quoth he) should have a face so fair:
But if deformed, he straight would counsel them,
With wholesome precepts to supply the same;
For fit it were (quoth he) a face so foul,
Should be provided of a beauteous soul.
But rare's this composition, for we find,
Seldom that double bliss in womankind,
Where she that is fair can soon admire her own,
And knows what Nature for her self has done:
Yeashe by this can learn another strain,
Put on coy looks, and th'fashion of disdain,
Mins-speech, huff-pace, sleeke-skin, and perfumed breath,
Goats-haire, brests-bare, plume-fronted, fricaceteeth,
All which infuse new motions into man,
Late borrowed of The Italian Curtezan.
But now to thee thou wanton, will I come,
To tax, not visit that polluted tomb,
Of all infection, which to give it due,
Is now become no Temple but a stue;
Tell me, disdainful fair, if I ere wronged,
Or thee, or any that to thee belonged!
Have I incurred dishonor, or devoted
My love to many, whereby I am noted?
Have I been too profuse in my respect,
To othersome, and blancht thee with neglect?
Have I incurred a merited disgrace,
In begging love when thou was out of place?
Have I by courting any, ere expressed,
My self ought less then what I still professed?
Did ever see a favor worn by me,
But that poor bracelet I received of thee,
Twisted with gold, and with thy faithless hair,
Which now I Have thrown away with all my care?
Did I ere vow and break, as thou have done,
Or plight my faith (save thee) to any one?
Why then should thou infringe that sacred oath,
Which with a kiss was sealed to us both,
When scarce one hour did us occasion give,
(So short was time) to take our lasting leave?
But I can guess where thou will lay the blame;
Not on thy self, but on them whence thou came,
That lustful stock I mean, which gave beginning
To thee of being first, and then of sinning.
It Is true indeed, we know a poisoned spring,
Can seld or never wholesome water bring,
Nor can we look that any barren field,
Should ought save tares or fruitless Darnell yield:
For this from Scripture may collected be,
"Such as the fruit is, such is still the tree.
Too late I find this true, and heavens I wish,
My former harms may caution me of this;
For what is ill descends in a blood,
Sooner and surer too, then what is good.
"For th'fathers virtues still attend his bear,
"And being dead, with him lie buried there;
"But th'vices which he had are not content
"To die with him, but live in his descent.
So native is thy ill, having her birth
From that corrupted stock which brought thee forth,
As sooner may the Aethiope become white,
The Cymmerian pitchie shade transparent light,
The Tiger leave his nature, the Wolf his prey,
The Sun to guide the chariot of the day,
The Queis pario perio; quod acerbae prolis imago Exticit, and tenerae nota
parentis erit. vid. Alcyat.
Pelican her desert, or the Quae parenti confecto aetate consulit, eique
prestando na tale officium, proprijs alis gerit. vid. Basil. in Homil.
Craine,
That natural love which in her does remain
Unto her parents; then thy parents shame,
Got by their sin, be wiped from thy name.
No wanton, no, thy darkness is displayed,
Which can by no means re-disperse her shade,
But shall survive all time; for it is the will
Of Powers above, there should be life in ill,
As well as good: that the memory of the first
Might make succeeding ages count her cursed.
For I have rod (and thou was cause I red)
Some fickle Dames in stories mentioned,
Whose small respect to the honor of their name,
Has made them since the lasting heirs of shame:
And such were Messalina, Martia,
Faustina, Lays, Claudia, Portia the famous Curtizan; and that noble Lady, an
eminent pattern of modesty, wife to Port. Cato the Senator.
Portia,
Two of which name there were of different kind,
In th'various disproportion of their mind;
"One good, one ill, one light, one constant proving,
"One spousall-lothing, one her honor loving.
But which of these can equal Omphale?
Or which of these live more licentiously?
All patterns in their time (as well they might)
And cautions too, to move us tread aright
That do succeed them: yet observe this stain,
This wedlocks-blemish, and you will complain,
Of th'present times, that they are more ripe in sin,
And breach of faith, then former times have bin.
More ripe indeed, for where is that age become,
"Folk di'd for love, as we have red of some,
Who their affections so implanted have,
As naught could bury fancy but their grave?
But these were childish times; indeed they were,
For rather then for her I Would shed one tear,
That disesteemes my love, or send one groan,
Or sigh, or sob, or pule, or make a moan,
Or fold my arms, as forlorn lovers use,
Or grieve to lose, when she does others choose,
Or break my sleep, or take a solemn fast,
I wish that task might be Admetus last.
No Omphale, though time was when I mourned,
That time is changed, and now my humour's turned;
So as I scarce remember what thou art,
That once lay near and dear unto my heart.
Now is my Pasture green and flourishing,
And poor Melampus which was wont to hing
His heavy head (kind curre) for's masters sake,
Begins his sullen humor to forsake.
Now is my bottle mended, and my hook,
My bag, my pipe, so as if thou should look,
And see Admetus with his woollie store,
Thou'de say, he were not th'man he was before;
And judge him too, (to see him now revive,
And change his note) the happiest man alive.
And so I am, to live and leave to love,
( Though faithful mates would flinty natures move)
Whose rare effects the Poet seems to show,
When wives express the affections which they owe.
" Turture sic turtur iungit ananda suo.
Turtle with Turtle, husband with his mate,
"In distinct kinds one love participate.
But since affection is so rare to find,
Where th'face wears not the liuerie of the mind,
And woman's vows (as Sic iurare soent, sed non ^eruare puellae. Lucian.
the Satyr rightly says)
Be rather made for complement then faith;
Be free from love Admetus: if not free,
At least from love of such as Omphale.
FINIS.
A Poem describing the leuitie of a woman: reserving all generous respect to
the virtuously affected of that Sex.
FIrst I fear not to offend,
A very thing of nothing,
Yet whom thus far I commend,
She Is lighter then her clothing:
Nay from the foot unto the crown,
Her very Fan will weigh her down:
And mark how all things with her Sex agree,
For all her virtues are as light as she.
1.
She chats and chants but air,
A windy virtue for the ear,
It Is lighter far then care,
And yet her songs do burdens bear.
2.
She dances, that is but moving,
No heavy virtue here she changes,
And as her heart in loving,
So her feet in constant ranges.
She softly leanes on strings,
She strikes the trembling lute and quauers:
These are no^ weigntie things,
Her strokes are light, so are her favors.
Those are her virtues fitting to her kind,
No sooner shown, but they turned all to wind.
Then to you, O Sex of feathers,
On whose brows sit all the wethers,
I send my Passion weau'd in rimes,
To weigh down these light empty times.
Descript.
What are you, O heirs of scorning,
But like Dew that melts each morning;
Evening vapors, and nights prize,
To answer our voluptuous eyes:
And but to screene that sins delight,
I think there never had been night.
Nor had we been from virtue so exempt,
But that the tempter did leave you to tempt.
You bit the Apple first that makes us die,
Wheres'ere we look the apple's in our eye,
And death must gather it; for your turned breath,
And mortal teeth even to the core struck death.
FINIS.
HIS ODES: OR, PHILOMELS TEARS.

Odes in strains of sorrow tell
Fate and fall of every foul,
Mounting Merlin, Philomel,
Lagging Lapwing, Swallow, Owl;
Whence you may observe how state
Raised by pride, is razed by hate.


LONDON. Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1621.

TO THE GENEROUS, INGENIOVS, AND JUDICIOUS PHILALETHIST, Thomas Ogle Esquire:
the succeeding issue of his diuinest wishes.
Unknown to you I am, yet known I am
To the better part of you, your virtuous name;
Which like a precious odor has infused
Your love so much in me, as I have chus'd
Your self, to patronize what I have writ,
Whose name I thought had power to shelter it.
I grant indeed, Smooth Sic tereti cursu repetit spiracula montis Aquila, quae
valles spernit, vt alta petat. Sol radios mittit, radiosque reflectit ocellis;
Aquila sis vis^ semper (Amice) tuo. Alcyat. in Emblem. Sa^. ibid. Plin. in Not.
Hist. Aelian. ibid. Greg. in Mor. expo. in Job.
Eagle for your name,
Includes that Sun-reflecting (Anagram)
These birds which in my Odes their fates display,
Are some night-birds, as others of the day;
Which in my judgment, tenders more delight,
To see how sin's orecurtained by night,
Whereas the day sends forth his golden rays,
And shows such birds as chant their makers praise.
Which Moral, as it suites these times of ours,
I do disclaim my right in it, it is yours,
If you esteem it worthy to obtain
Your approbation: This is all our aim.
R. B.

THE TRAVELLOVR, DILATING UPON THE sundry changes of humane affairs, most
fluctuant when appearing most constant.
AN ODE.
TEll me man, what creature may
Promise him such safe repose,
As secure from hate offoes,
He may thus much truly say,
Naught I have I fear to lose,
No mischance can me dismay;
Tell me, pray thee (if thou can)
If the woreld have such a man!
Tell me, if thou can discern
By thy reasons excellence,
What man for his providence,
Of the Pismire may not learn:
Yet that creature has but sense,
Though she do her living earne,
Spare, not costly, is her fare,
Yet her granar shows her care!
Tell me, can thou show me him,
That exact in each device,
Is at all times truly wise,
And is never seen to swim
(For in this his judgment lies)
Against the current of the stream,
But seems to have full command,
Of each thing he takes in hand!
Tell me, was there ever known
Such a man that had a wit,
And in some part knew not it,
Till at last conceited grown,
He grew prowder then was fit,
Ever boasting of his own;
For that Maxim true we know,
" He that is witty, knows him so!
Tell me, is that man on earth,
Whose affairs so stable are,
As they may for all his care,
Fall not cross and crabdly forth,
And of sorrows have no share,
Which descend to man by birth;
What is he can promise rest,
When his mind's with grief oppressed*
Tell me, is there ought so strong,
Firmely-constant, permanent,
Or on earth such true content,
As it fades not ere long:
Is there ought so excellent,
As it changes not her song,
And in time that all deuoures,
Mixeth sweets with sharpest soures!
Tell me, who is he that shines
In the height of Princes love,
Sitting minion-like with love,
Glorying in those golden times,
But he fears something may move
His distaste by whom He climbes:
Wherefore he that fears to fall,
Should forbear to climb at all!
Tell me, where is Fortune placed,
That she may not men beguile,
Shrowding frowns with fained smile;
Where is He so highly graced,
Showing greatness in his style,
Has not been in time out-fac'd,
By some rival, where still one
Strives to put another down!
Tell me, then what life can be
Moresecure, then where report
Makes us only known to the Court,
Where we lead our lives so free,
As we are strangers to resort,
Save our private family;
For I think that dwelling best,
Where least cares disturb our rest!
THE NIGHTINGALL.
2. ODE.
IVg, IVg; fair fall the Nightingall,
Whose tender breast
Chants out her merry Madrigal^,
With hawthorne pressed:
Te'u, Te'u, thus sings she even by even,
And represents the melody in heaven;
It Is, It Is,
I am not as I wish.
Rape-defiled Phylomel
In her sad mischance,
Tells what she is forced to tell,
While the Satyrs dance:
Unhappy I, quoth she, unhappy I,
That am betraide by Tereus treachery;
It Is, It Is,
I am not as I wish:
Chast-vnchast, defloured, yet
Spotless in heart,
Lust was all that He could get,
For all his art:
For I nere attention let
To his suite, nor gave consent*
It Is, It Is,
I am not as I wish.
Thus has faithless Tereus made
Heartlesse Phylomele
Moan her in her forlorn shade,
Where grief I feel:
Grief that wounds me to the heart,
Which though gone, has left her smart;
It Is, It Is,
I am not as I wish.
THE LAPWING.
3. ODE.
Unhappy I to change my aerie nest,
For this same marish dwelling where I rest,
Wherefore my song while I repeat,
I Will close it up;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Every Cowheard driving his beasts to graze,
Disturbs my rest, me from my nest does raise,
Which makes my young take up this song,
To wreake my wrong;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Thou subtle Stockdoue that have cheated me,
By taking up thy nest where I should be,
Have me and mine in peril set,
Whose song is fit;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Solely-retired, see I live alone,
Far from recourse or sight of any one,
And well that life would suite with me,
Were I but free;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Young-ones I have, that thinking I am fled,
Do leave their nest, and run with shell on head,
And having found me out we cry,
Both they and I;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Crest-curled mates why do you bear so long
The Stockdoues pride, that triumphs in your wrong
Let us our signals once display,
And make him say;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Too tedious has our bondage been I wis,
And only patience was the cause of this,
Where if we would contract our power,
We'de sing no more;
Rue yet, rue yet.
March on then bravely, as if Mars were here,
And hate no guest so much as slavish fear,
Let the proud Stockdoue feel your wing,
That he may sing;
Rue yet, rue yet.
Let none escape, though they submissiue seem,
Till you have spoiled and quite vnfether'd them,
So you shall make them veil the wing,
And hence forth sing;
Rue yet, rue yet.
THE OWL.
4. ODE.
IA Kings daughter, see what pride may do,
In fatal yewe takes up my forlorn seat,
The cause whereof was this, if you would know,
I would have better bread then grew on wheat,
Though now a Mouse be all the food I eat,
And glad I am when I can feed of it.
Ruff-curled neck, see I reserve some show
Of what I was, though far from her I was,
Wherein my boundless pride so far did grow,
That as in place I did the rest surpass,
So in the purest beauty of my face,
Courting my self in fancies looking glass.
Milke-bathed skin, see wantons what I used,
To make my skin more supple, smooth, and sleeke,
Wherein my native hue by Art abused,
I lay a new complexion on my cheek,
Sending my eyes abroad suitors to seek,
And vying fashions with each day in the week.
Naught I affected more then what was rare,
"Best things (if common) I did disesteeme,
Seld was I breathd on by the public air,
" For those are most admired are seldom seen,
Which is, and has a custom ever been,
"Such as come often abroad, we vulgar deem.
Thus selfe-admir'd I lived, till thus transformed,
I got a feature fitting with my pride:
For I that scorned others now am scorned,
Had in disgrace; and in pursuit beside;
May the like fate like spirits aye betide,
So worthless honor shall be soon descride.
For ruff thick-set, a curle-wreathed plume,
Round bout my neck I wear, for tyres of gold
A downie tuft of feathers is my crown,
For fan in hand my claws a perch do hold,
And for those cates and dainties manifold,
" A mouse I wish, but wants her when I would.
Be well advised then Minions, what you do,
"Portray my feature, and make use of it,
What fell to me may like wise fall to you,
And then how daring-high so ere you sit,
Naught but dishonor shall your pride begit,
"Dead to report of Virtue as is fit.
THE MERLIN.
5. ODE.
WHence Nisus, whence,
Is this the fate of kings,
For arm on Scepter,
To be armed with wings?
Poor speckled bird, see how aspiring may
Degrade the high, and their estate betray.
Once Fortune made
Nisus her favorite,
And rer'd his throne
To such unbounded height,
That foreign states admired what he possessed,
Till sly ambition nestled in his breast*
Till then how blessed,
And after see how base
His greatness fell,
When reft of Princely grace;
Those many fleering Parasites he gained,
In his success, not one in want remained
Chesses he wears
Now on his downie feet,
Where once guilt spurs,
With store of pearl set
Adorned his nimble heels, and hooded now,
His beuer wants: this can ambition do.
Up still he mounts,
And must a pleasure bring,
That once was king,
To meaner then a king;
Where he, who once had Falkuers at command,
Is feign to pick his meat from Falkners hand.
Imperious fate,
What can not thou effect,
When thou perceiues
In man a dis-respect
Unto thy honor, which we instanced see,
In no one Nisus better then in thee!
But stow bird stow,
See now the game's a foot,
And white-maild Nisus,
He is flying to it;
Scepter, Crown, Throne and all that Princely were
Be now reduced to feathers in the air,
THE SWALLOW.
6. ODE.
YOu chatt'ring Fleere, you Faune, you sommer-friend,
Not following us, but our success,
Will this your flattering humor nere have end,
Of all other meritlesse?
Fly I say, fly, be gone,
Haunt not here to Albion:
She should be spotless, as imports her name,
But such as you are borne to do her shame.
How many fair protests and solemn vows,
Can your hateful consorts make,
Whereas (heaven knows) these are but only shows
Which you do for profit-sake?
O then leave our coast and us,
Blemished by your foul abuse,
Virtue can have no being, nor could ever,
Where the Parasite is deemed a happy liner.
Tale-tattling gossip, prone to carry news,
And such news are ever worst,
Where false report finds matter, and renewes
Her itching humor till it burst,
Where each even finds (...) enough,
All the gloomie winter through,
To pass (...) night away* and (...) tries,
That truth gets friendship seldomer then lies.
Springtime when flowers adorn the cheerful mede,
And each bird sings on her spray,
When flowery groves with blossom^ checkered,
And each day seems a marriage day,
Chattring Swallow thou can choose
Then a time to visit us;
Such are these fained friends make much upon us,
When we are rich, but being poor they shun us.
The stormy winter with his hoarie locks,
When each branch hangs down his head,
And icie flawes candies the ragged rocks,
Making fields discolored,
Drives thee from us and our coast,
Where in springtime thou repo'st;
Thus thou remains with us in our delight,
But in our discontent the art out of sight.
Time-seruing humorist that faunes on Time,
And no merit do respect,
Who will not loath that sees that vain of thine,
Where deserts are in neglect,
And the good is prized no more
Then the ill, if he be poor?
Thou art the rich man's claw-backe, and depends
No more on men, then as their trencher-friends.
Go turne-taile go, we have not here a Spring
For such tempo^izing mates,
Pan's in our I Will, and he scorns flattering;
So those Guardians of our States,
Who are early up and late,
And of all, this vice does hate:
Fly tell-tale, fly, and if thou will, complain thee,
That Albyon's harsh, and will not entertain thee.
THE FALL OF THE LEAF.
7. ODE.
FLora where is thy beauty now,
Thou was while'om wont to show?
Not a branch is to be seen,
Clad in Adons color green;
Lambkins now have left their skipping,
Lawn-frequenting Fauns their tripping;
Earths bare breast feels winters whipping,
And her brood the North-winds nipping.
Though the Box and Cypress tree,
Wear their wonted liuerie,
And the little Robin scorn
To be danted with a storm,
Yet the Shepherd is not so,
When He cannot see for snow,
Nor the flocks which he does owe,
And in drifts are buried low.
Nor the Grazer, discontent
That his fodder should be spent,
And when winter's scarce halfe-done,
All his stacks of hay are gone;
Nor the Lawyer, that is glad
When a motion's to be had,
Nor poor Tom, though he be mad;
"Cold makes Tom a Bedlam s^d.
Nor the Webster, though his fecte
By much motion get them heat,
Nor the knave that curries leather,
Nor the cross-ledgg'd Tailor neither,
Nor at glass-worke, where they doubt
Lest their costly fire go out,
Nor the careful carking Lout,
That does toil and trudge about.
No, north' Lady in her coach,
But is muff*d when frosts approach,
Nor the crazie Citizen,
But is furrd up to the chin,
Oister-callet, sly Vpholster,
Hooking Huxster, merry Malster,
Cutting Haxter, courting ^oister,
Cunning Sharke, nor sharking foister.
Thus we see how Fall of th'leafe,
Adds to each condition grief,
Only two there be, whose wit
Make hereof a benefit;
These, conclusions try on man,
" Surgeon and Physician,
While it happens now and than,
Kill then cure they sooner can!
Now Is their time when trees are bare,
Naked scalps have lost their hair,
Teeth drop out and leave their gumms,
Head and eyes are full of rheumes,
Where if Traders strength do lack,
Or feel aches in their back,
Worse by odds then is the rack,
They have drugs within their pack.
Thus the harshest seasons come
In good season unto some,
Who have known (as it is meet)
Smell of gain makes labor sweet:
But where labor reapeth loss,
There accrews a double cross;
First, fond cares his brain does toss,
Next, his gold resolves to dross.
FINIS.
To my knowing and worthy esteemed friend AUGUSTINE VINCENT, all meriting
content.
MAy you be in
Your actions prosperous, Augustines (...). Tute vineas (...).

And as ingenious,
So victorious;
So may your fate,
Smile on your happy name,
And crown you with,
A glorious Anagram:
While Virtue,
(Man's best luster) seems to be,
That style, which stamps
You deep in Heraldrie.
BRITTANS BLISS.
A Pean of thanksgiving for our long enjoyed peace under a gracious Sovereign.

PEace, Plenty, Pleasure,
Honor, Harbor, Health,
Peace, to increase
In substance and in wealth;
Plenty, to praise,
Heavens Sovereign the more,
Pleasure, to solace us
Amidst our store,
Honor, to guerdon
Merit in our time,
Harbor, to fit
Each under his own vine,
Health, to enjoy
A blessing so divine,
Derived from Iesses root
And David's line.
Health, Harbor, Honor,
Pleasure, Plenty, Peace,
Which from our Sovereign
Have their prime increase;
Health, to perform
Our distinct offices,
Harbor, to shroud us
From extremities,
Honor, to crown
The temples of desert,
Pleasure, to cheer
The intellectual part,
Plenty, to store
Our hopes with all success,
Peace, to accomplish
Our full happiness.
All which, by heavens hand powered on Albion,
Make up a Catalogue to look upon;
That for so many quiet Halcyon days,
Her precioust prize, might be her Makers praise.
Pacis, honoris, amoris, Edena Britannica nostri, Regeregente bono, leta
trophaea gerit. Upon the worthy and sincere Proficients and Professants of the
common Law; an Encomiastick Poem.
LAw is the line,
Whose level is dispatch,
A lamp, whose light shows
Justice what is right,
A lark, whose vnseal'd eyes
Keeps early watch,
A loome, whose frame
Cannot be swayed by might,
A list, where truth
Puts injury to flight;
Straight line, bright lamp,
Sweet lark, strong loome, choice ^ist,
Guide, shine, shield, guard,
And live truths Martialist.
Law is the stern,
Which steares the ship of state,
The glorious stem
Whence Justice sciens spring,
The cheerful star,
Which early shines and late,
The staff, whose stay
Supports the languishing,
The stream, whose spring
Is ever cherishing;
Rare stern, rich stem, clear star,
Firm staff, pure stream,
Steer, cheer, direct, support,
Refresh the mean.
Blessed then are you,
Who labor to redress
The poor man's case,
And measure your contents
By shielding th'weake
From awful mightiness,
Like grave Professants,
Good Proficients,
Clozing with equity
Your joint consents;
It Is you, it is you,
Who in this blemishd time,
Send out your lights
While other stars decline.
When Greece in glory flourished,
She did rear
Some Images near
Justice sacred throne,
Which to be lame and blind
Portrayed were,
As proper objects
To be looked upon,
Implying what
In Justice should be done;
Blind to distinguish
Friend or foe, and lame,
From taking bribes,
To stain Astraeas name.
Clear lights, pure lamps,
Rare stemms, rich streams of life,
Who shine, beam, spring,
And draine your crystal course
From Justice throne,
To cool the heat of strife,
By curbing aw with law,
With censure, force,
To chastise with restraint,
Cheer with remorse;
Long may you live,
Since by your life you give
Justice new breath,
And make her ever live.
Salus ciuitatis sita est in legibus.

IN MOMVM.
QVid carpendo premis tua viscera ferrea Mome?
Momus, Mimus eris dum mea scripta premis.
Haud curo inuidiam, mea spes tenuissima tuta est,
Nam tuta est tenuis vena, sed alta minus.
Anguis es, and viridi latitans sub fronde, venenum
Eijcis, exiguo tempore inermis eris.
Non sum cui fortuna nocet, vel fata iuuabunt, Me paucis mal le a sapientibus
esse probatum.

Fata canunt magnis, non cecinere meis.
Non cecinere meis, licet ista poemata magnis
(Si mihi vota fauent) sint relegenda locis.
IN ZOILVM.
TExit vt exiguam subtilis Aranea telam,
Mercurium in lingus, non in pectore geris.
Zoile sic scriptis tela retorque meis.
Torque, retorque, manet mea laus, mea gloria mayor,
Quo magis exhausta est gloria mayor erit.
Ulciscar scriptis: tua men's tuus vltor adibit,
Inuidiae stimulis men's tua puncta tuis.
Pone miser miserae monumenta miserrima vitae,
Uixisti misero more, miserque mori.
IN PARONEM.
PAro parem, nec habet nec habere optat,
Impar est praemijs, impar and laboribus; Inuisurum faci ^ius quam imi^tutum.
Zenxes.

Opera carpit mea studijs assiduis,
Tacet, attamen aliena carpit;
O quantae tenebrae tenuere locum,
Tuum, Cymmerijs inuolutum vmbris? Vid. Martial. Lib. 3. Epig^. in Zoilum.
Conuiua qui^ quis Zoili potest esse, etc. -- rumpant^ ilia C^dri (...) dia.

Vt minus afflares aliorum operibus,
Opera carrigis, emendare nequis;
Oleum and operam perdidit Paro
Per aurea secula transeat Maro.
Non plura referam, reticere iuuat,
Si tu maleuolam reprimes linguam,
Sin maledicendo pergas dispergere
Hisce teterrima crimina scriptis, Crescant etc crepant. Vi^. Apo^eg.

Scribam, liuorem irritare magis
Torquendo rigidi viscera Paronis.
AD INVIDVM.
Exeat Menippus.
INuidus vlciscens vltor sibi maximus esset,
Nam stupet ille malis sic periendo suis.
AD SEIPSVM.
Intret Aristippus.
TV tibi res solitus non te subiungere rebus,
Me peritura doces spernere, spreta pati.
FINIS.
(...) Measures, now I must rep^se, (Retire (...)) and laugh at virtues foes,
Who let them fr^ne, (...), fret, this is my Mot, My spirit^ about their spite;
I fear them not.

Faults are as obuious to books in Press, as misconstruction after. Do me the
favor to coriect such escapes with thy pen as are past in the Pri^t: for such
as are more consequent they are here noted, for the impertinent they are to thy
discreeter judgment referred.

Errata.
Page Ta^ for (...), rea^e in (...) subject. page 48. (...) line (...). leave
page (...) 5. for that, (...). that p. 68. l. 16. for suppressed, (...).
^upprest. p. 79. l. 14. for (...), (...). fear p. 110. l. vlt. for marks,
marts. p. 160. l 8. for excellent, (...). exquis^e. p. 161. l. 1. ^dde are ever
^0 be. p. 164 for eminent, (...). imininent. ibid. (...) p. 209. in m^rg, add,
(...).


