The Engl^^^ Gentlewom^^

LONDON. Printed for Michaell Spark and are to be. Sold, at the Blew Bible*
in Green Arbor. 1631.

Will. Marshall (...)



THE ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN, drawn out to the full Body: EXPRESSING*

What Habilliments do best attire her,
What Ornaments do best adorn her,
What Complements do best accomplish her.
By RICHARD BRATHVVAIT Esquire.

Modestia, non forma.

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAUCET, for Michaell Spark, dwelling in
Green Arbor* 1631.

TO HER, WHOSE TRVE LOVE TO VERTVE HAS HIGHLY ENNOBLED HERSELF, RENOWNED
HER SEX, Honored her House: The Right Honorable, the Lady ARBELLA
WENTVVORTH; The accomplishment of her Divinest wishes.
MADAM;
SOme months are past, since I made bold to recommend to my Right Honorable
LORD your Husband, an ENGLISH GENTLEMAN; whom he was pleased, forth of his
Noble disposion, to receive into his Protection. Into whose most Honorable
service he was no sooner entertained, and upon due observance of his
integrity approved; then upon approvement of his more piercive judgment, he
became generally received. Out of these respects, my most Honorable Lady, I
became so encouraged, as I have presumed to prefer unto your service an
ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN, one of the same Country and Family, a deserving sister of
so generous a brother: Or (if you will) a pleasing Spouse to so gracious a
Lover. Whom, if your Honor shall be but pleased to entertain, (and your noble
Candor is such, as she can expect nothing less) you shall find excellently
graced with sundry singular qualities, beautified with many choice endowments*
and so richly adorned with diverse exquisite ornaments, as her attendance shall
be no derogation to your Honor, nor no touch to your unblemished Self, to
retain her in your favor. Sure I am, the sweetness of her temper, sorts and
suits well with the quality or disposition of your Honor: For she Loves
without any painted pretenses to be really virtuous, without popular applause
to be affably gracious, without any glorious gloss to be sincerely zealous.
Her Education has so enabled her, as she can converse with you of all places,
deliver her judgment conceivingly of most persons, and discourse most
delightfully of all fashions. She has been so well Schooled in the
Discipline of this Age, as she only desires to retain in memory that form
which is least affected but most comely; to consort with such as may improve
her Knowledge and practice of goodness by their company; to entertain those
for real and individuate friends, who make actions of piety expressivest
characters of their amity. Diligent you shall ever find her in her
employments, serious in her advice, temporate in her Discourse, discreet in her
answers. She bestows far more time in eying the glass of her life to
rectify her errors, if there be any, then the glass of her face in wiping of
such outward stains as might blemish her beauty. Neither in preserving that,
is she altogether so remiss, as not to retain that seemly grace in her
feature, as may put her in remembrance of the unexpressive beauty and bounty of
her Maker. Neat she goes usually in her attire, which she puts on with more
care then cost. And to these she adds such a well-seeming grace, as she
bestows more beauty on them, then she receives from them. Phantasticke habits
or foreign fashions are so far from taking her, as with a slight but sweet
contempt they are disvalued by her. She wonders how a wise state should employ
so much time in inventing variety of disguises to disfigure their Shape. This
makes her desire rather to be out of request with time, then with a civil and
well-composed mind; whose honor it is to be prized more by her own internal
worth, then any outward wear. Constant she is in her behavior; wherein she
affects little, but observes much. With a bashful admiration she smiles at
these civilized si^pring Dames, whose only glory it is to affect a kind of
reserved state; which, as they hold, consists principally in a minced speech,
set look, or ginger pace. She loves always to be her self, nor to
entertain ought which may estrange her from her self. So as, there is nothing
in the whole posture of her Behavior, but with a native graceful propriety
does infinitely become her. Take upon her to instruct others, she will not,
such is her Humility; albeit, every moving posture which comes from her, may
be a line of direction unto others to follow her. Complement she affects not,
as the world takes it. The word in his own native and unborrowed signification
is good, and in that sense she admits it; but to be restrained to an enforced
formality, she cannot relish it. Whence it is, that she preferres the
incomparable Liberty of her mind, before the mutable formality of a Deluded
age. She desires to be Complete in the exercise of goodness; to improve her
Honor not by titles but a lovely and lively proficience, graced with a
continuate practice in all virtues. She cannot endure this later introduced
kind of Complement, which consists in Cringies, Congies, or supple salutes. A
cheerful modesty is her best Complement, which she ever wears about her as
her chiefest ornament. Decency, she affects in her Clothes, affability in her
Discourse; she has made a covenant with her eyes never to wander, nor
intentively to bestow themselves on any other object than the glory of her
Maker. A proper personage is no such attractive motive to her eye, to make her
loose her self. Whatsoever she undertakes beseemes her, because she affects
naught but what naturally becomes her. Her beauty is her own; and whatsoever
else may better accomplish her. Her paths are evenly virtuous; her desires
truly religious; Piety is her practice; which she expresses so fully in
every action; as the whole course of her well-disposed life is not so much as
justly conscious of the least aspersion. So highly she values her Estimation,
as she will not engage it to suspicion. Promises cannot tempt her, nor hope of
advancement taint her. She wonders one should prefer a conceit of being great
before a desire of appearing good. Protesting Lovers she holds for no better
then deceiving Lures. Be their vows of service never so incessant, their
assaults never so violent; her resolves have vowed her constant. Hope of Profit
cannot surprise her, nor thought of Pleasure vainly delude her. Estimation she
holds her highest grace; with which untainted she purposes to go to her
Grave. She knows how to fancy; and in her she retains what she fancies
most: A chaste soul; this is that she loves, and with which she cheerfully
lives. She was never yet acquainted with a passionate ah me; nor a careless
folding of her arms, as if the thought of a prevailing Lover had wrought in
her thoughts some violent Distemper. So seriously does she task her self to
employment, as she never reserues so much time as to treat of so light a
Subject. Yet she unfainedly vows, that if it be ever her fortune to make her
choice, her constant affection must never admit any Change. To be Generous in
every action, has been ever the height of her ambition. Howsoever she might
boast of Descent, her desire is to raise it by Desert. She holds, no family
can be truly Generous, unless it be nobly virtuous. Her life must express
the line from whence she came. She scorns to entertain one thought below
her self. Or to detract from the glory of that house from whence she came. As
the blood that streams through her veins was nobly Derived, so must it not by
any action or affection drawn from the rule of her direction, become
corrupted. For Honor, she admits it, but seldom or never admires it; the
Stairs by which she means to clime to it, must be fair and firm, or she
will never mount them. She rather admires the Ages folly; while she observes
how many hazard their high-priz'd liberty, for a vading glimpse of popular
glory. Her desires are higher seated, where they are only to be sated. A
secure State consists not in styles but virtues, which are Honors surest
stays. Therefore her highest Honor reflects on her Creator, wherein she is so
far from fearing, as she is ever wishing more Corrivals. THIS is the
GENTLEWOMAN whom I have presumed here to present unto your Ladyships service;
Such, to your Honor, is her zealous affection, as she makes it the sole
Apology of her Presumption: which she weaves up in this Dimension:
whose sweet converse will at retired hours afford you choicest solace.
Neither, should you rank her amongst the lowest of your meney, will it
displease her, such is her Humility: for she has learned as well to obey as
command. Nor will she spare for any pains, so her diligence may please. Only
( Madam) be pleased to shine upon her with the gracious rays of your favor,
To serve some GREAT ONES l've been oftimes wood.
to shroud her bashful endeavors under the wings of your Honor; and
entertain her blushing approach with your benign Censure. But HERS I Am vowed,
that is both GREAT and GOOD.
So shall you find a constant desire of requital in her; and engage Him,
whose intimate Zeal to your Honor recommended her,

Your Ladyships devoted servant: Richard Brathwait.

TO THE GENTLEVVOMAN READER.
GENTLEVVOMEN:
I Have here presented unto your view one of your own Sex; One, whose
improved Education will be no blemish but a beauty to her Nation. Peruse her,
and I make little doubt, but you will so approve of her Behavior, as you shall
acknowledge her right worthy the title of a Sister. More shall you find in
her, by freely conversing with her, than in those YOUNG but loose ENGLISH
GENTLEWOMEN, whose long mercinarie Prostitution upon the Stall, has brought
them out of Request, and made them grow too Stale, by being exposed to public
Sale. Many Countries has she coasted, sundry Dangers accoasted, Courts and
Cities has she frequented, to return home better freighted, and re-convey
the benefit of that fraught to this Island, where she was first bred and now
arrived. Do ye itch after Fashion? She is for you; yet not that, which the
vanity of this Age admits; but what Modesty only affects. She has observed
much in foreign Courts, which deserved rather Contempt than Imitation; this
she would not for a world introduce into a well-governed State; so tender she
is of her Fame, as no place nor person shall derive from her the least stain.
Whatsoever she has commended to be seen, is no less fully than faithfully
shown, and with that temporate style drawn, as in every line some one precept
of Virtue seems to shine. Neither in this her strict or serious Observation of
Times, does she resemble those Lamiae, who use to take their eyes with them
when they go abroad, but lie them aside when they come home: No; so little
does she favor her self, as she preferres others Censures before her own;
and in no one particular so much expresses her own true glory, as in the
constant practice of Humility. Hence it is, that she is no curious pryer into
others actions, nor too cens^rious a reproover of others Directio^s; being
indeed, a TYRESIAS in the eying or descrying of others errors, an ARGUS in her
own. What is good and amiable in the eye of Virtue, she imbraceth with an
affectionate tender; making it her highest honor, to promote the glory of her
Maker. But least by being too serious, she might become tedious; she will not
stick to walk abroad with you into more pleasing groves or pastures of
Delight: where she will converse with you of Love, and intermixe her Discourse
with such time-beguiling Tales as variety shall no less sharpen your
attention, then the modesty of her Method beget admiration. Every Subject she
treats of, you shall find so equally tempered with profit and delight; as the
one shall no less benefit your mind, than the other solace your Ear. She
can reprove without gall, blush without guilt, love without guile, live without
gain. Her gain is to purchase virtue more followers; her guile, to deprive
the world of her favorers; her guilt, to defeat all vicious pioners; her gall,
to disrelish all Voluptuous practisers. She can discourse of Love without
lightness; converse with Love without looseness; and consort with those she
loves without lewdness. She knows how to retain a seemly state without
pride; to express her self praiseworthy without selfe-praise; and in all her
actions to make Virtue her highest prize. Humility, which is the princess of
Virtues, the conqueresse of Vices, the mirror of Virgins, and Crown of
Christians, she so much honors, as she values it above all humane glory:
whence it is, that she has ever reapt more spiritual profit by dis-esteeme
then selfe-esteeme. Day by day she recreates herself in her Garden of
goodwill; and in her recreation, she makes this her soule-solacing Meditation:
Who be they that neighbor near me, and whose weak estates stand in need of
me? Concluding with this charitable resolution: There is none so poor, but to
my power I will relieve, so long as I live, for the honor of his Image whom I
love. She devides her day into hours, her hours into holy taskes. Employment
takes away all occasions of distraction. Should she suffer a light or
indisposed thought to work upon her imagination: or give way to any such
intruder to di^sturbe the peace of her inward house, she would endure her self
worse for many years; and inflict upon her extravagant affections such a
censure, as might deter them thenceforth to wander. She distastes none more
than these busy house-wives, who are ever running into discourse of others
families, but forget their own. Neither holds she it sufficient to be only
an Housekeeper; or Snayle-like to be still under roof: she partakes therefore
of the Pismire in providing, of the Sarreptan widow in disposing: holding ever
an absent providence better then an improvident presence. She is no common
frequenter of public feasts, but if neighborhood require it, she will admit
of it: wherein she demeanes her self so civilly, as there is no discreet
person but joys in her society. There is nothing must beget in her a
distemper, having ever a tender eye over her honor. In the report of others
praises she is attentive, but deaf to her own. Be she in places of public
resort or privately retired, she ever enioyes her self; neither can excess of
mirth transport her; or any cross occurrent much perplexe her. There is naught
that aliens her mind more from those with whom she consorts, than an immodest
discourse, which she interrupts with a discreet anger. Wheresoever she sets
her rest, she makes Virtue her guest, whom she entertaines with so sweet an
embrace, as nothing can divide them: so firm and inviolable is the league that
is betwixt them. She conceives no small delight in Educating the young and
unexperienced Damsels of your sex: wherein she retains an excellent faculty
and facility. It shall not be amiss therefore for you who have Daughters, to
recommend them to her direction; whose government is such, as neither her too
much indulgence shall spoil them; nor restraint dull them. Whatsoever she in
many years has learned (so desirous is she to benefit where her Observations
may afford profit) she is willing to impart; to the end she may procure her
more servants, whom she^ religiously has ever vowed to serve. Long has she
been a Learner, neither is she ashamed to be so still. Only for virtues
honor, is she become a Teacher; that the Younger may be instructed by those
that are Elder; the vndisciplin'd by such as are riper. Neither shall you find
her slow in performing, what she has so perfectly learned. For her very Life
is a continued line of Direction, being solely dedicated to a virtuous
profession. St. Cyprian did sharply reprove a rich woman, for coming into the
Lords Temple without her Oblation: But this reproof she would be loath justly
to incur: therefore she goes better prepared, that her portion of Glory may
be sooner shared: having an Oblation in her hand, Devotion in her heart, and a
Crown of consolation in hope. You then, who love modesty, entertain her; for
she will sort well with your humor, and through her acquaintance improve your
honor. For such who sacrifice the Morn to their Class, the Afternoon to the
Stage, and Evening to revelling; she holds no correspondence with them. These
she holds for no employments; nor the Professors of them worthy her knowledge.
They must not abuse time, that are commended to her trust. She is not so weary
of time, neither does she so disvalue it, as with such impertinences to consume
it. Those likewise, who prefer Fashion before Decency, formal Punto'es before
real Formality, and will suffer themselves to be deluded by Vanity; they must
not be admitted into her family. She has learned better things than to fool
her self in a painted disguise, or to labor of that Universal disease, which
the corruption of a full and flourishing State usually produces. She has
learned with that better Sister, to choose the better part. Constant be her
purposes, contentment her desires, consonant her delights. Be it then your
honor to be informed by her, seeing her instructions are equally mixed with
profit and pleasure. Now if you object, that she has been too flow in
coming, seeing her GENTLEMAN so long since arrived; hear mine answer; and
suspend your Censure, by imputing this fault to our English Error. Where Venus
is longer in trimming, than Mars in training. Many provisions were required by
her, before the World were to be possessed of her. Much likewise expected from
her, before the World had knowledge of her; this made her the longer to retire,
that she might profit the more in her return. May you, Gentlewomen, be the
instance of it; so shall both the Author and his labor rejoice in it. To draw
then to a Conclusion, lest my Portell rise too high for my building; as you are
not to expect from her any guga-tyres, toys, or trifles; love-sented gloves,
amorous potions, perfumed pictures, or love-sicke pouders; so she doubts not,
but to find in you an Ear, prompt to attention; a Tongue, clear of
invection; a Spirit, free from detraction? with an Heart apt to harbor
affection.

Now for the Volume, I had purposely made it more portable, that it might
become your more sociable follower; had not my observation told me, that
albeit amiablenesse consist in a lovely feature, the goodlinesse of a
Gentlewoman rests in her comely Stature. Besides, this corresponded better with
the Portraiture of the ENGLISH GENTLEMAN, her affianc'd Lover. For the Margin,
I have not charged it with many Notes, lest you should neglect the Garment, by
being taken too much with the border. Improve it to your best profit, and let
GOD have the glory of it.

An Abstract or Summarie of all such Principal points, Branches or
Particulars, contained in this Book entitled, The English Gentlewoman.
The prime Subjects whereof it treates. Apparel. Behavior. Complement.
Decency. Estimation. Fancy. Gentilitie. Honor.

1. Argument. APPAREL.
THe Necessity of Apparel; Motto'^ upon every Subject.
Of the use and abuse of Apparel; Comely not gaudy.
Two means by which the use may be inverted to abuse; That Appears most
comely, which conferres on the Wearer most native beauty, and most honor on
her Country.
2. Argument. BEHAVIOVR.
Behavior reflects on three particulars; Loving modesty, it aliving bea^ty.
How to behave her self in Company; How in Privacy; That Behavior most
approved, which is cleanest from affection freed.
3. Argument. COMPLEMENT.
COmplement defined; how it may be corrupted, Civil Complement, my best
accomplishment.
how refined; wherein it may be admitted as mainely Consequent; wherein
omitted as merely impertinent; What Complement gives best accomplishment.
4. Argument. DECENCY.
Decency recommended as requisite in four distinct Subjects; Virgin-Decency,
is Virtues Livery.
Decency the attractivest motive of affection; the smoothest path that leads
to perfection.
5. Argument. ESTIMATION.
EStimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize; My prize, is her own praise.
how it may be discerned to be real; how Superficial; how it may be
impregnably preserved; how irreparably lost; The absolute end, whereto it
chiefly aspires, and whe^^in it cheerfully rests.
6. Argument. FANCY.
FAncy, is to be with Deliberation grounded; My Choice admits no Change.
with Constancy retained; Wanton Fancy is a wandering Frency; How it may be
checked, if too wild; how cheered, if too cool; an attemperament of both.
7. Argument. GENTILITIE.
GEntility, is derived from our Ancestors to us, Desert crowns Descent.
but soon blanched if not revived by us; Virtue the best Coat; a shamefast
read the best color to deblazon that Coat; Gentility, is not known by what
we wear, but what we are; There are native Seeds of goodness sown in
generous blood by lineall Succession; How these may be ripened by instruction.
8. Argument. HONOR.
Honor is painted, when it is not with virtue poudred; Honor is virtues
Harbor.
No cloth takes such deep tincture, as the cloth of Honor; Honorable
personages should be Presidents of goodness; Virtue or Vice, whether soever
takes hold first, retains a deeper impression in Honor, than in any lower
subject; That Virtue may receive the first impression, by means of an inbred
Noble disposition, seconded by helps of Education; which reduced to habit,
aspires to perfection.
A Compendious Table; wherein the Principal points contained in this Book,
are with no less Brevity than Perspicuity, Propriety, than Facility couched.
APPAREL. Observat. 1.
OF the necessity of Apparel. Page 1. Primitive purity exempted us from these
necessities; Original impurity subjected us to these necessities. page 4.
Apparel keeps the body warm two ways: first by keeping in the natural
heat: 2. By keeping out accidental cold. page 2. These benefits are inverted
by phantasticke Fashions late introduced: where attires are not made to keep
cold out, but to bring cold in. page 4. Of the Use of Apparel. page 5. To make
this use good, Modesty must be our guide, Virtuous thoughts our guard; so
shall Heaven be our goal. ibid. A memorable instance of a Religious woman;
expressing what Divine use she made in the eying of ^er Apparel. ibid. The
habit of the mind may be best discerned by the carriage of the body; the
Disposition of the body, by the habit. Page 6. The Constancy of the Heathen,
in retayning their ancient Country fashion; and immutably observing the habit
of their own Nation. ibid. Habit is to be used as an Ornament of Decency;
without the least border or Edging of Vanity. page 8. Directions, how to
dispose the Senses; and that Reason must keep Centinell, lest they become
Sensual. ibid. The preciousnesse of Time; whereof, a Moment is our portion;
nor has the Commandingst Emperor a larger proportion. page 9. How
contemptible a thing is Man, if he erect not his thoughts above man! ibid. Of
the abuse of Apparel. ibid. More time spent how to abuse time, and corrupt
licencious youth; then how to address employment to qualify the distractions
of the one, or to rectify the distempers of the other. page 10. This
illustrated by instances in three several pla^es. City, Court, and Country:
And accommodated, with Observations proper to every Subject. page 11. The Task
of a virtuous Mirror, and a true Lady of Honor, expressed; and to all Ladies,
as a President of goodness, zealously recommended. page 12. The life of a
mere Libertine instanced and displayed with a relation of those desperate
Conclusions to which she adheared. ibid. How the use of Apparel may be
inverted to abuse: either by Delicacy, or Superfluity. page 13. Reproof
touching Apparel, originally occasioned from four respects: 1.
Sumptuousness. -- And that confirmed by a memorable example. 2. Softness. 3.
Strangeness. And that reproveable in these 3. particulars. 4.
Superfluousnesse. -- Variety. Immensity. Vanity.
All which are intervained with sundry instances of various delight. Page 14.
and 15. A disswasion from Delicacy of Apparel, by reflecting on the Emblem of
humane frailty, the model of our mortality. Which continuate Subject is stored
with a select variety of divine and humane observations. page 16. 17. 18. etc.
Superfluity of Apparel condemned; the Fashionmongers answered; clozing that
Branch, with a devout Admonition from divine BASILE extracted, and usefully
applied. page 19. 20. 21. 22. That Apparel most comely, which conferres on the
wearer, most native beauty, and most honor on her Country. page 23. Habit is
a custom; yet it is our custom to change our Habit. ibid. Each Country
retains a fashion of her own, save our own. ibid. Ours an extraction or
confection of all, which makes us Ieered at by all. ibid. Phantasticke fashions
are no motives of affection to discreet Lovers. page 24. Discretion will be
more taken with Modesty, than Vanity; and Humility, than Vainglory. page 25.
The World is our Stage, our Life an Act; The Tyring-house, where we bestowed
such care, cost and curiosity, must be shut up, when our Night approaches, and
strips us of these robes of our mortality. Without Virtue, all humane glory is
a vading beauty. ibid.
BEHAVIOVR. Observat. 2.
Behavior reflects on three particulars. Action. Page 28. Affection. Passion.
Virtue is the life of Action, action the life of man. ibid. In this Subject
some are employed (but remissely) to the purpose. Others are employed to no
purpose. Others sleep out their mind in security. Others creep and cringe
into an Apish formality. None of these direct the bent of their actions, to the
Object of true Glory. page 29. A woman's honor is of higher esteem than to be
thus disvalued. Light occasions are many times grounds of deep aspersions.
Actions are to be seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction,
strengthened with instruction, least too much rashness bring the undertaker to
destruction. ibid. A brief Commemoration of diverse noble women, who as they
were honorable by descent, so were they memorable for desert. Paralels to the
best men for conversation, though weak in sex, nature and condition. page 30.
An exhortation to young Gentlewomen, to conform themselves to such imitable
patterns: concluding with that excellent instruction addressed by St. HIEROM
to that holy Virgin DEMETRIAS; commending nothing so much unto her as industry,
the better to inure her in the practice of Piety. page 31. Nothing requires
more discretion than affection. page 32. One can never truly love and not be
wise: which directly opposes PLATO'S opinion. ibid. Nothing more impatient of
delay than Love: Nothing of more different passion: with an exact relation of
their distinct operation. page 32. 33. Love is neither to be too subtly
colored, nor too simply discovered. If too hot, the violence of it is best
rebated by absence; if too cool, it is to be quickened with more frequent
conference, and assiduate presence. page 34. Passion never works more
fearful effects, then when it streams from Jealousy: verified by a tragic
Example in our own I Will and time occurring, and to succeeding times surviving.
page 35. 36. Remedies to appease anger, and every passionate distemper. page
37. The discommodities which arise from Passion; the benefits which redound
from attempering it. page 38. 39. An useful Exhortation, to this temperate
Moderation. Page 40. How a Gentlewoman is to behave her self in Company. page
41. Modesty and Mildness hold sweetest correspondence in all societies. page
42. Chastity is an enclosed Garden; and by no licentious foot to be entered.
ibid. Other vices are discomfited by fight, Aug. lib. de honestate mulieris.
Lust only defeated by flight. page 43. We may be in security, so long as we
are sequestered from society. ibid. We are to subject affection to the
soveraigntie of reason. page 44. How a Gentlewoman is to behave her self in
Privacie. ibid. Patterns of singular devotion recommended to her imitation.
page 45. 46. 47. Meditation being a Key to open the Morning, a lock to close
the Evening, should be a Gentlewomans bosom companion. page 48. Gentlewomen,
without much reservancie, are not to frequent public places of Society. Page
50. Instances of such, as being discreetly reserved, accommodated their persons
to public affairs, and became impro^ved by them* page 51. 52. A judicious
recollection of such who intend time, and such who mispend time: clozing with
the relation of sundry fearful Examples, to (...) loose livers from the like
securenesse. page 53. 54. That Behavior most approved, which is cl^ar^st from
affectation freed. page 55. Virtues Habit and Behavior is free and not
affected; native and not traduced. page 57. An accurate distinction or
dijudication betwixt an enforced and unaffected Behavior. ibid. A Gentlewoman
is so to behave her self, that too much curiosity tax her not of pride, nor
too much Majesty of State. page 58.
COMPLEMENT. Observat. 3.
COmplement defined. Page 59. With what constancy the Ancient retained their
form of Complement. Page 60. Different garbes proper to distinct places* Page
61. A distinction betwixt real and formal Complement. ibid. A deserving
commendation of sundry English Ladies, in their unaffected way of Complement.
page 62. How Complement may be corrupted. Page 63. A description of amorous
poems, with a just reproof of their enforced Hyperbolees. Page 64. 65. The
Complement used by some great ones, were but mere Canting among Beggars. page
66. How Complement may be refined. ibid. Civility is the best and most refined
Complement that may be. page 69. Civility is never ^ut of fashion: ever
deserving admiration. page 69. It is Society that gives us, or takes from us our
Security. page 67. Wherein Complement may be admitted, as mainely consequent.
page 70. The Court is the Beacon of the State; the Seat or School of
Complement. page 71. As Courtiers are Objects to many Eyes; so should their
Actions be Platformes to many Lives. Page 72. Corrivalship in a light Curtezans
love, has deprived many a hopeful Gentleman of his dearest life. ibid. In
Contests of love, it is hard to determine whether the Agent or Patient suffer
more. Page, 73. Wherein Complement may be omitted, as merely impertinent.
ibid. Apish formalists, or Complementall actors disesteeme those three
principal faculties of the Understanding. Discourse. Distinction. Election.
Singular Directions, how to acommodate them in all these. Page 75. What
Complement gives best accomplishment. page. 76. Sensual Curtezans are their
own Furies. page 77. 78. A good Christian the compleatest Courtier: Virtue the
Ornament, which gives Complement the best accomplishment. page, 79.
DECENCY. Observat. 4.
DEcency recommended as requisite, in f^ure distinct Subjects. GATE. LOOK.
SPEECH. HABIT.
It is no hard thing to gather the disposition of our heart, by the dimension
of our Gate. GATE.
Page 82. Though our Feet be here below, our Faith should be above. ibid. No
path of pleasure should draw us from those joys which last for ever. ibid. A
wanton Eye is the truest Evidence of a wandering LOOK.
mind: Our Eye becomes the sense of sorrow, because the sense of sin. An
Unclean Eye the Messenger of an Unclean heart. page 85. Distinct Obiect^
proposed to Eyes diversely affected. page 85. 86 By looking upward, the more we
look, we shall like, the longer we live, we shall love. page 87. Without
Speech SPEECH*
can no society subsist. page 88. Excellent rules for propriety of discourse.
ibid. A deliberate apprehension begot by serious attention, is to go ever
before discourse. page 89. What Subject suites best for a Gentlewomans
discourse. ibid. A pleasant answer of mellifluous BERNARD, applied to all
forward Shee-church discoursers. page 90. Silence in a Woman, is a moving
Rhetorioke. ibid. There is nothing which moves us more to pride it in sin,
HABIT.
than that which was first given us to cover our shame. page 91. Sumptuousness
of the Habit deserves not so much reprehension, as Phantasticknesse of the
Habit, in respect of the form or fashion. page 92. Decency is a civil
Gentlewomans choycest livery, which sets her f^rth before all embroidery. ibid.
Time is too precious to be made a Pageant or Morris on. ibid. A brief but
most useful application of those four preceding Subjects. Page 94. Decency,
the attractivest motive of Affection. ibid. Nothing convayes more affection to
the heart, than Decency in the Object we affect. ibid. In this age, the best
shot to be discharged is a Tavern reckoning, the best Alarm carousing, and
the most absolute March reeling. ibid. No Habit so decent, as what is native
and properly habituate. page 95. Where Virtue is not directresse i^ our choice,
our inconstant minds are ever prone to change. page 96. Nothing should give us
Content, but what is decent. ibid. Decency the smoothest path that leads to
perfection. page 97. The only way to be Complete, is to be decent. ibid. An
adumbration of that glory, reserved for those that affect Decency. page 98. A
virtuous Exmplarie life crowns the Soul with eternal rest. ibid.
ESTIMATION. Observat. 5.
EStimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize. page 101. The loss of Estimation
makes the richest Merchant an irreparable Bankrupt. ibid. Fame, the sweetest
flower that ever grew near the border of Time. page 102. A continuation of
sundry eminent personages; puissant in arms, continent in desires; and
absolute Commanders of their own affections. Page 103. 104. Greece and Rome
were no less honored for PENELOPES and LUCRETIA'S Constancy; than for
ULYSSES wisdom, or COLLATINES loyalty. ibid. Portion may woe a Wordling;
Proportion a youthful wanton; but it is virtue that wins the heart of
discretion. page 105. A select improvement of our Albion Ladies. page 106. How
Estimation may be disc^^^ed to be real. ibid. Instructions of singular use
for Mai^es, Wives, and Widows; illustrated with proper instances in each
kind. The way to win^^ a^ Husband is not to woe him, but to be wooed by him.
Page 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112. etc. Mothers the fittingst Nurses of
their own children; seconded by examples in all ages. Page 108. 109. A
Mistress of a family many times taxed for her Handmaides delicacy: instanced
and illustrated copiously. page 11^. The lives of the dying, consist in the
memory of the living. ibid. How Estimation may be discerued to be
superficial. page 114. Many desire to appear^ (...) to the eye, what they are
least in heart. ibid. The first occasion of kissing the lip: with a free
reproof of our late but too (...) introduced custom of kissing the cheek;
elegantly shad^^ed in a Sonnet. page 114. 115. Discretion cannot approve of
that for good, which selfe-opinion or singularity only makes good. ibid. Those
who dedicate themselves to the service of Virtue, prefer the pith before the
rind, substance before appearance. page ibid. A Caution to wanton Women. page
116. Sins may be without danger for a time, but never without fear. ibid.
Superficial Complement^rs, are hypocritical Courtiers. ibid. Directions how
to be gracious Courtiers in the highest Court. page 117. How Estimation may be
impregnably preserved. ibid. Of all arrows, those which are darted by the
spirit of zeal, wound the enemy most, and procure the Archer best rest:
confirmed by sundry notable examples. page 118. 119. None can walk safely,
that walks not religiously. ibid. A reflection upon the constancy and
resolution of Heathens* re^^mmended to the imitation of Christian women. page
120. Virtue cannot exercise her own strength, nor express her own worth
without an Opposite. page 121. An instance in a noble Lady. ibid. A direction
in the cloze. page 122. How Estimation may be irreparably lost. ibid. The
Ili^es hederae agiles horae con^^ciunt.
Ivy while it is winding, decays the plant, with which it is wreathing. ibid.
An instance of a Citie-Virago. page 123. An use of this instance. page 124. The
absolute end, whereunto Estimation aspires, and wherein it cheerfully rests.
Page 125. This confirmed by sundry examples; and one most remarkable of our
own. Page 125, 126. 127. An application to these Ladies of our own. page 127.
128.
FANCY. Observat. 6.
FAncy, is to be with deliberation grounded. page 129. The Eye is Fancies
harbinger, but the heart is her harbor, ibid. Directions for settling and
disposing our affection. page 130. Loves purity is to be discussed, before it
be entertained. page 131. Not the rind but the mind is Discretions Adamant.
Page 132. The misery of jealousy deblazoned and exemplified. ibid. Singular
resolves for a Conjugal State. Page 133, 134. Fancy is to be with constancy
retained. Page, 135. Two memorable Mottoes recommmended. ibid. The waywardness
of some women justly reproved, and how that humor may be rectified. page 136.
The admirable purity and efficacy of Love. page 137. Memorable examples of
Conjugal Constancy and Continency. ibid. An exhortation tending to the
imitation of such famous Presidents. ibid. Wanton Fancy is a wandering Frenzy.
page 138. Wanton Love, seldom or never promises good success. ibid. The
incendiaries or foments of this inordinate passion, to ^^xe particulars
reduced, all which are in one distich included. page 139 The Odious and
inhumane effects in all ages derived from the violence of this Wanton fancy,
or Wandering frenzy. Page 140. 141. Sovereign receipts to cure this desperate
malady. ibid. What kind of affection deserves a Gentlewomans election. page
142. How Fancy may be checked, if too wild; confirmed by a Philosophical
demonstration or Physical experiments ibid. A pleasant and pithy expostulation
with fancy. ibid. A disswasion from too much credulity to the light protests of
deceiving fancy: confirmed by a modern example. Page 143. A Gentlewoman may
with more safety suspect, than too rashly affect. ibid. A discreet resolution
upon terms of affection, seconded with the promise of an assured blessing.
page 144. The secret impression, and passionate expression of an unfortunate
Lady in the relation of her misery. page 144. 145. It is not so hard to give
comfortable counsel to the sorrowful, as to find a fit season when to give
it. ibid. Consideration, a necessary guide to affection. ibid. Repentance
comes too late at Marriage^night. How Fancy may be cheered if too cold. page
146. The incomparable honor of a Virgin-condition. ibid. The hate of Incest
with brute Beasts. page 147. The Bird of Love, the Emblem of a Lovers heart.
page 149. Moneys are inferior pictures to true Lovers. ibid. The absolute end
of a co^i^gall State. page 150* An attemperament of both th^se indisposed
Fancies before mentioned. ibid. The difference betwixt a wise and wild Love,
consists in this: the one ever deliberates before it love; the other loves
before it deliberate. Page 151. Necessary Cautions for all kind-hearted
Gentlewomen. page 152. The like for all coy or coole-affected Gentlewomen. page
153. A sweet attemperament of both these humors: with an apt Emblem explained
and properly applied, to such, as are with either of these humors distempered.
page 154. 155.
GENTILITY. Observat. 7.
GEntility, is derived from our Ancestors to us, but soon blanched, if not
revived by us. page 157. A persuasion to the imitation of our Ancestors
virtues. page 158. There was nothing mortal about them but their bodies, and
those were too frail Cabonets for such rich eminences to lodge in: whereas,
there is nothing but frailties about ours, for loose and licentious love to lie
in. ibid. Those Odours deserve highest honors, that beautify us living, and
preserve our memory dying. ibid. To see a light Lady descending from a noble
Family, is a Spectacle of more spreading infamy, than any Subject of inferior
quality. page 159. Gentility, is not to be measured by antiquity of time, but
precedence in worth. page 160. The reason why generous descents become so much
corrupted; and virtuous Parents by vicious Children so frequently disparaged.
ibid. and 161 Mothers, the naturallest Nurses: confirmed by precept, custom,
and example. page ibid. *Supra page 108. 109. An effectual persuasion to that
duty. ibid. and page 162. Virtue the best Coat. page ibid. Heraldry proves
virtues Coat to be the best, because deblazoned with least charge. ibid.
Virtue is no admiring lover of ought that is below her. page 162. 163. The
misery of this age, in sumptuousness of attire. page ibid The honor of
Humility. page 174. A glorious reproovall of modest Matrons. page 175. Sins
prevention, is to prevent the Occasion. Page 176. Gentlewomen are to reflect
more on their inward worth, than on their outward wear. Page 176. It will not
redound much to a Gentlewomans honor, to have observed the fashions of the
time, but with a discreet Contempt or civil neglect of fashion, to have
redeemed her time. page 177. Living actions of true Gentility, happy Precursors
to the State of Glory. ibid. There are native seeds of goodness, sown in
generous bloods by lineall succession: variously instanced. page ibid. and 178.
179. Those who are with the choycest virtues endowed, become often times, most
traduced. ibid. and 180. There is no one virtue which makes a Gentlewoman more
gracious in the eye of her beholder, than Modesty, the greatest advancer of
many ancient family ibid. To be high borne and basely minded, is to ingraft
bastard slippes in a Noble stock. ibid. High and Heroicke virtues become great
Houses: confirmed by the resolution of a noble Lady, in rejecting the powerful
solicitancy of a Sensual Suitor. ibid. and 181. Emulation of goodness in
great Persons is honorable. ibid. How these native seeds of goodness may be
ripened by instruction, page 182. No Tutresses fitter to perfect this excellent
work in Gentlewomen, than those who were the secundarie instruments of their
being: strengthened by example and reason. page 183. A select Choice and
recommendation of sundry books of instruction, to the perusal of our English
Gentlewoman. ibid. A brief enumeration, serious discussion, and judicious
election, of sundry ancient Fathers, with other moral Authors. page 184.
English translations, the lights of Ladies, but Dampes of Scholars. page 187.
Private Nurseries, household Academies. ibid. The first instruction takes the
deepest Impression; with an useful application to every condition. page 188.
Necessary directions highly conducing to the good report and repute of Maids
and Matrons, ibid. The most precious things have ever the most pernicious
Keepers. Nothing more precious, than a Virgins honor; it were a shame for the
Mother for any base lucre, to prove a treacherous Keeper. page 189. The whole
progress of a Gentlewomans conversation should be a continued line of
direction: to which line he confines his observation. page 190.
HONOR. Observat. 8.
PRomotion discovers what men be, but true Honor shows what they should be.
page 191. Honor is painted, when it is not with virtue poudred. page 192.
Moral Philosophy, nor Christian Theory, could ever hold that for deserving
greatness, which had not near relation to goodness. ibid. Their memory
cannot live long, who make Authority a Sanctuary to wrong. page 193. Virtue
defined, and by it true Gentility with the honor of an ancient family
expressed, page 194. An accurate connection with a personal application of the
preceding Subjects, to all Gentlewomen. page ibid. and 195. Be women never so
eminent, they are but painted Trunkes, if virtue be not resident. page 196
Virtue should not only be resident but president over all their actions. ibid.
No Cloth takes such deep tincture, as the cloth of Honor. ibid. No Pleasure
can be constant, unless it afford inward content. page 197. There is nothing
asperseth a deeper stain upon the Cloth of Honor, than too much attention
unto Sycophants. ibid. Sovereign receipts against the poison of flattery; with
a serious exhortation to the entertainment of humility, patience, constancy,
and every generous virtue. page ibid. and 198. 199. Violets though they grow
low and near the earth, smell sweetest: and Honor appears the fullest of
beauty, when she is humblest. page 198. Honor, if truly grounded, can look in
the face of terror, and never be amated. ibid. She that makes virtue her
object, cannot but make every Earthly thing her Subject. ibid. Honors imprezza
and Pasture. ibid. Honors complete armor, dress, and portraiture. Page 200
HER Description, with motives to her imitatation. ibid. A brief but useful
application. page 201. Honorable Personages should be Presidents of goodness.
Page ibid. LANDMARKES are usually erected for direction of the Mariner, and
Magistrates elected for instruction of the inferior. ibid. The world, a Maze
of Misery, a vale of vanity? ibid. Man, a story of calamity, a statue of
infelicitie. To be a Lady of Honor, is more than titular. Page 202. Three
especial Objects, upon which Honorable personages are to reflect. Charity.
Page ibid. Chastity. Humility. A most accurate and serious discourse on each
particular Object. Page 202. 203. 204 The very last day to an honorable
Christian, is every days memorial. ibid. The actions of Noble Personages,
like sweet odors, diffuse themselves by imitation to their followers. page 205.
Those that are followers of their persons, will be followers likewise of their
lives. ibid. Their private family is a familiar Nursery. ibid. Foul enormities
must admit of no Privileges: Eminent Persons are to be their own Censors.
ibid. An excellent application, by way of Exhortation to all such honorable
Censors. page 205. 206. Virtues are more permanent Monuments, than Statues,
styles, trophies, or oboliskes. ibid. Virtue or Vice, whethersoever takes hold
first, retains a deeper impression in honor, than any lower Subject. ibid. In
these, whom Nobility of blood has advanced, be ever some seeds or semblances
of their Progenitors retained. ibid. This con^^rmed by Philosophical reason
and example; President and Precept. page 207 Great minds are many times sick
of great malaladies: how this by timely prevention may be seasonably cured.
page 208. The efficient cause, why Virtue or Vice, whethersoever takes hold
first, retains a deeper impression in Honor, than in any lower Subject;
illustrated by instance. ibid. First Motions have deep impressions; first
Notions firm retentions. Page 209. The greatest profit of Honorable
personages, is to become Proficients in the practice of virtue; Their highest
delight, to subdue their delights to the obedience of reason, for the love of
virtue. ibid. The Corruption of time has introduced that deformity of fashion,
as it asperseth on our formal imitators much imputation. ibid. Where Youth is
initiated in affectation of State, it partakes in age of too much Pride. ibid.
The humor, temper, and danger of our Tame-Beasts, or State-Parasites. page 210
A reservancy of State in Pace, face, and every Posture, recommended by an
insinuating Faune, to a Phantasticke Gallant. ibid. Sycophancy the ruin of
many a Noble family. ibid. An election of honest and discreet followers. ibid.
Gentlewomens lives, as they are lives to themselves, so should they be lights
unto others. ibid. For Popular honor, Vice will but varnish it; it is Virtue
that will richly enammell it. Singular motives to Mortification. ibid. page
211. That Virtue may receive the first impression, by means of an inbred
noble disposition, seconded by helps of Education. ibid. A pleasant Epigram
alluding to all humerous Ladies. Marg. page 212. A Choice recollection and
expression of such virtues as sort and suit with the condition of our noblest
Ladies: with Cautions to attemper them in all extremes: by an useful
reflection upon all the Senses; and those Commanding passions, which domineere
most over the Senses. page 212. 213. A singular Meditation for recollection of
our affections. page 214. 215. Vice throws her aspersions on no subject, so
much as on Honor. page 215. A fruitful application to all young Gentlewomen,
for regulating their dispositions, and how to make them true inheritrices of
Honor. page ibid. and 216. Virtue reduced to habit, aspires to perfection.
page ibid. There is nothing under the heaven, that can satisfy a Soul created
for heaven. ibid. Exquisite directions for Virgins, Wives, and Widows. page
ibid. and 217. We are to esteem no life sweeter, than when every day improves
us and makes us better. ibid. A divine Contemplation, reflecting upon our
mutabilitie on Earth, our immortality in Heaven. page 218. A Revew of our
Ladies Court and City solace. ibid. Recreations run in a Maze, while they lay
their Scene of Mirth on Earth. ibid. A Twofold consideration full of sweet and
select consolation. ibid. and 219. How happy many Eminent Personages had been,
had they never been taken with this Shadow of happiness. ibid. and 219. No
passage to the Temple of HONOR virtutis praemium, VIRTUES honoris pretium.
Honor, but through the Temple of Virtue. ibid. If Gentlewomen desire to be
great, let it be their height of ambition to aspire to honor in the Court of
virtue. ibid. What a brave Saliquor State shall Gentlewomen enjoy, when
vigilance, becomes Warden of their Cinque Ports. page 220. Perseverance, the
Crown of goodness. ibid. A constant resolution, the Diadem of a Christian in
her dissolution. page 221. A Character, entitled; A Gentlewoman; wherein such
an One is described, whose desert answers her descent; whose actions truly
enn^ble her self: with a brief touch or revew of all his Observations; Which
are shown to be Objects of her love, improvements of her life.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
The Necessity of Apparel; Of the Use and Abuse of Apparel; Two means by
which the Use may be inuerted to Abuse; That Apparel most comely, which
conferres on the Wearer most native beauty, and most honor on her Country.

APPAREL. APPAREL.

HAD ADAM never committed sin, Obseruat. 1.
he had never needed figge-leaues to cover his shame. The necessity of Apparel.
Sin made him fly to the grove for shelter, and shame compelled him to play
the artlesse Tailor, and through mere necessity to make him a Cover. Well
enough was he before that time attyred, albeit naked: and so happily stated, as
we are to imagine, that ignorance kept him not from the knowledge of his
nakedness, but that his Original purity freed him from these necessities. But
no sooner was the forbidden fruit tasted, then poor Adam became tainted, his
nakedness discovered; so as now for honor of modesty, he must of necessity
betake himself to that science, whereto (being free till that time) he was
never bound Apprentice. His inhibited taste made him sensible (and therein more
miserable) of what before he felt not. No distemperature of cold or heat could
before that time annoy him. Now his failing in performing what he ought, brings
him to a feeling of that he never knew. Now tender Eve, whose temperate repose
ministered her all content in a sweet and cheerful Arbor, with all the
varieties and delicacies of nature, feels a shaking and shiuering in her
joints: Such a strange distemper has the taste of an Apple wrought in her. She
must fit her self then to endure that with patience, which she procured to her
self and second self, through disobedience; and put on what before she needed
not, a Veil to cover her Nakedness, and subject her self to these
Necessities. It is true, that Clothing keeps the body warm two ways: By
keeping in the natural heat of the body; and by keeping out the accidental
cold of the Air. All Creatures enter the world sheelded and shrouded, save
only poor man, who enters lists naked. Tender and delicate he is by nature;
more subject to prejudice by distemper, than any other Creature. Now to fence
himself against all occurrents, and the better to endure all intemperate
violence, the Divine Providence has accommodated it self to his Necessity,
from the very first entrance of his infancy: yet were it fit, when he reflects
upon himself thus decked and attired, to recall to mind the prime occasion of
these Necessities. So equally tempered was the Air where he first breathed; so
far from the distemper of heat or cold freed; with such variety of all
delights stored; as then in all happiness he seemed to be stated: but
presently after his fall, began these to fail. That soil, which before was
naturally fruitful, became wild without manuring: Those Rivers, which before
were purely relishing and delighitng, became muddy, brackish, and distasting:
Yea, that Air, which before was ever sweetly and temperately breathing, became
unseasonably scorching or freezing. Necessity then has provided for Adam and
his Collapsed posterity a Coat, to shroud them from the inclemency of all
seasons. And whence came this necessity, but from sin? To glory then in these
necessities, is to glory in sin. Which were, as if some grave Capital
offender, having committed high Treason against his Sovereign, should,
notwithstanding, out of a Princely Clemency be pardoned; yet with this
condition, that he should wear a Cord or Halter about his neck during his
life, to put him in remembrance of his disloyalty and treason. In which Badge,
this frontlesse Traitor should pride himself more, than if it were some
ancient Crest of honor. Reflect then upon the original source of your sorrow,
Eve, ye daughters of Eve. Ambition prompt her to sin, sin brought her to shame,
shame to her shroud. Mere necessity compelled her to wear what before she
knew not, and to provide her self of that which before she needed not. How is
it then, that these rags of sin, these robes of shame, should make you
idolize your selves? How is it, that ye convert that which was ordained for
necessity, to feed the light-flaming fuel of licentious liberty? Was Apparel
first intended for keeping in natural heat, and keeping out accidental cold?
How comes it then that you wear these thin Cobweb attires, which can neither
preserve heat, nor repel cold? Of what an incurable cold would these
Butterfly-habits possess the wearer, were pride sensible of her self? Sure,
these attires were not made to keep cold out, but to bring cold in. No
necessity, but mere vanity, introduced these Pye-coloured fopperies amongst
us. Vnuaile many of our light Curtezans, whose brothell practice has reft them
of the ornament of a woman, and you will find a strange Metamorphosis; Venus
armata turned to Venus calua. We say there is no good congruity in a proud
heart and a beggars purse. Why should we then pride our selves in that which
displayes our beggary? Before we had clothes, we wanted nothing; having
clothes, we stand in need of all things. Primitive purity exempted us from
these necessities; Original impurity subjected us to these necessities. Cold
we grew in Charity, cold in every Christian duty; garments then stood we in
need of, to shroud us against the tempest of a benumbed Conscience. These
habits then, it appears, were ordained, at first, for necessity to shield us:
Vanity had not then set invention on work, nor the age sent her Phantastickes
abroad to traffic with sorraine fashions. Winter made choice of his garment
to fit the season; so did Summer, without an affected singularity, fit him to a
seasonable fashion. They stood not much either upon color or curious border;
temperate heat they desired to retain, intemperate to repel; cold to keep
out, natural warmth to keepe^in. This was that, ancient times intended; this
was all that they affected. Necessity enforced them to do what they did;
otherwise, I am persuaded, they had not been, to this day, made. Those then
that esteem more of Apparel, how gorgeous soever, than of a work of
Necessity, detract from their own glory, to suit themselves in stuffes of
vanity.

THere is nothing in its own nature so absolutely good, The use of Apparel.
but it may be corrupted; what was at first intended for some good Use, if
perverted, declines into some apparent Abuse. Now Gentlewomen, (for to you I
direct this discourse) would you observe the right use, and divert in no
particular from the Ordinance of Apparel; Modesty must be your guide, virtuous
thoughts your guard, so shall heaven be your goal. When the Roman Princes, in
their Conquests, or triumphant honors, were with acclamations and vollies of
salutes received, by the general applause of the people extolled, and in their
triumphall Eb^r or Chair of estate seated; there stood always one behind them
in their Throne, to pull them by the sleeue with this Memorial; Remember thou
art mortal. A more useful Memorial you cannot have, than these Robes you
wear, of your own frailty, nor a more effectual motive to humility. Had not
sin worn you out of Gods ^auour, and reft you of your native splendor, you
had never worn these habits, signals of your dishonor. I commend her for the
good use which she made of her Apparel, who never dyed her garment, but she
watered it with a tear, remembering what necessities her ambitious thoughts had
brought her to: for by aspiring to know more than she did, she became deprived
of that excellent beauty which she had. Patterns likewise of modesty you may
be, and herein singularly useful by your examples, unto others of your sex.
Nor can you possibly express it better, then in observing that divine precept,
by learning how to array your selves in comely apparel, with sham^ fastness
and modesty, not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel:
But, as becomes women that profess the fear of God. For even after this
manner in time past did the holy women, which trusted in God, tire themselves.
Here is a prescript form by way of direction; for your habit. Choicer
ornaments you cannot have to adorn you; nor any fashion that will better seem
you. Where you walk, you may enjoy your selves freed from light eyes, gazing
and admiring vanity: your very habit is your Testate to witness for you: loose
thoughts nestle not in your bosom, nor do wandering distractions surprise your
breast: you have learned to your highest solace, even in every motion, action,
posture, gesture, to observe modesty, as an ornament to honor. For, seeing
that the very habit of the mind may be best discerned and discovered by the
state or carriage of the body, the disposition of the body by the habit; to
avoid scandal, and retain that Christian opinion which every one ought to
preserve, we are to make choice of that attire, which conferres most seeming
gravity on us. This the very Heathen, whose best direction was morality, were
careful of: for in the use of Apparel, they retained such constant course, as
they held it the greatest blemish they could asperse upon their Nation, to
introduce any new or exoticke fashion, either to effeminate the dispositions of
their people, or to derogate from the honor of their memorable predecessors;
whose model was their direction in habit, and all other obseruable customs.
What a simple, honest Rusticity our Ancestors retained in their wear, might
be easily discerned, if we should make recourse to one of their ancient
Wardrobes; where antiquity may prescribe for many ages, and constancy second
what antiquity had introduced. Yea, so obseruant were former times of those
fashions which preceding ages had recommended to them, as they held it ominous
to innouate or bring in any new form, even in matters of indifferency. When
Darius had altered the fashion of his Sword, which used to be Persian, into the
form of the Macedonian (in the year immediately before he fought with
Alexander) the Chaldees or Soothsayers prophesied, that into what fashion as
Darius had altered his Sword, time would reduce his State; and that the Persian
glory was drawing toward her last period, by subiecting her self to the
Sovereignty of Macedon. Which prediction was soon confirmed by the next years
Conquest. But tell me, ye curious Dames, who hold it a derogation to your
honor, to entertain ought that is vulgar; whereto were Clothes first
ordained, but to cover that nakedness which sin brought, and to skreene that
shame which the effect of sin first wrought? The use of Apparel is not to
dignifie the wearer, or add more beauty to the Creature. Sure I am, that a
judicious eye, who measures dignity by desert, scorns to prefer the Case
before the Instrument, the Rind before the Pith. Those who are worthy to be
your Judges, will determine your worth by what there is in you, not by what you
wear on you. Let May-games and Morrices beautify themselves with Anticke
dressings, to captiuate the vulgar eye; your breeding has been better, your
judgments clearer, your observations wiser, than to stoop to such base Lures.
Our life consists in the perfection or temperate infusion of natural or
radical humor, or in the conservation of natural heat: to preserve this, to
increase that, Nature has provided means inward and outward. To inuert the
use, is to pervert the Ordinance it self: So use the outward, that you darken
not the inward; so dispose of the inward, that it may rectify the outward.
Reflect on antiquity, yet no farther than may suit with the decency of the age
wherein you live. I am not ignorant, how many fashions formerly used, would in
this age deserve rather derision than approuement. And that the infancy of the
world had many shapes, as then but only in their Embrio or rather Conception,
which succeeding times, accommodated by more exquisite artists, brought
afterward to perfection. Use your habit as an ornament of decency; let it not
have the least Edging of vanity. Many Eyes are fixed on you, sundry motives of
imitation are derived from you. Send not out one fruitless sigh for any
phantasticke fashion which you see: they cannot be sighs of compassion, that
are sent merely out for fashion. Sigh rather that your Country should labor
of so vain a birth, as to prefer foreign inventions before the ornament of
a Maiden I Will, constant modesty. Spend not a fruitless hour in an unprofitable
garnish of corruption: Use these outward dressings as if you did not use them:
Let them be rather your scorn than your pride; your contempt than content. Be
those curious Cases of mortality decked or dawbed with never so much adulterate
beauty, they cannot confer upon themselves one beameling of lasting glory.
Look upon those poor bases of frailty, your feet, what a tinkling they make,
to partake of a lascivious meeting in priuacy: Eye those rising mounts, your
displayed breasts, with what shameless art they woo the shamefaste passenger:
View those wandering Lamps, how they roue abroad, as if they would fly out of
their Lodges, and spheere themselves in some amorous Orb. Call them home, lest
Dina^-like they lose themselves by straying, impeach their honor by wandering,
bring themselves woe by their lascivious wooing. Affect no fashion that may
beget in your generous bosoms a light thought; Contemn that fashion which
detracts from the native beauty of the feature, or which brings it to that
admiration of the Creature, as it makes it forgetful of the Creator. O how
contemptible a thing is man (the word may reflect equally upon either sex) if
he erect not his thoughts above man! What a poor use makes that miserable
creature of his being here, who bestows so much time in the Tyring house, as
he forgets what part he is to play on the Stage? O consider the preciousnesse
of time! it is all that may be properly said ours. Neither can we term that
portion of time which we call ours, years, or days, or hours. A moment is
our portion, and the Commandingst Emperor has no larger proportion. Of which
moment, whatsoever is past, is not now; and whatsoever is to come, is not yet.
Eye then your Houre-glasse, vye in tears with grains of sand. Bestow not this
little scantling, this moment shorter than nothing, in too curiously attiring
of vanity, but in meditating of your own frailty, and redeeming the time you
have lost in security. As Apparel was ordained for necessity; use it with
Christian ciuility. In observing this, you make the use good, which shall
hereafter redound to your greater gain.

O But the misery and leuity of this age is such, The Abuse of Apparel.
as that becomes generally least aff^cted, which adornes us most; that valued
most, which beseemes us least. Time was indeed, and may that time once re-shine
upon us, when the only flower to beloved of women, was a native red, which was
shamefastness. The face knew not then what painting was, whose adulterate
shape takes now acquaintance from the Shop. Then were such women matter of
scan^dall to Christian eyes, which used painting their skin, powdring their
hair, darting their eye. Our Commerce with foreign Nations was not for
fashions, feathers, and follies. There was distinction in our attires;
differences of ranks and qualities; a civil observance of decent habits; which
conferred no less glory on our I Will at home, than victorious mannagements by
the prowess of our Inhabitants, did abroad. If we reflect on them, we must of
necessity blush at our selves: seeing, what we have received for use, we have
converted to abuse* That distinction which decency found out for habits vi^ile
and feminine, what commixture has it found in latter times? What near
resemblance and relation has woman's to man's: suting their light feminine
skirts with manlike doublets? Semiramis, that victorious Princess, commanded
all to wear Tyres upon their heads, and to put upon them woman's apparel
without distinction, that she might reign securely without exception: Thus
the comely habit of modesty became a pretended veil to an usurped Sovereignty.
But these succeeding times have tired our women with tyres; translating them to
a plume of Feathers. Fashion is now ever under sail: the Invention ever
teeming; Phantasticke Wits ever breeding. More time spent how to abuse time,
and corrupt licentious youth, than how to address employment for the one, or
to rectify the distempers of the other. Take a survey of all degrees, and tell
me what uniformity you find in this particular. And to make instance in three
several places (for to these all others may have proper relation) take a more
precise and punctual perusal of City, Court, and Country, and return me a
brief of your Survey. In the first, you shall find many grave Matrons, modest
Maids, devout Widows; but are these all? No; with these you shall find a
strangely mixed generation. Some affecting nothing more than what is most novel
and phantasticke; Others envying what they disdainfully see in others, which
fashion rather than they will miss, they will not stick to set their honor
at sale: All, or most, true Biantines, carrying all their wealth about them.
For the second, you shall find, amongst many other plants of promising growth
and excellent proficience, sundry sweet-sented sprigs of Cynnamon, whose rind
is worth all the body. No discourse can relish their formal palate, but
fashion; if Eues Kirtle should be now shown them, how they would geere their
Grandam? For the last, though it be long ere they creep into form, having
once attained it, they can take upon them as unbeseeming a State in a Country
Pew, as if they were Ladies for that year, and had been bred in the Art of
mincing since their childhood. But what are these, but such, whose expense of
time is scarcely valued? Sacrificing more hours to their Looking-glass, than
they reserve minutes to lament their defects. Such, whose virtuous thoughts
never harbor the least conceit that may betray their honor, or deprave those
more noble parts wherewith they are endowed; scorn to drown their better part
in these dregs of sensuality. Virtue is their attendant, Honor their object,
all inferior delights their lowest subjects. Day by day have these their task
imposed, that the poison of sloth may be better avoided: No day passes
without a line, no action without a limit: observing the course of that
virtuous Mirror, of whom it is said: In distinct hours she did divide the day,
To walk, to work, to meditate, and pray.


Much different from this pious resolution, was that Libertines impious
conclusion, who held that none could be frequently devout in prayer, and
fashionably decent in attire. She bestowed too much time on her Glass, to
reserve any for her Lamp. Pride had exiled her zeal; delicacy of habit,
sanctity of heart. Her day might be easily divided: She bestowed the forenoone
on her skin, the afternoon on a Play, clozing her Evening Lecture with a
reere supper: and this was her Christian Task. Miserable is the condition of
that Creature, who, so her skin be sleake, cares not if her soul be rough. So
her outward habit be pure and without blemish, values little her inward
garnish. Such an one has made a firm Contract with vanity, clozing her
contemptuous age with a fearful Catastrophe. Thus far have we discoursed of
the effect or abuse it self, we are now to treat of those two sources, from
whence these abuses properly arise; to wit, Delicacy in being more curious in
our Choice of Apparel than necessity or decency does require; secondly,
Superfluity, in storing more variety and change of rayments than either nature
needs, or reason would admit, were she not transported with a sensual
affection, by giving way to what unbounded appetite requires.

IN the search of any Mineral, How the use of Apparel may be inuerted to
abuse.
we are first to dig for the vein; and in the curing of any maleuolent
effect, we are duly and seriously to inquire the producing cause, that by
stopping the Spring or source, we may stay the violence of the stream. We are
then to insist of those two precedent means, by which the use may be inuerted
to abuse; and that which of it self is approueable, if observed with decency,
becomes justly reprehensible by corrupting so necessary and consequent an use,
either by delicacy, which weakens and effeminates the spirit, or by
Superfluity, which ever darkens the beameling of reason with the Cloud of sense.

Reproof touching Apparel may be occasioned from four respects:

First, when any one wears Apparel above their degree, exceeding their
estate in precious attire. Whence it is that Gregory says; there be some who
are of opinion, that the wear of precious or sump^tuous Apparel is no sin:
Which if it were no fault, the divine Word would never have so punctually
expressed, nor historically related, how the Rich man, who was tormented in
hell, was clothed with Purple and Silk. Whence we may note, that touching the
matter or subject of attire, humane curiosity avails highly. The first stuff
or substance of our garments, was very mean; to wit, Skin with Wool. Whence
it is we read, that God made Adam and his wife Coats of Skins, that is, of
the Skins of dead beasts. Afterward (see the gradation of this vanity
derived from humane singularity) they came to Pure Wool, because it was
lighter than Skins. After that to rindes of trees, to wit, Flax. After that
to the dung and ordure of Worms, to wit, S^^ke. Lastly, to Gold and Silver,
and precious Stones. Which preciousnesse of attire highly displeases God. For
instance whereof (which the very Pagans themselves observed) we read that the
very first among the Romans, whoeuer wore Purple, was struck with a
Thunderbolt, and so dyed suddenly, for a terror and mirror to all succeeding
times, that none should attempt to lift himself proudly against God in
precious attire.

The second point reprehensible is, Softness or Delicacy of Apparel: Soft
Clothes introduce soft minds. Delicacy in the habit, begets an effeminacy in
the heart. John Baptist, who was sanctified in his mothers womb, wore sharp
and rough garments. Whence we are taught, that the true servant of God is not
to wear garments for beauty or delight, but to cover his nakedness; not for
State or Curiosity, but necessity and conuenience. Christ says in his Gospel,
They that are clad in soft rayments, are in Kings houses. Whence appears a
maine difference betwixt the servants of Christ and of this world. The servants
of this world seek delight, honor, and pleasure in their attire; whereas the
servants of Christ so highly value the garment of innocence, as they loath to
stain it with outward vanities. It is their honor to put on Christ Jesus;
other robes you may rob them of, and give them occasion to joy in your purchase.

The third thing reproueable is, foreign Fashions: When we desire nothing more
than to bring in some Outlandish habit different from our own; in which
respect (so Apishly-anticke is man) it becomes more affected than our own.
Against such the Lord threatens, Zephan. 1.
I will visit the Princes and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed
with strange Apparel. Which strange Apparel is after diverse fashions and
inventions, wholly unknown to our Ancestors. Which may appear sufficiently to
such, who within this 30, or 40, or 60 years never saw such cutting, caruing,
nor indenting as they now see.

The fourth thing reproueable is, Superfluity of Apparel, expressed in these
three particulars: first, in those who have diverse changes and suits of
Clothes; who had rather have their garments eaten by mo^ths, than they should
cover the poor members of Christ. The naked cry, the needy cry, and
shreekingly complain unto us, how they miserably labor and languish of hunger
and cold. What auailes it them that we have such changes of rayments neatly
plaited and folded; rather than we will supply them, they must be starued? How
do such rich Moath-wormes observe the Doctrine of Christ, when he says in his
Gospel; He that has two Coats let him give one to him that has none?

Secondly, we are to consider the Superfluity of such who will have long
garments, purposely to seem greater: yet, which of these can add one cubit to
his stature? This puts me in remembrance of a conceited story which I have
sometimes heard, of a diminutiue Gentleman, who demanding of his Tailor, what
yards of Satin would make him a Suite, being answered far short in number of
what he expected: with great indignation replied, Such an one of the Guard to
my knowledge had thrice as much for a Suite, and I will second him. Which his
Tailor with small importunacy condescended to, making a Gargantn^'s Suite for
this Ounce of man's flesh, reserving to himself a large portion of shreads,
purposely to form a fitter proportion for his Ganimede shape.

The third Superfluity arises from their vanity, who take delight in wearing
great sleeves, misshapen Elephantine bodies, trains sweeping the earth, with
huge poakes to shroud their phantasticke heads, as if they had committed some
egregious fact which deserved that censure: for in the Eastern Countries it
has been usually observed, that such light Women as had distained their
honor, or laid a public imputation on their name, by consenting to any
libidinous act, were to have their heads sowed up in a poake, to proclaim
their shame, and publish to the world the quality of their sin.

NOw to insist more punctually on that effeminatour both of youth and age,
Delicacy of Apparel.
Delicacy of Apparel; I would have our Daughters of Albion, reflect upon
themselves, those poor shells of corruption: what a trimming and tricking they
bestow on their brittle houses. Petrarchs advice was, that we should not be
afraid though our outhouses, these structures of our bodies, were shaken, so
our souls, the guests of our bodies, fared well. Whereas contrariwise, these,
whose only care is to delude the outward appearance with a seeming fair, so
they may preserve the varnish, disualue the foundation. O may this folly be a
stranger to our Nation! To allay which fury, at temper which frenzy, I hold no
receipt more sovereign than to enter into a serious meditation of your frailty.
As first to consider, what you were before your birth; secondly, what from your
birth to your death; lastly, what after death. If you reflect upon the first,
you shall find that you have been, what before you were not, afterward were
what now you are not, first made of vile matter (see the Emblem of humane
nature) wrapped in a poor skin, nourished in an obscure place, your Coat
the second skin, till you came to a sight of the Sun, which you entertained
with a shreek, implying your original sin. Thus attired, thus adorned came
you to us; what makes you then so unmindful of that poor case wherein you
came among us? Has beauty, popular applause, youthful heat, or wealth taken
from you the knowledge of your selves? Derive your pedigree, and blush at your
matchless folly, that pride should so highly magnify it self in dust, or
glory most in that which brings with it the most shame. Why do you walk with
such haughty necks? why do you extol your selves so highly in these
Tabernacles of earth? Attend and consider; you were but vilde corrupted seed
at the first; and now fuller of pollution than at the first. Entering the world
with a shreeke to express your ensuing shame, you became afterward exposed to
the miseries of this life and to sin, in the end worms and worms meat shall
you be in the grave. Why then (...) you proud, ye dusty shrines, ye earthen
vessels; seeing your conception was impurity, birth misery, life penalty, death
extremity? Why do ye embellish and adorn your flesh with such port and grace,
which within some few days worms will devour in the grave? Mean time you
neglect the incomparable beauty of your souls. For with what ornaments do ye
adorn them? With what sweet odors or spiritual graces do ye perfume them?
With what choice Flowers of piety and devotion do ye trim them? What Habits
do ye prepare for them, when they must be presented before him who gave them?
How is it that ye so disesteeme the soul, preferring the flesh before her? For
the Mistress to play the Handmaid, the Handmaid the Mistress, is a great
abuse. There can be no success in that family, where the household is managed
so disorderly. O restrain your affections, limit your desires, bear an equal
hand to the better part! The Building cannot stand unless you remove the
rubbish from the foundation. The Soul in the body is like a Queen in her
Palace. If you would then have this little Commonwealth within you to
flourish, you must with timely providence suppress all factious and turbulent
molesters of her peace: your passions, especially those of vainglory, must
be restrained; motives to humility cherished; chaste thoughts embraced; all
deuious and wandering Cogitations excluded; that the soul may peaceably enjoy
her self, and in her Palace live secured. Whereto if you object, that this is
an hard lesson; you cannot despise the world nor hate the flesh; tell me where
are all those lovers of the world, cherishers of the flesh, which not long
since were among us? Nothing now remains of them but dust and worms.
Consider diligently (for this consideration will be a Counterpoize to all
vainglory) what they now are, and what they have been. Women they were as
you are: they have eat, drunk, laughed, spent their days in iollity, and now
in a moment gone down to hell. Here their flesh is apportioned to worms,
there their souls appointed to hell fire: till such time as being gathered
together to that unhappy society, they shall be rolled in eternal burnings, as
they were before partakers with them in their vices. For one punishment
afflicts, whom one love of sin affects. Tell me, what profits them
their vainglory, short joy, worldly power, pleasure of the flesh, evil got
wealth, a great family, and concupiscence arising carnally? Where now is their
laughter? Where their jests? Where their boasting? Where their arrogance? From
so great joy, how great heaviness? After such small pleasure, how great
unhappiness? From so great joy they are now fallen into great wretchedness,
grievous calamity, insufferable torments. What has befallen them, may befall
you: being Earth of Earth, slime of slime: Of Earth you are, of Earth you live,
and to Earth you shall return. Take this with you for an infallible position
in these your Cottages of Corruption: If you follow the flesh, you shall be
punished in the flesh: if you be delighted in the flesh, you shall be tormented
in the flesh: for by how much more your flesh is cockered in this world with
all delicacy; by so much more shall your souls be tormented in hell
eternally. If you seek curious and delicate rayments, for the beauty and
bravery of your rayments shall the moath be laid under you, and your Covering
shall be Worms. And this shall suffice to have been spoken touching Delicacy
of Apparel: we are now to descend briefly to the second branch, Superfluity;
whereof we intend to discourse with that breuity, as the necessity of the
Subject, whereof we treat, shall require, and the generality of this spreading
malady may enforce.

Divine is that saying, Superfluity of Apparel.
and well worthy your retention: The covetous person before he gain loses
himself, and before he take ought is taken himself. He is no less wanting
to himself in that which he has, than in that which he has not. He finds
that he lost not, possesses that he owes not, detaines that he ought not,
and hates to restore what he injuriously enioyes. So unbounded is the
affection, or rather so depraved is the auaritious man's inclination, as he
cannot contain his desires within bounds, nor enter parley with reason, having
once slaued his better part to the sovereignty of a servile affection. This may
appear even in this one particular. Food and raiment are a Christians riches:
wherein he uses that moderation, as he makes that Apostolical rule his
Christian direction: Having food and raiment, I have learned in all things to
be contented. But how miserably is this golden rule inuerted, by our sensual
worldling? Competency must neither be their Cater in the one, nor Conueniency
their Tailor in the other. Their Table must labor of variety of dishes, and
their Wardrobe of exchange of raiments. No reason more probable than this of
their naked insides, which stand in need of these superfluous additaments. What
myriads of indisposed hours consume these in beautifying rotten tombs! How
curious they are in suiting their bodies, how remiss in perferring their
souls suit to their Maker! How much they are disquieted in their choice, how
much perplexed in their change, how irresolute what they shall wear, how
forgetful of what they were! This edging suits not, that pirle sorts not, this
dressing likes not: off it must after all be fitted, and with a new Exchange,
less seemly, but more gaudy suited. The fashion that was in prime request but
yesterday, how it begins to disrellish the wearer, as if it had lost the beauty
by unseasonable weather; thus is fashion fallen into a quotidian Fever: See our
compleatest Fashionmongers, how much they tire themselves with their attiring,
how they trouble themselves with their trimming! It seems wonderful to me,
that they are not wholly crushed, with that onerous burden with which they are
pressed. What a shop of guga nifles hang upon one back? Here the remainder of
a greater work, the relics of an ancient Manor converted to a pearl
Chain. There the moity of an ill-husbanded demaine reduced to a Carknet. Long
trains must sweep away long acres: the Epidemicall vanity of this age does
exact it; and she is held least worthy affecting, that does least affect it.
What; says my delicate Madam; Is it for one of my rank or descent to affect
what is vulgar? how then should I become popular? I confess, we are all
composed of one Earth, yet is there to be presupposed a difference in our
birth. Were it fitting that I should fall off, either from that delicacy which
is generally approved, or that variety which is by our more generous formalists
applauded? What auailes a mighty fortune to a miserable disposer? Or brave
means, where a base mind is the dispenser? Apparel must be with delicacy
sorted, variety suited, or the dignity of the person, be it never so
conspicuous, will be obscured. Admit, variety be mere superfluity, at worst it
is but the ages vanity: which is such an universal malady, as it pleads
exemption without far^^^r apology. Whereto I answer; it is true, the (...)
labors of this disease: where the eye becomes a determiner of our worth, by
the outward habit which we wear: It reflects not on what is in us, but what
is on us. She is not to be accounted a Court visitant, who restraines her self
either in her choice of deli^acy, or variety of habit. What then? Shall a
vicious or effeminate age deprave your judgment? Or a corrupt time deprive you
of judgment? No; you have more absolute perfections within you, than to be
blemished with these imperfections which you too frequently carry about you.
The more you display your pye-coloured flagge of vanity; the more Lures you
throw out of loosest liberty; the more foments you use of soule-soyling
delicacy; the deeper Lodging you bespeake your selves in the Lake of eternal
misery. To such I only speak, who, so they may furnish themselves of a dainty
artist, to teach them how to dye well, make it the least of their care how to
live well. These who love to dye their hair, but never change the dye of their
corrupted heart; These will not stick with frontlesse impudence to boulster
their depraved liberty. They may be, without control, dispensers and
disposers of their own. This variety and delicacy wherein they express
themselves by an especial mark of distinction from others, they derive it
from the affluence of their own fortunes, and not from others: which being so
justly enjoyed, and without injury, admits no exception in all probability.
Whereto I reply, with the words of a Divine Father, Basil.
Art not thou, whosoere thou be, a Robber, who have received goods as a
Steward or dispenser; and entitlest thy self the impropriator or owner? for
what fair glozes or pretenses, soever, thou make for thy self, to gil^ thy
shame, or mince thy sin, it is the bread of the needy, which thou
with-holdest; the Coat of the naked which in thy Chest thou storest; the shoes
of the barefoot, which with thee lie rotting; the coin of the beggar, which
with thee lies moulding. Away then with these Superfluous dressings; you see
daily objects of your charity, bring out your wardrobe, and cloth the naked.
That which you so prodigally spent upon your selves, convert it to the more
glorious attiring of your naked souls. See that your Kings daughter be all
glorious within, that the King of Kings may take pleasure in her. Let not so
precious an Image be defaced, so specious a Virgin defiled, so glorious a
Creature dishonored. Instead of Delicacy, deck your selves Modestly; instead
of Superfluity, out of your variety communicate freely to others necessity. We
are now to descend briefly to the last branch of this first Observation,
declaring, how, That Apparel is most comely, which conferres on the Wearer
most native beauty, and most honor on her Country.

AS that is ever held most generous which is least affected, That Apparel most
comely, which conferres on the Wearer most native beauty, and most honor on
her Country.
most genuine which is least forced; so there is nothing which confers more
true glory on us, then in displaying our own Countries garb by that we wear
upon us. The Crow in the fable was sharply taxed for her borrowed feathers:
The fable, though it spoke of a Crow^, the Moral pointed at a man. Habit (we
say) is a Custom; why should it be our custom to change our Habit? With what
constancy some other Nations observe their native attire, Histories both
ancient and modern will sufficiently inform us. Nothing is held more
contemptible with them, than apishly to imitate foraign fashions: Prescription
is their Tailor, antiquity their Tutor. Amongst the ancient Heathen, even their
very habit distinguished Widows from Matrons, Matrons from Virgins. So as not
only sexes, states, conditions, years, but even linages, races, and families
were remarkeably discovered. We usually observe such a fashion to be French,
such an one Spanish, another Italian, this Dutch, that Poland. Mean time where
is the English? surely, some precious Elixir extracted out of all these. She
will neither rely on her own inue^tion, nor compose her self to the fashion
of any one particular Nation, but make her self an Epitomized confection of
all. Thus becomes she not only a stranger to others, but to her self. It were
to be wished, that as our Country is jealous of her own invention in
contriuing, so she were no less cautelous in her choice of wearing. Gregory
the great thought that Angles did nearly symphonize with Angels, not so much
in letter, as in favor and feature: Were it not pity that these should darken
their beauty with vailes of deformity? Truth is, there is nothing which
conferres more native beauty on the wearer, than to be least affectiue in
whatsoever she shall wear, She asperseth a great blemish on her better part,
who ties her self to that formality, as she dare not put off the least trifle
that she wears, nor put on ought more than she wears, lest she should lose
the opinion of Complete. There is a native modesty even in attire as well as
gesture, which better becomes, and would more fully accomplish her, if fashion
were not such a pearl in her eye, as it keeps her from the sight of her own
vanity. I confess, light heads will be easily taken with such toys: yea, I
have sometimes observed a phantasticke dressing strike an amorous inconsiderate
Gooseling sooner into a passionate ah me, with a careless love sick wreathing
of his enfolded arms, than some other more attractiue object could ever do.
But what is the purchase of one of these Green-wits worth? what benefit can a
young Gentlewoman reapin enjoying him, who scarcely ever enjoyed himself?
Means he may have, but so meanly are they seconded by inward abilities, as
his state seems fi^ter to manage him, than he to marshall it. A long Lock
he has got, and the art to frizle it; a Ring in a string, and the trick to
handle it: for his discourse, to give him his true Character, his silence
approues him better; for his wit, he may laugh at a conceit, and his conceit
never the wiser; for his other parts, disclaiming his substance, I appeal to
his picture. Now, Gentlewoman, tell me, do you trim your self up for this
Popiniay? Would you have the fool to wear you, after so many follies have
outworne you? Let modesty suit you, that a discreeter mate may choose you. Be it
your prime honor to make ciuility your director. This will incomparably more
grace you, than any phantasticke attire, which, though it be get admiration, it
clozeth always with derision. You cannot possibly detract more from the
renown of your Country, where you received birth and education, than by too
hot a quest or pursuit afer Outlandish fashions. BEHAVIOR
Play not the Dotterell, in this too apish and servile Imitation; let other
Countries admire your Constancy and Ciuility: while they reflect both on what
you wear and what you are. Be it your glory to improve your Countries fame.
Many eyes are fixed on you, and many hearts will be taken with you, if they
behold those two Ornaments, Modesty, and Humility, ever attending you:
Discretion will be more taken and enamoured with these, than toys and
feathers. There is nothing so rough but may be polished; nor ought so outwardly
fair but may be disfigured. Whereas the beauty of these two cannot by
adulterate Art be more graced, by the aged furrows of time become defaced, or
by any outward Occurrent impaired. There are many beauteous and sumptuous
Cases, whose Instruments are out of tune. These may please the eye, but they
neither lend nor leave a sweet accent in the Ear. May-buds of fading beauty;
Fruits which commonly fall before they be ripe, and tender small sweetness to
them that reap. These Baths of voluptuous delights, chaste feet disdain to
approach. Virtue must either be suited with Consorts like her self, or they
must give her leave solely to enjoy her self. Be you Maids of honor to this
maiden Princess. Consecrate your day to virtuous actions, your night to
useful recollections. Think how this World is your Stage, your Life an Act.
The Tiring-house, where you bestowed such care, cost and curiosity, must be
shut up, when your Night approaches. Prepare Oil for your virgin Lamps;
marriage robes for your chaste souls; that advancing the honor of your
Country here on Earth, in your translation from hence, you may find a Counte^y
in heaven.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
Behavior reflects on three particulars; How to behave her self in Company;
How in priuacy: That Behavior most approved, which is clearest from
affectation freed.

BEHAVIOVR. BEHAVIOR

BEhauior being an apt co^posure of the body in arguments of discourse and
Action, Obseruat. 2.
expresses every person in so fair a Character, that if his breast were
transparant, he could not be displayed fuller. Albeit, some love to become so
estranged or retired rather from the eye of the world, as they have made it
their highest art and absolutest aim, to shrowde themselves from the conceit
or discussion of man: by entering covenant or contract with Dissimulation, to
appear least to the eye, what they are most in heart, Of this stamp was
Tiberius, who gloried in nothing so much (neither indeed had he many
demeriting parts to glory in) as in cunningly cloaking his foul purposes with
fair pretenses, going invisible, and deluding his Subjects anxious resolutions
with a seeming good. Sometimes imminency of danger begetting an apprehension of
fear, will produce this effect: whence it was, that Agrippina in Tacitus
knowing her life to be attempted by Ne^o, knew well that her only remedy was
to take no notice of the treason. Neither is it rare to find a staide look,
and a staid thought in one and the same subject. But for as much as this is
held the seldomest erring Index, ever expressing innocent thoughts the best,
and discovering disloyal thoughts the soonest, we are to proceed to such
particulars as the Subject principally reflects on: which are three; Action,
Affection, Passion: Behavior reflects on three particulars.
whereon we purpose so to insist, as what deserves approuement in each of these
particulars, may be by our Nobly disposed Gentlewomen cheerfully entertained,
carefully retained, and to the improuement of their Fame, the choicest Odor,
chiefest honor of true Nobility, employed.

Virtue is the life of action, ACTION.
action the life of man: without the former, all actions are fruitless:
without the latter, all our days are vselesse. Now in this one subject, it is
strange to observe what diversity of active dispositions we shall find. Some
are employed to the purpose, but they are so remiss in their employment, as
they lose the benefit of it. Others are employed to no purpose, making a
passing of time a mere pastime, coming as far short of one useful action
at their death, as they were incapable of it at their birth* Others sleep out
their time in careless security: saluting the morning with a sacrifice to
their Glass: the Noone with a luscious repast; the Afternoon with a Play or a
Pallet repose; the Evening with a wanton consort, accoutred with a
reere-banket, to belull the abused soul with the sleep of an incessant
surfeit. Others have crept into such an Apish formality; as they cannot for a
world discourse of ought without some mimicke gesture or other, which, seem it
never so complete to them, appears ridiculous to the beholder. This was
Sempr^nia's error, for which she was generally taxed, before ever her honor
was publicly tainted. What a tinkling you shall observe some to make with
their feet, as if they were forthwith to dance a Morris? They are ever in
motion like Puppets, but in actions of goodness mere Punies. Their pace is a
Pauin in the street; their look a Lu^e to a lascivious attempt; They express
nothing by their gesture worthy the image they bear. Besides, who is he, whose
judgment will not tax these of lightness, by these light and uncivil
appearances? A woman's honor is of higher esteem, than to be thus dis-valued.
Light occasions are many times grounds of deep aspersions. Actions are to be
seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction, strengthened with instruction,
lest too much rashness bring the undertaker to destruction. In the Maze or
Labyrinth of this life, many be our cares, mighty be our fears, strong our
assailants, weak our assistants, unless we have that brazen wall within us to
fortify us against all occurrents, O then, let not the least action betray you
to your enemy, for you have many; within you, for they are dangerous, because
domestical; without you, for they are strangers, and therefore doubtful! Let
your Actions be your applausiuest Actors; The Scene of your life is short, so
live that your noble actions may preserve your memory long. It was Seneca's
counsel to his dear friend Lucilius, that whenever he went about to do any
thing, he should imagine Cato, or Scipio, or some other worthy Roman to be in
presence. To second his advice, which may confer on your glorious actions
eternal praise, set always before your eyes, as an imitable mirror, some good
woman or other, before whom you may live, as if she eyed you, she viewed you.
You may find women, though weak in sex and condition, yet parallels to men,
for charity, chastity, piety, purity, and virtuous conversation. Reui^^^ those
ancient families of Rom^, and you shall find those famous Matrons, Octauia,
Portia, Ca^cilia, Cornelia, make a Pagan State seem morally Christian. Nor
were Nicostrata, mother to Euander, C^r^ina, Sappho, women less famous for
Learning, than the other for blameless living. Neither have our modern times
less flourished with feminine worthies, as might be illustrated with sundry
eminent instances, if I would re^lect upon this Subject: but this has been
the Theme of sundry Panegyric Poems, which makes me more sparing in it: Only
in your behalf, and to your honor, let me retort their Critic Censure, who
draw from the very Etymon of your name an occasion of error. Women are woe to
men; No, they are the way,
To bring them homeward when they run astray.


In a word, conform your selves to such patterns as are imitable; imitate
them in all such actions as are laudable; So live, that none may have occasion
to speak euilly of you, if they speak truly. The memory of Dorcas lives
still; She was full of good works and alms which she did. Yea, even the
very Coats and Garments which she made, while she was living, were shown the
Apostle as arguments of he^ industry, memorials of her piety. Hence it was that
Saint Jerome, that excellent pattern of holy Discipline, serious professor of
Divine Doctrine, counsels the holy Virgin Demetrias to eschew idleness:
Exhorting her withal, that having done her prayers, she should take in hand
wool and weauing, after the commendable example of Dorcas, that by such change
or variety of works, the day might seem less tedious, and the assaults of
Satan less grievous; concluding his devout Exhortation, with this definite
position. I speak generally, no raiment, ornament, or habit whatsoever, shall
seem precious in Christ's sight, but that which thou make thy self, either
for thine own peculiar use, or example of other Virgins, or to give unto thy
Grandmother, or thy Mother, no, though thou distribute all thy goods unto the
poor. See how strictly this holy Father proceeds with his religious Daughter!
Yet was this Demetrias, to whom he addre^^ed this his exhortation, a Noble
Lady; not one, whom poverty did enforce to actions of such necessity: but one
honorably descended, richly endowed, powerfully friended. Let this Lady be
your Pattern, her action your direction, her obedience your instruction, that
you may share with her in a peaceful dissolution. Entertain no time without
some devout task: reflect upon the Nobleness of your descent, ennoble it with
excellence of desert. For you must know true honor is not won,
Until some honorable deed be done.


Waste not prodigally the precious Lamp of your life without some virtuous
action that may purchase love. Your time is less than a minute in respect of
eternity, employ that minute so, as it may eternize your memory. Let this be
your highest task; to promote the honor of your Maker, esteeming all things
else a slavish and servile labor.

THere is nothing which requires more discretion, AFFECTION.
than how to behave or carry our selves while we are enthralled to affection.
The Lover is ever blinded (says wise Plat^) with affection toward his
beloved. Reason is laid asleep, while Sense becomes the master Wooer. Whence
came that usual saying, One cannot love and be wise. But I wholly oppose my
self to their assertion, who seem thus far transported with the sensual
opinion of affection. My Tenet is, One cannot truly love, and not be wise. It
is a Beldam frenzy and no fancy, which gives way to fury, and admits not reason
to have sovereignty. Yet in this Subject, Gentlewomen, is your temper best
tried, your discretion most required, and your Patience, oft-times, most
exercised. Look therefore how you plant it, lest you bootlesly repent it, when
it is misplaced.

It is most certain, there is nothing more impatient of delay than love, nor
no wound more incurable while we live. There is no exemption, all have a taste
of this Potion, though it have several degrees of operation. Look all about
you; who so young that loves not?
Or who so old, a comely feature moves not?


Yet what different passions arise from one and the selfsame Subject? Here,
Gentlewomen, you shall see some of your Sex so surprised with affection, as it
bursts out into violent extremes; BEHAVIOR
their discourse is semi-breu'd with sighs, their talk with tears; they
walk desperately forlorn, making Launds and desolate Groves their
disconso^ate Consorts. Their eyes are estranged from sleep, their weakened
appetite from repast, their wearied limbs from repose. Melancholy is their
sole melody; They have made a Contract with grief, till grief bring them to
their grave. And these poor wenches are much to be pitied, because their own
tender hearts brought them to this exigent; having either set their affections,
where they thought verily they might be requited and were not, or else where
they received like seeming tender of affection, but afterward rejected, what
they wished to effect they could not. So as, in time, if continuance of absence
reduce them not to a better temper, they fall into a poor Maudlins distemper,
by giving raines to passion, till it estrange them from the sovereignty of
reason. Whereas others you shall see, though not such kind souls, nor half so
passionate, yet more discreet in their Choice, and in the passages of love more
temperate. These will not deigne to cast a loose look upon their beloved: but
stand so punctually upon their terms, as if they stood indifferent for their
choice, albeit constantly resolved never to admit of any change. These scorn
to paint out their passions in plaints, or utter their thoughts in sighs, or
shed one dispassionate tear for an incompassionate Lover. Their Experience
has taught them better Notions: they will seemingly fly to make them follow,
and so take them by whom they are most taken. They can play with the flame, and
never cinge their wings; look love in the face, and preserve their eyes;
converse where they take delight, and color their affection with a seeming
disdain. These are they who can walk in the Clouds to their intimatest
friends: make their eyes strangers to their hearts, and conclude; nothing more
foolish than Love, if discovered; nothing more wise, if artfully shadowed. But
I neither approve the violence of the former, nor indifference of the latter.
The one interlayeth affection with too much passion, the other with too much
dissimulation. These were well to be so allayed or attempered, as neither too
much eagerness tax the discretion, nor too much remissness argue coolness
of affection. For the former, I must tell them they give great advantage to an
insulting Lover, to' entertain Love with such vehement ardour: it fares with
these, as with hot duellists, who fight themselves out of breath, and so
subject their relenting force to the command of a better tempered enemy. For
the latter, they hold constantly that position in arguments of Love, as well as
in other actions of their life; She knows not how to live, nor how to love,
that knows not how to dissemble. I must tell these, Dissimulation sorts not
well with affection: Lovers seldom read Loves Polliticks. Let them appear
what they are with that discreet temper, as they may deserve the embraces of a
Noble Lover. In brief, let such as are too hot in the quest of their desires,
attemperate that heat with intermissions: such violence is best rebated by
absence. Contrariwise, such as are too cool, let them quicken that easiness
with their more frequent conference, and assiduate presence.

What a furious and inconsiderate thing is Woman, PASSION
when Passion distempers her? how much is her Behavior altered, as if Iocasta
were now to be per^onated? True it is, some with a bite of their lip, can
snppresse an intended revenge: and like dangerous Politicians, pleasingly
entertain time with one they mortally hate, till opportunity usher revenge,
which they can act with as much hostility, as if that very moment were the
Actor of their injury. But this Passion never works more tragic of fearful
effects, than when it streams from Jealousy or Competition in the Subject
where they love. Whereof we have variety of instances even in our own Island,
to omit Italy, which is a very Theater of Tragic Conclusions in this kind.
It is not long since we had one matchless President of this stamp. It
sometimes pleased a young Gentlewoman, whose fortunes had swelled her high, to
settle her affection on a Gentleman of deserving parts, which he entertained
with a generous requital: nothing was omitted that might any way increase this
respect, or second the height of their joys. Continual resort and frequent
made them inseparably one: No day so pleasing, as when they were together; No
hour so tedious as when they were asunder. But how short is that moment of
vading happiness, which has in it a relish of lightness, and is not
grounded on essential goodness! Long had they not thus lived, and sociably
loved, but the Gentlewoman conceived some private suspicion, that her self was
not sole soueraignesse of his heart, but that another was become sharer in his
love. Neither was this Competitrice, whom she suspected, any other than her
own attendant, whose Caskets she secretly opened, where she found a Ring of
especial note, which she had formerly bestowed on him. This confirmed her
Conceit, changed her real love into mortal hate; which she seconded with
this tragic act: Inuiting him one day to a Summer Arbor, where in former
times they were usually wont to repose, amidst of an amorous discourse, she
casually fixed her eye upon three Lennets, one whereof picking some priuet
leaves purposely to build her neast, flew away, while the two which remained,
lovingly billed one with another: which she intentiuely observing, used these
words; How tenderly and intimately do those poor fools mate it? Were it not
pity they should ever be divided? Which words she had no sooner uttered, then
the Shee-Lennet flew away, and left the Male alone, till another returned: with
whom the Hee-Lennet billed, and amorously wooed as he had done before. Which
she more seriously eying, O, quoth she, How light these males are in their
affection! This may seem^ to you an easy error, but were I Judge of Birds, it
should receive due censure. Why Lady (replied he) These poor Birds do but
according to their kind. Yea, but what do ye kind men then, who engage your
loves, interest your selves, empawne your souls to be constant where you
profess love, and perform nothing less than what you profess most. Nor
would her long intended revenge admit more liberty to her tongue; for with a
passionate enterbreath she clozed this speech with a fatal stabbe: leaving so
much time to her unfortunate and disasterous Lover, as to discover to one of
that sorrowful family the ground of her hate, the occasion of his fall, which
hastened on the doleful Scene of her Tragedy. Now to allay or abate these
passionate furies, there is no better means than to enter parley with reason;
to chastise all such innouating motions as disquiet the inward repose of the
mind; to use the help of such wholesome instructions, as may attemper the heat
of those indisposed and inordinate passions. Anger, being an inflammation of
blood about the heart, is such a fury, as to give way to it, is to disclaim
reason: much wisdom is then required, mature advice to be used, all
assistants of Art and Nature to be employed before this Adder can be charmed.
For we shall hardly see any one more forget themselves, than when they are
surprised with this Passion. Some you shall observe so amazed or entranced, as
they become wholly silenced: They cannot utter an articulate word to gain a
kingdom. Gladly would they express their distaste, and menace revenge, if
their tongues would give them leave, but wrath has tied them to good
behavior. Others are so voluble of tongue, as nothing can pass them
untouched, to asperse disgrace on such by whom they hold themselves wronged. If
any infamy (which to that time lay buried) offer it self to their memory, how
they joy in the occasion of venting their malice on their persons, be their
Calumny seconded with words of fowlest aspersion: Which sort of people the
everliving Pindarus terms persons of unbounded and unbridled tongues. To
remedy which enormities, take along with you these instructions: they will
benefit you much in the height and heat of your anger, and allay your passion
when it rages and rises into hugest distemper. Forthwith, so soon as you
shall perceive your selves moved, restrain your passion; but if you cannot
appease nor compose your inward Commotion, at least restrain your tongue, and
inioyne it silence, that if it speak no good, it may speak no evil, lest
being loose and set at liberty, it utter what wrath, and not reason dictates:
More sovereign and peaceful it will be for you to retire from society, make
recourse to your Oratory, by recommending to your best Physician the cure of
this infirmity. Use likewise this Cordial salve to your corroding soar; the
receipt is Divine, if seasonably applied, and will minister you comfort when you
are most distempered. So soon as your disquieted minds begin to expostulate
with the quality of your wrongs, which your Enemy is apt to aggrauate and
exasperate, purposely to hasten your precipitate revenge; propose and set
before you all the disgraces which possibly you can suffer, and confer them
with those that were aspersed on your Savior: this will prepare you to suffer,
teach you to conquer: for Arrows foreseen menace less danger.

Likewise, when you consider the injuries which are done you by others, you may
reflect upon the wrongs which are done by you unto others: for the
consideration of your own infirmity, will exact of you toward others an
impunity. Weigh with your selves how much others suffer of you, how much God
himself suffers of you, who, if he should have inflicted revenge for every
particular offense, you should have perished long since. In a word, you your
selves are frequently grievous, and displeasing to your selves: Seeing then you
are so distastefull unto your selves, as you must of necessity suffer many
injuries and affronts from your selves, repine not at the sufferings which are
inflicted by others on our selves.

You are likewise to consider these discommodities which arise from this
Passion; which will arm you with patience, if of your selves you have any
compassion. What auailes it to be revenged, after our injury be r^ceiued? Is
your wou^d by another wound to be cured? Or disgrace tendered, by rendering
disgrace restored? Besides all this, see what he obtains, who anger obeys:
1. He is deprived of the Crown of glory, and reward of eternity: 2. He becomes
a Minister and Instrument of the Devil: 3. He destroys his own soul, that
he might hurt an others body: Greg.
For a dispassionate or angry person is like unto him, who that he may kill his
Ass, destroys himself; or rather like him, who for huge debts which he is
not able to discharge, is thrown into prison, and disdainefully refuses any
ones offer to pay his debt for him. For by him, who does you wrong, is the debt
which you owe to God, forgiven, if with patience you suffer the injury which is
done. Whereas the angry person, who will be his own revenger, tells God how
and in what sort he is to deal with him: that as he suffered not small
disgraces from another, so neither should small things be suffered in him by
God. As it is written, With what measure you mete, the same shall be measured
to you again. Six other detriments or discommodities there be which arise
from the exorbitancy of this passion. Ibid. lib. 5.
For by Anger is lost; Moral* cap. 31.
first, Wisdom, while reason becomes blinded. Secondly, Righteousness: for
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. Thirdly, Society, for
the Acquaintance of one angry man, is pleasing unto none. Be not, says the
Wiseman, a companion with the angry man. Fourthly, Concord: while peace is
disturbed. Fifthly, the Light of Truth, because anger casts the darkness of
confusion upon the mind or understanding, from whom God hides the cheerful
beam of his Divine knowledge. Sixthly, the Splendour of the holy spirit: upon
whom, says the Prophet, shall my spirit rest, but upon the humble and quiet?
that is, upon the meek, mild, and compassionate.

Thus you see what benefits may be procured by attempering what discommodities
incurred by fostring this Passion. Whereon I have the rather insisted, because
I am not ignorant, how the strongest and constantest tempers have been, and
may be distempered and disparraged by it; much more you, wha^e mainest strength
consists in the expression of that Passion. At all times therefore use a
moderate restraint; in the prime of your years, when youth sends forth her
first promising blossoms, behave your selves mildly without bitterness,
humbly without haughtiness, modestly without lightness, soberly without
childishness. The Caske will retain her first taste; the Wool her first dye.
If you show too much way wardnesse in your youth, small good is to be expected
in your age. As you tender your preferrement, seem mild while you are maids,
lest you prove scare^crowes to a young man's bed. Conform your selves likewise
to a nuptial State, and preserve your honor without stain. Contest not with
your head for preeminence: you came from him, not he from you, honor him then
as he cherishes the love he conceiues in you. A domestic fury makes ill
harmony in any family. The discord which was hatched and increased toward M.
Anthony by Fulu^a, was ever allayed and attempered by the moderation of
Octauia. Be you all Octauia's; the rougher your cross, the richer your Crown.
The more that injuries press you, the more shall your patience praise you. The
Conflict is but short and momentanie, the Triumph glorious and impa^l'd with
eternity. And thus much touching those three particulars, whereon your Behauior
principally reflects; we are now to descend to the next branch, which shall
show how a Gentlewoman of rank and quality, (for to such only is my discourse
directed) is to behave her self in Company.

SOciety is the solace of the living, for to live without it, were a kind of
dying. Companions and friendly Associats are the Thieves of time. No hour can
be so tedious, which two loving Consorts cannot pass over with delight, and
spend without distaste. Be the night never so dark, the place never so mean,
the cheerful beams of conceiving consorts will enlighten the one, and their
affections mutually planted, enliuen the other. What a Desert then were the
world without friends? and how poselesse those friends without conceiving
minds? and how weak those minds, unless united in equal bonds? So then,
love is the Cement of our life: life a load without love. Now, Gentlewomen, you
are to put on your vailes, and go into Company. Which (I am persuaded) you
cannot enter without a maidenblush, a modest tincture. Herein you are to be
most cautelous, seeing no place can be more mortally dangerous. Beware
therefore with whom you consort, How to behave her self in Company.
as you tender your repute: for report will brute what you are, by the Company
which you bear. Augustus being at a combat, discerned the inclinations of his
two daughters, Iulia and Liuia, by the Company which frequented them: for grave
Senators talked with Liuia, but riotous persons with Iulia. Would you preserve
those precious odors of your good names? Consort with such whose names were
never branded, converse with such, whose tongues for immodesty were never
taxed. As by good words evil manners are corrected, so by evil words are good
ones corrupted. Make no reside there, where the least occasion of lightness is
ministered; auert your Ear when you hear it, but your heart especially, lest
you harbor it. To enter into much discourse or familiarity with strangers,
argues lightness or indiscretion: what is spoken of Maids, may be properly
applied by an useful consequence to all women: They should be seen, and not
heard: A Traveler sets himself best out by discourse, whereas their best
setting out is silence. You shall have many trifling questions asked, as much
to purpose as if they said nothing: but a frivolous question deserves to be
resolved by silence. For your Carriage, it should neither ^e too precise, nor
too loose. These sempring made fac^s partake more of Ch^mbermaid than
Gentlewoman. Modesty and mildness hold sweetest correspondence. You may
possibly be wooed to interchange favors: Rings or Ribonds are but trifles; yet
trust me, they are no trifles that are aimed at in those exchanges. Let nothing
pass from you, that may any way impeach you, or give others advantage over
you. Your innocent credulity (I am resolved) is as free from conceit of ill, as
theirs, perhaps, from intendment of good: but these intercourses of Courtesies
are not to be admitted, lest by this familiarity, an Entry to affection be
opened, which before was closed. It is dangerous to enter parley with a
beleagring enemy: it implies want or weakness in the besieged. Chastity is an
enclosed Garden, it should not be so much as assaulted, lest the report of her
spotless beauty become soyled. Such Forts hold out best, which hold themselves
least secure, when they are securest. Nasica, when the Roman Commonwealth was
supposed to be in most secure estate, because freed of their enemies, and
strongly fenced by their friends, affirmed that though the Achaians and
Carthaginians were both brought under the yoke of bondage, yet they were most
in danger, because none were left, whom they might either fear for danger, or
who should keep them in awe.

How subject poor Women be to lapses, and recidi^a^ions, being left their own
Guardians, daily experience can sufficiently discover. Of which number, those
always proved weakest, who were confidentest of their own strength.
Presumption is a daring sin, and ever brings out some untimely birth, which
viper-like depriues her unhappy parent of life. I have known diverse so
resolute in their undertakings, so presuming of their womanish strength, so
constantly devoted to a single life, as in public consorts they held it their
choycest merriment to give love the affront, to discourse of affection with an
imperious contempt, geere their amorous suitors out of Countenance, and make a
very Whirligig of love. But mark the conclusion of these insulting spirits:
they sport so long with love, till they fall to love in earnest. A moment makes
them of Soueraigns Captives, by slauing them to that deservedly, which at first
they entertained so disdainfully. The way then to prevent this malady, is to
weane you from consorting with folly. What an excellent impregnable fortress
were Woman, did not her Windows betray her to her enemy? But principally, when
she leaves her Chamber to walk on the public Theater; when she throws off
her veil, and gives attention to a merry tale; when she consorts with
youthful blood, and either enters parley, or admits of an enter-view with
love. It is most true what the sententious moral sometimes observed: We may be
in security, so long as we are sequestered from society. Then, and never till
then, begins the infection to be dispersed, when the sound and sick begin to
be promiscuously mixed. Tempt not Chastity; hazard not your Christian liberty.
You shall encounter with many forward youths, who will most punctually tender
their vselesse service to your shadows at the very first sight: do not admit
them, lest you prostitute your selves to their prostrate service. Apelles found
fault with Protogenes, in that he could not hold his hands from his Table.
Whereas our Damsels may more justly find fault with their youthful Amorists,
for that they cannot hold their hands from under the Table. It is impossible to
come off fair with these light-fingred fools. Your only way is to rampire
your chaste intentions with Divine and Moral instructions, to stop the source,
divert the occasion, subject affection to reason; so may you become Emperesses
of that which has sometimes tyrannized over Emperors: By this means shall
every place where you publik^ly resort, minister to you some object of inward
comfort: By this means shall Company furnish you with precepts of chastity,
enable you in the serious practice of piety, and sweetly conduct you to the
port of glory.

PRIVACY is the seat of Contemplation, though sometimes made the recluse of
Tentation. From which there is granted no more exemption in the Cell, than in
the Court. Here is the Lawne where Melancholy draws her line. Here the
mind becomes our Mate; Silence, our sweetest Conference: where the retired
becomes either the best or worst friend to himself. There is none, who ever
conuersed with himself, or discanted solely with his own humor, who can be
ignorant of those numerous slights or subtilties, which by that great Tempter
(whose long exercise has made him no less subtle in contriuing, than cruel
in practicing our ruin) are priuate^y shadowed and shrouded, purposely to
circumuent poor man, and leave him deluded. Diogenes, when he found a young
man talking alone, demanded of him What he was doing? who answered, He was
conuersing with himself: Take heed (quoth he) thou c^nuersest not with thine
enemy. To you, Gentlewomen, I direct my discourse, How to behave her self in
Pri^a^y.
whose priuacy may enable you, if well employed, for better things than the
toys, tyres, and trifles of this age. How many (the more our misery) bestow
their private hours (which might be dedicated to Contemplation, or works of
piety and devotion) upon light-feather'd inventions, amorous expost^lations, or
min^ing of some unbeseeming fashions? How few enter into account with their
own hearts; or so consecrate their hours to Gods honor, as they make Priuacy
their souls harbor? The day they spend in visitations; how rare and tedious
is one hour reserved for meditation? What a serious intercourse or sociable
dialogue is between an amorous Mistress and her Looking-glass! The point or
pendent of her feather wags out of a due posture; her Cheek wants her true
tincture; her captious Glass presents to her quick eye one error or other,
which drives her into a monstrous distemper. Pride leaves no time for prayer.
This is her CLOSET for LADIES, where she fits and accommodates her self to
Fashion, which is the period of her content, while purer objects are had in
contempt. This is not the way to make Priuacy your minds melody. These
employments should sooner afflict than affect you, because they will sooner
distract than direct you. Your spirits will be revived most, when these are
valued least. Let me therefore recommend to your choice, Patterns of more
exquisite worth: such whose devotion may be your direction, whose direction
your instruction.

Devout mention is made of zealous Anna, who made recourse to the Temple,
offering her incessant prayers, a vial of sweet odours, that she might conceive
a son: of whom, to her succeeding memory, the Scripture records, that after
her tears so devoutly shed, her prayers so sincerely offered, her religious
vows so faithfully performed, her countenance was no more altered; Piety begot
in her divine love, faith in Gods promise made her believe, and zeal to Gods
house caused her to persevere: thus sighing she sought, seeking she obtained,
and obtaining she retained a grateful memory of what she received. No less
fervor showed Ester in preferring the suite of her distressed Israelites; what
perswasiue Oratory, what powerful Rhetoric, what inducing reasons she used,
to have their unjust censure reuersed, their insupportable wrongs redressed,
their agrieuances relieved, the incensed King appeased, and them to favor
restored? She wooed with tears in her eyes, faith in her heart, alms in her
hand; Gods cause was the progress of her course; she desired nothing more
then how to effect it, which was seconded with a successiue conclusion, because
begun, continued, and ended with devotion. The like zeal expressed Judith for
her besiedged B^thulites; the love of God had so inflamed her, as no fear of
the enemy could amate her; faith armed her with resolution; constancy
strengthened her against all opposition. Her armor was prayer, Bethulia's cure
her care; holy desires her sole attendants; she enters her enemies pauilion
with a zealous confidence; implores the Divine assistance in her entrance; and
discomfits a daring foe with cautelous silence. Her sighs and tears were as
the first and second rain; they brought success to her thirsty soul, and a
glorious Conquest to her native soil. No less are we to admire the wonderful
devotion of that teare-swollen Magdelen, who with devout love sought her dear
Spouse intombed, whose body with obsequious Odours she had embalmed before ever
he was interred* She, when his Disciples were departed, left not the Sepulcher
of her sweet Master; still she sat sorrowing and ^ighing, weeping long and
much, rising from her seat of sorrow, her gra^e of grief; where he was, he is
not; and where he is, she knows not: with pio^s tears, watchful eyes,
weary ways, she re^isits again and again the desert caves of his
relinquished Sepulcher, ^^ping at last to have the happiness to behold, whom
with so fervent a desire ^hee sought. Now once and again had she entered his
desolate Tomb: but little was all this to her that loved so much; The power or
efficacy of every good work consists in Perseverance. But observe the
comfortable effect of her effectual love! For as much as she loved more than
the rest, and loving wept more than the rest, and weeping sought more than the
rest, and seeking perseuer'd, allowing her self no rest: therefore deserved
she to find, behold, and speak unto him before the rest. And not only so,
but to become the very first messenger of his glorious resurrection to his
Disciples, according as her choice Spouse had commanded her, and by especial
Commission recommended to her. Go, tell my Brethren that they go into Galile,
there they shall see me. Hence note the fruit of a devout heart; the
incomparable prerogative granted to Divine love! Nazia^z^n in hi^ Epitaph for
his sister Gorgonia, writes, that she was so given to prayer, that her knees
seemed to cleave to the earth, and to grow to the very ground, by reason of
incessancy or continuance in prayer. Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his
Aunt Trasilla being dead, was found to have her elbowes as hard as horn: which
hardness she got by leaning to a Deske, at which she used to pray. Such as
these deserve your imitation; for their Vertue^, like sweet Odours, have sent
out a pleasant perfume. They prayed, and obtained what they prayed for; They
lived and practiced what they sought for; They died and enjoyed what they so
long time sighed for. You are taught to Enter your Chambers and be still*
Still, and yet stirring still. Still from the clamours and turbulent insults of
the World; still from the mutinous motions and innouations of the flesh. But
never still from warring, wrestling, bickring and embattailing with the Leader
of those treacherous associats, tyrannous assazinats. O should you consider
what troops of furious and implacable Enemies are ever lying in ambuscado for
you; how many soule-tempting Sirens are warbling notes of ruin to delude you;
what fears within you, what foes without you, what furies all about you; you
would not suffer one grain of sand to drop through the Cruet, without a
dropping eye; not one minute pass vndedicated to some good employment, to
prevent the fury of such desperate assailants. Make then your Chamber your
private Theater, wherein you may act some devout Scene to Gods honor. Be still
from the world, but stirring toward God. Meditation, let it be your companion.
It is the perfume of the memory; the souls rouzer from sins lethargy; the
sweetest solace in straits of adversity. Let it be your key to open the
Morning, your (...) to close the Evening. What an argument of indisc^^tion were
it for one, amidst variety of choice and delicious viands, to discourse of
vanity, and suffer himself to famish in the presence of such plenty? This is
your case, if amidst so many soule-solacing dainties of spiritual comforts,
you divert your eye, by fixing it on these Objects of earth: and repose not
your selves in those fragrant borders of Divine Contemplation; which, by how
much they are more frequent, by so much they become more sweet and redolent.
Surely, there is nothing that relisheth more sweetly, tastes more daintily,
with-draweth your minds from the world more speedily, strengthens you
against the temptations of your enemy, excites or exercises you in every
spiritual duty, as the soule-rauishing Contemplation of the Supreme Deity. All
other Objects are vanity. They may play upon your fantasy, and so delude you;
but being weakly grounded on pity, they can never suffice you. Task your
selves then privately, lest priuacy become your enemy. As man's extremity is
Gods opportunity, so the Devils opportunity is man's security. Let not a minute
be mis-spended, lest security become your attendant. Be it in the exercise of
your Needle, or any other manual employment: attemper that labor with some
sweet meditation tending to Gods honor. Choose rather with Penelope to weaue
and unweave, than to give Idleness the least leave: Wanton Wooers are
time-wasters. They make you idolize your selves, and consequently hazardize the
state of your souls. Let not their Lip-salue so annoint you, as it make you
forgetful of him that made you. Be you in your Chambers or private Closets; be
you retired from the eyes of men; think how the eyes of God are on you. Do
not say, the walls encompasse me, darkness o're-shadowes me, the Curtain
of night secures me: These be the words of an Adulteress: Therefore do
nothing privately, which you would not do publicly. There is no retire from
the eyes of God. I have heard of some, who for want of more amorous or
attractiue Objects abroad, have furnished their private Chambers with wanton
pictures, Aretine tables, Sibariticke stories. These were no objects for
Christian eyes: they convey too inordinate an heat from the eye to the heart.
Eye no object which may estrange you from thought of your Maker. Make every day
your Ephemerides. Let your morning imitate your purposes for the day, the day
second what your morning purposed, the Evening examine your mornings purpose,
your days purchase. And so I descend to the next branch: how you are to behave
your selves in public, which should be by so much more punctual, for as much
as the world is more Stoicall.

Women in sundry Countries, This branch might seem included in our former
discourse of Company; but that reflected on persons, this on affairs.
when they go into any public concourse or press of people, use to wear
vayles, to imply that secret inscreened beauty which best becomes a Woman,
Bashful modesty. Which habit our own Nation now in latter years has
observed: which, howsoever the intention of the wearer appear, deserves
approuement: because it expresses in it self Modest shamefastness, a Woman's
chiefest Ornament. I second his opinion, who held it for diverse maine respects,
a custom very irregular and indecent, that Women should frequent places of
public resort, as Stage Plays, Wakes, solemn Feasts, and the like. It is
Occasion that depraues us; Company that corrupts us. Hence it was, that some
flourishing States, having eyed the inconveniences which arise from the usual
resort of Women to Enterludes and other public Solemnities, published an
express inhibition against such free and frequent meetings. Had Hippodamia
never wandered, she had proved an Hypemnestra, and had never wantoned. Had
Dinah never roaued, she had proved a Diana, and had never been ravished. Yet
far be it from me, to be so regularly strict, or Laconically severe, as to
exclude Wom^n from all public societies. Meetings they may have, and improve
them, by a Civil and Moral use of them, to their benefit. They may chat and
converse with a modest freedom, so they do not gossip it. For these
Shee-Elpenors, and Feminine Epicures, who surfeit out their time in an unwomanly
excess, we exclude them the pale of our Commonweal. Be they of what state
soever, they are stains to their Sex for ever. Especially such, who carouse
it in deep healths, rejoice at the color of the wine, till it sparkle in
their veins, inflame their bloods, and lay open a breach to the frailty of
their Sex. For prevention whereof, we read that kinsmen kissed their
kinswomen to know whether they drunk wine or no, and if they had, to be
punished by death, or banished into some Island. Plutarch says, that if the
Matrons had any necessity to drink wine, either because they were sick or
weak; the Senate was to give them license, and not then in Rome neither, but
out of the City.

Macrobius says, that there were two Senators in Rome chiding, and the one
called the others wife an Adulteress, and the other his wife a Drunkard; and
it was judged, that to be a drunkard was more infamy. Truth is, they might
join hands as mates of one society, for I have seldom seen any one subject
to Ebriety, preserve long untainted the honor of their chastity.

Now for public Employments, I know all are not borne to be Deborahs, to bear
virile spirits in feminine bodies. Yet, in choosing the better part, you may fit
and accommodate your persons to public affairs, well sorting and suting with
your rank and quality. Claudia and Priscilla were nobly descended, yet they
publicly resorted, where they might be religiously instructed; and no less
publicly instructed others in those principles wherein they were informed. It
is said of the Vestall Virgins, that they first learned what to do; secondly,
they did what they had learned; thirdly, they instructed others to do that
which they had both done and learned. For this, the rich Saban Queen left her
own Region to hear the Wisdom of King Solomon. Surely, howsoever some, no
less properly than pregnantly, have emblematiz'd Woman by a Snayle: because
she still carries her house about her, as is the property of a good
Housekeeper; yet in my judgment (wherein I ingenuously submit to others
censure) a modest and well Behaved Woman may by her frequent or resort to
public places, confer no less benefit to such as observe her behavior,
than occasion of profit to her priu^te family, where she is Ouerseer. I have
seen some in these places of public repair, express such a well-seeming
State without Apish formality, as every action deserved imitation of such as
were in their Company. Their Conceits were sweetly tempered without lightness;
their jests sauory, yet without saltness; their discourse free without
niceness; their answers mild without tartnes^e; their smile pleasing, mixed
with bashfulnesse; their pace graceful without too much actiuenesse; their
whole posture delightful with a seemly carelessness. These are such mirrors
of modesty, patterns of piety, as they would not for a world transgress the
bounds of Ciuility. These are Matrons in their houses, Models in public
places. Words spoken in season, are like apples of gold with pictures of
silver: So oportunat^ly are their words delivered, so seasonably uttered, with
such unaffected eloquence expressed, wheresoever this sweet and well-tempered
discretion is seated. Whereas others there be, whose indiscretion makes
discovery of an Ocean of words, out a drop of reason. They speak much, but
expr^sse little; their conceits are ^uer ballased with harshnesse; their jests
^oisted in with too much dullness; their discourse trimmed up with too much
nea^nesse; their answers leauened with too much sowrenesse; their looks
promising too much lightness, or vnlo^iable perverseness; their pace either
too q^icke or too slow in dispatch of business; their whole posture an
indisposed frame of irregular absurdities. But to draw in our sails, touching
the prosecution of this branch; our reproof shall reflect upon two sorts
especially, whose deuious course drawn by an indirect line, may seem to
deserve reprehension worthily. The first are such, who give too easy raines to
liberty; making Pleasure their Vocation: as if they were created for no other
end, than to dedicate the first fruits of the day to their Glass; the residue
to the Stage or Exchange. These, no sooner have they laid their Artificial
Complexion on their adulterate faces, than they grow sick for their Coach.
They must visit such a Lady, or what, perchance, is worse, such a Lord. A
minute now in their Chambers seems a month. Shall we display one of these in
her colors? The Play-bills must be brought her by her Pentioner: her eye views
and reuiewes, and out of her feminine judgment culls out one from among them
which she will see, purposely to be seen. Much she observes not in it, only
she desires to be observed at it. Her Behavior in a Box, would make any one
think she were a Be in a box; she makes such a buzzing and rusling. This is
her daily task, till death enter the Stage and play his part; whom she
entertaines with such vnpreparednesse, as her extreme act presents objects of
infinite unhappiness: As it sometimes fared with a Gentlewoman of our own
Nation, who so daily bestowed the expense of her best hours upon the Stage, as
being surprised by sickness, even unto death, she became so deaf to such as
admonished her of her end, as she clozed her dying scene with a vehement
calling on Hieronim^. So inapprehensiue was she of death at her end, because
she never meditated of death before her end. Now for the second sort, they are
mere Antipodes to the former; These are only for profit, as the other were
for pleasure. These become so wedded to the world, as they afflict their
spirits, macerate their bodies, estrange themselves from offices of
Neighborhood, to improve their revenues, by discovering their too much
providence to the world. And these are commonly such, as are matched to
Scholars, whose contemplation has taken them from the world, and recommended
the mannagement of their estate to their wife. Now to both these sorts let me
address my instruction: As I could not possibly approve of the former, because
they made pleasure their business: so I cannot commend these, because they
make not their business a pleasure. Let these take heed, that they incur not
that miserable insensibility, which I have heard sometimes befell to a
World^ing of their sex: Who approaching near her haven, and entering now her
last Conflict with Nature, was, by such as stood about her, earnestly moved to
recommend her self to God, tender the welfare of her soul, and to make her
salvation sure; thus briefly, but fearfully answered, and forthwith departed:
I have made it as sure as Law will make it. D^ Done Timoris.
Or as we read in a book entitled The Gift of fear, how a Religious Divine
coming to a certain Vsuresse, to advise her of the state of her soul, and
instruct her in the way to salvation, at such time as she lay languishing in
her bed of affliction; told her, how there were three things by her to be
necessarily performed, if ever she hoped to be saved: First, she was to be
contrite in heart; secondly, she was to confess her sins; thirdly, she was
to make restitution according to her means. Whereto she thus replied; Two of
those first I will do willingly: but to do the last, I shall hold it a
difficulty; for should I make restitution, what would remain^ to raise my
children their portion? To which the Divine answered; Without these three you
cannot be saved. Yea but, quoth she, Do our Learned men and Scriptures say
so? Ye^ surely, said the Divine. And I will try (quoth she) whether they say
true or no, for I will restore nothing. And so resolving, fearfully dyed,
fearing poverty temporal, more than eternal, which she was of necessity to
suffer, (without Gods infinite interceding mercy) for preferring the care of
her posterity, before the honor of her Maker.

To be short, the former sort deserves reproof, for making pleasure their
vocation; the latter for barring business all recreation. A discreet temper
will moderate both these; the first, by holding pleasure a pastime, and no
business; the last, by applying a cure to an incessant care, and immixing some
pleasure with business, to attemper it, lest it incline to heaviness. Both
which, equally concurring, are ever conferring to the laboring mind, inward
quietness.

COmplexion enclosed in a box, gives no tincture to the Cheek, nor moral
precepts vnapplyed, beauty to the mind. Thus far have we proceeded in
directions of Behavior; insisting on such remarkable obseruances, as might
better enable you in each particular. We are now to lay before you, upon
serious discussion of the premizes, That Behauior most approved, which is
clearest from affectation freed.
how that Behavior is to be most approved, which is clearest from affectation
freed.

Apes are caught in Deserts by imitation. Would not you be caught by
indiscretion? Imitate nothing seruilely, it detracts from your gentility. I
have noted some of our Chambermaids take upon them such an unbeseeming state,
when they came to visit their poor friends in the Country, as they punctually
retained both gate and garb of their mincing Mistresses in the City. To their
Parish Church they repair to be seen and shown; where if any of these
ciuilized Iugs chance to be saluted by the way, having quite forgot both broom
and mop, with a scornful eye they will not stick to return this maiesticke
answer: We thank you my good people. It is discretion that appropriates to
every peculiar degree their proper distinction. Many things will beseem the
Mistress, which agree not with the quality of the Maid. But in no degree will
that Behavior seem comely, which affectaion has introduced, be it in Court,
City, or Countr^y. You shall see many, purposely to cover some natural blemish
or deformity, practice that which makes them appear far more unseemly. Here
one indents with her lips to semper, that she may hide the want or greatness
of her teeth. Another contracts with her Tailor, lest Nemesis should be seen
sitting on her shoulder. A third wears her Gown with a careless looseness,
to cover or color her bodies crookedness. This, with Fabulla, buys an
artfull Periwig to supply her art-fallen hair. That enazures her seered
veins, embolsters her decayed breasts, to purchase a sweethart. What an
affected state this generally-infected state assumes, purposely to gain a
popular esteem? Survey our streets, gaze on our windows; you shall ^ee gazers
to entertain your eyes with variety of phantasticke Behauiours. But these are
none of Virtues followers. Would you be prayse-worthy? Virtue to her self is
her chiefest praise, her choycest prize. There is nothing comparably precious
to a Continent soul. Affectation she will not admit, for her habit; both her
Habit and Behavior are proper and not enforced; native and not apishly
introduced. She cannot woo a wanton Lover with a dissembled blush, nor
promise more with an outward presence, than she resolves to admit with a
spotless Conscience. Outward semblances, if light, she holds apparent
blemishes to her life. Her life, as it is a line to her self, so she would
have it a light to others. Lacides, Prince of Argos, was accounted lascivious
only for his sleeke looks, and mincing gate. So Pompey, because he used to
scratch his head with one finger, albeit very Continent and modest. Believe it,
though your Person be the Book, your Behavior is the Index. Which will
require a large Comment, if it express it self in ought probably incontinent.
Now, for as much as nothing better seems you, more commendably adornes you, or
more absolutely accommodates you, than what is native and unaffected, so it be
by Education seasoned: be your own Women; dis-value all apish formality;
resort not to the Temple to take a pattern of some new fashion: modest
discretion blusheth at such servile imitation. What you see in another, may
become them, which would not become another. The Ass in the fable seeing the
dog fawn and leap upon his Master, thought it would beseem him, but sorting
not with his nature, it got him a beating for his labor.

Now to distinguish betwixt an enforced and unaffected Behavior, it is most
easy; the very first blush will discover the one by the other. You shall
observe these who are tied to affectation in this kind, set their look, gate,
and whatsoever else may con^ferre a phantasticke grace on their usurped
Behavior, so punctually, as if they had entered a solemn Contract with eye,
face, hand, foot and all, to hold constantly their dimension, to beget in the
beholder a more settled admiration. Whereas contrariwise, these whose free,
genuine, and generous demeanours express themselves less strictly, but far
more comely; scorn to tie their affections to these servile restraints. They
hold it far more suitable with an Italian Pantomime, who professes hope of
profit upon the Stage, to confine them to these regularities, than discreet
Women, whose honor is their honest Behavior: and whose praise it is, to be
exemplary to others in goodness, and not others Apes in imitating their
phantasticke fashions. To conclude then this Observation; as you are generous
by birth, dote not on that which is most ridiculous on this Stage of earth.
Approve your selves chaste Virgins, continent Wi^es, discreet Matrons,
honorable Widows, in your virtuous and modest demeanor. Preserve that
eternally, which gives accomplishment to Gentility. Your Educations (as may be
presupposed) have so beautified you, as the garb you retain is most proper
unto you. The Hyaene is a dangerous beast: yet her subtilty and cruelty take
life from affectation and imitation. Desire you to be so Behau'd, as others
may admire you ^ In your choice of Behavior, inure your selves to what is
neatest, not what is newest. Invention in subjects of this kind, does more
harm than good. So behave your selves, that too much curiosity may not tax
you of pride, nor too much majesty of State: Modesty mixed with humility will
temper both these, and make that Behavior which appears in you, so well
become you, as if it were borne with you, and not affectiuely derived from
others to you.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvom^n.
Argument.
Complement defined; how it may be corrupted; how refined; wherein it may be
admitted as mainely consequent; wherein omitted as merely imperti^^^; what
Complement gives best accomplishment.

COMPLEMENT. Complement

COMPLEMENT has been anciently defined, Obseruat. 3.
and so successively retained; Complement defined.
a no less rea^^ than formal accomplishment. Such as were more nob^y and
freely educated, and had improued their breeding by foreign Observations (so
sweetly tempered was the equal union and communion of their affections)
instructed others in what they had seen and observed either at home or abroad,
worthy imitation or approuement. Nothing was admitted in those times publicly,
but what was by the grauer Censors first discussed privately. Jealous were the
Pagans of foreign fashions: for, with such constancy they retained their own;
as they seldom or never itched after others. The Tyrian and Sidonian were so
suspected of pride, through their effeminacy in attire, and other light
fashions which they used, as they were held dangerous to commerce with. So
purely did those poor beamelings of Nature reflect on her people; that
formality was held palpable hypocrisy, fair semblances and cool performances
mere golden shadows to delude others, but gull themselves most. Princes
Courts were Princely Seminaries. Delicacy was there no Tutresse, nor effeminacy
Gouernesse. If Alcibiades, albeit in Athens the beautifull'st, for native
endowments the pregnant'st, and for d^scent one of the noblest, introduce ought
irregularly, or express any Complement which relisheth not of Ciuility; the
author must suffer the censure of the City. It was very usual in former times,
when any Embassy was addressed from one state unto another, for the Senate or
Council, from whence any such Legate was sent, to school them in sundry
particulars before they took their journey or received their Commission: but
in no caution were they more strict, than in express command that they should
use no other garb, Complement, nor salute upon their approach in foreign
Courts, than what they had seen used and observed at home. Thus their own
native fashion, became a note of distinction to every Nation.

Neither am I ignorant, how even in one and the selfsame Prouin^e, there may
be generally introduced a different or distinct garb: which proceeds either
from the Commerce and Confluence of people there resorting, and consequently
improuing their Behavior and Elocution by their mutual conference; or from
the Princes Court, where all State and Majesty has residence; or from the
temperature of the Air, to which some have attributed an especial
preeminence. Whereas, in desert and remote places, on which the beams of
Civil society seldom reflect, we shall find nothing but barbarism and
unsociable wildness. Education is the improuer of the one, and producer of the
other. We shall ever see Complement shine most in places eminent. There are
Objects fit for such Subjects: Such as expect it, and bestow their whole days
practice in exercise of it: These aspire to the nature or definition of no art
more eagerly, than Complement, which they hold the absolute ornament of
Gentility. Howsoever, mainely repugnant be their Tenets touching the
subsistence of Complement.

Some have held, it consisted in congies, cringes, and salutes; of which
error, I would this age wherein we live, did not too much labor: others,
merely in a painted and superficial discourse; wherein they so miserably tied
themselves to words, as they tired the impatient hearers with foolish
repetitions, frivolous extrauagancies; being, in a word, so affianced to the
shadow, as they forgot the substance. The last, which were only real and
complete Courtiers, held a seemly graceful presence, beautifide with a native
comeliness, the deseruingst Complement that could attend us. Certainly, if we
should exactly weigh the deriuation of the word, we could not imagine so
meanly of it, as to consist merely of words, or anticke works. It was first
intended to distinguish betwixt persons of civil and savage carriage: yea, to
appropriate a title of preeminence to such, who exceeded others in grounds or
pecepts of Morality; whose lives appeared as Lamps to enlighten others, and
consequently perpetuate the memory of themselves. Many noble and eminent Ladies
are recorded both in divine and humane writ to have excelled in this Complement
of honor. These knew the definition of it, and molded their conversation to
it: They knew what belonged to a posture of state; they could court it without
apish curiosity; embrace love with a reserved modesty; express themselves
complete without singularity. Foreign fashions they distasted; painted
Rhetoric they disrelished; real Complement was all they affected. Love they
could without dissembling; discourse without affecting; show curt'sie without
congying; still retaining what was best beseeming. In the Court they resided to
better it; not a straid look could promise a loo^e Lover least hope of a
purchase; nor Coyness dishearten a faithful servant from his affectionate
purpose. They knew not what it was to protest in jest; to walk in the clouds;
to domineere over their captives, or entertain many Suitors. They freed
Complement of dissimulation, made virtue their Loadstone to affection; their
actions were dedicated to good ends: by which means they made God and goodmen
their friends. Nor do I fear it, but that our flourishing Albion has many
such noble and complete Ladies; who so highly esteem the true and native
definition of Complement, as they prefer the substance before the shadow.
Honor is their dearest tender, goodness their line, by which they daily draw
nearer to perfection, their proper Center. Thus far for the Definition,
wherein we have the rather enlarged our discourse, that the Subject whereof we
treat, may be discovered in her own nature; and such as owe attendance to her,
become better proficients in their instructions derived from her. Neither can
we observe what may really deserve your imitation, but by discerning the
excellence of that whereof we treat by a true and proper definition*

THere is nothing on earth so pure, How Complement may be corrupted.
but abuse may corrupt it; nothing so good, but custom may deprave it. This
may appear in this one Subject, which we have now in discourse. Former times
were not so ^aded to fashions, as to esteem nothing formal, but what was
fantastical. It was not then held the life of Complement, to have the art to
set a face, court a glass, make a cringe or a ducke. Legs were held for
useful supporters, but no Complementall postures. New-minted words made not
their tongues more complete; nor an Outlandish Salute their Persons more
admired. Virgin-modesty made resolution her Steletto to guard her honor.
Plumes and Feathers were held light dressings for staid minds; suspicious
trimmings for stale Maids. Actors might wear them in their presentiments upon
the Stage, but modest Matrons were never allowed to wear them in the state.
Women were admitted to have Painters, but not to be their own painters:
Campaspe was pictured out in her colors by Apelles: Crotons five daughters
lively depictured by Ze^xes; yet these, without any help of art, still
retained their own native features. It was the Complement of that age to
deliver their mind freely without mincing, converse friendly without glozing;
walk the street demurely without gazing. Wherein (with submission ever to
graue^ judgments) this latter age, in mine opinion, deserves just reproof.
Education is a second Nature, and this has given that freedom to women, as
they may admit any opportunity to entertain time with their amorous servants;
redart wanton tales with light blushes; pass a whole afternoon in a
Bay-window, in Congies, Courtsies, and other vselesse Complements. Flashes of
wit are made beguilers of time; and these mixed now and then with such
lascivious passages, as modesty might justly hold it self abused to be so
encountered. Alas! Who knows not what secret trains are laid for credulous
women, under these pretenced parlies? Do you observe how their tongues are
tipped with your praises; how they honor your shadows; admire the earth you
tread on; adore the Air you breath on; and with their ayrie applauses so gild
you, as in the end they palpably gull you; leaving you no less miserably
deluded, than themselves seized of what their sensual quest pursued? Beware of
that Complement which gives way to rob you of your choycest Ornament. Egnatius,
in Catulli^, is brought out, showing the whiteness of his teeth: a poor
subject to raise an Encomiasticke poem. These are Theames for an amorous Muse:
White teeth, rolling eyes, a beautiful complexion (all exterior and inferior
goods) being that which Euryala his Nurse praised, when she washed the feet of
Ulysses, namely, gentle speech, and tender flesh. No less perswasiue by the
eleganc^ of the one, than inuasiue by delicacy of the other. But all these
ou^ward imbellishments give but small accomplishment to the inward beauty.
Where good's a better attribute than fair. No^ be not these dainty subjects
for a Complet^ youth to discant on? What Cro^chets and extemporall Conceits are
hatched out of an addle brain? The very shadow of Iulia's hair must not want
the complea^est honor, that either art can devise, or cest erect. Not a
Cooplet but must be poetically Complete; which out of an amorous frenzy must
with mounting Hyperboles be thus contemned. Skin more pure than Ida's snow,
Whiter far than Moorish milk,
Sweeter than Ambrosia too,
Softer than the Paphian silk,
Indian plumes or thistle-downe,
Or May-blossoms newly blown,
Is my Mistress Rosie-pale,
Adding beauty to her veil.


An excellent piece of Complementall stuff to catch a selfe-conceited one.
Many you have of your sex, who are too attentive auditors in the report of
their own praises. Nothing can be attributed to them, which they hold not
properly due unto them. Which conceit, many times, so transports them, as,
Narcissus-like, they are taken with their own shadows; doting on nothing more
than these Encomiasticke bladders of their desertlesse praises. Let me advise
you, whose discretion should be far from giving light ear to such ayrie
Tritons, to dis-rellish the oily Complement of these amorous Sycophants. Much
more useful and beneficial it will be for you to retain that modesty which
appeared in Alphonsus Prince of Aragon's answer to a plausiue Orator; who
having repeated a long Panegyricall Oration in his praise, replied; If that
thou have said, consent with truth, I thank God for it; if not, I pray God
grant me grace that I may do it. You shall encounter with some of these
Complete Amorists, who will make a set speech to your ^loue, and sweeten every
period with the perfume of it. Others will hold it an extraordinary grace to
become Porters of your Misset, or holders of your Fan, while you pin on
your Mask. Service, Observance, Devotion be the General heads of their
Complement. Other Doctrine they have none, either to instruct morally, or
inform politically. Believe it, Gentlewomen, they are ill-spent hours, that
are bestowed in conference with these Braine-wormes. Their frivolous discourse
will exact from you some answer: which if you shape justly to their dialect,
there will be more vain wind spent, than you can redeem with many tears. Let
no conceit transport you above your selves; hold it for no Complement worthy
your breeding, to trifle time in loue-toyes. They detract both from discretion
and modesty, and oft-times endanger the ruin of the latter fearfully. This
kind of Complement with great ones, were but mere Canting among Beggars. He
or she are the Completest, who in arguments of discourse and action are
discreetest. Full vessels give the least sound. Such as hold Complement the
sole subject of a glib tongue, active cringe, or artfull smile; are those only
Mimicks, or Buffouns of our age, whose Behauiours deserve far more derision
than applause. Thus you have heard how Complement may be corrupted; we now
purpose, with as much propriety and breuity as we may, to show you how it may
be refined. To the end, that what is in its own nature so commendable, may be
entertained with freedom of choice, and retained without purpose to change.

THe Unicorns horn being dipped in water, How Complement may be ^efined.
cleares and purifies it. It is the honor of the Physician to restore nature,
after it be decayed. It is the sole work of that supreme Archytect to bring
light out of darkness, that what was dark might be enligh^ened; life out of
death, that what was dead might be enliuened; way out of error, that the
erring might be directed; knowledge out of ignorance, that the ignorant might
be instructed; a salve out of sin, that sins sore might be cured; comfort
out of affliction, that the afflicted might be comforted; hope out of despair,
that the desperate might be succored; a raising from falling, that their fall
might be recovered; strength out of weakness, that his great work might be
glorified. Gold thrice tried, becomes the purer and more refined: And
Complement the most, when it is best accommodated. True it is, that Society is
either a Plague or a Perfume. It infects, where Consorts are ill-affected; but
works excellent effects, where virtuous Consorts are assembled. It is the
sweetest note that one can sing,
When Grace in Virtues key, turns Natures string.


Where two meek men meet together, their conference (says mellifluous
Bernard) is sweet and delectable: where one man is meek, it is profitable:
where neither, it proves pernicious and uncomfortable. It is Society that gives
us, or takes from us our Security. Let me apply this unto you, Gentlewomen,
whose virtuous dispositions, (so sweetly has nature graced you) promise
nothing less than feruorous desires of being good. Would you have that refined
in you, which others corrupt, by inuerting the means? Or express that in her
native Colors, which will beautify you more than any artificial or
adulterate colors, whose painted Varnish is no sooner made than melted? Make
choice of such for your Consorts, whose choice may admit no change. Let no
Company be affected by you, which may hazard infecting of you. The World is
grown a very Pesthouse: timely prevention must be used, before the infection
have entered. You have no such sovereign receipts to repel, as you have to
prevent. The infection of vice leaves a deeper spot or speckle on the mind,
than any disease does on the body. The Blackmoore may sooner change his skin,
the Leopard his spots, than a soul deep dyed in the grain of infection, can
put off her habituate corruption. Be it then your principal care to make
choice of such bashful Maids, modest Matrons, or reverend Widows, as hold it
their best Complement to retain the opinion of being Continent. Infamy has
wings as swift as fame. Shun the occasion, lest you undergo the brand.
Posthuma, because given to laughter, and something forward to talk with men,
was suspected of her honesty; where being openly accused, she was acquitted by
Spurius Minutius, with this caveat, to use words suitable to her life. Ciuility,
trust me, is the best and most refined Complement that may be. Courting in
public places, and upon first sight, it affects not; for it partakes more of
impudent than Complete. Be it of the City that argument of discourse be
ministered, it can talk freely of it without mincing; or of the Court, it can
address it self to that garb in apt words without minting; or of the
Country, in an homespun phrase it can express whatsoever in the Country
deserves most praise. And all this in such a proper and familiar manner, as
such who are tied to Complement, may aspire to it, but never attain it. He
that has once tasted of the fountain Clitorius, will never afterward drink
any wine. Surely, howsoever this civil and familiar form of dialect may seem
but as pure running water in comparison of Complement, which, like Nectar,
streams out in Conduits of delight to the humorous hearer: yet our discreet
Complementer preferres the pure fountain before the troubled river. It is
true, that many fashions, which even these later times have introduced, deserve
free admittance; yea, there is something yet in our Oa^e, that may be refined.
Yet in the acceptance of these, you are not to entertain whatsoever these
finer times have brought forth. Where variety is affected, and the age to
inconstancy subjected, so as nothing but what is rare and new becomes esteemed:
Either must our inventions be present and pregnant, our surueyes of foreign
places serious and sollicitant, or we shall fall into decay of fashion, or make
old ones new, and so by antiquity gull our Nation. Truth is, though our
tongues, hands, bodies, and legs be the same, our Elocution, action, gesture,
and posture are not the same. Should the soul of Troilus, according to that
erroneous transm^gration of Pythagoras, pass into the body of one of o^r
English Courtiers; or Hortensius, (who was an Orator acti^e enough) into one of
our English Lawyers; or Antigone (who was Complementall enough) into one of our
English Curtezans; they would find strange Cottages to dwell in. What is now
held Complete; a few years will bury in disgrace. Nothing then so refined, if
on earth seated, which time will not raze, or more curious conceits disesteeme,
or that universal reduction to nothing dissolve. That Complement may seem
pleasing; such a fashion generally affecting; such a dressing most Complete:
yet are all these within short space covered with contempt. What you observe
then to be most civil in others, affect it; such an habit needs not to be
refined, which cannot be bettered. Fashion is a kind of frenzy; it admires
that now, which it will laugh at hereafter, when brought to better temper.
Ciuility is never out of fashion; it ever retains such a seemly garb, as it
conferres a grace on the wearer, and enforces admiration in the beholder. Age
cannot deface it; Contempt disgrace it; nor gravity of judgment (which is ever
held a serious Censor) disapproue it.

Be thus minded, and this Complement in you will be purely refined. You have
singular patterns to imitate, represent them in your lives, imitate them in
your loves. The Corruption of the age, let it seize on ignoble spirits; whose
education, as it never equaled yours, so let them strike short of those nobler
indowments of yours: labor daily to become improued, honor her that will make
you honored: let virtue be your crown, who holds vanity a crime: So may you
show holiness in your life, enjoy happiness at your death, and leave examples
of goodness unto others both in life and death.

COurts and eminent places are held fittest Schools for Complement. Wherein
Complement may be admitted, as mainely consequent.
There the Cinnamon tree comes to best grouth; there her bark gives sweetest
scent. Choice and select fashions are there in only request; which oft-times
like those Ephemerae, expire, after one days continuance: whatsoever is
vulgar, is thence exploded; whatsoever novel, generally applauded. Here be
weekly Lectures of new Complements; which receive such acceptance, and leave
behind them that impression, as what garb soever they see used in Court
publicly, is put in present practice privately; lest discontinuance should
blemish so deserving a quality. The Courts gloss may be compared to glass,
bright, but brittle; where Courtiers (says one) are like Counters, Plutarch.
which sometime in account go for a thousand pound, and presently before the
Count be cast, but for a single penny. This too eager affection after
Complement, becomes the consumption of many large hereditaments. Whereto it may
be probably objected, that even dis^^^tion inioynes every one to accommodate
himself to the fashion or condition of that place wherein he lives. To which
Objection I easily condescend; for should a rusticke or boorish Behavior
accompany one who betakes himse^fe to the Court, he might be sure to find a
Controuler in every corner to reprove him; or some complete gallant or other,
pitifully to geere and deride him. But to dote so on fashion, as to admire
nothing more then a phantasticke dressing, or some anticke Complement, which
the corruption of an effeminate State has brought in, derogates more from
discretion, then the strict observance of any fashion adds to her repute. This
place should be the Beacon of the State; whose mounting Prospect surueyes these
inferior coasts which pay homage and fealty unto her. The least obliquity
there, is exemplary elsewhere. Piercingst judgments, as well as pregnantst
wits should be there resident. Not a wandering or indisposed hair, but gives
occasion of observance to such as are near. How requisite then is it for you,
whose Nobler descents promise, yea, exact more of you, then inferiors, to
express your selves best in these best discerning and deserving places? You
are women; modesty makes you completest: you are Noble women, desert
accompanying your descent will make you noblest. You may, and conueniency
requires it, retain a Courtly garb, reserve a well seeming State, and show
your selves lively Emblemes of that place, wherein you live: You may entertain
discourse, to allay the irkesomenesse of a tedious hour; bestow your selves in
other pleasing recreations, which may no less refresh the mind, than they
confer vigor and viuacity to the body. You may be eminent stars, and
express your glory in the resplendent beams of your virtues; so you suffer no
black cloud of infamy to darken your precious names. She was a Princely
Christian Courtier, who never approached the Court, but she meditated of the
Court of heaven; never consorted with her Courtiers, but she contemplated those
Citizens of heaven; nor ever entered the Presence Chamber, but she thought of
the presence of her Maker, the King of heaven. Such Meditations are receipts to
cure all inordinate motions. Your Lives should be the lines to measure others
actions. Virtue is gracious in every subject, but most in that, which the
Prince or Princess has made gracious. Anciently, the World was divided into
three parts, whereof Europa was held the soul; properly, every Politic State
may be divided into three Cantons, whereof the Court is the Suune. You are
Objects to many Eyes; be your actions platformes to many lives. I can by no
means approve that wooing and winning Complement (though most Courts too
generally affect it) which makes her sole Object, purchase of Servants or
Suitors. This garb tastes more of Curtezan than Courtier: it begets Corriuals,
whose fatal Duello's end usually in blood. Our own State has sometimes felt
the misery of these tragic events; by suffering the loss of many generous
and free-bred Sparks; who, had not their Torches been extinguished in their
blood, might to this day have suruiued, to their Countries joy and their own
fame. So great is the danger that lies hid in affable Complements, promising
aspects, affectionate glances, as they leave those who presumed of their own
strength, holding themselves invulnerable, many times laboring of wounds
incurable. Be you no such Basilisk^; never promise a calm in your face, where
you threaten a storm in your heart. Appear what you are, lest Censure tax
you of inconstancy, by saying, you are not what you were. An open countenance
and restrained bosom sort not-well together. Suit your discourse to your
action; both to a modest dispose of your affection. Throw abroad no loose
Lures, wandering eyes, strayed looks; these delude the Spectators much, but the
Actors most. A just revenge! by striving to take in others, they are taken by
others. How dangerous do we hold it to be, in a time of infection, to take up
any thing, be it never so precious, which we find lost in the street? One of
your loose looks, be it darted with never so Complementall a state, is far
more infectious, and mortally dangerous. There is nothing that sounds more
cheerfully to the ear, or leaves a sweeter accent; nothing that conueyes it
self more speedily to the heart, or affords fuller content for the time, than
conceit of love. It will immaze a perplexed wretch in a thousand extremes;
whose amazed thoughts stand so deeply engaged to the Object of his affection;
as he will sustain any labor, in hope of a trifling favor. Such sovereignty
beauty retains, which, if discretion temper not, begets such an height of
conceit in the party beloved; as it were hard to say, whether the Agent or
Patient suffer more. To you let me return, who stand fixed in so high an
Orb; as a graceful Majesty well becomes you, so let modesty grace that
Majesty; that demeaning your selves like Complete and gracious Courtiers on
earth, you may become triumphant and glorious Courtiers in heaven.

THis garb, Wherein Complement may be omitted, as merely impertinent.
as it suites not with all Persons, so sorts it not to all Places. For a
Mechanicke to affect Complement, would as ill seem him, as for a rough-hewen
Satyr to play the Orator. It is an excellent point of discretion, to fit ones
self to the quality or condition of that place where he resides. That Vrbanity
which becomes a Citizen, would relish of too much curiosity in a Country man.
That Complement which gives proper grace to a Courtier, would be get derision
or contempt, being personated by a Merchant or his Factor. In affairs of
State, is required a graceful or Complete posture; which many times procures
more reverence in the person interessed, than if that state were omitted.
Whereas, in ordinary affairs of traffic, it were indiscretion to represent
any such state, or to use any expression, either by way of discourse or action,
that were not familiar. That person, who preferres Complement before profit;
and will rather speak not to be understood, than lose one polite-stollen
phrase, which he has purchased by care only, and understands not, may
account himself one among his bank-rupt brethren, before he break. It is
pitiful to hear what a remnant of sustian, for want of better Complement, a
Complete-Country-Gossip (for so she holds her self) will utter in one hour
amongst her Pew-fellowes. How she will play the Schoole-Mistresse in precepts
of Discipline and moral Behavior! Nothing so graceful in another, which she
will not freely reprove; nothing so hateful in her self, which she will not
confidently approve. Teach she will, before she be taught; and correct Form
it self, to bring Form out of love with it self. To which malady, none is
more naturally subject, than some Ladies cashiered Gentlewoman, or one who has
played Schoole-Mistresse in the City, and for want of competent pay, remoues her
Camp into the Country; where she brings enough of vanity into every family
throughout the Parish. She will not stick to instruct her young Pupils in
strange points of formality, enioyning them not to ask their Parents blessing
without a Complement. These, as they were never Mistresses of families, so they
are generally ignorant in employments of that kind. Those three principal
works or faculties of the Understanding, which might enable them to Discourse,
Distinguish, and to Choose, are so estranged from them, as their Discourse
consists solely in arguments of vanity, their Distinction in mere shadows of
formality, their Choice in subjects and Consorts of effeminacy. Eight things,
says Hippocrates, make ones flesh moist and fat; the first, to be merry and
live at hearts ease; the second, to sleep much; the third, to lie in a soft
bed; the fourth, to fare well; the fifth, to be well apparelled and appointed;
the sixth, to ride always on horseback; the seventh, to have our will; and
the eighth, to be employed in Plays and pastimes, and in such time-beguiling
recreations, as yield contentment and pleasure. These are the only receipts in
request with those Shee-Censors we now discourse of; and of whom it may be
said, as was sometimes spoken of one Margites, that he never plowed, nor
dug, nor did any thing all his life long that might tend unto goodness; and
by necessary consequence wholly unprofitable to the world. Who, howsoever they
are less than Women at their work, yet at their meat (so vnconfined is their
appetite) they are more than men, and in their habit (so phantasticke is their
conceit) neither women nor men. So as, were Diogenes to encounter one of these,
he might well expostulate the cause with her, as he did upon like occasion
with a youth too curiously and ^ffeminately dressed: If thou go to men, all
this is but in vain, if unto women, it is wi^k^d. But these we hold
altogether unworthy of your more generous society; whose excellent breeding
has sufficien^ly accommodated you for City, Court, and Country; and so fully
informed you how to d^meane your selves in all affairs; as I make little
doubt, but you know, wherein it may be admitted, as ma^nely consequent; and
wherein omitted as merely impertinent. I mean therefore to descend briefly to
the last branch of this Observation; declaring, what Ornament gives Complement
best beauty or accomplishment.

IT is true, what the son of Sirach sometimes said; When a man has d^ne his
best, Ecc^^. 18. 6.
he must begin again, and when he thinks to come to an end, he must go
again to his labor. There is nothing so exact, which may not admit of
something to make it more perfect. We are to go by stayres and steps to the
height of any story. Virtues are the Stairs, Perfection the Spire. But I must
tell you, What Complement gives best accomplish^e^^.
Gentlewomen, the way for you to ascend, is first to descend: Complete you
cannot be, unless you know how repl^te you are of misery. Humility is the
staire that conducts you to this spire of glory. Your beauty may proclaim you
fair; your discourse express a pregnancy of conceit; your behavior confirm
you outwardly complete. Yet there is something more than all this required, to
make you absolutely accomplished. All these outward becommings, be they never
so graceful, are but reflections in a (...): quite vanished, so soon as the
glass is rem^^ed. Critol^^^ balance was of precious temper, and
well-deseruing estimation with Heirs of Honor; who po^sed the goods of body
and fortune in (...) ^^ale, and goods of the mind in the other: where ^he goods
of the mind so far weighed down the other, as the heaven does the earth and
Seas. To ^^ad a dance gra^efully; to marry your voice to your instrument
musically; to express your selves in pro^e and verse morally; are commendable
qualities, and en^^rcing motives of affection. Yet I must tell you, for the
first, though it appear by your feet to be but a mere dimension, in the
opinion of the Learned it is the Devils procession: Where the Dance is the
Circle, whose center is the Devil. Which may be restrained by a more easy or
moderate glass to such wanton and immodest Revels, as have ancien^ly been used
in the Celebration of their profane feasts by Pagans, and are to this day by
Pagan-christians; who, to gain applause from the Spectator, care not what
shameless parts they play in the presence of their Maker. But what are these
worth, being compared with these inward Ornaments or beauties of your mind;
which only distinguish you from other creatures, and make you soueraignesses
over the rest of Gods creatures? You have that within you, which will best
accomplish you. Let not that be corrupted, by which your crooked ways may be
best corrected. Hold it no such necessary point of Complement, to show a kind
of majesty in a Dance; and to prefer it before the Complement of a Religious
task. Those sensual Curtezans, who are so delighted in songs, pipes, and
earthly melody, shall in hell rore terribly and howl miserably: crying, as it
is in the Apocalips; Woe, Woe, Woe. Woe shall every one cry severally, Appoc. 8.
for the reward they have received in hell eternally, saying and sighing, Woe
is me that ^uer I was borne: for far better had it been for her, that she
had never been borne. And again; Cursed be the womb that bare me a sinner.
After this, shall she cry out in her second Woe against her self and all the
members of her own body. Woe be unto you my accursed feet, what evil have you
brought upon me miserable wretch, who by your perverse paths and wicked ways
have shut heavens gate of me? ^o unto you my hands, why have you deprived me by
your sinful touch, and sensual embrace of the Crown of glory; by your means
am I brought to hell fire, where I shall be tormented eternally? Woe unto thee,
thou cursed tongue, what mischief have thou brought upon me, by uttering words
so scurrilous and filthy, and singing uncivil songs so frequently? O ye cursed
Eyes, who by your unlawful objects of concupiscence, have deprived me of Gods
presence, and never shed one tear for your sins in token of repentance! Now
begins your intolerable weeping (ye teare-swolne eyes never dried) before all
the devils and the damned. Woe unto thee my heart, what have thou put upon me,
who by thy lustful thoughts and unlawful joys, have deprived me of eternal
joys? The third Woe, that she shall cry out, is this, saying: Woe unto the
bitterness of my torments, for they are comfortless: woe unto the multitude
of them, for they are numberless: woe unto the eternity of them, for they are
endless. Would our wanton Curtezans, who sport it in their beds of luory,
surfeit it in their delicacy, wanton it in the bo^ome of security, and dedicate
their whole time to sensuality, reflect upon such a sovereign salve or
spiritual balm as this; they would draw back their feet from the ways of
wantonness, and exercise them wholly in the paths of righteousness. They
would remove their hands from unchaste embraces, and inure them to the search
of Scriptures. They would stop their mouths from vttring ought (...), and
teach their tongues to be Orators of mod^sty. They would turn their eyes from
vanity, and six them on the purest objects of eternity. That so, instead of
bitterness of torments, they might taste the sw^^^nesse, of divine comforts:
instead of multitu^^ of torments, they might partake the numberless number of
Gods mercies: and instead of the eternity of those torments, immortality with
Gods Saints and Servants.

Prevention is the life of policy; the way to avoid those, and enjoy these, is
to live in your Court here on earth, where you are spheered, as in the presence
of God and his heavenly Angels, where your hope is seated. Though your feet be
here, your faith should be there: here your Camp, there your Court. Mean
time, while you soiourne here, you are to hold a good Christian the completest
Courtier: and that virtue is the ornament, which gives Complement the best
accomplishment. Silken honor is like painted meat; it may feed the eye, but
affords no nourishment. That Courtiers Coat gives a vading gloss, whose heart
is not inwardly lived with grace. Let goodness guide you in the way, and
happiness will crown you in the end. Let your Complete armor be
righteousness, your Complement lowliness; complete in nothing so much as
holiness; that in your conuoy from Earth, you may be endenized in heaven,
natural Citizens, angelical Courtiers.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
Decency recommended as requisite in four distinct Subjects: Decency the
attractiuest motive of affection: the smoothest path that leads to perfection.

DECENCY. DECENCY.

DECENCY takes Discretion ever along with her to choose her f^shion. She
accommodates her self to the place wherein she lives, the persons with whom
she consorts, the rank or quality she partakes. She is too discreet to
affect ought that may not seem her: too constant to change her habit for the
invention of any phantasticke wearer. What propriety she expresses in her
whole posture or carriage, you shall easily perceive, if you will but with a
piercing eye, a serious survey, reflect upon her demeanor, Decency recommended
as requisi^e in four distinct subjects.
in her Gate, Look, Speech, Habit. Of which, distinctly, we purpose to
entreat, in our Entry to this Observation; that by these you may probably
collect the excellency of her condition.

THat, GATE.
wherein we should express our selves the humblest, many times transports us
most, and proclaim^s us proudest. It is no hard thing to gather the disposition
of our heart, by the dimension of our gate. What a circular gesture we shall
observe some use in their pace, as if they were troubled with the vertigo!
Others make a tinkling with their feet, and make discovery of their light
thoughts, by their wanton gate. Others with a jetting and strutting pace,
publish their hauty and selfe-conceited mind. Thus do our Wantons (as if they
had transparant bodies) display their folly, and subject themselves to the
censure of leuity. This cannot Decency endure. When she sees Women, whose
modesty should be the Ornament of their beauty, demean themselves more like
Actors than civil Professants, she compassionately suffers with them, and
with choice precepts of moral instruction (wherein she has ever shown her
self a singular proficient) she labors to reclaim them. With amorous, but
virtuous Rhetoric, she wooes them, hooping by that means to win them. She
bids them look back to preceding times, yea those, on which that glorious
light which shines in these Christian days, never reflected. And there they
shall find Women highly censured, for that their outward carriage only made
them suspected. A veil covered their face, modesty measured out their pace;
their Spectators were as so many Censors: Circumspect therefore were they of
their carriage, lest they should become a scandal or blemish to their sex.
Their repair to their Temples was decent, without any loose or light gesture;
Entering their Temples, constant and settled was their behavior. Quick was
their pace in dispatch of household affairs; but slow in their Epicureall
visits or sensual gossipings. They had not the art of imitating such hu^^ing
and mounting gates, as our light-spirited Dames now use. They were not as then
learned to pace: so far estranged were they from the very least conceit of
vanity in this kind. How much more should these purer times, where verity is
taught and embraced, vanity so much taxed and reproved, affect that most, which
adornes and beautifies most? Is it not palpable folly, to walk so hautily in
these streets of our captivity? Eye your feet, those bases of frailty, how
they, who so proudly strut on earth, are but earth, and approach daily nearer
their earth. The Swan, when she prides her self in her whiteness, reflects on
her black feet, which brings down her plumes, and allayes her self-conceit
with more humbleness. What anticke Pageants shall we behold in this survey of
Earth? With what Apish gestures they walk, which taxes them of lightness?
How like Colosso's others walk, which discouers their haughtiness? how
punctually these, as if they were Puppets drawn by an enforced motion? How
phantastically those, as if their walk were a theatrall action? These unstaid
dimensions argue unsettled dispositions. All is not well with them. For if one
of the Spartan Ephori was to lose his place, because he observed no Decency in
his pace, how may we be opinion'd of such Women, whose years exact of them
stayednesse, whose places retain in them more peculiar reverence, and whose
descents inioyne them to a state-reseruance; when they, to gain observance,
admit of any new, but indecent posture? Deserve these approuement? No;
discretion cannot prize them, nor judgment praise them, Vulgar opinion, whose
applause never receives life from desert, may admire what is new, but
discretion that only which is neat. It is one thing to walk honestly as on
the day, another thing to walk uncivilly as on the night. Decency becomes the
one; Deformity the other. Neither only are modest women to be cautelous how
they walk, but where they walk. Some places there be, whereto if they
repair, walk they never so Ciuilly, they cannot walk honestly. Those who
value reputation, will not be seen there; for Honor is too dear a purchase
to be set at sale. Such as frequent these places, have exposed themselves to
shame; and made an irreuocable Contract with sin. They make choice of the
Twy-light, lest their paths should be discovered; and shroud their distained
actions with the ^able Curtain of night, lest they should be displayed.
These, howsoever their feet walk softly, their hearts post on swiftly, to
seize on the voluptuous prey of folly.

Far be these ways from your walks, virtuous Ladies, whose modesty makes
you honored of your Sex. Though your feet be here below, let your faith be
above. Let no path of pleasure draw you from those joys which last for ever.
Though the world be your walk while you soiourne here; heaven should be your
aim, that you may repose eternally there. Live devoutly, walk demurely,
profess constantly; that devotion may instruct you, your ways direct you,
your profession conduct you to your heavenly Country. It is a probable
argument, that such an one hates her Country, where only she is to become
Citizen, who thinks it to be well with her here, where she is a Pilgrim.
Walk in this maze of your Pilgrimage, that after death you may enjoy a lasting
heritage. So shall you praise God in the gate, and after your Christian race
finished, receive a Crown.

IT is most true, that a wanton Eye is the truest evidence LOOK.
of a wandering and distracted mind. The Arabians proverb is elegant; Shut the
windows, that the house may give light. It is death that enters in by the
windows. The House may be secured, if these be closed. Whence it was, that
princely Prophet praid so earnestly: Lord turn away mine eyes from vanity. And
hence appears man's misery. That those Eyes, which should be the Cesternes of
sorrow, limbeckes of contrition, should become the lodges of lust, and portals
of our perdition. That those which were given us for assistants and associates,
should become our assacinats. Our Eye is made the sense of sorrow, because the
sense of sin; yet more apt is she to give way to sin, then to find one
tear to rinse her sin. An unclean eye is the messenger of an unclean
heart: confine the one, and it will be a means to rectify the other. Many
dangerous objects will a wandering eye find, whereon to vent the disposition of
her corrupt heart. No place is exempted, no subject freed. The ambitious eye
makes honor her object, wherewith the afflicts her self, both in aspiring to
what she cannot enjoy, as likewise in seeing another enjoy that, whereto her
self did aspire. The Cou^tous makes wealth her object; which she obtaines
with toil, enioyes with fear, forgoes with grief: for being got they load
her, loved they ^oile her, lost they gall her. The Envious makes her Neighbors
flourishing field, or fruitful harvest, her object; she cannot but look on
it, looking pine and repine at it, and repining justly consume her spirit with
envying it. The Lascivious makes beauty her object, and with a leering look,
while she throws out her lure to catch others, she becomes caught her self.
This object, because it reflects most on your sex, let it be thus disposed,
that the inward eye of your souls may be on a superior beauty fixed. Do ye
admire the comeliness of any creature? remove your eye from that object, and
bestow it on the contemplation of your Creator. Worms and flies, that have
laye^ dead all winter, by reflexe of the Sun beams, are revived: so these
flesh-flyes, who have been long time buried in these sensual Objects of
earth, no sooner reflect on the Sun of righteousness, than they become
enliuened and enlightened. Those filmes which darkened the eye of their minds,
are removed, those thick Cataracts of earthly vanities are dispersed and
dispelled, and a new light into a new heart infused.

I know well, Gentlewomen, that your resort to places of eminent resort, cannot
but minister to you variety of Objects. Yea, even where nothing but chaste
thoughts, staid looks, and zealous desires should harbor, are now and then
loose thoughts, light looks, and licentious desires in especial honor. The
means to prevent this malady, which like a spreading ulcer disperseth it self
in every society, is neither willingly to take nor be taken. Dinah may be a
proper Emblem for the eye; she seldom strayes abroad, but she is in danger
of rauishing. Now to preserve purity of heart, you must observe a vigilant
discipline over every sense. Where, if the eye, which is the light of the body,
be not well disposed, the rest of the senses cannot choose but be much darkened.
We say, that the want of one peculiar sense supplies that defect with an higher
degree of perfection in the rest. Sure I am, there is no one sense that more
distempers the harmony of the mind, nor prospect of the Soul, then this window
of the body. It opens ever to the Ra^en, but seldom to the Dove. Rauing
affections it easily conueyes to the heart; but Doue-like innocence it rarely
retains in the breast. As it is a member of the flesh, so becomes it a servant
of the flesh; apprehending with greediness, whatsoever may minister fuel to
carnal concupiscence. This you shall easily correct, by fixing her on that
pure and absolute object, for which she was made. It is observed by professed
Oeulists (an observation right worthy a Christians serious consideration) that
whereas all creatures have but four Muscles to turn their eyes round about,
man has a fifth to pull his eyes up to heaven. Do not then depresse your eyes,
as if they were fixed on earth, nor turn them round, by gazing on the
fruitless vanities of earth; but on heaven, your haven after earth. In the
Philosophers scale, the soul of a fly is of more excellence then the Sun;
in a Christian scale, the soul of man is infinitely more precious then all
creatures under the Sun. Preserve then the honor of a beautiful soul,
which suffers infinitely when it is blemished with any soil. So order and
dispose your looks, as censure may not tax you of lightness, nor an amorous
glance impeach you of wantonness. Send not forth a tempting eye to take
another; nor entertain a tempting look darting from another. Neither take not
be taken. To become a prey to others, will slave you; to make a prey of others,
will transport you. Look then upward, where the more you look you shall like,
the longer you live you shall love.

Without Speech SPEECH.
can no society subsist. By it we express what we are, as vessels discover
themselves best by their sound. Discretion makes opportunity her anuile,
whereon is wrought a seasonable discourse. Otherwise, howsoever we speak much,
we discourse little. That sage Stagi^ian debating of the conuenience and
propriety of discourse before Alexander, maintained, that none were to be
admitted to speak (by way of positive direction) but either those that
managed his wars, or his Philosophers which governed his house. This Opinion
tasted of too much strictness (will our women say) who assume to themselves a
privilege in arguments of discourse, be the argument never so course whereon
they treat. Truth is, their tongues are held their defensive armor; but in no
particular detract they more from their honor, than by giving too free scope
to that glibbery member. For to such as profess their ability at this weapon,
may that saying of Pand^lphus be properly applied: They speak much ill, but
they speak little well; they speak much, but do little. Again, They do
little well, but they do much ill; they say well, but do ill. They promise
much, but do little. What restraint is required in respect of the tongue, may
appear by that iuory guard or garrison with which it is impaled. See, how it
is double warded, that it may with more reseruancy and better security be
restrained! To give liberty to the tongue to utter what it list, is the
argument of an indiscreet person, In much Speech there can never want sin, it
either leaves some tincture of vainglory, which discouers the proud heart,
from whence it proceeded; or some taste of scurrility, which displayes the
wanton heart, from whence it streamed; or some violent and dispassionate heat,
which proclaims a rancorous heart, from whence it issued. Whereas, a
well-disposed mind will not speak before it conceive; nor deliver ought by way
of expression, till it be prepared by a well-seasoned deliberation. That
Philosophers speech deserves retention; who seeing a silent guest at a public
feast, used these words; If thou be wise, thou art a fool; if a fool, thou
art wise in h^lding thy peace. As discourse usefully edifying conferres a
benefit to the hearer; so discourses fruitless and wandering, as they tire the
ear, so they tax the discretion of the speaker. It was an excellent precept
of Ecclesiasticus: Eccles. 22. 8. ^.
Thou that art young, speak, if need be, and yet scarcely when thou art twice
asked. Comprehend much in few words; in many be as one that is ignorant: be as
one that understands, and yet hold thy tongue. The direction is general, but
to none more consequently useful than to young women; whose bashful silence
is an ornament to their Sex. Volubility of tongue in these, argues either
rudeness of breeding, or boldness of expression. The former* may be reclaimed
by a discreet Tutor, but the latter, being grounded on arrogance of conceit,
seldom or never. It will be-seeme you, Gentlewomen, whose generous education
has estranged you from the first, and whose modest disposition has weaned you
from the last; in public consorts to observe rather than discourse. It suites
not with her honor, for a young woman to be prolocutor. But especially, when
either men are in presence, or ancient Matrons, to whom she owes a civil
reverence, it will become her to tip her tongue with silence. Touching the
subject of your discourse, when opportunity shall exact it of you, and without
touch of immodesty expect it from you; make choice of such arguments as may
best improve your knowledge in household affairs, and other private
employments. To discourse of State-matters, will not become your auditory: nor
to dispute of high points of Divinity, will it sort well with women of your
quality. These S^e^Clarkes many times broach strange opinions, which, as they
understand them not themselves, so they labor to entangle others of equal
understanding to themselves. That Divine sentence, being made an indiuiduate
consort to their memory, would reclaim them from this error, and free them
from this opinionate censure; God forbid, that we should not be readier to
learn than to teach. Women, as they are to be no Speakers in the Church, so
neither are they to be disputers of controversies of the Church. Holy Bernard
pleasantly glanced at these, when on a time entering a Church, wherein the image
of our Lady was erected, he was saluted by the Image in this manner, Good
morrow Bernard; which device having quickly discovered, perceiving some person
to be purposely enclosed in it, he forthwith replied: Your Ladyship has
forgot your self; Women should be no Speakers in the Church. In one word, as
modesty gives the best grace to your behavior, so moderation of Speech to your
discourse. Silence in a Woman is a moving Rhetoric, winning most, when in
words it wooeth least. Now to give Speech and Silence their distinct attributes
or personal Characters: we may gather their several tempers by the several
effects derived from them. Ambros. in lib. de offic. Greg. in mor.
More shall we see fall into ^inne by Speech than Silence: Yea, whosoever
intends himself to speak much, seldom observes the course of doing what is
just.

In the whole current of your discourse, let no light subject have any place
with you^ this, as it proceeds from a corrupt and indisposed heart, so it
corrupts the hearer. Likewise, beware of selfe-prayse; it argues you have flow
neighbors, or few deserts. Let not calumny run descant on your tongue: it
discouers your passion too much; in the mean time, venting of your spleen
affords no cure to your grief, no salve to your sore. If opportunity give your
sex argument of discourse; let it neither taste of affectati^n, for that were
servile; nor touch upon any wanton relation, for that were uncivil; nor any
State-politicall action, for the height of such a subject, compared with your
weakness, were unequal. If you affect Rhetoric, let it be with that
familiarity expressed, as your p^ainnesse may witness for you, that you do
not affect it. This will make your Speech seem gracious to the Hearer,
confer a native modesty on the Speaker, and free you of all preiudicate
censure.

THere is nothing which moves us more to pride it in sin, HABIT.
than that which was first given us to cover our shame. The fruit of a Tree
made man a sinner; and the leaves of a Tree gave him a cover. In your Habit is
your modesty best expressed; your dispositions best discovered. The Habit of
the mind is discerned by the state or posture of the body; the condition or
quality of the body by the Habit, which either adds or detracts from her
beauty. As we cannot probably imagine such to have modest minds, who have
immodest eyes; so can we not properly say such women to be modest matrons or
professors of piety, who in their attire show arguments of their immodesty. It
skils not much, for the quality of your habits, whether they be silken or
woollen, so they be civil and not wanton. For albeit, some have affirmed that
all gorgeous attire is the attire of sin, the quality of the person may seem
to extenuate the quality of that sin. For noble and eminent personages were
in all times admitted to wear them; and to be distinguished by them: Neither
indeed, is the sumptuousnes of the habit, so reprehensiue as the phantasticknes
of the habit respect of the form or fashion. It is this which derogates highly
from the repute of a Christian, to see her affect variety and inconstancy of
attire, more than ever did Pagan. There is nothing which introduces more
effeminacy into any flourishing State, than vanity in habit. Where we may
observe fashion, many times* so long affected, til all fashion become exiled.
Surely, whatsoever our lighter disposed Curtezans think, it is Ciuility which
adds most grace, Decency which expresses best state, and comlines in attire
which procures most love. Other habits, as they display the mind of the wearer,
so are they subjects of laughter or contempt to any discreet beholder. Time is
too precious to be made a Pageant or Morris on. These misconceiued ornaments
are mere deformities to good minds. Virtuous and discreet Matrons would be
loath to wear ought that might give least scandal or offense to their sex.
Foreign fashions are no baits to catch them, nor fantastic, rather
phanaticke dressings to delude them. They cannot eye that habit which deserves
approving, nor that attire which merits loving, where Ciuility is not pattern.
Decency is their choycest liberty, which sets the^ forth above a^l Embroydery.
There was an ancient Edict amongst the Romans, purposely to rid the State of
all vselesse loyterers, Cic. in lib. de leg.
that no Roman should go through the streets of the City, unless he carried
with him the badge or signal of that Trade whereby he lived: insomuch, that
Marc, Aurelius, speaking of the diligence of the Romans, gives them this
deserving testimony, that all of them followed their labor. Now I mar^ell,
whether upon due survey of all those artizans, either Periwig, Gregorian-maker,
or Tyre-woman, had any set place or proper vocation, or what badges they might
bear to signify their profession. Would not these newfound Artists have
been rather derided than approved, geered than applauded? Sure, Rome was more
civil than to give way to so contagious an evil. Vesta had her maidens, so
had Viriplaca her Matrons; but neither of their followers could admit of any
new-minted fashions. That Lady City had never soueraniz'd over so many rich
States, swelling Empires, victorious Princes, had she exposed her self to
such vanity, which had been the greatest Eclypse to her spreading glory.

To you let me bend my discourse, whose more generous parts confer more true
beauty on themselves, than these outward fopperies can ever do: do not betray
your names to suspicion. The Chaplet of fame is not reserved for wantons, nor
such as suit themselves to the habit of lightness; for these add one degree
more to their sexes weakness: but for such women as array themselves in comely
apparel, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.
with shamefastness and modesty, not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls,
or costly apparel. But, as becomes women that profess the fear of God. For
even after this manner in time past did the holy women, Pet. 3. 5.
which trusted in god, tire themselves. Here you have a direct platform, how
to attire your selves outwardly; suting your civil habit with variety of sweet
graces inwardly* ^et not then these Spider-cauls delude you, discretion will
laugh at them, modesty loath them, Decency contemn them. Loose bodies sort
best with these adulterate beauties. Those, whose conversation is in heaven,
though they soiourne here on earth; Those, whose erected thoughts spheere them
in an higher Orb than this Circle of frailty; Those, whose spotless
affections have devoted their best service to goodness, and made Modesty the
exact mold of all their actions, cannot endure to stoop to such braine-sicke
Lures. And such are you, whose generous descent, as it claymes precedence of
others, so should your virtuous demeanor in these four distinct subjects,
GATE, LOOK, SPEECH, HABIT, improve your esteem above others. In Gate, by
walking humbly: in Look, by disposing it demurely; in Speech, by delivering it
moderately; in Habit, by attiring your selves modestly: all which, like four
choice borders, perfumed with sweetest odours, will beautify those lovely
lodges of your souls with all Decency. Mean while, imprint these Divine
motions in your memory. And first for the first, hold this tenet; To walk,
walking to meditate, meditating to make the subject of it your Maker, is the
best portion of the Creature; for the second, to fix your eye with that
indifferency on the Creature, as it never auert your contemplative eye from
your Creator; for the third, to direct your Speech to the benefit of the
hearer, and to avoid impertinences for conscience sake far more than censure;
for the fourth and last, to make choice of that Habit, whose Ciuility may do
you honor, and publish you examples of Decency to any discreet or temperate
beholder.

WHat is it that conueyes more affection to the heart, Decency the attractiuest
motive of affection.
than Decency in the object we affect? The Spouse in the Cantiales was black*
but comely; and this gave praise to her beauty. A strayd look may more
affection in a light heart, but in a virtuous mind it begets (...). Truth is,
in this disordered age, where the be^^ shot to be discharged is the Tavern
bill, the best Alarm is the sounding of healths, and the most absolute March
is reeling; discretion has received such a maime, as affection is seldom
measured by what we are, but what we wear. Vanity has set up her Flagge; and
more fresh water soldiers desire to fight under her Banner, than the Ensign
of honor. But all this works little upon a constant and rightly-tempered
disposition. Such an one plants there his love, where with comfort he may
live. Do you think that a jetting Gate, a leering Look, a glibbery Tongue,
or gaudy Attire can move affection in any one worthy your love? Sure no; he
deserves a light one for his choice, who makes his choice by one of these. To
be an admirer of one of these, were to prefer in his choice a Maymarrian
before a Modest Matron. Now there are some fashions which become one
incomparably more than another; the reason whereof may be imputed either to the
native propriety of the party using that form, habit, or complement; or else
to the quality of the person, which makes the fashion used, infinitely more
gracious. For the first, you shall never see any thing imitated, but it seems
the imitator worst at the first. Habit will bring it into a second nature; but
till such time as custom has matur'd it, many imperfections will usually
attend it. Whereas, whatsoever is naturally inbred in us, will best beseem and
adorn us; it needs no other face than what nature gave it, and would generally
become worse, were it never so little enforced. For the second, as in any
Theatrall presentment, what becomes a Peer or Potentate, would not sort with
the condition of any inferior substitute; every one must be suited to the
person he presents: So in the Theater of state, distinct fashions both in Habit
and Complement are to be retained, according to the place wherein he is ranked.
Lucrece, no doubt, stamped a deeper impression of affection in the heart of her
beholder, by addressing her self to houswiuery and purple-spinning, than
others could ever do with their reere bankets and riotous spending. All are
not of Aegys^us mind, who was taken with a Complement of lightness. This
argued, that a youthful heat had rather surpised his amorous heart, than any
discreet affection preferred him to his choice. But how vading is that love,
which is so lightly grounded? To what dangerous ouertures is it exposed? Where
Virtue is not directrice in our choice, our inconstant minds are ever prone to
change. We find not what we expected; nor digest well what we formerly
affected; All is out of square, because discretion contrived not the building.
To repair this breach, and make the Object we once entertained, ever beloved:
Let nothing give us Content, but what is decent. This is the Habit,
Gentlewomen, which will best become you to be wooed in, and content a discreet
Suitor most to have you won in. All others are neither worth viewing, wooing,
weighing, nor wearing. Rich ^ewels, the more we look on them, the more are we
taken with them. Such Jewels are modest women, whose countenance promises
goodness, an enforced smile native bashfulnesse, every posture such tokens of
Decency and comeliness, as Caius Tarquinius in his Caia could conceive no
fuller happiness. She, I say, who made wool and purple her days task, and
this her constant impreze* Where thou art Cains, I am Caia. Conform then you
generous Dispositions to a Decency of fashion, that you may attract to your
selves and beget in others, motives of affection.

Fountains run by many winding and mazie Currents into one maine River;
Rivers by sundry Channels into one maine Ocean. Decency the smoothest path that
leads to perfection.
Several ways direct passengers into one City; but one only way guides man
to the heavenly City. This way is Virtue, which like some choice confection
sweetens the difficulty of every Occurrent that encounters her in her quest
after Perfection, Of all those Cardinal Virtues, it is Temperance only which
seasons and gives them a virtuous relish. Which Virtue dilates it self to
several branches; all which bud forth into one sauoury fruit or other. It is
true, that he who is every way Complete, may be properly styled an absolute
man. But what is it which makes him Complete? It is not a scrude face, an
artfull Cringe, or an Italionate ducke that deserves so exquisite a title.
Another age will discountenance these, and cover these Complete formalists with
dust. No, Ladies; it is something that partakes of a more Divine Nature, than a
mere Complementall gesture. If you would aspire to perfection, observe the
mean, that you may attain the end. Temperance you cannot embrace, if Decency
be estranged from your choice. If temperate, you cannot choose but be decent:
for it includes an absolute moderation of our desires in all subjects.

Come then, Gentlewomen, love to be decent, and that will teach you the best
Complement. You have that in you, which divinely employed, will truly ennoble
you. Your descent may give you an higher ascent by way of precedence before
others, but this you cannot appropriate to your own deserts, but that Nobility
of blood which is derived to you by others. Labor to have something of your
own, which you may challenge to be yours properly, without any help of an
ancient pedigree; How well does it seem you, to express a civil decent state
in all your actions? You are in the eyes of many, who precisely observe you,
and desire to imitate whatsoever they note obseruable in you. You may then
become excellent patterns unto others, by retaining decency, and entertaining
her for your follower. She will make you appear gracious in their sight,
whose judgments are pure and uncorrupted; howsoever our Corkie censurers
traduce you, your fame cannot be blemished, nor the odor of those virtues
which so sweetly chafe and perfume you, decayed. Decency attended you in your
life, and the memory of your virtues shall crown you after death. Even there,
Aug Soliloq. Cap. XXXV.
Where youth never ageth, life never ends, beauty never fades, love never
fails, health never vadeth, joy never decreaseth, grief is never felt,
groans are never heard, no object of sorrow to be seen, gladness ever to be
found, no evil to be feared. Yea, the King shall take pleasure in your beauty,
and at your end inuest you with endless glory. Prize not then the censure of
sensual man, for he is wholly set on vanity; but fix your eyes on him, who
will cloth you with eternity. Let this be your Crown of comfort, that many
are improued by your Example, Se^. de vita b^a^a.
many weaned from sin, many won to Sion. By sowing the seed of goodness,
that is, by giving good examples, expressed best by the effectual works of
faith, you shall reap a glorious harvest, Actions of goodness shall live in
you, and cause all good men to love you. Whereas, those are to be esteemed
worst, who not only use things euilly in themselves, but likewise toward
others, For, of so many deaths is every one worthy, as he has left examples
of naughtiness unto posterity. Aug. Med. c. 4. Greg. in (...).
Let virtues then be the stayres to raise you; these will add unto your
honor, seat you above the reach of Censure, and join you indiuidually to your
best Lover.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
Estimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize; how it may be disc^rned to be real;
how superficial; how it may be impregnably preserved; how irreparably lost;
The absolute end, whereto it chiefly aspires, and wherein it cheerfully rests.

ESTIMATION. Estimation.

ESTIMATION is a good opinion drawn from some probable grounds. Estimation, a
Gentlewomans highest prize.
An invaluable gemme, which every wise Merchant, who tenders his honor,
preferres before life. The loss of this makes him an irreparable Bankrupt. All
persons ought to rate it high, because it is the value of themselves, though
none more dearly than those, in whom modesty and a more impressiue fear of
disgrace usually lodge. These, so cautelous are they of suspicion, as they will
not engage their good names to purchase affection. Public resorts, because
they may corrupt, they avoid; Priuacy they consort with, and in it converse
with their own thoughts, whether they have in them ought that may betray them.
They observe what in others deserves approuement, and this they imitate; with
an vncorrupt eye they note others defects, which they make use of as a ^aueat.
Pure is their mold, but far purer the temper of their mind. Fame they hold
the sweetest flower that ever grew near the border of Time. Which, lest either
it should wither for want of moisture, or wanting warmth should lose its
vigor, they bedew it with gracious affects, and renew it with zealous
resolves, Descent, as they draw it from others, so would they improve it in
themselves. Ancient houses, now and then, stand in need of props and pillars;
these would they have supplied with the Cardinal virtues.

These are Emblemes of your selves (Noble Ladies) who so highly tender your
honor, as Estimation on ga^^es you more than what your bloods gave you. It is
a Princely command of your affections, which mounts you to this height of
goodness: distinguishing betwixt ^lind love, and discreet affection. Pleasure
cannot make you so forgetful of your honor, as to deprive you of that in a
moment, which you shall never recover. Virtue has taken that seazure of you,
as no light thought can seize on you, or dispossess her of that claim she
has in you Treach^rous Tarpeia's may be taken with gifts; but your honor is
of too high an estimate to suffer the ^ast blemish for reward. You observe what
staine^ have laid, and do yet lie upon may ancient families by means of
attainders in their Progenitors. Their bloods (say we) were corrupted, whereby
their estates became confiscated, their houses from their lineall successors
estranged, and they to lasting infamy exposed. Certainly, though not in so
high degree (for these were Capital) many famili^s have received deep stains
from light actions, which neither time, though never so aged, could wear out,
nor the living exploits of their noble successors wipe off. Vice has ever
been of a deeper dye than virtue; and the memory of the one commonly suruiues
the fame of the other. Wounds, when they are healed, leave their scarres
behind them: Paths retain their prints. Your memory shall neither receive
life from that noble blood which sprinkles in you, no^ from any monumentall
shrine which may hereafter cover you, but from those precious odours of your
everliving virtues, which shall eternize you. These are of power to make such
as long since dyed, and whose vnequall'd beauty is for many ages since to ashes
turned, retain a flourishing fame in the grateful memory of the living.
Penelope for spending chaste her days,
As worthy as Ulysses was of praise.


A daily siege she suffered, and in her Conquest equal was she to those
victorious Peers of Greece, who made Troy their triumph. Estimation was her
highest prize. Suitors she got, yet amidst these, was not her Ulysses forgot.
Long absence had not estranged her affection; youthful consorts could not move
in her thoughts the least distraction; neither could opportunity induce her to
give way to any light action.

Well might Greece then esteem her Penelope of more lasting fame than any
Pyramid that ever she erected. Her unblemished esteem was of far purer
stuff than any iuory statue that could be reared. Nor was Rome less beholden
to her Lucrece, who set her honor at so high a price, as she held death too
light to redeem such a prize. Though force, frights, foes, and furies gazed
upon her,
These were no wounds but wonders to her honor.


The presence of a Prince no less amorous than victorious, could not win
her; though with him price, prayer, and power did jointly woo her. Well
deserved such two modest Matrons the choice Embraces of two such heroicke
Champions, as might equal their constant Loves with the tender of their dearest
lives. And two our Histories afford, whom succeeding fame has recorded
eminent, because double Conquerours, both of Cities and of themselves: puisant
and continent. This noble testimony we receive of Scipio, that being a young
man of twenty four years of age, in the taking of a City in Spain, he
rep^essed the flaming heat of his youthful desires, when a beautiful maid was
brought him, restoring her to a young man called Allutius, to whom she was
espoused, with a great reward. Right worthy was he to conquer another, who
could with such temper subdue himself: such good success has ever attended
on these Moral virtues, though professed by Pagans. The other Hero was
rightly Cap.
Augustus both in name and nature; and wherefoe're you look, a victorious
CAESAR. Cleopatra kneeled at his feet, Tit. Liu. lib 4. cap. XI.
laid baits for his eyes; but in vain; her beauties were beneath that Princes
chastity.

Absolute Commanders were these Heroicke Princes of their affections, yet a
far more singular argument of his composed disposition, and of Moral, if not
Divine, Mortification, showed that young man SPVTIMIA in Valerius Maximus,
whose beauty did so incomparably become him, as it occasioned many women to
lust after him: which this noble youth no sooner prrceiued, than he purposely
wounded his face, that by the scarre he sustained; his beauty might become more
blemished, and consequently all occasion of lusting after it, clearly removed.

Now (Gentlewomen) if you make Estimation your highest prize; if you prefer
honor before pleasure, or what else is dear or tender; your fame will find
wings to fly with. This will gain you deserving Suitors. Portion may woo a
worldling; Proportion a youthful Wanton; but it is Virtue that winnes the
heart of discretion.

Surely, I have seldom known any make this esteem of honor, and dye a
contemptible beggar. Such as have been prodigal of it, have felt the misery
of it; whereas, a chaste mind has ever had something to succor and support
it. Thus you see what this inward beauty is, which if you enjoy, you sit far
above the reach of Calumny; age cannot taint it, nor youth tempt it. It is the
Estimation within you, that so confines you, as you hate that place which gives
opportunity, that person which makes importunity his agent to lay siege to your
Chastity.

Now we are to descend to the second branch, wherein we are to show you how
this Estimation, which is your highest prize, may be discerned to be real;
which is not gathered by the first appearance, but a serious and constant
trial.

IN Philosophy, a man begins with experience, and then with beleef^ but in
Divinity, we must first begin in faith, and then proceed to knowledge. True
it is, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars become subject to vanity; yet charity
bids me believe, that there are many beauteous and resplendent Stars in this
our Firmament, many fresh fragrant Roses in this our enclosed Garden of Albion,
who have preserved their beauty without touch, their honor without taint.
Where, if vanity did touch them, yet did it not so seize on them, as to
disfigure or transform them. You (noble Gentlewomen) are those Stars, whose
glory can never be eclipsed, so long as your Estimation lives unstained; you
are those fragrant Roses, whose beauty cannot be tainted, so long as your
stalk of honor grows untouched. Now to the end that your luster may not be
like to that of the Glow^rme, nor rotten wood, which is merely imaginary,
compared with that is real; How Estimation may be discerned to be real.
you are not to make fair and glorious pretenses, purposely to gull the world,
and cast a mist before the eyes of bleered judgments. No, you are to be
really, what you appear outwardly. These that walk in the Clouds, though they
deceive others much, yet they deceive themselves most. Observe then this rule
of direction; it will accomplish you more than any outward Ornament that Art
can bestow on you; Be indeed what you desire te be thought. Are you Virgins?
dedicate those inward Temples of yours to chastity; abstain from all corrupt
society; inure your hands to works of piety, your tongues to words of modesty.
Let not a straid look tax you of lightness, nor a desire of gadding impeach
you of wantonness. The way to win an husband is not to woo him, but to be
wooed by him. Let him come to you, not you to him. Profferd ware is not worth
the buying. Your states are too pure, to be set at sale; too happy, to be
weary of them. So long as you live as you are, so your minds be pure, you
cannot possibly be poor. You have that within you, will enrich you, so you
conform your minds to your means. In the discourse of virtues, and true
estimate of them, Salust.
none was ever held more excellent than that which is found in chaste youth.
You are Conquerours in that, wherein the greatest Conquerours have failed. Your
chaste paths are not traced with wandering desires; your private Chambers
arras'd with amorous passions; you spinne not out the tedious night in ah
mee's. Your repast finds no hinderance in digestion; your harmless repose no
louesicke distraction. Others you may command; by none commanded. Others will
vow their service unto you; while you are from all servitude freed. Live then
worthy the freedom of so noble a Condition; for your Virgin state wants
nothing that may enlarge her freedom. Again, are you wives? you have attained
an honorable state; and by it made partakers of that indiuiduate union, where
one soul rules two hearts, and one heart dwells in two bodies. You cannot
suffer in that, wherein you have not one share. Grief by your Consort is
allayed; joy by partaking with him is augmented. You have now taken upon you to
become Secretaries to others as well as your selves; but being one and the same
with your selves, do not betray their trust, to whose trust you have
recommended your selves. Imagine now (to recall to memory an ancient Custom)
that you have broken the axletree of your Coach at your door; you must be no
more straglers. These walking Burses and moveable Exchanges, sort not with the
constancy of your Condition. You must now intend the growth and proficience of
those Olive branches about your table. Like a curious and continuate builder,
you must ever address your selves to one work or other. From their infancy to
their youth, from their youth to their maturer growth For the first, I know
well that di^tich to be most true. A mother to be Nurse, that is great and
fair,
Is now held base: True Mothers they be rare.


But far was it from those ancient heroicke Ladies, to think this to be
either a disgrace to their place, or a blemish to their beauty. Their names are
by aged Annals memorized, and shall by these of ours be revived. Such were
Cornelia, the mother of Gracchu^, and Vetruria of Coriolanu^; who became
examples of goodness and chastity, Educating their children which they had
brought up from their own breasts, with the milk of morality.

The like did Portia the wife of Brutus; Cle^bula the daughter of Cleobulus,
one of the seven Sages of Greece; Sulpitia the wife of Calenus, who not only
instructed her children which she had tenderly nursed, with excellent precepts
while she lived, but left sundry memorable instructions, as Legacies or
Mothers blessings to them, when she dyed. Hortensia, the excellent daughter of
a most eloquent Orator, deserved no less fame, for her motherly care in
nursing and breeding, her ability in copious and serious discoursing, her
gravity in composing and digesting such golden sentences, as she afterward
recommended to the perusal of her suruiuing Children. Ed^sia borne at
Alexandria, far excelled others in profunditie of learning, and piety of
living; she was admired by such as lived in her time: performing the office of
a Nurse in her childrens infancy, of a Guardian in their minority, of a Sage
Counselor in their maturity.

Paulina the wife of Seneca, as she was excellently seasoned with the precepts
of her husband, so she surceas'd not from commending them to the practice of
those children she had by her husband. Whence it was, that Sen^ca bemoaned the
ignorance of his mother, for that she had not so exactly observed the precepts
of his Father. What shall I speak of Thean^, the daughter of Metapontus?
Phemone, who was first that ever composed heroicke verse? Cori^nathia, who
exceeded the Poet Pindarus in her curious and artfull measures; and contending
five several times with him for the Garland? Argenta^ia Polli^, the wife of
Lucan: whom she is reported to have assisted in those his high and heroicke
composures? Zenobia the Queen of Palmira, who learned both the Greek and
Latin tongue, and compiled an excellent History; approving her self no less
a constant wife to her husband, then a nursing Mother to her children?
Theodosia younger daughter of the virtuous and victorious Theodosius; no less
renowned for her learning and other exquisite endowments of mind, than by
being inaugurated with an imperial title, to which she was afterward
advanced. The Centons of Homer she composed, and into one volume reduced, which
to her suruiuing glory were after published. Diodorus Logicus his five
daughters, all which excelled in learning and chastity, and left memorials of
their motherly care to their posterity.

These were tender Nurses, careful Mothers, reverend Matrons. Or to give them
that title which antiquity has bestowed on them; they were in so dark and
cloudy a time, patterns of piety, presidents of purity, champions of chastity,
mirrours of modesty, jewels of integrity. Women (to use Plutarchs words) so
devoted to contemplating, as they conceived no delight in dancing; yet could
not contemplation estrange them from performing such proper offices as did
concern them. They knew what it was to obey; that it was not fit for an
inferior member to command the head, nor for them to soueraignize over their
husbands. What had sometimes been taught them by their Mothers, they now
carefully recommend to the serious reuiew of their Daughters. Wives with
obedience husbands should subdue, Sen. in Octau.

For by this means they will be subdued to you.


Thus learned they the duty of a wife, before they aspired to that title:
conform your selves to their examples: the cloud which kept them from a full
view of their condition, is in respect of you, dispersed; your eyes are
cleared, not with any Pagan error filmed. Be then in this your Christian
conjugal Pilgrimage so conformed, that as with increase of days, so with
appro^ement of deserts you may be firmed.

Again, are you widows? you deserve much ho^^ur, if you be so indeed. This
name both from the Greek and Latin has received one consonant Etimology;
deprived or destitute. Great difference then is there, betwixt those widows
who live alone, and retire themselves from public concourse, and those which
frequent the company of men. For a widow to love society, albeit her intentions
relish nothing but sobriety, gives speedy wings to spreading infamy. Saint
Hierom writing to E^stachia, gives her this counsel; If thou shall find any
question in Scripture, harder then thou can well resolve; demand satisfaction
from such an one, who is of a most approved life, ripe age; that by the
integrity of his person, thou may be secured from the least aspersion: for in
popular concourse and Court-re^orts there is no pace for widows: for in such
meetings she exposes her honor to danger, which above all others she ought
incomparably to tender. Yea, but will you object: admit, our inheritance,
family, fortunes, and all lie a bleeding? may we not make recourse to public
Courts, for redress of our public wrongs? What of all this? Do not complain
that you are desolate or alone, Modesty affects silence and secrecy; a chaste
woman solitariness and priuacy. If you have business with the Judge of any
Court, and you much fear the power of your adversary, employ all your care to
this end, that your faith may be grounded in those promises of Christ: Your
Lord makes intercession for you, rendering right judgment to the Orphane, and
righteousness unto the widow.

This inestimable inheritance of Chastity is incomparably more to be esteemed,
and with greater care preserved by Widows then Wives: albeit, by these neither
to be neglected, but highly valued. Out of that ancient experience which time
has taught them, their own observations informed them, and the reverence of
their condition put upon them; they are to instruct others in the practice of
piety; reclaim others from the paths of folly, and with a virtuous conuoy
guide them to glory. It would less become them to trick and trim themselves
gaudily or gorgeously, then young girls, whose beauty and outward ornament is
the hope and anchor-hold of their preferment: for by these do the husbands
seek, and hope in time to get what they seek. Whereas, it were much more
commendable for widows neither to seek them, nor being offered, to accept
them: le^ enforced by necessity, or won by importunacy, or giving way to
their frailty, they make exchange of their happy estate for a continuate scene
of misery. A widow ought to pray fervently, to exercise works of devotion
frequently, that the benefit of her prayer redound to her effectually and
fruitfully; and not return back from the throne of God drily or emptily. For
I would (according to Menanders opinion) have a widow not only to demean her
self chastely and honestly, but likewise to give examples of her b^amelesse
life to such as hear her instructions attentively. For she ought to be as a
Glass to young Maids, wherein they may discern their crimes.

Now I hold her a chaste Widow, who though she have opportunity to do it, and
be suited by importunity unto it, yet will not suffer her breast to harbor an
unchaste thought, or consent unto it. In that Country where I was borne (says
Lud. Viues) we usually term such widows the greatest associates and
assistants of vices, whose too much delicacy in bringing up their children,
makes them ofttimes-depraued, and to all inordinate liberty addicted.
Wherefore, I approve well of their course, who recommend the care of their
children to some discreet and well-disposed person. For such is the too tender
affection of mothers toward their children, and so much are they blinded with
the love of them, as they think they treat them too roughly, albeit they
embrace them never so tenderly.

Saint Hierome writing unto Saluina, says; The chastity of a woman is frail
and fading* like a flower quickly perishing and vading, with the least gust or
blast of adverse Fortune failing, if not falling: especially, where her age is
apt for vice, and the authority of her husband wants to afford her advice; from
whose assistance, her honor deriues her best succor and supportance. Who, if
she have a great family, many things are required of her, and to be found in
her, to minister supply to the necessity of time, and use of affairs, wherein
she stands interessed. Requisite therefore it were, that she made choice of
some one discreetly ripe both in years and inward gifts, by whose honest
integrity her family might be better managed, with more diligence attended,
and to the woman less occasion of disgrace objected.

For I have known very many women, who albeit they spent their days
continually within their own doors, yet have fallen into reproach either by
some persons observing them, or of their own families disposed by them; for
suffering their servants go abroad to neatly, arguing thereby a neglect of
their family: so as the handmaids pride brought her Mistress into suspicion of
contemning her honor.

Sure it is, that an honest woman, whose fame is her highest prize, requires
nothing else, desires nothing else, than to satisfy her husbands bequest,
though dead: honoring him with a due Commemoration and admiration of his
virtues: for the lives of those that dye, consist in the memory of those that
live. So did Anthonia the daughter of Marc. Authonie, and wife to Drusus:
leading all the remainder of her life with her stepmother, and retaining
always the remembrance of her dead husband. The like did Liuia, who left both
her house and land, that she might dwell under one roof with Noemia: fearing,
perhaps, lest the Maids of her family growing ^oo lasciuiously wanton and
inordinate, might by their lightness prejudice her honor, which she
incomparably valued above any treasure. See you not hereby our discourse (
Gentlewomen) what excellent Lights darted out from those dark times!
Estimation was their best portion; nothing of equal prize unto it virtues were
their choycest Ornaments, which they preserved with such constancy, as fear of
death could not deprive them of them, though after death they had scarce the
least glimpse of immortality.

Thus have we traced over these three Conditions, which we have stored with
precepts, strengthened with examples, sweetened with choycest sentences; that
this real Estimation, whereof we treat, might be discerned; and that
Superficial Esteem, whereon we are now to insist, discovered.

MAny desire to appear most to the eye, How Estimation may be discerned to be
superficial.
what they are least in he^rt. They have learned artfully to gull the world
with apparances; and deceive the time, wherein they are Maskers, with vizards
and semblances. These can enforce a smile, to persuade you of their affability;
counterfeit a blush, to paint out their modesty; walk alone, to expres^e their
love to priuacy; keep their houses, to publish them provident purueyors for
their family; receive strangers, to demonstrate their love to hospitality.
Their speech is minced, their pace measured, their whole posture so cunningly
composed, as one would imagine them terr^striall Saints at least, whereas they
are nothing less than what they most appear. Some you shall observe so
demure, as in their Salutes they forbear to express that freedom of Curtsie,
which civil custom exacts of them. Those true Trojan Dames, to pacify their
incensed husbands, could find a lip to procu^e them love, and supple their
contracted look. Whereas, these ciuilized Dames, either out of a reseruancy of
state, or desire to be observed, scorn to be so familiarly demeaned; as if
they renounced antiquity, and sought by all means, that such Customs as plead
prescription, might be reuersed. Their Lipp^ must be their Cheek; which as it
retaynes a better tincture, so many times a sweeter savor.

At these, the Poet no less pleasingly than deservedly glanced in this Sonnet:
Tell me what is Beauty? Skin;
Pure to the eye, but poor within,
What Is a kiss of that pure fair?
But Loves Lure, or Adons s^aire.
Nectar-balme did Adon sippe
Not from Venus cheek but lip.
Why should then Loves beauty seek,
To change lip unto be cheek?


All which he elegantly clozeth in opposition to himself, with these
continuate Stanza' s: Cheek shall I che^ke, because I may not taste it?
No; Nature rather; who to the eye so placed it,
As none can view it, but he must draw near it;
O make the Chart familiar, or else tear it!


To purchase improuement of esteem by these means, were to swim against the
stream. Discretion cannot approve of that for good, which selfe-opinion or
singularity only makes good. These are but Superficial shows, which procure
more contempt than repute, more derision than ground of esteem. It is not a
civil habit, a demure look, a staid gate that deserves this report, unless
all these be s^conded with a resolved soul, and a religious heart. Those who
dedicate themselves to the ^^ruice of virtue, prefer the pith before the
rind, substance before appearance. What can be safe, will these say with
Lucretius, to any woman, if she prostitute her honor, or make it common? Good
women, as they labor to avoid all occasion of scandal, so much more any act
that may give breath to ^candall. Civil they are in heart and habit; Constant
in the profession of virtue.

For others, they imitate the Whoorish Woman, who wipes her mouth, and says,
Who sees me? So they carry themselves charily, they care not how little
chastely. There is none looks through the Chinke to see them, none in presence
to hear them, freely therefore may they commit, what shall afterward shame
them. Let me then direct my Speech to these whited walls, who make pretenses
their best attendants, immaske their Impudence with the Veil of darkness,

Tell me, ye deluded daughters, is there any darkness so thick and
palpable, that the piercing eye of heaven cannot spy you through it? O, if ye
hope by sinning secretly to sin securely, you shall be forced to say unto
your God, as Ahab said unto ^^ijah: Have thou found me, O mine Enemy? Nay, O
God terrible and dreadful, thou have found me. And then let me ask you in
the same terms that the young Gallant in Eras^us asked his wanton Mistress:
Are you not ashamed to do that in the sight of God and before his holy Angels,
which you are ashamed to do in the sight of men? Sins may be without danger
for a time, but never without fear. Stand then as in the presence of God:
redeem the time you have lost; love that which you have hitherto loathed;
loath that which you have hitherto loved, Know that these Superficial
Complementors, are hypocritical Courtiers; these formal Damazens, professed
Curtezans. You must not hold Religion to be mere Complement. I will not say,
but the bleered eye of humane reason may be taken with these; and conceive
them real, which are only Superficial. But the All-seeing eye cannot be
deceived; he sees not as man sees. Neither distance of place, nor resemblance
of that Object, whereon his eye is fixed, can cause him to mistake.

Would you then be Courtiers graced in the highest Court? Throw away whatsoever
is Superficial; and entertain what will make you Divinely real. It is not
seeming goodness that will bring you to the fountain of all goodness. The
Fig Tree brought forth leaves, yet because it yielded no fruit, it was
cursed. Do ye blossom? So does every Hypocrite. Do ye bring forth fruits?
So does a Christian. What is it to purchase Estimation on earth, and lose it in
heaven? This will sleep in dust, but that never. Your highest task should be
how to promote Gods honor, and to esteem all things else a slavish and
servile labor. Thus by seeming what you are, and really expressing what you
seem, you shall purchase that esteem with God and good men, which is real,
by shunning ostentation, which would set such a vading gloss on all your
actions, as they will seem merely Superficial.

A Discreet Commander will take no less care in manning and mannaging the Fort
he has won, How Estimation may be impregnably p^eserued.
than in winning it. It is a constant maxim; there is no less difficulty in
keeping than getting. Some are more able to get a victory, than skillful to use
it; Others have more art to use it, than courage to atchieue; few or none so
accomplished, as propitiously to win it, and prudently to wear it.

We are now to suppose, that you (virtuous Ladies) to whom we address this
Labor, are victoriously seated in the fort of honor, where beauty cannot be
p^anted, but it must be attempted. But so constantly gracious are your
resolves, that though it be assaulted, it can never be soiled; attempted but
never attainted. This you desire, and to this you hope to aspire. In the Port
or entrance of every Castle, City, or Cittadell, there uses some Percullas to
be in readiness, to frustrate the Enemies assault, and keep him from entry.
The like must you prepare, if you desire to have your honor secured, your
daring enemy repelled, and a glorious conquest purchased. And what must this
Spiritual Engine be, but a religious Constancy, to resist temptation; and all
the better to subdue it, to shun the occasion? I do not admit of any Par^ies
over your walls, they give new breath to the beleaguer, and oftimes makes a prey
of the beleagured. If the assault be hot, devotion best fortifies the hold. One
Christian aspiration breathes comfort to the besiedged, and promises relief
when she is most straightened. Of all arrows these which are darted by the
spirit of zeal, wound the enemy most, and procure the archer best rest. And
that in all assaults whatsoever, plotted or practiced by so malicious a Tempter.

Lactantius shows, Lactant. lib 2 divine. ins^^^. ca. 16.
that in his days, among many other examples of the weakness of Idolatry, in
the presence of Christianity, a silly Seruingman that was a Christian,
following his Master into a certain Temple of Idols; the gods cried out, That
(...) could be well done, as long as that Christian was intresence. (...). l.
5. de praep. Euang.
The like records Eusebius of Di^clesian, the Emperor, who going to Apollo
for an Oracele; received answer; That the just men were the cause that he could
say nothing. Which just men Apollo's Priest interpre^ed to be meant ironically
of Christians: and thereupon Dioclesian began his most cruel and fierce
persecution in Fusebi^^ days. Sozo^^nes also writes, that Julian the Apostata
endeavoring with many sacrifices and coniurations to draw an answer from Apollo
Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daphne, in the Suburbs of Antioch:
understood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of S. Babylas the Martyr, that
lay near to the place, were the impediment why that god could not speak, And
thereupon, Julian presently caused the same body to be removed. And finally,
hereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifices coniurations, and other mysteries
of the Gentiles, there was brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian;
Exeant Christiani; Let Christians depart: Lucian. in Al^x.
for that, while they were present, nothing could be well accomplished.

Hence collect the force of a Christians presence; it extinguisheth the flame
of a Pagan sacrifice. Zealous thoughts, fervent desires, devout affections will
suffer no diabolical assault to surprise you. Christian constancy will so arm
you; pious motions so inflame you; thoughts of heaven so transport you,
contempt of the world so weane you; as no object of delight can draw you from
contemplating him that made you. It will not be amiss, if now and then you
reflect on the constancy and resolution of ancient Heathens, who so highly
prized their honor, as it was their highest scorn to gi^^ way to an injurious
usurper.

Camnia wife to Synattus suruiues to this day, as a Mirror of feminine
constancy; whom one Synoris, a man of greater authority than he, loved; and
making no small means to obtain her love, yet all in vain, he supposed the
readiest way for the effecting his desires, to be the murdering of her
husband: which he performed. This act of horror was no sooner executed, and by
the robe of his authority shrouded, than he renewed his suit, to which she
seemingly assented: but being solemnly come into the Temple of Diana, for
celebrating those Nuptial rites, she had a sweet Potion ready, which she
drank to Synoris: wherewith they were both poisoned, to revenge her husbands
death. Chiomara, wife of Orgiagon, a petty king of that Province, upon
discomfiture of the Gallo-Graecians, being ravished by a Roman Captain, gave a
memorable example of Conjugal virtue; for she cut off the fellows head from
his shoulders, ^^ Flor. lib. 2. cap. 11.
and escaping from her guard, brought it to her Lord and husband. More than
feminine was the resolution of Epicharia, a Libertine of Rome, who made privy
to a conspiracy against Nero, to free her nat^ue mother of such a Monster,
would not disclose the plotters thereof, though tormented with exquisitest
tortures. Near resemblance had Leena's name with her Leonine nature, who being
Conspirator against the Tyrant Hyppea^, and nothing aghast at the death of her
friends* (though torn with extrememe torments) would not reveal her partners,
but bit in sunder her own tongue, and spit it in the Tyrants face. Or to
instance you in subjects less Tragical, but for constancy every way equal.

Armenia, a noble Lady, being bidden to King Cyrus wedding, went thither with
her husband. At night, when they were returned home, her husband asked her, how
she liked the Bridegroom; whether she thought him to be a fair and
beautiful Prince or no? Truth, says she, I know not: for all the while I was
forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but thyselfe. An excellent
Commandresse was this Lady of her affections; and no less imitable was she,
whom we are to instance next; for her modest and bashful covering of her
husbands infirmities. One of Hiero's enemies reproaching him with a stinking
breath; went home and questioned his wife, why she told him not thereof: who
answered, She thought all men had the same savor.

Without question, there is nothing that adds more true glory to a woman, or
better preserues her esteem, than to retain a constancy in the quality or
disposition of her estate. Be she young or old, let her fame live ever fresh;
and like green Baye^, most flourishing, when the winter of ^duersi^y is most
nipping. Virtue cannot exercise her own strength, nor express her own worth
without an Opposite. Spices send forth the sweetest smell, when they are most
bruised; and Palms spread the broadest, when they are soarest pressed.
Resolution without an assailant, would, in time, become effeminate. Yet, I must
tell you, it is dangerous to tempt either youth or age with motives of fancy,
or to give least way to a promising opportunity. You shall find secret
assacinates enough to undermine you, you need little to become your own
betrayers.

I have heard of a noble Lady in my time, whose descent and desert equally
proclaim her worth, so tender of the esteem of her honor, as she held it
scarce safe to receive any Letter from a great Personage, whose reputation was
touched by rumor. This was the way to preserve her honor impregnably, and to
rear it above the reach of Calumny. Neither are you to be cautelous only of
your Estimation in subjects of love and affection; but even in your domesticke
affairs, which trench upon your providence or expense. Your discretions in
these are brought to the Stage. Let not profuseness draw you to spend, where
honest providence bids you ^pare; nor nigg^rdlinesse cause you to spare, where
reputation bids you spend. She deserves not to be gouernesse of an house, who
wants discretion to moderate her expense. Let her reflect upon her progeny,
intend her charge, and provide for her family. A good wife is compared to a
wise Merchant, who brings his traffic from a far. Now, a wise Merchant will
not have his Oar in every man's Boat, but will seriously address his care to
his own. Busy women would make ill S^ayles, and worse housewiues; straglers
will never become good housekeepers.

To cloze this branch: so compose your affections at home and abroad, as
providence may express your care and charge in the one; a grave and reserved
reverence preserve your esteem in the other. As your lives are lives of
direction to your selves, so should they be arguments of instruction unto
others. Be you planted in what state soever, let your good report be your
greatest stake for ever: so may you reap what your virtues have deserved, and
keep your Estimation impregnably preserved.

NOne can preserve what he loves, How Estimation may be irreparably lost.
by mixing it with the society of that he loathes. The Iuye while it winds and
wreathes it self about the Plant, with an envious consumption dec^yes the
sap. If you be companions to Ostridges, you shall savor of the wilderness.
Socrates called Envy an impostume of the soul: so may every corrupt affection
be properly termed. Vices love neighborhood, which like infectious maladies,
do ever most hurt, when they draw nearest the heart.

There is nothing (Gentlewomen) that brings your Honor to a more desperate
hazard, then giving reins to your own desires. These must you subdue to the
sovereignty of reason, if you expect rest in your inward mansion. What better
fruits then ignominy may carnal liberty produce? When you make the Theater
your chiefest place of repose: phantasticke gallants, who never yet conuerst
with virtue, your choicest consorts; delicious viands, servants to your
liquorish appetites; what conclusion may we expect from such dangerous
premises? when modesty puts off her veil, and vanity begins to ruffle it in
sin; when chaste desires are chased out a breath; and lightness pleads
prescription; when vermillion h'as laid so deep a color on an impudent
skin, as it cannot blush with sense of her own shame: when Estimation
becomes a word of Complement, or carelessly worn like some ouer-cast raiment,
valued as painted Pageants do gilded Puppets, only for show. What prodegy
fuller of wonder, then to see a woman thus transformed from nature? Her face is
not her own, note her complexion; her eye is not her own, note her straid
motion; her habit is not her own, eye her strange fashion. Whilst loose
wears imply light works; and thin cobwebbe couers promise free admittance to
all sensual lovers. Yea, which is more, she holds it no shame to glory in
sin, nor to court vice in her own livery; all which she maintains to be
complements of gentility. Thus vice is ever in fashion, and keeps her
gradation till she aspire to the height of her building. She begins with
conceit, seconds it with consent, strengthens it with delight, and incorporates
it with custom.

One of this rank have I oft-times observed tracing the streets of this
flourishing City; who, as one weary of her sex, forbore not to vnwoman her
self, by assuming not only a virile habit, but a virago's heart. Quarrels she
would not stick to bind upon any fresh water Soldier, whose late induction
to the siedge of Gallants, had not sufficiently informed him in that posture.
Nothing desired she more then to ^iue ^^^ronts in public places, which she did
with that contempt, as the disgrace she aspersed on others, was her sole
content. Places of frequent were her Rendeuon; where her imperious tongue run
descant on every subject ministered; her self she usually engaged for a Second,
upon least occasion offered. Now could these courses any way choose but cause
that to be irreparably lost, which by any modest woman should be incomparably
loved? Tell me, were not his spirit armou^ of proof, who durst encounter with
so courageous an Amazon? or enter nuptial lists with such a feminine Myrmidon?
Surely, these, as they labor to purchase them opinion of esteem, by their
unwomanly expressions of valor, so they eclypse their own fame, and by these
irregular affronts, detract high^y from their e^^entialst honor. Such may
gain them obs^ruance, but never esteem.

Take heed then, lest public rumor brand you, Scandal is more apt to
disperse what is ill; then Opinion is to retain what is good. When the world
is once postest of your shame; many deserving actions of piety can hardly wipe
off that stain. Esaus birthright was temporal, yet once lost, many tears
could not regaine it; your souls honor is a birthright spiritual, which
once lost, many tedious taskes shall not redeem it. Let your ^st^mation be by
you so tenderly loved, as you will rather choose to loath life, then
irreparably loose that, which is the sweetest Consort of humane life.

THere is nothing which works not for some and, wherein it may rest and repose.
Long before that glorious Light we now enjoy, The absolute (...) wh^reto
Estimation aspires, and wherein it cheerefu^ly rests.
did the very Heathens, who had no knowledge of a future being, rejoice highly
in the practice of Moral virtues, and performing such commendable offices as
might purchase them deserved honor, living; and eternally memorize them dying.

This might be illustrated by s^uerall instances in Maids, Wives, and Widows.
For the first; those Locrian Virgin, deserve our memory; whose custom it was,
yearly to be sent to Troy: which (...) continued for the space of a thousand
years; yet was it never heard, that any of those Virgins were ever deslowred.
Who can likewise pass over in silence those seven Milesian Virgins; who, at
such time as the Gauls raued and raged every where, subiecting all to fire and
faggot, deprived themselves of life, lest hostile force should deprive them of
their honor? With what praises also may we worthily advance those daughters
of Scedasus of Leuctra, a Town situate in the Region of Boectia; who having in
their fathers absence, hospitably received two young men, by whom, made drunk
with wine, they were that night defloured: conceiving a mutual sorrow for
their lost Virginity, became resolute actors in their own Tragedy. Aristomenes
of Messana; when in those public feasts called Hyacinthia, he had surprised
fifteen Virgins with the soldiers which attempted their dishonor, straightly
commanding them to forbear from using any such violence: whose Command when
they refused to obey, he caused them to be slain: redeeming those Virgins with
^ huge sum of gold. Afterward, these Virgins hearing that this Aristomenes
was accused about the death of one of those men, whom he had commanded to be
slain; they would not return into their own native Country, till such time,
as prostrating themselves before the feet of the Judge, with their prayers and
tears, they had delivered from bonds the defender of their honor.

Yea, An English Amazon.
to draw nearer home, and instance this Maiden-constancy in one of our own; I
have heard of a notable spirited ^irle, within the walls of this City; who,
albeit she frequented places of public Concourse boldly, discoursed freely,
expressed her self in all assayes forwardly; yet so tender was she of
preserving her honor, that being on a time suited by a young Caueliero, who
was so taken with the height of her spirit, wherewith she was endowed, as he
preferred it before the beauty of an amorous face, wherewith she was but
meanly enriched, She presently apprehending the looseness of his desires,
seemingly condescended; so she might be furnished and appointed, and the
business with that secrecy carried, as no occasion of suspicion might be
probably gounded. This answer cheered our young Gallant; winged with hope to
enjoy, what his wild desires did so much affect. A Coach is provided; all
things prepared; the very place appointed where they shall meet, to hasten
their light journey; which, for more priuacy, must be the Country. Time and
place they observed; but before she would mount her Coach, calling him aside,
she tells him, how she had vowed never to consent to any man in that kind,
till she had first tried his metal in the field. Draw he must, or she will
disgrace him; in which combat, instead of a more amorous Conflict, she
disarmed him, and with a kick, wished him ever after to be more wary how he
attempted a Maidens honor.

For the second, excellent was the answer of those Lacedemonian wives; who
being immodestly suited, made this reply: Surely, we should give way to your
request, but this you (...) for is not in our power to gra^^: for when we were
Maids, we were to be disposed of by our parents; and now bring wi^es, by our
husbands. At such time as the Inhabitants of Tire came to Lacede^^^; suspecting
them to be Spies, they threw them into prison; whose wives, having got leave to
visit and comfort them in their captivity, changed garments with them, and
according to their Countries guise, veiled their faces, by which means the men
escaped, Plutarch.
leaving their wives restrained: which deeply perplexed all the Lacedaemonians.
No less conjugal love showed Alcesta to her (...) to her Prot^esilaus;
Pant^ia to her Susi^^; Arte^i^^a to her Mausolus; Zenobia to her Oedenat^^.

These were good wives, which (...) calls the highest grounds of humane
felicity. Nothing being more amiable than an honest woman, says Theog^i^;
nothing conferring more joy to man, says sententious Xistus.

For the third, what singular mirrors of viduall continency, and matron-like
modesty were Cornelia, Vetruria, Liuia, and that most Christian widow Salui^a,
to whom S. Hierom directed many sweet and comfortable Epistles. These you might
have sound attired in grave funeral garments, (as memorials of their deceased
husbands) of modest behavior, reue^end presence, publishing to the world a
contempt of the world, in their outward appearance.

Now, what may you suppose did those Pagan Ladies hold to be the absolute end,
whereto this tender care of their Estimation chiefly aspired, and wherein it
cheerfully rested? It was not riches, nor any such temporal respect: for
these they contemned, so their honor might be preserved. No; there was
implanted in them an innate desire of Moral goodness; mixed with an honest
ambition, so to advance their esteem during life, that they might become
examples unto others of a good Moral life, and perpetuate their memories after
death.

Your ambition (Ladies) must mount higher, because your Conversation is
hea^enlier. It is immortality you aspire to; a lower Orb cannot hold you;
nothing else may confine you. Be it then your highest Estimation to honor him,
who is the b^rne of your salvation. Let not a moment of (...) vanity, deprive
you of the hope of eternity. Your voyage is short; your hazard great. Many
(...) encounter you in the way; address your (...) therefore in the way, to
some good work. Let Patience teach you how to suffer, D^uotion sweeten your
encounter, Estimation crown you with succeeding honor.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
Fancy is to be with Deliberation grounded; with Constancy retained; Wanton
Fancy is a wandering frenzy; How it may be checked, if too wild; How cheered,
if too cool; An attemperament of both.

FANCY. FANCY.

FANCY is an affection privily received in by the eye, Obseruat. 6.
and speedily conveyed to the heart. The Eye is the harbinger, but the heart is
the harbourer. Fancy is to be with deliberation grounded.
Love conceived at first sight, seldom lasts long. Deliberatim must lead it,
or else it is mis-guided. Look before you like, is a good rule; but to like at
first Look makes an house of mis-rule. Is he of hansome personage whom you
love? His proportion is a moving Object to your eye, but his pertion (it may
be) will not agree with your state. Again, admit he have both these;
proportion to purchase your esteem, and portion to maintain your estate: his
breast is not transparent; his disposition may be crookod; and that will cast
down all that was before affected. Them^stocles being demanded by a Nobleman
of Gr^ece, whether he had rather marry his daughter to one rich and evil, or
one poor and good; made this answer: I had rather ^aue a man without money,
than money without a man. Whence it was, that Portia, the younger daughter of
Portius Cato, being asked when she would betake her self to an husband,
replied; When I find one that seeks me, not mine.

Witty was that young Gentlewomans answer to an inconsiderate Suitor: who with
much instancy solicited the father for the affection of his daughter; whereto
having at last consented; and the Covenants of marriage concluded: this
indiscreet wooer vns^asonably imparts his mind to the daughter; who made
strange with it, saying, She never heard of any such matter: Yea but, replied
he, I have made your father h^rewith acquainted, and he has already consented;
and you may marry him too, answered she, for you must hold me excused.

There is no time that exacts more modesty of any woman, than in her time of
suiting; a shamefast red then best commends her, and the mouingst Ora^or that
speaks for her. So as Virgil, the very Prince of our Latin Poets, when he
should bring in King Lati^us privately conferring with his wife Ama^a, and
T^r^us, to whom in nuptial bands he was to espouse his daughter: he brings in
the young maid weeping, blushing, and silent. Whence is employed, that it
becomes not a Maid to speak of marriage in her parents presence, for that were
small argument of modesty or shamefastness. There is a pretty pleasing kind
of wooing drawn from a conceived but concealed Fancy; which, in my opinion,
suits well with these amorous younglins: they could wish with all their hearts
to be ever in the presence of those they love, so they might not be seen by
those they love. Might they choose, they would converse with them freely,
con^ort with them friendly, and impart their truest thoughts fully, yet would
they not have their bashful loves find discovery. They would be seen, yet
seem obscured; love, but not disclose it; see whom they love, but not be
eyed. This the Poet in the person of a Shepherdess neatly displayeth: Phillis
to willowes, like a cunning flyer,
Flye^, yet she fears her Shepherd should not spy her.


Now in this Subject of Fancy, as there is nothing more dangerous than
entertaining it without due and deliberate advice: so there is nothing grows
more generally fatal to the indiscreet Lover, than by grounding affection on
outward respects, without relation to that inward fair, which only makes the
Object of Fancy full of beauty, and presents every day as a Marriage-day to the
party. Neither affluence of estate, potency of friends, nor highness of
descent can attemper the grief of a loathed bed. These may play upon the
Fantasy, but never give satisfaction to the Fancy. Wherefore (Gentlewomen) to
the end you may show your selves discreetest in that, which requires your
discretion most, discuss with your selves the purity of love, the quality of
your lover; ever reflecting on those best deserving endowments of his, which
either make him worthy or vnwo^thy your love. Affection, though it enter in by
the narrow cranny of the Eye, it shoots at the heart; which, unless it be
seasoned by judgment, it can not deserve so fair a title. A discreet eye will
not be taken with a smooth skin; it is not the rind but the mind that is
her Adamant.

Iustin^ a Roman Maid, no less nobly descended, than no^ably accomplished,
being married to one more rich than wise, exclaimed against her fate, that
folly should hale her to so loathed a bed. And good reason had she to repine,
when his groundless iealosie made her a tragic spectacle of misery before her
time. For seeing her white neck, that object begot in him presently an
argument of suspect, which he seconded with revenge, to vent the fury of his
nature, and publish to the world the weakness of his temper. Let deliberation
then be the Scale, wherein you may weigh Love in an equal poize. There be many
high and consequent Circumstances, which a discreet woman will not only
discourse but discuss, before she entertain so mysterious and honorable
estate. Disparity in descent, fortunes, friends, with other like respects, many
times beget distraction of minds. Whence it was, that Pittacus of Muylene,
being entreated by a young man, to afford him his best advice, in the Choice of
two wives tendered him, whether he should marry; the one whereof was equa^l to
himself both in birth and wealth; the other surpassing him in both; Wished him
to go along the streets of the City, where children use to play, and there
observe what they did advise him. Truth is, inequality in these, procures
distaste; but where there is a difference in the seazure or disposure of the
heart, (which should be the firmest and strongest Cement to unite affection)
there arises the greatest hazard. Thence is it, Suspicion works upon ^uery
light and frivolous subject; while the other party hunts after opportunity, to
surfeit on forbidden fruit, and give her suspitio^s Mate just ground of
jealousy. Feed he may his indigested humor in a jealous pasture, and vow
revenge when he shall find an apt subject, mean time he becomes inuisibly
gulled, while he deludes himself with painted shadows, -- No Jealousy can
ever that prevent
Whereas two parties once be full content.


Several, Hieron. cont* Ruffia.
I know, are the effects of love, as are the dispositions of those that love.
Liuia made quick dispatch of her husband, because she loved him too little:
Lucilia of hers, because she loved him too much. Phoedra fancied Theseus less
than she should, but young Hippolytus more than he would* Which effects are
usually produced, when either disparity of years breed dislike; or obscurity
of descent begets contempt; or inequality of fortunes, discontent. Deliberate
then before you marry, and thus expostulate with your selves touching his
Condition, whom you are to marry. Is he young? I will bear with his youth,
till better experience bring him to the knowledge of man. My v^age shall be
more easy, than to weane him from what he affects, by extremity. Youth will
have his swinge; his own discretion will bring him home; at least, time will
reclaim him; he shall not find me put on a clowdy brow, or entertain his
freer course with a scowle. I must conform my self to him, confirm my love
in him, and so demean me toward him, that Conjugal duty mixed with all
affability may win him.

Again, is he old? His age shall beget in me more reverence; his words shall
be as so many aged and time-improued precepts to inform me; his actions as so
many directions to guide me; his rebukes as so many friendly admonitions to
reclaim me; his bed I will honor, no unchaste though^ shall defile it; his
Counsel I will keep, no foreign breast shall partake it. I will be a staff
to him in his age, to support him; an eye to direct him; an hand to help him;
his Substance I will not scatter on a youthful Lover: but serve him still,
whom I have vowed to honor.

Again, is he rich? Much good may it do him; this shall not make me proud; my
desire shall be, he may employ it for his best advantage; I will move him to
communicate unto the needy, that his riches may make him truly happy. It is a
miserable state that starues the owner. I will persuade him to enjoy his own,
and so avoid baseness; to reserve a provident care for his own, and shun
profuseness.

Again, is he poor? His poverty shall make me rich; there is no want, where
there wants no content. This I shall enjoy in him, and with him; which the
world could not afford me, lived I without him. It has been an old Maxim;
that as poverty goes in at one door, love goes out at the other; but this rule
shall never direct my thoughts; should poverty enthrall me, it shall never
appall me; my affection shall counterpoize all affliction: No adversity can
d^uide me from him, to whom my vowed faith has indiuidually ti'd me. In a
word, is he wise? He shall be my Thales. Is he follish? I will by all means
cover his weakness: as I am now made one with him, so will I have mine equal
share in any aspersion that shall be thrown on him.

Thus if you expostulate, your Christian constant resolves shall make you truly
fortunate. Your Fancy is on deliberation grounded; which promises such
success^, as your Marriage-dayes shall never fear the bitter encounter of
untimely repentance, nor the curelesse anguish of an afflicted Conscience.

THe selfsame rule which Augustus was said to observe in his choice and
constant retention of friends, Fancy is to be with constancy retained.
are you, Gentlewomen, to apply to your selves in the choice of your
second-selues. He was slow in entertaining, but most constant in retaining.
Favorites are not to be worn like favors: now in your hat, or about your
wrist, and presently out of request. Which to prevent, entertain none to lodge
near your heart, that may harbor in his breast ought worthy your hate. Those
two Motto's I would have you incessantly to remember; for the useful
application of them may highly conduce to your honor. The one is that of Caia
Tranquilla, which she ever used to her royal Spouse Caius Tarquinius Priscus;
Where th^^ art Caius, I am Caia. The other, that of Ruth unto Naomi; Whither
thou go, I will go; and where thou dwell, I will dwell.

There is no greater argument of lightness, then to affect the acquaintance of
strangers, and to entertain variety of Suitors. These, as they distract the
eye, so they infect the heart. Constant you cannot be where you profess, so
long as you affect change. Vows deliberately advised, and religiously
grounded, are not to be dispensed with. But say, you never vowed: have you made
outward professions of love, and entertained a good opinion of that object in
your heart? Again, are you resolved, that his affection is real toward you?
That his protests, though delivered by his mouth, are engraven in his heart?
Let not so much good love be lost; insult not over him, whom unfeigned affection
has vowed your seruan. Let Wolves and beasts be cruel in their kinds,
But Women meek, and have relenting minds.


It were too much incredulity in you to distrust, where you never found just
cause of distaste, Yea, but you will again object; we are already by your own
Observations sn^ficiently instructed, that Fancy is to be with ^eliberation
grounded, that love lightly laid on, lasts not long. Should we then affect
before we find ground of respect? Should we entertain a Rhetorical Lover,
whose protests are formal Complements, and whose promises are gilded pills,
which cover much bitterness? No, I would not have you so credulous, lest your
Nuptial day become ominous. Make true trial and experiment of his Constancy,
who tenders his service to you. Sift him, if you can find any branne in him.
Task him, before you take him. Yet let these be sweetly tempred with lenity;
Let them not be Taskes of insuperable difficulty. This were to tyrannize, where
you should love. This was Ompha^es fault, to make her faithful servant, a
servile slave. Alas! shall he fare the worse because he loves you? This would
induce others, who take notice of your cruelty, to loath you. And make your
discarded lover, surprised with an amorous distemper, to reply, as Absal^m to
Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? My counsel is, that, as it will
be useful for you to deliberate, before you take so much as the least Notions
of an affectionate Servant; yea, and to second that deliberation with some
probable proof or trial, that he is truly constant: so it will be a
grateful office in you, to retain him in your favor with a gracious respect;
to countenance the improuement of his constancy with a cheerful and amiable
aspect: to banish all clouds of seeming discontent, and to give him some modest
expressions of the increase of your good Conceit toward him. Let this be done,
till Hymen make you indiuidually one. Then, and never till then, may Love enjoy
her full freedom. She stands priuiledg'd by a sacred rite to taste that fruit,
which before was forbidden. Mutual respects, like so many diametrall lines,
pointing all to one Center, are then directed to one exquisite object; the
purity of love; which produces this admirable effect: it makes one soul rule
two hearts, and one heart dwell in two bodies. Now, I would have you, when your
desires are drawn to this period; to become so taken with the love of your
choice, as to interpret whatsoever he shall do, ever to the best sense. It
were little enough that you retained a good opinion of him, who stands in so
many several engagements obliged for you. Should your riot bring him into
debt; his restraint must make you free. D^rance must be his suit, while better
stuff makes you a Coat. Yea, what Conscience is there in it, but he should
receive an affable and amiable respect from you; seeing, if your Consci^nce be
no Conformalist, he must pay for you?

These respects should perpetually tie you, to honor him, who becomes so
legally tied for you. Requite these then with constancy, and retain this
ensuing Example ever in your memory. Theogena, wife to Agathocles, showed
admirable constancy in her husbands greatest misery, showing her self most his
own, when he was relinquisht and forsaken of his own; clozing her resolution
with this noble Conclusion: She had not only betaken her self to be his
Companion in prosperity, but in all fortunes that should befall him.

Conform your selves to this Mirr^r, and it will reform in you many a
dangerous errors. Thus if you live, thus if you love: honor cannot choose but
accompany you living, much comfort attend you loving, and a virtuous memory
embalme you dying.

VVAnton Love seldom or never promises good success; Wanton Fancy is a
wandering frenz^e.
the effect cannot be good, when the object is ^ll. Sense must be the blind
lantern to guide her, while she rambles in the street: for Reason, she
leaves her sleeping with the Constable. What devices she has to purchase her
a moment of penitential pleasure? Her eye looks, and by it the sense of her
mind is auerted; her ear hears, and by it the intention of her heart is
perverted; her smell breathes, and by it her thoughts are hindered; her mouth
speaks, and by it others are deceived; by touch, her heat of desire upon every
small occasion is stirred. Never raged Alcydes on Mount Oeta, nor O^lando for
his Angelica, more than these Vtopian lovers, for their imaginary shadows.
There is a kind of Spider bred in Pul^a, called Tarandula, which being of a
diverse nature, causes diverse effects; some to dance, some to sing, others to
weep, or watch, or sweat. The soueraignest cure it admits of, is Music; while
the Patient by dancing, or some other vehem^nt exercise of that sort, expulseth
the poison, and gives passage to his pores of respiration. Many like Creatur^s
there be of a malignant nature, but none comparable to a distempered Lover.

Now, that we may use the method of Art; to cure the effect, is to take away
the cause: my purpose shall be first to discover those incendiaries or foments
of this inordinate passion, or intoxicating poison; secondly, the effects
arising from them; lastly, the cure or remedy of them.

For the first, we may very properly reduce the prime grounds of this wanton
fancy, or wandering frenzy to a Catalogue included in these two verses: 1Sloth,
2Words, 3Books, 4Eyes, 5Consorts, and 6luscious fare,
The Lures of lust, and sta^nes of honor are,


On every of which particular to insist, would enlarge this branch too much; we
will only point at them and so leave them. For the first, sententious Seneca
says, he had rather endure the utmost of fortunes extremity, than subject
himself to Sloth or Sensuality. For it is this only, which makes of men,
women; of women, beasts; of beasts, monsters. This then is to be shunned, if
the reward of virtue be to be shared. Secondly, Words corrupt the disposition;
they set an edge or gloss on depraved Liberty: making that member offend most,
when it should be employed in profiting most. The tongue is more effectual
than any Letter; let it be then so ^mployed, as it may improve the hearer.
Thirdly, Books treating of light subjects, are Nurseries of wantonness: they
instruct the loose Reader to become naught, whereas before, touching
naughtines^e he knew naught. A story of the rape of Ganimedes, or of light Lais
in Eurypedes, are their daily L^ctures. Plato's Divine Philosophy, or (...)
pious Precepts Morality, must va^le to Alcaeus, or Anacreons wanton Poesy.
Venus and Adon^s are unfitting Consorts for a Ladies bosom. Remove them timely
from you, if they ever had entertainment by you left, like the Snake in the
fable, they annoy you. Fourthly, Eyes are those Windows by which (...) enters;
your inward house cannot shine, (...) these be shut; Objects they have of more
beauty to take them, than these sights of vanity, which miserably tain^ them.
Eve looked on the fruit before she co^^ted, coveting she tasted, tasting she
perished. Thus aspiring to the knowledge of good and evil, became to her and
her posterity evil. The Eye is a Living glass, but if we make it a false
glass, it will neither represent us truly, nor discover our blemishes freely;
but make that seem fair which is odious and ugly. By this means, many good
objects become Eye-soares unto us, which, if clearly viewed, would like a
sovereign Eyebright, restore sight unto us. Fifthly, Consorts are thieves of
time, they will rob you of opportunity, the best treasure time can afford you,
if you suffer them to incroach on you and abuse you. Choose such then for your
Consorts, of whom you may have assured hope, that they will either better you,
or be bettered by you. Choose such, whom you may admire both when you see them
and hear them: when you see their living Doctrine, and hear their wholesome
instruction. Lastly, Luscious fare is the fuel of every inordinate
concupiscence. Nothing so much feeds it, nor insensates the understanding by
delighting in it. By restraint of this, you shall learn to moderate your
desires. Whence you may rejoice, yet in him, who is your joy, if you can live
sparingly, and embrace the means that may chastise in you all sensuality: for
by your spare life is lust extinguished, virtue nourished, the mind
strengthened, the understanding to heavenly things raised. Yea, abstinence
avails much for preserving health of body and length of life. Whence it is
said: He that di^teth himself, prolongeth life. Eccles. 37. 30.
Which the profound Stagirian confirms in these words: To abstain from riot
and superfluity, is the soueraign'st prescription or physic for the body.
Arist dereg. Princ.


Now to descend to the second branch of our division in this Observation; we
might here enumerate those many odious and inhumane effects, which have and do
daily arise from the violence of this Wanton fancy or Wandering frenzy; and what
tragic events it has in all times produced: but they would seem relations
too full of horror to your modest and timorous Natures. Only let me tell you,
if you desire to be satisfied in subjects of that kind, our Italian Stories
will afford you variety: Where indiscreet Love clozeth her doleful Scene with
so miserable an Exit, as no Pencill can express any picture to more life, than
an historical line has drawn out the web of their miseries. So as, that
ancient Adage might seem verified: That from slaves and miserable people God
has taken away the one half of their understanding.

Now to cure this desperate malady (though to you the cure, I hope, be
needless, being free from all such violent distempers;) the best and
soueraignst receipt is to fortify the weakness of your sex with strength of
resolution; that, with incessant devotion. Be not too liberal in the bestowing
of your favors; nor too familiar in public converse. Presume not too much on
the strength of a weak Fort. Make a Contract with your eyes not to wander
abroad, lest they be caught in coming home. Treat not of love too freely;
play not wagges with the blind boy; he has a dangerous aim, though he has
no eyes. Sport not with him, that may hurt you; play not with him, that would
play on you. Your Sports will turn to an ill jest, when you are wounded in
earnest: the Fly may be then your Emblem: So long the foolish Fly plays with
the flame,
Till her light wings are cinged in the same.


Fly to an higher Sphere: you are yet untouched; this wandering frenzy has
never yet surpised you; prevent the means, and it shall never invade you. Be
not such foes to your selves, as to purchase your own disquiet. Examples you
have of all sorts, both to allure and deter you. Pure love admits no stain.
Such a fancy is never (...) to a f^e^zy. If ever then you entertain any ^oue,
let it (...) it a virtuous solace; for all others, howsoever they may seen to
premise some perf^^ctory delight, they ever cast up their last account with
repentance.

WHen a man bleeds at the nose, and thro^g^ aburdance of blood is bro^ght
danger of his life, How Fancy may be checked, if too w^^de.
the (...) the course of the b^ood a^ other way. If (...) in too vio^ent a
(...), it is to be ^ooled by a t^mperate expostula^^o^ with Fancy: or e^se by
fixing (...) upon some more attracti^e object, divert the course of that (...)
passion. Expostulate with Fancy, thus you may, safely and freely How is it with
me? Me thinks, it fares otherwise than it has done formerly. A strange
distemper I find in my mind; and it might seem to resemble ^oue, if I knew the
nature of it. Love! Can virgin-modesty return that accent, and not bl^sh? Yes;
why not? If the Object I affect be worthy loving. And if not, what then? Is not
the l^uer ever blind^^ with a^^fection toward his beloved? He, who may seem a
(...) to another, may be a Par^s in (...) Were he poor as (...), Fancy makes
(...), dearer to me, than the wea^^ of Cr^^u^. Yea, but a little advice would
do well. Art thou perseaded that this Non-pa^a^e^, thou thus affectest, has
dedicated his service only to thee? Yes; his protests have confirmed him mine.
Besides, his continua^l presence seconds what he protests: That hour is
tedious, wherein he sees me not; those pleasures odious, which my presence
accompanies not. His eye is ever fixed on me; his sole discourse is to me. What
I affect he embraces with delight; what I dis-rellish, he entertaines with
distaste.

These, I must confess, ( Gentlewoman) are promising arguments of unfeigned
love: yet may all these ^rre, and consequently leave you in a miserable Error.
Your True-loue may prove a Jason or a Theseus, and leave you in the briars for
all your confidence. You say, his Protests have confirmed him yours; he has
attested heaven to bear record of his love. Alas of Credulity! Take heed he
play not the part of that ridiculous Actor in Smyr^a, who pronouncing, O
heaven! pointed with his finger to the ground. Or like that namelesse Lover,
who soliciting a Gentlewomans affection with abundance of amorous Rhetoric,
concluded with this Emphaticall protest; that she was the only Mistress of
his thoughts: which conclusion being ouerheard by one to whom not long before
upon like protests he had engaged his faith; she replied, Do not believe him,
Gentlewoman; the selfsame Arbor where you now are, might witness that he
has made the very like protests unto me, many times before.

Trialls in affairs of this nature have ever a truer touch than protests. It
is easy for beauty to extort a vow, or a temporary protest; which many times
is as soon forgot as made. Let not these then work on your Credulity.

There be, I know (and so all be that are truly generous) who, rather than they
would infringe their ^aith, would engage their life. But all are not of that
noble temper. Others there be, who can tip their glozing tongues with
Rhetorical protests, purposely to gull a credulous Creature, for the purc^ase
of an unlawful pleasure; which obtained, they leave them to bemoane their lost
honor. With more safety therefore may you suspect, than too rashly affect. It
will not be amiss for you to read him, before you choose him. As thus; Has
his fair carriage got him estimation where he lives? Has he never inured his
tongue to play Hypocrite with his heart; nor made Ceremonial protests to
purchase a light Mistress? Has he kept a fair quarter, and been ever tender
of his untainted honor? Has he never boasted of young Gentlewomans favors,
nor run descant on their kindness? Has he kept himself on even board with
all the world, and preserved his patrimony from engagement? Has he ever since
he vowed himself your servant, solely devoted himself yours, and not immix'd
his affection with foreign beauties? Choose him, he well deserves your choice;
in which choice, let this be your impreze; My choice admits no change.

To be short; the blessing which Boaz pronounced upon Ruth, shall like a
honey-dew destill daily from the lips of your husband. Blessed be thou of the
Lord, my Spouse; thou have showed more goodness in the latter end, than at thy
beginning, in as much as thou followest not young men, were they poor or rich.
Contrariwise, where you find no such demeriting respects in him, who makes love
unto you; Check your wild Fancy by time, lest a remediless Check attend
your Choice.

Covertly knew that unfortunate Lady how to paint out her grief, the extent
whereof her tongue-tide passion could not relate; When like a fruitful vine,
she had brought forth many fair and promising branches to a debaucht husband,
by whose profuser course, her hopes which she had stored in her numerous
progeny, perished, and her self through grief irrecouerably wasted; she
wrote these pensive lines with a Diamond in her Chamber Window, to give a
living shadow to her lasting sorrow. Up to the Window sprung the spreading Vine,
The dangling Apricocke, and Eglantine;
Since when, that vine and branches too were found
Shred from their root, laid sprawling on the ground.


It is not so hard to give comfortable counsel to the sorrowful, as to find a
fit season when to give it. I would have you, whose more noble parts promise
much comfort to your families, give such attention to seasonable counsel, as
you may prevent all ensuing occasions of sorrow. It is the condition of an
inconsiderate person, who never foresees his fall, to cloze the issue of his
misfortunes with this improuident conclusion; Sen. de Tranq. an.
I would never have thought that this should have thus come to pass; I never
dreamed of this Event. It will be more useful and beneficial to you, to
check your wild Fancy, if any such seize upon you, than to give way unto it,
and consequently undo you. Repentance comes too late at Marriage-night.
Affairs of such weight and consequence are not to be entertained without due
advice, nor seconded with rashness. In one word; have you played a little too
long with the flame? Have you given too free access to your desertlesse lover?
Have you suffered your heart not only to think of him, but with more intimate
respect to harbor him? Lodge him no longer in that room; it deserves a far
better guest. I will not hear you, if you reply, and say; This is a Task of
impossibility. Continuance of time, with discontinuance of his presence, will
easily effect it. Mean time, fix your eye upon some more deserving object.
Revenge your self of that Conceit, that shall affresh present him to you. So
shall the wildness of your Fancy be checked; your halfe-lost liberty regained;
and your affection afterward planted, where it may be better acquitted; there
seated, where it may be more sweetly seasoned.

THere be Haggards of that wild Nature, How Fancy may be che^red if too cold.
as they will by no means be reclaimed; Neither Love nor fear will cause them
stoop to any Lure. Emblemes these are to such wayward Girls, whose inflexible
natures will neither be wooed nor won at any rate. These had rather dye for
love, than be deemed to love. Their hearts are smeer'd over with Salamanders
oil, and will admit no heat. They may entertain Suitors, but it is with that
coldness of affection, as the longer they resort, the lesser is their hope.
They may boast more of the multiplicity of their Suitors, than their Suitors
can of any probability to be speeders. As it chanced sometime in a Contest
betwixt two Maids, who comparing one with the other their descents, friends,
and Suitors: Make no comparison with me, replied the one to the other, for I
must tell thee, I have more Suitors than thou have friends, More shameless you
(answered the other) unless you mean to set up an house of good fellowship.
These unsociable Natures, who many times defer making their choice, till age
bring them to contempt, and excludes them from all choice, Or Danae-like, live
immured in their Chamber, til their Fort be undermined by some golden Pioner;
detract much from the relenting disposition of their Sex. It is their honor to
be wooed and won. To be discreet in their choice, and to entertain their
choice without Change. Of such I speak, who have not dedicated their days to
Virginity; which is such a Condition, as it aspires to an Angelical
perfection. Good, (says venerable Bede) is conjugal chastity, better is
viduall continency, but best is the perfection of Virginity. Yea, Virginity
exceeds the condition of humane nature, being that, by which man resembles an
Angelical Creature. We read likewise, that the Unicorn, when he can be
taken by no force nor subtle Engine, will rest and repose in the Lap of a
Virgin.

To those only I direct my discourse, who have a mind to take themselves unto
the world, and to entertain their Lover: but it is with such coolness, as it
drives their dispassionate Sweet-hart into strange extremes. And this proceeds
commonly from an ouer-weening Conceit, which these dainty Damsels have of their
own worth: with the apprehension whereof they become so infinitely taken, as
they can find none worthy their choice. Of this disdainefull opinion was that
unhappy Gentlewoman, who after many fair fortunes tendered, Suitors of
deserving quality rejected, made her incestuous brother her licentious lover.

A crime detestable even to Barbarians and bruit beasts. Insomuch as, it is
reported of the Camel, that they usually hood-winke him, when at any time they
bring his mother unto him; which act he no sooner knows, than he tramples her
under his feet, and kickes her to death with his heels; so hateful is Incest
even to bruit beasts, whose native instinct abhorres such obscene commi^tures.
You, whose discreet affections have cast anchor, by making choice of some
deserving Lover; afflict him not with needless delays; if he merit your
choice, one day is too long to defer him; if undeserving, tax your own
indiscretion to rashly to entertain him.

Is it bashful modesty that withholds you? I commend it; it well becomes you.
Chastity cannot express it self in a fairer Character, than in blushing lines
of loving shame fastness. Is it consent of friends that detaines you? I
approve that too; These rites are best accomplished, when they are with consent
and consort of friends solemnized. But if the ground of your delay trench
either upon some future expectance of better fortunes; or indifferency of
affection in respect of your Choice: the issue cannot possibly prove well,
being built upon such weak grounds. For, to insist cursorily upon either of
these two; Shall a deceiving hope of preferrement dispossess him of your
heart, whom personal deserts make worthy of your love? Look to it; Such
fortunes cannot purchase you content, which are got with an aged husbands
contempt. It shows a servile nature, to cashiere a faithful Lover, because he
is poorer; and to prefer another less desertfull, because he is richer.
This inconstancy cannot succeed well, because the foundation is grounded ill.

Again, are you indiff^rent or Lukewarm in affection; in respect of your
choice? for shames sake, what do you make of love? Do you use it like a toy
or tire to put off or on as you like? Must it resemble the fashion? This day in
request, and next day out of date? This, indeed, is such a cool and
easie-tempered Love, as it will never mad you; yet, trust me, it may well
delude you. Fancy will not so be played with. You will object, I imagine, your
stomachs are too queasie to digest Love. Why then did you ever seem so
greedily to feed on that, which your stomachs now cannot well digest? Have you
surfetted on the substance? Lay that aside for a while, and bestow your eye on
the Picture. Such impressions have sharpened the dull affections of many Lovers.

Alexander being much in love with Apelles, as one highly rapt with the
exquisiteness of his art, proposed him that Model for a task, which he of
all others, affected most; commanding him on a time to paint Campaspe, a
beautiful woman, naked; which Apelles having done, such impression wrought the
Picture in his affection, as Apelles fell in love with her, which Alexander
perceiving, gave him her. It is incredible, what rare effects were sometimes
drawn from a Morian-Picture, being only hung up in a Ladies Chamber. If such
impressiue motives of affection draw life from a Picture, what may be
conceived by the Substance? Oris Apollo writes, that the Egyptians, when they
would describe the heart, and fit her with a proper Emblem, paint the bird
Ibis: because they think that no Creature, for proportion of the body, has so
great an heart as the Ibis has.

It is the Bird of love must be the Emblem of your heart. It is neither
picture nor posture can content her. Much less these inferior pictures, which
we call m^neyes: which are so far from satisfying the affection, as they are
only for the Mold or Worldling: whose grosser thoughts never yet aspired to
the knowledge of loves definition. As then, the precious stone Diacletes,
though it have many rare and excellent soueraignties in it, yet it loses them
all, if it be put in a dead man's mouth: so Love, though it be a subject so
pure, as none of a more refined nature; so firm^, as none of a more holding
temper; so hot, as none of a more lasting fervor: yet becomes her splendor
darkened, her vigor weakened, her feruor cooled, when she is in a cold breast
entertained. Resemble, rather, the Iuniper-tree, whose coal is the hottest,
and whose shadow is the coolest: be hot in your affection, but cool in your
passion. If you find any thing which cools love in you, remove it; if any
thing which urges passion, quench it: contrariwise, feed in you loves heat;
but repress in you all passionate hate. Take into your more serious thoghts, a
view of his deserts whom you affect: increase the conceit of them by supposing
more than he expresses. The imagination of Love is strong, and works
admirable effects in a willing subject. Yet in all this, let not one straid
thought wrong your Mayden-modesty so much, as to suggest to you a strain of
lightness: Other Closet-treaties you may entertain safely and freely, without
touch of modesty. As to think of the honor of that State, to which you are
approaching; the mutual Comfort from that mysterious union arising; how
griefs will be attempered by one another suffering; how joys will be
augmented by one another sharing. These thoughts cannot but well become you;
nor otherwise choose than with a pure affection inflame you; nor receive less
than free acceptance from you.

Thus may that Love, which seemed before to have been as chilled, by these
modest motives be cheered. That day no black Cloud should by right sit on
your fair brow; no cold dampe seize on your heart. You have got one whom a
sacred gage has made yours; with a cheerful requital render your self his.
This cannot choose but highly please the pure eye of heaven, to see that
Mystery so sweetly solemnized, which was honored by Christ, with his first
Miracle on Earth.

IN this last branch of our Observation, An attemperament of both.
we are to propose an attemperament of both those indisposed Fancies before
mentioned, and deservedly taxed. First, the wildenesse of the one; secondly,
the coolness of the other: by seasoning them both with an indifferent temper*

In a Vine, wild and luxurious branches are to be pruned, that such as are
free and kindly may be better cherished. In the spiritual field of your
heart, is never to be expected any fruitful increase of virtues, till there be
weeded out of it all the thorns of vices. The difference betwixt a Wise and
wild Love, is this: the one ever deliberates before it love; the other loves
before it deliberate. The first question that she asks, who wisely loves: Is
he, who is here recommended to my choice, of good repute? Is he rich in the
endowments of his mind? Next question she asks, are of a lower siege: May
his personage give content? Are his fortunes such, as may not beget in love a
contempt? Thus begins she that loves wisely, with goods inward, and ends
with outward; whereas, she that loves wildly, begins with outward, and ends,
or else never remembers the inward: Is he, you tender to me, of promising
personage? Is he neat in his clothes? Complete in his dress? Can he Court
me in good words? and perfume them with sweet protests? Can he usher me
gracefully in the street? and in his very pace express a reserved state? Next
question she asks, must be near the same verge: Is he rich in Manors? Has
not fortune made him a younger brother? Can he, to buy himself honor, pawn
the Long-acre? May his swelling means furnish me of Coach, Caroach, and daily
fit me for some Exchange trifles? I have a months mind to see the man! He
cannot but deserve my love. Wherein she says well, for in very deed he could
deserve little else. Now as the former, seldom bestows her self, but where
she finds content; so the latter, seldom or never, but either she with her
Choice, or her Choice with her falls into contempt. The reason is, this wild
Girl never cares for more than to be married. If she may but see that day, it
accomplisheth her content: though she have but one Comicall day all her life.
Yea, it is as well as can be expected from her hands, if she attain that style
without some apparent soil. Such as these I could wish, to pre^ent the worst,
they were married betime, lest they mar themselves before time. Albeit,
moderate restraint, seasonable advice (presupposing some seeds of grace to
work on) have wrought singular effects in many of these wilde-ones, who
afterward became grave and modest Matrons.

To you then, kind-hearts, am I to recommend some necessary cautions, which
carefully observed, may make you wiser than you thought of; and cause you have
a tender care of that, which before you had never mind of. Your breasts are
vnlock'd, your tongues vnty'd; you cannot love, but you must show it; nor
conceive a kind thought, but you must tell it. The Index of your hearts you
carry both in your tongues and eyes; for shame, learn silence in the one, and
secrecy in the other. Will you give power to an insulting Lover, to triumph
over your weakness; or which is worse, to work on the opportunity of your
Lightness? Do not; rather ram up those portells which betray you to your
enemy, and prevent his entry by your vigilance. Keep home and stray not, lest
by gadding abroad, you incur Dinahs fate. You have Consorts of your own sex
to pass time withal; their society will teach you to forget, what is better
forgot than kept. Let not a straid thought betray your innocence. Check your
madding Fancy, and if it use resistance, curb it with restraint. It will do
excellently well, if you forbear to resort to places of public meeting; till
you have drawn up and sealed a Co^enant with your eyes, to see naught that
they may not lawfully covet. These, when they wander, they breed in the heart,
a dangerous distemper. Lastly, address your employment ever to something that
is good; so shall your fantacy find naught to work upon that is ill. This
shall afford you more liberty, than the whole worlds freedom can afford you.

Now to you, Coy ones, whom either coldness of nature has benumbed, or
coyness has made subtle to dissemble it. You can look and like, and turn
another, way, where you like most. No object of love can take you, till it
overtake you. Be not wise too much. True affection cannot endure such
dissimulation. Divide not him, whom you love, into such extremes: you may be
modest, and spare a great deal of this Coyness; It is the rule of Charity to
do as you would be done to. Now, would it content you to be entertained with
disdain, where your deserts merit acceptance? Rectify this then on your
selves, which you would not have done by another to your selves. It is an ill
requital, to recompense fancy with contempt, or constant love with disdain.
This were to incur ingratitude, a vice so odious, as no age could find ever
ought more uncivilly impious. I do not move you to be too open-hearted, or if
so, not too liberally to express it; this were no discovery of fancy, but
folly. So conceal your love, as your lover may not despair of all hope to
obtain your love. Indifferent Curtsies you may show without lightness, and
receive them too in lieu of thankfulness. I leave it to your discretion to
distinguish times and places; for these may either improve or impair the
opportunity of such like Curtsies.

Do not immure your beauties, as if a jealousy of your own weakness had
necessitated this restraint. There can be no Conquest, where there is no
Contest, Converse with love; conceit with your selves whom you could like. This
your cooler temper may admit, and st^^l retain that liberty which is fit.

^alconers use many means to make their Hawks sharp; they begin with short
flights, till weathring bring them to endure longer. Pigmalions image received
no^ life in all parts at once; first, it took warmth, after that, vital
motion. Is love cool in you? let a kindly warmth heat that coldness. Is Love
dull in you? let a lively agility quicken that dullness. Is love coy in you?
Let a lovely affability supple that coyness: So, in short time, you may have a
full relish of loves sweetness.

Now we come to the attemperament of these; wherein we are to extract out of
grosser metals some pure Oar, which we must refine, before it can give any
true beauty to this specious palace of love. Draw near then, and attend to
what of necessity you must observe; if ever you mean to deserve HER love, whom
you are in Ciuility bound to serve.

In Sicilia there is a fountain called Fons Solis, Po^p. Mela.
out of which at Midday, when the Sun is nearest, flows cold water; at
Midnight, when the Sun is farthest off, sloweth hot water. This should be the
lively Emblem of your state ( Gentlewomen:) who, now after those cooler
vapors of your frozen affection dispersed, those lumpish and indisposed humors
dispelled, and those queasie risings of your seeming coyness, dispossessed;
have felt that chaste amorous fire burn in you, which will make you of
shamefaste Maids, modest Matrons. When the heat of passion is at Midday, I
mean his full height, with those, to whom faith has engaged you, and love,
before the hostage of that faith, confirmed you; then are you to resemble the
quality of that fountain, by flowing with col^ water of discretion and sweet
temper, An Explanation of the Emblem.
to allay that heat; lest it weaken those you love, by giving way to passion,
which patience cannot choose but loath. Again, when heat is farthest off, and
providence begins to labor of a lethargy; when servants remit their care,
neglect their charge, and the whole family grow out of order, through the
coldness of a remiss Master; resemble then that fountain, by flowing with
hot water; win and weane these whom love and loyalty have made yours, with
warm conjugal tears, to compassionate their neglected estate, and by timely
prevention to auert the fate of improuident husbands.

Or thus, Another proper application of this Emblem.
if you please, may you make your selves gracious Emblemes of that fountain:
Does the Sun shine at Midday, and in his fullest height on you? Do the beams
of prosperity reflect brightly on you? Flow with cold water; allay this your
heat and height of prosperity, with some cooling thoughts of adversity, lest
prosperity make you forget both the Author of it, and in the end how to bestow
it. Again, does the Sun shine farthest off you? Does not one small beameling
of prosperous success cheer you? Flow with hot water; vanquish adversity with
resolution of temper. Desist not from labor, because fortune seconds not your
endeavor. To conclude, as your wild fancy (if you were ever surpised of any)
is now rectified; your coolness heatned; your coyness banished; so conform
your selves to them, whom one heart has made one with you, as no Clowd of
adversity may look so black, no beam of prosperity shine so clear, wherein
you may not with an equal embrace of both estates, bear your share.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
Gentility is derived from our Ancestors to us, but soon blanched, if not
revived by v^; Virtue the best Coat; A shamefaste^ed, the best color to
deblazon that Coat; Gentility is not known by what we wear, but what we are;
There are native seeds of goodness sown in generous bloods by lineall
succession; How these may be ripened by instruction.

GENTILITY. Gentility.

GENTILITY consists not so much in a lineall deblazon of Arms, Obseruat. 7.
as personal expression of virtues. Gentility is d^riued from our Ancestors to
us, but soon blanched, if not revived by us.
Yea, there is no Ornament-like virtue, to give true beauty to descent. What is
it to be descended great? to retain the privilege of our blood? to be ranked
highest in an Heralds book? when our lives cannot add one line to the
memorable records of our Ancestors? There should be no day without a line, if
we desire to preserve in us the honor of our Line. Those Odours then deserve
highest honors, that beautify us living, and preserve our memory dying.
Should we call to mind all those our Ancestors, who for so many preceding ages
have gone before us; and whose memory now sleeps in the dust; we should,
perchance, find in every one of them some eminent quality or other, if a true
survey of their deserving actions could be made known unto us: yea, we should
understand, that many of them held it their highest grace, to imitate their
Predecessors in some excellent virtue; the practice whereof they esteemed more
prayseworthy, than the bare title of Gentility. Now, what just reproof might
we deserve, if neither those patterns, which our Ancestors had, nor the
virtuous examples of our Ancestors themselves, can persuade us to be their
followers? Their blood streams through our veins; why should not their
virtues shine in our lives? Their mortality we carry about with us; but that
which made them immortally happy, we retain not in us. Their Gentility we
claim; the privileges they had by it, we retain. Mean time, where is that in
us, that may truly Gentilize us, and design us theirs? What a poor thing is
it to boast of, that our blood is nobler, our descent higher? Tell me, can any
one prescribe before Adam? And what shall he find in that first Ancestor of
his, but red clay? The matter whereof he was made, it was no better; nor can we
suppose our mortar to be purer. He most emphatically described our Genealogy,
who cried, Earth, Earth, Earth* Earth by Creation, Condition, Dissolution. No
less fully understood he the quality of his Composition, with the root from
whence he took his beginning, who called Earth his Mother; Worms his Brethren
and Sisters. His Kinsfolks he could not much boast of, they were such
inferior Creatures; no strutters in the street, but despicable Creepers.

Let me now reflect upon you, Gentlewomen, whose generous birth should be
adorned with v^rtuous worth, and so make you moving Objects of imitation, both
in life and death.

Are you nobly descended? Ennoble that descent with true desert. Do not think
that the privilege of greatness, can be any subterfuge to guiltiness. Your
more ascending honor requires more than a Common luster. In places of public
resort you challenge precedence, and it is granted you. Shall the highest place
have the least inward grace? No; let not a word fall from you, that may
vnbeseeme you. Others are silent when you discourse; let it be worth their
attention; lest a presumption of your own worth draw you into some frivolous
excursion. There is not an accent which you utter, a sentence you deliver, any
motion in your carriage or gesture, which others eye not, and eying assume not.
Your Retinue is great; your family gracious; your actions should be the life of
the one, and line of direction to the other. To see a light Lady descending
from a noble Family, is a Spectacle of more spreading infamy, than any subject
of inferior quality. I cannot approve of this Apish kind of formality, which
many of our better sort use; it detracts from their descent, to make
affectation their Tutresse. They were freeborn; nothing then that is servile
can become them. It is nothing to retain the favor or feature of your
Ancestors, and to estrange you from that which truly dignified your Ancestors.

Virtues have more living Colors, and are seconded with more lasting honors
than any outward beauties. You deceive your selves, if you think that honor
received her first life from descent; no, It was demerit that made descent
capable of honor. A Pedigree argues your Gentility: but had not some deserving
action been, you had never attained to any noble Pedigree. For Gentility is
not to be measured by antiquity of time, but precedence in worth. If brackish
or troubled water seldom come from a pure Spring; wild and unsavory fruit from
a good tree; whence is it, that noble Predecessors, whose pure blood was never
corrupted with any odious stain, should bring forth such degenerating scienes?
Surely, this generally proceeds from the too much liberty that is granted to
our youth; whose inclinations, though otherwise good and equally disposed, are
usually by Custom, which becomes a Second nature, miserably depraved. Society
they affect, and this infects them; repair to public places they admit, and
this corrupts them. Those eminent examples which their Noble Progenitors left
them, become buried with them. They comply with the time; Virtue (they say) can
hardly subsist, where Vice is in highest request. What though Plato advise them
to make choice of the best way of living, which may be easily effected by
assiduate use and daily custom: they have learned to inuert his rule, by
affecting that custom most, which tends to the practice of virtue least.
Besides, there is another reason which may be probably alleged, why generous
descents become so much corrupted; and virtuous Parents by vicious Children so
frequently seconded. Our Nobler women, though in other respects truly imitable,
and for their virtuous Conversation admirable; come short in one peculiar duty,
which even Nature exacts of them, and which being duly performed, would,
doubtlesly, no less enable and ennoble them who are descended from them, than
any particular, were it never so powerful, that could inform them. These
which are mothers by generation, are seldom their Nurcing-mothers by
education. No marvel then, if they degenerate, when they partake of the
natures of other women. Though their own mothers blood stream through their
veins, a strangers milk must feed them, which makes them participate of their
nature, as they are fed with their substance. Wheresoever the Nurses milk is
received, the Nurses manners are likewise retained. Whence it was, that
Chrysippus expressly commanded that the very best and wisest Nurses should be
made choice of; that what good blood had infused, might not by ill milk be
infected. It was the joint advice both of Plutarch and Pha^orine, that a mother
should be her childrens Nurse: because, commonly, with the milk of the Nurse,
they suck the quality or condition of her life. Yea, according to ancient
Decree, women were bound to nurse their own children, and not to have any
other women (unless necessity enforced them) to nurse them.

Let this then be rectified; ye, whose Noble descents have made you eminent
in the eye of the world; and whom Gods blessing has made fruitful Mothers, to
bring forth a fair and hopeful increase unto the world: nurse them with your
own milk; this will express in you a motherly care^ to them; and beget in
them a greater measure of child-like love to you. Your care, the more it is
parentall, will exact of them a love more faithful and filial. Nurse them, I
say, with the milk of your own breasts to feed them; with the milk of your
own lives to inform them. So shall their actions prove them to be your
Successors; when they shall not only derive their blood from you, but on this
Theater of humane frailty, shall publish themselves to be true representers of
you. For in vain is your blood to them derived, if your memory by their
virtues be not revived. Give them then that which may make them yours.
Goodness may be blamed, but her succeeding memory can never be blanch^d. Thus
shall you not only show your selves worthy of that house, from whence you
came, but after your period on earth, be received into a more glorious house
in time to come.

IT is not the Nobility of descent, but of virtues, that makes any one a
graceful and acceptable Seruitour in the Court of heaven. Houses are
distinguished by Coats and C^^sts; but these are dignified by something ^^se.

In Heraldry those are ever held to be the best Coats, that are deblazon^^ with
least charge. Virtue the best Coat.
Consequently, then must virtue needs be the best Coat. She requires the least
charge, in her attire, she is not sumptuous; in her fare, delicious; nor in
her retinue (the more is the pity) numerous. She confines her desires upon
earth within a strait Circumference; a very small portion of that metal will
content her. She sees none so great in the Court, as may deserve her envy; none
so rich in the City, as may beget in her an earthly desire; none so reposed in
the Country, as to induce her to change her state. She is infinitely happy,
in that she aims at no other happiness, than where it is to be found.
Ambition may display her Pie-colour'd flagge; but she will never get virtue to
be her follower: Her desires are pitched upon a far more transcendent honor,
than these State-corriuals on earth can ere afford her; or by their competition
take from her. Pleasure may cast out her Lure, but virtue is so high a flyer,
as she scorns to stoop to ought unworthy of her: it pleases her to
contemplate that on earth, which she is to enjoy in heaven. Profit may seek to
undermine her; but all her policy cannot work on virtues constancy. Content
is her Crown; Contempt of the world, her care; what worldlings seek, she
shuns; whence it is, that her beauty, in the darkest Night of adversity,
shines. In a word, she is an absolute Commandresse of her self; and easy is
it to have that Command, where no turbulent passions labor to contend.

Far otherwise is it with those, who be they never so generously descended,
popularly graced, nor powerfully guarded, yet being not adorned with this
Crest, distinguished by this Coat, they can neither enjoy freedom within, nor
safe^y without.

Lewis the eleventh had a conceit, which, no doubt, proceeded from his
m^lancholicke and indisposed humor, that every thing did stink about him; all
the odoriferous perfumes, or fragrant savors they could get, would not ease
him, but still he smelled a filthy st^^ke. So fares it with them, whose corrupt
hearts, like musty vessels, not thoroughly seasoned with virtue, fe^d forth no
other smell than what is most distastefull to a pure and well-disposed mind.
Now, there be many, who make an outward semblance of conscience; and promise
to the world apparent arguments of their uprightness; whose inward Cells, like
corrupt Charnell-houses, afford nothing but filthiness. Y^a, these, to make
the world more confident of their s^nctity, will not stick to condemn
themselves, dis^value their own worth, and rank them amongst the unworthiest
that breath on earth. Yet, though they disprayse themselves before others, they
cannot endure to be dispraysed by others. Whereof we read one excellent
example to this purpose: There was a certain woman, who had taken her self to
a Cloyster-life, and seemed very devout; so as she usually said to her
Confessor, who came often unto her, to hear her Confession, and partake of her
Devotion: Good father, pray unto the Lord for me; for I am a woman so evil,
yea, even so utterly naught, as I much fear left the Lord punish others for my
sins. Upon this, the Priest out of a discreet zeal, desired to try whether
there were in her the foundation of true humility or no. Next time therefore,
that she uttered the like words unto him, saying; That she was the very worst
of all women; the Priest forthwith answered: I have often times at many hands
beard thus much of thee before this. Whereat she being presently incensed,
replied: You lie in your throat: And whosoever has told you, or reports such
things of me, are all liars. To attemper which immoderate passion, the Priest
humbly returned her this answer: Now I perceive thy pride and hypocrisy; for
as much as thou speak that of thy self, which thou disdainest any other
should speak of thee. And this is no sign of true humility, but of inward
pride and gross hypocrisy.

These dissembled, be they never so assiduate, semblances, are no colors for
Virtues crest. They must be dyed in grain, or they will not hold. These, who
^xpresse modesty in their outward carriage, are good examples to those that
consort with them; yet if their private Parler be a witness of their dishonor,
they deface the figure of goodness in themselves. Virtue consists note in
seeming, nor piety in appearing but practicing. What is it to be outwardly
retired from the world, and inwardly affianced to the world? How are those
women in Turkey affected, that most part of the year come not abroad? Those
Italian and Spanish Dames, that are mewed up like Hawks, and locked up by their
jealous husbands? This is such an enforced restraint, as it many times begets
loose desires in the restrained. It is the prevention of occasion that crowns
us. More prayse-worthy were those women of Sio, could they confine their
actions within the bounds of modesty, than these restrained Libertines. For
those Island Women, as they are the beautifull'st Dames of all the Greeks, so
have they more liberty granted by their auaricious husbands, than all the Dames
in Greece. For their wives prostitution is their promotion. So as, when they
see any stranger or promising factor arrive, they will presently demand if he
would have a Mistress: which, for want of better supply, they mercenarily tender
him in the person of their own wives: so willing are they to wear the lasting
Badge of infamy, for base lucre or commodity.

It is not then an enforced moderation of our affections, that deserves the
style of goodness. We are to enjoy freedom in our desires, and over those a
noble Conquest, if we merit the name of ^^rtuous.

Come then, Gentlewomen, you see what Coat will honor your House most. Other
Coats may be blanched by corruption of blood; or blemished by some other
occurrent: but this is so pure as it will admit of no stain. Fantastical and
false prophecies may be ominously advanced, published, and dispersed, upon
Arms, Fields, Beasts, or Badges, against which our Laws have ordained
necessary prouisio^s. But no Augur, Seer, or Soothsayer can by any such
groundles Diuinatio^, detract from the constant beauty or splendour of his Coat.

Soueraignizing Saladine, after he had made himself a terror to many potent
Princes, by making them his Subjects, who never till then knew what subjection
meant; after he had achieved so many prosperous victories, taken in so many
flourishing Provinces, and attained the highest degree of an imperial
greatness; being surprised by so mortal and fatal a malady, as he despaired
of recovery: called his Chiefetaine or General before him, and bad him haste
away to the great City Damascus, and there in the midst of that populous City,
to fix his shrouding-sheete upon a Sphere, and display it like a banner, with
these words; This is all that Souldan Saladine has left of all his Ensigns.
How happy had that Emperor been, if after so many memorable exploits done by
him living, so many imperial trophies of his dispersed victories erected by
him breathing, he had reserved this Coat to have memoriz'd him dying?

Dorcas Coats were brought forth and shown, after she departed. So live, that
your best Coats, which are your virtues, may give testimony of you, when Earth
shall receive you. Let not your Gentility become blasted with infamy; nor your
Noble families labor of that scarcity, as not to give virtue all hospitality,
Divinely sung our Modern Poet: To be of generous blood and Parents borne,
And have no generous virtues, is a scorn.


Let it be your highest scorn, to stoop to any base thought. It is not
priority nor precedence of place, but propriety and proficiency in grace that
makes an honorable Soul. That Cloth is of most worth that wears best; and
that fashion of most esteem that h^lds longest in request. Virtue is right
Sempiternum for wear; and of that complete fashion, as with Christian women it
grows never out of date. Make choice of this stuff then to suite you, of this
Coat to gentilize you. All others are but counterfeits in comparison of her;
whose property it is to honor those that serve her; harbor those that fly
for refuge to her; and to reward those who constantly stand in defense of her
honor. There is nothing can wound you, being thus armed; nothing ill-beseeme
you, being thus adorned; nothing disparage you, being thus honored. Heraldry
finds a Coat for your house, but Virtue finds honor to grace your person.
Retain those divine impressions of goodness in you, that may truly ennoble
you: display your gentility by such a Coat, as may best distinguish your
family; so shall you live and dye with honor, and survive their fame, whose
only glory it was to enjoy fortunes favor.

PAinters are curious in the choice of their colors, lest their Art become
blemished, through those decayed colors, wherewith their Pictures are
portrayed. Some are of opinion, that the receipt of Painting or Coloring the
substance of glass through, is utterly lost; neither that these late
succeeding times can regaine, as yet, that mysterious perfection. Far more is
it to be doubted, lest virtue, which we have proved by infallible arguments to
be the best Coat, want her true color, and consequently become deprived of her
chief luster. Some Pictures, I know, will do well in white; yet it is color
that gives them life, Beauty never darts more love to the eye, nor with quicker
conuoy directs it to the heart, then when it displayes her guiltless shame in
a crimson blush. There is one flower to be loved of women, which is the
chiefest flower in all their garden; Nazian.
and this is a good red, which is shamefastness. A shamefastered the best
Color to deblazon virtues Coat.
These standing colors are slow wooers to discreet Lovers. Virtues Coat then
is best deblazoned when a shamefastred breathes upon it.

Protogenes tables, wherein Bacchus was painted, and all his furious Bacchanals
to life displayed, moved King Demetrius to such admiration, during his siege of
the City Rhodes, that where he might have consumed the City with fire, and
buried the glory thereof in ashes, would not for the preciousnesse of that
table: so as, protracting time by staying to bide them battle, won not the
City at all. If a liuelesse Picture could enforce such affection in a knowing
Commander, what effects may we think will a living substance produce? Truth
is, there is such sweet and amiable correspondence betwixt virtuous beauty, and
shamefaste modesty, as the one cannot subsist without the others society. Not a
light passage can want the attendance of a blush, whilst modesty is in
presence. Yea, though she be not conscious of any conceit, that might beget in
her face a shamefaste blush; out of a modest Compassion she will not stick to
blush, when she observes ought in another, deserving blame. Her ears glow at
any light report; which, lest they should grow too credulous, she fortifies
with reason, to oppose the too easy entrance of suspicion. She partakes of no
resemblance less than that of the Chameleon, whose natural property it is to
represent all Colors save white. She is a mild and moderate interpretor of
others actions; but a serious Censor of her own. Light discourses, which tend
rather to the deprauing of the hearer, than ministering any useful subject to
an attentive Obseruer, she excludes; uncivil Complement she abhorres; what
only is modest she approues; and seconds her approuement with a graceful
smile. She holds an infected mind to be more dangerous than an infected house:
such Company she shunnes, on whom the rays of virtue seldom or never shine.
There is not that Condition, be it never so mean, which she cannot with
cheerfulness entertain: so as, she holds outward poverty the best enricher
of an inward family. Her desires are so equally poyzed, as she neither seeks
more than she enioyes, nor wants freedom to dispose of what she enioyes.
Honor she affects, yet with no such eagerness, as to hazard the loss of a
dearer honor, for so uncertain a purchase. Friends and favorites she admits,
and with that constancy, as it neither repents her of accepting, nor them of
tendering such virtuous fruits of amity.

Here you have her, Gentlewomen, who will tell you, and in her self exemplify
what she tells you; that modesty is the choycest ornament that can adorn you.
Now if you purpose to trace her path, or conform your selves to her line; you
must work on your affections, to embrace what she loves, and reject
whatsoever she loathes. Are you conversant at any time with such protesting
servants, as make deep Oaths mere Complements; and whose tongues are witty
Orators in running descant on a wanton Tale? These are such Consorts as Modesty
would be loath to converse with. She can never endure any of these discourses
without an angry blush. Should you delight in these, you should quickly hear
her out of a virtuous passion, cry out with the Poet: O Age! most of our women
know not now,
What 'ti^ to blush, till painting tell them how.


Again, should you entertain in your naked bosoms, what some wantons have
too much affected, light amorous Poems; perusing them with no less Content,
than if they had been purposely penned to work on your Conceit; this cannot
stand with your modesty; These may corrupt you, but never rectify what is
wandering in you. Suffer not a wanton passage to play on your fantasy. Sin
would never enter in upon you, if she found but a preparation of resistance in
you. Tell me, what a sweet grace conferres it on you, to mix your salutes with
modest blushes, and entertain your Suitors with a shamefaste bashfulnesse!
Sure I am, where love is discreetly grounded, this cannot choose but be an
especial motive to affection. There may be, I grant, such wild lovers, who
prefer the loose love of an inconstant Phaedra, before the chaste embraces of
a continent Antiope: but their indiscreet choice is ever seconded with a
fearful cloze. Those, who esteem more of a painted cheek, than a native
blush, shall find all their imaginary happiness resolved to a painted bliss.
It is Modesty and not Beauty which makes the husband happy. Would you then
deserve the title of Chaste Virgins, constant Wives, modest Matrons? While you
are ranked amongst the first, converse not privately with a wanton thought;
send not forth a wandering eye to fetch in a Sweetheart. Dis-value not your
own worth so much, as to woo others to become your Suitors. This would be a
means rather to depresse love, than increase it; impair love, than improve
it. If you be worthy winning, you cannot choose but be worthy wooing. Mean
time, let not a straid look betray your too forward love; nor a light conceit
tax you of deserved reproof. Dye your cheeks with a Rosy blush, when you
hear ought that may detract from the modesty of your Sex. Be as silent as the
night; your best Rhetoric consists in maiden blushes, and bashful smiles;
which will work more powerfully on a Lovers heart, than a Rhetorical tongue,
be it never so curiously tipped with Art.

For the second rank; you know how strict a duty is imposed on you; now are
you not to converse with strange love: or suffer any other person have the
least share in your affection. To Court love, or use any Complement, purposely
to win a private favorite, would detract as much from your honor, as for a
Soldier to fly from his Captain, and adhere to a stranger. He has invested
you in himself, and engaged himself yours by a sacred vow, which death only
may reuerse: the dispersed loves which you entertained before, must now be
reduced to one, and that but one, by whose mutual choice two are indiuidually
made one. A heart divided cannot live; no more can the heat of divided love.
You are now so far from entertaining any stranger; as you have vowed with
your heart, not to enter so much as any treaty with an unjust intruder. It is
dangerous to converse with a professed foe, whose drift it is to undermine you;
and such an one is every loose lover, who labors with the licentious art of
adulterous Oratory, to deprive you of that inestimable gemme, which of all
others, most adornes you.

For you that are Matrons; ripeness of years has enjoined you to bid a
lasting adieu to the vanities of youth. Now are you set as examples of gravity,
for others to imitate.

It were dotage in you now to begin to love, when your decay in Nature tells
you, it is not long you are to live. You have hitherto performed your parts
with a generous approuement of your actions, fail not in the conclusion. This
small remainder of your declining pilgrimage, should be wholly dedicated to the
practice of goodness; that your pious end may second your virtuous beginning.
The Sun shines ever brighter at his setting than rising; so should your life
appear better at your departing than entering.

It were incomparably beneficial for you, now in this your Exit, to have your
affections seated in heaven, before you depart from earth: leaving some
memorable examples of your wel-spent life, which may eternize you after this
li^e.

This will make your names flourish; and cause others in a virtuous emulation
of your actions, to retain your memory in their lives. To be brief, be you
of what Condition soever, either in respect of your age or state; there is
nothing can better become you than a modest shamefastness: which consists
either in ^uerting your ear from your own praise; or withdrawing your
presence from dishonest or uncivil discourse; or rejecting an importunate
Suitor, whose too inconsiderate entertainment might question your honor. I
have noted in some women a kind of zealous and devout passion, when they
chanced but to hear any light or wanton communication; they could not hold but
reprove them for their impudence, and amidst their reproof, to adorn the Rosy
Circlets of their cheeks with a blushing shamefastness. Surely, this
expressed a singular modesty in them; which I would have you ( Gentlewomen) in
a serious imitation of them, to represent in your selves. It will happen, many
times, that you cannot choose but encounter with some frontlesse Buffoun^, whose
highest strain of obscene wit, is to justify some fabulous story, or repeat
an uncivil Tale; which you are to entertain with such disgust, as these
odious relaters may gather by your Countenance, how much you distaste such
uncivil discourse. For it is a sweet kind of euincing sin, to
discountenance it with a modest shame.

Thus shall you make your very frown an ingenuous Index of your vncorrupt
heart: and to add one line more unto your Honor, display the Character of
your guiltless shame in a Maiden blush, a Virgin-colour.

SEuerus the Emperor would have majesty preserved by a virtuous disposing of
the desire, not by a c^rious ^ff^minacy in attire. Gentility is not known by
what we we^re, but what we are.
For, as we cannot account him for less then a fool, who prizeth his horse by
the saddle, and trappings that hang about him, more then by the worth that is
in him: so is he most foolish, who values the man by the worth of his Clothes,
rather then those inward parts that do accomplish him.

How many formal Gallants shall we observe, whose only value consists in
putting on their clothes neatly; with whom, if you should converse, you might
easily find Aesops painted souls, fairly promising, O age! no cover now fit
for our mold, but Plush, (...)* Velvet, Tissue, Cloth of Gold.
but weakly performing? The greatest Obliquity these can find in our age, is
the too careless observance of fashions; which our neat formalists have no
great cause to tax for an error, seeing affectation in the choice of fashion
is this ages humor. The golden apple was given to the fairest, not the finest;
the golden Tripode, neither to the fairest nor finest, but wisest. For might
the fairest have obtained it, Alcibiades, being the daintiest and best favored
Boy in all Athens, might by right have challenged it. Again, might the finest
have enjoyed it, ^he Lydian Croesus, being richer in attire than any of his
time, might have pleaded for it. Of whom it is said, that Solon of Salamine
came to visit him: not to admire him, as simple people did, whose judgments
most commonly were placed in their eyes: but to reprove him for his vanity, an
apt subject for Philosophy; and weane him from that, which threatened ruin to
his State. This delicate Prince had that learned Sage no sounder found decked
and adorned with the choicest Ornaments, and seated on an high Throne, than he
encountered that grave Philosopher with this vain question: demanding of him,
Whether he had ever seen a more glorious sight? To whom Solon right gravely
answered; Yes, quoth he, I have seen House-cocks, Phesants, and Peacocks: And
these were graced with a natural beauty; whereas yours is but a borrowed
glory, which must veil to time, and shake hands ere it be long, with mortality.

Truth is, should we judge of men's worths by their outward wear, or
distinguish Gentility by a fashionable attire, we should err more in
judgment, then a blind man in his first discovery of colors. What eminent
Ladies are recorded in the continuate historis of fame; whose esteem took
first breath, not from what they wore, but what they were? It was not their
aim to strike a stupid Beholder into admiration with a phantasticke habit, nor
allure an humorous Lover with a conceited complement. Our simple Elders knew
not what it was,
To set their face, or court a Looking-glass.


It was their highest task to correct those errors that were in them: by
which means they became so inwardly lovely, as none truly knew them, that
could do less than entirely love them. Surely, there is no state that suites
so fit^y with Gentility, as the low, but loyal attendance of humility. This is
she, who (as she is rightly defined) is the Princess of virtues, the
conqueresse of vices, the mirror of virginity, the choicest harbor or repose
for the blessed trinity. Aug.
She considers, how he, by whom our corrupt blood was restored, our invaluable
losses repaired, and our primitive nakedness compassionately covered, was not
with a Diadem crowned, nor in a stately bed couched; yea, scarcely rather with
one poor coat covered: which he wore not as an ornament to his body, to bestow
on it trimnesse, but for necessity to cover his nakedness. What a poverty is
it then for you, whose ancient descent promises something extraordinary in
you, to have nothing to boast of, save only a gilded outside? It was Necessity
that invented Clothes for you; now were it fit to pride you in that, which
deprived you of your prime beauty? You shall observe in many of our grave
Matrons, with what indifferency they attire themselves. Their inward ornaments
are their chiefest care; their renewing and repairing of them, their highest
cure. They have found such choice flowers, as they afford more spiritual
delight to the soul, than any visible flowers or odours do to the smell. And
what are these, but divine and moral precepts, sovereign instructions; which
have taught them how to contemn earth, conquer death, and aspire unto
eternity? These by a continued custom or frequent converse with heavenly
things, cannot now conceive any object to be worthy their beholding on earth.
Fashions may be worn about them, but little observed by them. The WEDDING
GARMENT is their desired raiment. This they make ready for the Nuptial day;
the meditation whereof so transports them, as nothing below heaven can possess
them. It is not beauty which they prize; for they daily and duly consider the
Prophets words, Joel. 2.
All faces shall gather blackness. Again, they remember the threats which God
denounces upon beautiful, but sinful Nineveh, I will discover thy skirts
upon thy face. Nahum. 3.
This makes them seriously to consider the dangerous quality of sin, and to
apply Niniuehs salve to their soar: that wine of Angels, the tears of
repentance. Which, howsoever it is, as one wittily observes, Every man's
medicine; an universal Antidote, that makes many a Mithridates venture on
poison: yet works it not this banefull effect with these; for their affections
are so sweetly tempered, their hearts so truly tendered, as they make not
Repentance security to delinquents: They well remember that Aphorism of
spiritual Physic: As he that sins in hope of remission, feeds
distemperature to seek a Physician; so he that repents with a purpose of
sinning, shall find an eternal place to repent in. Th^se, who thus be^ull
themselves in the downebeds of security, labor of an irreparable Lethargy.
They make bold to sin, as if they were sure to repent. But the medicine was
made for the wound, not the wound for the medicine. We must not suffer our
selves voluntarily to be wounded, in hope we have to be cured: but prevent the
means, that we may attain a more glorious end.

Prevent the means or occasion of sin; which if at any time we commit, to
infuse the balm of repentance into it; which seasonably applied, may minister
a sovereign salve to our soar, so we intend our care to so consequent a cure.

Come then, Gentlewomen, begin now at last to reflect on your own worth.
Understand, that Gentility is not known by what you wear, but what you are.
Consider, in what member soever your Creator is most offended, in that shall
every sinner be most tormented. Bern.
Remember, how the time shall come (and then shall your time be no time) when
the M^ath shall be your vnderlining, and the Worm your covering. Trim your
selves then with an inward beauty; that a glorious Bridegroom may receive you.
Fashion your selves to his image, whom you represent. That Fashion only, will
extend the (...) of time, and crown you with immortality (...). These, who
have their judgments in their eyes, may admire you for your Clothes; but
those, who have their eyes in their heads, will only prize you by your inward
worth. Were it not a poor Ensign of Gentility, to hang up a phantasticke
fashion to memorize your vanity after death? So live, that you may ever live in
the memory of the good. It will not redound much to your honor, to have
observed the fashions of the time, but to have redeemed your time; to have
dedicated your selves to the practice of virtue all your time; to have been
Mirrors of modesty to your succeeding sex; to have dis-valued the fruitless
flourish of fading vanity, for the promising hopes of a blessed eternity.
Supply then that in you, which bleered judgments expect without you. You
challenge precedence in place, express your selves worthy of that place.
Virtue will make you far more honored, than any garish habit can make you
admired. The one is a Spectacle of derision, the other of true and generous
approbation. This you shall do, if you season your desires with discretion; if
you temper your excursiue thoughts, and bring them home with a serious
meditation of your approaching dissolution. It is said of the Palm tree, that
when it grows dry and fruitless, they use to apply ashes to the root of it,
and it forthwith recouers: that the peaceful Palms of your virtuous minds
may flourish ever; that their branches may ever blossom and never wither:
apply unto their roots the ashes of mortification; renew them with some sweet
and sovereign meditation. That when you shall return to your mother Earth,
those that succeed you may collect how you lived while you were on Earth: by
making these living actions of your Gentility, happy Precursors to your state
of glory.

Fountains are best distinguished by their waters, There are na^iue seeds of
goodnesse^ sown in generous bloods by lineall success^on^
Trees by their fruits, and Generous bloods by their actions. There are inbred
seeds of goodness (says the Philosopher) in every good man: and these will
find time to express themselves.

It was David's testimony of himself: From my youth up have I loved thy Law. An
excellent prerogative given him, and with no less diligence improued by him.
Now these Native seeds, as they are different, so are the fruits which come of
them, variously disposed. Some have a relish of true and generous bounty;
wherein they show that noble freedom to their own, in their liberality
toward others: as their very actions declare unto the world, their command and
sovereignty over the things of this world. Others discover their noble
disposition, by their notable pilty and compassion; These will estrange
themselves from no man's misery. If they cannot succor him, they will suffer
with him. Their bosoms are ever open with pitiful Zenocrates, to receive a
distressed one. Over a vanquished foe they scorn to insult; or upon a dejected
one to triumph. They have tears to partake with the afflicted; and real
expressions of joy to share with the relieved. Others show apparent arguments
of their singular moderation; abstemious are these in their dishes; temperate
in their Companies; moderate in their desires. These wonder at the rioters of
this time; how they consume their days in sensuality and uncleanness. Their
account is far more straight; their expense more strait; but their liberty of
mind of an higher strain. Clothes they wear, but with that decency, as
curiosity cannot tax them; meats they partake, but with that temperance, as
delicacy cannot tempt them. Others from their Cradle, become brave sparks of
valor; their very Childhood promises undoubted tokens of succeeding honor.
These cannot endure braues nor affronts. Generous resolution has stamped such
deep impressions in their heroicke minds, as fame is their aim; which they
hunt after, with such constancy of spirit, as danger can neither amate them,
nor difficulty auert them from their resolves. Others are endued with a natural
pregnancy of wit; to whom no occasion is sooner offered, than some dainty
expression must second it. Others with more solidity of judgment, though of
less present conceit. And these are such, as generally employ themselves in
State-affaires; wherein Experience, purchased by an useful expense of time,
does so ripen them, as the Public State takes notice of them, and recompenceth
their care with honors conferred on them.

These and many other excellent endowments shall we observe to be lineally
derived from Ancestors to their successors; which, as they retain a near
resemblance of their persons, so they represent their Actions: so powerful is
nature in bestowing her distinct Offices on every creature, wherein they
generally partake of their disposition as well as outward feature: whence the
Poet, Stout men and good are sprung from stout and good,
Horses and steeres retain their parents blood.


Yet see the iniquity of time! It fares oft-times with those who are endowed
with these virtues, to be most traduced, where their more noble and eminent
parts are to be highliest honored. Which, as it was a maine error in former
ages, so descends it to these present times. When Rome was in her glory, this
eclipsed her light, by detracting from their demerits most, whose free-bred
virtues deserved of their Country best. Sundry Families she had, famous for
their virtues, which by a depraved and mis-interpreting Censure, became branded
with undeserved aspersious. If the Piso's were frugall, they were held
parcimonious; if the Metelli devout, they were superstitious; if the Appij
strict, they were rigorous; if the Man^^j affable, they were ambitious; the
Laelij, if wise, they were dangerous; the Publicolae popular, by being
courteous. But with good and and well-disposed persons, virtue is never out of
favor, though it be never so much impeached by a tradu^ing censure.

Thus you have heard, Gentlewomen, what vert^es have lineal^y and by blood
descended from Parents to their Children; what especial inward graces usually
attend some especial families, which no less memorize them, than those native
honors which are conferred on them. Now, to select such as sort best with your
sex and condition; in my opinion there is none that ennobles you higher, or
makes you more gracious in the eye of the beholder than Modesty, which was the
greatest aduancer of many Roman families. This is that virtue, which expresses
you to be women; this is that, which makes you honored amongst women. Chains
and Carken^ts, Jewels and Habiliments may be valued; but this Ornament is of
that high estimate, as it is not to be prized. Now, there is nothing that will
cause this to appear more precious unto you, next to the testimony of a good
Conscience within you, with an ardent desire of promoting his glory who made
you, than a reflection to your Family which bred you; whose honor to preserve,
as it is your especial duty, so no object of profit or pleasure, no attractiue
Lure of deceiu^ng honor should remove this opinion from you: To be high borne
and basely minded, is to ingraffe bastard slippes in a noble stock. High and
heroicke virtues become great house* for, as they were first made great by
being good, so should they by ^^rceasing from being good, lose their title of
being great. If by abusing the liberty of time, you detract from your Ancestors
fame, you lie a blemish on his shrine; which, though it touch not him, yet it
taints you who represent him.

This, no doubt, was that Noble Lady right mindful of, when on a time being
solicited by a powerful Suitor, who wooed her first in person, and after in a
wanton Rhetorical Letter, she, as one tender of her honor, and perceiving
that the scope of his suit tended to her dishonor, answered his fruitless
sollicitancy in this sort, with great modesty: Should I condescend to your
Suit, I should not only derogate from the honor of my present state, dis-value
that which I hold most dear, make my self a subject of contempt to every
ear, but asperse that infamy on my family, which would bear record of my
inconstancy. O what would the next age report of me, that I should so far
degenerate from those that bred me? No; poverty may enter in at my gate, but
dishonor shall never lodge in mine heart. Reserve these promises of honor for
such, as prize them above their ^^nour: That generous blood which distreames
through my veins, shall sooner be dried, than it shall be for any hope of
advancement ingloriously stained.

Such singular resolves many of our Albion Ladies, questionless, even at this
day retain; who, rather than they would incur the least dishonor, or
occasion suspicion by their too free entertain of light Suitors, would confine
themselves to their Chambers* and debar themselves of public recourse.
Seeing then, that there are native Seeds of goodness son in generous bloods
by lineall succession; which even in their first infancy give fair promises of
their inward beauty: express your selves Daughters worthy such virtuous
Mothers. Emulation of goodness in great persons is honorable. Their Pictures
you hang up, that their memories may live with you. Enjoy their virtues too,
and their memories shall live fresher in you. All memorials, being materials,
be they never so durable, are subject to frailty; only these precious monuments
of your virtues survive time, and breath eternity. You spring from a noble
Seminary; let those seeds of goodness which are sown in your youth, come to
that ripeness in your age, that as in piety you imitated others, so you may
become Presidents unto others; as you were here seasoned with grace, a good
report may follow you to your grave. All which by instruction only may be
effected, as in our next branch shall be more pregnantly proved.

HE cannot choose but live well, who conformes himself to that he hears. How
these native seeds of goodness may be ripened by instruction.
Good instructors are such faithful Monitors, as they will advise what is most
fitting, not what is best pleasing. And these are to be entertained with such
endeered respect, as their speeches, be they never so tart, should not incense
us, nor their reproves, be they never so free, distaste us.

Though Clitus open rebukes cost him his life, his free and friendly reproof
expressed his love; so as Alexander could never sufficiently bemone his loss.
Those Native seeds of goodness, whereof we formerly treated, be they in our
infancy never so plentifully diffused, yet in time they would grow rank and
wild, unless they were by seasonable instruction ripened. Now, Gentlewomen,
there be no Tutresses fitter to perfect this excellent work in you, than those
who were the secondary instruments of being unto you; Neither can those, who
are derived from you, become better instructed than by you. Your love, I
confess, will be more indulgent, yet your care so much the more incessant.
Their dispositions are best known unto you; if motherly affection then will
give way to discretion, who more fit to mold them than you? Preceding times may
afford you variety of examples in this kind.

Cornelia instructed hers in all piety; Portia hers in exemplary grounds of
chastity; Sulpitia hers in precepts of conjugal unity; Edesia hers in learning
and morality; Paulina hers in memorials of shamefaste modesty. These, though
Heathens, were excellent informers of youth; so as, their Children were more
bound to them for their breeding than bearing, nurturing than nursing. Besides,
there is an inbred filial fear in Children to their Parents, which will beget
in them more attention in hearing, and retention in holding what they hear.
Now, there is no instruction more moving, Greg. in 38. Euang.
than the example of your living. By that Line of yours, are they to conform
their own. Take heed then, lest by the dampe of your life, you darken both
their glory and your own. I might propose unto you books of instruction,
which might minister arguments plenteously in this kind: but so short is the
memory in retaining what it reads, yea so distracted is the mind in observing
what it reads, that, as it fares with our natural face in a glass, from which
the glass is no sooner removed, than the resemblance of it is abolished; even
so, the book is no sooner left out of the hand, than the Contents are leapt
out of the heart. Yet, to the end you may not be unprovided of such Tracts as
may enable you for instruction; and prepare you to encounter with tentation; I
will recount such unto you, as may best accommodate you for the one, and
fortify you against the other.

Learned Viues in his instruction of a Christian woman, recommends unto them
these glorious Lights of the Church, A brief enumeration, serious dicussion,
and judicious election of sundry ancient fathers, with other moral Au^hors.
S. Hierom, Cyprian, Augustine, Ambrose, Hilary, Gregory; annexing unto them
those moral Philosophers: Plato, Cicero, Seneca, etc. Of which, severally to
deliver my opinion, it is this:

Than S* Hierom none more gravely copious, as may appear by those pithy and
effectual Epistles of his, directed to those Noble Ladies, Marcella, Demetria,
Laeta, Furia, etc. wherein he uses singular exhortations, invincible
arguments, perswasiue reasons, sweet similitudes, and forciue examples. Modesty
is the subject he commends unto them; decency in apparel he approues in them;
to a moderate restraint of liberty he enioynes them; to an exemplary holiness
he exhorts them; and with sweet and comfortable promises of an incorruptible
reward he leaves them.

Than S. Cyprian, none more devoutly feruerous; in his reproves he shows
mildness; in his treaties a passionate sweetness; he winnes the sinner by
inducing reasons; he strengthens the soul mightily against temptations; he
proposes an excellent way of moderating the affections; he applies sovereign
receipts to soueraignizing passions: and concludes with that sober and discreet
temper, as with a Divine insinuation he wooes, winnes, and weanes the sinner,
and in a spiritual tie unites him to his Redeemer.

Than S. Augustine, none more profoundly judicious, more indiciously zealous;
pithy are his directions, powerful his instructions; in his Meditations he is
moving; in his Soliloquies inwardly piercing; in his Manual comfortably
clozing. Amongst all those Conflicts in our Christian wa^fare, he holds none
sharper than our Combat with Chastity. He applies means how we may resist,
resisting vanquish; and by our Christian victory, receive Crowns of eternal
glory. That Conquest he holds, deserves small honor, which is atchieu'd
without Encounter. In a Divine rapsodie drawn, as it were, from himself, he
shows what should be done by us. Earth is no object fit to entertain our eye;
nor her deluding melody our ear: He exhorts us therefore to leave Earth now
while we live, that leaving Earth for altogether, we may enjoy our best Love.

Than S. Ambrose, none more Divinely plenteous; sweetly serious are his
instructions; enforcing are his reasons; he speaks home to the sinner: whom he
no sooner finds wounded for sin, than he applies a Spiritual Salve to cure
his sin. Many grave sentences are in his Offices methodically couched;
singular directions to guide every Christian in his Spiritual Pathway, are
there delivered. Like an expert Physician, he first gathers the nature or
quality of your distemper, and then ministers soule-saluing receipts to restore
you to your right temper. He shows you how in your very motion, gesture, and
pace you are to observe modesty: concluding that nothing can afford true
comfort to a soiorning soul, but practice of piety.

Than S. Hilary, none more fully sententious; he discouers the occasion of our
corruption familiarly; advises us with many passionate and teare-swollne lines
to provide for our inward family; he proposes us a reward, if we contemn
Earth; he threatens us with the Law if we contemn life. Sundry moving and
effectual Lessons he recommends to the perusal of women of all ranks, ages,
and conditions. Tenderly he compassionates the case of a sinner; passionately
treats he of those torments which shall last for ever: with prayers and tears
he sollicits them that have gone astray, to return; those that are already
returned, to go no more astray. He concludes with an useful Exhortation to
sorrow for sin, promising them, ^orth of that Storehouse of Comforts,
contained in the Gospel, for this their momentaine sorrow, an incessant joy in
Sion.

Than S. Gregory, none more highly mysterious, nor contemplatiuely glorious;
Divinely moral are his Morals; full of heavenly comforts are his instructions;
he walks in an higher way than others trace, yet with that humility, as there
is not a cloze from him, but it discloseth in him a love of meekness,
lowliness, and piety. With proper and elegant similitudes are his works
adorned; with choice sentences, as with so many select flowers, neatly
garnished; in a word, he is sweetly substantial, and substantially sweet. He
reprehends the times gravely; commends the practice the virtue gracefully. With
an holy zeal he reproues the remissness of the Ministry. Directions he gives
unto women, to have an especial care of modesty: concluding, that the love of
this life should not so possess us, as to deprive us of that inheritance which
might eternally bless us. In good minds he holds poverty the portresse of
humility: accounting those Evils or Adversities, which do here press us, to
be the Cords which draw us unto God who made us.

Touching those three Philosophers, this is my conceit of them; wherein none
can otherwise choose than concur with me, that shall seriously read, and
sincerely scanne them: Than Plato, none more Divinely Philosophical; Than
Cicero, more philosophically Rhetorical; Than Seneca, more Sagely Moral.

But for as much as it is not given to most of you to be Linguists, albeit many
of their works be translated in your mother tongue, you may converse with
sundry English Authors, whose excellent instructions will sufficiently store
you in all points; and if usefully applied, confer no small benefit to your
understanding. I shall not need particularly to name them to you, because I
doubt not, but you have made choice of such faithful Retainers and virtuous
Bosome-friends, constantly to accompany you. Neither, indeed, are books only
necessary; conference will singularly improve your knowledge; but that is not
altogether so convenient nor decent for your sex in public places. So as, I
much condemn their opinion, who hold no means so fitting to bring their
daughters to audacity, as a frequent consort with Company. This, in time,
begets in them rather impudence than boldness.

It was held a touch to a Maid to be seen talking with any one in a public
place. But in private Nurseries, which may be properly termed your household
Academies, it will suit well with your honors to treat and enter into
Conference one with another; or in such places, where your own sex is only
conversant. For such indiscreet Mothers, who usually trim and deck their
daughters, to send them forth to Shows, Meetings, or Enterludes, they annoint
bauin with oil, that it may burn the better. But much more blameworthy be
those, who take them along to Tauernes and gossippings; which Educat^on a
little time will bring into custom, and make modesty a stranger to her self.
For above all things (says the Philosopher) ought young Girls to be kept from
Ebriety: which he confirms with this reason: It is good, says he, for young
men and maids to be kept from wine, lest such become afterward professed
drunkards, profuse rioters, and prodigal exposets of their honor: the maine
occasion whereof, are their parents, Arist. Po^it. 7.
by means of their ill instruction, and worse example.

It is the very first instruction that takes the deepest impression; how
necessary then is it for you, Gentle women, whose sex is the Emblem of
weakness, and whose best resolves are oft-times weakened by youthful
promises, to furnish your blooming youth with wholesome instructions: and so to
improve them, that they may increase in vigor, as you do in stature? This
your sex exacts of you; this your present estate requires of you: and this
shall easily be effected by you, if having (as is to be presupposed) discreet
and religious Mothers, you submit your selves in all humble obedience to their
direction. For as it is very hard for any one to know how to command, unless
she know first how to obey; so will it be unto you to perform the office of a
Mother, if you never knew the duty of a daughter. Strict and severe may those
Commands seem to your youth, which riper age will easily digest. Again, you
that are Mothers, become patterns of modesty unto your daughters. Your living
actions are the lines of their direction. While they are under your command,
the error is yours, not theirs, if they go astray. Their honor should be one
of the principall'st things you are to tender; neither can it be blemished,
without some touch to your Credit. I have known some inconsiderate mothers,
and those none of the lowest rank or quality, who either out of a confidence
they had of their daughters good carriage, or drawn with the hopes of some rich
Suitors to advance their marriage, have usually given too free way to
opportunity, which brought upon their daughters names a spreading infamy.

Your instructions will do well with them, till society deprave them: divert
then the occasion, so shall your daughters, be they never so poor, have good
portions of reputation. Suffer not then those who partake of your image, to
lose their best beauty. Sigh then if they be soyled, for their shame must be
on you aspersed.

Grace is a pure balm, and consequently requires a pure and sound vessel. In
vain is it infused, if the vessel be not whole and sound to preserve it.
Look then to your own actions; these must inform them; Look to your own
examples, these must confirm them. Without you they cannot perish; with you
they may. What will you do with the rest that is left, when you see a part of
your self lost?

The Harpie has the face of a man, but a Bird so cruel by nature, as when she
is an hungry, she will assault any man and kill him. After which bloody repast,
she becomes thirsty, so as, going to the River to quench it, she sees her own
face; and recalling* to mind how it resembles him whom she slew, she conceiues
such grief, as she dies therewith. If your Education or instruction deprave
those who derive their beginning from you, the resemblance of this story may
have proper relation unto you. But if your pious examples enable them, their
proficiency in virtue shall ennoble you; your comforts shall be multiplied in
them; your hopes seconded by them; and to your everliving fames, the memory of
your virtues preserved by them.

Let not that adage prove true, in respect of your Charge: The most precious
things have ever the most pernicious Keepers. Nothing more precious than a
Virgins honor; it were shame for the mother to prove a Tarpeian or treacherous
keeper. That Conceit was elegantly expressed by the Emperor Charles the fifth,
in his instructions to the King his son; That Fortune had somewhat of the
nature of a woman; that if she be too much wooed, she is the farther off. But I
hope I shall not find that auersenesse in you. I have wooed you in words;
express your selves won by the testimony of your works. I would not follow
the indiscretion of Empericks, which minister same medicines to all Patients; I
know well, that such Physic as agrees with age, would not agree with the hot
constitution of youth: To either sort therefore have I applied my several
receipts: and to both, do I address my conclusion.

Let the whole progress of your Conversation be a continued Line of
instruction; Let the mother discharge her office in commanding, and that
without too much rigor or indulgence; Let the daughter perform her duty in
obeying, with all faithful and filial observance: So shall honor grace you
here, and glory crown you there with an heavenly inheritance.

THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman.
Argument.
Honor is painted, when it is not with virtue powdered; No cloth takes such
deep tincture, as the cloth of honor; Honorable personages should be
presidents of goodness; Virtue or vice, whethersoeuer takes hold first,
retains a deeper impression in honor, than any lower subject; That, virtue
may receive the first impression by means of an inbred noble disposition,
seconded by helps of Education; Which reduced to habit, aspires to perfection.

HONOR. HONOR.

PRomotion discouers what men be, but true Honor shows what they should be.
Obseruat. 8.
That is fed with a desire of being great; this is inflamed with a noble
emulation of being good. It is a miserable thing to observe what brave and
heroicke Spirits, whose resolutions neither danger could amate, nor any
disaster perplexe, have been madded with an ambitious quest after Honor; what
difficulties they incountred; what oppositions they suffered; what intricate
passages and provinces they entertained! Corriuals they could not want in their
rising; nor Enuyers of their greatness in their settling; nor Spectators to
rejoice at their setting. Rough and menacing was the Sea, on which they sailed;
dangerous and sheluy the ways, by which they passed; yea, full of disquiets
was the Port, at which they arrived. Nay, which is worse; in what sinister and
indiscreet paths would they walk; upon what strange plots and proiectments
would they work; how discontentedly and disconsolately, with Themistocles,
would they walk, till they attained their end: which, many times, brought them
to an untimely end? So quickly is poor man deluded with this shady picture of
greatness, as he will not stick to engage for it his hopes of quietness.

But these be not those Eminent Personages, Honor is painted, when it is not
with virtue pondred.
of whom I am now to treat: for such men's honor is merely painted, because it
is not with virtue pondred. Moral Philosophy, much more our Christian theory,
could never hold that for deserving greatness, which had not near relation to
goodness. Those only they esteemed worthy honor, who did not seek it, much
less buy it, but were sought by it. Such as knew not what it was to admire the
purple, nor fawn on a rising favorite; but interueined their actions with the
precious Oar of Diuinest virtues. Such as had attained to a singular Command
or sovereignty of their affections: so as, they had learned to say as Chilo
answered his brother, We know how to suffer injuries; so do not these fiery
and furious spirits. It is a poor expression of greatness, to exercise it in
revenge; or in triumphing over inferiors; or countenancing unjust actions.
These detract from honor; neither can their memory live long, who makes
authority a Sanctuary to wrong. Know then, (noble Gentlewomen) that your
Honor, be it never so eminent; your Descent, be it never so ancient; lose both
their beauty and antiquity, if virtue have not in you a peculiar sovereignty.
Be your wanton fancy painted and trimmed in never so demure or hypocritical
disguise; Be your ambition or Courtly aspiring never so shrouded with gilded
shadows of humility; Be your unbounded desire of revenge never so smoothly
colored with the seeming remission of an impressiue injury. In a word, should
you never walk so covertly in a Clowd; nor never so cunningly with a dainty
kind of dissembling gull the world; all this will not avail you. When your
bodies shall come to be shrouded, then shall all your actions be uncased.
Rumor then will take more liberty to discover unto the world, what you did in
it. Show me that deepest dissembler, who retired himself most from the
knowledge of man, and came not to discovery, for all his secrecy, to the eyes
of man.

Many you have known and heard of, that were great, but failing in being good,
were their pretenses never so specious, did not their memory rot? Iezabel was
more eminent in titles than A^igall; but less glorious in her fame. Such a
poor piece of painted stuff is that adulterate honor, which from virtue
receives not her full luster. When the subtle Spider shall weaue her curious
web over your Monuments; when those beauteous structures of yours shall be
dissolved; when all your titular glory shall be obscured; when those fading
honors, on which you relied, and with which you stood surprised; shall be
estranged* and you from this goodly low Theater of earth translated; it shall
be then demanded of you, not know how eminent you were in greatness, but how
fervent in actions of goodness. While your skins then are with choycest
Odours perfumed, let your souls be with purest virtues poudred. Now for
virtue, would you know how to define her, that you may more eagerly desire to
become her retainer? Or would you have her described, that you may thence
collect how well she deserves to be observed? Hear the Poet; Virtue in
greatest danger is most shown,
And though oppressed, is never overthrown.


Such a noble resolved temper ever accompanies virtue, as no prosperous
success can ever transport her, nor any adverse occurrent deiect her. She
feeds not on the ayrie breath of vulgar applause: her sole ambition is to
aspire to an inward greatness; to be truly honorable in the title of
goodness. Great attendance, punctual observance, stately retinues are not the
objects she eyes^ she loves to be known what she is, by that constant
testimony which is in her, rather than by any outward ornament, much less
formal Complement, that may apishly suit her.

Would you enter than (Gentlewomen) into a more serious survey of your selves?
Would you rightly understand wherein your persons deserve honor, or how you
may be eternally honored by your Maker? Tender your service to virtue; avoid
what is hurtful; admit what is helpful. Sacrifice not a vain hour to the
Altar of vanity. Employ your time in exercises of piety. Dedicate your days to
the ad^a^cement of Gods glory. See not that poor soul in want, which your
noble compassion will not re^^^ue. Have you fri^nds? hold them dear unto you.
If dear in the eye of virtue; otherwise, discard them, for you shall be more
stained by them, than strengthened in them. Have you foes? if vicious, they
deserve ever to be held so; but if they affect goodness, prize them above the
value of your highest fauning friends: who, as they are mere obseruers of the
time, prefer your fortunes with which you are enriched, or honors to which
you are advanced, or some other by-respect secretly aimed, before those
essential parts which are in you, and truly ennoble you.

Are you of esteem in the State? Become powerful Petitioners for the poor
man's sake. Prefer his suite, entertain a compassionate respect of his
wrongs. Labor his relief; and do this, not for the eyes of men, but of God;
who, as he sees secretly, will reward you openly.

Again; have you such as malign your honor? Their aspersions cannot touch
you; He that made you, has made you strong enough to despise them, and with a
patient smile, or careless neglect to slight them. The sweet smell of your
vertus has already dispersed themselves; your memory is without the reach of
infamy: (...) then secure, while your virtues shine so pure. Retain a true and
unenforc'd in you; so shall honor appear more g^a^efully in you. Imitate not
those sudden-rising gourds of greatness, who have no sooner attained the
titl^s of Ladies, than this report makes them put on a new port; old
acquaintance, must be forgot; (...) must sit on their brows; and a
contemptuous disdain on their lips. Though their mold be but the same, they
would feign change themselves into another mold. These are such as deserve not
your knowledge; though they be by their titles honored, their titles by their
ignoble actions become blemished. Let them therefore study making of a face;
composing of their gate; preserving of their vain pomp; with an unbeseeming
port: while your Contemplation shall fix it self on no other object, than
that true expressiue end of honor: which is, to retain a Christian humility
in your state; a noble Compassion in your eye; an affable sweetness in your
discourse; an exquisite practice of goodness in your whole life. To
dis^esteeme virtue, and hug that painted Idol of titular honor; is to
contemn the Instrument, and foolishly to prize the Case or Cover. Be ye never
so eminent, ye are but painted Trunks, if virtue be not resident. Let her then
not only be resident but president over all your actions; so shall you not
only live but dye with honor; by leaving that succeeding memory of your
virtues behind you, that time may here eternize you, when time to eternity
shall change you* For as salt to every subject, whereto it is applied, gives a
savor; so gives virtue the sweetest relish unto Honor.

Cloth dyed in grain retains ever the deepest color; No cloth takes such
deep tincture, as the Cloth of humor.
but none of deeper dye than the Cloth of Honor, If it be but with the least
blemish tinct, it can never wipe off that taint. Spots in white are soonest
discerned, and errors in great personages, whose actions should be whites for
inferiors to shoot at, are quickliest discovered. True Coral needs no color;
no more needs true Honor any exterior luster. When Parasius, that exquisite
Painter was to take a Counterfeit of Hellen, he drew her with her head-attire
loose; and being demanded the reason, answered, She was loose.

Be your actions never so darkely shrouded, nor your amorous encounters
cunningly carried; there will be ever some priute Pencill to portray them, some
quicke-sighted eye to display them. Loves enteruiew betwixt Cleopatra and Marks
Anthony, promised to it self as much secure freedom as fading fancy could
tender; yet the last Scene clozed all those Comicke passages with a Tragic
conclusion.

No pleasure can be constant, unless it afford inward content; nor can it
minister content, unless it be on virtue grounded. Honor then must choose for
her self such a Consort, as she may not be ashamed to have chosen. A
vigilant Circumspection should attend her; resembling in this particular, the
watchful Crane, whose wary eye ever fears, and by a timely fear preuents
surprizall. Now, there is nothing that asperseth a deeper stain upon the
Cloth of Honor, than too much attention unto Sycophants. These are they,
which transport Honor above her self, by bringing her to a vain and odious
idolizing of her self. These will not suffer their Trencher-patronesse to
reflect on her self, nor to enter into a private treaty with mortality. Those
be too sour and severe Tractates for greatness. Death is to be thought on
with these, when nothing else is to be thought on. O what pernicious Consorts
be these for noble Personages? Antisthenes said truly of them; Praestat (...)
quam (...) incidere: for Ravens feed only on dead Carcasses, but flatterers
upon living men.

O banish these your Portells! Their glozing will labor your Confusion. They
will make you forgetful of your being, and consequently deprive you of your
well-being. Every fool (says Menander) will be taken with arrogance and
applause; whereas the iudiciously wise account it their highest happiness, to
meditate of the means how to prevent their highest unhappiness. It is a
miserable thing in a man, to make himself a beast, by forgetting himself to
be a man. Which usually comes to pass, when we propose before our bleered and
deluded eyes the glorious Spectacles of this Theater of vanity, but never
seriously meditate of our own frailty, nor of the excellency of that Supreme
beauty, which makes the enioyer absolutely happy.

That Mot of the Athenians to Pompey the Great, Thou art so much a God, as thou
acknowledgest thy self to be a man, was no ill saying: for at the least to be
an excellent man, is to confess himself to be a man. Violets, though they
grow low and near the earth, smell sweetest; and Honor appears the fullest of
beauty, when she is humblest. Alas! what are titles worth, when deserts are
wanting? The best signal of descent, is distinguished by desert. Antiochus was
at one time saluted both (...) and (...), a glorious Prince, and a furious
Tyrant. So flitting is the applause of the vulgar, as it never conferres on the
subject it approues or applauds, any permanent honor. It is miserable (says
the Poet) to rely on another fame; Horace*
but worse, to beg fame from them that are infamous. It is prayse-worthy to
be by some dispraysed; yea, virtuous actions, should they be by vicious
persons commended, would rather lose of their luster, than become any way
improued. To be cheerful in adversity, humble in prosperity, and in both to
show a temperate equality, is worthy praise, and deserves Honor for a prize.
Yet, should these be but only pretenses to gull the world, or delude the
simple admirer, they would in time unmask themselves, and display their
counterfeit insides with shame to the world. False and adulterate colors will
not hold, nor virtuous semblances long retain the esteem they have. We have
ever held them for most ridiculous, who follow the fashion, and were never yet
in fashion. And such are all those Counterfeit followers of virtue, who pretend
fairly, but fall off fowly. These may be properly, in my opinion, compared to
our new counterfeit stuffes; which, as at first they are made best, so do they
wear best at first. Your Cloth, Gentlewomen, must be of another nap: it must
not be the best a far off. Flowers, Edgings, Laces, and Borders do beautify
the outward attire, but add no grace to the inward man. Now, that Cloth is
the best, which shrinks the least.

Do any extremities encounter you? Let the innocence of your untainted minds
cheer you? Does disgrace or infamy press you? You have a Cloud of witnesses
within you, that can bear testimony of you, and for you. That person needs not
fear any foe, that has within him such an incomparable friend. There was
never any yet so happy, as to be wholly freed from adversity, and never feel
any gusts of affliction. Trials of patience are sweet encounters; by a mind
rightly-resolued, they are with more delight than distaste entertained. Which,
as they come not unexpected, so are they no less cheerfully received.

It is the argument of a generous spirit, to express his highness most, when
the world account^ of him least. Honor, if truly grounded, can look in the
face of terror, and never be amated. Her device deserved approuement, who in
the portrature she made for her self, directed her eye to the picture of
virtue, and pointing thereat with her finger, used this Imprezza: That picture
is my posture. Truth is, she that makes virtue her object, cannot but make
every earthly thing her subject. Yea, there is nothing she wears, which she
makes not a moral use of to better her self. Her very attire puts her in
mind of what she was before she needed it; and how breach of obedience
necessitated her to wear it. She will not therefore pride her self in her
shame, nor glorify her self in the cover of sin. She cannot eye her self
with any self-love, seeing she lost her self by affecting that which she
ought not to love. Her head-tyre puts her in mind of the helmet of s^luation;
her stomacher, of the breast plate of righteousness; her partl^t, of the shield
of faith; her very shoes, of the sandals of peace. In this Tabernacle of
earth, she is every day nearer her port of rest; for her discourse is ever
seasoned with discretion, winged with devotion, and graced by her own
conversation.

She is none of these, who are Saints in their tongues, but Devils in their
lives: She propounds naught fit to be done, which she confirms not with her
own action. Again, for her actions, she is free from public scandal, as
her whole life is a golden rule of direction, a continued precept of
instruction. In a word, she considers from whence she came, her descent was
noble, and this she graceth with noble virtues. Her house must receive no
dishonor from her, but an ample testimony of a deserving successor.

Let this Idaea, Gentlewomen, be your Pattern. Pure is the Cloth you wear;
let no stain of yours blemish it; no Moath of deserved detraction eat into it.
Many of your Sex, though highly borne, have so blemished the honor of that
house from whence they came, and corrupted that noble blood from which they
sprung, as their memory rots, yet their infamy lives. Again, others there have
been, who though obscurely borne, yet by those eminent virtues which did
adorn them, those Divine parts which did truly ennoble them, they became
enlightners of their obscurity, filling Annals with their glorious memory.
Imitate these; relinquish those. Honor is not worth receiving, unless it be
entertained by one that is deserving: yea, how many have incurred disgrace by
dis-esteeming virtue, when they were advanced to highness of place? Nay, how
many while they lived obscure, lived secure, and preserved their good names,
who afterward, by becoming great, lost that private esteem which before they
possessed? So hard it is to encounter with honor, and every way return a sauer.

Seeing then no Cloth takes such deep tincture as the Cloth of Honor; Let
no vicious aspersion spot it, no corrupt affection stain it; lest, by being
once blemished, it bring that honor into contempt, which before you retained.

LAndmarkes are usually erected for direction of the Mariner, Honorable
Personages should be Presidents of goodness. Epictet.
and Magistrates elected for instruction of the inferior. The keele of man's
life, being ever more laden with vanity than verity; and more chilled with the
bitter gusts of affliction, then cheered with the soule-solacing drops of true
consolation, is ever tossed with contra^y winds: neither, without the help of
some expert Pilot, can poor deluded man arrive safely at the Port where he
would be* Pride transports him, avarice infects him, riot corrupts him,
sensuality secures him, anger distempers him, envy consumes him, idleness duls
him. Thus becomes he piece-meale divided from himself, because he reflects not
with a pure and impartial eye upon himself. What great need stands he in then
of direction in this Maze of misery, vale of vanity? He portraid him well, who
in the description of him, styled him a story of calamity, a statue of
infelicity. He is frail in resisting, prone to falling, slow in rising.
Examples then were useful, to conduct him in his ^ournall. And who more fit to
be these Presidents, than such whom an honorable descent has ennobled, or
Princes favor advanced? It is not for these to entertain any servile or
degenerate affection, nor to ^arbour one mutinous thought against the
sovereignty of reason. To be a Lady of honor is more then titular. She is
only eminent, who makes every action of her life a virtuous president.
Goodness must be infused in her blood, that descent may partake of desert.
Now, there be three especial objects, upon which they are to reflect: Charity,
Chastity, Humility.

An honorable mind is best shown in her Liberal and compassionate
exhibition to such, whose necessities require relief. Yea, she loves those
best, to whom these arguments of bounty are in highest measure expressed. She
auerts not her ear from the needy beggar, she will show him all favor for his
image or feature. She holds it an unbeseeming state, to entertain a sour
look, where noble pity should beget in her a compassionate love. She is so
daily and duly inured to works of mercy, as she joys in no object more than
occasion of bounty. She considers (and this she Divinely applies unto her
self) how naught but vanity is to be attributed to them, retain they never so
much earthly glory on them, who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in
the dust, which are crushed before the Moath. Job 4. 19.
Silken vanity cannot delude her, nor any opinionate conceit of her own estate
transport her. Her mind is not subject to wavering, nor her walk to wandering.
Be her life long; her goodness becomes improued: be it short; her desires are
crowned. Neither reserues she the gleanings for him, that is Master of the
Harvest. Poverty, appear it never so despicable to her eye, it conueyes
compassion to her heart. She gives Alms of the best, for his sake whom she
loves best. A miserable mind she hates; for she conceiues how nothing can be
better worth enjoying, than a liberal desire of disposing: which she
expresses with that cheerful alacrity, as it inhanceth the value of her
bounty. Thus she lives in a free and absolute command of what she enioyes;
with an hand no less open than her heart; that action might second her pious
intention.

Neither is the true Nobility of her mind less discerned by her love to
Chastity. Pure be her thoughts, and unstained. The Sanctuary of her heart is
solely dedicated to her Maker; it can find no room for an inordinate affection
to lodge in. She knows not how to throw out her loue-attracting Lures; nor to
expose the glorious beauty of her soul to shame. A moments stain must not
blemish her state. She will not therefore give her eye leave to wander, lest
it should betray her honor to a treacherous intruder. How weak prove those
assaults, which her homebred enemies prepare against her? Her look must be
set on a purer Object than vanity: She will not eye it, lest she should be
taken by it. Her Discourse must be of a better subject than vanity: She will
not treat of it, lest she should be engaged to it. Her thoughts are not
admitted to entertain vanity: They must not conceit it, lest they should be
deceived by it. Occasions wisely she foresees, timely preuents, and
consequently enioyes true freedom of mind. You shall not see her consume the
precious oil of her Lamp, the light of her life, in unseasonable
reere-bankets; unprofitable visits; or wanton treaties. Those will she not
admit of for companions, who are prodigal of their honor. These she reproues
with a mild spirit, laboring to reclaim them with an ingenuous tender of her
virtuous compassion toward them. None she more distasts than these Brokers or
Breakers of licentious bargains: She excludes them the List of all ci^ill
society. How cauteious she is, lest suspicion should tax her? Outwardly,
therefore, she expresses, what she inwardly professes. That honorable blood
which she from her Predecessors received, till death surprise her, will she
leave untainted. Neither is there ought she hates more than pride, nor scorns
more than disdain. She rightly considers how her days are mensurable, being
but a span long, which implies her breuity; and miserable, being altogether
vanity She disclaymes that state which consists in scornful looks; A sweet
and affable Countenance she ever bears: The honor she enioyes makes her
humbler; and the praises which are given her, work in her thoughts no
distemper. So far is she from affecting the pomp of this world, as it
grows contemptible to her higher-mounting thoughts. A fair and well-seeming
retinue she ever keeps about her: but none of these must be Sycophants, with
their oily tongues to delude her; neither must any, who clothes his
Countenance with scorn, attend her. She observes on what steep and dangerous
grounds ambition walks. Her sleeps are sweeter; her content higher; her
thoughts heauenlier. It is one of her greatest wonders, that any one should be
so rest of understanding, as to forget what infirm ground he stands on. The
purest Creature, be she never so absolute in her feature, is of no richer
temper than Earth, our Common-mother. She is wiser than to prefer a poor
handful of red Earth before her choycest treasure. Though her deserts merit
honor, she dis-esteemes her own deseruings; being highly valued by all but
her self. Thus she prepares her self daily for what she must go to. Her
last day is her every days memorial. Lower may her body be, when interred;
but lower cannot her mind be, than at this instant. So well has she attained
the Knowledge of her self, as she acknowledges all to be frail, but none
frailer than her self.

Here, Gentlewomen, have ye heard in what especial Objects you are to be
Honorable Presidents. You shine brighter in your Orb than lesser Stars. The
beams of your reflecting virtues must admit of no Eclipse. A thousand eyes
will gaze on you, should they observe this in you. Choice and select are the
societies you frequent, where you see variety of fashions: imitate not the
newest, but neatest.

Let not an action proceed from you, which is not exemplary good. These that
are followers of your persons, will be followers likewise of your lives. You
may weane them from vice, win them to virtue, and make them your constant
followers in the serious practice of piety. Let your virtues cloth them
within, as their veiles do without. They deserve not their wage, who desist
from imitating you in actions of worth. Your private family is a familiar
Nursery; Plants of all sorts are there bestowed. Cheer and cherish those that
be tender; but curb and correct those that be of wilder temper. Free and
fruitful Siens cannot be improued, till the luxurious branches be pruned. But
above all things; take especial care that those vices spread not in you, which
are censured by you. You are Soueraignesses in your families; neither extend
your hand too much to rigor; neither contract it by showing too much
remissness or favor. Let neither virtue pass unrewarded, nor vice, if it grow
domineering, pass unreproved. Foul enormities must admit of no Privileges.
No; should you, by a due examination of your selves, find any bosome-sinne
secretly lurking, any subtle familiar privately incroaching, any distempred
affection dangerously mutining: Be your own Censors. Be not too indulgent in
the favoring of your selves. Proficients you cannot be in the School of
virtue, unless you timely prevent the ouer-spreading growth of vice. Let not
your Sun, the light of your soul be darkened, Let not your Spring, the fount
of your virtues be troubled; Let not your Fame, the perfume of your Honor be
impaired. As you are generous by descent, be gracious by desert. Presidents are
more powerful than Precepts. Be examples of goodness, that you may be heirs
of happiness. The style you enjoy, the state you retain, the statues which
after you may remain, are but glorious trophies of fading frailty. Virtues are
more permanent Monuments than all these; these are those sweet flowers that
shall adorn you living, impall you dying, and Crown you with comfort at your
departing. Lastly, as you were honorable Personages on Earth, where you were
Presidents of goodness, so shall you be glorious Citizens in heaven, where you
are to be Participants of all happiness.

WHere Virtue is sown in a noble Seed-plot, Virtue or vice whethersoeuer takes
hold first, retains a deeper impression in honor, than any lower subject.
manured and fructified by good discipline, strengthened by Example, and
adorned with those more graceful parts, which accomplish the subject wherein
virtue is seated: what bickrings of fortune will it sustain? What Conflicts in
the necessities of nature will it cheerfully encounter? Her spirit is raised
above any inferior pitch. Yea, the habit of goodness has wrought such divine
impressions in her soul who is thus disposed; as society may improve her, but
cannot corrupt her, because a zealous affection to virtue does possess her.

You shall ever observe these, whom Nobility of blood has advanced, to retain
some seeds or semblances of their progenitors, which are so impressiue in them,
as no occurrent, be it never so violent, can estrange these from them. Here you
shall see a native affability, or singular art of winning affection, to one
naturally derived. There in another such a rough and unseasonable austerity, as
her very countenance is the resemblance of a Male^ola. Some from their infancy
have retained such a sweet and pleasing Candor, as they could cover anger with
a cheerful smile, and attemper passion with a graceful blush. Besides, they
had the gift to expostulate with their discontents, and by applying seasonable
receipts to their wounds, free themselves from falling into any desperate
extremes. Others would rather dye, then suffer the expressions of their
Passions to dye. For affronts, as their spirits could not bear them, so did
their actions discover them, and make them objects of derision to such as
observed them. And whence proceeds all this? Surely, from the very first relish
of our humors; Arist. 3. de anima.
when that unwrought Table of youth, becomes furnished with choice characters;
and the Subject begins to affect what is engraven in them; by continuance of
time they become so habituate, as no art can make them adulterate. Sempr^nia
was too light in her youth, to be staid in her age. Fuluia gave too much way to
her passion in her youth to attemper it in her age. Zantippe was too shrewd a
maid, to become a quiet wife. What Nature has not effected in us, may by
industry be facilitated in us, so we begin to work, while the wax is soft. O
Gentlewomen, how many, whose excellent endowments deserve admiration, either by
selfe-opinion have become transported, or by giving loose reins to passion,
have miserably wandered, or by inueying against others more deserving parts,
have wittingly transgressed? By which means, they become spectacles of
contempt, who otherwise by their conceiving discourse might have given occasion
of content. It is too true, that the liberty of greatness is such, as it is
more apt to find fuel to feed the humor of vice, then to minister any
useful ingredience for the recovery of virtue. Great minds are many times
sick of great maladies, which by soothing parasites become insensible, and
consequently incurable. Vice in a poor habit never retains that majesty,
which it displayes in a richer ro^be. Is it so? Reflect then upon your selves;
if vice seem so specious, what will virtue do. (Though all your virtues be but
indeed specious vices.) Believe it, if you cherish virtue in your minority, she
will perform the office of a faithful guardian. The widows tears shall be
very few, for she will find justice to redress her: the Orphans cries shall
not be so loud, she will find compassion to cheer her. The State shall not
exclaim of surfeits, for temperance shall shield her: nor the Church of
coldness, for zeal shall inflame her: What a sweet consort is an unison of
virtues to the ear of a divine soul? All other Music is disrellishing,
because it works not on the affection.

Now would you know whence it comes, that virtue or vice, whethersoeuer takes
hold first, retains a deeper impression in Honor, than in any lower subject?
The reason is evident: As in their state or condition they are more eminent, so
is their representative example in others more inherent. Do these honorable
personages then love virtue? they are virtuous molds unto their followers: they
shall find in their shadows what they express in themselves. Iulia could not
be loose, when Lucrecia was so chaste: she saw that in her Mistress, which
deserved love, and to that she conformed the line of her life. To consort at
unseasonable hours with loose lovers, or to entertain light discourse to
beguile time, was no authenticke doctrine in her Mistress family: no day was
without her task, no night without her peculiar employment. There is no
question, but the prime years of this noble Lady were seasoned with such
exquisite instructions, as what her youth had received; were not in her riper
years to be abolished. First motions have deep impressions: especially, when
they become seconded by examples of authority, whose very persons impose on
their Pupils a resistlesse necessity. The estimate of Honor, with those who
are truly honorable, is at too high a rate to engage it self to the hazard of
disgrace, for any temporary profit or delight. Their only profit is to become
proficients in the practice of Virtue; Their highest delight, to subdue their
delights to the obedience of reason, for the love of virtue. Such as these, are
to be accounted only Noble; for their desires are so, which they ever ennoble
with deserving actions For tell me, can any one whole judgment is not blinded,
or inward light not wholly blemished, esteem that Person for honorable, whose
Outside only magnifies it self in a poakt head, a poland sleeue, and a
^rotean body? No; these are but outward badges of their inward vanity. These
have too much coare at their heart, to be of sound health. If they have no
other expressions to deblaze their honor, they are rather objects of Contempt
than State, be they never so glorious to the eye of our vulgar.

It has been (and I could wish it were not to this day continued) an usual
form of breeding, with some more eminent Persons, to have their Children
practice a kind of state from their infancy; which, indeed, being truly
defined, was a phantasticke supercilious garb, which discovered more pride
than deserved praise. Neither could these so easily relinquish in their age,
what was commended to them in their youth. ^or such as commonly attended their
persons, extolled whatsoever they saw by them, or (...) them expressed, such is
the misery of greatness, that if it be not an exact Censor and reprouer of her
own vanity; They shall find approuers of it by those odious professors of
lycophancy, whose glozing cond^tion has been the ruin of many a noble
family. For what may be the usual dialect of these Tam^ Beasts to their
bounteous Benefactors, those prodigal disbursers of their fathers providence,
but this parasit^call parley? It would well become you, to be rarely seen,
reseruedly affable; to retain state in your peace, awe in your face, scorn in
your eye, a storm in your brow, with a graceful contempt in all your
carriage. An excellent direction to purchase hate. These followers are not for
your honor. The way to divert their strain, is to affect what they distaste.
You cannot want vicious Libertines to second you in a sensual course, if your
own disposition stand so affected. Calphurnia could not be good, when
Messalina was so naught. Your lives, as they are lives to your selves, so
should they be light^ unto others. Are you modest? it will beget a love of
modesty through all your family. Not one who owes their observance to you, but
will admire this virtue in you, and practi^e it in themselves, because they see
it so highly valued by you. Again; Lightness or any irregularity in you
whatsoever, will not redound only to your own, but your whole families
dishonor. Which opinion once possessed, your Honor receives such a mortal
wound, as no continuation of time (so lasting is the record of infamy) may
perfectly cure it: which seems confirmed by our modern Poet: Search all thy
books, and thou shall find therein,
That Honor is more hard to hold than win.


How cautelous then ought you to be of that, which preserues your well being?
Many nobly descended, are sufficiently instructed, how to retain their state,
what place to take, by remembering whence they came; mean time, they forget
whence they came first. O consider how this Speciosior p^luis, this more
specious or seemingly precious dust of yours is but dust. Vice will but varnish
it; it is virtue that will richly enammell it. Your birth rather restraines
than improues your liberty; your sex should detract from it self, were it
estranged from modesty; your beauty, honor, and all, are servants to time, or
worse, if bestowed on vanity. Let virtue retain such deep impression in you,
as no vicious affection may seize on you. Occasions are dangerous persuasions:
prevent therefore the mean, that you may attain a more glorious end. That
only deserves your love* which shall make you for ever live. Virtue, if you
love her and live with her, by becoming your suruiuor, will crown your happy
memory with succeeding honor.

IT is usually observed, that Hawks of one Ayrie, That virtue may receive the
first impression by means of an inbred noble ^^sposition, seco^ded by helps
of Education.
are not of one nature; Some are more mettall'd, others more lazy. As in Birds,
so in all other Creatures. Liuia and Iulia, Augustus his daughters, were
sisters, but of different natures. Some there are, who even from their infancy
have such excellent seeds of native goodness sown in them, as their
dispositions cannot relish ought that is irregular. In arguments of discourse,
they are moderate; in Company temperate; in their resolves constant; in their
desires continent; in their whole course or carriage absolute. Others naturally
so perverse, that like our These are described to life in the person of an
hu^orous fantarticke in this pleasant Epig^am.
humorous Laie^s, they can affect ^ought that others love, nor relish ought
that others like. The byas of their fancy runs still on the fashion; their
tongue a voluble Engine of feminine passion; their resolves full of uncertainty
and alteration. The whole Interlude of their life a continued Act of
femall-follies. It were hard to win these to the love of virtue, or those to
delight in vice. This might ea^^ly be illustrated by diverse memorable
instances, Sic (...) must eat her break fastis her bed, And is til noon in
trimming of her head, and s^^s at table like a maiden-Bride, And takes all day
of nothing but of pride, God may dae mu^^ in mercy to save her, But what a c^se
is he in tha^ shall have her?
personated in such; who from their very Cradle, became seriously devoted to a
religious priuacy, supplying their want of books, wherein they were merely
ignorant, with a devout and constant meditation of Gods works, wherein they
employed their whole study.

Industrious were their hands in laboring, and bounteous were they in
bestowing. A native compassion lodged in their hearts, which they expressed in
their charitable works. Hospitality to the stranger and needy beggar, was
their highest honor. Suffer they would the height of all extremes, ere they
would suffer the desola^e to want relief. So strongly were their affections
fortified against the assaults of an imperious Lover; as death was to them a
cheere^ull object to preserve their high-priz'd honor. Such singular effects
as these, have been usually produced by an innate noble Disposition; so as,
some of these whom we have here cursorily shadowed, were endowed with such
virile spirits, as they stickt not to spit in the face of tyranny; others were
not abashed to This was formenly instanced in that memorable example of
Sput^nia, pay. 104.
disfigure their own beauty, lest it should become an adulterers booty. In
these had virtue taken such deep impression, as nothing could deeply touch
them, but what trenched on their reputation. Though by nature they were
timorous, and inconstant, resolution had so prepared them, as they became
discreetly valiant; looking death in the face without fear, and embracing her
stroke as a favor. Do you admire this in them? Imitate them, and you shall
be no less by succeeding times honored, than these in ours admired. Conceive
your life to be an intricate Labyrinth of affliction; the very anuill, whereon
the heavy hammer of misery incessantly beats. Reflect on your birth; and you
shall perceive how you give the world a good morrow with grief; Look at your
death; how you bid the world good night with a groan. Joy then cannot be long
lasting, when you are daily taking leave of the place where you live; which
now, though living, you are leaving. Besides, no continued hope of comfort can
be expected, where fear presents her self an inseparable attendant. Fear
has command over subject and over King,
Fear has no Phere, feare's an imperious thing.


To allay which fear, address your selves to that most, which may give you
occasion of fearing least. And what may that receipt be? A mind purely refined
from the corruption of this infectious time. Meditate therefore of that never
fading beauty that is within you. Labor to preserve it from the injury of all
incroaching Assailants. If you fl^s with any painted flourish of light
Rhetoric woo her, timely prevent her before she win her. If the world
with her Lure of honor, command, or the like, seek to draw her; reclaim her,
lest vanity surprise her. If her professed Enemy labor to undermine her, make
known his long-profest enmity unto her, that a vigilant circumspection may
arm her. Admit, your dispositions become sometimes auerse from the practice of
that which you should most affect; divert the Current of them. You love
liberty; confine it to moderate restraint. You affect honor, curb it with a
serious meditation of your own frailty. You desire to gather; sow your bread
upon the water* Charity will bring you quickly to a better temper. You admire
gorgeous attire; remember the occasion how you first became clothed: had not
sin been, these poor habiliments had never needed. Does delicate fare
delight you? Consider how it is the greatest misery to pamper that delicately,
or cherish it with delicacy that is your mortal and professed enemy Do wanton
Consort* work on your fancy? Cure betime, this dangerous phrenzy. Auert your
eye, lest it infect your heart: Con^erse with reason, and avoid nothing more
than occasion. Do you find your affections troubled, or to passion stirred?
Retire a little from your selves; attemper that boiling heat which works so
violently on you: and in the end, resolve thus; It will redound more to our
honor to bridle anger, than to engage our discretions by giving reins to our
distemper. Can you not see your Neighbors fi^d flourish without an Envious
Eye? Of all others, expulse this soonest; because of all others, it partakes of
the Devil the nearest. As you are commanded to love him as your selves, so
wish not that evil unto him, which you would not have to fall upon your
selves. Lastly, do you find a remissness in you to any employment that is
good? Tob. 4. 15.
Shake off this natural du^nesse, and inflame your affections with a Divine
feruentnesse. You have hitherto been slow in doing good, show that in doing
ill. Mean time, with the wings of holy and heauenl^ desires mount from earth
to heaven; plant your affections above, though your pilgrim dimensions be here
below. Which the better to facilitate, certain ever in your memory this devout
Memorial or Meditation: Think whence you came, and be ashamed; Bern.
where you are, and be aggrieued; where you go to, and be affrighted.

Every way wherein you wake, as it is full of snares, so should it be full of
eyes. Those two roots of inordinate fear, and inordinate ^^ue, have brought
many to the brinke of misery, by plunging their minds in the puddles of
vanity. Look about you; snares you shall find within you, snares without you.
Snares on your right hand, and those deceitful; Prosperity in affairs
temporal. In which, such persons are usually taken and surprised, by whom the
benefits of God are abused. As the Rich, when he bestows his wealth in
attiring himself sumptuously: the Mighty, in oppressing the needy; the Amorous
or Lovely, in giving others occasion to be taken with their beauty: Whence the
Lord by the mouth of his Prophet: Thou have made thy beauty abominable. Snares
likewise on your Left hand, and those fearful; adversity in affairs
temporal. In which the poor, ^nfirme, and afflicted are entangled and
miserably in ^hralled: who by suffering affliction impatiently, cur^e God,
their Neighbors, and themselves in their ^duersity: Whence that D^uine and
devout Father ^aith: In affliction the wicked detest God, and Aug. lib. 1. de
Ciuit. Dei.
blaspheme him: but the godly pray unto him, and praise him.

Now, virtuous Gentlewomen, whose titles do not so much transport you, as your
love to goodness does inflame you; you may hence observe, how noble and
generous dispositions, which indeed, are properly defined equal or temperate
disposers of the affections, have and do ever receive the first impressions of
virtue; which are with constancy retained, as they were cheerfully received.
Express then this Nobility of your well-disposed natures in affecting what is
good. Vice throws her aspersions on no subject so much as on Honor.
Relinquish then rather all state, than it should retain the least stain. Much
is promised by your disposition; and no less by your Discipline or Education.
Your well-seasoned youth was never known to that rudeness, which more rural
or servile states were bred in. Second these rising hopes of inward happiness.
You are fruitlesly great, if you be not fruitfully good. Every moment wafts you
nearer your haven; let every action draw you nearer heaven. If you fear at any
time to wander, Religious fear will be your Conductor. If you doubt the issue
of your Encounter, steadfast patience will be your Encourager. If you distrust
your own strength, you are securer; humility will crown you with honor, and
direct you to an happy harbor. As inbred noble dispositions have then enriched
you, which by helps of Education are seconded in you, profess your selves
lovers of virtue by your affections, aduancers of virtue by your actions; that
as honor attends your persons, fame may crown your names, felicity your
souls.

What remains then, Virtue reduced to b^bit, aspires to perfection*
to perfect this absolute Masterpiece of honor; but that ye reduce to habit,
and consequently to their best improuement, these initiate seeds of goodness
sown in your native disposition, grown by succession, and ripened through
Education? Now are ye in the way, and daily nearer the end of your work. Your
vnconfined souls must ever be aspiring, till they come to their perfection.
There is nothing under heaven, that can satisfy a ^ou^e created for heaven.
Are you Virgins? Let ^our Virgin-Lamps be fed with the Oil of Charity. Be
ready before the Bridegroom call you; yea, call on him before he call you.
Let not your Virgin-vayles be vayles for vices. Entertain not a light thought,
lest by degrees it spread to a sin. In suffering Ismael to play with you,
though her sport seem in jest; your ruin will prove in earnest. Eye not that
Object, which may enthrall you; hear not that Subject, which may corrupt you;
relish not that Delight, which may deprave you; admit not of that conceit,
which may delude you.

Retort a light discourse with a Maiden-blush; Candida virgineis miscuit ora
rofis.
it argues a spotless soul. He well described a Virgins prime beauty, who
displayed it in shamefaste modesty. Let your good name be such a precious
ointment as you would not spill it for a world.

Are you Matrons? Enlarge your selves by instruction unto the younger; this is
the office of a Reverend Mother. Derive some portion of that knowledge unto
others, which you fruitfully received from others. Your lives must be their
lines. Every action of yours is exemplar; take heed then, it lead not into
error. As you are ripe in years, so appear rich in hours. Remember not a
sin without a sigh; nor a toy without a tear. There is no sin more odious,
because none more insolently glorious, than to remember sins committed with
joy, and apprehend them with delight. Your families should be virtues
Nurseries, wherein your selves are to be Governesses and Presidents of
goodness. Aug. in Epist.
Here you are to teac^ your children in the trade of their ways, that when
they are old, Prou. 22. 6.
they may not depart from them.

Briefly, are you young or old? Esteem no life sweeter, than when every day
improues you and makes you better. Delights, as they may moderately cheer you,
so let them not play too much on your fancy, lest they take you: Be not
commanded by them, but command them. The only means to weane you from them,
or make you more ind^fferent for them, is to fix your affections on those
which do infini^ely surpass them. There is no comparison betwixt a Palace
and a Prison. Neither betwixt finite and infinite is there any Proportion. O
how happy were you, if with spiritual eyes you might once behold, how the
Princes go before, joining with the Singers, and in the midst, young Damsels
dancing!

The way to contemplate these, and consort with these, is to meditate of
heaven, which enjoys all these. Here no pleasure, be it never so promising;
no delight, be it never so relishing; no recreation, be it never so
refreshing; but though it cheer you in the beginning, it cloyes you in the
end. Last day, you were at Court; where revels, reere-bankets, shows, and
solemnities, were objects to your Eyes, Ears, and Tastes: but all these are
vanished. This day, you Coach to the Exchange; where you see all kind of
vanities set at sale, that may any way soil a deluded soul: but the night
clozeth the day, which makes them shut up shop, and then all those vanities are
shroaded. Next day, you go to a Play; wherein you expect some new Scene of
mirth, or some State-action lively presented: but the last Exit, your impreze
of frailty, dismisseth you, and then all those artfull presentiments, which gave
so much content, are removed. Thus you run in a maze, while you lay the Scene
of your Mirth on Earth. Recollect then you^ d^uided thoughts; seat there the
delight o^ your mind, where you may find a continued Mirth. Earth is too low a
Stage for an Act of that Majesty; and too stra^ght to give your best guest
content within her Mad-wals of misery. Let not one hour pass by you, which is
not well past.

Consider, how the eyes of heaven are upon you; how that generous stem, from
whence you were derived, expects much from you. The former inioynes you upon
hope of a future reward, to be more cautelous; The latter, as you tender the
honor of your house, to be virtuous. Besides, know ( Noble Ladies) that all
the port or state-magnificence which this inferior Globe can afford you,
clozeth ever with more discomfort than content, be your persons never so
seemingly happy, nor happily secure, that do enjoy them. Yea, how happy had
many Eminent personages been, had they never been taken with this Shadow of
happiness? Conclude then, for this conclusion will beseem you, and in your
highest ascent of honor incomparably secure you: Honor is virtues harbor;
only those
Styled great, are virtues friends, and vices foes.


That glorious Light of the Church, an industrious Searcher and judicious
Censor of Antiquities, S. Augustine, says, That anciently the Romans
worshipped Virtue and Honor for gods. Whence it was, that they built two
Temples, which were so seated, as none could enter the Temple of Honor,
unless he had first passed through the Temple of Virtue: to signify that
none was to be honored, unless by some Virtue he had first deserved it. The
Moral admits no other exposition than its own expression. For Honor, none
should be so daring bold as to woo her, till by passing through Virtues Temple,
he get admittance unto her.

If you desire to be great, let it be your height of ambition to aspire to
honor in the Court of Virtue. Where the lowest cannot be less than a Lady of
Honor, because the lowest of her actions correspond with Honor. Such a
service were no servitude but a solace. Admit, that sometimes you affected
foreign fashions, now let foreign Nations admire your virtues. Perchance, the
delicacy of your nature, or misery of a long prescribed custom will not so
easily at the first be wholly weaned, from what it has for so many years
affected. Use then an easy restraint at the first; withdraw your affections
from vanity by degrees; reserve some select hours for private Devotion; check
your fanc^es, when they dote on ought that may distract you. The first
Encounter will be hardest; Time will bring you to that absolute sovereignty
over your passions, as you shall find a singular calmness in your
affections. What a brave Salique State shall you then enjoy within your own
Commonwealth? Vigilance becomes Warden of your Cinque Ports; not an inuasiue
forrainer dare approach, while she with watchful eyes waits at the Port. All
your followers, are vertu^s sauorites. Piety guides you in your ways; Charity
in your works. Your Progenitors deserved du^ praise, but you surpass them
all. Thus shall you revive the ashes of your families, and confer on them
suruiuing memories. But, it is the ^uening Crowns the day; sufficient it is
not to diffuse some few reflecting beamelins of your virtues, at your first
rising, and darken them with a Cloud of vices at your setting. As your days
and more in number, so must they be every day better. What auailes it the
Mariner to have taken his Compass wisely, to have shunned rocks and places of
danger warily, and at last to run on some shelfe, when he should now arrive
at the ^ay where he would be? Rocks are ever nearest the shore, and most
tentations nearest your end. If you resolve then to come off fairly, prepare
your ^elues for some encounter daily; observe your exercise of devotion duly;
resist assaults constantly; that you may gain a glorious victory. This is all
the Com^^at that is of you desired; wherein many of your s^x^ have nobly
deserved. Stoutly have they combated, and sweetly have they conquered. Emulate
their virtues, imitate their lives, and enjoy their loves. So may you with that
Pattern of patience dye in your own Nests, and multiply your days as the
Sand: So may your virtues, which shone so brightly in these Cour^s of Earth,
appear most glorious in those Courts of heaven. So may these Sca^tered flowers
of your fading beauty, be supplied with fresh flowers of an incorruptible
beauty; yea, the King himself shall take pleasure in your beauty; who will come
like a glorious Prince out of his Palace of royal honor, to grace you; like a
Specious Spouse out of his Nuptial Chamber, to embrace you. Mean time, fear
not death, but smile on him in his entry; for he is a guide to the good, to
conduct them to glory. Conclude your resolves with that blessed Saint; in hope
no less confident, than in heart penitent: We have not lived so in the world,
Ambros.
that we are ashamed to live longer to please God: and yet again, we are not
afraid to dye, because we have a good Lord. Short is your race, near is your
rest: Only, let the loss of earth be your gain, the love of God your goal;
and Angelical perfection, ^o which your constant practice of pretty and all
Christian duties have so long aspired, your Crown.

The fear of the Lord is a pleasant Garden of blessing, there is nothing so
beautiful as it is, Eccles. 40. 27.

Trin-vni Deo omnis gloria.
A Gentlewoman, Character

IS her own Tyrewoman; one that wears her own face; and whose complexion is
her own. Her Iournals lie not for the Exchange, needless visits, nor
Reere-bankets. Shows and presentiments she viewes with a civil admiration;
wherein her harmless desire is, rather to see than be seen. She ha^es nothing
so much as entering parley with an immodest Suitor. Retire from occasions draws
her to her Arbor: where the sole object of her thoughts is her Maker. Her eyes
she holds her professed foes, if they send forth one loose look; tears must sue
out their pardon* or no hope of reconciliation. Her resort to the Court, is for
occasion, not fashion: where her demeanor ever gives augmentation to her
honor. Her winning modesty becomes so powerful a Petitioner, as she ever
returns a prevailing Suitor. During her abode in the City, she neither wears
the Street, nor wearies her self with her Coach; her Chamber is her
T^ring-roome, where she bethinks her how she may play her part on the worlds
Theater; that she may gain applause of her heavenly Spectators. Her constant
reside is in the Country; where hospitality proclaims her inbred affection to
works of piety. All which she exercises with that priuacy, as they will
witness for her, she fears nothing more than vainglory. In her house she
performs the office of a Mistress, no imperious gouernesse. She knows when to
put on a smooth brow, and to cherish industry with moderate bounty. Her
discreet providence makes her family look with a cheereful countenance: Her
posterity cannot choose but prosper, being nursed by so natural a mother. The
open field she makes her Gallery; her Laborers, her living Pictures; which,
though she finds mere Pictures, hanging on, rather than laboring, Passion
transports her not above her self, nor forces her to the least expression
unworthy of her self: she passes by them with a modest reproof, which works
in them a deeper impression, than any fiery or furious passion: Her Neighbors
she daily wooes and winnes: which she effects with such innocent affability, as
none can justly tax her of flattery. An Ouer-seer for the poor she appoints
her self, wherein she exceeds all those that are chosen by the Parish. She
takes a Survey daily and duly of them, and without any charge to the Hamlet,
relieues them. She desires not to have the esteem of any She-clarke; she had
rather be approved by her living, than lear^ing: And has ever preferred a
sound professant before a profound disputant. A president of piety she
expresses her self in her family, which she so instructs by her own life,
as virtue becomes the object of their love. Her task she sets her self
daily, which she performs duly* Her own remissness, (if any such be) she
reproues by so much more than observe her, could be well content to serve her.
She is generous in all; Not a Look but gives Life to Love; and that so
virtuously disposed, as not a light thought can distract it. Her very motion is
a moving direction; She never learned to tinkle with her feet, to wander with
her eyes, to stai^e her spotless honor with a painted blush. All she does is
her own; All her own does incomparably please; which she clozeth with this
impreze: Loving Modesty is a Living Beauty.

COMPLEMENT she admits, but not that which this Age affects; she preferres
Substance before mere formality. Pith before the Rind, Performance before
Ceremony. She distasts nothing so much as that Courts sustian; which, in her
esteem, is quite out of fashion, your Servants Servant. She cannot protest in
jest, nor profess what she means not in earnest. She cares not for this
Rhetorical varnish, it makes a good cause suspicious; her desire is to
express her self in action more than discourse. That COMPLEMENT which
consists in congies, cringies, and salutes, dis^ell^sheth her palate most: it
tastes too much of the Caske; for the rest she is secure, so her actions be
really pure; her self completely honest. Thus she sums up her days, makes
virtue her praise, this her Impreze; Civil Complement, my best Accomplishment.

DECENCY is her native Livery; though she make no shadow of it, her own
shadow is not more indiuiduate. In her attire she is not so sumptuous as
seemly, not so costly as comely; in her discourse she delivers her mind not so
amply as fully, not so quickly as freely; in her whole course she expresses
her inward beauty. Her Glass is not half so useful to her self, as the
glass of her life is to others. Whatsoever is worn by her, receives a
singular grace from her. Her fashion is never out of request; though more
constant in it, than the Age would admit. She lives to bring time into some
better tune: this is her task in every place; this is that which crowns her
with peace; while she deuiseth this for her impreze: Virgin-Decency is Virtues
Livery.

ESTIMATION is that precious odor which gives sweetness to her honor. Dye
had she rather with it, than enjoy an Empire and live without it. It is the
Goal of all her actions. The Crown of all her Labors. Poverty she holds an
incomparable blessing, so her name be enriched by ESTIMATION: No dead Fly can
corrupt that Ointment. Happy needs must be her State, that preserues this
without Stain. This she feeds not with the i^yce of vainglory; nor seeks to
augment it with a fabulous story. Many have purchased praise in Oily lines,
that never merited applause all their lives. Her desire is to be, rather than
seem, lest seeming to be what she is not, she gull the world, but her self
most, by playing the counterfeit. Resolute is she in this her Impreze: My prize
is her own praise.

FANCY she entertaines with a cheerful but chaste bosom. Though Love be
blind, her love has eyes. No less faithfulll is she in retaining, than
doubtful in entertaining. Protests are dangerous Lures to credulous Lovers,
but her FANCY is too staid to stoop unto them. She can love well, but lest she
should repent soon, and that too late, she will try before she trust, have
some reason to like before she love. She holds that FANCY ^ Fren^y, which ^s
only led by Sense. She makes reason her guide, that Content may be her Goal.
Long time she debates with Love, before ever she give Love her heart; which
done, she confirms the bargain with her hand. Her Constancy she displayes
in this Impreze: My Choice admits no Change.

GENTLITY is not her boast, but that which dignifies that title most. Virtue is
her soueraignesse; in whose service to live and die she holds the absolutest
happiness. Gentry she thinks best graced by aff^bility: To be surly,
derogates as much from her worth, as baseness from Nobility of birth. Her
Lineage is best distinguished by her Crest, her ^orth by her self. Her desert
gives life to her descent. Not an action comes from her, but excellently
becomes her. She ever reflects on the House from whence she came, whose
antiquity she ennobles with numerous expressions of piety, from the rising
height of which increase, she draws this Christian Impreze: Desert Crowne^
Descent.

HONOR she deserves more than desires; This she may admit, but not admire.
Weak she holds that foundation of HONOR, where virtue is not a supporter.
The more HONOR that is conferred on her, makes her the humbler; she clothes
not her Look with a disdainful scorn, nor clouds her brow with an imperious
frowne^ Far more esteems she the title of goodness than greatness. She
holds nothing more worthy of her approving, than a daily drawing nearer to
Perfection, by her virtuous living. Her whole Pilgrimage is nothing else than
to show unto the world what is most requisite for a great Personage. In a word,
shall we take a re-view of her Noble carriage in each of our Obseruances? For
the first, she is fashionably neat; for the second, formally discreet; for the
third, ciuilly complete; for the fourth, amiably decent; for the fifth,
precious in repute; for the sixth, affectionately constant; for the seventh,
generously accommodated; for the eighth, honorably accomplished. Whence it is,
that she impalls her diurnall race with this imperial Impreze: Honor is
Virtues Harbor.

Go on, then, she may with Honor, seeing the King in her beauty takes such
pleasure. A Divine presage of promising goodness was her infancy; A continuate
practice of piety was her youth and maturity; The cloze of her Pilgrimage a
calm passage from frailty to felicity. Long would the earth keep her, but so
should she be kept from that which she values far better. Her Husband cannot
stay long behind, seeing his better part is gone before.

FINIS.
EMBLEM.
SOme hold these Observations to be long,
Some more judicious, hold them to be short,
Thus are they censured be they right or wrong;
What should we then make Censure but a sport,
Since good or bad, we are never the better for it?
Which to attemper, I should think it best,
Virtue were Censor in each Authors breast.

