A MYLD AND JUST DEFENSE OF CERTAIN ARGVMENTS, AT THE LAST SESSION OF
Parliament directed to that most Honorable High Court, in behalf of the
Ministers suspended and deprived etc: for not Subscribing and Conforming
themselves etc. AGAINST AN INTEMPERAT AND VNIVST CONSIDERATIon of them by M.
Gabril Powell. The chief and general contents whereof are breefely laid down
immediately after the Epistle.

G. Powell.

Let there be no strife I pray thee between thee and me, for we be brethren:
Genesis 30:8.

Reply.

The words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet war is in his heart:
His words were more gentle then oil, yet they were swords. Psalm: 55, 21.

Out of one mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren these things
ought not to be so. James 3.10.

My little children let us not love in word neither in tongue only, but in deed
and in truth: 1 Ioh: 3:18:

Imprinted, 1606.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST CHRISTIAN HIGH COURT OF PARliament which
lately was, and shortly again is to be assembled.
RIght Honorable and most Christian Senate, as at your last Session, there were
certain Arguments directed unto You for the quickening of your godly Zeal to
speak, not only boldly, but also in all humility to the Kings most excellent
Majesty, for the Ministers suspended and deprived for not Subscribing and
Conformyng themselves to some present Constitutions, and as ye did graciously
accept of the said Arguments, and most worthily acquit your selves to the
utmost of your powers, touching the matter pleaded for by them: so now
vouchsafe (I most humbly beseech you) the like favorable acceptance of a
sober, modest, and just defense of the same Arguments against a late
uncharitable, unchristian, bitter, calumnious, and cavilling answer, published
under the title of A consideration of them by M. Gabril Powel. I am bold in
steed of the author himself of the Arguments, to take the defense of them upon
me, and to present them to your Honors, because M. Powel himself in his said
pretended answer unto them, has so often referred the judgment of the
Arguments of his consideration of them, and of the whole cause, to your most
grave and gracious company. Yea, there is nothing that I am more willing unto,
or which I do more earnestly desire, then that the cause betwixt M. Powel and
all those for whom he pleads on the one part, and the author of the
Arguments and me the defendant with all other in whose behalf we speak on the
other part, might be iudicioussy and equally heard at the bar of your most
Christian Court. But the truth is, because we desire and endeavor this, hinc
illae lacrymae. Hence is their chief hatred of us, their great contention with
us, and their bitter writing against us. Notwithstanding though now we be
uniustly charged as writing from Cimerian darkness, for concealing our names;
yet if public liberty might be granted to both parts, to stand before your
judgment seat, there freely to plead and debate the cause by the word of God,
and that neither the worldly might and pomp of our adversaries, nor our
meannes and baseness might be respected, but the truth it self simply
considered and regarded, we would also accoumpt it as a singular mercy of God,
and as a special favor of you toward us in that behalf.

In the mean time, I do in all humility referr the Arguments, together with
the defense of them to your grave and judicious consideration against your next
meeting in Parliament: not doubting but that the equity of the cause, and the
innocence of our selves will thereby be so apparent unto you, that though
before some perhaps among you, did think the one not to be so just, and the
other not so free from all blame, yet when ye shall again assemble, ye will
all with one mouth as one man, both justify the cause, and also speak more
then ever before ye have don, for favor unto us, and to our people: betwixt
whom the bond before made by the Church, and sealed by the holy Ghost in the
effects of our Ministry, cannot by any Lordly Episcopal severity be justly
dissolved.

I do further likewise humbly crave your Honorable lawful favor more
specially toward me (if at any time I shall be discovered) against all those
that shall not well brook the sober and modest taxing of their corruptions in
this defense: especially considering the same is not done of any contentious
mind; but only in love of the truth, to support it against those that deprave
it: and in regard of our own good names, to mainteyne our own innocence
against those that under the name of brethren, do most unbrotherly disgrace us.

Moreover, if any thing in this defense following, or in the Arguments
themselves, by the malice of any shall be wrested and perverted, thereby also to
wrest and pervert the law to the danger of the several authors of the one or
the other (being found out) may it likewise please you, in all lawful and
righteous manner to put forth your selves for protection of the said authors:
as chiefly because such wresting of words and perverting of judgment, may
procure Gods judgments against themselves that shall so offend, and against the
whole land; so likewise because to speak in such matters and for such persons
(whatsoever the answerer says to the contrary) shall not only bring much peace
and comfort to such speakers themselves, but shall also be beneficial to the
whole land, as is showed in the Arguments, nothing infringed or weakened, by
all M. Powels opposition unto them.

Yea let this consideration be a third reason to move you the rather so to
speak, viz. that if one man had the divinity and knowledge in law, as also all
other learning, wit and wisdom of all men, yet could he not so warily and
circumspectly write in all things, but that some wrangler or other (instructed
and set a work by the serpent, that is more subtle, not only then all beasts,
but also then all men now living on the earth) might and would find some matter
or other, whereby to molest and trouble him.

I had thought much more to have enlarged this my preface, but the prolixity of
the defense it self much exceeded my first purpos, I will here conclude, both
humbly and with all thanks to God and to your selves acknowledging your most
religious and gracious endeavors at your last Session for the cause and for the
persons pleaded for in the arguments; and most heartily and instantly likewise
praying for you and yours as Nehemiah Nehem: 5:19: and 13:4:
prayed for himself: viz. that God in goodness would remember you (and yours)
according to all that ye have done for us: and that he will never wype out
your kindness that ye have showed on the house of your God, and on the officers
thereof.

A BRIEF NOTE OF SOME OF THE CHIEF general points handled in this defense
following.
THat the author of the Arguments is falsely accused to impute any dissembling
or equivocating to the Kings most excellent Majesty, but that in all things he
has conceaved and written most reverently, Christiantly and duetifully of his
Majesty.

2 That he is as untruly charged with any undutiful speeches against the
Nobility, or any other that have obeyed his Majesty's procedings

3 That the Ministers pleaded for are not refractary, superstitious, or
schismatic: neither confronters of the Magistrate, or troublers of the state,
but that these and other the like imputations do rather belong to their
accusers

4 That our Churches of England are in nothing so glorious state as is
pretended by M. Powel, and other prelaticall persons but rather in diverse
respects, and for diverse parts thereof in lamentable condition.

5 That the late proceedings of the Prelates against such Ministers for not
subscribing, conforming etc: and that many of the late Canons or co^stitutions
are contrary to the word of God, and the laws of this Realm.

6 That the oath likewise Ex Officio is repugnant to the laws of this Realm:
yea abrogated by them, and only enforced by forreyne Canons.

7 That the obedience and loyalty of the Ministers for conscience of Gods word
not conforming themselves, is as good as of the greatest conformitans, yea that
their not conforming themselves in that respect, makes more then conformity
for the good and safety of his Majesty.

8 That the Considerer of the arguments, in his inconsiderat consideration of
them, has most unreverently and undutifully censured the High Court of
Parliament, for their late most religious endeavors in behalf of the Ministers
pleaded for in the said Arguments.

9 That the Ministers so deprived, do not forsake their callings.

10 That although the number of the Ministers so deprived be but small in
comparison of other, yet the deprivation of them and the loss of their
Ministry is dangerous for the whole Church in this kingdom.

11 That the Considerer of the arguments ofttimes offends in those things
which unjustly he objecteth unto the author of the arguments: viz: in
sophistications in general, and particularly in begging of the question: as
also in equivocations, and in vain repetitions of the same things for
increasing of his volume: and lastly incontradicting himself, yea sometime in
one and the same place.

12 That he and other the Prelates most striving for conformity, do attribut
more to conformity, then to any more material and principal duties of the
Ministry expressly commanded by God.

A DEFENSE OF THE ARGVMENTES Lately directed to the High Court of Parliament
for the Ministers silenced ect, against the answer unto them by M. Gabriel
Powell.
All though the late answer of M. Powell to the Arguments in the title
mentioned, for moment of matter be not such, that either any disgrace of the
said Arguments or of the cause it self, with any wise and judicious reader,
need to be feared thereby; or that therefore the said answer should have reply
thereunto: yet for their sake that are not so judicious; and that neither the
answerer himself, neither any other by our silence may have any cause to
insult and triumph, as having won some great field, and gotten some worthy
victory, I have presumed to take upon me the replying thereunto, instead of the
author himself.

Herein (notwithstanding the answerer his scoffing at our triobular Pamphlets)
I will labor as much as I may for brevity, that so the Christian reader may
the less behindred from his other weighty affairs. For this cause I nether
will reply to the whole answer, neither will cause the said answer to be wholly
reprinted, but will only most briefly collect such things, as may most seem
to require reply; but yet with such faithfullnes, that the answerer shall have
no just cause to complain of the said collections, as unjust, or not agreeyng
to his own words. The marginall notes I will reply unto by themselves, and
that according to the letters prefixed unto them: and the rest that he writes,
in that order they are by himself set down.

But before I proceed any further, let me admonish M. Powel of one fault in
him, and common to many other of that side; that is to attribute that to all of
us which is done by any one. I mean in things which they think to be
blameable. These Arguments were written by one alone, yet whatsoever he can by
hook or crook gather as worthy of rebuke or show of rebuke, that he imputes
to all that crave any favor? In good things they deal not so, but that which
is well said or done by one is imputed to one only, so that the rest fare not
the better thereby. My humble desire therefore is, that howsoever these men deal
with us, yet that other would deal otherwise. viz. That if there be any thing
blamable in the Arguments, or in any other one man's writing of our side, it may
be taken as the fault only of one, and not imputed to all. Especially let this
be considered, when there is no fault at all, but only by surmise, and upon
uncharitable misconstruyng and wresting of a man's words. It was the fault of
Saul, for the supposed offense of Abimelech, to kill both him, and also all
the rest of the Lords Priests. It was the sin of Haman, for the suspected
pride of Mordecai in not bowyng unto him, to hate him and all the Jews, and to
plot and contriue the ruin of them all. So the Apostle notes it as a fault of
the heathen, that knew not God, and were given over to a reprobate mind, to
take all things in the evil part. Romans 1.24. Let this therefore be the sin
of such wicked men, but let all true Christians that love and fear the Lord,
be free thereof. Now to proceed, I will begin with the preface.

TOuching the preface there being not much therein which is not afterward
mentioned in the rest of the book, I may the more cursorily pass and rune it
over.

The first point here to be observed, as also in the place of scripture
subscribed to the title Genesis 13.8. Is that he calls us brethren, as if he did
so account and regard us. Notwithstandidg whether he do any otherwise, or with
any other mind so call us, then only as Ioab called Amasae his brother with
his mouth, and yet at the same instant killed him with his hand. 2 Samuel 20 9. I
leave it to be judged by his opposition to our petition, by his most
unchristian, and uncharitable raylings, revilyngs, reproaches and scoffs, as
also by his most unjust collections; as directly contrary to the words, and
much more to the meaning of the author of the said Arguments, so likewise to all
reason, and common sense. Sharpnes and bitterness are the common weapons and
principal armor of that side, which is an evidence of the badnes of their
cause, and no less testimony of the goodness of ours. For truth and
righteousness can support themselves without any such means. Notwithstanding in
this kind, this answerer has far exceeded many other, yea, he may well be
acknowledged to have won the spurs from many other. They commonly object
this fault unto us, and it may be some one of his private motion and
disposition, does a little sometime offend this way, to the grief of the rest
that favor the cause. But if all speeches of that kind that have ever been used
by any of our side, were gathered into one (truly and without any wresting)
they would not a mount to the number proportionably, that is apparent and
evident in this answer.

The which fault is so much the greater, because the arguments are propounded
with all temperance, and without any just occasion to provoke him, except it be
as a weak stomach is sick with the best and most wholesome meat.
Notwithstanding I do the less marveile hereat, because as the more extreme
the love of Amnon was toward Tamar at the first, and the more extreme also
his hatred against her afterward, 2. Sam. 13.15. So this is often to be
observed, that such as sometime have been most hott in dislike of the
corruptions of our Church, they changing their minds and for preferment
conformyng themselves, have become more bitter and heavy adversaryes, then any
of those that were never other the^ conformable men. But was M. Powel at any
time of such a mind? Yea certainly within these few years he was so over
strong, that he called the Communion book a Mass book. At another time
likewise being at a Church, and hearing the Latiny, he rose up saying, come let
us go, what, shall we now hear conjuring? So likewise the time has been when
some other (now very conformable) have publikly in pulpit (I will not say in my
hearing) to the disgrace of the Bishops said, If ever the Bishops do good in
the Parliament house let me be damned. Many other the like instances might be
named, But I regard brevity. These things will be justified. Did any of us ever
so be have our selves? If we had, we might be justly blamed in that behalf.
But I will press this point no further. I have the rather reported this, for
the better answer of the matter of giddines afterward by him objected unto us.

2 The next point in the preface, is, that he charge us with emulation of
forreyne novelty.

Ans. Neither noveltie, nor forreyne. We desire nothing, wherein we have not
proved our desires by such Arguments of Gods word (the best antiquity, and
besides which, the more ancient any thing is, the more rotten is the same)
such arguments (I say) as never have been yet sufficiently answered. Touching
the word forreyne, though indeed the things desired by us are in all Churches
of other Countries fully reformed in doctrine with ours, yet those Churches
being all the same household of faith that we are, they are not aptly called
forreyne. As Englishmen travelyng in other Countries and livyng after English
fashion, are not therefore Forreyners in respect of England whiles they so
travel, but still to be accounted of the same country, so all Churches and all
members of the Church, in what Country so ever they be, are not to be accounted
Forreyners one to another, because they are all Citizens of heaven, and we make
all one family or body.

Besides, the things in controversy which we desire to be removed, may much
more justly be called both Noviltie and Forreyne, because they were not of
Apostolical institution, neither heard of in the Apostles time, yea, condemned
by general arguments in the writings of the Apostles, as has been showed in
diverse other books written one our side, not yet answered: especially in the A
bridgment made by the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese, the Demands, and in the
12 Arguments: as also because they are in use in more Forreyne Popish
Synagogues, then there are reformed Churches in all Europe. Lastly, although
Communion with the Churches of Christ in what country soever, be much more to
be respected, then fellowship with the sinagogues of Antichrist, yet we do not
therefore desire that which we do, because it is in other Churches, but
because the word requires the same.

G. Powel
They refuse to conform them selves. Answer.
None of us have ever had the book of Common prayer authorized by Act of
Parliament 1 Eliz. And some of us have never had the book now urged by the
Bishops provided for us, or tendered unto us: How then have we refused to
conform our selves? Yet we are deprived. By what right and equity I know not.

The ancient approved Discipline and Ceremonies of our Church. Not ancient,
because they have not warrant from God. Neither ever so approved, but that from
the first Preaching of the Gospel in this kingdom, they have been by diverse
godly and learned men oppugned.

His Highness sought to reclaim them by some correction of their obstinacy, as
by silencyng etc. That which his Majesty permitted on that behalf, was
qualified with gracious provisors; 1. To proceed no otherwise therein then
according to the laws of God and the land. 2 To execute even that with all
mildnes and moderation. And thirdly, to endeavore to persuade by all arguments,
rather the^ by censures: which things because they have not been done, but that
in many respects the Bishops and other Prelates have exceeded their commission,
we doubt not but that if it might please some attending upon his Highness and in
grace with him, in all humble manner to inform him, we doubt not (I say) but
that his Majesty, according to his most christian disposition, would
graciously respect the humble desires of his subjects therein. Touching the
other part of M. Powels speech, it is no small abuse of his Majesty to impute
unto him the severitie of the Bishops against us: whereas in truth whatsoever
his Majesty does theri^, is only through their importunity, and by their
accusing us of schism, disorder, sedition etc.

The moderat severity of the Bishops, Gab. Powel
is unfitly and unduetifully termed oppression, and cruelty. Is it moderate
severitie to turn so many Ministers as are now silenced, out of their livyngs?
Yea, Answ.
to provide also, that they shall have no other way or means whereby to live,
that so they, their wives and children may go abegging, to the disgrace of the
gospel, the dishonor of the land, the grief of the godly, and the joye of the
wicked? Especially, is it moderate severity so to do for such causes? Did they
ever read in any antiquity, so many of such quality, and whose labors God had
so blessed, to be thrust and cast out as unsavory salt in the time of the
gospel, in a kingdom whereof both King and people do profess the gospel,
and in an age, in respect of the sins thereof, requyering ten times as many
preachers more then their are, if they could be gotten? If these be the mercyes
of the Bishops, what would be their crueltyes? If this be their moderat
severity, what would be their extremity if they might be suffered?

If a Father should cast his son out of house and home, and utterly
disinherit him, because he would eat no cheese, were this moderat severity?
What then may be said of them that cast out other from the inheritance of the
Lord, whose labors God has blessed to the joye of many an elect soul, and
that only for not doing that, against which they can yield a far better
reason from God his will revealed in his word, then any man can do for his not
eating of cheese or for any other the like action, from the secret instinct of
nature?

G. Powel
The author of these arguments, is not afraid; to persuade and provoke your
Honorable Court (these are his own words) to intercede with his Majesty, that
he would compel the Reverend Prelates to surcease their rigorous and cruel
dealing. The Apostle bids us to provoke one another to love and to good
works. Heb. 10.24. Therefore why might not the author of these arguments use
this word unto the Parliament for so good a work, as in all the said arguments
is intended. But for the latter words of M. Powel, to compel the Reverend
Prelates to surcease their rigorous and cruel dealing etc. Where does the
author use them? The drifte of all the arguments insinuates so much. If it be
but insinuation, then all the words before set down, are not the express own
words of the author, as M. Powell has said. 2 It may be taken for granted,
that the said Prelates are so resolute for mainteyning of their Hierarchy,
Discipline, Ceremonies, and other conformity, that they will not yield one
inche, yea not to his Majesty, exceept they be compelled.

Gab. Powel
The Prelates have soberly and temperatly carried themselves in their proceedings.
Answ.
We will all with one accord most thankfully acknowledge this, when we shall find
it. In the mean time, we do acknowledge it comparatiuly true, in respect of
their wills and desires. For by this answer written by their authority and by
diverse other tokens, it is apparent that they would gladly provoke us to give
them further advantage against us, and also that for these causes they would
do more the^ they do (yet I speak not of all, I do unfainedly confess that
their is great difference of affections amongst them it respect of us) they
would I say do more then they do If they feared not the people? No, but if
his Majesty, his most Honorable counsel would give them leave: and if they
feared not as much indignation from his Highness as now they seem to be in
grace with him; and as much opposition by the honorable Counsel, as now
perhaps they seem to have furtherance by some of them that do not so well
understand the cause.

G. Powel
Their obstinat superstion has worthily made them subject to the proceedings of
the Bishops. What? Superstition? And obstinate superstition? Answ.
We were never before (to my remembrance) charged with superstition, much less
with obstinat superstition: but have always been accounted great adversaryes
to superstition. Yea, we hate it with a perfect hatred, yea our souls abhor
and detest the least superstition, much more obstinat superstition, as much as
the best of them do hate it: yea, much more then some of them: it is one of
our reasons against some points of conformity, that we judge them
superstitious. How then may we be charged with superstition? Yea with obstinat
superstition? But what if we were superstitious? May we therefore be punished
contrary to law, or above that that the law requires? Were not this to ad
transgression to transgression, and to punish sin with sin? We may not do
evil, that good may come thereof.

G. Powel
The author cries out, as if the gospel by such proceedings were banished,
Gods worship profanely adulterated, to the eternal peril of many thousand
souls. Where is this outcry? It is very low and soft, Answer.
in some secret corner, or written in very small letters, that no man can see
or hear of it. The author might well cry out, that the gospel is in part
banished, by the suppression of so many able, godly, faithful and paynefull
ministers; that Gods worship is in part corrupted, both in the doctrine,
especially since this late vehement strivyng by our Prelates for conformity
(as shall be afterward touched) and also in the other public exercises of
religion by mixture of humane inventions, Ceremonies and Traditions. Yea, and
that heerby we are in danger to have the candlestick removed, and the kingdom
of Heaven taken from us, and given to a Nation more worthy then we, except by
repentance and doing our first works Revel. 2.5. Yea, making our last works
more then our first verse. 19. We do in time prevent this judgment.

G. Powel
The Parliament is able to convince him heerin of malepart Sycophancy, and
manifest untruth. Answer.
I would such accusers (notwithstanding their such threats of the Parliaments
kindness) would stand with us, and that we might be admitted to stand with them
at the bar of the Parliament for trial of this accusation, and whether the
author of those Arguments, or this answerer have abused that most worthy Senate.

G. Powel
This author fears no rebuke of shame, for his unconscionable dealyng. Answer.
Let this unsconscionable dealing be showed in the author: or else let this
answerer be ashamed.

G. Powel
This man speaks from Cimmerian darkness, by concealing his name. Answer.
Then also by the same reason many books of the scripture, the writers whereof
have concealed their names, were written from Cimmerian darkness. The like may
be said of many other most worthy Theological books, without name of any
writer. Much more may the same be said of the book entitled SCOTTISH
GENEVATING and ENGLISH SCOTIZING, and many other such disgraceful and
scornful books published without name of any author, against the desired
reformation, and all the favorers thereof. It is also the severitie of the
Prelates that makes us the rather to conceal our names. If we had as much
liberty to publish our books for our selves, as every rayler has to put forth
any thing against us: Yea, as there is for Printing of many profane, filthy,
scurrilous, lascivious, and ungodly books authorized by some of them, you
should quickly see our names.

The author is bold to offer his writing even to your Honors, Gab. Powel
to provoke you to supplicat to his excellent Majesty, in behalf of their
cause, or else to determine it of your selves. Answ.
The author never desired this determynation you speak of by the Parliament, as
though that would or might be authentical without his Majesty's Royal asse^t,
but only that his Majesty thereby seeing the equity of the cause, and the
affection of his people thereunto, might also be the more easily persuaded to
vouchsafe his princly favor toward them therein.

G. Powel
I was commanded by some in authority to peruse and breifely to refute these
Arguments, which at the first I was unwillyng to take upon me. If you be so
ready to be commanded to write against such a cause, take heed you be not
found a servant of men. Answer.
But if any in authority have commanded you this work, did they also command
you to rail and revile your antagonist (as you call him) in such manner as you
do? It is lamentable that any in authority in such a Christian Church, should
either command any such thing, or allow of it being done. But it is more
lamentable to obey. The time was when you did well employ your self against
the Common adversaryes. You did then run well. What let you that you did
not hold on in that course? What has provoked you to turn your pen from them,
and to whet it now the second time against those, whom you call and should in
truth acknowledge your brethren? Do you fear any violence from the Papists by
holding on against them, because perhaps of some former experience? Indeed,
you may well fear such violence from them, and be secure touching all danger
from us, because you have learned from the Apothegme (after mentioned) of D.
Elmer late Bishop of London, and much more from all experience, that you may
justly fear your life and cuttyng of your throat in the company of one Papist,
but that no such thing is ever to be feared amongst ten thousand of (those whom
it pleased him to call) prescisians.

G. Powel
In diverse respects I feared to plead in so high a Court, before such judges
etc. Yet the equity and holiness of the cause moved me etc. Answer.
Why should you fear, being commanded? Would not your comnaunders bear you
out? It may be they will before men, but who shall plead for you before God,
except you repent? Take heed you commend not that to be equal and holy, which
agrees not with the ways of God.

G. Powel
I presently resolved to stand in the gap and breach, between our brethren and
us. Answer.
This resolution upon bare commandment of a man, (it may be also contrary to
the likyng of some to whom you are more bound) was too present to be sound. How
have you stod in the gap and breach? By treading it down to make it lower that
wild beasts, or at the least strange cattle may the more easily break in to
devour the Lords vine, and to eat up the Lords people as it were bread.

G. Powel
Albeit I knew my brethrens affections to be somewhat unkind, and their pens
foul and shameful. Answer.
Whereby knew you their unkindnes and foulnes toward you? Indeed they have
seen and daily do see your unkindnes toward them: yea toward the Lord, in
oppossing your self to the Lords cause, and to them in seeking thereof, and
that in this bitter manner: yea for the foulnes of your pen you might justly
fear the like measure from them again to you. But God forbid that for that we
should sin against God, and cease praying for you.

G. Powel
Seeing it lies not in our powers to make them modest and peacable, and that we
are called to serve God and his Church, which we are bound to do in good and
evil report. Answer.
You should first have proved us immodest and unpeaceable, before you had used
these words. God give those graces to you and us. The serving of God and of
his Church, is not in railing and reproachful speeches, in sharpnes and
bitterness, in untrue and unjust collections directly contrary to the words of
our brethren. But what mea^e you by good and evell report? If as patients, it
is well: if as agents it is not so. But though by your book I have little
cause, yet I will take you in the better sense.

G. Powel
I pray our heavenly Father to forgive them any injury etc. Answer.
Before prayers you should lay aside all wrath of heart, and bitterness of word.
Math. 5.22. 1 Timothy 2.8. Pray also sor the forgivnes of the wrongs you do to
us, both in this book, and also in your latin treatise De adiaphoris.

I have not with drawn my self from this work, Gab. Powel
no not for the estimation and reverence I have of the grave judgments of your
honors. If you had duly reverenced their Honors, Answ.
you would have feared the offering unto them such a present of raylings,
unjust collections etc. As if they had been void of judgment, not able to
discern of such accusations.

G. Powel
I mayntaine here the glory of God, and honor of our Prelates. Answer.
As our Savior said, They shall excommunicate you, yea, the time shall come,
that whosoever kills you, shall think that he does God service. Ioh. 16.2.
So this answerer thinks that he glorifieth God by railing on his cause and
servants. As for the Honor of our Prelates, you should first have been on a sure
ground for the lawfulnes thereof, before you had taken upon you (like a
champion) the defense thereof. 2. Even a good cause is rather overthrown then
vpheld by such means of scoffing and railing, as in this this book you have
used. Thus much for the answer to the Preface of M. Powels.

THE NEXT THING TO BE CONSIDERED is his marginall Notes upon the preface of the
author.
The first note with (a) I pass by.

G. Powel
b This pretense unto the Christian reader, is because they would not seem to
be petitioners unto the Parliament. Answer.
What a strange collection is this? Have we expressly directed all the said
arguments unto the Parliament house, and yet would we not seem to be
petitioners unto the^? Nay rather since this answerer thus carpeth at these
words the Christian reader, M. Powell makes the Parliament no christian
assembly.
gatthering from the humble petition of the Author of those Arguments to the
Christian Reader etc. that he would not seem to be Petitioner to the
Parliment, may not this be better gathered that the answerer distinguishes the
christian readers from the Parliament, and the Parliament from them, and so
makes the Parliament no christian assembly? But why did the author use those
words, the christian reader? The reason seems double: 1 because he did so
account of every one in the Parliament house: 2 because he thought that those
arguments might come to the hands of other Christian readers, then only of
Parliament men.

G. Powel
c The supplicants make the profession of the gospel and all religion to
consist in refusing cap, surplice, cross etc. Great cry, little wool. Answer.
This etc. After the word cross, is well added. For otherwise although we hold
those things to be matters of religion, yet never any of us did affirm all
religion to consist in the^. without this etc. therefore, this is an unchristian
slander, and to speak according to the answerers learning in Aristotle's
Eleuchs, a fallacy ab eo quod est secundum quid, ad id quod est simpliciter.
The adage in the end of this note is too homely for that Honorable Court to
whom the answerer speaks, as being taken from swyne, which for some causes
(not fit to be written) being sometimes shorn, make a great cry, and yield
little wool. And though the answerer by this adage seem to esteem us no
better then swyne, (as also in his other book De adiaphoris it pleases him to
compare us to Apes) yet indeed may he well say that the most of us have but
little wool on our backs, we have been so long and often shorn and shaven,
that we hage nothing left but our very skine: Yet it may be that some of our
adversaryes hope for wool and fat from our livings.

G. Powel
d As if his Majesty would be displeased if any promoted a religious or honest
cause. A malepart and presumptuous (if not a disloyal) censure. Is this man in
his right mind, Answ.
that he makes such collections? The author persuades all men from all such
un-christian and disloyal suspicions of his Majesty, how then may this note
be applied unto him. contradiction in the answerer.
In the last Argument (or rather conclusion of all the arguments) where the
author speaks of some that are always accusing and disgracing the ministers
(pleaded for with Nobles and Princes,) the answerer makes this marginall note,
An unjust calumny. Whether it be so or no let all men judge, as by his whole
answer, so particularly by this note, and them that follow, yea by his whole
answer to all the preface before the arguments. But to return, since sometimes
some fear that even of Christian Princes which they nether need nor ought to
fear, what mallepartnes, presumption, or disloyalty was there in the author
to prevent such fear. Does not the Apostle often times Romans 7.7. and 9.14. and
Galt. 3.21. and often else where, prevent objections that might, but needed not
be made? Shall he therefore be charged with malepert presumption against God and
his truth?

G. Powel
e I know not whereto all his whole Paragraph tends, if the Suppliants deem
not his Majesty to have forsaken his first love, and to have revolted from
religion, at least in show for a time. (f) A malicious, uncharitable and
unchristian allegation to be applied unto the whole State (that loyally obey
his Majesty) especially to his Nobles and servants. Answer
O uncharitable collections. Let the reader by them judge whither this man do
not accuse us, and provoke (what he can) our gracious Prince, his Nobles and
all other against us: Yea, directly contrary to the words of the author, who
laboreth by the whole Paragraph spoken of by the answerer, to persuade all men
to conceive well and Honorably of his Majesty, according to many former most
worthy testimonies of his Princely piety and religion. And albeit all in the
said Paragraph be spoken only to that purpose, yet the answerer wresteth the
same as intended also against the whole State, especially against his Majesty,
Nobles and servants. But he that judges righteously, to whom we commend the
cause and our selves, shall one day make our righteousness known.

G. Powel
g If they had perticularly applied these things, their malice had been the
more manifest. Answer
It greeveth this answerer most, that we are not so maliticious as himself, and
that we give no just occasion of further quarrel with us. When they want
matter of just accusation, then they pretend that aliquid latet quod non patet,
some thing is hid that is not manifest. But of this afterward.

G. Powel
h No bolder and securer censurers of all sorts and degres of men, under the
cope of heaven, then these singular and self conceited refractaryes. Answer.
Yes, this notary is a more bold and secure censurer, in as much as in his notes
before he has censured the author of the arguments, and all other desiering
that which he desires, (of what sort and degree soever) for that that is not
expressed, neither intended, nor any ways to be justly gathered from his
words. When this censuring he speaks of, is proved by any of us, let the
party against whom it is proved bear the blame thereof. If any man censure a
tree according to the fruits it bearerh, he does no more then he may.

G. Powel
i How prodigal they are of the Kings thanks. Answ.
This note shows the prodigality of this answerers malice and words.

The k. is answered before.

G. Powel
l Is a triobular pamphlet such an huge quantity or volume? It may seem the pen
man of this supplication was the worthy author of the late two leaved libels.
Seeing words (as this answerer says in his conclusion) ought to be numbered to
so great States, Answer.
why should respect of brevity be thus scornfully objected to the author?
Especially considering the other manifold and weighty affairs of that
Honorable assembly, unto whom the said Arguments were directed. If the
Arguments were a triobular pamphlet, what would the answer have been without
them: especially without all his cavils, reproaches, unjust colections, vain
repetitions, and that false ground that always he builds upon, viz. his
supposition that we are schismatics? The answerer his former book also De
adiaphoris, what were it with a less margin, without the great multiplicity
of sections, and if every bird had her own feather. The two leaved libells
whereof he speaks, are perhaps the more offensive unto him, because some of
them do attribute more authority to his Majesty, then they would have us to
do, or then the prelates do, that the challenge so much to themselves.

G. Powel
l Such presumptuous and self conceyted Elihues, are these male content
Ministers, who take upon them to instruct such, as be wiser then themselves.
Vide Gregorium in hunc locum. Answer.
What a thing is this? For want of matter against the author, this answerer
falls out with the worthy Elihu, as a presumptuous and self conceited man,
whose wisdom notwithstanding, modesty, and singular humility are evident in
holy scripture, by his silence till other (more ancient then himself) had
spoken all they could, as also by his pleading the cause of God himself, when
all the rest there present had geiven over the same, (in which respect also all
in these days that plead for God against the oppositions of those that would
be accounted the only wise and learned men, are likewise reproched as
presumptuous and self conceited) and lastly by the elegancy and eloquence of
his speeches, and by the profound and divine matter therein contained. Finally
are humble petitioners, that bow themselves to the ground, before them to whom
they do petition, are such petitioners (I say) before heaven and earth to be
proclaimed presumptuous and self conceited instructers? Is this the man that
erst now blamed other as bold and secure censurers?

A REPLY TO THE FVRTHER ANSWER OF the preface to the Arguments.
G. Powel
Some have foolishly made a breach and division amongst us about cross and
surplice etc. Wisdom consists in understanding what the will of the Lord
is, Ephe. 5.17. And in a conscience of keeping Gods commandments and
observing his word. Answer
Deuteronomy. 4.6. The which to reject is the greatest folly Ierem. 8.9. We have made
no breach or division at all: But as Joseph for telling his divine dreams, was
hated of his brethren, and at the last sold a way to strangers by themselves:
and as the blind man John 9. for confessing Christ, and stoutly standing in
that confession, was thrown out of the Jewish Synagogue by the Pharisees, so
(to use the words of this answerer) we are violently and unjustly broken of and
divided, and thrust out of the ministry by other, and yet charged that we have
made a folish breach and division.

G. Powel
And therefore I cannot allow the opinion of such as give out, Answer.
Yet we do all as heartily and faithfully love and affect our Prince and King
(yea of whatsoever religion) and are as ready and willing to defend his person
and honor, against all adversaryes etc. that these our factious brethren are as
dangerous enimyes unto the state as the papists etc. Neither you nor any other,
have ever yet had, or ever (I hope) shall have cause justly to speak, write,
or think otherwise concerning either our love and loyalty toward our
Sovereign, or our duty to any of his governors: yea though we should
cunningly be solicited to some undutiful practices, as some not many years
since were, in the days of late Q. Elizab. of most Honorable memory, who were
so far from enterteyning any such motions, as that most dutifully, they
discovered the same to other in higher authority. Though (I say) we should be
cunningly solicited to any undutifull practices or to the approbation of any
such practice, yet I trust that never any of us shall be found so to offend
against his Majesty's meanest and lowest officers.

G. Powel
D. Elmer late B. of London gravely said, If I were in the company but of one
Papist, I might justly fear the loss of my life, but being amongst ten
thousand Precisians, well might I be afraid of my Bishopric, but never of my
throat: the one would cut my coat, and the other my throat. The Precisians
(as it pleases B. Elmer to call them) never desired the Bishopprickes of any
of their adversaryes, Answer
but only that they would give glory to him that sits upon the Throne, and
cast their miters at the feet of the Lamb, acknowledging him worthy of all
rule and Dominion, and contenting themselves with the places and Honors
commended in the scriptures: according to an other apothegmaticall exhortation
of the said Bishop, both made openly at Paul's cross, and also printed (before
himself was so advanced in the world) viz. that Bishops and other Prelates
should come down from their thowsands, and content themselves with an hundred,
until which abasing of themselves, and resignyng that which uniustly they
hold, reigning as Lords and Kings over the Lords inheritance, neither the
Church of God in general, neither our Sovereign in special, shall have so
much service, and good by their service, neither themselves so much peace and
comfort of conscience, as otherwise would be.

G. Powel
Though they be free from suspicion of treason and rebellion, yet it cannot be
denied, but that presumptuously and wilfully, they contend with the Magistrate,
impugning his authority in things indifferent. Cannot that be denied, which
never was, neither ever can be proved against us? Answer.
1 We deny that it is the Magistrates mere pleasure that we should conform,
otherwise then by mis information of our adversaryes against us, as David upon
the like mis information of Ziba against Mephibosheth, gave all to Ziba that
had been Mephibosheths 2 Samuel 16.2. Yea, they do not only give all the mis
informations themselves against us which they can jmagine, or wherewith they
are informed by other, but also they labor what they can to keep the
Magistrates from all right information in our behalf by any other: yea they
endeavor their utmost to keep both Parliament and all other, from mediation
for us. 2 Though we yield not in all things required of us, yet it is not
presumptuously and wilfully, but in all humility and modesty: we contend not by
the sword nor any violence, but only by word, yea, pleading the word of God
for our cause. Our contention also is in a patient suffering, with a duetifull
clearing of our innocence against the false imputations wherewith we are
burdened. The things in question have been said, but never substantially proved
to be indifferent in such sort, and to such uses as now they are urged. Our
adversaries have so long strive^ to maintain the things (which they call
indifferent) for such uses as to which they are not indifferent, that they have
made religion it self an in different thing to many men. In things truly
indifferent, it is already justified, and shall be further justified (if need
requyer) that we attribute no less to the magistrate, then our adversaryes do.
Let them name in what sense and degree the Papists deny the Sovereignty of
Princes in any thing, and I doubt not, but that it may be proved that
themselves (holding their own principles) do deny the same, in the same sense
and degree.

G. Powel
All of them make a faction and schism in the Church for carnal respects: some
because they know not otherwise how to be mainteyned: some to gratify their
benefactors and Patrons and to please their friends: some for coffeehouse and
want of preferment: some for giddines of innovation etc. What? all M. Powell?
How do you forget your self? Answer.
You should have left this general judgment of all, to the general judge of
all. There is none of these of whom you speak, but for the world and outward
things they might live better conformyng then not co^forming themselves. What
benefit have any by gratifying their Patrons? Will their Patrons give them
better mayntenance otherwise? Nay some Patrons are their adversaryes, and are
gratified by them that put such Ministers out, that so they may present again
etc. Some so displease their friends heerby that by their displeasure they loose
more in one day then they get all their life by any Ecclesiastical living.
Some also by displeasing their friends do not only lose temporal benefits for
them and theirs, but do also hinder themselves of as great Ecclesiastical
promotion, as many or the most of the conformable sort do ateyne unto. Some by
their troubles for this cause, having had good patrimonyes: have consumed and
wasted them so, that in their age (when they need most comfort) they live in
penury and want, and at their death leave not so much to their wives and many
children, as was left to themselves alone. Some by want for this cause, are
forced to take their children of very great hope and forwardnes for learning
from the school, and to make them apprentises to their own great grief, and
in time to the detriment of the Church. Again, this imputation of carnal
respects unto us (such as you reckon) is contrary to your often imputation of
superstition unto us. For what is superstition, but to make that sin that is
not sin; and so to fear sinnyng against God, as that we do not that which
lawfully we may do: or one the contrary to make that good, holy, and necessary,
that is nether good, holy, nor necessary, and so to think himself bound to do
that, which well he might leave undone? If then we be superstitious, and do
that which we do in fearing to sin against God, how can such carnal
respects as before are particularized, be imputed unto us? But the truth is,
that these carnal respects do belong rather to conformiry, for which many
will do any thing rather then they will loose their livyngs. Of how many also
of them may it be said that they seek their own, and not that which is Jesus
Christ's? Philip. 2.21. Yea, that their belly is their God, their glory their
shame, and that they mind earthly things? Philip. 3.19. that also with
Diotrephes, that love to have the pre-eminence? 3. Ioh. 9. How many of that
side have received 500. or 600. pounds from their people, since their last
Sermon, yea, since their last presence amongst them? Yea, are their not some
that buy and sell benefices, as men buy and sell horses? Truly there are so^e
that being not old me^ have in their days passed through many benefices, and
those of very good worth. To who^ then does this imputation of carnal
respects belong. Cease therefore, cease M. Powell to charge us with that
against which there are so many reasons. Yea, wherein all the world can
convince you.

G. Powel
They have altered the state of the question. For the question being about
subscription, Ceremonies, Conformity etc. (which are but things indifferent
and of small moment) they make it the cause of God, the ministry of the
gospel, the salvation of the people, the main cause of the land. How do we
alter the state of the qvestion? Do we mince that which sometime we held? Answer
Do we go from any thing which before we maynteyned? What ever was in
controversy betwixt you and us, that is not comprehended under subscription,
or some other of the particulars by you here mentioned? It is mere folly so
often to repeat the indifferency of these things, that has never been
neither can be proved by you. For as much also as for not subscribyng, and for
not conforming to Ceremonies etc. Many more are thrust out of the ministry
then for any other matter of ten times greater moment, may it not be truly
called the cause of God? Especially it being in so many books proved that they
are unlawful and contrary to the word of God? Yea, since for these things the
word is restrained, may we not say that the salvation of the people depends
thereupon? And consequently that it is the main cause of the land? What is
greater then salvation? Your self grant that we are Ministers of Christ, in
grace and favor with God. It follows therefore that our cause is the cause
of God. Luc. 10.16. Yea, of the land also, because besides salvation many other
benefits do depend upon the ministry of the word, and many evils upon the
restraint thereof. Prove. 29.18. For this cause the Apostle joyneth these two
together in the Jews, that they were contrary (or adversaryes) to all men,
and forbad them to preach to the Gentles. 1. Thessalonians 2. ver. 15.16.
Touching your often objection of our suspension and deprivation for not
conformyng our selves, consider this one thing M. Powell, and consider it
seriously, viz. that when as John and some other Disciples took upon them to
forbid one casting out Devils, (that had before done it in the name of Christ)
and that only because he would not join with them and follow them to Christ:
and that afterward when they made relation unto Christ, of that which they had
done, and of the reason why they had done it (as though they had done some
great service, as many think they do now great service in forbidding us to
preach) consider (I say again) that our Savior was so far from approving that
which they had done, that he rather reproved it saying, Forbid him not. Mar.
9.38.39. Whether was a juster cause of suspention, not to join with such
worthy Disciples of our Savior, and that in following them, and goeing with
them to our Savior himself, or not to join with the Bishops, and to conform
our selves unto them in those things, wherein we are persuaded we should sin
against Christ, and in part go away from him? For we follow not Christ,
neither walk with him any longer, then we do observe his word. Further also
consider whether is a greater, or at the least a better and more necessary
work, to cast out Devils from their possession which they had of the bodies
of men, or to cast them out from the spiritual possession they have of the
soul of men, which eiection is wrought by the preaching the gospel Acts 26.18.

G. Powel
They make this such a cause, as if all religion depended on refusing of a crose
and furplice etc. No, no. Answer.
All religion and piety does not depend on these things. Yet religion is the
less, and does the more decay, the more that the preaching of the gospel, for
these things is restrained. The increase of sin and iniquity in those places
already where such Ministers are put out, does too much testify this thing.
Here again is his former fallacy, as eo quod est secundum quid, ad id quod
est simpliciter. We say, that some religion depends on refussing of a cross,
surplice ete. Hence he concludes, that all religion depends etc. Further,
whether we make all religion to depend on refussing a cross, surplice etc. or
no, it seems that the Bishops make all religion (or the most) to depend on
cross, surplice, etc. For if a man yield to these things, he may pass away
with any other matter uncontrolled: but if he stands in these things, then he
is unworthy the ministry, whatsoever guiftes he have, how godly soever he be,
and what good so ever he have done, or might do by his continuance. Is it not
so?

G. Powel
They boldly, presumptuously, and unduetifully censure his Majesty for coldness
in religion, for losing his first love, deep dissembling, seeming to pretend
one thing and to intend another as if he had been trained up in the Jesuits
schools to equivocat: which fault I would some of their faction did so little
practice, as his Majesty abhorres it. Wheris there any such censure of his
Majesty for coldness Answer.
in religion, for losing his first love, and for deep dissembling? Nay, does
not the author expressly labor the quit contrary, professing that he wrote that
which he did to this very end, that men might not judge Christian Princes upon
outward apperences, yea adding supposed apparences? Yea, wishyng also less
censuring of them, and were praying for them? Is there not by all authors a
difference made betwixt Simulare and di^simulare, that the one may be used in
godly policy and christian wisdom, but that the other is always of the flesh
fleshly? In allegation of examples, every particular is not nicely and strictly
to be respected, but that point only is to be considered for which they are
produced, and whereto they be applied. Otherwise, from the application of David's
eating of the show bread, unto the Disciples plucking the ears of corn to
eat. Math. 12.3. A man may gather that because David used lying as a means to
obtain the sheew bread at the Priests hands, therefore also it is lawful for
us by lying to obtain some thing in our necessity. By the same reason also,
because the midwiues of Egypt are commended to fear the Lord etc. and to have
spared the male children of the Israelits, the same fault of lying may be
justified, because they being examined by Pharoh of that their doing, excused
themselves by a lie. The like may be said of Rahab, commended for her faith in
savyng the Israelits spies, Heb. 11.31. Though she defended her self from the
inquisitors of the King of Jericho by a lie. Ios. 2.4.

If the example of Constantius and Iehu, may for some things be excepted
against, yet it might have been considred, that the author to express his
general meaning the better, did mention also the example of Joseph, and of our
Savior Christ Jesus, against whom there can be no exception. And now to clear
his meaning the better, let the example of Solomon in that wherein he is so
highly commended, be also remembered: who to try whither of the two weomen were
the mother of the living child, commanded the lyving child to be divided in
twane, and the one half to be given to the one woman, the other half to the
other woman. 1 Kings 3.25. Here is a manifest pretense of that which was not
intended. Let the answerer therefore learn, that there is great difference
betwixt pretending only for trial of the affections of other, and deep
dissembling or Iesuitecall equivocating, for the hiding or maynteyning of some
impiety and wickedness. I doubt not therefore, but I may justify the author
from all such things, as by allegation of the examples of Constantius and
Iehu, are most uncharitably imputed unto him: yea, that also I may truly
affirm his meaning in them to have been, only to show that he conceaved of
his Majesty's meaning, that which he was persuaded to be best. Therefore far
was he from all undutifull conceits against his Majesty.

It is also to be observed, that he does not absolutely say this or that to be
his Majesty's meaning, but only that it might be like to the meaning of
Constantius, Iehu, Joseph, and our Savior: for ought that any man else did
know. If it be otherwise, Gods will be done: and I hope that whatsoever some
do imagine of such as are silenced and deprived, that upon sight of his
Majesty's full resolution for the countenancyng and authorizyng of the Bishops
to hold on their course against us, then many will yield etc. yet it shall well
appear that we have not depended upon any other then upon God alone: and that
that which we have done, is not done upon any vain hope or expectation, but in
conscience of that word which is our only rule and canon whereby to live, and
whereby to die. Touching the answerers wish that some of our faction (as he
unbrotherly speaks) did so little practice equiuocating as his Majesty
abhorres it, either let him name such (if he know any) and let them bear their
iniquity, or else let him spare such wishes, as whereby he implies a secret
accusation.

G. Powel
Whereas his Highness heart is evidently discerned to be fully seasoned with true
piety etc. Answer
Though flatery be odious, and the wages thereof fearful, yet if his Majesty or
any other do well consider the best fruits of a true heart, our love and
loyalty toward his Majesty should be sound as good, as the best Prelate in
the land.

G. Powel
It suffices me to have detected the license of their raving pe^nes, the
restraint of which fury, specially belongs to your Honorable and judicious
Court. Answer.
O M. Powell you do to much forget modesty. Whither pen raveth most, yours or
the authors, or whither he or you, (I will not say ye though you write by
authority of some other) be in most fury, let that Honorable and judicious
Court judge. Yea, if it might please his Majesty to vouchsafe the reading of
the wrightings, and in his Princely wisdom to consider the dealing on both
sides, we would not fear his Royal judgment concerning our cause or our
selves. We fear the judgment of one Lordly Bishop ten times more, then the
judgment of ten such religious Princes. For we assure our selves of more
equity from his Majesty, then we do from all Lordly Bishops in the land.

G. Powel.
Which your Honors will the rather perform, considering what unchristian
conceits they have of this Honorable assembly, and of all other his Majesty's
loving subjectes, who loyally obey him and serve God, according to the religion
established: resembling them to Constantius his Nobles. Who became Idolaters
and Atheistes upon his commandment. As before we have seen how untruely the
answerer makes this note upon the authors conclusion, Answer.
with the letter e an unjust calumni page 77. in as much as he has accused the
author before of bold, presumptuous, and unduetifull censuring of his Majesty
etc. thereby to provoke his Majesty's heavy indignation against us all,
Contrariety
so now contrary to the same note, he accuses us also before the Nobles, yea,
before all the states of the whole kingdom. Doeht this man spare us, as he
professes to do in his second note upon the 4 argument? Touching the matter
here objected, it is partly answered before. The authors intent and purpose was
only to persuade all his Majesty's christian subjectes to think Honorably of
his Highness, and not to judge him by outward supposed apparences. Therwas
nothing to insinuate any such unchristian censure of this Honorable assembly
and of other loving subjectes as this wranglinge answerer would wrest from the
authors words. The matters in question concern only or specially the
ministers of the word. The things also commanded by his Majesty are nothing
like to the things commanded by Constantius. How injurous therefore it is, to
conclude the same sin to be of them that obey his Majesty in the things now
commanded, that was in those that obeyed Constantius, I leave to the judgment
of all reasonable men. The fallacies of this collection, in respect of the
difference both of things and also of persons commanded, I leave to the
sentence of them that are as skillful in Aristotle his Elenchs, as M. Powell
seems to be. The childish accusation of the author from the 8 Argument (here
inserted either of malice, or to increase his volume) shall be discovered in
the defense of that 8 Argument.

Concerning the Arguments themselves, may it please the Christian reader first
of all to take a general veiwe of the general frauds of the answerer in his
answer unto them.

His first general fraud is, that he sets upon these Arguments, as though
in them the main cause betwixt, the Prelates and us were handled. Whereas the
purpose of the author was not to inform the minds and judgme^ts of the
Parliament, but, taking that to be already done by other books written in that
behalf, and the rather because he did already see them to deal in the cause;
he labored altogether, to quicken their affections, and to whet and increase
their zeal to be the more earnest in that cause, of the equity and sincerity
whereof, by former books touching their judgments they were abundantly
informed and persuaded. And heerin he had the more reason to provoke their
godly zeal, in respect of the manifold and mighty adversaries the cause had,
and because he knew that the said adversaryes would make strong opposition
thereunto and labor what they might to hinder the same. 2 Because the main
controversy betwixt the Prelates and us is not handled in these Arguments,
therefore he insulteth mightily, and often (almost in every page) he objecteth
petitionem principii and begging of the question unto us, as though because the
controversy were not handled in the said arguments, therefore it were not
handled else where. But since it is handled by other whose books and reasons are
not yet answered, neither ever will be substantially, therefore this is but a
vain boasting.

His third general fraud is, that himself commits the same fault in all
his answer, that he objecteth to the author of the arguments. For whereas the
said author upon sufficient proof made of the cause by other books, does
make this the general conclusion of all the arguments, that it would please
the whole State graciously to relieve the ministers oppressed for that cause
etc: this answerer makes this his conclusion, that it would please the State
to relieve the refractary and schismatic Ministers. So never prooving us,
neither any other having ever proved us to be refractary, schismatic etc.
(except every Bishop be a Pythagoras, and do always speak oracles, which
they seeldome do) yet he takes it for granted that we are such. Huic arenoso
fundamento tota strues et moles sequentis Praelatici responsi innititur. Upon
this sandy foundation the whole frame and lump of all the Prelaticall answer
following does rely.

M. POWEL TO THE TITLE OF THE Arguments.
G. Powel
All the Arguments following be common (excepting one or two) and may be urged
for popery or any other heresy etc. Are Popish or other herericall Priests,
ministers of Christ, Answer.
in grace and favor with Christ etc. Do the Angels so long after, and rejoice
in their Ministry as in ours? Do they as truly interpret the mysteries of
God to eternal life, as Joseph interpreted dreams for this life? May they as
truly be commended for the spiritual deliverance of many souls, as Jonathan
did work the bodily deliverance of the Israelits? etc. The like may be said of
the other arguments. How then are they so common as the answerer charge them
to be? This beginning shows, what we are to look for in the rest of the
answer.

The first Argument.
The Ministers supplicated for, are evident to be the true Ministers of Christ.
1 By the special hatred of all wicked men against them: John 15.19. 2 By their
godly life. 3 By their gifts and by the blessing of God upon their labors.
Romans 10.15. 1 Cor. 9.2. 2 Cor. 3.2. 3. Therefore the State ought to relieve
the^ being now oppressed: because that which is done for them or denied unto
them, is done for Christ, or denied unto Christ. Exodus 16 2. 1 Samuel 8.7. Luc.
10.16. Math. 25.40 Gal. 3.25. Ephe. 5.30.

THE MARGINALL NOTES OF M. POWEL upon the former Argument.
a Gab. Powel
That is but justly omitted that makes nothing to the purpose. Answ.
The word gospel signifiyng the preaching of the gospel, the furtherance or
hinderance thereof makes to purpose in this matter, or else nothing does.

G. Powel
b There be other Ministers of the gospel. Answer.
I acknowledge it with all thanks to God: and whatsoever difference of judgment
or practice there be, betwixt them and us in the present controversy, yet I
love and reverence them for their gifts and pains. But what then? Though
there were ten times as many more, and every one as sufficient as the best, yet
these times require all. Number. 11.29. 2 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1.

The note with c I pass by. When they show our proofs not to prove our
intent, we will either strenghten them, or bring better.

G. Powel
d Palpable ignorance. Many lay men, I are hated of the world. 2 lead an
unblamable life. 3 have sufficient gifts, ergo They are Ministers of Christ.
Double Sophistry. 1 Whereas the author says, those Ministers that are so hated
of the world etc: Answer.
are the Ministers of Christ, this answerer says, they (not those Ministers)
that are so qualified etc. 2 He leaves altogether out the last point taken
from the success of their Ministry whose art it is so to clip words, I need
not to note.

G. Powel
e They have ill neighbors, that commend themselves. But I could wish they were
such indeed albeit they are generally noted to be great teachers and practisers
of usury. We have such ill neightours that as by their daily false accusations
and slanders against us, Reply.
do urge us to plead our own innocence, as Moses, Samuel, Jeremy, Paul and
Christ himself, having the like neighbovrs were urged to justify themselves.
Usury cannot be so truly proved to be taught and practiced by us, as all men
see many conformitans to be usurers, Symonists, non residents, gamesters,
potcompanions etc. Yea, and to defend also some of these things.

G. Powel
f Why do you not name them? Reply.
It is needles. The namyng also of such Prelates as have commended those whom
they have deprived, may perhaps purchase them as much ill will and hatred with
their greater Prelates, as Nicodemus and some other had envy with the Pharisees,
for speaking any good word in behalf of Christ.

g All this evidence can make but a conjecture, and that scarce probable,
seeing many heretics, papists etc. Gab. Powel
Have suffered more then all this comes to, for their heresies and
superstition. Thus may the suffering of all Martyrs be eluded. Reply.
For heretics have suffered as much. etc. But mark here his cunnyng. The
author speaks of suffering wrongs, indignities etc. M. Powel speaks of
suffering more, leaving out the substantive of the comparatiue adjectiue more.
Sophistry
If he do understand the former substantive wrongs etc: then heretics,
Papists suffer not more. For they are worthy of whatsoever they suffer. If he
understand an other substantive, then he does sophisticate, and equivocat.

h As we envy not their gifts, so we commend their pains: and wish they had
not put their hands to the plough and looked back. Reply.
Such good words are little worth, where there is such actual unmercifulnes.
James 2.16. We look not back, but they that call themselves our Fathers, have
beaten and driven us from the plough, except we would wound our souls by
sinnyng against Christ.

i Gab. Powel
It seems they favor the doctrine de opere operantis: especially waighing the
latter part of this Pharisaicall comparison. Reply.
You know the contrary. Paul may as well be said to hold this doctrine as we:
because he spoke much more of his labors and of the blessing of God upon them,
then we have done or can do. 2 Cor. 11.23 The Pharisaicall comparison I leave
to them, that take upon them Pharisaicall authority.

G. Powel
a They commend themselves to disgrace other. A lying and malicious censure.
Reply.
To plead for sufficient Ministers that have done good is not to disgrace other,
but to have all Churches the better provided for. Touching the ignorance,
prophanes, irreligion, contention etc: of many places where there are
conformable Ministers either ignorant or idle, or scandolous, I would there
were not too lamentable experience thereof. Wherefore Sir, put up again your
lying and malicious censure into your own sheath.

G. Powel
b It is not their calling, but innovation and schism that is blamed. Reply.
This is a jest, like as if a man should fall upon another and beat him that
had an ague, and say, he beat not him, but his ague. Of innovation and schism
else where.

(c) and (d) I pass by as nothing worth.

G. Powel
e As if the kingdom of heaven consisted in meat, drink, or other outward
things. Gross impudency, or blind ignorance. Reply.
1 The kingdom of heaven consists as well in the abuse of outward things, as
in other matters. 2 The Prelates most offend in that which is here objected: in
that they put men from preaching the kingdom of heaven, that will not yield to
their outward things. To reproach us with gross impudency or blind ignorance
beseems not M. Powell, especially he supposing those arguments to be written
by consent of all of our side: whereof some were preachers before he was borne,

G. Powel
f They spare speech for Christ. Wherefore? Because the godly have put on the
Lord Jesus. A ridiculous conclusion. A little thing will make him laugh, Reply.
that will laugh at this conclusion. They that have put on Christ, are also his
members, flesh of his flesh etc: as likewise is expressed in the argument at
large, but sophistically omitted by the answerer: who were best to take heed he
clip not the Kings coin, as he clippeth men's words. If the godly be Christ's
members, do not they spare speech for Christ, that spare spech for the godly.
Call not therefore such conclusions ridiculous, but make you graver if you can.
The last note where, when, by whom, being rediculous, I dismiss with this
merry answer, that the predicament quando is before vbi, and so is the answer
of the Bedles questions in Cambridge. Solent quaeri questiones, quando, vbi,
sub quo?

THE FVRTHER ANSWER OF M. POWEL to the first Argument.
G. Powel.
We grant the refractary Ministers to be indeed the ministers of Christ,
neither is their calling brought into question: yea we hope they are sent by
God, and in grace and favor with God: yet all their gifts and sanctification
being but in part, they may be over seen in some things. Here is a manifest
contrariety. He that is refractary cannot be such a Minister of Christ. Reply.
He that is in grace and favor with God, ought not to be disgraced and molested
by men. The later part of the answer we never denied. But are not the gifts
and sanctification of the Prelates also in part? May they not be, yea are they
not in some things overseene?

G. Powel
It is true also properly in matters that belonging unto their ministry, not to
speak for them etc. is to spare speech for God and Christ Jesus. But such are
not the things in question, viz. Cross surplice, etc: which are laudable
ceremoyes, commanded for order and decency. Reply.
1 As it is the duty of all to speak for common Christians not only in
matters properly belonging to christianity, but also in matters of their
outward estate, peace, liberty, liffe, and things belonging to their life etc:
so it is the duty of all Christians, not to speak only for Ministers in
matters only properly, and necessarily concerning their ministry, but also in
other matters. The liberty also of preaching necessarily (though not properly)
concerns the ministry of the gospel (preaching being the most principal
part of the said ministry) so also to preach without givyng offense to the
weak, and with out disgrace to their ministry. For what hope can there be of
comfortable success where the ministry is joined with offense or disgrace?
These things are necessary though not proper: wherein the answerer commits
a great error, in confounding that that is necessary, with that that is proper.
For many things may be necessary for every calling, which are not proper.
Further for the whole ministry to be performed in all purity and sincerity,
(as nigh as is possible) according to Gods word and practice of the Apostles,
without inventions of men etc: this (I say) is also necessary (not proper) to
the ministry, because by inventions of men, the ministry of the gospel is
corrupted and weakened, even as mixture of water with wine so weakeneth the
wine, that in time also it does corrupt and decay. These things are
supplicated for to the Parliament: If Cross and surplice be laudable
Ceremonies, then when or where, the Sacraments are celebrated without them,
there wants some laudable ceremonies. This is absurd and jmpious. What would
further follow heerof I need not to write, we may here also noate his cu^nyng,
in that he says not that these things are for order and decency: but
commanded for order and decency. Many men wear long hair, and command their
sons to do the like for order and decencyes sake. In like respect many
husbands command their wives to paynt their faces, thus and thus to attire
themselves: Are these things therefore orderly and decent?

The Second Argument.
By the ministry of the gospel the Angels of heaven receive divine revelation
to their further joy etc. Exodus 25.20. 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10. Ergo To
speak for the ministry and ministers of the gospel, is to speak for Angels
etc.

The marginall notes.
The first with (a) shall be answered afterward.

G. Powel
b What a consequence is this? The Angels desire to see into the secrets of our
redemption, ergo. The ministry of the gospel is prepared for them. These
words into which things the Angels desire to behold, Reply.
1 Pet. 1.12. must of necessity have relation to the things before said to be
showed by them that had preached the gospel. For there is no other antecedent
to the relative, into which. Therefore the consequence is not to be so scorned
by any that knows a consequence. Here also the answerer abuses his reader,
by wrangling with the conclusion and leaving out the principal confirmation
thereof, Ephesians. 3.10. Where it is expressly said, that Paul had received the
ministry of the gospel, to the intent that unto Principalityes and powers in
the heavenly places now (not before in that manner) might be known by the
Church (let that be also noted) the manifold wisdom of God.

The other two notes touching schism and contention have been answered, and
shall afterward be answered more fully: yet here I ad, that he does unjustly
here say, their contention. For we contend not with them, but they with us. We
seek to take nothing from them: they seek and take all from us. Abraham for
peace with Lot (his younger, and nepheu) was content to part from his own
right: but these are such holdfasts of their rites and ceremonies, that for
peace with us, they will not part with an inch, though they get nothing by the
whole. No marveill: for they will not part with that which is the right only
of Christ. Let it be therefore here noted, how unfitly in the title page, the
answerer has prefixed the sentence of Abraham Gen: 13.18. Let there be no
contention etc.

Further answer to the 2 Argument.
G. Powel
This Argument is ambiguous and savors of a paradox. For how will they
understand it? That Angels should be ministers of the gospel? Impossible. Or
that they should be converted thereby etc? Absurd: they never sinned: or that
they might learn to know the wisdom of God? So they do by all other
creaturs, and actions of God: Reply.
No paradox at all. Neither had the answerer any cause to make the two first
questions, if he had considered the places alleged. That which he opposes to
the third against knowledge of the wisdom of God by the gospel etc: may as
well be opposed to men's knowledge of the wisdom of God by his word. For they
are also taught the wisdom of God by his creatures and works. psa. 19.1 Romans
1.1920. The further meaning of this argument, in any special manner differing
from other, I leave to the author himself: who is able (no doubt) to defend
his meaning, or ready to yield better reason to the contrary. But be it, that
he had no other meaning in this point then other men have, yet the common
doctrine of the scriptures touching Angels in this behalf, makes the argument
good. For the Angels of themselves, know not who be elect, and who be reprobat.
This knowledge before calling is proper to the Lord. 2 Timothy 2.19. The election
of men is made known to the Angels, by their calling and conversion, wherein
it is said the Angels rejoice Luc. 15.7. and 10. And so accordingly they
glorify God, in glorifiyng of whom consists their happiness. The more
therefore the word is preached, and men converted thereby, the more the Angels
rejoice, and glorify God: the less the word is preached, the less they
rejoice: yea, they may be said in some sort the more to mourn. In this respect
therefore, the gospel may be said to be for the Angels. So this great paradox
is unfolded. The substance of the second part of this answer to this 2
Argument has been answered before. Whereas he charge us to forsake our
ministry for a few pety accidental circumstances; therein he discovers the
nakedness of the Prelates, in inflicting so material and substantial
punishment, for a few pety accidental circumstances. For justice requires a
proportion betwixt the offense and the punishment. But we acknowledge no
offense. For we may not purchase liberty of doing the greatest good, with
committing the least evil. He that says do good, first says, eschew evil.
psalm. 34.14. These things being also proved evil in other books, they are
not to be accounted pety and accidental circumstances. The least sin against
the great God, is to be accounted a great matter.

In his third answer he proclameth again, but proves not our error and
faction. If we err or be factious, let us in that respect be punished (so
notwithstanding that the people be not punished with us) and let us be helped
as we are Ministers.

G. Powel
It does not follow, that if the wise and judicious Parliament, should justly
refuse to deal in the cause of Schismatic Ministers, further the^ only to
admonish them to desist from their singularity, etc: therefore they should
provoke God and Angels: Yea, if they should take part with Schismatikes, and
intercede for them, to deteyne them and the people still in faction, the^ they
should provoke God, etc. psa: 50: 1718 Reply.
Indeed now you speak sure: and if always you speak so, you shall not be
trapt. If the Parliament justly refuse etc. and if we be schismatiks and
singular etc. then all is well on your side: But when will you prove us such?
As I shall anon prove the contrary, so in the mean time for singularity, it
belongs not to us, but to the Prelates, that are singular by themselves,
differing from the word, and from more Churches reformed then we; both in
judgment and also in practice. But to return to your other words, thus I
reason from them against you. The wise and judicious Parliament will not
intermedle in the quarrel of Sdhismaticall ministers further then only to
admonish them to desist from their singularity etc: all these are your own
words.

But the Parliament has further intermedled for us etc. ergo. We are not
schismatic. Either therefore recant your commendation of the Parliament, or
else revoke yous reproachful accusing us to be schismatikes. Vtrum horum mauis
accipe. I suppose you will not charge the Parliament, with any thing contrary
to the commendation you have before geiven of them; and which all wise and
judicious men will acknowledge to be due unto them. Therefore I hope you will de
nobis palinodiam canere, and never hereafter charge us as you have done.

Here is one thing more to be noated as some what crossing my former supposall,
for not revoking his former commendation of the Parliament, yea, and making me
to fear that he will rather impute folly to them (according to the manner of
some other Prelates) then revoke his reproaches against us. What is this that is
to be noted? viz. That to prove, if they should take part with us, then they
should provoke God and the whole host of heaven against us, that (I say) to
prove this, he applies unto them, psalm. 50.17.18. Whereby he insinuates, that
they having interceded for us, do therefore hate to be reformed, have cast
Gods word behind them, have run with thieves, and taken part with adulterers.
For these are the express words of the psalm, which he applies to the
Parliament for dealing in our behalf: so indeed accusing us as the principal
offenders in those sins, that are mentioned in that psalm, but yet making
the Parliament also accessory with us in them.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT.
It was a fault in Pharaoh his butler, that he did no sooner remember to speak
to Pharaoh for the liberty of Joseph, and for his release from his affliction.
Genesis 40.14. and 23. Seeing Joseph had interpreted his dream of reconciliation
to the grace of Pharaoh, and to his former place of earthly honorable service
in the house of Pharao. Ergo

The Parliament ought so to remember the interpretation of the mysteries of God
his favor and heavenly kingdom by the ministers now silenced: etc. That they
do what lawfully they may, to release them of their troubles.

1 Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a This and most of the arguments following are grounded upon a false principle,
viz: that the refractary Ministers quarrel against the Church of England, is
the ministry of the gospel, the salvation of the people etc: whereas indeed
all the contention is about cross, surplice, and some other indifferent
Ceremonies. and actions in the Church. And all these arguments do specially
make against them, seeing they be only disturbers of the sincere profession of
the gospel, and work of the ministry: yea seeing they forsake their calling,
and move so great contention. And again.

G. Powel
b would God they were half so diligent in a good cause, as they are
importunat to sow schism and sedition among brethren. But they deserve small
commendation etc. Reply.
One reply shall serve to both these notes. Especially because (as it is noted
before) all the answer is grounded upon a false principle, that we are
schismatiks etc. and so worthy of all that has been done unto us. To insist
therefore upon this point, I say first of all, that this accusation of us to be
such, is a most beggarly begging of the question, most unjust, untrue, and
uncharitable, never yet proved, neither able to be proved, until they prove
the matters in controversy, to be merely indifferent to such uses, as whereto
they are employed and urged by them, yea, good and laudable Ceremonies, matters
of decency, and order in the Church: yea, that we also refuse to conform our
selves unto them, more of stomach, then of conscience. Much less can they
justify their proceedings against and and punishing of us: yea not only of
us, but also of our people (a thing most unrighteous and odious to God and men)
in such manner as they have done, especially more for these things (which
themselves call indifferent, small, petty, accidental, circumstantiall) then
they do other, for things expressly forbidden by God himself, and a thousand
times more offensive to other, and more reprochful and disgraceful to our
Church, profession, and kingdom then these things. Yea it is to be observed,
that notwithstanding all these proceedinges against us, all our books written
against the ceremonies, (only to show the righteousness of our cause) and all
their writtyngs against us, none of them have ever yet, either in open
consistory, or in private conference (that I have heard of) or in public
writing, made any one, (no not one) demonstratiue reason, necessarily
concluding the lawfulnes, and the good and necessary use, of the things they so
heavily impose upon us. Some indeed have written against some of our
arguments, but no otherwise, then the wit of man may cavil against any
principle of religion, though never so substantially proved by the best divine
upon the earth.

But to return to the point, there is nothing in these two notes and in the
rest of the book objected against us, where with our ancients and betters,
Our betters heretofore charged as we are now.
have not been charged in former times. Elia was charged with troubling
Israel. 1 King. 18.17. Michaiah might have been charged with singularity and
schism, for dissenting from all the 400 Prophets in Ahabs time. 1 King 22.
Jeremy was accused by the Priests and Prophets of his time, to have spoken
against the state of the City, and to be therefore worthy to dyc. Ierem. 26.11.
Amos was charged by Amazia the priest, with such conspiracy against the King,
that the land was not able to bear all his words. Amos 7.10. All the Jews was
generally accused by Haman to Ahashuerosh, not to have observed the Kings
laws. Ester 3.8. Ezra and the Jews with him, were accused by Rehum, Shimshay,
and other beyond the river to Artashasht the King, as rebellious and wicked for
building of Jerusalem: Yea, they were not only so accused for the time present,
but also for the time to come, (as we are afterward in the 16 Argument in the
marginall note with (r) that if they were suffered to proceed in building of
the City, they would not pay toll, nor tribute: nor custom, yea, Ezra and his
companions were not only charged to be such, but the whole City of Jerusalem
for former times was also charged to have been a rebellious and noysom City
unto Kings and Provinces, that the inhabitants thereof had moved sedition of old
time, and that for that cause, that City had been destroyed. Therefore also
the said Rehum and Shimshay and their companions, pretended regard of the Kings
Honor, in writing so against Ezra and the rest of the Jews, Ezra 4.12. etc.
The enimyes of Daniell framed the like accusation of him to Darius, Daniell 6.
Our Savior himself was blasphemed by the name of a seducer and deceiver of
the people. Ioh. 7.12. Yea often times as a blasphemer, profaner of the Saboth, a
friend to publicans and sinners. Paul was accused to have taught men against
the law and the Temple. Acts 21.28. and to be a pestilent fellow, a mover of
sedicion. Acts 24.5. yea to be an heretic verse 14.

Such also have been the accusations of all Martyrs by the common adversaries
the Papists. It is therefore the more to be marveilled at, that our Prelates
(professing, and sometime preaching the gospel) do accuse us in like manner.
Yea, charge us to disturb the sincere profession of the gospel, and work of
the ministry, and yet allege no reason heerof: or at least no other reason
then such as for which all or the most part of those before named, were so
charged as we have heard. For besides traditions of men, antiquity (not proved,
at least not true antiquity) the commandments of Princes (procured by
themselves, uncharitably misinformyng such princes) besides these things (I say)
what else have they said, do they say, or can they say? The Ministers not
yelding to conformity, are no schimatickes.


Do we vary from the sincere doctrine of the scriptures? Nay, rather many of
them do much more swerve from the same: especially since their late strong
patronizing and urging of these things: yea, they have fallen from that that
heertofore has been constantly, and generally held by our Church now teaching
these things, which have been accounted and are in truth, popish, or Lutheran
errors: viz: touching general grace, and the death of Christ for every
particular person: against particular election and reprobation: for images in
Churches, Exceter
both for remembrance of history and also for devotion: touching the manner of
Christ's presence in the supper of the Lord: That the Pope is not the
Antichrist, which is the next step to say, that he is Christ's vicar, and whereby
they hinder (what they may) the zeal of Christian Princes from executing that
against him in general, and against his members in particular, which the word
partly foretells, and partly commands to be done: concernnyng also the
necessity of Baptism: touching auricular confession: for ignorance (according
to the popish saying, that ignorance is the mother of devotion) that it is not
necessary for the people to have much knowledge, and that therefore not much
preaching, but that it is sufficient, if they can say the Lords prayer, the ten
commandments, and the articles of faith: which is directly contrary to the
scriptures. Ioh. 6.69. Ephe 4.13. Philip. 1.9. and 3.7.8. Colos. 3.16. Ephesians.
5.17. 2 Pet. 3.18. Who can lay any such points to us, or to any of us? This
point is not lightly to be regarded: yea, it is of great moment. For the
Apostle describes schismatikes, not to be such, as make division only, but he
adds, contrary to the doctrine which they had learned. Romans 16.17. Yea in the
very next verse he describes them further, saying, They that are such serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellyes, and with fair speeches, and
flattering, diceaue the hearts of the simple. Do we so? Nay rather we labor
only for the ordinances, which the Apostle has taught us. In this respect we
serve not our own bellyes, but rather for those ordinances sake, and to serve
the Lord Jesus by them, and according unto them, we deprive our own bellyes of
that which otherwise they might have; neither do we use fair speeches, and
flattering, but by plain dealing for those ordinances of Christ Jesus, we
procure the displeasure of all men against us. As therefore this place makes
for us, and evidently shows us to be no schismatikes, so likewise it does as
plainly prove them to be schismatikes that make division for humane
inventions, either in doctrine, or otherwise in practice in the worship of God,
contrary to those things which they have learned from the Apostle; who also
therein, serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellyes, using fair words
and flattering in that behalf to deceive not only the simple, but also if it
be possible, them that are wise.

Again have we made any departure from the Church? We are deprived of our
Ministry, and so thrust out of our lyvinges, perforce against our wills, as
any man leaves that which is violently taken away: but though we be thus put
from our ministry and lyvinges by our Prelates, yet we do not forsake the
communion of the Church. The cause also why we are put out, is not for respect
of our selves, but for fear of sinnyng against God, and of aggravating the
burden of our own conscience thereby. We disturb not the sincere profession of
the gospel, and work of the ministry, but in all humility, and with the
words of sobriety, we condemn the corruptions of our profession and of the
ministry, most duetifully and by all lawful means (and no other) desiring
both to be reformed, according to Gods word. So in like manner we desire to be
eased of those cloggs, which hinder both us in the work of the ministry, and
also the people so, that they neither do, neither can so edify themselves in
their most holy faith, as otherwise they and we would do. On the contrary, the
Prelates stoutly mayntaine and support the said corruptions, and in love of them
(or rather of some other matter depending upon them) they hate and molest us.

Again have we loytred in the work of the ministry? Have we heaped benefice
upon benefice? Have we eaten and drunk, and beaten our fellow servants? Have
we sought our own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's? Phil. 2.21. Have we
made our bellyes our God? Have we minded earthly things? philip. 3.19. I speak
not these things boastingly (as before we have been charged) but only to purge
our selves of those crimes, which the former two notes did cast upon us, and to
prove that we have not been disturbers but furtheres of the sincere profession
of the gospel, and work of the Ministry. Therefore let them that do so
untruly accuse us, take heed that he (whose check no fleesh shall be able to
endure) do not charge them, rather to have taken away the key of knowledge,
and to have shut up the Kingdom of heaven before men, not goeyng in
themselves, neither suffering them that would enter, to come in. Mat. 23.13.
whereas also the word Schism in the Greek language signifies a renting, and
the word sedition in the latin tongue signifies seorsim ire, to go aside or,
a going a side: as we have proved that in these significations, we cannot be
justly charged with them, so let them that do charge us in this behalf see
and consider well, whether themselves may not more truly be said to have rent
themselves, and to have gone a side, first from the word (the rule of all
Churches) in the points of doctrine before mentioned, and in some other, as
also in the observing and maynteyning of human Ceremonies in the worship of
God: 2 From other Churches of Christ Jesus: both the ancient Apostolical
Churches, and also the present Churches reformed in other Cou^tryes: nether of
which either held or do hold such points of doctrine as before I have named:
or have or do observe and maintain such human Ceremonies in the worship of
God, as are here in question. We being charged with heresye and schism by the
Papists for renouncyng the doctrine and communion of the present Romish
Synagogue, do truly return the same charge upon the papists touching herisie
and schism, because they have fallen away from the doctrine and ancient
simplicity in the worship of God, that at the beginnynge was in the Ancient
Roman Church, and in other true Churches, planted by the Apostles. In like
mannner therefore let our accusers in the fear of God consider, whither the
blame of schism do not for the causes before expressed, more aptly belong
unto them, then to us etc.

Let me yet also (though somewhat perhaps out of place) ad one reason more, to
prove the Ministers pleaded for, not to be Schismatikes.

All Schismatikes are abomination to the Lord: The Ministers pleaded for: are
not abomination to the Lord, but in grace and favor with him, Ergo: The
Ministers pleaded for, are no Schismatikes. The proposition or first part of
the Argument, is Salomons, who among the six things which the Lord hates,
and the seven which the soul of the Lord abhors, he reckons him that
rayseth up contention among brethren. The assumptio^ or second part of the
former Argument is granted by the answerer answerer himself in his answer to
the first Argument: yea it is manifest by the good success of their ministry
from God in the said Argument mentioned. Yea, and that this argument from the
blessing of God upon their ministry, is of force, and much to be respected,
appears by the words of the blind man reported with commendation by S. John.
This is a mervelous thing that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened
mine eyes. Now we know that God hears not sinners; but if any man be a
worshipper of God, and does his will, him hears he. And verse 33. If this man
were not of God, he could have done nothing. Was this argument good from the
opennyng of the eyes of the body of one that was borne bodily blind, and is it
not much stronger: from the openyng of the eyes of the mind of many that are
borne spiritually blind?

The further answer of M. Powel to this third Argument conteyneth nothing, but
that which is partly answered before, and partly to be answered afterward.
Therefore I pass the same by and come to the 4 argument.

The Fourth Argument.
The Israelits so respected a bodily deliverance wrought by Jonathan for them,
that they saved him from danger of death. Ergo Much more ought this Christian
high Court of Parliament, (being not a company of rude soldiers, but the
chief flower of this Realm, and representing the whole Realm) so to respect
the spiritual deliverance of themselves and of many other, wrought by the
Ministers now silenced etc. That they speak what lawfully they may for all
lawful relief of them against their troubles.

The marginall notes.
G. Powel.
a Ionathans case and the Schismatic Ministers is altogether unlike. And the
urging of this zeal, having not the like cause, seems to be dangerous. But I
spare my brethren. The author urges not this argument from Jonathan as from a
like example, but from a comparison a minore ad maius, from the less to the
greater. Therefore though there be not the like cause, yet there being greater,
viz. From consideration of a spiritual deliverance there is no danger therein.
The author by this example moves only the Parliament to be zealous for the
said Ministers, Is there danger now in the zeal, of so wise and judicious an
assembly? It is also acknowledged by the answerer afterward, that the Israelits
did justly rescue Jonathan. Is there any danger then by an example of them that
did justly, to provoke the wise Parliament, to plead with a wise and religious
Prince for the Ministers. Wherein then does this answerer spare us, that seeks
every corner, to find something for which he might (if he could) hang us?

G. Powel
b The greater is their sin, whose superstition, and wilful obstinacy has
restrained their liberty, and made them unserviceable in the Church. Reply.
Is it not a strange thing (I had almost said, sin) that it should be
accounted sin, superstition, and wilful obstinacy, yea, such as makes men
unserviceable in the Church, (in fear of sinnyng against God) soberly to
refrain from humane Ceremonies, and yet swearing, swaggering, rioting, gamyng,
dronkennes, whoredom, adultry, (even in the sight of the world) should not
make men unserviceable etc? That such things are, in many suffered and
countenaunced in the ministry, is known to many of the Parliament house. If
his Christian Majesty were also rightly informed thereof, I doubt not but that
things would be otherwise ordered.

Further answer to the 4 Argument.
The Ministers did but their duty etc. If men should always be so answered,
when in their necessities they should require some help and comfort, in regard
of some former kindness; would not men condemn such answerers of great
ingratitude and in humanity? viz. Thus to be answered, that which you have
done was but your duty?

G. Powel
Ionathans example is unlike unto the suppliants. For Saul in hypocrisy had
made a rash vow etc. But the actions of our Sovereign are not so exorbitant,
etc: but advised and just etc. See how wise the children of this world are in
their kind? Reply.
The author altogether wisely and purposely (as it seems) concealed the name
of Saul in the argument; that he might reason from the comparison of the work
only of Jonathan in a bodily deliverance, for the better regard of the
Ministers now silenced etc. In respect of the spiritual deliverance of the
people by them. This (I say) he does without any mention at all of Saul, that
so the work might be generally and simply respected in it self; without any
particular eye unto Saul, out of whose hands the people delivered Jonathan. He
respected their thankefulnes in delivering Jonathan from death, without respect
of the person that would have put him to death.

Again, I know not why the answerer should think the author to mean rather
our gracious King as answerable to Saul, then the Prelates, the chief and
principal actors, in all wrongs and injuries done unto the Ministers pleaded
for: except that either he had rather impute all hard dealing to his Majesty
than to the Prelates: or that hereby he would provoke the more wrath, against
the author and all by him supplicated for, whom before notwithstanding he
seemed greatly to spare. Further if the Israelits justly rescued Jonathan as
the answerer confesses they did justly) much more just is it, that many
ministers should be releeved in their troubles. If yet they press the author
further for meaning Saul, and comparing our King unto him (as Saul was the
Lords anointed) what is the danger, wherein the answerer before should brag
of sparing his brethren? Can he gather any undutifulnes toward his Majesty?
Or can he imagine, the author to have intended any forcible means to be used
by the Parliament, that sitting to make laws against force and violence
toward any subject, must therefore much more themselves be far from
offering any force and violence toward their Sovereign? Do the words in the
Argument (to be Zealous and earnest) import any such matter? Force and violence
of any, especially of subjects against their Princes, is rather of Popish fury
and madness, then of any Christian zeal and earnestnes. Besides, the often most
Honorable mention of his Majesty in the Arguments, and his express pressing
the Parliament to do all in humility and modesty, (in the next argument) yea,
that they should not only use boldness, but christian boldness, yea, that they
should put forth all their gifts and graces, of knowledge, Zeal, compassion,
modesty and humility: yea, finally, that in the preface he petitioneth, nothing
by him written, to be understood of any other means, then good, honest,
lawful, peaceable, and agreeable to every man's calling; All these things do
abundantly clear the author from all undnetifull intent and meaning against
his Majesty. That the Israelits did not in such humility speak for Jonathan
to Saul as they should have done, in regard that Saul was the Lords
anointed; this is not so much to be respected, as the consideration and
reason, why they rescued Jonathan. Neither is the Argument, by that wherein
they failed any weakened, but rather the more strenghtened. For if they so
respected a bodily deliverance wrought by Jonathan, that they passed the bounds
of their duty; should not the regard of a spiritual deliverance, move such a
christian assembly to speak what lawfully they may, with all modesty and
humility.

THE FITH ARGUMENT.
Nehemiah spoke to an heathen King for the material Jerusalem. So did Hester
to the like King for her people, and that not without great danger to her
self. Joseph also of Arimathea and Nicodemus, (both timorous men) spoke boldly
to Pilate, (an heathen also) for the body of Christ being dead, that they might
honorably bury it: yea this they two did, when all the Disciples of Christ had
forsaken him, as also when his enimyes had prevailed against him. Yet all these
had good success in that for which they spoke. Ergo Much more ought this High
Court of Parliament, to speak to a Christian and religious King, for the
building of the spiritual Jerusalem, for the spiritual state and furthering
of the souls of many depending upon the Ministers now molested, and for whole
Christ Jesus now living and reigning.

Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a Impertinent example. Reply. G. Powel
This note is impertinent, as shall appear by his answer afterward, and the
reply thereunto.

b A foul beggyng of the question, as if the schism of a few, were so just
and important a matter, as the delivery of the whole Church, from intended
certain destruction. Reply.
The substance of this note (touching schism) being like the song of the
April bird that has but one note, I have often answered. Though we were such
Schismatiks as the answerer charge us to be, yet we ought to have that
benefit of law which Paul claimed even in Nero his time, and was not denied
it. Acts 25.12.

G. Powel
c These pure Angels of light think all the world in darkness, besides
themselves. These scoffs can hardly come from a pure mind, but do rather
beseem profane Angels of darkness, then the children of light: Reply.
much less the Preachers of holiness. Whether we that are deprived and
silenced, are fitter for the work of the ministry, then 5000. in the land
that stand for ministers, and receive the wages of Ministers; I will not say,
let the whole High Court of Parliament judge, but, let many of the Prelates and
other conformitans judge.

G. Powel
d An impudent untruth of a false Prophet. They made themselves incapable of any
place in the ministry. Reply.
Let all those that charge us with impudency, and making our selves incapable of
the ministry, take heed that one day, they be not ashamed before the Son of
God at his coming: and that then also the Son of God be not a shamed of
them, before his Father and his holy Angels, and so pronounce them incapable of
the kingdom of heaven; yea, least also the master of such a servant come in an
hour, that he is not ware of, cut him of, and give him his portion with
hypocrites. Mat. 24.50.51. Michael the Archangell durst not blame the Devil
with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord rebuke thee. Iud. 9. You know what is
written by an orator, of an orator. Ex eius ore, verba magno impetu atque aestu
erumpebant, non secus ac feruentes aque ebulliunt et exiliunt. That which is
said of his words, may be said of the reproaches, raylings, scoffings etc: of
this notary. But are we false Prophets? False Prophets run before they are
sent. They speak out of their own hearts, they follow their own spirit, and
have seen nothing. Eze 13.2.3. Ierem. 14.14. They flatter, and heal the hurt
of Gods people with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace, where there is no
peace. Ierem. 8.11. They are hypocrites, pretending great holiness, coming in
sheeps apparel, but being inwardly ravenyng wolves. Math. 7.15. They are
covetous and cruel like a roaring Lion, ravenyng the pray, devouring souls;
taking riches and preciouss things etc: Ezech. 22.25. They are proud and
ambitious, loving the praise of men, more then the praise of God.

Can we be charged with these things? Has not the Lord sent us? Do we speak
any thing but that the Lord has put into our mouths? Our flattery consists
in plain reprehending of sin, and denouncyng the judgment of God against the
same. Our covetousnes is inspendyng all we have, and leaving nothing to our
posterity. Our cruelty is in suffering the manifold injuryes that are done
unto us. Our hypocrisy is in a care of keeping a good conscience. Our ambition
is in the abasing of our selves, beneath the parentage and education of many of
us: and in bearing the scorns and reproaches of the world, yea, in being
accoumpted the skumme of the world and contemned by some, that have been glad
of the crustes that have come from some of our tables. Why then does this
Notary call the author of those Arguments, or any other by him pleaded for in
his Arguments, by this odious name of a false Prophet? If the Lord rebuke him
for so calling us, I pray that it may not be in anger. Touching our in
capacity of any place in the ministry, wherefore are we so incapable? What be
our errors in doctrine? What are our vices in life? Is conformity the chief
and most cardinal virtue? Is it the soul of a minister, tota in toto, et tota
in qualibet part? Must all learning, all piety, all gravity, all soundnes give
place to conformity? So it seems. For learned men, godly men, grave men, and
sound Divines (I speak not of my self, I confess my self the meanest of
many hundreds) such men (I say) are thrust out, and ignorant men, wicked men,
young men, corrupt and Popish men, are put into the service of the Church. May
we not say, Plead thou our cause O Lord etc? psalm. 35.1. Yea rather may we not
say, Arise O Lord, maynteyne thine own cause: remember thy daily reproaches by
the foo: man. psalm. 74.22.

G. Powel
e They mean their Presbytery. Reply.
This is but a scoff and mock. But though we be mocked, yet let this mocker
remember, that God is not mocked. The author speaks expressly of the ministry
of the gospel which is for instruction, this Notary says, he means thereby,
their Presbytery, which is for government. But more of this afterward.

G. Powel
f Note this, They would have all the Bishops removed and deprived. Do you
gather this, because mention is made of removyng of the lets and impediments of
the sincere ministry of the gospel? Reply.
Then it seems that either you would have a sharp physician for the casting
of waters, since you can see such invisible things in a man's words, or else that
your own conscience told you that the Bishops are great lets and impediments
to the sincere ministry of the gospel. If you be of that mind and show the
same, it will be no small let and impediment to your own preferment with the
Bishops, If you be not, then surely this your note is not worth the noting.

G. Powel
g If we profess Christ and maintain his gospel, what do they plead for
then? Wherefore have they denied it all this while, pretending they labor for
nothing but the gospel, and the ministry thereof? What an untruth is this?
Where have we denied Christ here to be professed, Reply.
and his gospel maynteyned? But though we profess Christ and maynteyne his
gospel, yet we plead, 1 for the better continuance of the gospel where
already it is: 2 That so it may the better be where it is not: 3 That it may be
more glorified, and the better flourish and fructify in all places: all which
things cannot be, if the proceedinges begun be not stayed and mitigated. 4
May not a kingdom in general profess Christ and maynteyne his gospel, and
yet have some superfluityes, which obscure Christ and hinder his gospel; as
also want some things belonging to Christ and his gospel, which may make
Christ more glorious, and further his Gospel?

G. Powel.
h Lo: now the Disciplinariay ataxie, for which the suppliants plead so much, is
whole Christ Jesus. Intolerable blasphemy. So cried the High Priest, Reply.
when Christ confessed himself to be the Son of the livyng God. Math. 27.65.
If it had pleased you notwithstanding, you might in charity have otherwise
understood the authors words. But let the meaning be as you take it: have you
caught him in any trap? Nothing less. For what else can be gathered, but that
in the profession of the gospel here in England, there are defects and wants?
That the Church of Christ among us, is in some sort defective? And although we
have Christ in his word and Sacraments, and in other exercises of religion, yet
we have not whole Christ, in that we have not all his ordinances? And that
therefore some thing more ought to be added, that Christ may reign more fully
and absolutely over us? Neither is there any such ataxie in the Discipline by
these words signified. For we desire nothing but the order, wherein the Apostle
rejoiced. Colos. 2.5. Whereof also we have the rudera, and (as it were) the
stumps yet remaynyng, in our Parishionall Churchwardens and sidemen: though
entitled with other names, and wanting that ordination and authority, which
with the Pastors within there own Parishes, Elders ought to have. This
Discipline (if we might have equal hearing) we could casily free from all such
imputations, as whereby it is commonly disgraced by the adversaryes thereof with
Princes and Nobles. Yea we could plainly and truly show the same to be
nothing prejuditiall, but very helpful both to all Royal authority, and also
to Nobility: yea better agreeyng with the one and the other, then all other
inventions of men for Ecclesiastical government whatsoever. Touching the
intolerable blasphemy, imputed in the end of this note to the author of the
Arguments by way of an exclamation, it lies upon them, that fear not openly
to deny Christ Jesus to be law giver and King of his Church. How it can be cast
upon us, for desiryng whole Christ Jesus (I mean all his ordinances) I can not
discern.

Further answer to the Fith Argument.
G. Powel
Zeal and courage for defense of Gods truth and Church is commendable: but it
were rashness and fool hardines: for any to adventure hazard and danger, by
intermedling in a frivolous quarrel, and in a cause not justifiable. Reply.
Now you pay home indeed. If Cardinal Wolsey were livyng, he could speak no
more imperiously. For except by a frivolous quarrel, and a cause not
justifiable, you mean not the cause of the Ministers; you speak nothing to
the purpose. If you mean that (as needs you must) then do you not speak to
us poor Ministers alone, but also to the Parliament, and to all other (Noble
men or gentlemen) that have intermedled, M Powels censure of the Parliament
house.
or shall intermedle in our cause. Yea, them you do not cunnyngly, but openly
and plainly, charge all such with rashness and foolehardines. If you had been a
man that in heart had not cared for the opposition of any, yet this speech
would scarce have beseemed your person. One of us for half so much against the
meanest Prelat, yea against the basest Chancellor, should have paid full
sweetly. But your side seem to have privilege of speak and writing what you
please against any, yea against many: yea against the High Court of Parliament.
Yea, against whole Churches and kingdoms For the rest if we cannot make our
cause good and justify the same, so that all your side shall not be able
substantially to answer, without scoffing, railing, wrangling and
sophisticating, then let our quarrel be accounted frivolous, and our cause not
justifiable.

G. Powel
There are great ods between these examples proposed, and the refractarie
ministers case. There should be such ods. Reply.
For the author reasons not a similibus or paribus, from likes or equals,
but from the less to the greater.

G. Powel
In the time of Nehemiah, the Jews by long captivity, were in great affliction,
the walls of Jerusalem broken down etc. But our Church has long flourished, is
glorious still, and more and more increases. I will not say your words are
like to his words that boasted saying, I am rich and increased with goods,
Reply.
Revel. 3.17
and have need of nothing: but this I say, that all being granted that you
say, does not hinder but further the cause. The more the Church florisheth, the
more easy it is to grant that, which the Arguments plead for. Ministers also
of the word, are as necessary for the preserving and increasing of the glory
of Churches, as for the procuring thereof at the first. But alas I would God our
Church did so flourish as you pretend. Indeed it has many rich mercyes, God be
blessed for them; but he that sees not what the Church wants, does not
rightly acknowledge that which it has. Is this the glory of a Church for
Prelates to flourish and flant it out gallantly: and for their men to ruffle it
out lustily? Nay rather, this is the glory of the world, and better beseeming
the Courts of Princes, and houses of Noble men, then the calling of orthodox
Bishops, who should as well in their life as in their doctrine, preach
humility, modesty, and contempt of the world. The more glorious that Prelates
are outwardly, the less glorious (for the most part) they are inwardly. Yea it
is to be observed, that the more the outward glory of Churchmen (as they are
called) has increased, the more has true and inward glory decayed. The more
also, that the inward and true bewty of the Church has decayed, the more has
the outward state and pomp of the officers thereof increased. When were the
Priests of the law, of greater outward authority, and took more upon the^,
then when the church of the Jews touching true beuty, was in worst case? Search
the scriptures for they bear witness heerof. Yea, were there ever so many
degrees of dignity in the Church, and do we ever read of so great state and
pomp of the Preistes in the former times, as there was of the Priests, Scribes
and Pharisees at the first coming of Christ? And were ever things in so bad
case before, as the^ they were? So also sinc that, the more that truth of
doctrine, and purity of Discipline decayed in the Church, after the golden and
most glorious age of the Apostles, the more did the Church grow unto, and swell
in outward riches, pomp and glory. Experience also teaches, that the more
glorious Prelates are in their outward state, the less benefit the rest of the
Church has by them; because they take the less pains; at the least, such
pains, as are most agreeable to the true Episcopal and ministerial calling,
described in holy scripture. Wherein then is the true glory of the Church? 1 in
such ministers of the word and other officers; as Christ has commended. 2 In
the performance of such duties by them, as he requires, that is in preaching
the word faithfully, in administering the Sacraments sincerely, in praying
zealously and aptly according to the necessityes of the Church, and in
executyng Discipline wisely, and justly: 3 In the effects of the former two,
viz: in true knowledge, faith, love, zeal, humility, patience, temperance,
righteousness, peace, etc. Touching these things, the more we want some of those
officers that Christ has commended by his Apostles to the Church, and the more
negligent those that we have are in their duties, the more lamentable it is to
see the carved pillars of the temple broken down, and the faithful workmen in
Gods house to be cast out, by whose labors it had been before built and brought
to some good bewty. Touching the last, what christian heart is so stony, that
it does not mourn? What eye so dry, that it does not shead tears, yea
rather, gush out with tears, to consider and behold, the mesery of our
supposed glorious Church, by the spiritual nakedness, blindness and poverty
thereof? I mean the great ignorance, the superficial worship of God, the
fearful blasphemies and swaringes in houses, and streates, so also the
direful cursings, the open contempt of the word and Sacraments, the wicked
profanations of the Lords days, the dishonor of superiors, the pride, the
cruelty, the fornications, adultryes, and other uncleanness, the dronkennes,
the covetousnes, the usuryes, and other the like abominations, almost as
grevous as either heertofore in the time, or now in the places of Popery, when,
and where, there was no preaching at all of the gospel? O M. Powel, and ye my
Reverend Fathers, and brethren in the ministry (even of the conformable sort,
flatter not your selves in this behalf, but behold and pity the woeful and
lamentable stat of our Church in these things.

But to return, heerin you err not a little, in that you confound the state of
the Church, and of the common wealth of the Jews. The Common wealth was indeed
at that time, in much misery. But was the Church also amongst them, for such
things as wheerin cheifely consists misery, in as bad condition? Had they
not those officers that God had prescribed? Were the Priests and Levits either
so ignorant, or so idle, or so scandolous, as many called Ministers amongst us?
Were the faithful and paynfull Priests and Levites, so urged to the
observation of men's traditions and Ceremonies in the worship of God, and
otherwise so molested, as now many godly ministers are? Were the people so
blind, so irreligious, so unrighteous as now they are? Were the godly forced to
hear dumme dogs, or corrupt teachers? Or restrained from hearing of those
that preached wholesome doctrine, or urged to communicate with the Preistes in
human Ceremonies, to the grief of their souls, and wounding of their
consciences, as many now are? The Lord give you all such consideration of these
things, that ye may not so much labor for outward pomp, preferments,
honors, dignityes etc. As for the true felicity of our English Jerusalem and
Sion, that God may build up the walls thereof, and still love, and delight
therein.

G. Powel
As Nehemiah having by prayer and fasting, found favor with an heathen King for
the building of Jerusalem, was resisted and hindered, by Sanballat, Tobiah,
Geshem etc. So worthy Nehemiah in the beginning of our religious Sovereigns
reign, finding grace for the continuance of the prosperous estate of our
Church, begun in the days of our blessed Queen, so many Sanballats, Tobiahs
and Geshems, as there be refractary ministers and Papists, deryding and
despisyng us, labor to hinder our ministry etc. The ods that before he spoke
of, Reply.
now he makes likes. Is this to dispute ad idem, and to the purpose?

Touching his worthy Nehemiah (whom he compares to ancient good Nehemiah,)
let this be observed, that although he speak of the prayer and fasting of the
ancient Nehemiah, yet he speaks not of any prayer and fasting of his new
Nehemiah. What may be suspected or noted heerin, I leave to the consideration
of the wise and judicious reader, that remembers what opposition many of the
Prelates have always made to true fasting, and that also knows what be the
things which men may safely comme^d in prayer unto God, especially, for which
they may humble themselves extraordinary in fasting before God. Touching the
Tobiahs, Sanballats, and Geshems, (whom feign he would have to be those that he
calls refractary ministers, as well as the Papists,) let him not deceive
himself heerin. For the wise and Christian readers, are able to discern, the^
to be most worthy of these na^es, that strive most for men's precepts, that
study more to please men then God, that preach not themselves, and hinder them
that would: whose chief work, is not to increase God his kingdom, but to
uphold their own, fearing nothing more then the downfall thereof: which also
feed not the Lords people, with the bread of eternal life, but their own
bodies with the meat that perishes and with all carnal delights: who care
not to enrich the Lords people, with durable riches, that shall not be taken
away, but plod day and night to enrich themselves in this world, and to build
great house for their posterity. Such are indeed the Sanballats, Tobiahs, and
Geshems, that do most oppugn the spiritual building of the spiritual
Jerusalem. Now although this answerer, and other not much unlike those before
described, for a time reproach and scorn us, by such odious names and
comparisons; yea, plough upon our backs and make long furrows, yet the
righteous Lord, in the end shall plead our cause against them, and bring forth
our righteousness even as the morning Sun; it may be in this world, that even
those that have been through their raylings, and suggestions against us, hardly
persuaded of us, may at the last see and acknowledge our innocence: if not, yet
in the world to come, when the longer the equity of our cause has been
obscured and disgraced, the more glorious it shall be made, when some of our
adversaries (without repentance in the mean time) shall be thrown into the
place, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth: psalm. 129.4,
and where to be indeed, is more then only to dream thereof. Yea, the same
righteous Lord shall (certaynely one day) cut the cords of the wicked. They
that hate Sion, shall be ashamed, and turned backward.

G. Powel
We still thinking most of these men to sin of ignorance, cease not to pray
unto God, O Lord open the eyes of these men, and lay not this sin to their
charge. See how this man tumbleth up and down, and how he contradicts
himself. Reply.
Has he not before expressly charged all of us, contradiction.
to do that which we do for carnal respects? Has he not also in the same
place (I mean in his preface) as expressly said, (speaking not particularly of
some of us, but indefinitly of all) that it cannot be denied, but that
presumptuously; and wilfully, we contend with the Magistrate, impugnyng his
authority. etc. How often else where also does he object unto us, wilfullnes,
obstinacy etc? Yea in the very next Argument, the note with (d) charge us
with wilfulnes and superstitious obstinacy: yet here, he says that most of us
sin of ignorance. If also he and other prayed in truth, that God would open
our eyes, then let the^ not pluck our tongues out of our heads: and so thirst
for our blood, as many speeches in this answer seem to bewray then to do.

G. Powel
In Esters time, all the Jews were in danger to have been swalowed up by Haman,
if Queen Hester had not interceded. I hope the Supplica^ts think not our
Church to be so desperate, neither outwardly nor spiritually. The whole Church
of one place, Reply.
and a whole kingdom, may fare the worse for the sin of some one: yea,
somtims long after the death of him, Josh. 7:11. 2 Samuel 21.
by whom that sin was committed. All Israel for the cruelty of Saul toward
the Gibeonits (who yet were not Israelits) were punished, even in their bodily
states, long after the death of Saul. May we then fear nothing to our whole
Church and kingdom, for the hard dealing of the Prelates, toward the souls of
many thowsands of our own Nation? Let no man deceive us with vain words.
Blessed is the man that fears always. There is danger in security, Ephesians.
5.6 Pro. 28.14.
there is much safety in a godly fear. As for the spiritual danger of the
Church, it appears by the decay of the spiritual bewty, and by the increase
of the spiritual deformity, that is of ignorance and of impiety, in those
places already, which are deprived of their good Ministers. How will these
things increase in continuance of time? Yet it may be, that as the more the
Egyptians by oppression labored to suppress the Israelits, the more they
multiplied: so the more that Prelates shall oppress and silence us, the more
God shall change the minds of the conformitans themselves, to dislike those
things, which yet a little they yield unto. If they shall hold their peace, yet
God shall open the mouths of children to give him praise, and to bear witness
unto his truth: If they also be silent, the Lord can make even the stones to
cry.

G. Powel
The examples of Joseph and Nicodemus, are altogether impertinent. For neither
had Pilat any reason, to deny the burial of Christ's body: neither is the
ministers request, concerning cross and surplice, of such importance as the
burial of Christ's body: for it is not true that they contend about whole
Christ. Reply.
The Argument speaks of the honorable burial of Christ's body, the answerer
only of the burial, leaving out honorable; Is not this sophistry? Though
perhaps Pilate had no reason, to deny the burial of Christ; yet Christ being
put to death (in part) for supposed treason, Sophistry:
he had carnal reason, to deny honorable burial: the more because of the
spite and malice of the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ. John 19.12
For as before, when they said, he that makes himself a King, speaks
against Caesar, he made the more have to judgment against him, so he had cause
in fear of their like hatred and malice, to be the slower in granting his
body to them to be buried, who he knew in respect of their honorable persons
and places, would bury it in the most honorable manner they could. As Pilat had
cause to fear the malice of the Scribes and Pharisees heerin, so also and much
more, had Joseph and Nicodemus cause to fear the same, by performyng the least
honorable service unto Christ: especially Nicodemus, being one of the same
coat might fear it. If the Ministers request concerning Cross and Surplice,
be not of such importance, as the buryall of Christ's body, this weakeneth not,
but adds strenght to the Argument. For the less it is, the more easily it
may be granted, and the more easily it may be granted, the more boldly it may
be sued for.

THE SITX ARGUMENT.
If God respected the tears of reprobate Hagar, in want of water of this life
for Ishmaell: and of the women, cruelly used by their husbands. Genesis 21.16
Malachi 2:13:14: Mat: 15:22.
If Christ also pitied many in their bodily miseryes, yea some, that being
heathen, were in that respect little better then dogs; then much more this
Honorable Court, ought to pity the moon and lamentation of many Congregations,
deprived of their faithful Pastors, for want of the water and bread of
eternal life, which sometime the said Pastors, were wont to give unto them.

But the first is true, Ergo. The second ought to be performed; and
consequently, the Honorable High Court of Parliament, ought to speak for those
Ministers and people, that do so mourn.

Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a The refractarie ministers, ought to have had compassion on their sheep, and
not desperately to have forsaken them for cross and surplice. We must so have
compassion one our sheep, Reply.
that we wound not our own souls. We must (as has been said) eschew evil,
and do good: not commit evil, to do good. As gold may be bought to dear, so
may the good of our people. That which is here said against us touching cross
and surplice, may also be said touching images, if we were commanded to
worship them, Our yielding also would be so offensive, that we should not do
that good, that we intend by yielding. We may also fear the hardenyng of our
hearts by yielding, as well as we see the hearts of other by little sins, to
be hardened for greater.

The note with (b) is often anserwred.

G. Powel
as that Christ himself testified of her, that he had not found so great faith
in Israel. Read the place. Reply.
c Absurd. The woman was such, Absurd. Our Savior speaks not that of that
woman, Math: 8, 10
but of the Centurion. Though the Notary were an Archbitshop, yet I might
entreat him, better to read the place. But Christ said, Mat. 15.28.
O woman, great is thy faith? What then? Though as she was elect, she was also
blessed: yet as she was out of the visible Church, the words of our Savior
might be spoken of her. Neither does the author say, that she was a dog: but
that she was little better then a dog, and in that respect, that is, as she was
a Cananit, and none of the children of Israel. Is there no difference betwixt
these words, and to say plainly, that she was a dog? Yet the words of our
Savior are plain. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it
to dogs, or whelps. Therefore this note reproves our Savior, Sophistry.
and not the author of the Arguments.

The two next scoffing notes with (d) and (e) have been often answered. We
leave not our flocks in the plain field, but are driven from them by force,
because we will not displease God, to please the Prelates.

G. Powel
f Only Christ is the husband of his spouse. Here the supplicants
blasphemously papize. For I think they mean not this literally. If they do,
they are surely very honest men in the mean time: Reply.
A man should first cast out the beam that is in his own eye, before he find
fault with a mote in another man's eye. Math: 7, 5
As Christ is the only Archbishop of the Church, so I acknowledge him also the
only husband of his spouse. For the one title, is as proper unto Christ, as
the other. But here the Notary falls again, over head and ears, into the
same sophistry, that in the former note with (c) he did. The author says, that
such Ministers had performed the duty as it were of husbands; Sophistry
the notary cries out blasphemy, as if he had simply called them, the husbands
of the churches. The author therefore, did not blasphemously papize. But let
other take heed of like papizing, that usurp such names and authority, as are
proper only to Christ; and neither are, nor can be maynteyned by any other
Arguments, then such as whereby the Papal dignity of the Antichrist of Rome is
supported. The latter part of the note is to loathsome for any Christian tongue
to read, or chaste ears to hear: therefore I cast it out on the dunghill, as
unworthy of any answer.

G. Powel
g A lying hyperbole: Then belike the Prophet Malachi, Reply
(upon alleging of whose words this note is grounded) used a lying hyperbole.
Mala: 2.13:14
God that puts up all the tears of his children into his bottle, knows
and beholds this, and will one day, Rom 12, 15 Job. 30, 25 Amos 6, 6
wype a way these, and all other tears from their eyes: when they that in the
mean time scorn such tears of the godly ( so far are they from mournyng
with them that mourn, and being sorry for the afflictions of Joseph) shall
except they repent) have more, then their bellyes full of weeping and waylyng,
and gnashing of teeth.

G. Powel.
h If the refractary Ministers be so unkind, and hard hearted, that they will
have no pity upon them, then may they be otherwise releeved well enough: The
Lord that searches the hearts of all men, Reply.
knows the affections of some of the Ministers now deprived, to be such
toward their people, that if they might stay with their people with
comfortable conditions, they had rather stay, (though their maintenance be but
small) then accept of a thousand pound by the year else where with as good
conditions. Therefore hardness of heart is not to be objected unto them. Touching
the rest of this note, it is strange, that in the question of depriving
ignorant Ministers, according to the law and statute in that behalf, this has been the principal objection, where, or how, will you have their places
supplied? Much like to the question of the Disciples, whence should we get so
much bread in the wilderness, as should suffice so great a multitude? Now the
question being of our deprivation against law, and the paucity of sufficient
Ministers being objected, reply is made, There is store, the Churches may be
releeved otherwise. But let them be first releeved, that have ignorant
Ministers, not knowing the principles of religion themselves, much less able
to teach other.

Further answer to the 6. Argument.
G. Powel
If such congregations do so mourn, then the more hard hearts have those cruel
tyrants rather then sheepherds, that without pity, desperately forsake them, for
little or no cause: Reply.
The substance of these words being the same with the former note, is answered
before: yet here I ad, 1 that it is more cruelty for the Prelates, for little or
no cause to deprive such Pastors. 2 that this answerer seems still to
account, sinnyng against God to be little or nothing. 3. that a thief by the
like reason, may complain of the hardness of his heart, that had rather lose
his Purse, then have his throat cut.

G. Powel
Those Congregations may cease mournyng, and comfort themselves, because there
is store enough of able Ministers, and they shall have those, that will not run
away from them: Take away tautologyes and other superfluityes, and this answer
it self would scarce have been an obular or two farthing pamphlet. Reply.
The first part of this answer, has been removed before. Those that will not
run away, where are they to be found? What net may one have to ketch them,
what keep to hold them? For do not the Formalists daily run away from their
people? Do they not take another lyving, and keep the former also, leaving one
to some journyman, fit for all companyes? Yea, both Master and man, oftentimes
leave both flocks to the Wolf, yea, I know some that for sake their own
charges, and are curats else where under other. And to whom do some of them
leave their own? To one, that all the week long goes to hedging, ditchyng,
throshyng, and other day labor for his livyng: who on the Lords day, is at
Church, with a white Surplice to read service. In harvest also they take
harvest work, as ordinarily as other harvest men. I have seen it, not long
since with my eyes. Some also within a fortnight after they are possessed of a
living, of good worth, let it out for diverse years, and so take their leave of
the people, to serve a cure under another. O miserable condition of such a
people. Whose heart melts not to think of such wretched watchmen? What
liklyhod therefore is there, that the Congregations deprived of their godly,
loving and paynefull Pastors, shall have other as faithful, that will not run
away from them? Touching the answer to the consequence of the former Argument,
that the Pastors should rather return to their people and comfort them,
obeying the wholesome ordinances of the Church etc: I answer that we will so
do, when such ordlnances are proved by Gods word to be wholesome.

THE 7 ARGUMENT.
All true Ministers, 2 king. 2, 12 and 13.14 Prove. 3.16 psalm. 45.12 1 Samuel 4,
21 Ephesians. 6. 5 Isai. 2:4 and 65:25: 2 chronicles, 14:14, 17.10:27.6,
are as the Chariots and horsemen of those kingdoms where they are. In the
Ministry of the gospel, and sincere worship of God therein commended,
consists the glory of Kings and kingdoms. So also the peace: yea also their
whole outward prosperity. And the contempt of the gospel and of the sincere
worship of God, procures all outward calamityes of Kings and Kingdoms. Ergo

As men will be faithful to Kings and Kingdoms, so they must maynteyne the
sincere Ministry and Ministers of the gospel, and therefore speak for them.

The Marginall Notes.
G. Powel
a Is a handful of refractary ministers, the safety of the whole land: 1
Cosmographers in some Maps describe a bird called a Ruc, of such bigness, that
she takes up an Elephant with her talants very high into the air, Reply.
and then lets him fall to be broken and bruised, for her to feed on. It
seems, this Notary has an hand as large as the foot or tallants of this
bird, since he makes but an handful of all the Ministers suspended, deprived,
or like so to be, for these matters now in question. Secondly, As the loss of
one of his Majesty's ships Royal, or of one of his strongest holds, or of
one of his most worthy warriors, may be said to weaken the whole Kingdom,
especially in the time of great war: and as the cutting in sunder of one
principal post, or beam or pillar of an house, does weaken the whole house;
so, and much more is the loss and cutting of of so many worthy ministers of
the gospel, the weakenyng of the whole land. For is not Satan, and are not
Papists, and all the rest of Satan's army, so much the more strenghtned? 2 king.
2, 15 and 9.1.
Elia was but one, and accounted (as we are) a troubler of Israel: and left
Elisha behind him: and yet the Argument tells you; how they were accounted,
though in their time there were many other Prophets. O therefore, that the
meanest able and godly Minister, might not be lightly regarded, in these last
and dangerous times. Howsoever they are esteemed of by the world, yet they are
of more price, then great riches.

G. Powel
b As if God never had defended any Pagan, in case of innocence and justice etc:
c Outward prosperity consists in pure worship: They speak so profoundly, as
an intelligent and sensible man, cannot understand them: As if the ungodly
flourished not ofttymes, as a green bay tree: and the outward prospeity of the
Persians and Romans, did not surpass the mean estate of the Jews, the true
Church of God: Reply
If there had been no name set to this book, these two notes, and many other
the like, might have brought it in suspicion to have been penned by some
professed Atheist. For (who almost but smelling of religion,) would have
objected such things? Yea, who that had but tasted of logike, would have denied
the conclusion, not regarding the proofs and premises? The wicked do indeed,
some times in joye outward prosperity, either to molifie their own hearts, or
to harden them the more to be the fitter for Gods judgmentes, or to be scourges
of God unto other: or to make them the more in excusable: yet they have no
assurance, either of gettyng, or of holdyng such prosperity. Neither can they
have any more comfort thereby: then the godly may have discomforte by their
afflictions: because indeed they have no intrest thereunto from God. It is also
a shameful untruth, that the Persians, Romans, or any other, in outward
prosperity excelled the Jews, so long as the Jews regarded the word, honored
the Prophets and other Ministers thereof, and maynteyned the pure worship of
God. All that while, they were even in outward things the glory of all the
world. What people ever had the like victoryes? What Nation for all prosperity
was comparable to Israel in the days of Solomon, and to the Jews afterward,
psalm: 48:2:87:2: and 12: Lament. 1:1 and 2:1:
in the time of many other Kings? Of what City are so glorious things ever
written as of Jerusalem? Read the places in the margin. Indeed after that they
contemned the word of the Lord, abused his prophets, and neglected God his
worship (and that especially through the fault of their Priests etc.) then the
Lord forsaking them, made their enimyes the chief etc. Lament: 1:5


The other notes upon this Argument, I pass by, as either answered before, or
being of no moment.

Further answer to the 7 Argument.
G. Powel
What can a sensible man make of this enthymem? The refractary ministers are
the safety of the whole land, Ergo, the Court of Parliament must speak for the
gospel. Reply.
The title refractary omitted, he is a sensles man, that can make nothing of
that enthymem: especially these ministers pleaded for, being proved true and
faithful. For though the gospel and Ministers thereof be distinct, yet he
that speaks for one, speaks for both, and he that speaks for both,
speaks for the land, the safety whereof depends upon both. But mark here
again, the answerers sophistry; Sophistry:
For whereas the author says, that the Parliament is to speak for the gospel
and Ministry thereof, the answerer takes the word gospel, and altogether
leaves out, the other words, and the ministry thereof.

G. Powel
There are thowsandes of faithful Ministers besides them in this kingdom, that
are Charets and horsemen etc. Ministers are therefore termed Charets and
horsemen, because they are Gods instruments for gathering of the Saints, Ergo:
The antecedent is improbable, if not false: Again, these men refuse their
Ministry, wherefore they cannot be called charets: yea so far are they from
being the safety, that would God they were not the sores of the Church, and
sowers of sedition. I mean schism and faction: Reply.
As there are some other faithful Ministers, so there are not many thousands
that are able, much less faithful besides us. Generally throughout the land,
there are Six reading ministers, for one preacher, at the least by practis.
For there are some that are licensed to preach, that never did, are, or were
able to preach. Many also that can preach seledome do Preach. Some also that
do preach, (and that often) do it so Popishly or otherwise so corruptly: so
foolishly and ridiculously, to make sport rather then to edify: so vaynly and
unprofitably, that it were better to hold their peace then so to preach.

That Ministers are called charets and horsemen for gathering the Saints, (viz:
out of the power and holds of the Devil) may be the truth in part: but yet,
they being (in the places alleged) called the charets and horsemen of Israel,
not of the Saints, (and most of the Israelits being then wicked) and these
titles being acknowledged of Elisha by a wicked King, that respected not the
gathering of the Saints, but the outward defense of his kingdom, by the
prayers and preaching of Elisha: it cannot be the whole truth. That we are such
sores as the answerer speaks of, is not proved. Indeed some conformitans so
account us, because we rub their sores so much, and desire so earnestly the
healing of them, that so their souls may be the better saved. We are also
eye-sores to them: but sure I am, that we are not so to the godly, many of
whose sores, God has cured by us, and to whom our ministry has been the
savor of life, unto life. Other things in this argument, have received their
reply.

THE 8 ARGUMENT.
The proceedings of the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Judges, against the
Ministers in silencing and depriving of them, is against the law, Ergo.

This High Court of Parliament, being the chiefest Court of justice in all this
kingdom, ought to relieve them.

The marginall notes upon the 8 Argument.
The first 3 notes I pass by; as note-les.

G. Powel
d Object against these, and you shall be answered: How shall we be answered?
With words, and raylings, Reply.
as before, not otherwise. To the oath Ex Officio, and to the Canons afterward.

G. Powel
a These men would bring in all by popular trial: Nay rather, Reply.
would not the Prelates be glad to have all persons and all causes subject to
themselves? But more to this afterward.

G. Powel
b A sensles sentence: How can a man in matters of eternal life, be cast out of
his freehold: Reply
A simple cavil, from the misplacing of a comma. The Notary might well have
perceived, that these words, (in matters of eternal life,) were to be joined
with the words going before, ambassadors of Jesus Christ, not with the words
following, should be cast out of their freehold. This I say he might well have
perceived, because there had been no speech of our freehold of eternal life,
but only of this life.

G. Powel.
c The Ecclesiastical judge may proceed Ex officio: (d) directly against the
statute, 1 Elizab: cap: 2 Reply.
These two notes being in the margin contiguoe, and touching one another, I
join together in my reply; the rather because (d) the letter of the second
note, and the mention of the statute in the end of the said second note
omitted, they may both in better sense and truth, be read thus together,
Ecclesiastical Judges may proceed ex officio, directly against the statute.
For touching the former note with (c) let the best Civilian show (if he can) by
what other law, the Ecclesiastical judge may proceed ex officio, then by the
Canon law abolished by statute. The second note with (d) shall be satisfied
afterward.

The note with (e) of begging the question, is now too stale.

G. Powel
f As if God and his Son Christ Jesus were not president of the religious
assembly already: An unchristian suggestion: Reply
When the Prophet exhorts the Church, to open her doors for the King of glory
to come in: psalm. 24, 7:9 Cant: 5:2:
did he signify that the Church had not before interteyned the King of glory?
When Christ says, Open unto me my sister etc. does he mea^e that his sister
had him not at all before? Christ daily knocks by his word and Sacraments,
Revel. 3.20
at the hearts of all the faithful to be let in. Are they therefore altogether
without Christ? Allthough therefore Christ be already president in the
Parliament, yet by the propounding of any good cause, he desires to be further
interteyned amongst them. This the author has acknowledged, by calling the^
often a Christian assembly: by commending their Christian zeal against the
Papists etc. But this is the answerers sophistry before noted, Sophistry:
to reason from the want of a thing in part, to the want thereof altogether.
Therefore this is an unchristian and simple collection.

Further answer to the 8 Argument.
G. Powel
I am constrained to dance as the suppliants Pipe: They lead, and I follow. Nay
we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced. Reply.
We have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented. Mat, 11.19
Neither to evident Arguments out of holy scripture, will you submit your
human ordinances, or your selves: neither by any gentle and humble petitions,
will ye Prelates come to any brotherly peace. Mildnes does as much provoke you
as bitterness. M. Nichols of Kent, writing most mildly and humbly, was rewarded
severely, with suspension, deprivation, degradation. Our most humble petition
to the Convocation, at the first Session of this Parliament, received a most
rough answer. We seek peace, and when we speak thereof, ye are bent to war.
psalm. 120 7. Job. 31:8.
As though ye sat in heavenly places, we have been unto you more vile then
the earth. I complai^e not thus of all the Prelates. I know that some are wiser,
milder, kinder, and more courteous the^ other. As the bramble took more upon
it, then the Olive tree, Judge. 8.15
the vine or the fig tree, so sometime it is among Prelates.

G. Powel
Hitherto they prayed your Honors but to speak for them etc. Now they urge you
to determyne, and actually to decree something in their behalf: We neither
prayed nor urged any thing to be done, but with all humility and loyalty: G.
Powel
hoping that his most excellent Majesty upon the sight of the reasons, why they
had decreed or determined any thing (so far as they might among themselves)
would likewise in his Princely and christian regard, have vouchafed his Royal
assent to their such decrees and determinations: which although it have not
pleased his Highness yet to do, yet we hope that hereafter upon further
consideration, some other may find further grace with his Majesty in the like
behalf.

G. Powel
To the consequence of the former Argument: The consequence has 2 parts,
whereof the first is granted, but that the deprived and suspended ministers
ought to be restored is denied, because they have not justified their cause,
and declared that they are unjustly oppressed, nor can ever do: Reply.
Touching the former answer, may it please the reader, first to remember, that
all the authors speech of the proceedings of the Bishops against Ministers
suspended etc: is only to be understood of such Ministers, as whom they suspend
and deprive, only for such causes as are mentioned in the title of the
Arguments, not of other whom they suspend or deprive for any just cause. Now
to proceed, that such Ministers have not yet in law (whereof the present
question is) justified there cause, and declared that they are unjustly
oppressed, nor can ever do, is not for want of matter of justification, or for
want of the truth of unjust oppression (I mean only by the Prelates) but
because they have not been admitted, to prosecute the justice of the land, nor
to call in question the proceedings of their ordinaryes: who have been hitherto
both Agents and Judges; both accusers and advocats in their own cases against
them. And especially because upon pretense of a Canon lately made, (repugnant
to the laws, statutes; and customs of the Realm) they be not suffered by the
Archbishops Judge ad quem, to plead and to prosecute their appeals, and to
declare their innocence according to the ancient laudable, and common usage
and justice of the land: unto which grevance also many more exorbitant
injustices (by the Prelates) hereafter mentioned may be added. Let the answerer
therefore understand, that some Ordinaryes in their public sentences, The Bishop
of Lincoln against the the Ministers of Leicestershire.
have most uniustly charged some Ministers, with denial of the oath to the
Kings supremacy: which notwithstanding, diverse times before, they had willingly
sworn unto, and which at the very instance of pronouncyng the sentence, they
offered before their Ordinary to swear unto again. And not only thus
lesingly, (to make the Persons of the said Ministers more odious to our most
Christian King, his State, and all his people) in their public sentences of
deprivation, have some Ordinaryes traduced the good name and estimation of the
Ministers, but also without any other special crime worthy deprivation
mentioned in their sentences, have they stussed their sentences full, only with
general words of general crimes, contrary to the right form of judgment.
For by right form of judgment, the Ordinaryes ought not to have impeached the
Ministers, because of general crimes, but they ought to have said, and put in
certain, in what things, and in what manner the said ministers have done any
thing worthy punishment of deprivation.

An other grevance and unjust oppression (by the said Prelates) of the said
silenced ministers, is, that upon sentence of deprivation and appeals of the
Ministers, the Ordinaryes have given notice to the Patron of the voydance of
the Church, and upon new presentation of the Patron, have not only instituted
new clerks; but also (to avoid the possession of the Minister deprived and
appealing) have suggested and intimated by their certificatory writ, under
their public seal unto the King, into his Court of Chancery, that the
possession of the church was kept per vim laicam, Old natura brevium fol 33.
Que breife ne ser grant, avaunt que levesque de tiel lieu eit certify en le
Cha^cerie per so^ breit de tiel resistance.
and withal have prayed the Kings writ de la vi laica removenda. By virtue of
which writ (upon their suggestion and intimation) granted, (for without their
suggestion and intimation it would not be granted) the party appellant, before
the appeal finished, has been removed out of his possession by the Shiriffe of
the Cou^ty. Notwithstanding in truth, the Church, parsonage or vicarage house,
had within the same, no manner of vi laica at all: but was only quietly and
peaceably possessed, by the late derived spiritual person, and his poor
family.

And that this manner of a possession of a Church, by a spiritual person and
his family, by the law of the Kingdom, is not to be holden vis laica, is
plainly justified, by a late judgment given by the Kings Justices, touching the
possession of the Church of Newton Valencoe in the Diocese of Winton. For
where as a spiritual person possessed of the same Church, by virtue of the
Kings writ de vi laica removenda, was removed out of his possession, and
another spiritual person put in possession of the same church; the spiritual
person dispossessed, upon the matter heard and examined, before the Kings
Justices, that he was a mere spiritual person, and that his Church was
possessed only by himself, and his domestikes, was by an other of the Kings
writs restored into, and possessed of the same Church; and which Church unto
this day, he peaceably holds and injoyeth.

A 4 grevance of the silenced Ministers, is that (there being a Canon made in
the last Synod, that no judge ad quem shall grant any Inhibition to the judge a
quo, Bishop of Chichester and Salisbury
unless he first see the original appeal) sundry Ordinaryes upon appeals
made before them, have taken order with their Registers and Notaryes, not to
deliver to the parties appellant, any noate or copy of any act or sentence,
made or given before them. Where upon not only the party appellant is wronged,
but the Notary also upon refusal of gra^ting to the party appellant
(demanding and tendering to the Notary his fee) a public instrument of the
public Acts and Records of the Court, cannot but incur the infamy of
corruption and perjury: in as much as he being a public Notary, is sworn
faithfully to execute the office of a publik Notary; the execution of part of
which office, consists (he being required thereunto) in his testimony and
delivery of the public acts made in his presence.

A fith injustice or rather nullity is, because sundry sentences of deprivation
have been given a Iudicibus non suis, namely by such Ordinaryes, whose power
and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical at the time of giving their sentences, was
suspended, shut up and closed, by the Archbishop of Canterburyes Commission and
his Archiepiscopall visitation.

A 6 grevance or rather a nullity is, because the whole power and jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, touching causes criminal, without exception or reservation of
the examination and definition of the crimes of Ministers, by sundry Diocesans
under their seal at arms, before that time was committed in solidum for term
of life and years not expired unto their principal Commissaryes, Officialls,
or vicars general: whereupon it consequently follows, the same Diocesans
having no power by the Kings Ecclesiastical laws, to resume at their
pleasure their said Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, that the sentences given by
the said Diocesans, in these cases are sentences void and of none effect in
the law, as being given a Iudicibus jurisdiction in ea part carentibus.

A 7 grevance or rather nullity is, that sentences have been given nullo Iuris
ordine servato: but omni iuris ordine spreto et neglecto.

An 8 injustice is, because some acts and sentences have been made and given in
some private chamber of some common Inn or Tavern, and not in publico et
competente foro, in any public or competent seat, of Ecclesiastical justice.
As M. Vinall and M. Warren, in the Diocese of Chichester were deprived, in a
common Tavern, viz. at the sign of the Ounce and Ivy bush in Greensteed.

The 9 injustice is, because some sentences, given by some Ecclesiastical
judges, for not use of rites and Ceremonies, or not observing of the book of
Common prayer, have not been given according to the tenor of and effect of the
statute of the first of our late Queen, upon inquisition, information, or
accusation, but only upon process ex mero officio. A thing if not directly, yet
by consequence repugnant to the said statute; and therefore unwarrantable by
the said statute. And therefore it is to be noted, that this marginall note
(the Ecclesiastical judge may proceed ex officio) in page 37. and this
pare^thesis (which they may do ex officio) inserted in the body of the statute
page 42. is but a begging of the question. Certain Ministers in the Dioces of
Oxford and Lichfeld etc.


An other injustice against some Ministers has been committed by some
ordinaries, for that they have deprived them for none other cause, then only
for not subscribing to the 3 articles, mentioned in the 36. Canon. And this
wrong has been openly in Parliament acknowledged, to be a wrong by the
Archbishop himself, and by the Judges and advocats of his own Courts.

These and many such like things being thus, may it not be truly said, that
the Ministers pleaded for are unjustly oppressed? And being so oppressed and
without relief any other way, have they not just cause to supplicat to the
High Court of Parliament? And has not the said High Court great reason, yea is
it not bound to find remedy, and to relieve them?

The answer concerning the person of him who is said abundantly to have proved
the unlawfulnes of the proceedings against the deprived ministers, that he is
no judge nor any good Civilian or common lawyer, what reason have you to be so
resolut heerin? He may be a judge, a good Civilian, or common lawyer for ought
you know, though you seem never so doubtless thereof. But what is this answer
to the point in question? Seeing it mattereth not, what the person of the
probator be, if his proofs be sufficient? And yet how mean so ever you think
him, or his learning to be (if he be the party whom I aim at) I shall do no
wrong (as I suppose to the cheifest judge, and best approved Civilian, of the
now Archbishop of Canterburyes courts, if (without flattering the party) I
shall affirm that he was a student and an advocate, and a Judge, yea, I may
(as I think) say more, a reader of and a director in the practice of the
civil law about 30 years passed, to so^e that be now Doctors of the same law.

But to let the person and learning of the probator pass, I resolutely and
directly answer to the answerers 3. Queres (the same being partly fraught with
equivocations, and partly childish and absurd,) that the one sort can receive
no resolute answer, before he have resolved his intrinsecall and mental sense
and understanding, and that the other without question, is a question
questionles. His first Quere then being this, namely, whether the Church under
Christian godly Magistrates, has any tribunal proper unto it self, for the
decyding of controversies, and punishing of such persons as shall refuse the
ordinances thereof? Unto this Quere, when he shall distinguish and make his so
many equivocations (contained in the Quere) prespicuous and plain,
Equivocations.
to the understanding of every simple and plain meaning man, I shall (God
willing) make him a simple, plain, resolute, and direct answer. In the mean
time let him understand, first that we may justly doubt, what he means by the
word Church: and namely, whether he mean the universal Church, or a
National, a Provincial, a Diocesa^, an Archidiaconall, a Decanall, a
Capitular, or lastly a Parochial Church. For all men (as usually and commonly
we speak) do understand, that every of these Churches, has her proper name,
after which she is so called: as namly the Church dispersed throughout the
world, is called the universal Church, the Church within England is commonly
called the National Church of England; the Church within the Province of
Canterbury, the Provincial Church of Canterbury, the Church of the Diocese of
London, the Diocesan Church of London, etc. And lastly the Church of great S.
Ellens in London, the Parochial Church of S. Ellens in London. And therefore I
crave a resolute and direct answer, of what only persons you mean that the
universal, this National, Provincial, Diocesan, Archidiaconall, Decanall,
Capitular, and Parochial Church consists? Who only be the Christian godly
Magistrates, under whom every one of these Churches lives? Whether the same
christian godly Magistrates may personally be present, give their express
consents, and have their decisive voices, to and in making all and every
decrees of every of these Churches? What is the tribunal proper to it self,
of every of these Churches? What only manner of controversies, by every of
these Churches may be decided? What only kind of ordinances, every of these
Churches may decree? What only kind of subject, and with what only kind of
punishment, and none other, every of these Churches may punish the refusers of
every their ordinances?

Our second main scruple, touching this first Quere, arises from these words
(under Christian godly Magistrates) For if by these words (under Christian godly
Magistrates) he understand that every of these Churches, livyng under the
obeisance of such Magistrates, has a tribunal proper unto it self, immediately
derived to the same by the holy law of God, wholly secluded from the Christian
godly Magistrates presence (as was the Sanctuary divided from the Court) and
wherinto the christian godly Magistrates may no more at this day enter, or no
more give their consents and decisiue voices, in making the ordinances thereof,
then it was lawful in times past for the Kings of Judah to enter into the holy
place, and to burn incense at the Altar: then must we frame him one kind of
reply: but if he shall inform us, his mental understanding to be thus, namely
that the Christian godly Magistrates, have none other power, by law divine or
human, but only to assemble every of the said Churches, to ratify the
ordinances of every of the said Churches, or has only power to command the
same ordinances to be put in execution under them, then unto this answer we
must shape him an other manner of reply. Notwithstanding, in the mea^e time
this he must understand generally, that in right (though not always in
possession and practice) the church being distinguished from the common wealth,
has the same power under a Christian, and under an Infidel Magistrate.

G. Powel
2 Quere. Whether so many judicial acts of deprivation of Bishops from their
benefices since the conquest, to the time of Magna Charta, and since that to
this age, were ever held to be contrary to the laws of this Kingdom? To dance
after your Pipe, (I will not say, what a foolish and ridiculous question, Reply.
but) what an od tune is this? For can a man dance after a pipe, before the
Pipe be stricken up? So could acts done before Magna Charta, and other laws
since made, be said to be contrary to them? This is as much, as one should
ask, whether Adam not Circumcising Cain and Abell, did contrary to the law
given for Circumcision, to Abraham many years after? Or whither Ishmael
persecuted Isaac, before Isack was borne? Or whether stealing of horses an
hundred years past, were punishable with death, before any law made for death
in that behalf? One thing cannot be said contrary to an other, that is not,
neither ever was extant in rerum natura. The Second part of this Quere, whether
since the granting of Magna Charta unto this age, the judicial acts of
deprivation of Bishops etc: were ever held to be contrary to the law of this
kingdom, and Magna Charta, we shall answer (if God permit) more plentifully
anon.

G. Powel
3 Quere. Whether any Judge of this Realm, or any chief officer learned in the
laws, be of opinion, that such sentences of deprivation, as have lately passed
in due form, in any Ecclesiastical Court, be contrary to any, much less to
many statuts. Reply.
Though it were a sufficient answer to bid him go look, and himself to ask
the opinion of every judge and learned officer, yet will I not altogether yield
him so short and cutted an answer. And though it be a principle in Philosophy,
that forma dat esse rei, yet to the being of every thing there must be matter,
to which the form gives being. And therefore in this case, besides due form,
there must be also due matter, inserted in due sentences. Whereupon I crave a
resolute and direct answer, whether by those words (passed in due form) he
mean passed for matter and form, in due form? Or whether he mean, passed
without due matter in due form only? For if he mean by passed, (for matter
and form,) in due form, then is his question (without question) either a
foolish question, or no question at all. For who would question, whether any
Judge or learned officer, could doubt, that a sentence passed for matter, and
form in due form, were a sentence contrary to any, much less to many
statuts? As though there were any Statuts so ridiculous and absurd? On the
other side, if he mean by passed in due form, only due form without due
matter, then we answer that the same sentence may be unjust, for want of due
matter, and yet be just by reason of due form. And so on the other part, we
affirm, that a sentence may be just, by reason of due matter, and yet unjust
by reason of an undue form. How many sentences therefore of deprivation
soever, as have been lately given without due and just matter, or without due
and just form, we answer so many not to have passed in due matter and form,
and so contrary to some laws or statuts. But were this question wholly
granted, what ease and advantage can the opinion of any judge or learned officer
yield to those Judicial acts of deprivation (whereupon the controversy is
grounded) which are not passed in any due form of any law, or Statute
Ecclesiastical whatsoever?

Furthermore touching this question, if the Prelates did intend that all their
sentences should be according to law, wherefore did they make a Canon against
the ordinary prosecution of appeals? Yea, what needed such a Canon? What
benefit is there to any appellant by his appeal, from a just sentence? Or
what danger to the Judge a quo by such appeals? The whole danger is to the
appellant himself. For the sentence being just, he shall be sure to get
nothing, neither the Judge a quo to lose any thing by the appeal.

G. Powel.
Who having but half an eye, does not see, but that (by pleading Magna Charta
cap. 29:) they would not only weaken, but also subvert and utterly overthrow
all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical? Does every one that desires limitation of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, Reply.
and laboreth to restrain it from all communion of forreyne laws, seek the
subversion thereof? If also the laws Ecclesiastical, be the Kings
Ecclesiastical laws, and the jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, the Kings
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, then is this place of Magna Charta, so far from
subverting the jurisdiction or law Ecclesiastical, as that by that place, the
same law and jurisdiction is up held, and more thoroughly established. That the
law and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical ever has been, and yet is accounted the
Kings Ecclesiastical law and juridiction shall be showed anon.

G. Powel
The sentences and grave determinations whereof (that is of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction) have never yet in any age or Country, been submitted to popular
trial, by the judgment of Peers etc: Reply
All sent ces of Ecclesiastical Courts, are not so grave but that some are
somtymes repealed by Higher courts, and sometimes revoked by themselves.
Sometime also they meddle with matters not belonging unto them, and therefore by
ordinary course of Commmon law, they are prohibited to proceed. Finally in some
case the Bishop gives not Institution to a benefice, until by a Jury of 12.
men (whereof 6. are to be of the Clergy, and 6 of the Layity) the controversy
de iure patronatus be decided. Yea sometime the Bishop having instituted a
clarke, is forced by writ from the common law, to admit of another clark
presented by another Patron, and so to displace him whom before he had
instituted.

G. Powel
The place of Magna Charta, cannot be understood of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, or the practice thereof, especially if we consider the end why
this law was made, and the time when: The Prelates should make sure work
indeed, Reply.
if they could make, that no laws were against their power. The^ might they
take upon them without controlment, what they would under color of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: as indeed they do now pretily begin to do.

G. Powel
The end was, that the Kings of this Realm, might not challenge an infinite and
absolute power, (as some Kings else where did, and yet do) without judgment
and lawful proceedings, to take away any man's liberty, life, Country, goods,
or lands. Then belike the Kings Majesty is restrained by Magna Charta, but the
Prelacy is not. Reply.
Is not this good stuff? The King shall wear the Crown, but the Prelates will
bear the sword. Whether now do they that are falsely called Puritans, or the
Prelates most encroch upon the Royal authority?

G. Powel
It was made at such time, as the Kings thought Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, no
more in right then in fact, to belong to the Crown. Therefore the words have no
relation to Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. This is utterly false: Reply
yea the falsehood thereof is evident by the testimony of that worthy and
renowned Lawyer S. Edward Cook, in the book alleged by the answerer. For he
says expresely, that as in temporal causes, the King by the mouth of Judges
in his Courts of Justice, does judge the same by the temporal laws of
England; lib. de jure regis Eccle. fol: 8
so in causes Ecclesiastical etc. (the connusance whereof does not belong to
the common laws of England) the same are to be judged and determined, by
Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical laws, etc.

fol. 39
And again, observe good reader, (says S. Edward Cook) seeing that the
determination of heresies etc. belongs not to the Common law, how necessary
it was for administration of Justice, that his Majesty's progenitors Kings of
this Realm, did by public authority authorize Ecclesiastical Courts under
the^, to determyne those great and important causes, etc. by the Kings
Ecclesiastical laws. The jurisdiction therefore, Courts, and laws
Ecclesiastical, in the opinion of the Kings progenitors were thought and held
to be their own Kingly laws, Courts, and jurisdiction. The same is further
proved by the said S. Edward Cook: fol. 9
by the president of Renulphus, in discharging and exempting the Monastery and
Abbot of Abinden, from the jurisdiction of the Bishops and granting also to the
said Abbot Ecclesiastical jurisdiction etc: by the president of William the
first, fol 10. 11:
who made inpropriatio^ of Churches with cure, to Ecclesiastical persons etc.
and by diverse presidents of other Kings since the conquest.

That which in this part of the answer, is afterward added of the necessary
restitution of the right of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to the Crown is also
confuted by the same S. Edward Cook, who plainly says, that though there had
been no such law of restitution made, yet it was resolved by all the Judges,
that the Kings and Queens of England for the time being, by the ancient
prerogative law of England, may make such a Commision etc. And therefore by the
ancient laws of this Realm, this kingdom of England is and absolute Empire,
and Monarchy, consisting of one head, which is the King, and of a body
politic, etc. Also that the Kingly head of this body politic is furnished
with plenary power. etc. to render justice and right, to every part and member
of this body. Thus far S. Edward Cook. From all which it follows, that the
restitution of the ancient right, howsoever lawfully made (as being made by
the whole body of the kingdom) was notwithstanding not necessarily made, as
though without it, the King or Queen, for the time being, could not have used
their ancient right.

That which follows in the 2. 3. and 4. branches of this 4 answer to the
consequence of this 8 Argument, does not belong to the matter, because it does
nothing justify the proceedings of the Bishops or other Ecclesiastical
Judges, in depriving of the Ministers pleaded for, in such manner and for such
causes, as for which they have depriveded them. The question is not whether
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical by the laws of the land does be long (under the
King) unto the ordinaryes: nor whether the Ordinaryes in the exercise of the
Kings jurisdiction Ecclesiiasticall, and Consistoriall trialls, ought to
proceed by virtue of Peers, etc: but whether some Ordinaryes, exercising the
Kings Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, have proceeded in their Ecclesiastical
Consistories, against some Ministers, without authority of the Kings
Ecclesiastical law: and therefore in that respect, contrary to Magna Charta,
which requires nothing to be done without the Kings law.

Further, De jure Regis Ecclesi. fol. 9
although we grant (as S. Edw. Cook instructs us) all laws Ecclesiastical
derived from other (which by and with a general consent are approved and
allowed here) to be aptly and rightly called the Kings Ecclesiastical laws of
England: yet I deny that all laws Ecclesiastical, derived by the Kings
progenitors, either before or since the Conquest from others, are now in this
age our Sovereign Lord King James his Ecclesiastical laws: and therefore
howsoever many judicial Acts of deprivation, of Bishops and Priests, from
their benefices etc. according to the Ecclesiastical law, which is called ius
Pontificium, and which was derived, by the Kings Progenitors, from the Bishops
of Rome, either before, or since the Conquest, unto Magna Charta, and since
that, to the 25 of King Henry the eight, were never, all held, to be contrary,
but were ever all held, to be agreeable to the laws of this kingdom: yet
notwithstanding, I affirm that all Judicial Acts and sentences, 25. Hen. 8
cap. 17
(how many soever, of deprivation of Ministers, from their benefices) had made
and given, by the Ecclesiastical Judges, since the 25. of King Henry the 8.
only according, or only by force, and virtue of the said ius Pontificium, or
Bishop of Rome his law, (the sentences given in the time of Queen Mary
excepted) are, and ought to be holden, not to be had, made and given, by the
laws of this kingdom, or by the Kings Ecclesiastical law: And why? Even
because the whole ius Pontificium, or Bishop of Romes law was altogether
(excepting the time of Queen Mary) abrogated, adnulled, and made void, by an
Act of Parliament; and consequently is but a mere Alien, Foreign and strange
law, and no municipall law of England, and therefore not the Kings
Ecclesiastical law.

Wherefore our Sovereign Lord King James, by this grant of Magna Charta made
by his progenitors, being obliged, to suffer no Free man of the Realm, to be
taken or imprisoned, or disseissed of his Frrehold, or liberties, etc. Nor to
pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by
the law of the land. We again assume from this statute of the great Charter,
that sundry sentences of deprivation of Ministers, from their benefices, for
causes before specified, are unlawful; because such Ministers have been
condemned, and judgment has been passed upon them, without lawful judgment of
their Peers, or law Ecclesiastical of the land. For here we must give the
answerer to wit, by these words, (or law of the land,) that all the Kings
laws, of what nature or quality soever, whether Ecclesiastical or temporal,
and not only the laws temporal, (as he insinuates) are included. As
therefore no temporal Free man of the Realm, may be condemned, passed upon,
or disseissed of his liberty, and freehold, etc. in a temporal cause, and in a
temporal Court, without lawful judgment of his Peers, or temporal law of
the land. Even so likewise, no Ecclesiastical person, (being a freeman of the
Realm) may be condemned, passed upon, or disseissed of his liberty, or
frehold, but by lawful Ecclesiastical judgment, according to the law
Ecclesiastical of the land. And hereupon we grant, if the King have any law
Ecclesiastical of the la^d, for the deprivation of a Minister, from his
liberty and frehold, for not subscription, perjurie, contempt of Canonical (so
called obedience, omission of Rites, and Ceremonies, not precise observation of
the book of Common prayer etc. Then we grant, that the Ordinaryes (being the
Kings Judges Ecclesiastical) may rightly deprive a Minister from his benefice,
for these offenses.

And yet still we deny, and shall be able to mainteyne, that sundry sentences
of deprivation, made and given, by sundry Ordinaries, against sundry Ministers,
be either unjust or unlawful; or no sentences at all, for the reasons and
causes before specified.

It is therefore erroniously alleged, that that which was done by
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, when Magna Charta was granted, was not at that
time taken to be done by the King, or by his authority, and that the laws
which Ecclesiastical Judges practiced, were not then held, to be the laws of
the land, or the Kings laws. For the Kings progenitors, did both think and
held, that jurisdiction Ecclesiastical did in right belong unto their Crow,
and therefore in fact, by right of their crowns, did they both exercise, and
command to be exercised, in their Kingly names, their Kingly right, authority
and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within their Realms. For how could those
Kings, have commanded, and how could their subjectes have obeyed, if the Kings
themselves, had thought, and held, that the Ecelesiasticall courts, laws or
jurisdiction, were not in right, no more then in fact, at that time belonging
unto the Crown as the answerer, vaynly, and childishly fancyeth? Which fancy
also seems sufficiently confuted by the very title of S. Edward Cooks book,
de iure regis Ecclesiastico. For how could the Kings before and after the
Conquest unto Magna Charta have been justly entitled to Kingly right of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, if the Kings had no Kingly Ecclesiastical right,
or jurisdiction at all.

G. Powel.
Breifely, the lawfullnes of they deprivation, of the refractary Ministers. is a
plain case adjudged, in open Court, as appears in S. Edward Cooks Report
part 5 in Cawdries case according to a Statute of I. Elizab. cap 2. etc. It is
a most plain and clear case, that neither the case of Cawdrie, Reply.
is the case of sundry the late deprived Ministers; nor that the case of sundry
the late deprived Ministers, is the case of Cawdrie.

Cawdrie was deprived, not by his Ordinary, but by the Queens Ecclesiastical
high Commissioners; not for not subscribing to the 3 Articles; not for the not
use of rits and Ceremonies; not, for the not exact, S. Edward Cook de jure
regis eccl. Cawdries case fol. 3
and precise observation, of the book of Common prayer: But as well, for that
he had preached against, and depraved the said book, as also for that he
refused to celebrate divine service, according to the said book.

Again, in his cause, it being found before the High Commissioners, that he
had uttered verba convitiosa and contumeliosa, convitious, and contumelious
words, look sent against Caw.
against the book of Common prayer; the case was not, whither his fact were
punishable by the Statute, (for of that no man then doubted;) but whether his
depravation, and preaching against the book of Common prayer, being the first
offense committed by him against the Statute; he was punishable by tenor of the
statute, for the same his first offense, by depravatio^, yea or no? Lastly
Cawdries offense was punishable as well before the Queens Justices by
imprisonment, and loss of one whole years profits, of his spiritual
promotions, as by deprivation before his Ordinary. None of all which things,
were within the co^pass, of sundry the late deprived Ministers. For non of the^
ever preached against the book, nor depraved the same. They never refused to
observe the same book, according to the proeme of the book and tenor of the
statute. They were so far from claymyng any immunitie, from being depraved,
for their first offense, as that they stood and yet do stand, upon their
innocencyes, not to have committed any offense at all, against the statute
punishable with deprivation, by the statute they allege, that they were not
punishable before the Kings Justices by the statute, for these facts which they
were charged by their Ordinaries to have committed against the statute, and for
which they were deprived. Lastly, some of them were deprived not for any fact
done, committed, or perpetrated: but for not promissing hereafter, to observe
the whole book. And what an unconsiderate part therefore is it, to avowe the
lawfulnes of the deprivation of all the late silenced Ministers, to be a plain
case adjudged in open Court; when neither their case, nor any like case to some
of theirs, was ever yet brought or argued before the Kings Justices in any of
the Kings open courts at all.

Touching the statut alleged, 1. Elizabeth, it helps nowhitt at all the
late deprivations of sundry Ministers, First, because such Ministers as have
been deprived only for not conformyng themselves, to the use of the book
provided by the parishioners cannot truly be charged to have refused the book
commanded by the statute. Because the same book was never provided for them.
Secondly, the statute punishes not every refuser, but wilful and obstinate
refusers. They then that upon conscience only of Gods word, do refuse to
observe al things contained in the book, cannot be justly called obstinate
refusers, till their grounds out of the word, be by the word removed. Thirdly,
the statute requires some Act, done, committed or perpretrated against the
Statut: but some Ministers have been deprived only for not promising etc: as
before was said. Fourthly, the statute appoynteth the Ordinaries to proceed by
inquisition, accusation, or information: But many of us have been deprived
without any of these means, and only upon Process, Ex officio mero. Heerby
therefore appears, how unjustly, and directly contrary to the words of the
statute, you insert this Parenthesis, (which they may do Ex officio,) as if
they might by virtue of this Statute proceed Ex officio, whereas the Statute
expressly requyres inquisition, accusation, or information. Is this good
interpretation? If you do so interpret the scripture directly contrary to the
words of scripture, in the same place you make but mad interpretations.

Touching that which is objected against all hitherto spoken in the point of
the law, of the opinion of the Judges to be against the same, may it please the
reader to remember the saying of an Honorable and most renowned Counselor in
that behalf, viz. that in such cases and all other, men are not so much to
respect what judges speak standing bare headed, 2 chro: 19:6
as what they say sittyng upon the judgment seat, representing the Kings
person (yea not executing the judgment of man but of the Lord) when all men
stand bare headed before them.

Concerning the oath Ex officio, of the oath ex officio
we affirm that the law of the land is against the exercise of the same oath,
by Ordinaries and other judges Ecclesiastical.



Iobskinne for skin, and whatsoever a man has will he give for himself and
for his life, but stretch out thy hand (says Satan) and touch his bones, and
his fleesh, and see if he will not then blaspheme Secondly in respect of the
feeblenes of the judgment and sentence, that should be grounded upon the oath
of such a party, being even then at his convention, aforehand defamed, and of
suspected faith or credit. Bracton


iudicium est in qualibet action trinus actus trium personarum Iudicis,
actoris, et rei. Secundum quod large accipi possunt huiusmodi personae, quod
duce sunt ad minus inter quas vertatur contentio et tertia persona ad minus qui
iudicet; alioquin non erit iudicium cum istae personae sunt parts principales
in iudicio, sine quibus iudicium consistere non potest.

Britton
And the renowned Prince King Edward the first says by the penn of the learned
Judge Britton, that no judgment may be of fewer, then three persons, that is to
say; a Judge, a plantiefe, and a defendent, and in case (says the King) that
we be a party, we will that our Court shall be Judge.

actoris et rei, which the law hates, or else the Ordinary or Judge susteineth
two of the said parties in judgment, that is both Judge and Promoter, which
the law does also abhor.



tam ficti pravique tenax quam nuncia very, and ought to have no credit until
it be presented in course of law or proved, For the law is, that the Judge
himself (if he would of his own knowledge affirm the party to be in famous)
is not to be received or believed. For that the law will, quod secundum acta et
probata iusticia ministretur.



Ex officio mero, vice would abound; for that accusation is dangerous, and
odious,) is easily answered. That the common law sees this also, and therefore
has ordained common enformers to proceed against such as private persons will
not deal with by witnesses and such legal courses, and allow them part of the
penalty for their labor, and yet allows the party wrongfully accused his
damages and costs if the accusation be wrongful and injurious. In so much as
if the enformer will not, or be not able to render it, he shall receive
corporal punishment for his offense, and for the redemption of the defendant
credit and reputation.

The Statute law also is, 9: H: 3: c: 29
that no fre man shall be apprehended or imprisoned, or to be disseased of his
free hold, or liberties, or free customs, or to be outlawed or exiled, or any
wise distroyed, nor we shall pass upon him, nor deal with him, but by lawful
judgment of his peers or by the law of the land, that is by presentment,
Indictme^t, witness, verdict, voluntary confession, or process of utlary.

In so much as when the Popish Clergy would neverlesse be tampering with this
oath ex officio, (as their practice was to be meddling for the advancment of
Antichrist in all States) there was a writ of prohibition awarded, as
warrented formerly by the Common law; to be directed to the Sheriff commanding
him that he shall not permit etc: and thereupon an attachment against the
Bishop if he disobey:

After this in the height of the Popes pride in the days of King Henry the 4.
(who was willing to please him being a King in facto, 2: H: 4: c: 15
but not de iure,) this oath crept in, as a Canonical sanction, by the statute
of 2. H. 4.

But the iniquity, injustice; and repugnancy thereof to the Common laws and
statutes of the Realm appearing to the State, 25 h. 8: c. 14 23: H: 8: c: 9
it was by K. H. 8. by the whole Parliament abrogated as injurious to the
Crown, and utterly against the common justice of the kingdom, and so it
rests condemned to this day. So that no Ordinary can practice it by any
power under the Crown.

Then it follows that the use thereof must needs be by color of the Canon
law, which being in that point derogatory to the Crown, 25 h. 8. c. 19
repugnant to the law of this kingdom, and abolished by Act of Parliament, it
consequently cannot be used, but by a foreign power and the^ it is praemunire.

wager of law
And to that which is alleged by the Civilians, that the Common law allows it
in that, which is termed the wager of law, or doing of his law, it appears
that they are therein utterly mistaken, which may easily arise out of their
ignorance thereof.

First the wager of law is voluntary for he that offers it may be tried per
patriam at his election; This is contrary viz. extorted and constreined.

2 The wager of law comes from the certain knowledge of the deponent, who
best knows whither he ow the debt or not: This is contrary, most uncertain,
what shall be demanded or interrogated

3 Again, the wager of law makes an end of the strife; but this is contrary
viz: the beginning of strife: for it is not final, but from thence the Judge
gathers the ground whereupon to proceed against the party convented.

4 The wager of law is in case mere and only civil, for an honest man may be
in debt; but this oath is ministered in case mere criminal, in which case the
oath is so much the more odious to the Common law, by how much it is an
apparent occasion of perjury: which carnal men will rather fall into, then to
subject themselves to corporal punishment, or to lay open their own turpitude
or sha^e?

Neither can this proceeding by oath ex officio be found in the Honorable Court
of Starr chamber. For although the courts of Starr chamber and Chauncery
proceed not by Jury, yet they observe the due form of justice, Starr chamber:
and enforce no man to answer, but where he has a known accuser and perfect
understanding of the cause or crime objected, and therewithal is permitted to
have a copye of the bill of complaint or information, and allowed more over
both time convenient and council learned, well to consider and advise of his
oath and answer, and if his adversaryes complaint, be either in sufficient in
form, or such as the Court has no jurisdiction to determine, the defendant
upon demurrer without oath is dismissed, and that with costs. And admtit the
accusation be such as is every way aunswerable, yet if the interrogatoryes
ministered be impertinent to the matter of complaint, the defendant without
offense to the Court, may refuse to make answer to the same.

Therefore no similitude or likeness between this oath used in these Honorable
courts of Justice and that constreyned oath ex mero officio Iudicis.

1 Since the former sort be orderly taken in courts of justice, the other
without all course of judgment.

2 The one where the plantiff and matter of complaint are manifest, the other
where neither accuser nor matter of accusation does appear, unless the bare
suspicion of the Judge, fame unproved, or private insinuation, may be allowed
for competent persons in judgment, against whom the party defenda^t is
deprived of all legal exceptio^s, and is often, after great trouble dismissed
and (though innocent) yet dampnified and slaundered and without recompense,
there being no complanant found, but the Judge himself.

3 The one made upon certain knowledge and good advisment, the other soddenly
without all discretion upon uncertain demands.

4 The one wisely restreined to certain limits and bounds the other foolishly
wandering at the doubtful will of a sly and subtle opposer.

5 Upon the one the deponent answers to the accusation of his adversarye, by
the other he is compelled to be his own accuser and condemner.

6 The one requires an answer to matter in fact done either to the injury of
some private person, or hurt of the public state, the other constreineth
revealing of words, deeds, and thoughts though never offensive to any.

That which is objected that the said proceeding is warranted by the Canon law
or Civil law, is answered many ways; but breifely by the positive law it
self, that banisheth all Canon Civil, or other law, or pre-eminence, or power
whatsoever, which is contrary or repugnant to the common law of the land; But
this proceeding by the parties own oath ex officio mero, is contrary and
repugnant to the common law of the land. Ergo

Thus we see that this proceeding by oath ex officio was a mere stranger in
England, Conclusion:
and how it arrived herein Anno 2. H 4. but yet as a masker, disguised,
marching in the rowte of Cannonicall sanctions and obscured from the veiw of
the State under that name; but after being discovered as an adder in the grass,
was damned and expelled, by the Statute of 25. H. 8. as a traitor to the King
and his laws, and has no lawful or warrantable interteynment by the statute
of primo Elizab, For that there by no jurisdiction excercised by the Bishop of
Rome in this kingdom is annexed to the crown, but that which was then
lawfully used and excercised within this kingdom:

Then, for any Ordinary or Judge Ecclesiastical to enterteine it and use it in
their courts and proceedings; is a high misprision against the King his Crown
and dignity, and punishable by the Statute of the 16. year of K. R. 2.

Now to pass from the oath ex officio, to the Canons, of the Canons
and yet not to deal with those that are of indifferent sort, but with those
only, that are either contrary to Gods word, or repugnant to the laws of the
land, neither also to say all of these in this place, that might be said, but
only (for brevities sake) to give a taste, and to point at some; may it please
the Christian reader, yea the answerer himself, yea all our adversaries in
this cause (that are not too much blinded with malice) to consider, that all
such Canons generally as pronounce a man ipso facto excommunicate, for saying
thus or thus, against the Canons themselves, against the Ceremonies, against
the book of Common prayer, and the strict observation thereof, etc: cannot be
justified in this behalf by the word of God. For as (to prevent an objection
that might be made from the commandment for reading of them publikly in
Churches) albeit the sacreed scriptures be daily publicly read and preached,
yet many things are both wittingly and unwillingly spoken, and actually
committed, against the said sacreed scriptures, for which notwithstanding, such
persons are not presently to be held ipso facto excommunicate: so certainly
(except the authority of the Church be greater then the authority of God, and
the Canons of this last Synod more authentical, then the holy scriptures given
by inspiration from God,) it must be acknowledged of these Canons, and all
other constitutions of the Church whatsoever, that every word spoken, or act
committed against the^ (especially unwittingly) is not so heavily to be
punished.

Again, whereas the said Canons, do forbid any man by speech so offending,
without public revocation, of his said (pretended) wicked error, to be
restored: since the said offense may be committed as well privately, as
publicly, and since the Canons speak generally (whosoever shall affirm etc,)
without any exception of private affirmations; how can the said Canons in this
respect, be warranted by the word of God? 1 Timothy: 5.1
If all offenses against Gods word, (at least of man against man) be not
publicly to be reprehe^ded; much less are all affirmations in disgrace of any
Ecclesiastical co^stitutions of men, to be punished with public penance.

Furthermore whereas diverse of the said Canons, do forbid many offenders by
such affirmations, to be restored by any other means, then only by the
Archbishop: since the said offense may not only be unwitting and private, but
also by a poor ignorant man, yea perhaps a lame impotent man, dwelling also it
may be an hundred miles, or almost 200. miles from the Archbishop. What equity
is there, that svch an offender, should be debarred from all restoring by any
other? And so, for want thereof, be deprived (perhaps all his life) from all
public communion with the Church, and from all spiritual comfort for his
soul thereby? Is this the mercy that is better then sacrifice? And whereby we
do represent our heavenly Father?

The 13. Canon commands the celebration of holy days, as well as of the
Lords day, and that as equally agreyng to Gods holy will and pleasure. I deny
not, but that as Gods word is to be preached at all times, in season and out of
season, so it is also to be heard as often as men have opportunity: but yet that
the holy days now commanded to be celebrated, are as equally according to
Gods holy will and pleasure, as the Lords day (especially so to be celebrated,
as they are enjoined, with greater solemnities sometimes then the Lords day it
self,) this is contrary both to the 4 commandment, and also to many other
Scriptures, Gal: 4.10: Coloss. 2. 16
which condemn such observation of days, and times. The holy days also now
commanded to be kept, may be abrogated by the Magistrate, as well as other,
that were wont to be observed. But I hope, that although some are bold to say
as much of the Lords day, yet our Prelates will not publikly allow of any such
rash and impious opinion.

The 14. Canon commanding all divine service, prescribed in the book of
common prayer to be read upon the days appointed, without any diminishyng in
regard of preaching or in any other respect; is against charity and
consequently against the word. For the weakness of some men's body, at all times
is such, that they are not able to read all and to preach. At sometime also,
the strongest man, may have such an infirmity, that he may not be able to
endure the performance of both. In winter, many times the extremity of cold,
will not permit the whole auditory, to continue so long at Church. Then (will
some say,) let preaching by such persons as are so weak, or at such times, be
omitted. This indeed is that which many would have. But this is to perform
bare reading before preaching: ignorance before knowledge: and the ordinances
of man, before the commandments of God.

The 18 Canon for bowing at the mention of the name of Jesus, is absurd in that
respect: because the place whereon it seems to be grounded, philip. 2.10.
is not literally so to be understood. First for that it speaks of things not
only in earth but also in heaven, and under the earth, in which places there are
no knees. 2. It speaks not only of men, but also of all other creatures. For
it says of all things. By the literal interpretation therefore, all creatures
at the mention of the name of Jesus, should bend their knees. 3. By this
interpretation, no man must sit whilst any thing is read, that has that name,
or else the must rise at the mention thereof to bow their knee. 4. It is
superstition, to give more reverence, to the name Jesus then to the name
Christ, God, Jehovah, or the Holy Ghost. 5. If the knee be so to be bowed, at
the name of Jesus, why not also at the name Savior? For what does Jesus
signify but Savior? 6. The place speaks not of that which is due to the
name, but of that which is due to the person of Jesus. So the Canonists are
deceaved, with that fallacy, which is a rebus ad voces. 7. It speaks of that
which is due to him, as well in private, as in public places: in our houses,
at our tables, in our beds: as we sit, as we walk, as we ly: If then we sit at
table, or ly in our beds etc: we must not speak of Jesus, but we must arise to
make a leg. Lastly, this name Jesus, is no more then Joshua, who therefore is
called Jesus Act. 7.45. It is also the name of Iozadak. Zech. 3.1: compared
with Ecclesiasticus 49.12: and Ezra 3.2: and of the Son of Syrach: and of one
Iustus Coloss. 4.11. The common people therefore for want of preaching and by
their own negligence, being so ignorant, that they cannot well discern the
name Jesus our Savior from the same name of other, they may mistake themselves
and bow the knee, as well at the mention of other so named as of Jesus our
Lord and Savior, and so ignorantly they should commit blasphemy. That which is
said for defense heerof by some, that we should the rather bow at this name,
to testify our hatred against Arrianisme, is more dotage the^ divinity: and
therefore not worthy any answer. The Deity of Christ is more manifest by other
names, especially by the name Emmanuell, then by the name Jesus.

Touching the Canons for Coapes, Surplices, Cross, and other Conformity, as
also touching the present Hierarchy, and manner of ordaynyng Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, etc: and for Subscription; it is too long in this
place, to set down particular reasons against them. Therefore I referr the
reader to particular treatises of those things, both hertofore, and also lately
written.

The 49. Canon, for no Minister to preach or expound any Scripture or matter of
doctrine, without a special license in that behalf; is a most lamentable
contrariety to the word, which commands every Minister, both to be apt to
teach, and to teach indeed. And I would gladly know of such Canon-makers,
whither those that they call by the name of Ministers, be Ministers of the word
or no? If they be Ministers of the word, shall they not have power to expound
and preach the word by virtue of the said Ministry? Yea, do not they
themselves, when they ordain them Ministers, bid them take power to preach the
word? It is yet more lamentable in the said Canon, that they command all
Ministers (not specially licensed, to preach or expound in their own chardges)
only to study to read plainly and aptly (without glozing or adding) the
Homilies already set forth, or hereafter to be published etc. For do not these
words plainly import, that some Ministers are not able to read without
studiyng for it, even after they be made Ministers? Yea, do not the words
(only to study to read plainly and aptly the Homilies etc.) implye a precept
against studiyng to read the scriptures, which are harder then Homileis:
especially against studiyng to preach hereafter? O miserable condition then of
such people, as have such Ministers as must go to school to learn to read
the Homilies, not the scriptures, yea and which must not study at all ever to
Preach.

The 53. Canon against confuting of any public doctrine (how heretical or
dangerous so ever) before the Bishop be made acquainted with the said doctrine;
is most prejudicial to the salvation of the hearers of such erroneous
teaching. For the souls of men being by nature as capable of any errors, as
their bodies are of any infectious disease; and the Bishop of the same
Diocese, sometime perhaps dwelling or being an hundred miles from the Church,
wherein such errors were delivered; and the life of man being most uncertain;
and Bishops themselves being sometime erroneous, and therefore not very hasty
to have errors confuted: may not many a soul be infected with such error, yea,
and dye in them, before any remedy can be had against them?

This shall suffice for a taste of the contrariety of diverse Canons, to Gods
word. If I should perticularly run over other, that have like co^trariety;
this volume would much exceed, both my own purpose, and also the likyng of all
readers.

Before I proceed to the Canons repugnant to the laws of the land; let me here
interlace one reason in a word generally to prove, both the Canons and also the
book of Common prayer (now imposed upon Ministers,) not yet to be established
by law, and so consequently all the proceedings of the Prelates against the said
Ministers for not subscribyng, observing the book, conformity etc, to be with
out law, and a against law. This one reason, is from the late Bill of the
Bishops presented to the Parliament for the establishing both of the book of
Common prayer, and also of their Canons. For if the said book and Canons were
already good in law; what needed any new statute to establish them? If they say
that abundans cautela non nocet, plentiful caution is not hurtful, they must
also remember, that they have likewise learned, frustra fit per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora: It is in vain to do that by many things, which
may be done by few.

Now to the Canons repugnant to the law.

We decree and appoint (says the Synod) that no judge, ad quem, shall admit
or allow any his or their appeals (speaking as they call them of obstinate and
factious appellants) unless he have first seen the original appeal. But the
King (say I) is a judge ad quem. Ergo, the King (says this Synod) may not
admit or allow any appeal etc. The liberty, and franchise then of the Kings
will, and grace, after this unwonted manner, (by a Synodall decree only) being
thus blemished, impeched, and restrained; what dignity, pre-eminence,
superiority, or prerogative, has the Kings grace, when the King himself is
chardged, not to grant any inhibition out of his Court of Chauncery, but
conditionally and upon an unless etc.

And if by this Canon, the Kings will and grace, receive let, hinderance, and
prejudice; what should we think, but that this Canon also tends, to the
weakenyng of the Kings arm and power? For how can his power be strong, and his
arm able to help, when his grace is bound, and his will, unable to will?

And then again, if these two main pillars of his Majesty's prerogative
Royal (namely his grace and his power) be thus shaken by this Canon, must it
not necessarily follow, that the Lords and Commons in Parliament, are
prejudiced thereby? For the rights and prerogatives, of the Kings Crown, by the
laws of the Realm, be not invested, and appropried, unto the Kings person,
only in regard of his Majesty's own Royal estate; but also for the good
condition, and preservation of his body Politic, which is the Common wealth.
Which body also for the just, and necessary defense both of the head (which is
the King) and of it self, has such a proper claim, and interest, in, and to
the grace, and power of the head, as the lest jote of the power and grace of
the head, may not be blemished to the prejudice of the body, without consent of
the body. viz: of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, who are the very image,
and true representiue body of the Realm: yea and thus much in effect, have the
Kings progenitors, and the Ancestors of our Nobles, and Commons agreed upon in
Parliament; when by their authority and consent, it was forbidden, that any
thing should be attempted, which should tend, to the blemishyng of the Kings
prerogative, or to the prejudice of his Lords and Commons. And when also, by
common consent, Acts and Monuments 4: Ed. 3 page 422. 424:
it was enacted in effect, that neither King John, nor any other King, could
bring his Realm and people in thraledome, and subjection, but by consent in
Parliament.

Furthermore appeals being de iure naturali, and introduced into judgment
seats, tam ob defensionem et presidiu^ innocentiae, quam ad deprimendam
iniquitatem, et corrigendam imperitiam iudicis; as well for the defense and
savegard of innocence, as for the depressing of the iniquity, and correcting
the unskilfulnes of a Judge, as they have been evermore allowed by the laws,
and custo^es of the Realm, so have they been suffered, as freely to be
prosecuted, as interposed. For otherwise, how should either innocence be
protected, or the injustice of a judge reformed, in case an appeal being
interposed, might not be prosecuted, frustra (says S. Edward Cook) expectatur
eventus, de jure Reg Eccles.
cuius effectus nullus sequitur.

And according unto this natural equity, has it been specially provided by a
Statute of the realm, that the Kings subjects, being greived, should not only
have liberty, to make, but also, to take, have, use, and prosecute all manner
of appeals, after such manner, form, and condition, as is limited, for
appeals, to be had, and prosecuted. And for lack of Justice many Courts of
the Archbishops of this Realm, it is lawful for the party greived, to
appeal to the Kings Majesty in his Court of Chauncery. And upon every such
appeal, a Commission (says the Statute) shall be directed under the great
Seal, to such persons, as shall be named by the Kings Highness, to hear and
definitivly determine such appeals, with the causes, and all circumstances. It
is therefore apparent, that this Canon, is contrary or repugnant to this
Statute. For this Canon, and this statute thus repugnantly providing, and
working diverse repugnant effects, the statute simply, admitting the use and
prosecution of all manner of appeals, the Canon not admittyng but
conditionally the use and prosecution of some appeals; can not stand together.

Again, some inferior Ordinaryes having liberty, to take the bridle in their
own teeth, and to lay the reins loose, on their own necks, may in time
(being proudly pampred) wax wanton in their judgment seats; when they shall
stand in no awe, of having, the nullitie or injquity of their process and
sentences, weyed in the balance of any superior Judge. By reason whereof,
this Canon, can not but prove exceeding onerovs to the subject.

For let a man or woman, dwelling at Michaels Mount, be but once judicially,
(though perhaps wrongfully) cited by the name of a factious or obstinat person,
and co^temner of ceremonies, and from such wrongful citations, let his, or her
appeal, made to the Kings Majesty in his Court of Chauncery (if it be from
the Archbishop,) or unto the Archbishop (if it be from the Diocesan) be never
so just, and equal, thereis no remedy in this case, before his, or hirs
appeal, be admitted or allowed, but the same man or woman (by the letter of
this Canon) must personally appear, in the Archbishops Consistory, if the
appeal be by the Archbishop, and if the appeal be to the King in the Kings
Court of Chauncery, though the same should be at Barwicke. Yea, and though the
party appellant be never so poor, aged, weak, and impotent. Nay not only
personal appeara^ce, but personal subscription also, by this Canon is
required, to the Kings Supremacy, to the Articles of Religion, to the book of
Homilies, to the book of Common prayer, and to the book of Consecrating
Bishops, be the party appellant, never so simple a laborer, or never so silly a
spi^ster.

The 37. Canon disauthoriseth every Minister by what authority so ever he be
admitted, to preach, or to read a Lecture in any place within the Realm,
unless he be licenced, either by the Archbishop, or by the Bishop of the
Diocese, or by one of the two Universities under their hands and seal. Let the
King then under his broad seal, grant license to any of his Chapleines to
preach within his own chapple, this licenc by this Canon, is of no value; then
the which what can be more derogatory, to the Sovereign dignity of the King in
causes Ecclesiastical?

Unto the mould of this Canon, agrees the 47. Canon, (before me^tio^ed) which
concludes, that no Minister not lice^sed a Preacher, under the hand and seal
of the Bishop of the Diocese, or Archbishop of the Province, or under the seal
of one of the Universities, shall take upon him to expound, in his own cure
any scripture, or matter of doctrine, but shall only study to read plainly,
and aptly, without glosing or addyng, the Homilies already set forth, or
hereafter to be published by lawful authority. The King then by this Canon,
may not license, a Minister to preach or to expound any scripture, no not in
his own cure, no though the ministers Cure, be the Kings own household, or the
household of the Prince, or any other of the Kings children. Nay by these two
Canons and the Canon of subscription it is evident, that the Prelates intended,
that every Scottish Minister havyng renounced the Hierachie, and embraced the
single form of Government in Scotland, should be barred from preaching at any
time before the King in England, unless he should subscribe to the Hierarchy of
England. For with out a license may none preach, and without subscription may
none be licenced.

And not only is this 47. Canon, derogatorie to the Kings prerogative, but it
is also repugnant, to other the Kings laws and statuts. For whereby that
statute, made against Lolardy, and Heresy,, it was enacted, that none should
presume to Preach openly, or privily, without the license of the Diocesan,
first required and obtained, yet by the same Act, Curats in their own
Churches, and Parsons privileged were excepted, and by the Provincial
Constitutions, confirmed and ratified by Parliament, it is provided thus: We
establish, that no secular, or regular, not authorized by written law, or
protected by special privilege, to preach the word of God, may take upon him
the preaching or exercise of the same word, within any Church, or without any
Church, unless first he present and submit himself, to the examination of the
Diocesan etc: But concerning aperpetuall Curate, we understand such a one, by
law and right to be sent to the place, and people of his Cure. And that we may
understand whom the Canon means, to be a perpetual Curate the gloss shows
us, that a Bishop in his Diocese, a Parson and Vicar in his Parish, and every
other Person entitled, to any benefice whereunto apper teyneth cure of souls,
is to be understood to be a perpetual Curate, and that he may preach in his
own Cure, without the Bishops license.

Moreover by the book of ordering Bishops, Ministers, and Deacons, every one
made a Minister, promises that he will give all faithful diligence always,
to minister the doctrine etc: as the Lord has commanded etc: so that he will
teach the people committed to his cure and chardg, withal diligence to keep
and observe the same. But how can a Minister instruct and teach the people
committed to his chardge, according to his public vow, if (as it is said in
this Canon) he shall not take upon him to expound in his own Cure, any
scripture or matter of doctrine at all, but shall only study to read plainly
and aptly, (without glosing or adding) the Homilies etc?

Lastly, the words of the Bishops institution are these. Teque rectorem
eiusdem, ac de, et ineadem instituimus canonice, et investimus, cum suis
iuribus, et pertinentiis universis, curamque et regimen animarum prochianorum
ibidem in Domino co^mittimus per-presentes. And we (speaking of a Clarke to be
instituted into a benefice) Canonically institute thee rector of the same
Church, and of, Cure and government by law ought to go together in a minister
and in the same do invest thee, withal her rights and appertinances; and by
these presents, we in the Lord commit unto thee both the cure and government, of
the souls of the Parishioners in that place. The Clearke then instituted into
a benefice, by these words of the Bishops institution, by the book of
ordering of Bishops, Ministers, and Deacons, and by the Provincial
Constitutions, having not a private, but a public office, of cure and
regiment of souls, committed unto him; how can it seem reasonable, that he
should be countermanded by reason of a Provincial decree not confirmed by Act
of Parliament, not to exercise the same his public office, without a Bishops
license? For what if the Bishops refuse to grant him a license? Or what if the
Bishops and his officers see, for granting, writing, and sealyng his license
be greater then the poor Minister is able to disburst, is it reason that his
chardg by this mea^es should be left uninstructed? Nay is it not, as if a
Sergiant at law, called to the bar of the Common pleas, by the Kings writ,
solemly created a Sergiant, and publicly admitted to the same bar, should
afterward be forbidden by the chief Justice of that Court, to plead at that
bar, without license otteyned, under his hand and seal? Or is it not, as if a
Doctor of Physic, solemnly created in the University, and publicly admited
to practice artem medica, should notwithstanding, without a new faculty from
the Doctor of the Chair be inhibited, to minister any Pill, or Portion, to any
pacient?

The 53. Canon, before also mentioned, viz. against public opposition between
preachers, is not only repugnant to the doctrine of levit 5.1 2 Timothy 4.2:
holy Scripture, and contrary to the practis of the 2. Chron. 18.7 Ierem. 27.9
and 28:7 Acts 13.10. Galat. 2: 11
Prophets and Apostles, but also crosses the Ministers vow solemly made at his
ordination. Whose promise is that he will be ready, with all faithful diligence,
to banish, and drive away, all erroneous, and strange doctrine contrary to Gods
word, and to use both public, and private motions, and exhortations, as well
to the sick as to the whole within his cure. But upon occasion given, by any
false Prophet, publicly broaching false doctrine, in a Ministers chardg, how
shall the Minister with all faithful diligence drive away the same false
doctrine, and publickely teach the truth, if he may not teach, admonish, or
exhort his people, without a license first obtained from the Bishop of the
Diocese? For what if the Bishop be upon an embassadg in Denmark? Or what if
the Bishop himself be of the same judgment with the false teacher?

The 91. Canon entitled Parish Clearks to be chosen by the Ministers, is
contrary and regugnant to the customs of the Realm, in many Parishes of the
Realm. And in this regard, this Canon has been blown to pieces, at the bar
of the Common Pleas, by the opinion of the whole be^ch in Hylarie term last:
when upon a writ of prohibition, procured by certain Parishioners, in the
County of Hertford, the Judges denied a consultation, to the Minister of the
same Parish, who had convented the Parishioners, before the Ecclesiastical
Judge, for gaynsaying his election of the parish clearke; which by virtue of
this Canon, he had declared in the Ecclesiastical Court, to belong unto
himself a lone.

The 77. Canon entitled, none to teach schole without license, is repugnant to
a statute made the first Session of this Parliament in diverse poyntse. First
the statute permits ascholemaster to teach, in any public free gra^mer
schole, without any license of the Bishop of the Diocese; or Ordinary of the
place: but this Canon commands, that none teach public schole, but such as
shall be licensed by the one; or by the other. Secondly, the statute permits
any person, in any Noble man's or Noble woman's; gentle man's or ge^tlewoma^s
house, being not recusants, to teach without any license of etc: but this
Canon, commands that no man shall teach in private house, but by license etc.
Thirdly, the statute permits not any person to be ascholemaster by any other
license, the^ by the Archbishop Bishop, or guardian of the spiritualties. But
this Canon permits a scholemaster to teach, if he be allowed by an Ordinary
of the place a lone. Which many times, and in many places, is neither
Archbishop, nor Bishop, nor guardian of the spiritualties.

Lastly, this Canon commands, that none teach in public schole, or private
house, unless he first subscribe, to the first and third articles, mentioned in
the 36. Canon simply, and to the two first clauses of the second article,
whereas the statute requires no manner of subscription at all.

All these things before written considered, we may safly affirm concerning
many of the said late Canons, that they be not to be put in execution within
the Realm, unless they shall be confirmed by Act of Parliament: yea that we
may also truly speak this in generality: that eiall the Churcwardens and
side men throughout England sworn to present all offenses committed against
the said Canons, must be falsely perjured; or else that there is not one
Minister which shall exercise his ministerial function, nor any one man, or
woman, which shall usually come to common prayer, and divine service, but they
must stand continually at the Ordinaries mercy, for one offense or other. For
the things commanded, or forbidden, being innumerable, and impossible at all
times to be kept, into what a servitude these Canons have brought both
Ministers and people, and what an excessive chardg, is laid up on the purse of
every person be he bond or be he free, be he young, or be he old, for citations,
Excommunications, absolutions, and dimissions, licenses, faculties, and
dispe^sations, Who havyng but half an eye sees not? Nay, that many, in many
places, have already borne the Yoke, and felt the burden of these Canons,
cannot be denied. Again, howsoever at the petition of the Prelates, his
Majesty has been pleased generally to allow, ratify and confirm, the book
of Canons, under the broad seal of England; yet may no loyal and honest
subject hereupon infer, that his Majesty intended by the general words of
his confirmation, to authorize any particular matter, devised and decreed, by
the Synod, contrary to the holy scriptures, hurtful to the rights,
prerogatives, and dignities, of his Highness Crown; repugnant to any laws,
statuts, or customs of the Realm, prejudicial to his Lords and commons in
Parliament, or onerous to his people. The contents then of sundry the late
Canons, in as much as the same be contrary to the holy scriptures, tend to the
blemishing of the liberty and franchise of the Kings will, grace, and power, be
co^trariant, or regugnant, to the laws, statuts, and customs of the Realm,
be prejudicial to the Lords, and Commons in Parliament, without whose consent,
no new bindyng law, ought to be made, or be such, as may become very onerous to
the people; it is a plain case, that every of the Kings liege and faithful
subjects, ought to defend the Kings right, Honor and dignity against all such
Canons.

For heerby it seems that as all other the wisest and best Princes that ever
have been, have in some things at some times erred, so we without offense (I
hope) may say, that the King also veritate tacita, or falsitate exressa, was
unawares somewhat mistaken in his grant. In regard whereof, such Canons, by
the laws, statuts, and customs of his kingdom be merely void, and of none
effect to all constructions and purposes: whereupon also, that necessarily
follows, that the same can receive no being, by his, Majesty's confirmation,
Quod omnino, non est, confirmari non potest.

THE 9 ARGUMENT.
God has promised to recompense the least kindness showed to his servants,
especially to the Ministers of the Gospel. And the same God is not unrighteous
to forget etc: but faithful, and has always performed his promise, as
appears by diverse examples. Heb. 6:10 and 10.23:
Ergo: In this regard the High Court of Parliament ought the more to help and
relieve the Ministers pleaded for, and the people depending upon them.

Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a Ministers are to be rewarded as they be such, and in their office: but not as
they be Schismatikes, and disturbers of the peace of the Church. Thereis a
secret contradiction in the first part of this answer. Reply.
For as a Mayor ovt of his office is no Mayor, so a Minister out of his
ministry is no Minister. See the answerer at large. Secondly, Ministers
violently thrust out without just cause, are not to be blamed. Touching
disturbance, we say that not we, but the Prelates that plead for humane and
Romish Ceremonies (much hurtful and nothing profitable,) are they that trouble
the Church. For the Church would otherwise be quiet enough.

G. Powel
b Arcadian wisdom. The place Math. 11.11. is to be understood not in regard of
the office, but in respect of the clear knowledge they should have of Christ,
after his resurrection. The first part of this note being but a scorn I leave
to scorners. The other divinity of this note, is very deep and profound. Reply.
How shall I sound the bottom of it? Does Christ speak of John, in respect of
his knowledge, or of his office? Did the people go out into the wilderness unto
John, in respect of his knowledge, or in respect of his office, to be baptized
of him? Math. 3.6.7
Does Christ also ask whether the knowledge, Math 21.25
or the baptism, (that is the ministry) of John were from heaven or of men?
Heerby it is manifest that Christ compares John with the Prophets in respect
of office, not in respect of knowledge. Therefore also in the same respect he
compares the least in the kingdom of heaven with him, and prefers the least
Minister of the gospel for his ministeryes sake as much before John, as he had
before preferred John before the Prophets.

Lastly, the ministry of the gospel is greater then the knowledge of the
gospel, because it is both the end for which God gives more knowledge to some
then to other, and also the cause that works knowledge in other. If therefore
the least in the kingdom of heaven, be greater the^ John Baptist in respect of
knowledge, which is the least, then much more is the least minister of the
gospel greater then John Baptist, in respect of his ministry which is the
greater. The note with (c) is not worth a Cee (as they speak at Oxford) of
single beer.

Further answer to the 9. Argument.
G. Powel
He does any kindness to a Minister, as he is a minister, shall have reward. But
if a Minister do otherwise then he ought (as these refractaries do) what
kindness then ought such to have? What a multitude of conformable Ministers are
quite overthrown by this Argument? Reply.
For do not many of them otherwise then they ought? Yea, do not more of them
otherwise, then all these now in question? Is not this so to stand in a gap, as
that the gap is trodden down, and a door opened, for all men to deny all duty
to all Ministers? For who does not otherwise, the^ he ought to do?

G. Powel
Let the refractary Ministers duetifully serve God and his Church, in their
diligent and humble obeydience, in the work of their vocation. Then let them
supplicat for kindness etc. What is that dilligent and humble obedience etc?
Reply.
To put on a Surplice, to make a vanishing Cross, to read service, to
acknowledge the Prelates to have power to make ordinances against Gods word etc.
How shall they supplicat? With an 100. or 200. in a bag. Then perhaps if they
arise betymes, and ride a pase, they shall have a pair of benefices; an
Archdeconry etc: yea liberty also to go whither they will, and never to come
at any of their benefices, but only in gathering time or if they lie at one of
their benefices they shall have leave I to suspe^d themselves from preaching as
long as the list: yea to do what else they will without controllment, so it be
not against conformity. Notwithstanding the Canon for half years residence at
either of their livinges, they have many quirkes to avoid the danger thereof.

THE 10. ARGUMENT.
The Lord has forbidden all wrong to any of his servants, especially to
Ministers. He threateneth also to revenge the least injury done unto them:
psalm. 105.15 exodus 17.14 15. 1. Sam. 15.3 Judge. 5.23.
and performs that which he has threatened. Neither does he account them
only guilty of the former fault, that do his people any hurt, but those also
that do not, help in their need. Ergo The high Court of Parliament, ought to
take the present opportunity for releeving the Ministers molested.

The marginall notes of this Argument conteyne nothing but a vain repetition
of matters before noted and answered; they conteyne nothing, but that we are
Schismatiks, false prophets etc: cruel, in forsaking our charges for little or
nothing etc. I do therefore dismiss them, with admiration, as of the notaryes
barrenes and folly, so also of the virtue of Cross and Surplice. As the
Ephesians cried out of their Diana, Acts 19.28:
Great is Diana of the Ephesians; so say I, great are Cross and Surplice of the
Conformitans. The use of them, makes men Gods, Prophets, true prophets,
peaceable men, faithful Ministers: but the refusal of them makes men
schismatic, cruel, superstitious, false prophets etc. Who would not be in
love with them, wherein there is such excellent virtue? How many may more
truly sacrifice to them; Habba. 1:16
then some sometimes are said to have sacrificed to their nets?

Further answer to the 10. Argument.
G. Powel
It is an ungratfull, yea an ungracious part of these supplicants, to tax the
Honorable assembly, or any Magistrate in this land so undutifully and
unchristiantly, for unjust, cruel and merciless dealyng. Who does so tax
them? Reply
Does every one that admonish other of that which God forbids or threatens,
tax them whom he does so admonish of those faults that are forbidden? Your
self have taxed them indeed before, of matters nothing beseemyng you: yea,
and the Prelates do daily tax (if not also threathen to excommunicate them)
for dealyng so much for us: for opposing themselves so much to the Prelacy: for
doeyng so much as they have done against non residency, the disorders of the
high Commission, the abuse of citations, the horrible abuse of the great
censure of the Church, Excommunication etc: yea for dealing at all in the
matters of religion: yea, have they not more stoutly then wisely sent out their
Inhibition against them in that behalf? Thus they may do what they list,
Psalm: 12
as though their tongues were their own, and there were no Lord over them: but
we poor men oppressed by them, may not humbly petition to the Parliament, but
that we are presently exclaymed of, as ungrateful and ungracious, and as
undutifully and unchristiantly taxeyng them for unjust, cruel and merciles
dealyng. Wherefore do they thus charge us? Because they fear that we will lay
the same things to their charge. But though they do thus esteem of our
petition, yet we hope it is better accepted of the Honorable Court, unto which
it was directed.

Whereas in the rest of the answer to this 10. Argument, he says the refractary
Ministers (as he calls them) were never proceeded against for preaching the
gospel, or for appertune and sober executyng their Ministry, this is utterly
untrue, for some have been molested for preaching any thing tendyng against
the present Hierarchy, or any other corruptions: some also for confuting the
Popish doctrine of other, though they have done it never so soberly: and some
for other matters, which are points of the gospel as well as other.

THE 11 ARGUMENT.
Pharao in the great Egiptian famine, at his own cost provided for all his
Idolatrous priests, Gen: 47:22
that they might not sell their lands. The Monks, and Friars in Popery (yet in
the twylight of the gospel) at the dissolution of the Abbyes, were provided
for, during their life time. Ergo, The high Court of Parliament, in this clear
light of the gospel, ought much more to provide that the ministers of the
gospel; may not be turned out a beggyng with their wives and children, as they
are; when all other have their fill.

The Marginall Notes.
G. Powel
e Where superstition fitteth Judge, there neither nature, nor reason may dare
to plead the cause. Alas, it is very lamentable, that some men (I know not for
what carnal respects) had rather curry favor with other, and beholding to
other men, the^ conscionably live (...) ^^eir own. They should well consider
the saying of the Apost 1: Tim. 5.8. Reply.
In divine matters, neither superstition must sit Judge, neither must things be
pleaded by nature or reason, but all must be done by the word of God, the store
house of divinity. They are superstitious, that strive more for reteyning and
practicing of humane Ceremonies in the worship of God, (be the pretense what it
will) then they regard the truth of God. The (answerer as a very pitiful man)
cries out, Alas it is lamentable etc. But one of these poor Ministers, yea
many of them by reason of their trobles, may come ten-tymes to some of his
great Masters houses, and not be offered once, to drink of a cupe: but the
truth is, they have forgotten Apostolical hospitality, and they have learned
Lordly Episcopal hostility. Further mark here his contradiction, or oblivion.
Before in his consideration of the preface to the Arguments, he has expressly
charged them with diverse particular carnal respects, etc. Now he says,
contradictio^
that he knows not for what carnal respects they curry favor etc. As for
currying of favor; it belongs rather to some hungry trencher chaplines, then
to those against whom he writes. Yea, 2 Samuel 16 13 2 Samuel: 19 18
as Shimei that cursed David when his kingdom was somewhat doubtful, yet at
his safe return and reestablishing of the Crown unto him, was as forward as
any other, by creepyng and crouchyng, by flattering and fawnyng to curry favor
again with David, so it is well if there have been no such curryers of favor
among the Prelates. The place of Timothy is abused. It might in like sort have
been applied to all the Martyrs. We must not provide for our familyes by doing
any thing against Gods word. That we had rather live of our own, then of other
men's, is manifest in that we do so earnestly sue to be restored to our places,
the rather that we may not be chargable to other.

G. Powel
b Alas let them have pity upon themselves, and leave their quarreling, and they
shall not be neglected. This is spoken more like an Archbishop that had power
to prefer other, Reply.
then like a young chapline that needed and waited for preferment himself. I
know not, who may more justly be charged with quarrelling, then they that beat
and buffet their fellow servants: yea then they that smite Christ's Sister, his
love, his Dove, his undefiled, yea, not only smite her, but also wou^d her, and
take her veil from her. We would gladly live in peace, (with holiness) but we
cannot be suffered.

Further answer to the 11. Argument.
G. Powel
The Argument does not follow, because of the dissimilitude in the instances, or
examples: The Argument does follow the better, Reply.
because of the similitude of instances (as the answerer speaks) or rather
because it is a minore ad maius, from the less to the greater. This inequality
of examples, rather strenghtneth then weakeneth the Argument and the cause. But
let us see his dissimilitudes.

G. Powel
i Pharao thought his priests to profess true religion, and diligently to obey
him etc: But refractary Ministers, though professing true religion, yet do
obstinatly (being blinded with superstition) refuse to serve God etc: Reply.
As Pharao was in error touching the religion and obedience of his Priests, so
are our Prelates touching our refractariness and superstition, The obedience of
the molested ministers to his Majesty: as good as the best Conformitans:
as has been sheewed. Our obedience to his Majesty is as good, as of the best
of their side. That man's obedience to a Mayor of a town or to any other
inferior officer of a Prince, is always the best, that is most agreeable to the
pleasure of the Prince himself. In like manner, that obedience is best unto
Princes, that does best agree with the pleasure of the Prince of Princes, and
King of Kings. To obey the inferior without due regard of the superiors
pleasure, is but flattery and fawnyng, not good obedience. So to obey Princes,
without due regard to our duty to God. For it is more prejudicial and
hurtful, then beneficial or profitable to such Princes. See the words of
Samuel to the Israelits. 1 Samuel 12.15. and 25: and the example of Ioab in
numbering the people by the commandment of David, whereupon followed an
exceeding plague.

Touching the serving of God and his Church, in the faith full and diligent
function and exercise of the Ministry; we are unjustly charged to refuse it,
for we humbly and earnestly desire it, above all maintenance: and for this
desire we are thrust out of our livyng.

G. Powel
2 The Monks and Friars, were put out against their wills for Sodomi, heresy,
Idolatry etc: The refractary Ministers are willingly deprived for obstinate
superstition, in refusing sincerely to Preach the gospel, not being
conformable to the Christian laws of our Church, and Magistrate: The more
justly, that Monks and Friars were put out, Reply.
the stronger is the Argument for us to be provided for, that are put out
unjustly: without objection of any such foul crimes to us, as for which they
were put out. Yet it is false, that they were put out for heresy or Idolatry;
though they were heretics and Idolaters. For they were suffered still in their
heresy and Idolatry, as well after their putting out as before. Neither also
are we willingly, deprived, any othewise then Mariners, willingly throw their
goods over board into the sea, Acts 27.38:
to save their lives and the ship the better. Of superstition I have spoken
often; this now I ad, that many account carefulnes to keep a good conscience in
small matters as well as in great, to be superstition. And in the mean time,
themselves care neither for great nor small matters, any further the^ there are
laws of man in that behalf. As for superstition indeed, we are silenced and
deprived because we will not yield to huma^ Ceremonies, that have been and are
superstitiously abused in the worship of God, and of Idols, amongst the
Papists, whatsoever they are amongst us. It is also as false, that we refuse to
be conformable to Christian laws.

G. Powel
Monks and Friars could not have kept their places, by submitting themselves:
But these may by conformyng themselves: etc. I know no condition of submission
offered to Monks etc: Touching the rest, we thank you for nothing. Reply.
This is the courtesy of Prelates, to make us pay decre for our lyvings, even to
buy them with sinnyng against God, (as some of them are said to do,) with
Symony, and otherwise. But we dare not accept them at the price. The rest have
been often answered. I have not such leisure, to use tautologies as the
answerer seems to have had at the writing of his answer, as though he were
connyng a lesson by heart, in fear of beating for forgetting the same.

THE 12. ARGUMENT.
James 5.6 Apoc. 5:8: Ezra 6:10 Cenes: 20:7
The prayers of all the godly are much to be esteemed. Especially of the
Ministers of the word. Ergo In this behalf the Ministers now troubled, are the
more to be respected.

Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a True: if they continue diligent in their vocation: But being members, rent
and cut from the body of the Church of God in this land, they are unserviceable
for the same: What man? Have you unchristened us? Are we now Heathen and
infidells again? It may be you will say we are worse; Reply. lib: de
Adiaphoris:
yea you have already called us Apes. Before also in a note we have been
secretly compared to swyne. But how then do you call us your brethren? He is
certainly of a strange stock, that has Schismatikes, falss prophets, heathens
and infidells, Apes and swyne to his brethren. But it were good that some of
the Prelates that made the Canons and do execute the same, did consider, in
what danger they are by the statute of Excommingment, for making and executing
Canons contrary to former laws, and statuts of this kingdom. Here again
behold, the admirable efficacy of conformity, as that wherein consists the
life of the Church, and whereby men are members, yea Angels of the Church in
England: and without which, men are not so much as members thereof.

G. Powel
b Are they faithful that fall from their rule of obedience? Reply.
So long as we keep our selves to Gods word, we fall not from our rule or
obedience. For we acknowledge no other rule or obedience. Luther left the rules
and obedience of Monks: so many other left other rules of Popery. Yet, I hope
you will not deny the^ to have been faithful, or call them schismatikes. As
for your rule and obedience of Conformity in some perticulars, many of us have
not fallen from them: First because we never yielded to them. 2 Because to leave
Conformity, is not to fall, that is to go downward; but to arise, that is to
go upward. Bittter roots spring up, that is, come out of the earth from
beneath. Heb: 12:15 prove. 15:24 James 1.17.
But the way of life is on high, and every good and perfect gift comes from
above. They that have left conformity, are more ashamed and greived for having
been Conformable, then for leavyng it, though they pay sweetly for it.

Further answer to the 12. Argument.
G. Powel
1 Neither are the prayers of Schismatiks much to be regarded: 2 Neither will
the Honorable court of Parliament, altogether neglect the refractary ministers:
3 Nether can the refractary ministers in charity but pray for the high court,
yea in case, they did not satisfy their desire: This answer consists of 3
parts, according as I have noted the same. Concerning the first, Reply.
it is not much to be denied if men be schismatikes indeed, and not only in
name. Therefore touching that and the second, neither the answerer nor all the
Prelates in the world: shall ever prove us schismatikes and refractaryes, as
they unjustly term us. For the third, albeit the High Court of Parliament
would do nothing in our behalf, yet we will say with Samuel, 1 Samuel 12:13
Genes: 20:7 Ezra: 6:10
God forbid that we should sin against the Lord and cease praying for them.
Notwithstanding it cannot be denied, but that the more justice and kindness we
shall receive from them or by them, either at this Session or at any other
hereafter, the more we should be both bound and quickened to pray for them. But
the zeal of the Parliament, in doeyng so much all ready for us as they have
done, is worthy our remembrance whilst we live. Though it have not that
success presently, that we have desired, yet we know not what it may have in
time, upon further consideration thereof by his most excellent Majesty, and by
his wise and most Honorable Counsel. No seed grows presently: yea the best
seed lies longest in ground (for the most part) before it appear, especially
before it yield fruit again. That that is done also, shall be a good evidence
for us, and for the equity of our cause, as also against the Prelates, to all
posterity; whatsoever reproaches, and other indignityes in the mean time we
sustain either by their speeches, or by their unjust writing (upon record)
against us. Contradiction or co^trarietie.
But here is further to be noted, the contradiction or at the least the
contrariety of this answerer, even in this very part of his answer. For in the
first part thereof he says, the prayers of Schismatikes are not much to be
regarded. Where his meaning by comparyng these words with other his terms of
being rent and cut of from the Church, obstinat, wilful etc: must needs be,
that our prayers are of no regard. In the third part notwithstanding, he says
that we ought to pray for the Parliament, though they should do nothing for us
according to our desire. Ought we to do that which is of no regard, of no use,
of no benefit, to no purpose? math. 12:23
Shall not we give account of every idle word, much more of every idle prayer?
Yea are not the prayers of all obstinat, wilful, impudent, schismatic and
seditious persons, and of all liars, and false Prophets (such as he has often
called us to be) abominatio^ to the Lord? prove: 15:8
How then are we bound to pray for the Parliament, or for any other? Are we
bound to do that tnat is sin, and whereof we shall give an account?

2 If they had still made conscience of their duty in their Ministry, Reply.
their prayers had been much more effectual. Behold what conscience these men
make of subscription, Cross, surplice, conformity, G. Powel
and other particular obedience; that make no conscience of preaching: yea not
of coming to their flocks once in a year; yea some not once in 3. or 4.
years. Is it not strange also, that surplice and cross should ad such
efficacy to prayers? How merry then would it be with England, if all men in
all places, were forced to were a red, blue, green, white, or yellow cross,
upon their hats, sleeves, or breasts etc? And if every man, woman and child
might never pray privately, or publicly, but in a surplice? Further I pray God,
that such as make so light account of our prayers for them, do not by their
hard dealyngs with us, force us to cry for help from God against them, and then
feel the virtue and efficacy of our prayers in this behalf, to their grief.
For shall not God aveng his elect, which cry day and night unto him, Luc: 10:7:
yea though he suffer long for them? I tell you he will aveng them quickly. Let
not this be lightly thought on. In the mean time also, how vilesoever our
prayers are in their judgments; yet let this answerer and all other our
greatest adversaryes understand, that they are not so in the sense and feeling
of those mercyes, that they do daily enjoye, as well by our prayers, as by
their own. For our consciences bearing witness, our prayers are of faith, and
in truth and love, we doubt not, but that the King and whole kingdom, yea our
greatest adversaryes do daily fare the better by them. And this I fear would
too soon appear, if they should or could suspend us from praying, as they
have done from preaching.

The 13 Argument.
We must pray the Lord of the harvest, Math: 9:23:38:
to thrust forth laborers into the harvest. God will not have men only to
pray, but also to use other means. Ergo The High Court of Parliament, must be
the more careful, to provide what they may, that godly and paynfull Ministers
whose labors God has already blessed, may not by head and sholders, be thrust
out of the Church, as they are.

There is but one marginall note upon this Argument, which has been often
answered.

So also has all his other answer to the said Argument touching the sowyng of
the tares of sedition, schism, faction, and disturbing of the peace. All which
do rather be long to them that teach that a true justifiyng faith may be lost,
that there is no certeinty of Salvation, that plead for ignorance and an
ignorant Ministry: (the mother of rebellion and treason, and all other sins
against God and man) and other such like things.

THE 14. ARGUMENT.
Luc: 9:26
In the time of persecution, men ought not to be ashamed of the word of Christ,
but to confess and speak for the same. Ergo. They ought much more so to do
in the time of peace, in a kingdom, and to a King and State professing the
gospel.

Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a As if that Disciplinarian giddines, were Gods word. Reply.
Though you take your pleasure of us, yet take heed, take heed, you blaspheme
not the ordinances of Christ. Such certainly are little better the^ mad men, who
impute giddines to the Discipline of Christ, commanded to be kept without spot
and unrebukeable until his appearing. 1 Timothy: 6:13
It is no new thing for them that stands for Gods truth to be accounted mad
men, 2 King 9, 11 Acts: 26.24 Luc: 15:17:
or besides themselves, and in these days, Protestants scared out of their
wits. But let them that now offend this way, and especially that account Gods
ordinances to be giddines, let them (I say) repent and come to themselves, lest
the Lord strike them with a far worse spirit of giddines then yet they have,
which will not be cast out by any means, no, not by prayer and fasting.

G. Powel
b Here again the Supplicants confess that we profess Christ and his word.
Why do they exclame then? If you so call it, we do exclame as we do, Reply
that we may profess Christ and his word more sincerely, without any
traditions of men in Gods worship. The Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus and
Thyatira, professed Christ and his word and had many excellent things in them;
yet our Savior himself exclameth, and calls them to reformation of the few
things amiss with them. So did Paul to the Churches of Corinth and Galatia.

G. Powel
c Fear and weakness forsooth, because they will not partake with Schismatikes.
Let scoffers and mockers take heed, Reply. Psalm. 2.4 prove: 1:26
that he that dwells in the heaven laugh not: yea that the Lord have them not
in derision: yea least he laugh at their destruction, and mock when their
fear comes etc.

Further answer to the 14. Argument.
G. Powel
The argument follows not: for refractary Ministers are neither Christ, nor
his word, as has been declared before. It has indeed been said before: but by
whom, when, Reply.
or where has it been declared and proved? Which of us has ever said that we
are Christ or his word? As the Church is called Christ. 1. Cor. 12.12. so both
the Ministers and all true believers are the Ministers of Christ. Lastly, they
that strive against humane Ceremonies in Gods worship, and for the ordinances
only of Christ Jesus, do strive also for Christ and his word.

THE 15. ARGUMENT.
As the Parliament has had a godly care of severity, for the better converting
of the Papists, so likewise there ought to be the like godly care for their
good instruction by such able Ministers, as against whom they may have no just
exception. Ergo.

In this respect the Parliament ought to do the more; for the liberty of the
Ministers suspended etc.

I defferr the reply to all the marginall notes, to the further answer
following.

G. Powel
As if there were not able Ministers enough, in both Universities and in other
parts of the kingdom (if competent mayntenance might be procured for them)
for every Congregation, without the small hand full of schismatic Ministers.
Reply
Part of this has been answered before: yet to help the answerers memory (if it
be weak) I tell him again, that if we had tentymes as many more, as there
are, either in the universities, or else where, there would be use of them all.
The Lords harvest is great: the day is far spent: the laborers that are, are
some so weak, some such loyterers, and some so unskilful, that they make no
clean work, but leave as much behind them, as they gather and carry before
them.

Besides is it a small matter, for the Minister to be acquainted with the
people, and the people with the Minister? As likewise for the Minister to
affect the people, and the people the Minister? Again, are all fit to teach
and to govern the people, that are learned and good scholars in the
University? It has been justly blamed by learned writers of our side, that
some Papists have blasphemously called the scriptures a nose of wax, and a
shipmans hose. But now would God, it were not so made in open pulpit, by some
great scholars, that are accounted great divines. Yea, it is lamentable, that
in some great places (if not in the greatest) men preach of the scriptures; and
yet never interpret the scripture whereof they preach: yea that indeed so hammer
the scripture, as though it were a piece of metal, the which they might work
or cast: into what form themselves best liked: who also make the Pulpite a
place rather to sheew their own wit, whereby to win credit and praise to
themselves, (perhaps also to get a Bishopprike in the end) then faithfully to
deliver the message of God, whereby to glorify God, and either to win souls
unto him, or to confirm and further in godliness, those that are already won.
Lastly, who rather play with the scripture as if it were some gue gawe, then
wisely handle the same.

As for competent maintenance, I remember what one (that has now turned his
coat, and every where almost chafeth at us like a Cook, I remember (I say)
what he once answered a Bishop being asked, where he would have sufficient
maintenance for preachers in every Congregation: A good thong (quoth he) might
be cut out of your hyde. As also what John Baptist said unto the people, Luc:
3: 11
He that has two coats, let him part with him that has none. So say I, that
for the better mayntenance of the gospel where there were need; there might
be many a good share had out of the surperfluity of those, that maintain their
wives in satin and dammaske gowns, velvet kirtles, cheynes etc: that bring up
their children like the children of Noble men, that fat themselves and theirs,
and starve the Lords people: and who after their great abundance Preach not so
much in 4 years, as they did before, in one.

G. Powel
Suppose there were not able Ministers enough for this purpose: Have not the
refractary Ministers, then greater reason to join with their brethren in
preaching the gospel, confuting the Papists etc: then superstitiously to
quarrel about cross and surplice, and to forsake their necessary vocation?
Nay. Reply,
Have not the Prelates the more reason to suffer us still in the work of the
Ministry with them? We are all willing, so far to join with any in
preaching the Gospel, as we may do nothing against the Gospel, to craze the
peace of our own conscience. The answerer often charging us with superstition,
co^vinceth them that say that we do not that which we do of conscience. For
if we be superstitious in not yielding to cross, surplice, etc: then are they
to us mere matters of conscience. For superstition is not in words, but has
her seat in the conscience.

THE 16. ARGUMENT.
Ephesians: 2:14 15:
As Christ Jesus to make peace betwixt Jews and Gentiles, took away the
Ceremonies ordained by God himself, because they had been a partition wall
betwixt the said Jews and Gentiles: and instituted no other in their places: so
the Ceremonies and other things now in question, having been the means of
much debate amongst us, whereby the buildyng of the Church has been greatly
hindered, and the enimyes thereof strenghtned; they ought in this respect to be
removed. Ergo.

The Ministers now molested for the said things inquestion, ought to be spoken
for and releeved, and that by the Parliament, because none may do it better.

The Marginall Notes.
G. Powel
a Hence appears what things they be, that the refractaryes are offended with,
why then do they pretend, the gospel of Christ, reconciliation with God etc:
Ad populum phaleras: Reply.
These things being repugnant to the purity and sincerity of ihe gospel, under
which God will not be worshipped in any such Ceremonial sort, John: 4:23:
but in spirit and truth; Being also such, as for which the Ministry of the
gospel is restrained (upon the liberty whereof depends the salvation of the
people and their reconciliation with God) There is no cause, why such scoffing
and frumping outcryes should be made against us, as here and else where are
made. Yea, though the ministry of the gospel, were not for these things
restrained, yet being urged in the worship of God, they are unlawful: and men
standing against them, and in all humility desiryng them to be removed by
lawful authority, may well be said to stand in Gods cause, and to plead for
God.

G. Powel
c O, Martin was an modest man. Thanks be to God, Reply
that you have no other then Martin to upbrayd us with: who was unknown what
he was, and whose writing was never approved by us: and who also though he
jested at some manners of your side, yet never wrote so bitterly as many of you
now do.

G. Powel
d They will offend, and yet will not be told of it. You have not proved us to
offend, Reply.
in those things wherein you impute most offense unto us. If we do offend, we
are more then told of it: yea our punishment is greater then our offense,
because it is greater both then the law appoynteth, and also then the
punishment of other whose offenses are greater.

G. Powel
e Heat of contention may carry men further then were expedient. But are the
refractaryes mylder in this kind? Witness all their Pamphlets and libels written
against us. The first part of this note is plentifully justified, not only by
the book Scottish Genevating, Reply.
by the most scurrilous book of The picture of a Puritan, and by the answerers
own book De Adiaphoris, but also by this present answer, enjoined and allowed
by authority: wherein (for ought I know) there are more railing, scoffing, and
untrue speeches, then are in all the books here unjustly termed pamphlets and
libells. If any notwithstanding of us do offend in this kind, they are not
justified by the rest: yet this is not to be forgotten, that they that be the
loosers, and go away with the blows, may be the better borne withal, in
their words.

G. Powel
f A disgraceful term. But do they acknowledge themselves non conformitans
and schismatic? Reply.
If the word conformitan be a disgracfull term, is there not disgrace in
Conformity and being conformed? For are not these words Conformed, conformity,
and conformitans coniugata? Why then are we urged to conform? Either therefore
you justify us in not conforming our selves (for who would disgrace himself?)
or else you do ill to say, we call you by a disgraceful name, when we call
you conformitans.

G. Powel
g Suam scabiem affricant. Reply.
It needs no answer. All men know and daily hear, how they galle us in every
sermon, and how little we deal with them.

G. Powel
h A malicious lie. There are few or none in the Church of England, so ignorant
and so scandalous in the Ministry, as here the suppliants insinuat: and if any
such be amongst us, sure I am that (upon complaint and intimation otherwise)
they are severely censured and punished for it. Yet I must give them to
understand, that scandalous Ministers for life, are more tolerable in the
Church, then such as be factious, Schismatic, or scandalous for doctrine,
and phanaticall conceits. Plus enim nocent doctrinae scandala, quam morum
delictae. Reply.
Neither malicious, nor lie. All men, good and bade do too well know, too many
both ignorant and scandalous to be in the Ministry. If it might please his
most excellent Majesty, or his most Honorable Council, to send out
Commissions into all Countries, and to appoint indifferent Commissioners
(neither Bishops nor any other Prelaticall persons, because such are parties,
but religious Noble men and gentlemen) to inquyre of this matter, the truth
would much better appear to the everlasting reproach, of all those that do so
justify the present state of the Ministry. For the rest of the former note,
who knows not, that one lewd person (how base and abject soever) may, and
daily does procure and work more trouble to a good Minister, and does more
easily prevail to his ejection, then twenty good men (though of never so good
credit) yea, then somtymes the whole Parish besides (though never so great) can
do for the good and peace, of the best Minister? That also for a man, not to
were a surplice, or make a cross in the air (or I cannot tell where or how)
etc: should be less tolerable, then many great sins expressly forbidden by
God himself, is very strange, yea lamentable, yea fearful to think: much more
to speak and write: most of all to print, for all the world, yea for all
posterity to behold. Especially, that a learned man, a divine and Minister of
the word should so think, speak, write, and publish. If this be not to
prefer the authority of mortal and frail man, before the authority of the
immortal and most mighty God, Mar. 7:13:
yea to make the word of God of no authority by traditions which men have
ordained, I know not what is. As for false doctrine, or phanaticall conceits,
which of you all, can justly charge us with them, as many conformitans may be
with diverse points of Popery, with toys in the pulpit (more fit for a stage,
then for Moses chair) with foolish allegoryes, and with such pleading for
Ceremonies, as that the people are not only not edified, but also corrupted
and infected: yea and the minds of those that are judicious, and have any taste
of goodness, exceedingly wounded? The like commission, that before I spoke of,
would sheew the truth of these things also.

G. Powel
i An impudent and loud lie. What an exclamation and accusation is this, upon
the Printers fault, in setting Conformitans for unconformitans? If malice had
not overswayed reason, he might easily have seen it to be so, by the scope of
the author. I have also seen (and so many other) diverse copyes corrected
heerin, with the authors own hand.

The notes with (k) l) and m) are often answered. The Greek word of the next
note, the Printer for want of Greek letters, was feign to omit. For which
reason also all the fallacies in the end of every answer, are left out: the
rest of the note follows.

G. Powel
n The time of the old Testament being expired, Christ abolished the Ceremonial
law, and ordained the New Testament: what will they conclude from hence? Reply
That no Ceremonies being instituted by God himself since the death of Christ
whereby the former were abrogated, God is therefore now to be worshipped in
spirit and truth; and that no man or Church whatsoever has power to ordeyne
Ceremonies for the worship of God.

G. Powel
o What? Not any? No Sacraments? No other Ceremonies? Reply
Not any. No Sacraments. No other Ceremonies. For the Sacraments that now are,
were ordained before Christ's sufferings, and before the abrogation of the
Ceremonial law upon his Cross. These words go teach all Nations, Colos: 2:14:
math. 28:19 Romans 3.2: Psalm. 1 47.19:26
baptissing them etc. do but ratify and confirm that which was before
instituted: as also make for the commucating of the word and Sacraments to the
Gentiles, which before had been peculiar to the Jews. All other things now in
the Church for the government thereof, differing from those that were under the
law, were ordained by Christ (or at least he had given commandment for them
to the Apostles) before his passion, and therefore before the abrogation of the
Ceremonies. For Christ commanded his Apostles to teach only such things, as he
had commanded them: Mat: 28:20: Ioh: 14:26.
and the Holy Ghost was only to teach them althinges, and to bring althinges
to their remembrance, which he (Christ himself) had told them.

The (p) has been answered in the marginall note with h) of the 5 Argument.

G. Powel
q False. They are the bonds of society, besides other uses for edificatio^.
Then, where there is no Cross and surplice, Reply.
there is no society; or at the least but loose and weak society. But perhaps
he mea^eth no Lordly Episcopal society, because no Ceremony, no Bishop. He may
also mea^e society betwixt a Minister and his benefice. So some have found it
true. Touching the other uses for edification, we desire to see them.

G. Powel
r If the supplicants request were granted in the Ceremonies, yet would the
refractary Ministers be restles still, until they had altogether brought in
their New Discipline: and (peradventure) more restles then, then ever they were
before: As the news of Christ birth at the first troubled all Jerusalem, Reply.
so it troubles all Papal Prelates to think of Christ's coming, in the
Discipline that he has ordained. These words, their Discipline and new
Discipline, are but marginall Mathematical fictions. None of us desire any
thing of our own, but only the ordinances of Christ Jesus: which cannot be
otherwise called new, then his commandment for loving one another, John 13.34
is called a new commandment.

This Discipline we have never attempted to bring in, by any unduetifull
means, but by all humble supplication to the supreme authority, to which we
acknowledge the establishment thereof to belong. Therefore, that we will be
more restles either before or after the obteyning thereof then becomes us, is
but his own imagination, from the experience (perhaps) of the restlesnes of
some Prelates, till they be Bishops, and afterward till they come to be
Archbishops. Yea the^ also, till they get some further honor, yea till they
have suppressed all those, that they think do any ways dislike of such
places. If it might please his Majesty and the other States of this Kingdom,
but to permit it in some places where it might be most conveniently, it should
much more clearly appear, both how we would content our selves with all
humble thanks to his Majesty and to the other States in that behalf: and also
how much better this would agree with all Civil Magistracy, then their present
Hierarchicall and Ecclesiastical government does: yea how far more
beneficial it would be to the Common wealth: and finally how untrue many other
imputations are, whereby it is commonly disgraced. If any should abuse the
same, or himself in the execution thereof, we never denied, but that such
offenders should be subject to the censure of his Majesty, or of any his
inferior officers.

G. Powel
s Sound and solid peace, will never be wrought, but by recalling the refractary
Ministers from Schism and faction unto perfect obedience. Reply.
You must first prove us to be in a schism and faction. In the mean time,
sound and solid peace would a thousand times better be made by removing all
humane Ceremonies, by a more free preaching of the gospel of peace: If all
Ministers should conform themselves, yet if the gospel should be sincerely
preached, (though never any word should be spoken against the Ceremonies, and
other things in controversy particularly) certeynly, the Ceremonies and other
matters now in question, would be as odious, and in as great disgrace as now
they are. It is therefore a vain thing to labor for peace, without removing of
those things. Touching obedience it can never be perfect to man, where it is
not sound toward God. The establishing of Gods ordinances, will teach and
work perfect obedience unto men, to whom obedience is due.

Further answer to the 16. Argument.
G. Powel
1 If the question be but subscription, cross etc: wherefore then, have they
maynly cried out that it was the cause of God etc: All this is often answered.
Reply
The least transgression of Gods word, and the least obedience to Gods word, is
the cause of God, as well as the greatest. I wonder the answerer was not
ashamed, so often to repeat the same things.

G. Powel
2 We hold not Subscription Ceremonies, etc. absolutely necessary to salvation,
nor to be imposed upon every Church (for why should not other Churches use
their liberty?) Yea our Church has power to alter these particulars, yet we
know some ordinances necessary for gathering assemblyes, establishing of a
Church, and be as it were bonds and links of society. How does the first point
of this answer agree with that that some of the great Prelates hold, Reply
that their authority is Apostolical, and the Ceremonies matters of order and
decency? Are not things Apostolical and decent, common to all Churches? Or
may our Church, alter that that is Apostolical? Or why should these
ceremonies, be more necessary for our Church, then for other Churches? Or not
decent for other Churches, and yet decent for ours? If also Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, be in vested into the crown, except the King and with him the
officers of the crown, be only the Church; our Church has no power to alter
them, having no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction resident in it self. The latter
part of this answer is needles, our assemblyes being already gathered. What a
foolish and gross absurdity also is it, to insinuate that an invisible cross,
or a smockish surplice, should be of any effecacy for gathering of assemblyes?

G. Powel
3 Yea these particulars, Subscription, Ceremonies etc, being jmposed by the
Church and commanded by the Magistrate, are necessary to be observed under
pain of sin, seeing he that resists authority, resists the ordinance of
God. Reply
What if they be commanded only by the Christian Magistrate, not jmposed by the
Church? Or jmposed by the Church only, the Magistrate being an infidel, or a
persecuter of the Church? Can pain of sin also be without pain of
damnation? Are not those things that are to be obyed, contradictio^
under pain of damnation, necessary to salvation? Hence also it follows,
that things once commanded by the Church or Magistrate (especially by both) are
as holy, as the jmmediate commandments of God. The particular inconveniences
and absurdities heerof are infinite. What also is here said, that was not wont
to be said by the Papists against the Martyrs?

G. Powel
4 That they are things indifferent etc. and may be used without sin we have
proved in a book De Adiaphoris. Reply.
Alas M. Powell, make not such account of your book De Adiaphoris, then which,
there never came more simple stuff from any man reputed learned. You had need
to recant your blasphemous point therein, against the authority of Christ Jesus
for making laws in his Church. Uerily you might as well have denied him to be
a King, and a redeemer. To the 5 part of this answer unto this 16. Argument,
reply has often been made. That these things are become bones of contention, is
only the fault of the Prelates, that strive with might and maine for them. They
acknowledge that they have power to alter and remove them, and the sea great
reason so to do: neither can they give any reasons but childish for
continuance of them, and yet to the great dishonor of God, and to the grief of
thowsands of the godly, they reteyne them. For our parts, if we were not
troubled for them, we would be so far from contending about them, that we
would never ask after them, neither would we care if we never saw them.

THE 17. ARGUMENT.
God has lately visited us with a fearful pestilence, which yet is not
ceased: and the end of all his chastisements is, Psalm. 94:12: Heb. 12:19.
Revel: 3:19 Levi: 26:18 John 5:14: Psalm: 193: Psa: 116:12
to make us all the better by them. Yea to make us more Zealous: which if we
do not, he threateneth worse things unto us. God has also lately mightily
delivered us, from the greatest danger, that ever any people were in: to this
end also that we might praise him the more: and that all Estates may more
seriously consult and deliberate, what to give unto the Lord for all his
benefits. 2 Chronicles: 32 25:
And this is the more to be considered, because the Lord took the
unthankfulnes of Hezekia in a small matter for his health, very unkindly. This
our former deliverance also was the greater, because it was wrought without the
means of our prayers. Ergo

The High Court of Parliament, ought to be the more Zealous for the gospel
etc: the rather now, because they know not (at least many of them) whither ever
they shall have the like opportunity again or no. Yea that so also, their
thankfulness may be as publik and renouned, as our deliverance: Yea, their zeal
must be the more against all Popery (in respect of our danger by the Papist)
for the rooting out of every stump thereof, that their souls may have the more
comfort, especially in death: and that their memory may be the more honorable,
with all posterity.

This is the general substance of the 17. Argument, though amplified by many
particular places, examples of scripture. Now let us see what is said against
the same, in the notes, and in the Further answer.

Marginall notes.
G. Powel
a The mistake the ends, as those Gentiles did, who affirmed they were plagued,
because of the Christians contempt of their Gods. Reply.
Nay, you have forgotten your Logike, in mistaking the end for the efficient
cause. The Gentiles did not affirm themselves plagued, to the end the
Christians might contemn their Gods, but because they thought they had
contemned their Gods. This error is in all the answer following. For the author
took not upon him, to particularize the sins for which God had visited the
land, but only to show what the Lord looked for from us, both by his works of
Justice, and also by his works of mercy and goodness amongst us. Therefore the
notary and answerer in all that follows, sits besides the cushion. Again,
what does this note else import, but a soothing up of themselves and of all
other in their sins, that they may not enter into particular examination and
judging of themselves? When as every man, and every state should perticularly
censure and judge himself and his sins, to have had a stroke in provoking
the wrath of God so against us. And therefore happy had it been for the
Prelates, if they had smitten themselves upon the breasts, for their hard dealing
with the Church, in restraynyng the Lords servants, that would have given every
one in the Lords household, his portion in due season. So happy also were it,
if every other state and person, would do the like touching their particular
sins.

The second note with (b) is nothing: because the schism is not yet proved
against us. Though we deny not, but that for our sins, the Lord has visited
this land as well as for the sins of other, yet not for any schism of ours.
The like I say for the like cause, of the note with (c) And though it behooves
the Parliament, especially, to consider of the works of God, (as representing
the body of the land,) yet I wish all other likewise to consider of the same.

G. Powel
a I will not descant of the Suppliants meaning, in alleging this example. The
wise may consider it. So the wise may consider, how foolish malice is, Reply
for want of matter from words, to wrangle with a man's meaning, The example is
good and holy. The Be will gather honey, out of a stinkyng weed: but the
Spyder sucketh deadly poison, out of the fairest and sweetest flower. The
flatterer cares not what he say against one, so that he may please another.

G. Powel
e To wit by settling the state thereof, against heretical Papists, and
schismatic refractarves. I grant this; Reply
it being understood of such schismatic refractaryes, as in part rent
themselves, both from the Apostolical doctrine, and also from the ancient
Apostolical Churches, as likewise from all other Churches thoroughly in doctrine
reformed: and so stand in medio, betwixt such Churches, and the Romish
Synagogues. Who also being admonished thereof, in duetifull manner by their
brethren; yea by some special works of Gods loving severity, do persist in
their said schism, in a most refractary manner.

G. Powel
f As if no good could come unto the Church, but the restitution of
schismatic Ministers, which is indeed no good. Reply.
Let the reader be pleased to see, whereupon this note is gathered, and he shall
see, that there is no ground thereof. The author only asks a question upon
former promises, whether such and such things considered, the Parliament would
dissolve their meeting without doeyng any further matter in that behalf (that
is for the Ministers pleaded for) then they had done. He does not say, without
doing any good, but any further matter, insinuating thereby, that they had done
something already: again he speaks not of all causes, but only says, in
that behalf. But this is the answerers sophistry, Sophistry.
often detected. Howsoever he say no good has been done by Ministers who^ he
calls refractary, yet thowsands that fear God can testify, that the Church
has received more good by such Ministers, then ever it has or will by any
Papal Prelates, careless Non-residents, trencher chaplins and idle bellyes, that
seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's, and who are
noted, in all public meetings for reformation of abuses, more to hinder then
to further all good motions against the Papists, against swearing, and for the
religious observation of the Saboths etc, then common Christians, at the least
then those, that they do contemptuously call lay persons.

G. Powel
g What godliness is there, in wilful and malicious confronting the Magistrate,
in repinyng at their brethren, and superstitous for sakinge their callings,
flocks and all to the undoing of themselves, their wives children, and friends?
Reply.
None at all. But who do more comfront the Magistrate in all kingdoms, then
Papal Prelates, that hold their own jurisdiction to be iure divino by Gods
law, and that therefore deny all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be absolutely
invested into the crown of those kingdoms where they live, that take upon
them to deal without law, besides law, and directly contrary to law, and that
many ways oppress the Magistrates subjects at their pleasure? As for us, I
have said before, I say again, and it is published to all the world in the
book entitled, A protestation of the Kings Supremacy, that we are so far
from confronting the Magistrate, that we attribute much more unto him, then all
the Prelates do. Touching repinyng at brethren, I know none guilty heerof,
except wishing that Christ Jesus may have his own, the Church her own, the
Magistrate his own, the Ministers of Christ, and the subjects of the Magistrate
their own, yea every Byrd to have her own feathers, I know none (I say) to
repine, except wishing of these things, and that every mortal man would
content himself with his own, be to repine. The rest of this note has been
answered.

G. Powel
h A calumnious censure. What? Reply
To say that unworthy persons are thrust out into some of their places that are
deprived? A man need not to ascend into an high mountain, or to ride many
miles out of London for proof thereof.

The next note with (b) after (h) and before ( a, (as though the Notary had
forgotten his alphabet) is often answered. The next note also with ( a(after b)
is not worthy of answer.

G. Powel
l We must wisely distinguish between such things as are proper to the Papicy,
and what they have by usurpation, but are proper to the true Church of God. Are
Coapes, Surplices and Cross etc: Reply.
proper to the true Church of God? If they be not, why is this noted upon the
authors petition in this Argument, for removing of Popish ornaments? If they
be, then either it is no Church, or an imperfect Church, that wants them.

G. Powel
m Proper thereunto. Are no appurtinances of Romish religion to be hated, Reply.
but such as proper thereunto? This is wonderful. For what appurtinances are
there of Romish religion, which agree not either with Iudaisme, or Paganism?
We are therefore to abhor whatsoever appurtinance of Romish religion, whereof
there is no necessary use in the service of God, and which were better
abolished, then retained. Thus much to the marginall notes, of this 17
Argument. In the rest of the answer he deals deceitfully, racking diverse
particular examples, applied by the author, only for amplyficaton and
illustration of this general Argument, or of some particular branch thereof,
racking (I say) such particular examples, and applying them to the maine
conclusion and petition, as intended by the author for a several Argument to
confirm the same. Whereas in like manner, he might have done the like with
diverse other perticulars in this general Argument comprehended. But let us see
what he says.

Further answer to the 17. Argument.
G. Powel
In this Argument the Suppliants do certeynly very worthily and christianly
discourse, as of sundry other things, so especially concerning the Lords great
mercyes etc. In these words, let the contrariety of the answerer, to almost in
his whole answer written, Reply.
be observed. For he being a scholar, his words must be schollerly
interpreted. Because therefore we are not to doubt, but that the answerer
reme^breth, as well what he has learned in the Ethics, as in the Elenchs of
Aristotle, may it please the reader to understand, or (rather) to remember,
that Aristotle in his said Ethnicks, makes great difference, betwixt bonum and
been, good and well: iustum and just, that which is just, and justly. For he
teaches, that good and just things may be done, by evil and ujust men, which
have not the habit either generally of goodness, or perticularly of Justice: but
he says, that only good and just men, which have the habit of goodness and
justice, Marc: 6:20:
can do things well and justly. And this distinction is agreeable to holy writ.
For Herod is said to have done many things; viz. that were in themselves
good: the like may be said of Saul and diverse other. But certain it is, that
evil men can do any good or just thing, well and justly. This comes only
from the spirit of regeneration, and from a true faith wrought thereby, without
which it is impossible to please God. For as much therefore, Heb: 11:6.
as this answerer does here testify generally of the Supplicants, that they
do discourse in this Argument not only of many worthy and Christian points,
but also worthily, and Christianly, yea very worthily and Christianly:
contraritie
yea also for as much as he sets this down for a certeynty, saying
certeynly, how does this, or can this agree, with all the reproach full terms
before given by him unto them, of Schismatiks Refractaryes, wilful contenders
with the Magistrate, presumptuous censurers, wilful and malicious confronters
of the Magistrate, boasters, liars, impudent, blind and ignorant persons, false
Prophets, fowers of sedition, disturbers of the Church etc? For can it be said
of such men, and that for a certeynty, that they discourse very worthily and
Christianly of sundry things? Let it not be said, that to discourse, is but a
matter of words. For their is the same reason of words and works. No man can
say well and rightly that Jesus is the Lord, 1 Cor: 12:3.
but by the Holy Ghost. Though an evil man therefore may speak many good and
Christian things, yet only good men, speak good and Christian things, well
and christianly.

G. Powel
Does God plague us, because of the proceedinges against the refractary
Ministers? And not rather for our horrible sins of security, pride,
unthankfulnes etc: This is certain: and the rest unproved: I have told you,
Reply
of your mistaking your Logike before. The author disputes not perticularly of
the sins that moved the Lord to visit us etc: but of the general end
wherefore he did both correct us, but also magnify his mercy toward us. The
which he applied to the particular point of favor for the Ministers molested.
Notwithstanding, to answer your question, though it cannot be denied, that for
other sins the Lord has so heavily scourged us, yet why should the
suppressing of the Ministry of the gospel be concluded? Was, not to receive
and hear the Disciples of our Savior, which were sent out by two and two but
for a time to prepare men for the gospel, so great a sin, that our Savior
pronounces, that it should be easier for Sodom and Gonorrha in the day of
judgment then for such a City, Mat. 10:14. 15:
as should not so receive and hear his Disciples, and shall the silencyng, and
depriving of so many Ministers settled in particular Congregations, and all
ready blessed in their labors, be accounted no sin? Yea not only the
silencyng of them etc: but also, providyng that they shall have no other means
whereby to maynteyne themselves, their wives and children? God open your eyes
to see, and move your hearts so to consider hereof, that ye may not flatter
your selves, but see your sin herein. Yea, because your self speak of
unthankfulnes, as one special sin provokyng Gods indignation, what greater
unthankfullnes can there be, then so to entreat his servants, whom he has so
graced and blessed? Judge your selves ye Reverend Fathers (that are principal
actors in this matter) that ye may not be judged of the Lord. 1 Cor: 11.31
Take heed (I humbly beseech you, in the fear of God) take heed (I say) in
time, least fire break forth from the Lord, and there be none to quench the
same. In the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnetzer, 2 Chronicles: 36 16:
and the carrying of the people away captive to Babell: and in the last
desolation of the same City by the Romans, the like misusing of the Lords
Prophets is set down as one principal cause thereof. Mat: 21.35:23:37:
And who I beseech you, in such misusage of the Lords messengers, had always a
principal hand? Had not the Priests of the Lord, that should have done the
contrary? Search the scriptures, and see if they bare not witness in this
behalf. If God once set things in order before you, Psalm: 50.12:
shall it be sufficient to plead, that the Ministers of his word, against whom
ye have so proceeded, were Schismatikes, refractaryes etc. Alas, alas this
will be but a weak plea. Ye have herd before, that the Prophets were so termed.

Lastly, concerning the particular sins by you mentioned and other the like,
from whence do they more proceed, then from the restraint of the word, by the
Preaching whereof, they would be either repressed or restrained? If the liberty
and free passage of the gospel, work an holy fear, humility, and duetifull
thankfulness, yea, if the preaching of the word, do restrain the most wicked
and reprobate themselves, that they bite in their lips, hold their hands, and
refrain from many sins, which otherwise they would commit, (as it cannot be
denied) do not security, pride, unthankfulnes, and all other sins come from
the restraint of the word?

The answer to the Second supposed Argument, in this 17 contained, has in part
been answered before, because it has been proved, that we are no Schismatic
Ministers. Touching the rest of the said answer, we deny not but that there are
other means whereby that Honorable Court, may testify their thankefulnes, yet
this hinders not, but that this may also be one: yea if it be granted that
there are other, then by virtue of relation, this also must be granted to be
one. Yea, if mercy to the soul, be more then mercy to the body (as the soul
is better then the body: and the misery of the soul greater then of the body;
and cruelty to the soul worse then to the body) then it follows that this is
a special and principal means, whereby to testify their thankfulness.

His answer to the third supposed argument in the 17 Argument has also been
answered. The same I say of his answer to the 5 supposed argument. Only therein
the answerers censure of the Parliament if they should restore us, is to be
observed, viz. that they shall not only attract guilt and remorse of
Conscience, but also prejudice their Honorable age, and make their names
reproachful to all posterity. This touches not only the Lords of the upper
house, and body of the Commons in the Netherhouse, but also his most excellent
Majesty, without whose Princely authority nothing can be done by the other.
Let all Prelates that plead more stoutly for superstitious Romish rags, then
they do duly regard Gods holy ordinances, let such Prelates rather take heed,
that such things as are here threatened to the Parliament by the answerer, do
not be fall unto them.

Whereas the answerer, in his answer to the ^4 supposed Argument betwixt the
third and the first, reckons us up (in the bitterness of his spirit) with all
Schismatikes, Heretics, Papists, Athists, murderers, thieves, cutpurses, etc:
therein he sheeweth his brotherly love and kindness toward us, Esa: 53:12 Mar:
15:27.
and how well he spares us. But since Christ Jesus was counted among the
wicked; yea crucified betwixt two thieves. yea, and had also a murderer
preferred before him; why should we his servants, wretched men, and great
sinners be greeved or ashamed, thus to be recko^ed with such vile persons? 2 Timothy 2.12 John 17.24
Yea rather we may the more comfort our selves, because if we suffer with him,
we are the better assured that we shall reign with him, who has prayed the
Father, that we may be with him, even where he is, to behold his glory.

G. Powel
For Siserae was a special enemy of the children of Israel, Judges 4.2:
The instance of Iaeel is altogether different, and Church of God, but the
ornaments the Supplicants speak of, are the good creatures of God, having no
hurt at all in them. Was not Sisera also the creature of God, Reply.
and in that respect may it not be said, that he had no evil in him? And is
not the Pope also an enemy to the people and Church of God, as well as Sysera
was? Yea is he not much more, in as much as he is enemy to their spiritual
state, and everlasting salvation? Moreover, touching the ornaments of Popery
mentioned in the Argument, do we speak of them as they were the creatures of
God, or as they were and are still by many Papists abused to Idolatry? What
does the answerer say for them, that might not have been said for the covering
of the images of silver, Isa. 30:22
which the Jews (that should truly repent of Idolatry) were to pollute, that
is to account as things polluted; and for the rich ornaments of the images of
gold, which also they were to cast away as a menstrous cloth, Sophistry.
and (with great disdain) to say unto it, get thee hence. What fallacy this
is, the answerer knows.

G. Powel
Neither were the Popish Priests, ever decked with our ornaments, neither are
they now. Neither, were our ornaments ever worshipped, or abused to Idolatry,
either are they yet. Neither, if they had been, is it absolutely necessary to
destroy the substance of them etc, but only to take away the abuse, and to
restore the right use. The reasons are sheewed chap 11 De adiap horis. Are you
sure, their is never a Surplice now in England, Reply
that was abused to Idolatry publicly in Queen Maryes time, or secretly
since that time? If it be true of surplices, are you sure it is true of all
Coapes? Nay rather, I scarce think, that there is not any Coape now, that was
not in the time of Popery. Besides, have you forgotten the distinction of idem
specie, and idem numero? Ahas sent not the same Alter to Jerusalem, that was at
Damascus, 2 Kings 16:10:
but only commanded the like thereof to be made. By this reason also we may
erect new images in Churches, (as some all ready are in some places) and say
that these images were never worshipped or abused. Exceter
Here therefore behold agai^e your sophistry. Sophistry.
Touching the substance of things abused to Idolatry, we urge not the
destroying thereof, neither do we deny the restoring of them to any good
civil, or natural use from which they were first taken and employed to
Idolatry. But we deny that we ought to have any such honorable use, as to have
any place in the service of God, Deuteronomy 12.31
who expressly forbids to be so worshipped. I understand this of such things
as God has not commanded, or whereof there is no necessary use. Such are the
ornaments in question. The objections against this are plentifully answered in
other books. The 11. chapter of your book whereunto you refer us, is not
worth the reading of a learned man. It conteyneth objections of your own
making not of ours. Which of us, was ever so mad, as to say, que ad Dei gloriam
fiunt, iis colitur Deus. For are not the duties of the second table performed
for the glory of God? Is God worshipped by them? This is to confound both the
tables. Who ever also said, Quicquid fit ex fide et Deo placet, whatsoever is
done of faith, and pleases God, is the worship of God? So our eating,
drinking, and whatsoever else we do, shall be the worship of God. I wonder you
blushed not to impute such things unto us, and to cast your own shame upon us.

The third objection indeed in that chapter, touching the proposition, is in
part (yet not wholly) ours. But your answer thereunto makes more for us then
against us, as a child that has well learned the principles of religion might
easily show. But I for bear answer of them, and leave them to other to show
your childish weakness there in, and in that whole book. By the sight whereof I
pray God you may see, what it is to write against the truth. In other things
you have written well, and we thank God for your pains: but in these causes
your arguments are like fagots of thorns full of pricks without substance,
bound with bonds of straw, which by the fire of Gods truth, are quickly burnt
up, though for a time they fill agreat room, and seem to make a great blaze:
yea they are like to ignis fatuus, which terrifieth simple men, as if it were a
spirit, but is in truth, but a little fire of certain slymie exhalations: at
the most they are but like a Comet or blazing starr, which though it seem to
ignorant men, to be above in the starrie heavens, with the fixed stars, yet
for all that is but in the highest region of the air, and at the last is
dissolved into winds.

Thus much for reply to the 17. Argument: yea to all. For to the conclusion of
all (which the Notary and answerer unaptly call a distinct Argument) their is
nothing answered requyring any further reply, then has been already made. This
therefore shall suffice, for defense of the former Arguments. In the answer
whereof, though (perhaps) there be the more scoffs, reproaches, cavils, bitter
speeches, and uncharitable collections, to have provoked us unto the like, that
thereby some further advantage might have been ministered unto them, against our
cause and against our selves: yet as the author of the arguments, used not any
such word to provoke them, so I thought good to walk in the like stepes of
modesty, that the defense of the Arguments might be the more suitable to the
Arguments themselves: that the author of them might have no cause justly to
blame me, for disgracing his work and the cause it self by a contrary course:
and that the minds of the Prelates may rather be molified toward us. then any
thing more exasperated against us. If it fall out otherwise, and that our
mildnes do still increase their rigor, God (I hope) shall give us patience, to
endure whatsoever he shall suffer them to do unto us: together also with such
comfort, as all the world shall not be able to take away from us. For we are so
thoroughly persuaded, from the evidence of Gods truth, revealed in his word: and
sealed up in our hearts by his spirit, the cause wherein we stand, to be the
cause of Christ Jesus, that we say with Paul, Acts 21.13:
we are ready, not to be bound only, (neither only to loose our livings) but
also (herein) to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. I speak not this
seditiously (and therefore let no man so wrest my words) but I speak, with that
mind, and in that manner, that Paul spoke the former words, to signify our
readiness, for suffering any thing, which the Prelates shall do unto us: not for
doing any thing to resist them. Some of the^ harp much upon this string, (as
appears by wresting of our words in most malicious manner in the former answer
against us) yea, they seem also to think long, for some law or other of this
land to be wrested against us, to make some of us examples unto other, by
sheading of our blood; but if they should so fare prevail (which I hope they
shall never do, in the days of gracious and merciful King James, nor in the
days of any of his most Royal blood) let them remember the words of Jeremy in
the like case, Jeremy 26:14:15
to the Priests and Prophets that sought his blood, As for me, be hold I am in
your hands, do with me as you think good and right. But know you for
certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon
your selves, and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof: etc. For of
a truth the Lord has sent me to speak all these words unto you. Yea, let
them not only remember those words, but so also take admonition by them, that
in the presence of God, they be not guilty of high treason against our most
Christian Sovereign, against his Royal issue, and against the whole land, by
provoking the Lord, to inflict such judgments upon all, as the words before
mentioned do insinuat. We are in their hands, 2 Chronicles: 24 22:
ready without any resistance meekely to suffer any thing: but he that judges
righteous judgment, though he sit in the heavens, will look upon it, and one
day (as Zechariah in the like case said) will require it: as indeed then he did.

Not withstanding, I am so far from Prophesying or wishyng any judgment to
the whole land, (though I cannot but fear it) that I do, and will earnestly
pray, Joel 2.17 Gen, 18, 26
spare (this) thy people o Lord, and give not (this part of) thine heritage
into reproach etc. Yea, I do the more hope of mercy in sparyng us yet a while
longer, because of the great multitude of the righteous in the land: and
because perticularly of many that have been and yet are (under Christ) dressers
of this the Lords vineyard, that day and night (whiles many Prelates eat and
drink, and take their ease and pleasure) do pray the Lord of this his
vineyard, to let it yet alone, Luke 13:8
and to spare it a while longer. But for all this, whosoever shall procure the
blood of the meanest of us to be shead, (under whatsoever pretense) let them
know that such blood, shall cry louder in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, for
vengeance upon the procurers thereof, then ever we have cried in the ears,
either of our most gracious Sovereign (whom God long preserve in person, and
in vprightnes of heart) or of the High Court of Parliament for Justice. If
their shall be judgment merciles, to him that shows no mercy, what shall the
portion be of the cruel and blood thirsty? James 2:13: Pro: 21:13
Verily, though they cry, yet the Lord shall not hear them.

As also they that put the Martyrs to death, missed of their purpose, so shall
all blood thirsty and ambitious Papal Prelates. Epist: 243.
Sanguis martirum, semen Ecclesie. The blood of Martyrs is the seed of the
Church: and foecundi (says Calvin) sunt martyrum cineres. The very ashes of
Martyrs are fruitful. The truth may be oppressed, but it cannot be suppressed:
yea the more it is oppressed, the more it shall bud forth and spring. If one of
us in this cause should be put to death (though perhaps under color of some
other offense, by perverting of words, wresting of law or otherwise) yet for
that on, the Lord can raise up ten: yea, there is nothing that has made, or
does make the cause of Papal Prelates more odious, and the reformation desired,
more gracious and honorable (even with some that before the consideration of
that which I now say, were of another mind) then the unjust, and especially
the unmercifull proceedings of such Papal Prelates, against the seekers of
reformation. Philip: 1:28
Therefore in this case (as the Apostle exhorts the Philippians) we do in
nothing fear our adversaries, because as to be our adversaryes in such
respects, is to them a token of perdition, (if they repent not) so also, to be
hated and persecuted by the Prelates, is a like token to us of salvation, and
that of God. But being so confident, why do we conceal our names to our
writings? Because as Christ Jesus, notwithstanding all his heavenly fortitude
without any defect, did for all that, often times hide and with draw himself,
from the fury and rage of the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, till his
appointed time was come, so do we by this means, hyde our selves from the
violence of some of our Prelates.

To your conclusion I will answer little, because it has little, that has not
been answered before. Whereas you say that words are to be numbered to so great
states, I answer that words are not only to be numbered, but also for the
quality, truth, modesty, sincerity, and equity of them to be weighed and
considered; which if you had done, your whole labor had been spared. If you did
greiue in your soul, to hear us complain of our poverty, why do you by
bitter railing, false accusations, and most unjust and unreasonable wresting of
your antigonists words against all other Ministers of his sort, ad affliction
to our affliction: do you not know, that by this circumstance, David amplyfied
his co^playnts and deprecations against his adversaryes? Is this to judge
wisely of the poor? Psalm. 69 and 109.16 Psalm. 41.1.
Whereas you wish us to be a shamed of our feeding on shales, and husks at
other men's tre^thers, you mistake your mark. For this belongs not to us, but
to trencher chaplins, that gape after dead men's shoes, or live in miserable
hope of the livings of their brethren better then themselves, to be unjustly
deprived: and that in the mean time wait at their Masters table, till they
have said grace, and then sit down (if there be any roo^e) at the nether end,
after all the meat served in. Who also are glad of ij s. vj d. or five
shillings for examinyng some clarke presented, to a benefice, or that (which is
worse) do now and then take a brybe, for allowing one to be sufficient for the
Ministry, that is scarce fit to be a Ministers clarke, except only to help
on with the Surplice: who finally (for the most part) are every tawny coats
companion, to play at cards, tables (perhaps also at dyce) and at bowls etc:
Yea sometimes to drink, quaffe, and all most quid non. All your reasons out of
Arretius, against popular contributions (as you call them) and for set stipends
and tithes I pass over with silence, because the author of the arguments has
commenced no suit against you in this behalf. Therefore I leave you to fight
herein, with your own shadow. Touching you M. Powell, as Job said to Eliphaz,
Job. 16.3
What makes thee bold so to answer? Or as some other read it, what provokes
you so to answer? So truly I cannot but admire the bitterness, sharpnes, and
unrighteousnes of your pen (according as before I have discovered the sa^e)
against one that has used so great mildnes in all his Arguments.
Notwithstanding remembering the fall of Peter, and the means thereof, viz. His
being in the high Priests Hall, and not forgetting his gracious repentance
afterward, testified by many a salt tear, I do the more pity your present
state, by considering that provocation, which from other you have had, so to
write; and I do the better also hope of your repentance. For though it be more
advisedly to write an whole book, then on the sudden to speak a few words,
yet in other respects, I will not compare your fault in thus writing to the
fall of Peter, as equal thereunto: and if you had so fallen, yet would I not,
neither might I, despair of your risng. Only in unfeigned love toward you, I
do seriously exhort you, to take heed hereafter of any such service. Be not to
ready, be not to ready, to be commanded such a work by any Prelat whatsoever.
You may perhaps have some reward in the end of such pains: (such as men can
bestow upon you) but look more to that reward, that is in the right hand of
the great master of all rewards. Remember well, what Balaam a sorcerer refused
at the hands of King Balak, being sent for by very honorable messengers, to
curse Israel: yea, remember what a worthy answer he made, though himself were a
most unworthy man. Nu^b. 22.18
If Balack would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond
the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. Yea, remember (I say once
again) how constant he was in the said answer. chap. 24.1^
For he repeated it afterward, when Balak was much provoked, because he would
not satisfy him in cursing of the Israelits, and threatened as much evil
against him, as before he had promised and offered preferment. If such a person
made such an answer to a King, and were so constant therein, should the
Ministers of the Gospel be so easily commanded by less then Kings, to revile,
and (in some sort) to curse, so many worthy Ministers of Christ Jesus, which
have been valiant captains of his armies against Satan himself, and all his
forces? Whatsoever you have in this book written against them, yet I appeal
to your own conscience for the contrary: yea you have expressly before
professed, that you hope they are the Ministers of Christ Jesus, and in grace
and favor with him. Look therefore heerunto in time, before you be too much
hardened against him.

Touching the cause also it self, beware, yea, I say again beware, you sin
not for any worldly preferme^t, against your former knowledge. Plead not
better judgment now, then before you had. Psalm. 4.4
Examine your own heart (as it were) upon your bed, whether this plea be
insincerity, or only from regard and hope of some prelaticall advancment. The
more knowledge, the more dangerous it is to fall away. A little disease is
ofttymes the beginning of great sickness. Small hurtes also at the first
neglected, grow in the end to greevous and incurable sores. Remember Lots
wife. Luc. 17.32 Revel 2.^.
Finally remember from whence you are already fallen, and repent, and do your
first works etc: and let not the precious promises made to them in the word,
that endure to the end, be forgotten. Whereof he that has made them; make both
you and me partaker, for his sake in whom they are made: to whom be all praise
and glory for evermore, Amen.

Page Lin Errata Correct. 4 17 what what? 8 5 intended intended? 9 3 supestion
superstition 15 10 hage have 16 4 his this 18 1 put out the, 23 1 that love
they love, 31 12 they some. 36 1 properly in matters that belonging, that in
matters properly belonging: 35 15 answer order, 38 30 yield yield to 42 20 and
us: 34 21 was were 45 22 1 Pet. 2 Pet: 47 17 furthers furtherers 52 vlt. ad
thing, 56 6 foo: foolish 19 have have made 57 30 stamps stumps 58 29 them then,
59 4 put out two 61 7 extraor: extraordinarily 64 31 does does he 80 14 vi vis
81 24 and in 87 28 so so to be 91 1 and an 94 9 crow crown 95 18 depravation
deprivatio^ 28 depraved deprived 98 9 duce due 29 tenex tenax 106 11 performed
prefer, l, 24 the: for he: l: 25: there, for his 111 29 many in any 119 18
exressa expressa 121 11 he he that 123 28 appertune opportune 124 18 and and be
126 22 to of 129 17 the that, 21 therefore but 130 28 this the next, 29 should
shall 131 3 obedience obedience to men's precepts. 133 26 Ministers members 134
5 deffer differ 136 9 seat seat is 140 3 co^formitans, co^formita^s? l: 5, so,
for so have. 142 25 by and by 147 27 promises premises 149 27 as as are 150 22
Ethnicks Ethiks vlt. can cannot 151 29 but and 152 2 concluded excluded 16
herein herein repent 154 16 14 4 17 first fifth 156 7 we they

Marginall Notes.
page 48, lin. 31 and Prove. 6.19. page 49. l 7, John 9 30.31, page 125, l 25:
Cant 5.7.

page 131, l 16. Luk 10.7 for Luk 18, 7. and l. 25 before over, ad that.

page 132: l 17, Luk 9:2 for Luke 9.26.


