A TREATISE OF THE NATVRE AND USE OF THINGS INDIFFERENT.

TENDINGE TO PROVE, THAT THE CEREMONIES IN PRESENT Controversy Amongst the
ministers of the gospel in the Realm of England, are neither in nature or use
Indifferent.

John 18.23. IF I have spoken evil bear witness of the evell, but If I have
spoken well why smitest thou me.

Math. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when men reuil you and persecut you and say all
manner of euel against you for my sake falsely, Rejoice and be glad for great is
your reward in heaven for so persecuted they the prophets that were before you.

Printed 1605.

THE PRINTER TO THE Reader.
A Copy of this Treatisse by the providence of God coming into my hand: I
thought it behoofull for my Countrymen, that they should be made acquainted
with it, that by means thereof they might receive some light of the truth for
which so many suffer. The author whosoever he is has little cause to be
offended with it, The pains he has taken in it, does perswad me that he
cannot but desire the same in it self though danger and want of means might
hinder him from publishing it, But howsoever (good reader) accept it as a
testimony of my vows for the good of my Country, the weal whereof shall
ever possess me, though I cannot possess it.

Farewell.
A TREATISE OF THINGS Indifferent.
CAP. 1. Of things Indifferent ingenerall.
A Thing Indifferent (in the largest extent of sense) is any Mean between two
Extremes.

2 Extremes (properly) are the vtvttermost bounds and limitts of any thing
being in direct opposition one unto the other.

3 To be a Mean between two Extremes, is so to be seated between the^ as that
it stand equally affected to either, inclinnyng no more to the one, then to the
other.

4 Hence the Latins call: things indifferent, Res mediae. (Middle matters) And
that by reason of that analogy and proportion that is between them, and those
things that in physical or Mathematical Dimensions possess the middle place
in any line, figure or body: For, that is properly called the middle of any
thing, that in position being as near as can be, to both extrea^es, inclines
no more to the one then to the other, but is a like equally distant from both.

5 And they are therefore called, things indifferent, because in their relation
to those extremes between which they are seated, and unto which they are
referred, they stand indifferently disposed and affected to either, whence of
the Greeks they are called Adiaphora, unto which our English term does
precisly answer. For as that is just the middle of a line that leaves on both
sids so much to either extreme, that there is in respect of it no difference
between the one and the other: but unto, it both are equal and a like: So
those things are called indifferent properly, that without any difference, do
equally agree unto, or dissent, from those extremes, unto which they have
reference and relation.

6 By all this it may appear that things Indifferent, are not such, simply, in
themselves and of themselves considered, but as they are compared, and have
relation to the said opposite extremes, as the Center in a circle, considered
in it self, and by it self, is not the middle of any thing, but only as it
has reference to the opposite extremes in the Circumference: from any of
which it is equally distant, and in that respect only is it called the mean or
middle of such a figure.

7 The very essence therefore of a thing indifferent, consists in that equal
and indifferent reference and relation that it has to some two opposite terms
or extremes, unto which either in sense or reason it is compared, and by which
only it is measured. So that it is in the number of those things that in
schools are called relatiues, all which have only but an accidental being.
The subjects thereof being variable, according to the diverse references and
respects that they have unto diverse things. For as a man simply considered in
himself, is nether husband, Father, nor Master, but only in respect of Wife,
Child and Servant. And as the same man in diverse respects may be a father and a
son, a master and a servant: So nothing is in and of it self indifferent,
but only in relation and reference to some opposite extrea^s: And those things
which in some such respect may be indifferent, in some other respect may be
Extremes.

Cap. 2. Of things more commonly called Indifferent.
1 Though things indifferent may in that former generality, spread themselves
to any mediocritie whatsoever. Yet Custom the mistress of all speech, and
language, has restrained and limited the name, to such things only, as are a
Mean between good and evil. So that (to omit what in rigorous propriety of
speech may be comprehended under the name that is given unto them) In commen
use of speech, a thing indifferent is only, any mediocritie, between good and
evell.

2 The proper Extremes therefore of things indifferent, being good and evil,
they cannot (retaininge the nature of their indifference) communicate or
partake of either, for whatsoever stands equally affected to good and evell,
cannot in that affection, have in it, either good or evell: It being
impossible, that either of the extremes should be found in the Mean, without
destruction of the nature thereof.

3 Whatsoever then void of all evil, such they say are our Ceremonies. For
those things are good that are decent, orderly: and mea^es of edification.
participateth but the least measure of good: or void of all good, pertaketh
but the Such we say* and have proved the Ceremonies to be.
least degree of evell, cannot bear the name of a thing indifferent, For there
can be noe indifferency in that, which inclinneth more to the one extreme,
then to the other.

4 A thing indifferent therefore being a mean, between good and evell, it is So
are not these ceremonies
so seated between them: that it is as far removed from Good, as a thing not
evil, can be, and as far removed from evil, as a thing not Good can be, and
as near unto Good and evil, as any thing can be, that is neither good nor
evil. So that whatsoever is Indifferent, is neither good nor evil, whatsoever
is either good or evil, is not Indifferent, whatsoever is not Indifferent is
either good or evil.

5 Things indifferent, being equally divided from good and evil, are in like
manner, divided from all the properties of either, For every property being
inseparable from that subject, from the nature whereof it springs, noe one,
can be communicated to any thing but unto that, unto which the subject it self
communicates it self, If therefore the property of any extreme, be found in
a thing indifferent, the extrea^e it self: is to be sound likewise therein.
Which to imagine, is as absurd, as to look to find the Circumference of a
Circle in the Center.

6 No indifferent thing therefore as it is an indifferent thing, But they say
that the Ceremonies in controversy have: For that which is a grace and
ornament to Good, makes the better.
has power to make any thing good or evil, better or worse: For it is the
property only of good and evil, either to make or increase good or evil in
any thing.

7 That But such are the ceremonies inco^trouersie.
which does more hurt or good, then some things that are good or evil, is not
indifferent, but either good or evil: for nothing but Good, can exceed in
goodness that which is good, and nothing but evil, can exceed in hurt, that
which is evil.

8 Whatsoever This do the Ceremonies incontrouersie:
works upon any affection of man, stirring up in him, love, hatred, delight,
sorrow, zaele, malice, envy, Jealousy, hope, fear etc. cannot be apprehended
as a thing indifferent, by him in whom these passions are wrought. For it is
the property only of those things that present themselves as good or evil, to
begett and move such passions in the soul of man. For it is impossible that a
thing indifferent apprehended as a thing indifferent, should beget any thing
in the soul of man but Indifferency, and a Stoicall apathie or sencelesnes:
So that whatsoever a As our Prelates do the Ceremonies
man entirely loves and delights in, admireth, commends, persueth with
zeal, commands with authority. Whatsoever also a man shall abhor,
condeme, forbid, punish, persecute, he cannot in any sincerity affirm, that
he judges that thing to be indifferent, but to be in some degree either good
or evell.

9 The omission of that is indifferent, the commission whereof is indifferent:
and that whose Such is the omission of our cerem^n^es said to be and that in a
high degree.
omission is evel, is certainly good.

10 All the former premises considered this must needs follow. That To
command our ceremonies, is to command as the^ say, a great good yea, a
public common good.
to command a thing indifferent is to co^mau^d noe good, to for bid a thing
indifferent, is to forbid noe evell. But to use the ceremonies is to do much
good, if they edify the soul.
To do a thing indifferent is to do no good. To forbear a thing indifferent
None are more spitfully entreated then those that forbear these ceremonies,
and therefore sure their in they do much evil:
is to do no evell. And therefore to punish for a thing indifferent, is to
punish for no evell.

Cap. 3. Of things indifferent in special.
1 The essence of things indifferent, consisting in a mere and equal
privation of Good and Evell, there cannot be given any true kinds or degrees
of the^, For all priuattiues considered in them selves are of the same nature.

2 Though their be no true kinds of them, yet they may be varied according to
the diversity of those extremes with which they are compared. And therefore
may be distinguished according to the commen distinctions of good and evell.

3 That Good that has not an Evell opposite unto it in the same kind, cannot
be the extreme of any thing indifferent, and therefore cannot vary,
distinguish, or denominat a thing indifferent. as if their be not an opposite
color unto white, then it is impossible to imagine: how white should be an
extreme, to any other color, or any other color a mean unto it.

4 That which is properly a mean, must agree with the extremes in althinges in
which the extremes do agree: for example, If black and white be both of them
colors: that which is properly a mean between black and white, must be a
color also, for it were absurd to call any thing but a color, a mean between
black and white: so that the mean follows the common natures and qualities of
both the extremes, for as it is said before, That only is a mean that is not
only equally distant from two extrea^es, but withal is as near to both as may
be, which cannot be verified of that mean that shall not be found to agree with
the extremes in those things wherein the extremes do agree within them selves,
and therefore things indifferent follow their extremes. As therefore that
cannot be an extreme that has not in the same kind an opposite, so that can
be no medium to any extremes, that does dissent from them in that wherein they
shall accord and agree. So that that denomination and predication that belonges
to both extremes, belongs also to their mean. The mean between two opposite
Qualities is a Quality: between two substances, a substance, between two
actions, an Action: between two goods, a Good, betwee^ two evils, an Evil,
between two quantities, a quantity etc.

5 Hence it will follow, that no All substances therefore are indifferent only
by accident, in respect of some use
substance (as it is a substance) can be called thing indifferent, because that
there is a no substance that is evil as it is a substance. For an indifferent
substance, must needs (if there were any such) be a mean between a good and an
evil substance. If then there be no evil substaunces, it cannot be imagined
how there should be any indifferent.

6 The like may be said of all As also of all artificial which imitate
natures.
created species and kinds of things considered not only in their substances,
but qualities and dispositions. For the voice of God pronouncynge them all to
be good: none of them are evell, and if none of them be evell, none are
indifferent. For indifferent created things, can have no place: either real,
or imaginatiue, but between a created Good: and a created Evell. There is
therefore no Creature of God: nor noe created property or quality of any
creature: that is by creation a Thing Indifferent.

7 Also upon the said grounds it apperes, that there is noe And therefore there
cannot be made an absolut and perpetual law concerning any thing under the
name of indifferent, for a law binds only to good and punishes for evil,
and therefore to imagine a law that binds to the doing of a thing indifferent
when that thing indifferent turns evel^ as the most indifferent thing may, then
the force of the law cease.
absolute Indifferent thing: because their is no thing in nature either
absolutely good, or absolutely evell: It being impossible that any thing should
be an absolute Mean, whose extremes are not absolute, for where one extreme
is absolute and the other not absolute: the Mean cannot be absolute, for if it
be, it enclineth more to one extreme then the other, which is to distroye the
nature of a thing indifferent.

CAP. 4. Of the first distinction of things indifferent.
1 Things indifferent therefore, being to be distinguished according to those
distinctions of Good and Evell that are equally commen to them both, we are in
the next place distinctly to propounde the same, and by them accordingly to
distinguish the other.

2 First therefore Good and Evil is such, either in appearance only, or indeed
also. Whence arriseth the first distinction of things indiferent, for
accordingly some things are indifferent in appearaunce only, some indeed.

3 A Thing indifferet in appearaunce only, is that which is a mean between
that Good and Evil consider whether the mystical ^^ts of an Id^latrous
religion and worship, be not at least an evell in appearaunce and sheew, and
therefore cannot be so much as in appea aunce indifferent.
that is in sheew and appearance only. For that appears to be indifferent,
that being Good or evil indeed, appears or seems to be neither.

4 A thing indifferent indeed: is that which is a Mean between those things
that are in truth and verity Good or evell. So that such an indifferent is
void of all true good, If our Ceremonies were such. The Devil and Antich st
and all superstitious and lewd persons would not so much dote upon them, and
the h^^tes of so many learned and godly men would not burn against them as they
do
and evil.

5 As that which is good in appearau^ce only, is indeed either evil or
indifferent, and that which is evell in appearaunce only, is indeed either good
or indifferent, and that which is indifferent in appearau^ce only, is indeed
either good or evil, So that which is indifferent indeed, is in truth, neither
good nor evil.

6 As If Turcisme, Iudaisme. Page ^isme* and the grosest Idolatrye that ever was
amongst the Heathen were estab^ished by that law and authority that these
Ceremonies are, any point or percell thereof might be mainetained by the some
or the like g^ou^ds. That M. Hooker Couel^, W^lkes, mainetaine the
Indifferency of ^^es ceremonies And their is noe Arti. of faith and ^^ligion,
but (by the same method that the S^^veo^ uses against the Discipl^ne of other
reformed Churche^) it may be traduced and oppugned a^ most odious gro^se, and
impious.
the grossest evil may by mea^es of some counterfeit or shadow cast upon it,
be in appearaunce, the greatest good, and the greatest good may be disguised,
and in sheew transformed into the greatest evil: So with much more facility
may either of them by the wit of man have cast upon the^ the forms of things
indifferent.

So that there must be special heed taken that we admit not of all things as
indifferent indeed that present themselves to us under that name and shape:
Florentines can disguise and collor any thing. and it is now a days the common
exercise of the greatest wits of the world. to transform good into Evil,
Evil into good, and both into Indifferent so that in these days scant any
thing is as it appears or appears as it is.

Cap. 5. The 2 distinction of things Indifferent
1 Good and Evil is either Some of our (...) Divins think all external things
Indifferent: which sheews that they that talk most o^ them, know lest what
they are.
Internal or External, according to which difference arises a second
destinction of Things Indifferent.

2 An External Indifferent is whatsoever has in it nether inward good nor
What inward hurt and evil is in these Ceremonies they best know, that are best
acquainted with the state of their flock.
Evil

3 An Internal Indifferent, is whatsoever has in it, neither inward good What
inward hurt and evil is in these Ceremonies they best know, that are best
acquainted with the state of their flock.
nor evil.

4 Something The Doctor of Oxford ask what hurt can a wise man see in a square
Cap and a surplice. Inded their is no outward hurt or evil in it, but it must
be considered wether their be not any inward hurt theirin, for if it can be
proved that by them, the souls of many are poisoned with superstitious
conceits then it is apparent that they have inward hurt in them.
External Indifferent may have in it internal good or Evil and somethinges
internally Indifferent may have in them outward Good or Evil

Chap. 6. OF the 3. distinction of things Indifferent.
1 Thirdly Good and Evil, is either of it self or by accident: which also make
the 3 distinction of things Indifferent.

2 An Indifferent by accident is a mean between those Extremes that If it can
be proved that these Ceremonies are but evil by accident, (they being not good
of themselves) it is enough to argue that they are evil and not indifferent.
For if many things that are good in themselves, be to be for borne, when by
some accident they do hurt* much more ought a thing in different when it
hurts, though but by accident
are Good and Evil by accident and not of thems^lues: for that must needs be
only accidentally indifferent, whose Extrea^es (by which it is limited and
defined) are but accidentally good or Evil: so that whatsoever is Indifferent
only in relation of some accidental good or Evil is Indifferent not of it
selse but by accident

4 Ergo their is no thing absolutely Indifferent (as our Divines of state
drea^e) but ^y some circumstaunce of time, place, person, use: it may be either
very good, or very evil.
There is nothing so good of it self, but it may be made Evil by accident,
nothing so evil of it self but it may become good by accident. Nothing so good
or Evil but it may become Indifferent by accident, nothing so Indifferent of it
self but it may become Good or Evil by accident.

5. Unto this head may be referred, such things as are Indifferent by
comparison for as there are some things good simply that are Evil in
comparison. and somethings Evil simply that are good in comparison* so also
there is some good and Evil, that in comparison with others is Indifferent.

Cap. 7. OF a 4. Destinction. of things Indifferent.
8 THings are Good or Evil either Actually or Potentially. A possibility of
evil in a thing indifferent, makes it evil and worthy to be removed Nature
teaches to prevent evils, and (...) a man cannot do in prevention thereof,
then to leave of a thing in it self indifferent which does no good and may do
hurt.
So are also Things Indifferent.

2 A thing actually Indifferent, is that which has in it neither actual good
nor hurt.

3 A Thing Potentially Indifferent, is that which in act does either hurt or
good, though in po^sibilitie it may do neither.

4 There is nothing actually Indifferent but is potentially good or (a) evil,
Their is nothing potentially, only indifferent but it is actually either good
or evil. Th^rfore their is nothing absolutely Indifferent.

Chap. 8. OF the 5. Distinction of things Indifferent.
1 LAstly, Good and evil is either Corporal in respect of the body, or
spiritual, in r^spect of the mind, In which respect, Things Indifferent do
always vary.

2 A Thing Indifferent in respect of the body is any such thing that applied
to the body, does it neither good nor hurt. As that which makes a man neither
rich nor poor, Strong nor Weak, bewtifull nor deformed, hungry nor yet
satisfied, sick: nor healthy. etc.

3 That may be Good Circumstaunces of time and place do also v^ry the things
of th^s kind exceedingly. For that in some time and some place is in different
to so^e body, that in an other place, and at another time is Good or evil.
to the body in one respect that is evil in another et contra and that may be
indifferent unto it, in one respect, that is good or evil in another. Also
that may be good or evil to one part of the body that is indifferent to
another part. And a thing may be indifferent to one, that is good or evil to
another.

4 A thing Indifferent in respect of the mind or Soul, is whatsoever having
reference and relation to the soul Either indeed or appearaunce of it self or
accident: actually or potentially.
does it neither good nor hurt.

5 The Goods and Evils of soul: are either dispositions, qualities, or
habitsin the soul, or such actions as proceed from them. As Thoughts, words,
deeds. All which are called Moral. A Moral good: is whatsoever in Man or from
man is agreeable and correspondent to the law of Nature, Reason, or the Diui^e
Law of God revealed supernaturally in his word. Unto this head are to be
referred: all true wisdom, knowledge, under standing, providence, discretion,
and all actions flowyng from the same. Also all Moral virtues, as, Justice,
Temptera^ce, Holiness, etc. With all the Actions proceedyng from them. All which
are squared and ruled by some or other of the former Laws. A Moral Evil is
whatsoever is any ways repugnau^t (whether in general or particular) to any
of those former Laws. As Ignorance, Folly, Injustice, intemperaunce etc. with
all Actions proceedyng from them.

6 Those things are in a Moral respect indifferant (whether they be Qualities,
inclinations, Habitts or Actions) That have in them (b) neither virtue nor
vice. See ch^p. 8. s^ct ^^^^^gent.
Herein such Actions of man's will are most frequent, that are neither
commanded nor forbidden in the word of God.

7 There is no Action of man's will: so indifferent So that (by M. Hookers ^auor)
a man may by taking up astr^^ or a ^^sh. commit a Moral vice* For example if
he should use to d^e it in the time of p^a^e^.
but the doing thereof (by some circumstau^ce) may be repugnaunt to the law of
God and by consequent be hurt full to the soul of man.

8 An Action that in some one respect unto some one special law, is
Indifferent in respect of some other law may be Good or Evil. As that action
may be either Religious or Superstitious, that has in it neither Temperancie
nor Intemperancie.

9 Any action done by man that is not commanded Such are the Ceremonies in
controversy: They are no where in general or special commanded, no more
then the shave^ crown and holy water, and yet* they have been and are the
special means and occasion of the Scisme of many hundred Brownists Of much
superstion in many 1000. ignorant prorestants, and of confirmation of many
infinits of wilful, Papists in their Idolatry, as is most evident. Also (if
it be a sin to dislike our Lords spiritual) there is no one greater cause
that moves those that the profane call Puritanes to do it, then these
Ceremonies, which if they might be freed from, as all other re^ormed Churches
are. There is no other Civil obedience or subjection due unto them: that they
would refuse to perform, in as a low a degree as any other whatsoever.
by God, either expressly or by direct consequent, that is a means either of it
self or by accident of any hurt either to the body, or soul, of a man's
self, or of his Neighbor, either by bringing evil into them, or nurishyng or
increasing evil in them, cannot bear the name of an Indifferent action For
there is no indifferency in that, which being not required of God. (and
therefore is not Good) does hurt (any ways) a man: which must needs be against
the law of God. For the some of the Law of God being the love of God and our
Neighbor, And Love ai^ming only at the Good of the loved. That action, that
(besides the law) does any hurt to any, must either have an exceeption in the
law, or else be against it, and the^ it cannot be indifferent.

10 Moral Actions whether virtues or vices, respect either God imediately, or
our selves or our Neighbor, as is intimated before. So do also all
Indifferent Actions.

11 That Action is indifferent in respect of God, that does neither advance nor
obscure the glory of God. For this is the only Good or Evil we can do unto
God.

12 There is no Action that a man can do by the power of his will, but either
in it self or by accident, it does either glorify or dishonor God, and
therefore no action in respect of God, is merely and absolutely indifferent,
Such are the Cemonies and rites that are peculiarly acted in Divine worship, if
they be good and lawful.
but thereby God receaueth some Honor or dishonor.

13 All Actions of Religion (amongst which What honor receaueth God by our
ceremonies? It is certain that Antichrist receaueth great honor by them.
those are special that are peculiarly done in Divine service) are (if they be
as they ought to be) in a special manner good, tending more directly to the
glory of God, then any other Actions, therefore no action of Religion, whether
it be Moral or Ceremonial, is indifferent but either good or evil.

14 No Action of Religion whether Moral or Ceremonial Such are our Ceremonies
else they are not Indifferent.
grounded only upon the will of man, and not upon the word of God, can bring
any special glory to God, and therefore no such Act can be an act of Religion,
but of superstition, and therefore cannot be indifferent.

15 There being some mystical Ceremonies of Religion Good: and some Evil. If
there be any mystical Ceremonies indifferent, they must then in some special
and material point differ from the Evil, even as far as from the good. But
there is no mystical Rite of religion, Crossing in Baptism being no more
commanded nor no less forbidden then breathinge upon the child, or
anoylynge, which are rejected as evil. It must needs com nearer to these, then
it does to Baptim which is commanded.
but does come many degrees nearer to the Evil then to the Good. And therefore
there can be no mystical Rite of religion indifferent.

16 An Evil Ceremony of Religion being therefore only Evil because it is
forbidden of God: A good Ceremony of religion is therefore only a good
Ceremony because it is commanded of God: and that must be an indifferent
ceremony that is neither forbidden nor commanded: But all ceremonies in
religion that are not good, are evil, and therefore there are no indifferent
Ceremonies of Religion.

17 As no man by his sole will, can make that ceremony good in divyne worshipp
that God forbids to be done their in, or make that Evil that God
commands to be done therein. So can he not make that which is but indifferent
to be Good: for he cannot make that to be commanded of God, that is forbidden
of God, that (though it be not forbidden) is not commanded: If therefore what
Ceremony of religion soever is good, be commanded of God, and if every
Ceremony of religion ought to be good, and if whatsoever ceremony is
commanded of God is not Indifferent. Hence it will follow: that no Ceremony
of Religion is indifferent.

18 Thus much of actions indifferent having reference to God. Those actions of
man are indifferent in respect of a man's self, or his neighbor, that being
committed, bring neither moral hurt nor good unto him self or them. For those
actions are Evil to the doer, and such as hurt his soul: that are a means of
bringing either upon himself or upon his neighbor any evil forbidden. And
those actions are good to his soul, that are a means of affecting with any
Good commanded, himself or his Neighbor.

19 Whatsoever therefore doing a man no Good is a means either to But we
shall be ready to prove, that such is the law that requires these Ceremonies.
take from a man any good thing that God has freely granted unto him, as
life, health liberty, name, honesty, piety, etc. Or to bring upon a man that
evil: that God otherwise with houldeth from him, that cannot be indifferent.

20 All such human laws therefore, that Much more those Laws tha^ lay
greater penalties upon the omisi^i-of some Indifferent, then the omission of
the greatest good: or commission of the grossest evil and as do the Canons and
laws that require these Ceremonies.
upon any penalties, bind m^^ to those things that are confessed indifferent,
which are such things as God has left to the free liberty of man to do or
not to This hinders not but that the Magistrate may and ought (if it be for the
good of the common weal) command fish days, and such lik, the neglect
whereof, may do much hurt, and the observation much good, for in such cases
eatinge of fish and flesh is not a Thing indifferent, but that which men stand
bound either to for bear to do according to the Civil Laws of Magistrates.
do: is a deprivyng of me^ of that liberty that God has granted unto the^,
and therefore such a law is neither good nor indifferent, But evil to the
soul of him that enacteth it, though not of him that obeys it. For it is no
indifferency in any man to take that away from a man that God has freely
given unto him.

21 All Moral actions, of men that are good or evil, are either private, or
common and public. The common and public, are either Domestical,
Political, or Ecclesiastical. Actions also in their Indifferency may vary
according to their diverse references to these.

22 A private Good or Evil action, is that which affects with good or Evil
only a man's own person that does it, and which spreads not to the Good or
hurt of any other (except secondarely and by accident) as he that eats and
drinks) does himself only good properly: Though secondarely and by
accident, he may, in that strenght he receaueth, thereby do his family or the
common wealth good.

23 That action is Indifferent in respect of a man's private self, that does
his own private Person no ways any good or hurt.

24 Those Domestical, Political, Ecclesiastical actions, are good, or evil,
that tend to the good or hurt of a family, common wealth, or Church, and those
are indifferent, that being done do bring neither good nor hurt, or as much
good as hurt unto any of the said societies.

25 That may be good, evil, or indifferent, to a private person as he is a
private person, that is not so unto a Family, Common wealth or Church, or unto
him, as he is a member, of all or any of them.

26 That may be Indifferent to be done by a Family, or the Commen wealth as it
is such, That is evil and not indifferent, to be don by a Church. That may be
indifferent to one member of a House Church, or commenwealth, that is not
Indifferent to another* that may be law full or Indifferent for the Church to
do in one place and at some one time, that is unlawful in another place and
at another time

27 All which premises or the most of them being granted, it will easily
appear to any that can rightly apply these principles and general
assertions that the Ceremonies in present controversy in our Church are not
(as is pretended by the forces of them) merely Indifferent* but either
excellent parts of our religion or notorious parts of superstition.

FINIS.
APRIL. 12
Summa Summae.
THE PRELATES TO THE Afflicted Ministers in this Realm.
ALL those that wilfully refuse to obey the King in things Indifferent, and to
conform them selves to the orders of the church authorized by him, not
contrary to the word of God, are scismaticks enemies to the Kings Supremacy
and State, and not to be tolerated in Church or commenwealth.

But you do wilfully refuse to obey the King in things indifferent and to
conform your selves to the orders of the Church authorized by him not
contrary to the word of God Ergo

You are Scismaticks Enemies to the Kings Supremacy and the State, Let them
prove this assumption; but by one Argument* and we will yeald. But it is to be
noted That the Prelates still take all things contained therein as granted and
without quest^on, where as we have proved and offer to prove the contrary.
and not to be tolerated in Church or Common wealth.

THE AFFLICTED MINIsters, to the Prelates.
All those that freely and willingly proforme unto the King and State, all
Obedience not only in things necessary, but Indifferent commanded by law.
And that have been always ready to conform themselves to every order of the
Church, authorized by him, not contrary to the word of God, are free from all
Scisme, Friends to the Kings Supremacy, and to the State, and unworthy in this
manner to be molested in Church or Commenwealth.

But This Treatise: and other books lately written, and exhibited to
authority, do prove the Assu^ption.
their is none of us that is deprived or suspended from our ministry, but has
ever ben ready, freely and willingly to perform unto the King and State all
obedience, not only in things necessary but Indifferent, requyered by Law,
And to conform our selves to every Order of the Church authorized by him not
contrary to the word of God. Ergo.

We are all free from Scisme, Friends to the Kings Supremacy and the State, and
most unworthy of such molestation in Church and Commenwealth, as now we
sustain.


