DE^ECTION OF Ed* Glouers heretical confection, ^ately contrived and proffered
to the Church of England, under the name of A Present Preservative. Wherein
With the laying open of his impudent slander against our whole Ministry, the
Reader shall find a new built nest of old hatched heresies discovered, (and by
the grace of God) overthrown: together with an admonition to the followers of
Glouer and Brown. By Steph. Bredwell, Student in Physic, Seen and allowed.

1. Io. 4. 1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God: for many false Prophets are gone out into
the world. LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to sold by Edward White,
dwelling at the sign of the Gunne at the little North door of Paul's*

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful his very loving Cousin, M. Thomas Hussy Esquier,
Stephan Bredwell wishes all increase of Christian knowledge, zeal, and
worship.
THe life of a Christian (Right Worshipful) is aptly compared, by that
skillful teacher S. 1. Cor. 9. 24. and Hebr. 12. 1.
Paul, unto the running of a race for a game. The goal is the end of this
life, and the game or price, the crown of glory. Now as they that strive for
games, carefully prepare their bodies for greatest fitnes and vantage, to
their enterprise, and thereto long before, apply their whole study and
invention, even so will every true Christian, advise of the race of his
present life, as, at the end thereof, a price may be given unto him. Which
similitude, as it has great light to induce us to conceive the exhortation of
scripture studies, and heavenly meditations, so yet shall it further enforce
us, if we consider it clothed in the fit circumstances of time. For like as a
man that is to strive for a mastrie, does so much the more busy himself in
all his preparations, as he perceives himself to be more urged with
shortness of time, and other difficulties in the place of his trial, so will the
shortness and euilnes of our time (if we way it well) quicken our care, and
stir up our uttermost endeavor, to frustrate even all the inconveniences thereof
whatsoever. And certainly if we stand upon this circumstance of time, whether
we behold the shortness or the euilnes thereof, either way it will be
concluded, that if we love our own salvation, and hope to attain that crown
of life, it stands us upon, to shape out so much time, to the search and
study of the scriptures of God, as that we may worthily be numbered with the^,
which the Prophet David says, do meditate upon Psalm. 1.
the law of God both day and night. For if the Lord justly require obedience
to his will, and withal mercifully have left us the exact form thereof in
his word, how shall not we be guilty of our own blood spilling, if by
ignorance we err, and by erring enkindle his hot displeasure against us? The
shortness of time must whet us on more egerly, whether we think of the
ficklenes of man's life (whose breath is in his nosthrils) or else of the
dissolution of all things, so ready now at hand. The shortness and uncertain
state of this life, must tell us in the mids of our temporal profits and
pleasures, when our affections would begin to feed upon them, and our hearts
offer to sit down in them, that it may in no wise be so with us, we may pass
through as with a light touch, the necessary and lawful use of these things,
but our dwelling must still be in removing tents, until we come to Canaan.
Yea it must daily cry in our ears, break off, and be brief in all things
belonging to bodily provision, for great matters have you to set in order, and
very little time to do them in. Also it shall vpbraid unto us our negligence
(if we fail in this watchfulnes) as sauouring strongly of hypocrisy: when it
shall stir up the witness of our own conscience against us, that we are not
so careful for heavenly things, as for the earthly. Now if to the shortness of
man's age, we adioyne the ruinous condition of this world, ready (for ought we
know) every moment to fall from the foundations (and which shall be done
suddenly without warning when it comes) there seems to be no corner for
foolish security to hide her head in. But the arguments that might be drawn,
from the iniquity and malice of the present time, are yet (if it were
possible) more vehement. For whether we labor to learn the fear of God, or
yet set forth our selves to practice the same sincerely, in either way is
danger, and offensive places to fall upon. The Devil knovveth his time to be
but short, and therefore he bestirreth his stumps most busily. Against we
should learn, he frayeth us with heresies and dissentions in the church.
Whilst we are learning, he seeks to ensnare us with unsoundness. If both
these fail him, yet in our practice, he will heap upon our backs reproaches
and persecutions, till we groan again. It is hard to say, whether those
that he holds back with the first engine, or else they that he overthrows
with the two latter, be more in number. That there are very many of the
first sort, we may gather by this common and profane objection: What
religion should we rest upon, when we see so many opinions in the world? Or
who should we believe, when the Preachers agree not among themselves? This
objection (I say) being commonly in the mouths of high and lovv, as it
nakedly bevvraieth their shameful ignorance in the scriptures, so does it
openly discover the rottennes that is in their hearts before the Lord. For
were it not, that they have settled themselves upon Zeph. ^.
their lees, and like it best of all, to be ignorant of the way of truth, lest
their darkness should be controlled by the light thereof, they should find in
the scriptures strong leauers, to lift out of their way this stumbling block.
The Lord by Moses tells the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1^.
that if a false Prophet should rise up amongst them, to seduce them unto
strange gods, they should not harken unto him, but take it, as a matter
wherein the Lord did prove and try them, whether they loved him with all
their heart, and with all their mind, or no. To the same effect speaks
Paul, There must 1. Cor 11. 1^.
be heresies among you, that they that are approved may be made manifest
among you. And our Savior Christ has told before, That false Christ's and
false Prophets should Math. 24. ^4.
arise, in the last times, so as to seduce (if it were possible) the very
elect. And immediately adds, Behold I have told you before verse 25.
hand. Now if the Lord have dealt so graiouslie with us in his word, as to
leave us instruction therein to furnish us against these offenses, and we
delighting in our own shame, wilfully deprive our selves of the benefit
thereof, can we think by that means to escape the revenging hand of the
almighty? Surely common sense does tell us, that if such men had but one
right spark of the love of God in them, they would be so far of, removing or
abstaining themselves, from the study of the scriptures, at the sight of these
swarms of heresies, as that much rather, they would sise out far larger
times thereunto, and bend their wits with greater force, to sort out the truth
from every falsehood: especially seeing the issues of truth and falshoode, are
life and death. Others look into the lives of professors, and willingly from
thence take occasion of falling. Do you not see (say they) that many of these
professors, say well, but do evil? Nay some of them fear not to multiply
their sin with blasphemy, saying, There is not the best of them all, but
will do as other men do, when occasion is offered, they mean, when sin
comes to hand. In deed many professors give evil example by their lives, a
great number being hipocrites. Yea amongst the sincere, many show their slips
and falls, whilst yet the new man is tender and not come to his growth. If
any man at the sight of these things, either defer his coming, or yet
slacken his hold, woe shall be his portion. For these things also has the Lord
forewarned us of, saying, Because that iniquity Mat. 24. 12.
shall be multiplied, the love of many shall wax cold. Is not this a fair
watchword? Then he adds, But he that endures to the end shall be saved. Which
is a flat priuatio^ of the health and salvation of all such, as shall take
offense, and give back, at the sight of iniquity in others. Those that say,
There is not the best of these holy professors but will, do as others do,
speak it not as a known truth, (for it is a manifest lie) but because sin
has such dominion over them, as that it can not once enter into their heads,
to conceive what a case the mortification of a Christian may be: like as it is
said in our proverb: He that is in hell, thinks there is no heaven. But
howsoever these wretches feed themselves in their sins, with this imagination,
that all do accompany them, (as though all were well, if they had company
enough to go to the devil,) yet (if the Lord grant them not better grace) they
shall find, (all too late,) that they were much deceived, in many their
supposed companions. Those therefore that are the Lords* will be so far off
discouraging, or cooling, by the evil examples of professors, as that rather,
their heed, study and watchfulness, will be doubled in them by it. The same
likewise I say, by all other iniquities, and injuries of time, that can be
reckoned. Do we see secret and open persecution or violence prepared for us?
Let us remember that the disciple is not above his master, nor the Mat. 10. 24.
servant above his Lord. Do they lade us with odious names and titles, and
deride our simplicity as Ismael did Isaac? Let us not Genesis 21. 9.
be discouraged. Is it not joy to us, to be like our Lord and master Christ?
If they called the father of the household Beelzebub, Mat. 10. 25.
how much more his servants? Yea, let the profane filthians even afflict us
for holy exercises, and cry out of us, as not the friends of Caesar, because
we wincke not at their wickedness: let them (if they will) disdain us even
the air to breath withal, and themselves under the cloak of our disgrace,
continue in all dissoluteness: we shall not saint hereat. It shall but
declare us to be the true children of God and not bastardes. And Heb. 12. 6. 7.
^.
in this case, let the comfortable words of him that suffered a thousand times
more for us, stand before our eyes: Verily, verily I say Ioh. 16. 20.
unto you, you shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: you in deed
shall be sad, but your sadness shall turn into joy. And again, And you
therefore now shall be holden in heaviness, but I will see you again, and your
verse. 21.
hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. Tribulation is
the furnace of (...) the Lord, if we be gold and not chafe, we shall not be
turned into ashes by it, but made ^ore pure from our dross. The sound corn
^^ideth winnowing, it is the chafe that the wind carries to and fro. If we
suffer with Christ we shall be glorified with him. and there is no comparison
of our suff^^nges Romans 8. 17.
here, with the joys and glory that shall be revealed unto us afterward. For
after verse. 18.
the affliction of ten days, if we be faithful Apoc. 2. 10.
unto the end, the Lord shall give us a ^^owne of life. And we shall see the
day when the son of man shall send his Angels which Mat. ^^. 4^.
s^all gather out of his kingdom all things that ^ffend, and those that work
iniquity: and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing
verse. ^^.
and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the just verse. 43.
shine as the sun in the kingdom of their father. Whosoever, on the contrary
part, prefers the pleasures and ease of this life, to those ioies of the
life to come, or shall divide themselves (according to the politikes of this
world) as though they could enjoy them both: let them in time again consider
that saying of Christ: If any will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Mat. 16. 24.
cross, and follow me. Let them (I say) consider it, lest the cunning carriage
of themselves in this life, according to the dissimulations of men, to avoid
these worldly afflictions bring them not, a day too late, to hear tha^
sentence of Christ, to their condemnation which at first was set down for
their instruction. Mat. 10. 37. 38.
He that loves father or mother above me, is not worthy of me: and he that
loves son or daughter above me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes not
his cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me These things I had
(right worshipful cosen) as standing in your presence, to speak unto all
those that should come to read my book. They that are ignorant of these
things have need to hear them. And as many also as have pure minds, may be
excited and stirred 2. Pet. 3. ^. ^.
up, by their remembrance. Now the first fruits of my simple labors in these
matters, I offer (as it were) thorough your hands unto the Church of God: both
in regard of many courtesies, wherein you hold me bound and deeply endebted: as
also in that I have experience of your great desire, to see the foggie mistes
of ignorance and error dispelled, and the clear light of the shining truth, to
break forth, in all things. How well the same is in these points performed by
me, I cannot say: I humbly submit me to the judgment of the Church. This only
my conscience bears me witness of, that besides the glory of God I have
sought nothing in all this business. If any think strange, that one of
another profession has done this: I suppose they will easily be satisfied, when
they shall consider, that the doctrine of our ministers, being grieuouslie
slandred, seemed rather to require, this defense and testimony from some of
their hearers, then from them selves, in their own behalf. If any yet further
ask, while I have done it. This is my answer: if some other else had done it,
I hope I should have received it with thanks giving. Fare ye well most loving
cosen, and according to your wonted kindness, receive this simple token of my
good will. The Lord bless and preserve you, and youres, unto his heavenly
kingdom.

London the XX. of the IX. Month. Your kinsman most loving and assured in
Christ, Stephan Bredwell.

THE FIRST PART against his wicked slander.
IN your words ( E. G.) to the reader, I understand the disease you propounde
to cure, and in the rest following, the causes of the same: the disease is, the
evil life, or (to use your own words) the sorry life of many, which seem
Zealous professors. The causes are poison, and the giuers of that poison. The
poison is, A persuasion that albeit men be Usurers, Extortioners, Drunken,
Leacherous etc: as that no sparckles of virtue, or grace appear in them, yet
if they at any time, condemn this evil in themselves, approve the contrary
godliness, believe that their sins are pardoned in Christ, love these their
teachers, and be beneficial unto them, and desire to hear their delectable
Sermons, they may (though they cease not from their former sins) assure
themselves for all that to be the dear children of God, sanctified by
Christ's spirit, and so elect and praedestinate to salvation, as that they
cannot possibly be damned, what sin soever they commit. The sickness I
acknowledge (...) too grievous, and this poison, I confess, is as infectious
as that of the Cockatrice. Who be these merciless murderers, that dare infect
the f^^de of Christ's flock, with this mortal poison? You say, privy
libertines, and carnal gospellers. A cold answer, in s^ hot and necessary
suit, an unprosperous cure follows such slight discovering of causes. But
why do you not name them unto us? why are you so dark in so dangerous a
matter? If they be worthelie suspected as accessaries, that upon an inquiry
of murder, which they saw, direct the pursuers with doubtful and ambiguous
notes to take the murderers: then must I charge you with as great a guiltines,
that seeing so many souls poisoned daily with this pestilent doctrine, and
knowing (as you seem) the dooers thereof, could find in your heart, to pass
them unnamed. But let us see, whom your dark description, well wayed* pointe^h
us unto. Through the policy of Satan (you say) this poison is proffered, by
such men, as make a great sh^we of godliness, and yet denay (as you hear) the
power thereof, and that with most goodly, and godly words of righteousness,
regeneration, repent^unce, sanctification, mortification, and what not, to
seduce the simple soul? By this, though men of your spirit (like enough)
perceive your meaning, yet what is this to those, that know you not, and are
unacquainted with your phrases* You give slender address hereby to the simpler
sort, that I say little of the offense you lay before them, to stumble on,
whilst your description gives no special difference, but has all the notes,
pointing out the best sort of preachers. If you ask me, whether those be the
best preachers, that make a great show of godliness, and yet denaie the power
thereof. I answer, if you had left this note so to the liberty of men's
judgments, and not restrained them with ( as you hear) to apply the same to
your only accusation, and thereby to judge, I would not, neither could I
have occompted this note, in any wise, appliable to a godly preacher. But now
seeing the note to stand in these words* [ This poison is proffered by men that
make a great show of godlines] and the other words, [ And y^^ denaie (as you
hear,) the power thereof] to be but an enfors^^ conceit of your own perverse
understanding, we have good cause to cry out of you, that have given us no
other notes, to know the poisoners by, then such as may agree (especially in
the judgment of the unexercised) with the truest teachers of the gospel.
Again, in that sentence, and by that clause, is dangerously ins^nuated unto
the simple, that even the preachers of godliest outward show (and God only
judges the heart himself) with the most grave and godly terms, of
regeneration, sanctification, and such others, do nothing else, but vnder*hand,
and privily (as you spoke) sow those venomous seeds of poisonous doctrine
above mentioned: which, as it shall appear (Christ willing) to be as false as
the Devil himself, so lays it open a wide gappe, unto all Atheism, on the
one side, and on the other side, armeth the Darts of the persecuting papists,
as it were, with wild fire, against us. Their father the Devil, who is a lier
from the beginning, has of late years, erected them a new Forge in the Shop
of the blasphemous Jesuits: how heavy a judgment is comne upon you, that (of
a christian) are become a minister of matter unto that brood, to coin new
reproaches, and reuilings, against the christians, and saints of God? But say
you in sadness ( E. G.) that this abominable doctrine, by you mentioned, is
openly taught by men of great godliness in outward appearaunce? Naie do you
say, that it is taught generally, or for the most part, in the Church of
England? (speak plainly man, and be not cawtelous like the old serpent.) If
here you would shrink, the want of such exceptio^s in your writing, your
quarelling at such points of doctrine, as they all do hold with sweet
consent, the general accusation of the lives of the gospellers, together with
your wilful departure from our Church, are as a wall behind you, so as you
cannot hide your head. And if you stand forth, and abide by it, then I ask
you, where is your evidence, where be your proofs and witnesses? Have you no
deed of theirs to show against them? Nor none to depose with you, and yet
would you be believed of your bare word? You (I say) a private man,
accusinge the Church of God in a whole kingdom? What said I (in a kingdom?)
Naie, throughout Christendom: for in preaching the redemption by Christ, they
have all trodden one common path with our ministers, as app^ereth both by their
confessions, commentaries and printed sermons. If this sin be not in time
repented, ( E. G.) think not otherwise, but in that great day, before the
judgment seat of the Lamb, you shall plead guilty, holding up your hand
with Satan, th'accuser of Gods children. But you say, If they shall blame me,
because I bring not their meaning in their own words, let them show their
meaning to be otherwise then I have set it down, or else all that fear God,
and love goodness must needs abhor them etc. Naie, rather it was your part,
putting on the person of an accuser, to have built herein, upon so sure a
ground of proof, as that, either you would have brought forth their own words
or writings, saying so much expr^s^ie, or (at least) such assertions, and
sentences, as out of which, you might reasonably gather it, by necessary
consequence and implication. As for them, if their daily preaching could
beat no better understanding into your head, yet their infinite volumes, which
every where confute this madness, might have made you blushe at your rashness,
and have caused your words to stick fast in your mouth, that they might
never have come to light. You in this importunate arrogancy, provoking them to
show you another meaning, give us plain enough to understand, that your
self are altogether unacquainted with their writings: which if you be, what
madness has possessed you, to condemn the things you know not? If it be
otherwise, and that you grant, you are well acquainted with their doctrine,
and therefore do of knowledge, charge them with this heinous sin, then can
it not be, but that you have borrowed y^ iron forehead of some Jesuit, which
knows not how to blushe, even in the most desperate insolency of lying, and
forgerie. Now I hear you say, But that men may be sure I belie them not, but
speak that, which is too true of them, it shall be now showed, how slightly
they pervert holy scripture, for the proof of that which is laid to their
charge.] First let us call to mind, ( E. G.) the question, wherein lies the
controversy betwixt us. This is it, Whether the preachers of the gospel
teach, that Usurers, Extortioners, Covetous men, proud men, Leacherous
persons, drunkardes, gluttons, etc. Having no sparkles of virtue or grace
appearing in them, and continuing without ceassing in the foresaid sins,
may notwithstanding assure themselves, to be the elect children of God, so
as they cannot possibly be damned what sin soever they commit: only so, that,
they sometime condemn this evil in them selves, approve the contrary
godliness, believe that their sins are pardoned in Christ, love these their
teachers, and desire to hear delectable sermons. This you stiflie auouche, I
utterly deny it, and put you to the proof of it: you begin to prove it
thus: They pervert holy scriptures to that end, therefore they say so much in
effect. I deny they pervert holy scriptures to that end. Now give us your
instances. The first place (which you call poison) is this: Paul (say they) was
a sanctified man, and the child of God, and yet he fealt no good thing
dwelling in his flesh, but the evil fruits thereoof: yea, he fealt a law,
or power of sin in his members, forcing him to do the evil he would not,
and to leave undone the good he would, and so leading him captive to commit
sin.

If you had meant sincerely, you would have produced nothing of their own
against them, without notinge their names, or coatinge such places in their
writings, as might witness your report. This by the way. Now to the place,
whereby you would gain your cause, if I should grant unto you, that this place
of Paul is misinter preted by them (which you shall never gain at my hands)
yet, how can you out of this place make good your accusation against them? Was
it for lack of will, or skill, that you show not how you gather your
conclusion, out of this assertion? That your will is good, experience teaches
us: that your skill is not sufficient, argues more pride. Remember ( E. G.)
that you said not barelie you would show how, They pervert holy scriptures,
But how they pervert them, to prove this, which you lay to their charge? Now if
you show a hundredth evidences, and yet never a one, that specifieth that land
you claim, what judge will give sentence on your side? So, though it were
possible for you, to charge the ministers of the gospel, with many other
crimes, and yet fail in the proof of this one, you have now undertaken, all
this labor in your sorry book is lost: naie, I would it were so lost, as it
might not be found, to redouble your condemnation. But let us examine that
which you have left at liberty. If by this place you said any thing at all
for your cause, then thus you reason: All that understand this place of Paul,
thus do it to conclude that which I have laid to their charge, but the
Preachers of the Gospel generally understand it so, therefore they do it to
that end. But that the first part of your argument has no truth in it, I would
grant your conclusion. For I grant the preachers of the gospel generally, do
interpret that place so, and therefore I rightly pronounced of you, that you
accuse not the Church of England only, of Libertine preaching, but al others
of the gospel likewise, throughout Christendom, with it. But we will not yet
throw away your argument, but rather prosecute it to the vt-most, to see if
any pith of reason may be found in it. This place of Paul, thus understood,
what can it conclude? Forsooth, that a regenerate man, and elect child of God,
so long as he bears flesh and blood about with him, cannot be free from all
sin. The reason is, because so notable a vessel as Paul, testifies so-much
of himself. Now sir, is it all one, to say, the regenerate man is not free
from all sin, with this, That Drunkards, Gluttons, Leachours, etc. though
they continue in their sins without ceassinge, may nevertheless assure
themselves to be saved, if they believe their sins are pardoned in Christ,
etc? And do all that conclude the first point, auouche the latter leasing? I
hope, by this time, your impudency in this point is open. The second
instaunce you bring us is this: But they object that Paul witnesses of
himself, that he had a prick in the flesh, and that God would not deliver
him from that weakness. Go to, if this interpretation of Paul's prick be not
aright, what makes it for you? Are you so short witted ( E. G.) as so soon to
forget what so lately you assumed and took upon you to show: namely, how they
pervert holy scripture to prove that wicked doctrine which you charge them
withal? Else, why do you not uncover the danger of this interpretation, and
make manifest, how it leads to that terrible downfall of pestilent
persuasion aforesaid? All that have common sense in them, see that this place,
(noting only holy Paul to have his infirmities) hatcheth no such monster, as
you, in a spiritual drunkenness, have dreamed of. And thus you go forward to a
third instance. It is set down (say they) for a certain point of doctrine,
Gal. 5. 17.
that the spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh lusts against the
spirit, so that ye cannot do the things ye would. This, confirming the
interpretation of the first place of Paul, sets the picture of your mind,
as it were in a glass, before mine eyes: wherein I see, that some godly men
having taken pains with you, to remove you from your errors, and namely from
this, which you hold, That the regenerate man has full power to abstain from
all sin, and to do the works of righteousness, have in their conference urged
you with these places of Paul, which you resisting, as a man void of all
understanding, can make no difference between light and darkness, life and
death, heaven and hell. To the fourth place you bring, They will ask then from
whence came that will to do well, etc.] Proving good the former interpretation
of the seventh to the Romans, and affording never a word for your monstrous
accusation, what should I say, but that it is truly verified of you, A true
witness delivers Prou. 14. 25.
souls, but a deceiuer forgeth lies. The fifth objection, wherein you say [
They make the inuer man, and the spirit of Christ all one] as it makes neither
too nor fro, for your cause, so is it a bastard (perhaps) of your own
begetting: the Preachers of the Gospel teach it not. This man is desperately
bent to slander, that forgeth false objections to feed the fire of his
quarrel? If any your friends ( E. G.) think it not likely that you forged it,
because you made it no more pregnant for the proof of your cause, let them
know, that as this argument has not virtue enough to clear you of just
suspicion, though you be suffered to enforce it as far as you can, so
contrariwise it being exactly weighed in the impartial balance, of upright and
circumspect judgment, does not only point in secret, to the forgery, but as
in certain cyphres also, uncover the cause, and (as it were) the cogitation of
your heart therein. For whilst it proves nothing your accusation, but is only
used by you, as a plain song, for your furious pen to descant upon, what else
appears it, but some new affected standing, wherein you would set to sale
other far fetched wares of your pelagian heresy? All which stuff (the Lord
willing) shall be sorted out, and examined hereafter, in his fitter place. Your
sixth instance, of there perverting scriptures, to teach that wicked doctrine
you accuse them of, is this: That they say, the holy Ghost means him only,
to be the servant of sin, and of the devil, who willingly with delight,
commits sin, not misliking, nor striving against it. If (I say) this
interpretation were not aright, yet it says never a word, ne gives one back,
nor wink, to witness against the teachers thereof, the intoilerable
accusation which you, as one that cannot blush, have laid against them.
Therefore take unto you this saying of wise Solomon, as a glass wherein to see
your self, if possibly any prick of remorse may pearse into you: Foolishnes
is joy to him Prou. 15. 21.
that is destitute of understanding, but a man of understanding walks
uprightly. And a little before: The mind of the prudent seeks Verse. 14.
knowledge, but the mouth of fools is fed with foolishnes. What I can say,
to warrant their assertion, you shall hear anon, after I have once thoroughly
showed, how honest a man you are of your word. Yet or I pass, let it be noted
in this place, that of these six witnesses, which you have (indeed) not
orderly produced, but forcibly haled into the Court, to testify for you, not
one of them would do you that favor, as to give you a good countenance, but
presently turned their backs, so soon as the matter was but repeated, and in
a deep silence departed. Wherefore now at length, being somewhat spent of
witnesses, and hardly distressed in your cause, you set forth your self, to
entertain your judges, partly with the odious repetitio^ of your unproven
slander, and partly with a new craft of subtle insinuation, as though our
Ministers indeed by an argument of comparison, did drive at some such
conclusion as you have enforced upon them. For answer whereunto, I must tell
you, first, that whilst you proceed thus, you betraie the very issue of your
cause into my hands. For whereas in the beginning, you knew that our Preachers
said not that in express words, which you accuse them of, and yet charged
them still to teach no other thing in effect, you grew on then to this point,
that you would prove it, by showing how they pervert the holy scriptures to
that end. Hereupon we have joined our issue, hitherto your proofs have
failed, and now you fall a shifting, as though you would alter your issue. So
that A wavering minded man is unconstant in all his ways. But I am content to
make no gain of this vantage, my cause is full so good, as that I doubt not to
overthrow you, although I yield you all those liberties and helps, that may any
way (lawfully) be used of you in this case. Now let us hear you. These men (you
say) do hold, That the spirit is in their belieuers, though they be wholly
possessed of pride, covetousness. etc. because we see fire may be raked
under the ashes, and the sap may be in the root of the tree, and yet appear
not. Which men? where be they? when heard you it ( E. G?) (lying is no lawful
help, I can not grant it you.) Or if you heard it not, perhaps you might
read it, tell us, what writers do so apply that similitude? for this he
brings not a syllable to satisfy us. O beastly impudency. O Babilonish
pride. O palpable impiety. But I will stay my self in exclaming, though this
man has neither stop nor stay in lying. But do you persuade your self ( E.
G.) there are any so seruilely addicted to your heresy, as that they should
easily brook this lothsomnesse, of your lying and forgerie? for my part,
though I know (as experience of all ages has confirmed unto us) that there is
no heresy so foul or vgglie, but it shall find too many fit subjects to
receive* it (such is the just judgment of God, upon those that rest not them
selves in his truth) yet am I in very good hope, Romans 1. 24. 26. 2. These. 2.
11.
that this gross impudency, and apparent sin of slander, which thus
reigns in you, throughout all your writing, will give as clear light as the
sun, unto the consciences of all those that have any feeling, not only
that your accusation is without proof, but also that your opinion, of the full
power, of the regenerate man, over al his ways, to abstain from evil, and
keep the commandments is, (besides the falsehood of it) a very monster,
fearful and venomous, not to be approached of any, that would avoid the
poisoning of their souls. But of this more fully in his place. Mean time, let
every faithful brother know this, that the ministers of the Churches,
professing the gospel, generally throughout Christendom (I speak not of any
limbs of the devil in corners) do use this similitude, of fire raked under the
ashes, and sap in the roots of the trees, only in the case of some afflicted
conscience, and not otherwise. As for example: there be many dear children of
God, that either immediately upon their new begetting to the faith, or shortly
after, in the growing up of the same (God in his wisdom so seeing it good for
them) are, not so daungerously, as grievously (for the time) assailed of
Satan, with diverse storms of doubtfulnesse, dreades, and discomfortes, and
amongst the rest, with the terror of the remembrance of some special time,
wherein the fruits of their faith appeared not: with which terror, so soon
as ever he has dumpped them, he slacketh no time (presently to waielaie them
with this twofold snare: to wit, either that their faith (which before they
had stood upon) was no true faith, but a counterfeit (says he) because it was
not fruitful by works, or else though it were at first a true faith, yet now,
they had lost it, by their own negligence: by one of which hooks it comes
often to pass, that the humbled soul is hurried (as it were) to the gates of
hell, before it obtain deliverance. In which case, when the minister of
Christ's glad tidinges, finding any, shall say to him: this argument that
Satan opposes you withal is sophistical and false, and he does it, but in
the rage of his malice, to drown you in doubtfulnesse and despair. For, the
intermitting of good works, does not necessarily conclude a voidnes of faith,
no more then you can truly say, of fire under the ashes, or of a tree whose
sap (as in winter) is withdrawn to the roots, either that the one is quite
put out, or the other utterly dead. By this similitude (I say) if the
minister of the gospel shall detect the fraud of the devil, and reach a hand
for the distressed soul, to be lifted out of the mire by: what does he
worthy blame therein? or not warrantable by the eternal word of truth? Thus
let the faithful reader in this place, observe, that this shameless mouth,
has brought nothing by this place, but one vnaltouchable slander to maintain
another. After this, he retnrneth to his issue again, as though he would show
how our preachers pervert the holy scriptures for the end aforesaid: though
with no better success then before. Thus he sets down the places: Christ's
sheep Io. 10. 28.
(say they) can never perish, neither ca^ any man pluck them out of his hands:
for whom he loves, he loves Io. 13. 1. Philip. 1. 6.
to the end, and in whomsoever he has begone this good work of regeneration,
in them he will perform Romans 11. 2^.
it: for the gifts and callings of God are without repentance.

Were it not for the simple souls sakes, which by this confident writing you
suppose to carry away, no man would file his hands with so senseles an
adversary: for as a man that has a fever, relisheth the things he takes
(many times) according to the humor that afflicts him, so that (sometime)
the most pleasant supping is bitter in his mouth, in like sort fares it with
you (E. G.) that can hear of our preachers neither the scriptures alleged, to
prove the regenerate subject to sin many times, or that the elect can not
utterly fall away, but straightwaies you must needs conclude that they
maintain gross wickedness to reign in the children of God, and warrant them
of salvation, notwithstanding, upon most light conditions. But would you were
no further gone, that I might stay, with comparing you to a simple feuerish
man. I would your ague had not affected the original of sense, and hurt your
understanding, so that now, even as a man frantike, is no longer ruled and kept
in order by any, but reiecing the counsel of his best friends, accuses
them most as otherwise ill minded, because they most restrain him in all his
will, that might hurt him: in like sort, you, being troubled inwardly with
some heriticall frensies, would make men believe that the doctrine of our
preachers, tends to some general evil, because in truth, it most
notoriously labors against your errors: and will not suffer you peaceably
to broach, neither your heresy of free will, nor y^ against the Lords eternal
predestination. Otherwise (I say) were it not, that you are carried in the rage
of these frensies, maliciously to kill their credit, with so odious an
accusation, whiles you in the mean time, may get placing for your pestilence,
all indifferent men see, that neither these your last places, nor all the
instances you have hitherto urged, do any more justify you, for an honest man
of your word, (that said you would show, how they pervert holy scriptures to
justify the wicked) then the fruit of the crabtree, answers the beauty of
his blossoms, wherewith before, both for color, plenty, and largenes, he had
given greater expectation then any aple trees: yea so much less tolerable
are you herein, then the crabtree, inasmuch as his fruit, yeldeth commodity
to the use of man's life: but this your book, bane and poison, to destroy as
many souls as embrace it. This your shameless slander, you have devised to
make seem likely, by patching unto it, some foolish conditions, of your own
forging, as though the preachers of the gospel should make open sale of the
graces of God, to all the unclean beasts of the field, even for their own
promotion and bellies sake: which having alike, both proof and truth, with
all the rest, I am sorry, that the father of lies, could obtain so much
liberty to lead you.

THE SECOND PART against his heretical doctrine.
Hitherto I have detected your impudent slander ( E. G.) now I come to the
points of doctrine between us. And to begin at your first instance, I
confess, we are taught by the preachers of the Gospel, that the regenerat,
whilst they live, are not free from sin: and that this is an argument
whereby they prove it, namely, because that special vessel S. Paul,
confesses so much Romans 7. 15. 18. 22. 33.
by himself. You, having a quarrel to the question, flatly deny that Paul
confessed any such thing of him self, touching his regenerate state, but only
of his estate, when he was a carnal man, sold under sin. etc. Your reasons
such as they are, let us first examine. Because Paul in that Chapter confessed
verse 14*
him self a carnal man, sold to be subject to sin, therefore he meant not
there, of his regenerate estate. If to be regenerate and yet carnal in diverse
respects, could not possibly be verified of one man, your reason were good,
but now, because there is no man so perfectly regenerate, but that still he is
withal, partly unregenerate, and carnal, therefore Paul in regard of this,
might well call him self carnal, though so far forth, as he was regenerate,
he was otherwise. And this he declares plainly afterward when he says, I
do not the good that I would, but the evil that I would not, that do I. Now no
verse. 19.
man does any evil unwillingly, but by reason of a contrary power that is in
him resisting evil. Wherefore also, the Apostle accounts it not absurd,
according to those diverse respects, to call himself in the 25. verse; both the
servant of the law of God, and of sin. And the rather I must enforce this
argument, because although you deny all the rest of y^ chapter, to concern
Paul as a regenerate man, yet the 25. verse you acknowledge to that effect. And
in y^ same verse (if your eyes had not dazzled) you might have seen that the
Apostle after his thanks giving, for his deliverance from the danger of that
same body of death, against which he had exclamed, confesses that even then,
as touching his mind, he served the law of God, but in his flesh the law of
sin. Which place is as clear as the sunshine, not only to show the
falsehood of your first reason against our interpretation of the 7. to the Romans
but also to prove, so your great shame, the truth of the general assertion
aforesaid: namely, that The regenerate are not free from sin. Yet these are
not all the foiles you receive by it, for it cutteth likewise the throat of
your second reason, before it have time to draw one breath of life. for where
you say, Therefore after this, he thanketh God in Christ, that he was delivered
from that body of sin, which made him to do that evil he would not, and to
leave undone the good he would. You would make us believe, that Paul in this
place was a changed man, so as he could no more sin unwillingly, as before:
which purpose of yours, now you see, is prevented, and therefore your reason
spoilde: yet ere I pass, I must admonish the Reader, to consider of what
spirit, this sauoureth, that in alleging the 25. verse, which sounds thus,
I thank my God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Now therefore even I in my
mind, do serve the law of God, but in my flesh, the law of Sin. He brings
it out thus: He thanketh God in Christ, and so cutteth off all the rest, but
chopping into the room thereof these words, that he was delivered from that
body of sin, which made him to do that evil he would not, and to leave undone
the good he would. A sentence (I confess) of like length, but neither of like
nature nor truth. If any say for E. G. (For now I understand he is dead) that
he added that part, not as to have it taken, for the words of scripture, but
the sense of the place: I could easily admit that answer, were it not for the
sakes of some, of his sect, who (as I understand) can not read at all, and yet
are very stiff in his opinions, I know not, how they have been this way
abused. Besides, it is not comuenient, in citing of scripture, to sow any
pieces of our own into it: without putting some partition wall betwixt, or
bringing in the servant, in some differing weed from his master, that the one
be not taken for the other, of the comers in. Moreover if he bring those
words for the meaning of the place, yet he is too impudent, and blasphemous,
presuming to speak directly against the spirit of God: which it is clear
that he does, when the text says, Paul had yet such an enemy of flesh about
him, as served the law of sin, and this man says, Paul was now delivered
from that body of sin, as made him do the evil he would not: Two things in
their substance, flat contrary, though change of words, at first, would
seem to cover it. But lest we should marvel at this dealing, he makes a
custom of the matter, for the next place he brings out of the beginning of
the 8. chap. where he would feign make S. Romans 8.
Paul speak, according to his humor, for whereas the text is, There is now
therefore no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. You must understand it,
as it is thus paraphrasticallie delivered by him: To them which are in Christ
Jesus, there is no condemnation (or no such body of death, which is the cause
of our condemnation) for they walk not after the flesh (as he was forced to
do by the law of sin, when as he did the evil he would not, and left undone
the good he would) but they walk after the spirit, and so do the good they
would. His bolonesse here as before, whether it savor of Babylon or no, I
leave it to the christian Reader to judge. But three things must be observed
and examined, wherein beyond al reason and warrant, he abuses this place of
the Apostle. First, for the word [ condemnation] by that, he will have
understood the body of death: therein without any necessity, transforming
the effect into the cause as though he would co^pel the holy ghost to speak
for his purpose: but without all probability: both forasmuch, as that word is
no where used in that sense, as also this verse, repeating the argument of the
5. chap. 1. verse, of the same Epistle, concerning justification by faith
only, proved by an argument drawn from the effects, touches nothing at all
that special objection, which he answers in the latter end of the 7.
chapter, whereby he was occasioned so to handle that conflict of the flesh and
the spirit. So that then we see if ( E. G.) would have taken this word (
condemnation) in his natural sense, and not maliciously perverted it, as one
that would wilfully run into the pit, he should have been so far off
finding his body of death in it, as that much rather the sun shine of
comfort would appeared unto him, to have banished the night of dark discomfort,
that came upon him in his sickness: when as this place rather would have told
him, there is no condemnation toward thee if thou be Christ's: agreeably
whereto the spirit says in the 33. and 34. verses afterward, [who shall lay
any faults against the elect of God? It is God that justifies: who is he
that shall condemn? It is Christ that is dead, yea rather that is risen
again, who sits also at the right hand of God, and entreats for us. The
second thing I observe, is concerning these words: [They walk not after the
flesh] which walking he takes to be al one with that, S. Paul calls, the
law of sin in his members, whereas he might as well have compared a beast unto
a man: for by that other law in his members, it is manifest he meant the power
of sin, which gate oportunities many times against him, although in his
inner man, to his might, he made resistance: as all open eyes may see, both by
the opposing of the law in the members to the inner man, as also by the whole
suite and circumstances of the text. Contrariewise, in the other place, Paul
speaks of the mind giving obedience to the law of the members, which he
calls To walk according to the flesh, as when there is no resistance made to
sin. So that her^ the holy Ghost speaks of a whole man willingly going
after sin, there, of a man, falling but sometimes through infirmity: also
there he shows in what respect the law has a work of death in our mortal
bodies, (according to the objection in the 13. verse) but here he teaches a
note to know our selves truly justified by (even our sanctification) according
to the matters handled from the beginning of the sixth chapter. Thirdly ( E. G.)
expounds [walking according to the spirit] to be a doing of the good we
would. Either this is idle, or else it sounds a full ability to do the good
we would. And then I see well, one wilful master or Pilot, is able to cast
away a ship full of men. Let those that have been hitherto addicted to this
man, look better to them selves, he has given the ship in this place, one
notable stroke, upon the rock of free will, they can not endure many more
before they make shipwreck of faith. But he will prove it (I trow) that they
that walk after the spirit, can do what good they would: because (forsooth)
the Apostle affirms of him self in Christ, that the law, rule, or power of
the spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, did free and deliver him from the
law, rule or power of sin, which before prevailed over him unto death. The
Reader must be advertised, that this clause [ which before prevailed over him
unto death] grows not unto the text, but is the addition of a presumptuous
spirit. And whereas he would seem to borrow it from the places before cited
in the 7. of the Romans he blasphemeth, there being no syllable to prove that
sin prevailed over Paul unto death, but the flat contrary. And whereas to
make the word [law] in both places, the fuller to serve his turn by, he
sets to all his strength to stretch it out, with these words, [rule or
power] let him take heed, lest, the text thereby suddenly breaking, he receive
some dangerous fall, for by [rule and power] he would have us understand an
absolute rule, or vngainsaid jurisdiction, which the spirit of regeneration
brings us, by which, sin should be so banished in us, as no more to be able
to show his face, wherein he plays Satan's part with us, to beguile us with
false allegatio^ of scripture. not caring, so his sense might stand, though he
set the scripture at odds with it self. For as Satan tempting Christ, to
throw him self Mat. 4. 6.
headlong from the Pinnacle, solicited him thereunto Psalm. 91. 11. 12.
with It is written: [he shall give his angels charge over thee, and they shall
hold thee up in their hands, that thou hitte not thy foot against a stone:
dissembling in the mean time, that this must n^edes be understood of an
action done in the fear of God and a warranted calling, the other sense being
flatly gainsaide by Chapter ^. 16.
the place of Deuteronomy. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: so in like manner,
this man, in strayning here the text to this his sense, would ^aine have us,
not to see, our freedom by the law of the spirit, to be meant (in that place)
a deliverance, from the danger of sin and death, which the law brought us
into before, as Paul had proved in y^ 7. chap. 7. 13. verse, 6. and although
the 25. verse of the same chap. (which E. G. him self allows to be spoken of
Paul a regenerate man) must necessarily enforce it: when as the Apostle says
there, Therefore even I now in my mind, do serve the law of God, but in my
flesh, the law of sin. For otherwise, there is a plain contradiction betwixt
this place, and the 2. verse of the 8. chap. if this man's interpretation
thereof may stand. Well if you will not yet believe him, now he sends you to
consider the whole two chapters going before, and following after the said 7.
chap. And what shall we find there for his purpose? forsooth That the Apostle
does plainly define the regenerate man to be so dead to Romans 5. 2. 4.
sin, as that he can not live in sin, but in righteousness, (that is as
long as he continues a regenerat verse. 7. 13. 19.
man) as that he does leave the committing or serving of sin, and he does
serve and do with his members righteousness, as he before did serve or commit
sin, he has his fruit in holiness (and not in sin) and the end everlasting
life. He is not in the flesh (or a carnal man as was Paul before his
delinerance from Romans 8. 9. 10.
the body of death) but he is in the spirit, his body of sin being so
dead or mortified in respect of sin, as that he lives in righteousness,
and does not the verse. 11. 13.
deeds of the flesh. Has any man heard a more uncertain answer? if this
man walk not like a giddie-braine, I never saw any. He is off and on, here
and there, feign he would speak out and he dare not. The Apostle (says he)
does plainly define the regenerate man, to be so dead to sin, (who looks
not here for a great blow) as that he can not live in sin. Is it no better?
alas poor faintling. But you may perceive his heart was good, eue^ to have
stricken out his blow at length, that it might have sounded, The regenerate has
power not to sin any more: (which is ye stroke he must strike, if he mean to
war against our said assertion) but he knew well enough, that then, all ye
scripturs which there he cites, would have laid hands on him. Again, next
that, he interprets [ committing sinne] by [ serving sin] and contrary wise
in the next sentence [ serving sinne] by [ committing sin.] And at latter
end, saying, He that is in the spirit, lives in righteousness, and does not
the deeds of the flesh: he both offers an inkling to his Disciples, to take
hold of his meaning, and withal cunningly reserueth a vantage to himself: to
wash his hands of the blooude of those, he should thereby seduce, as Pilate did
his hands from the blood of Christ: otherwise he would have delivered plainly
thus: he that is in the spirit, lives in righteousness, so that he does not
any deeds of the flesh any more. To have thus therefore pointed out his
fraudulent dealing (for the simple souls sakes) is answer enough for this
place: for if I should take any other course therewith, I see not how a
needless strife of words can be avoided, as where no clear meaning can be
found, and I am warned, not to answer a Prou. 16.
fool according to his foolishness, lest my self also become like him. I
shall meet him more plainly hereafter, without these starting holes, and that
variable monster of often regeneration with him, (which here he leads tied in
the string of a parenthesis) and then shall they both feel (by the grace of
God) the strong hand of truth to encounter them. Hitherto I will reduce, as
fittest for this place, the residue of the controversy, concerning the 7. to
the Romans which he as a man, that had waged battle, both against truth, and
all good order, has bestowed other where. He acknowledges these six reasons
to be brought (by our side) out of the 7. chap. to the Romans to prove Paul's
acknowledging of sin, even in his regenerate estate. namely 1. In that he
says there, he had a will to do well. 2. A love of goodness. 3. A loathing of
evil. 4. A strife against the flesh. 5. A delight in the law of God, concerning
the inner man. 6. That service of it in his mind: All which he supposes to
swoope down, with the crooked tail of one false answer, to wif, that These
were no true affections, nor endeavors in Paul, nor any other, then do fall
into a natural man, knowing and approving by force of conscience, the law of
God to be good, according as the Apostle speaks of the Gentile in the first
and second of the Romans. I acknowledge the disciple of A. C. and doubt Dial.
theol. in Epist. ad Romans
not (in the strength of the Lord) to meet you both in this quarrel. Let us
first try out the bounds and limits of the natural man, by the line of Gods
word, that so the dwelling of the righteous may enjoy the just space of his
allotment. Then afterward, we shall easelier examine, the affections and
endeavors here spoken of, whether they concerned Paul, as he was profane, or
regenerate. The natural man is to be viewed, as he is simply disposed in
himself, or as he is affected by the written law coming to him. Again, of
those that are simply in their naturals, some live in a deeper ignorance,
others in a greater light of knowledge. In the former rank may be raunged
the people of India, Gronnland, Canibals, etc. Whose lives (save for some seed
of religion, argued even by their Idolatrous worship, which shows they are
persuaded there is a God) seem to differ but a little from the very bruit
beasts. Among those of greater knowledge, let us reckon the ciuiler nations,
even the Romans and Graecians themselves: Romans c. 1. c. 2.
and of all these, the Apostle Paul makes two orders: one both impudently
committing sin, and also Cap. 1. 32.
defending the doers thereof. Another sort more staunch and restrained so far
of defending, as Cap. 2. 1.
that they reprehend sin in others. And this being the best kind (as I may
speak) of natural men, yet if we look upon him well, we shall find, (though he
carried a general course of life, bent unto virtue, God so brideling his evil
affection, like as he does the affections of many civil men in this life, so
far forth, as he sees it expedient, for preservation of the generality of
things) that his heart was never taken with love of the law of God, his mind
never delighted in it, much less his will and purpose bent to practice it: all
the civil honesty of his life, coming from some unclean fountains of
worldly respects. For some are restrained and kept back with shame, some with
fear of laws, from breaking out into many sorts of filthiness: others take
the honester course of life, with propounding to themselves a ready way
thereby, to estimation, promotion, authority and rule: but not one seeks the
Lord and his glory, (the device of man's heart Psalm. 14. ver. 2. 3. Genesis 6. 5.
and ^. 21.
being evil, even from his youth) and therefore not one loatheth evil, and
wills good, according to Gods law. Which point also the Apostle Paul well
proves, when he says: We are not 2. Cor. 3. 5.
fit of our selves even to think any thing, as of our selves. And again, It is
God that works Phil. 2. verse. 13.
in you both to will and to perform, according to his frank benevolence. So
thus we see, the best natural man, by his own light, cannot go so far as to
have a will or desire to serve God, so far is it of the truth, that E. G.
says, The love of goodness, loathing of evil, strife against the flesh,
delight in the law of God, etc. which Paul speaks of in the seventh of the
Romans, may proceed only from the force of conscience, knowing and approving
naturally, the law of God to be good. Now let us consider what effect the
written law takes with the natural man, and what proceeding To. 7. ver. 7. 8.
9. 10. 11.
he makes by it. Paul expresses this in his own person, where purposely he
shows, what place the law took with him before he was regenerate. To wit,
By means of it, sin took verse. 8.
occasion to beget all manner of lust in him. That it revived sin in him, That
in stead of verse. 9. verse. 10.
life it wrought death in him. And finally, that the law was so far unable, to
crush the force of verse 11.
sin in him, as that sin much rather found a vantage to it self, by means of
the Commandment, to seduce him, and to kill him. And in this respect, is the
law called a Husband, that verse. 5.
begets fruit unto death, the law of sin, and Romans 8. 2. 1. Cor. 15. ve. 56
death: and The strength of sin. Thus we have a sight also of the natural
man, as he is affected, when the written law approaches him, and ye see what he
is, even so far from being better disposed by it, and framed to that tough
battle and conflict, that Paul describes in himself. From the 14. ve. of the
7. chap. to the Romans to the 25. verse.
as that contrariwise, he is become by it much more sinful, and his affections
brought to a greater outrage of rebellion, then before. How far the hipocrite
by his enlightening, can go, beyond the mere natural man, I am not ignorant, as
appears hereafter. But neither has the hipocrite any such conflict, as
whose faith and religion is never unfeigned. Therefore to conclude this point,
since the natural man, neither by his own light, nor yet by the light of the
law, can attain to be a party in this combat, he must of necessity, yield the
place to his better, namely to him whom the Lord has sanctified by his spirit,
and made fit to endure it. And so it follows, that those, that have armed
thus the natural man, and brought him forth to the lists, for so honorable an
enterprise, must be content to suffer loss of their labor, and receive the
regenerate man (whom the king of kings has made worthy) into his place. The
rest of E. G. answer to this place, (as, that Those affections Paul
mentions, might be some good motions, and inspirations of the spirit of
Christ, which wicked men may have,) being but a toye of his idle brain,
without proof, a begging of the controversy, and sufficiently by this that is
said, disproued, I will spend no further time withal. And thus having gained
this place of the seventh to the Romans. I conclude by it, the general
question thus: If Paul regenerate was subject to sin, then every regenerate
person is subject to sin, but Paul regenerate was so, as this place apertly
proves, therefore our Ministers teach truly, that no regenerate person is free
from sin. This they confirm by two other places of scripture: the first is,
whereas Paul witnesses of him self, that he had a prick in the flesh, and
that 2. Cor. 12. 6. 8. 9.
God would not deliver him from that weakness. E. G. says, They pervert this
scripture: What is his reason? Because The Apostle shows, that this was a
prick painful, not delightful to the flesh, as is sin. Well, thus then he
reasons, Sin is delightful to the flesh, but this prick was not deliteful to
the flesh, therefore this prick was sin. I answer, if by flesh he understand
the unregenerate part of Paul, as usually the scripture does, in such cases,
then is it false that he says, [ This prick was not delightful to the flesh]
but if by flesh, he mean whole Paul, (as by his next words [ It was a
messenger of Satan sent to buffet his flesh, not to tempt him to sin] he must
needs do, or elshee corrupts the text) then the first part of his argument
is false, where he says: Sin is delightful to the flesh. For it is proved
before, that sin is loathsome to the regenerate man, and he does it
unwillingly* whenever he falls into sin. So here we see, this man would
sophistically beguile us, with a failation of Homonymie. Concerning that he
says, This prick was a messenger of Satan, sent to beat or buffet his flesh,
not to tempt him to sin. Let the Reader note, first, that [ of] is here rashly
put in betwixt Messenger and Satan. Secondly he shows his accustomed
sawcines, in restraining to a part, that, which the text attributes to the
whole: as where Paul says: The Angel Satan did buffet him. E. G. says, He
did buffet his flesh. His meaning thereby he shows soon after, for he would
have us to understand by this prick and buffeting of Satan, nothing but the
outward humblings, and afflictions of Paul's body: which afterward indeed he
reckons up, as things wherein he made his profit and rejoicing also. But what
reasons brings he, that the place must thus be understood? Forsooth Because
Paul rejoiced and took pleasure in these his infirmities, which he would
never have done, if they had been vices, and such fleshly infirmities as they
speak of. First mark his words. [ Such fleshly infirmities as they speak of]
What may he mean by this think you? If you read the first page of his book,
where he makes a flood of slandrous spewings, to drown (if it were possible)
all the sincerest Preachers of the Gospel in, you shall see, he would have the
simple take it thus, that our Preachers do extenuate and hide the greeuousnes
and ouglenes of the grossest sins in the world, with the nice and soft term
of infirmities: which is so open a lie as it bewrays, there was no fear of
God before his eyes. Now for his reason, if he will thus mean by infirmities,
whoredom, drunkenness, oppression, etc. We are so far from understanding them to
be any cause of Paul's rejoicing (who was far from their infection) as that we
deny, the temptations, lust, and eggings of sin, (which here we take for the
prick in his flesh) or the buffets of Satan (which are, by his continual
stirring up those lusts of concupiscence) yea or yet his infirmities indeed,
(whereby he means his weak condition, and necessary subjection unto these
things) to be any true causes of his glorying: no more (if you remember well)
then the law could be truly said Romans 7. 5. 8.
to be the cause of sin, for that the natural man was the more stirred up to
rebellion by it. And yet it is true that Paul gloried in his infirmities: not
in respect that they were uncleanness in the sight of God (for in that regard
they humbled him, and kept him from being proud of his revelations) but in
respect that they were the way that the Lord had chosen both to do him best
good, and also to advance his own power by: for so he plainly expresses it,
when he says, Therefore 2. Cor. 12. 9.
I glory rather in my infirmities, that the power of Christ might dwell in
me. And the divine answer it self said to him: My grace is sufficient for
thee: for my power is made perfect through weakness. If beside this refutation
of his reason some require more, to the clearing of this place to our side, I
will add two or three arguments more out of the text it self, to prove Paul's
infirmity in this place, to be a sinful weakness, and not the outward poverty,
reproaches, verse. 10.
persecutions, and anguishes for Christ, which he afterward remembers. First,
because those can be understood but of a bodily or outward weakness, but by
this is meant a spiritual or inward weakness, which I prove by the very cause of
this weakness, which is the prick there mentioned, which being no outward thing,
but inwardly fastened in the flesh (for so y^ text gives) ^^^sc. 7.
has his proper effect, not in outward abasing of the person in the eyes of
men, (for that do those things that come to him from without) but for that it
inwardly reprocheth, straineth and so abaseth him in the eyes of the Lord.
Herehence I gather my second argument, in that this weakness was such as humbled
Paul in the sight of God, so, as though he had the comforts of excellent
revelations, yet he durst not boast himself by them, for the priuitie of his
inward uncleanness, which he knew was open unto the eyes of the Lord. Now we
know there is nothing in the world can make us hang down our heads before our
God, but sin only: for concerning all outward persecutions and anguishes, we
have a recompencing comfort and joy in the presence of our God, even in the
mids of their enduring, so as in them, we are more then conquerours: Romans 8. 37.
as the same Apostle testifies in another place. Therefore it must needs be
understood a sinful infirmity, which Paul there acknowledged in himself. My
third argument I take from that, that the Apostle prayed simply for the
removing of it, which, because it cannot be confirmed, by a like example in all
the scriptures, naie, is plainly disallowed by the practice of the Apostles.
Act. 5. v. 41. And by Paul himself likewise in sundry Phil. 2. 17. Col. 1. 24.
places, it proves strongly that outward afflictions may not be understood
thereby, but that sinful weakness, which even then remained in him. And so thus
we see, this place well agreeing with the former of the 7. to the Romans And to
prove the question of the regenerate man's weakness, equally with it. Again for
further proof of that Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
question, (because by the word of two or three witnesses a matter stands
firm,) there is added unto these a third place, out of the Epistle to the
Galathians, in these words, The flesh lusts Cap. 5. 17.
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are between
themselves contraries, so as you cannot do whatsoever you would. E. G. fearing
y^ light of this place, would feign if he could, at least, make our eyes dimmer
in seeing it, and thus he answers: The flesh indeed will lust in all men
against the spirit, but that it shall so prevail against the spirit in the
regenerate man, that he shall not be abled by the spirit to do the things he
would, that I deny. An answer not only false but frantic. False (I say) two
ways: first in that he says, The flesh will lust in all men against the
spirit, as though all men had the spirit. Secondly, in that he benieth That it
can so prevail against the spirit in the regenerate man: as though he that
has the spirit of God is not a regenerate man. Surely me think this gear
hangs together like the words of a frantike man. But here (I trow) he
brings some reasons, let us give ear unto them. First (says he) The Apostle
bids verse 16.
us walk in the spirit, and then we should not fulfill the lusts of the flesh
(or we should not leave undone the good we would.) Then he shows the
inconvenience verse 17.
which would follow, if we did not walk in the spirit, that is, the flesh
then would force us to leave undone the good which God commanded, or the good
we would: Thirdly and lastly he shows, that if we be not thus led by the
flesh, but by the spirit, we shall not then be under that law of sin, which
makes us verse 18.
leave undone the good we would. Well, let us first try his fidelity in the
text, and after that ye strength of his reason. For of truth in all these
words here, as his folly is miserable, so his untrue dealing with the text is
damnable. In the 16. verse, besides that he follows the worser translations
which are read thus, Walk in the spirit, and then you shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, whereas it is righter thus: Walk by the spirit, and fulfill
not the lust of the flesh. Besides this (I say) which somewhat bewrays his
evil heart, he is so impudent, as to add such a paraphrase, as utterly
corrupts the text it self. It is in his parenthesis ( Or we should not leave
undone the good we would) he would have ye reader understand, that not to
perform the lusts of the flesh, is as much as to do that good that we would.
But there is great difference betwixt them. For not to perform the lusts of
the flesh, is to stay the accomplishing of such sins outwardly, as our lusts
do inwardly solicit us unto. But to do the good we would (if it be taken
according to Paul's meaning) is not only to abstain from the actions of sin,
(which is but the first step of sanctification) but to bring to pass all good
that we would in our conversation of life. Now the regenerate man having his
affection sanctified by the spirit of God, approves and wills all the law
of God: Romans 7. 18.
therefore by this man's exposition, he should be able also to perform al ye
law of God. In which point he is not only Antichristian, and therefore a lier:
but one that contumeliously (as it were) to his teeth, withstandeth the spirit
of God: who Galat. 5. 1^
in the next verse says flatly, We cannot do whatsoever we would. In this 17.
verse, giving the sense of it, he is yet (if it were possible) more shameless:
for he delivers it, as though Paul should say (in effect) these words unto
the Galathians: [ For if you do not walk in the spirit, the flesh then will
force you to leave undone the good you would] The reason that moved him to make
this sense of Paul's words is this, That the Apostle there reasons from an
inconvenience. I answer, first, whenever the literal sense may stand with
the proportion of faith and consent of other scriptures, there it is to be
followed and preferred, (for otherwise it must argue a judgment stained with
some corrupt prejudice) but of this place, the literal sense is both agreeable
to faith, and the other scriptures, V. petition. Ia. 3. 2. 1. Io. 1. 8. 9. 10.
Cap. 2. 1.
which every where testify that the elect do sin, and therefore cannot do
the good they would: (for it is certain that the elect do desire Psalm. 119.
v. 101. 104 112. 128. 159. 174.
to walk in all the law of God) therefore ought the literal sense in this
place to have been followed. And so Paul should have been heard, (according to
the evident meaning of his own words,) not enforcing his exhortation to the
Galathians, by a reason taken from the inconvenience that might follow (as this
man foolishly fableth,) but by an argument of comparison from the less to the
greater, and that in this sort. They that by reason of some strong enemy in
themselves, cannot attain to do even whatsoever in ye rightnes of their mind
they would, have cause to labor so much the more, to follow the spirit, and
forsake the ways their flesh stirs them unto in all things: but such is
your condition, by reason of the sight between the flesh and the spirit, two
mere contraries, and therefore you have so much greater cause to take heed to
this exhortation. Now as you see this argument lies plain according to the
literal interpretation, (which every wise interpreter first strives to
attain to, so far forth as he may,) and contains doctrine, not only
agreeable to the scriptures, but also very notably making for the purpose of
ye Apostles exhortation, so on the other side, if we should stand to the
exposition of this miserable man, first, the sense must he such, as never a
word in the text gives countenance unto, (as is manifest by co^paring it with
his exposition.) and then such a point of doctrine shall be set down, as is
utterly without rhyme or reason (as they speak): yea such a reason shall the
Apostle persuade the Galathians withal (which is a horrible thing to grant) as
is foolish, absurd, and one part of it overthrowing another. And this is it,
worthy for every man to look upon. When he had first w^l^d them to walk in
the spirit, and not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, then this should be his
argument to persuade them* For if you do not walk in the spirit, the f^^sh
will force you to leave undone the good you would. How foolish and unsavory is
this? to say, If you will not walk right, you shall be forced not to walk
right: I never heard that a willing mind needed forcing. But O how far from
the Apostles spirit? who when he would reason from the end, or (as this man
says) from the inconvenience of a thing (as in other places he does) sets
another manner of edge upon his argument, as for example, and even in the very
like case, in the 8. of the Epistle verse. 13.
to the Romans: exhorting to forsake the flesh, and follow the spirit, among
other arguments he has this: For if you live according to the flesh you shall
dye, but if by the spirit you mortify the actions of the body, you shall
live. He can not make us believe therefore, that Paul was so rude a workman
as he pretends. Now, in that I said one part overthrows another, I
suppose there is none so simple as sees it not: or cls I pray you, what good
wills he, that walks not in the spirit? May not a man as easily make a
rope of sand? Thus much for the 17. verse, let us look if any better spirit
led him in the 18. the text is this: But if you be led by the spirit, then are
you not under the law. He delivers it thus: If we be not thus led by the
flesh, but by the spirit, we shall not then be under that law of sin, which
makes us leave undone the good we would. In the second page of his book, he
would make us believe that our ministers have a singular fleight in perverting
the scriptures: I perceive he dreamed of his own disease, and so when he
wakened, told his dream of others. For is not this very slight and cunning
conueyance, upon this text, in stead of the law of commandments, to profer us
ye remnant of old Adam, yet remaining in the regenerate man? but let those
admire him whose eyes he has bemisted. They whose eyes the Lord has opened to
see, may rather wonder at his impudency, then be deceived by such shifting. If
the scriptures could have lent him but one example for this word [law] being
simply set down (as it is here) without any word of restrainte accompanying
it, to have meant the law of the members, he might have had some warrant of
this his dealing. But a rubbed forehead, that can not change color, makes a
hold tongue to utter any falsehood. Before (if the Reader do remember) whereas
we read in the 1. verse of the 8. chapter to the Romans There is now no condemnation
to those that are in Christ Jesus. This man exp^undeth the word [ condemnation]
by the body of death, which Paul spoke of before in the 7. chap. and 24.
verse. Here he can make the word law sound the remnant of sin or unregenerate
part, which Paul in that place also to the Romans terms the law of sin in his
members. Now if it be lawful for a man, to use this liberty, namely to
interpret terms of scripture, only for his own turn, both taking them from
their manifest sense, and yielding no proof thereof by conference of other
places, then is there no heresy in the world so foul, as the devil in his
members, cannot find shift enough to maintain, by color of scriptures. This
considered, my answer might be sufficient, if I barely denied his foolish
fiction. Yet because his friends shall know that I stand by the heap of truth,
I will not spare, in ans^^ring, to fill his measure full. To the disproofe
therefore of his sense, let us first remove the doubtfulnesse of his speech,
and after that the falshoode. The doubtfulnesse is in these words [ we shall
not then be under the law of sin] if he understand here, such a being under, as
is a willing lying down, and subjection thereunto, which Paul forbids, and
is only true in the Romans 6. ^^.
unregenerate, then this makethnothing for him self, nor against our
assertion, though we granted him this meaning of that place. If so be then we
take it to mean (as necessity enforces) that as many as are led by the
spirit, are no more subject in any respect, to the remnants of sin, but that
they may do whatsoever good they would: then this can not be the sense of that
place, because it is flat contrary to the Apostle both in the verse before
going: (which I hope is clearly euicted from the adversaries sense) as also in
the 1. verse of the 6. chap. where Paul plainly grants, that even they
that have the chiefest measures of spiritual graces, may also be taken tardie
in offenses. Wherefore, if this man's mind had not been forestalled with
corrupt opinions, which like the worst melancholy, turns even those things
that be very contrary in their own nature, to the feeding and maintenance of
it self, he might have found such a sense of this place, as had been both
suitable to that exhortation the Apostle makes to the Galat. as also well
according with every point of doctrine, which any where else he teaches:
namely, that those that are led by the spirit, are not under the law, as
touching the guilt and condemnaiion thereof, as Romans 8. 1. in in which respect
it is dead, Romans 7. 6. and we are no more subject to it. Romans 6. 15. and
hereby the Apostle utterly removed all scruple of want endeavor, that might
stick in the Galathians minds, by occasion of his former argument. The rest,
from the 19. to the 21. verse, being but a distribution of the effects of the
flesh, and making nothing at all for his interpretation of the 17. verse (which
is the question) is therefore idly here brought in of E. G. to fill up room.
As for the end of the fruits of the flesh, there set down, to wit, that
Adulterers, Idolaters, drunkardes, gluttons, etc. shall not be heirs of the
kingdom of GOD, it has been of our part so firmly alwaie believed and
taught, that the Church of GOD never needed the life of E. G. nor of any such
tumultuous spirit, on this blasmous manner, to urge it. Thus having gained
this place also to our cause, the proud building of free will, and
Anabaptistical holiness, which he foolishlie raised thereupon, is fallen, and
there appears therein, foundation for nothing else, but the humble habitation
of Gods children, not only outwardly laid at with the storms of worldly
calamities, but most of all, inwardly assailed with the buffeting temptations
of Satan, and rebeilious affections of onr own remaining nature, as that
although we watch, and labor against them all the days of our life, yet
shall we be never, in this life, utterly rid of them, nor yet in such case, of
ability, as always, and in every thing, to prevail against them. And
therefore in this respect, is our redemption observed, to be twofold: the one
from the curse Col. 1. 13. 14. Gal. 3. 13. Romans 6. 22.
of the law, and servitude of sin, (which held thereby) the other from the
Romans 8. 19. 21 22. 23. 24. Ephe. 1. 14.
coruption of our body. The first freeth us from the rule and jurisdiction of
our corrupt nature, the second from the very corrupt nature it self. By
means of the first we are so delivered from our sinful nature, as that, we
yield no more willing obedience thereunto, (it having no right over us) but do
wage continual battle against it, so as, though it sometimes get the vantage
and prevail, yet we also many times have victory over it. But by the other,
we shall have so full and co^plet deliverance, as that neither any corruption
at all shall be left unto us, nor yet any other adversary, that now (by
means of it) take part against us, to annoy us. Finally the benefit of our
first redemption, we enjoy with great comfort, in this life, (as those that
being anoyed, yet can never be taken any more, or spoiled of our adversary)
but the second we hold in ye assurance Romans 8. 24. 25.
of hope only, it being a thing, which, as for the excellency, we sigh and
groan for, (that we might once freely worship our redeemer without all
impediments of the flesh) so we are sure, in that day, to see it, when the
sons of God shall be revealed: which is the day, that even all the creatures
To. 8. 19. 20. 2^.
tures else, likewise, do long to see, and groan in the expectation of it with
us: yea which that holy vessel S. Paul, casting all things already gained
behind him, labored with all contention unto, as one, that confessed him
self, whilst he Phil. 3. 10. 11. 12 13. 14.
lived here, neither to have attained the mark, nor yet to be perfect. Out of
all which, standing on the natural sense, of the very word of God, what
appears clearer unto us, then these conclusions? 1. That the regenerate has
not whilst this life endures, full freedom of his will. 2. That he sins
many times.

But now E. G. fearing lest his natural man would not be entertained of us
according to his speech, hitherto given out in his recommendation, seeks
color to enter his suite again, by most untruly charging our ministers (and
that without offering any proof) to teach, That the inner man of the
regenerate is the spirit of God. Which I can not think he did, as having
received it, either by speech, or writing, from any of account, on our side,
but because the Adamant rocks of free will, and man's ability had such power
to work his shipwreck, and therefore he labors, not only to overthrow our
supposed opinion, of the inner man, but also above all, to establish the
natural man, with as many prerogatives as we give the regenerate man,
concerning a sanctified life, that so by that means, his regenerate man might
sit above the Stars, and attain to that in this life, which we have no promise
for, but in the life to come. In answering whereunto (I hope) many words will
not be looked for, (though he in this point be larger then ordinary) partly
because, I may not follow his humor, where he fights with his shadow, and
partly also, for that I have already, set out the full proportion of the
natural man, according to the scriptures. First therefore in a word, to
satisfy the Reader concerning the false report of this man. We are taught,
and do receive it from the evidence of the word, that the inner man, is the
whole man, so far forth, as he is borne again of God, and wrought upon, and
renewed Romans 7. 22. Ephe. ^. 16.
by the holy Ghost: whereby not only his understanding is enlightened, to
apprehend and perceive the things that are of God, but also his will and
affections rightned, to desire, and to move the members to the doing of them.
Which renewing, because it is but in Ephesians. 1. 17. 18 Col. 1. 10. 11. Phil. ^.
12. 13. 14. 2. Cor. 3. 18. 1. Cor. 13. 9. 10. 11. 12.
part in this life: therefore is there a contrariety and strife in the child
of God, between this, and his regenerate part, the one disposed according to
God, the other according to corrupt nature. And this latter is according to his
contrary condition, called the outward man, which Paul sets out, Romans 7.
23.
by the term of the other law in his members: whereby we understand, even the
whole man, insomuch as he is borne, corrupted and depraved from Adam. Which
distinction the scripture observes likewise in other places, Romans 6. 6. Col.
3. 9. 10. Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24
by the terms of New man, and Old man. E. G. chalengeth these parts, as the
natural man's right, in common with the regenerate, and puts this for
difference, that the regenerate has moreover, beside the inward and outward
man, the spirit of Christ. Should I say, this is strange stuff, and hitherto
unheard off, in any sound congregation? I shall move those of his spirit,
nothing at all; nay, (I fear me) they take pleasure in walking alone, making
to them selves an Idol of their own conceit, and so their rejoicing is
naught: but I will say this by the grace of God, and make it good, that the
word of the Lord allows no such division for his natural man, and therefore
he shall not enjoy. What therefore brings E. G. to prove y^ natural man to
consist of these two parts? First because, whereas the holy Ghost does bid
the natural man to cast off the old man, he does there plainly distinguish
between the natural man, and the old man. The place that he cites for this,
is the 4. off the Epist. to the Ephe. and 22. verse: whereupon as though it
were clear for his cause, he presumes to interpret the meaning of that speech
[the old man] for his purpose, namely that by it is meant nothing else, but the
old, and wicked conversation and life, of the natural man. But his reason is
apparently false, and his conclusion heretical. That his reason is false,
every man sees, that can read the 1. verse of the Epistle to the Ephe.
unless E. G. presuined so far, of his singular cunning in conuaying, that
he could bring his natural man, into y^ mumber of the true saints, and
faithful ones, whom the Apostle called upon in that Epistle, to put off the
old man. If one say, there were hipocrites among them, not regenerated, I
strive not therein. But then they must observe withal, that, which I wish E.
G. could have considered, in all the Apostles writings. Namely, that in regard
of this mingling, whilst they exhort, they write that unto all, which can in
deed take place but in the truly

sanctified. And again in dehorting, they write many things unto all, which
can simply be verified but in the hipocrites. And yet both these courses have
due effect, in both these sorts of men. By exhortation, the hipocrites are
made inexcusable, and by threatenings, the children of God are made more
watchful, as hereafter more largely. Now where he says, The old man is
nothing else, but the wicked conversation, and life of the natural man. His
breath is rank of pelagian free will, whilst hereby, he insinuatety, yea and
the law of contraries constrains him to say, that the new man, is the new and
godly conversation of the natural man. Which though it be an absurdity
hateful enough, to all that are but meanly exercised in the scriptures, that
the natural man should thus be adorned with free will, yet it is so much more
foul and odious in this man, as that he gives the natural man in this place,
by consequence of the opposition, some power, both of willing and doing good:
and again, within the space of two leaves following, spoileth him of the
latter utterly. So that he is not only contrary to us in this case, but to
himself also: that he might agree with no body. Another reason he would draw
from these words of S. Peter, For of whomsoever any man is overcome, 2. Pet.
2. 19.
to him also in servitude is he addicted. Here (says E. G.) the man that is in
bondage, must needs be distinct from his corrupt nature, to whom he is in
bondage. And out of the word [ ouercome] he gathers, that there must needs
be a fight and resistance, without which (says he) there can be no conquest
nor victory. This is but ungracious dealing with the scriptures. Peter
speaks not there, neither of a mere natural man, but of such, as had a
calling and reckoning in the congregation of the faithful, which because they
bare the estimation of fighting the Lords battles, together with his people
(though it were but in their own conceipte) if it had been lawful to have
dealt thus with comparisons, E. G. might yet have seen, that it was not
without cause, the Apostle afforded them such a Phrase as being agreeable to
their own sense, might the more notably convince them in their consciences, of
their most miserable case. Especially this being no new guise or unwonted
thing in the scrip tures: As namely where our Savior says, I am come into the
world to execute judgment, Io. 8. 39.
that they which see not, might see, and they which see might be made blind.
Should we gather by these last words, that the Pharisees did see? We know that
our Savior meant nothing les: for he says of them flatly in another place,
that they are blind leaders of the blind. Thus E. G. might have seen, the
holy Ghost Mat. 15. 14.
sometime, leaving the propriety of speech, to apply himself to the sense of
those, whom his reproof should most concern, for the deeper impression
thereof. But I must answer him moreover, that this liberty of stretching
comparisons is unlawful. For like as they that compare things together,
reckon it sufficient, that there be proportionable agreement, in those points,
wherein the comparison stands, although in every circumstance, one be not
like an other: so we must be wise, in reading, to understand, chiefly the
scriptures: namely, to note, and receive, the very drift and point of the
comparison, and busy our selves no further in the other parts of the same.
Which rule, if E. G. had here known, or else observed, I should have had no
cause in this place to note him for an encrocher upon the spirit of God. For
whereas the Apostle was to prove the false teachers, to be servants of
corruption, he does it by an argument of equal effects, and notes of victory,
set out by a similitude of martial conquest: wherein the case is such, that
whosoever is overcome in fight, is diligent to apply himself afterward, to
serve his pleasure that overcame him. Now what is the drift of this comparison?
but to show, by one proper note of both, that the servitude is alike in both
conquests. Whereby the carnal professors might see, that howsoever they
persuaded themselves of freedom and liberty with the children of God, though
they followed their lusts still, making the Gospel a protection of their
loosenes, yet should their daily iniquities, in spite of their beardes, argue
against them, that they are no less the servants of sin, seeing they occupy
themselves in the works thereof, then we see them to appear servants of their
conquerours, who apply them selves to do their commandments: and this the
Apostle amplifieth in the next verse, by a comparison verse. 20.
of unlike ends. Now having here the full purpose and meaning of the Apostle,
what warrant have we, to strain the comparisen, to make the circumstances
meet likewise? If it were warrantable for E. G. herehence to infer a
resistance, because there is mention of a victory: why might not another of as
evil a spirit, and by the like liberty, gather, that a man serving sin
abundantly, shall never be brought to death thereby, because we know, it is so
by the law of arms, that he that yields his life, and his service to his
conqueror, is accepted into grace, and never endangered any more, so long as
he abides faithful unto him? but that the error is infinite, that comes by
this manner of dealing with comparisons in the scriptures, this one example
shall be in stead of many others: even the parable of the unjust Steward in
the Gospel, Luke. 16. 1.
which, if a man of an unclean spirit, should come to handle, according to
the several parts of it, he might make plain footing for manifest theft in
the 8. verse, and all kind of oppression, and popish merits in the 9. verse:
and that clean beside the purpose of our Savior Christ, who in all that
parable, had simply this meaning, to show that the care and providence of the
children of God, touching the eternal life, is even far short of the care
that profane worldlings have in temporal things. Other circumstances, of the
particular practices of the steward, in accomplishing his forecast, are of no
regard in all the matter. Thus have you all the arguments, this good patron
can bring for his natural man: which being poor two, and too too weak, yea
false and fabulous, yet he is so foolish, as to cast his plot out of them, and
make divisions, for the safe seating of him there, as in his natural
habitation: yea and that with sound of trumpet (as it were) liking to be
contrary to all others in the matter. But Solomon says, The froward Prou. 3.
32.
are abomination unto the Lord, and shame takes the foolish out of the way.
His verse. 3. 5.
wise collection of absurdities, with his lying reports often repeated, and other
railings, I willingly pass by, as things that escaped him, immediately upon
his wakening out of that dream, wherein he thought we had held the inner man
to be the spirit of God. Where he takes the inward man, both of the
regenerate and unregenerate person, but for the heart, mind, or conscience,
thus far equaling either, with the other, ignorantly, arrogantly, and without
all ground of scripture, what should I answer? let it go for me, to the
fulfilling of the measure of his folly. In the rest of this division he has
promised to stand upon two points. 1. To reconsile some scriptures which seem
at first blush to say the contrary. 2. To show what difference the holy Ghost
makes between the inner man of the good, and the inner man of the bad. In the
first his ignorance is woeful, and in the latter his impudency wonderful. His
[ some scriptures] fall out to be but one place, and that not the most
pregnant for this purpose: for where the question is, whether the natural man
be endued with an inward man, he brings that place to the Cor. which 1. Co.
1. 14.
denies the natural man to be able, to perceive the things that be of God:
which though it be mightier against him, then he or his can ever answer, yet
because it concerns knowledge chiefly, and touches not the affection
directly, it appears he was willingly, and therefore woefully ignorant of all
other places, which cut the comb, and spoil all the powers of his natural
man, concerning the righteousness of God. Sufficient of such places, have I set
down before, where I have done the natural man his right. But now since E.G.
has brought out this place as easiest for him to answer, let us see how well
he will avoid it. The argument it afordeth, is of this sort: he that is not
able to understand the special righteousness of God, is much less able to
will it, but the natural man is not able so much as to understand it,
therefore much less to will it. I mean by special righteousness the
special form thereof, which God propounds unto men: which is the sense of
this place to the Corinthes, agreeable to the 17. verse of the 1. chap. of the
Epistle to the Romans. For otherwise, we know, the Apostle allows the
profane Gentile, to have a certain general notion, and understanding of God
and his law, but Romans 1. 19. 20. 21. c. 2. 15.
because it is not, nor can not be, according to Gods prescribed rule, (yea
though that rule be amongst them,) therefore is it said also, to be enemitie
against God. As for the argument, E. G. belike saw it not: for he answers
never Romans 8. 7.
a word. But to this text of the Corinthes, he opposes a place of the
Romans, where the natural ^h. 2. 13.
man is said to have the law written in his heart. Out of which two places, he
would feign resolve, that the natural man knows, and approves the
commandments of God, according to the rule of his will, but only lacks
ability to walk in them. Ability being the very difference betwixt the
regenerate and him. And hereupon without any more labor of reconciling
places, he leapeth into his second point, being gladly rid of the former.
But have makes wast and accompanies danger. Two places of scripture, that by
words seem contrary, can not be easelie or undoubtedly reconciled, without
the thread of a third place (at the least) to sow them together. And that
third place, must not be the word of a man, but the word of God. For he, that
shall piece his own words, unto the words of the living God, shall have the
plagues added unto Apoc. ^2. 18.
him, mentioned in the word of God. Yet E. G. in reconciling these places,
delivers his own sense, without testimony of other scripture for the same.
Therefore he can not be excused of presumptuous and wicked dealing therein.
Again, call you that reconciling, when the sentence of reconciliation it self
directly fights with one of the textes? Truly it is like, as if a man
pretending to part a fray, should set upon one of the parties himself. But it
is manifest, that E. G. resolution of these two places, stands directly
against the place of the Corinthes, as appears both generally by the whole
drift of the chapter, and perticulerlie by the reason S. Paul there renders,
while the natural man can not understand the things that be of God: to wit,
because they have a spiritual understanding in them, which the natural man
can not reach unto. Now if E.G. sense stand, that the natural man has the
same knowledge, with the regenerate man, then is the Apostles reason quite
overthrown. Therefore it appears, that E.G. has here reconciled no places
at all. And now that his foil is apparent in this, I will proceed to buckle
with him in the next. You know he promised to show, what difference the holy
Ghost makes, between the inward man of the good, and the inward man of the
bad. Let us attend unto him, though he have thereby, enlarged his question,
from the natural man, to the unregenerate. The difference he puts thus,
that whereas the unregenerate man, misliking evil, and desirous to will and to
do that which God commands, wants notwithstanding strength, either to will
or do any thing that good is, according to the commandment: the regenerate
man, has that strength added to him by the spirit of God, so as he can both
will, and do that which God commands, though flesh and blond strive never so
much against it. Let us divide the parts, and examine them a sunder. Who sees
not, that all the drift of E.G. in this section, is to able his natural man,
to say as much, as S. Paul said in the 7. to the Romans, when he said, To
will is present with verse. 19
me, but to perform that is good, I attain not to. etc. to the end, he might
prove that Paul spoke that, but concerning his estate before he was
regenerate, and therefore has he all this while, been busily blewing in the
face of his natural man, to fill him as full of an inner man as he could, but
now when we come to try him by his speech, he says he would both will and
do, but he has no strength either to will or do: whereas Romans 7. 15.
the regenerate man in a true measure wills to do the commandment of God
in the perfectest manner: so that we see this is but a rash Ephraimite, who
stammeringly pronou^ceth siboleth, Judge. 12 6.
for shiboleth, therefore he must needs have here the reward of a conquered
Ephraimite, that henceforth we be troubled no more with him. Well, though he
have thus ouerthrown his own purpose, for his natural and unregenerate man, yet
he minds to make up his loss, in the gifts of the regenerate person. For if
he might once furnish him, thoroughly, with free will, he would soon prove
that Paul was no regenerate man, when he could not do the good he would,
His very words are these: The inner man, mind or conscience of the
regenerate and righteous man, it has strength and sufficiency by the spirit
of God, both to will and do that good which God commands, though flesh and
blood strive never so much against it.

First for his phrase, wherein the conscience is put to ye office of the
members, not so strangely as fondly, I will not take the vantage that I could:
but refer it to his oversight, being persuaded, that indeed he meant thereby
flatly thus much: to wit, That the regenerate man has strength and
sufficiency by the spirit of God, both to will and do that good which God
commands, etc. To which purpose therefore he says by and by afterward, That
God has often and plainly pronounced, that he is not the servant of
righteousness, or of Christ, but the servant of sin, and of the devil, which
commits sin with his members, and so serves and obeys the lusts of the
flesh, until that Christ has so loosed the works of the devil in him, that
he sin not.

These two places set together, show his meaning to be as I have said. Now is
the regenerate man not only a mighty warrior, but a soueraign king, this
latter place having clothed him with the robe of perfection, and the former,
put the crown of free will upon his head. Why should we not now make have to
salute him, saying, All hail victorious king? But soft, that is a matter not
so safe as you take it: experience tells us, that if there be a prince set
up without right, not only he and his proclaymers, but all other likewise, that
congratulate and are known to ratify him with their voices, are in little
better case then traitors, and so shall be esteemed and rewarded. And if the
terror be so great in worldly cases, what are we to fear in heavenly matters,
y^ Lord our God being king of kings and a ielous God? It is best therefore,
before we salute him king, to enquire of his right. This must he have, either
in himself, or from another that has power to give it him. That he has any
such right in himself, by all the graces of his regeneration, the scripture
every where denies, as has been hither to proved. And here I say moreover:
if the regenerat should have such power and perfection in this life, he must
either have it at his new birth, or else shortly after it: so as there may be a
manifest season, wherein he may appear by his actions to be even such a one,
because E. G. makes it here an essential and proper note, to know the child
of God by, [ That he sin not]. Now that he has it not, upon his first
begetting by the spirit, the Apostles themselves are a president, who whilst
our Savior walked with them, fell sundry times, not only in unseemly
behavior worthy Mar. 9. 32. 33.
rebuke (as we in extenuating will speak:) but also some into Math. 20. 20.
Mark. 10 35.
foul ambition, Peter into Math. 26. 69.
gross denial of his master Christ. And if we follow them further, in their
perfect state, (when they had had the exceeding measure of the spirit poured
upon them, we shall find Peter a chief Apostle, to have committed Gal. 2. 11.
such a sin in Antioch, as for which, our Savior had pronounced, that it
should be better Math. 18. 6.
for a man, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he thrown into the
midst of the sea, then to commit it. What Paul has confessed of himself, many
places have been showed. James says (to quench the ambitious controlling of
some opinionatiue brethren) In many things Chapter 3. 1. 2.
we sin all. And John confesses us all, and himself yet sinners, when he
says: If any man sin, we 1. Io. 1. 1.
have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous. Yea these
words of James and John, freely acknowledging a subjection to sin, without any
restraint or limitation of time for y^ ceassing thereof in this life, do at one
lash, cut off all ye interest of the regenerate man's full power and dominion in
this life. And besides, when we consider our daily prayer, which Christ our
careful teacher left all his saints to say, what shall we think of that, we
are therein commanded: every day to ask for giuenes of our sins? If we be
regenerate, so as we sin no more, what need we? If to stop up this breach for
E. G. any of his disciples have a liking, to bring in his popish distinction of
venial and mortal sins, let them not spare. I could here bring it in, to
make them blush, if it were possible, for I have it written by his own hand
(as I am persuaded) mentioning the conference between M. Whitaker and him: but
for that I know of what spirit they are, and am loath to loose labor upon
written papers, I will not now stand upon it. Thus first we find, that the
regenerate person by no warrantable right in himself, can take this title upon
him. But because some men look not upon the right and worthiness of a Prince,
so he have the place by the forcible decree of some mighty monarch that has
power to establish him, let us examine in like manner, whether this kingly
condition of the regenerate man be by the will and appointment of the eternal
God or no: for by the places I find quoted, some such thing se'emeth to have
been by E.G pretended: and especially his confident speech declares it, where
he says, [ This being proved and authorized by the word of God, etc. For the
former part, that The regenerate man is able to do what God commands, though
flesh and blood strive never so much against him, he coateth three places: The
first is in the 2. Cor. 3. 5. in these words: Not that we are fit of our selves
to think any thing as of our selves, but that we are fit, it is of God. This
text teaches us plainly, that we are in no wise verse 2. 3
to ascribe any thing to our selves, no not in those works, wherein our labor
has chiefest success, for as much as there is not the least thought verse 5.
of good, that rises in us, that may in any truth be referred to our selves as
the fountain, but to God only. Wherehence we draw these lessons to carry with
us: First that no man by nature, has any thing in him toward the service of
God. Secondly, That we must seek to him for fitnes in every particular
service and duty, and return the praise of the success thereof, to him alone.
These things by the grace of God we see and learn in this text. Only, how the
regenerate should herehence be warranted, to have full strength to keep the
law, this we shall never see, so long as there is one heretic upon the face
of the earth. His second place is, Ephesians. 3. 16. where the Apostle prays for
the Ephesians, That God would give them even for his rich glory sake, to be
mightily strengthened by his spirit, in their inner man. The effect of the
petition is this, that there might be a verse 16.
continuing growth of their inward man, and enlargement of their knowledge in
Christ, and they verse 18. verse 19.
every way fulfilled, even to the high measure that God has appointed. This
place therefore gives us this lesson for our instruction very profitably. To
wit, That no regenerate man, ought to stay in any measure of his gifts, but
to labor and look continually for the increase of them. Which is so far of
from enstalling the regenerate man, in any kingdom of absolute power, as that
with one hand it disrobeth him of all perfection, and with the other, casts
his glorious crown of free will to the ground. For if increase must be sought
for continually, then is there no perfection in this life. And if no
perfection, where is that sufficiency to do the commandments? Miserable is
that case, when a man ministers a sword to cut his own throat withal. His
third place is, Phil. 2. 13. For it is God that woorketh in you, both to will,
and to do, according to his frank benevolence. These words prevented a
certain secret objection or scruple, which might be in the minds of the
Philippians, upon the vehemence of the exhortation which Paul made unto them,
concerning the accomplishing of their salvation, in the 12. verse. For, that
they might not slothfully lie down under the burden, as men out of hope and
heart to go through with so great an enterprise, he puts them in mind, that
they have it from the Lord, both to will, and also to be able to perform.
Whereby they had to observe these two points. First, that they had not the
rightnes of their will of themselves, but from y^ Lord. Secondly, that he was
also disposed to give them ability if they sought it. Which doctrine
necessarily urges this use thereof: first humility and reverence in all our
behavior. Secondly, careful diligence, in continual seeking of the Lord by
prayer, in every thing we need: he having very well confirmed this last unto
them, by his own practice and example in the first Chapter. Where he had with
fervent affection, prayed the verse 8. 9. 10.
Lord to give them more and more abundance of knowledge and judgment, and
still to clear the whole course of their life, until the very day of Christ.
Now to conclude thus from the text, The regenerate has full power to keep the
commandments, because the Lord does give them both to will and to do, is not
to deal truly with the word of truth, but sophistically to adulterate the
same unto the peril of souls. If that be sound reasoning, I may in like manner
conclude thus: Whosoever honoreth his father and mother, shall live long in this
life, because God has promised so, in his fifth commandment. Again it is said
of the righteous man: That whatsoever Psalm. 1. 3.
he does, it shall prosper: therefore shall no unprosperous success come to
ante of his labors and endeavors in this life? And on the contrary part
(according to this man's fashion) shall we condemn all for disobedient children
that die in their youth, or unrighteous men, that sow seed which comes not
up again? Nay, who is ignoraunte that albeit we read in the new covenant,
many promises of fuller words, then this, whereof is now the question, yet is
not there performance to be expected or taken (touching ^his life) absolutely,
or simply, according to the ^ordes, but in a measure and dispensation only.
Examples whereof I will reach you one or two. Christ says, Io. 14. 13. c. 16.
23.
Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Yet Paul 2.
Cor. 12. 8.
prayed often for a full deliverance from ^he sting of concupiscence, and could
not obtain. Again he promised, that when they should receive the spirit of
truth, Io. 16 13.
It should lead them into all truth. Yet we know they were not afterward
without all error in their practice, which appeared both in Act. 15. 37. 38.
39. 40.
Barnabas and Gal. 2. 11.
Peter. So likewise, Io. 14. 26.
The holy Ghost which my father shall send in my name, he shall teach you all
things: proves not an absolute knowledge in present, to be given to the
Apostles, neither indeed did they attain unto it while they lived 1. Cor. 8.
2. ^. Cor. 13. 9. ^. Cor. 12. ^. 11.
here: but only in an ordered measure, according to the most wise dispensation
of the God of spirits, the full performance thereof resting to be revealed 1.
Cor. 13. 12.
in that day, when they should see the Lord face to face. And according unto
this proportion, we ought to understand that saying to the Philippians, That
God works in us, both to will and to do: not that this work is full and
absolute, as E.G. pretends: but daily by measure, wrought in every of the
children of God, according to the good pleasure and dispensation of his will.
Which thing he must likewise have necessarily seen, (if he had not wilfully
closed his eyes) both by the contradiction of other scriptures to his sense of
this place, as also by the very light of the words in the text it self. For
it is not written, God has wrought in you both to will and to do: as though it
were done already) but God does work (or bring to pass in you) both to will
and to do: as implying the work to be but begun, and in doing in them yet.
And this being well considered, is so far from mainteining a full freedom of
will in the regenerat, to do the commandment of God. as that it concludes just
the contrary: and so taking this proud crown from his head, humbles him
again upon his knees, to beg daily of his heavenly father, new supplies of
strength, to fight the spiritual battles of continual temptations. But the
regenerate person must not only be content to depart with ye counterfeit
crown, which this foolish man had put upon him, but eue^ tolaie by his robe
also, and to put on his armor again, acknowledging himself to be yet subject
to the wounds, though not to the death of his adversaries hands. For where
E.G. would persuade him, that The servant of God is so quite separate from sin,
as that he is not to be reckoned the servant of God that does sin: what does he
but bewitch his senses, with the enchanted cup of a false persuasion, that
whilst he thus grows to some security in his strength, Satan (as he is a
cunning pioner) might secretly undermine his foundation ere he be aware. For
he that supposes himself all strong, grows shortly to less suspicion of
danger (especially ye Lord in his judgment so suffering Satan accordingly to
use his cunning) who then does subtly withdraw him self, and for a season
puts no more fire to ye darts of concupiscence, that so, this man having many
days the glory of the field, and thereby grown secure in the high conceit of
his own strength, might have at the length all childelike fear and trembling
stolen out of his heart, and into the place thereof conuayed (no less privily
then the East wind carries the Caterpiller) the filthy influence of meritorious
imaginations. Which if they once draw nourishment of life in the party that
they be able to move, long time shall not pass, ere they leave neither bud nor
blossom of true religion in him. How far E. G. had the woeful experience of
this, (and therefore how much it stands every man in hand to mark this
point) let his miserable fall even in y^ very foundation In his conference with
M. Egerton, and in the latter end of his conference with M. Whitaker,
propounds the same.
testify, whilst this was a question, which he stiffly maintained also,
namely, That we are justified by faith and works, not by faith alone. Which
things considered, I thought it my duty, to give this caveat to the church,
that whosoever thinks himself to stand in the number of the regenerate,
might a fresh consider himself, (especially the danger being thus openly set
before his eyes) that he be not carried away by this false seducer, lest he
try the manner of his woeful fall soon after. Neither think you that the
places of scripture which he mustreth here in the marge^t, are any less for
this matter, then after his accustomed manner, abused. The first place he
points us to, is To. 6. 16. 19. thus it is read: Know you not, that to whom
you apply your selves as servants to obey, his servants you are, who^ you obey,
whether it be sin unto death: or obedience unto righteousness? In ye 19. verse,
As you have applied your members to be the servants of uncleanness and
iniquity, to fulfill iniquity, even so now apply your members to be the
servants of righteousness, unto holiness. Let the reader also consider the whole
Chapter, for his instruction: it resists the profane verse 1.
security, that wicked men would take by the doctrine of justification by
faith taught before, and proves, that they only are to glory in the benefit
of Christ, as having true faith, that walk now in newnes of life, and resemble
Christ, verse 4. 5.
in crucifying the old man, and living unto God. Whereof he gives most
certain notes, in the verse. 11. verse 11.
words that E.G. has cited. For as to occupy our selves in serving, argues a
Lord or master to whom we are adicted, so the works of our service must needs
prove, whom we have taken our selves to: especially there being in this case,
but two masters to serve, to wit, sin or righteousness, and their ways openly
repugnant one to the other. Accordingly whereto, in ^he 19. verse, he exhorts
to apply their service unto righteousness, all those that hold the benefit of
justification by faith. Which, as all the world knows, we are daily taught,
with great instancie and earnest obtestation, (and therefore E.G. to have been
in this his abominable insinuation, impudent above all measure) so yet, this
makes not one mite for his purpose, to prove us altogether free from the power
of sin, but is still his old sophistry, (taking it simply, which is but in
some measure or respect) to the great abusing of his reader. His second text,
being the 9. of John, and 34. verse, let the Christian reader look upon it,
and consider the question: further answer I need not give. The last two places
are out of the Epistles of John: which indeed I perceive were such unto him, as
certain places of Saint Paul's writings are said, of S. Peter to be, to the
unlearned 2. Pet. 3. 16.
and unstable. The places are these: Whosoever abides in him, sins not,
whosoever 1. Io. 3. 6.
sins, has not seen him, nor known him. He that commits sin, is of the
devil: verse 8.
because the devil sins from the beginning. And to this end is the son of
God revealed, even to loose the works of the devil. And again: He that is
borne of God, does not verse 9.
sin, because his seed abides in him: neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God. So also in the 3. Epistle and 11. verse: Beloved, follow not that which
is evil, but that which is good, he that does well is of God, but he that
does evil, has not seen God. But where learned this man, in y^ interpreting of
scriptures to take the sense of repugnancie? Else knew he not, that even the
same Apostle said a little before, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
Cap. ^^. 8.
selves, and there is no truth in us. Yea we do a horrible thing, even make
God himself a liver? verse 10.
Either else, if he knew the first Chapter, why did he dissemble this place in
it? Or why did he not reconcile it with others, seeing it so manifestly
gainsayeth the letter of the others? He could not. Or he would not. Therefore
either way, a false prophet and seducer, even in the grossest kind of
impudency. Confer (beloved reader) the places together, and read the first
Epistle of John, from the beginning of his quotations, thitherto, or (if thou will) unto the end, and tell me, what spirit was in his eyes, that he could not
see the Apostle in the third Chapter, to frame his speech directly against
such, as hypocritically professing faith, gave freely themselves in the mean
time to serve sin, and live in their old wickedness. Especially he being (as it
were) led by the hand unto it, not only by the 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. verses of
the first Chapter, but also by the beginning of the second, and all the third.
A reason or two among many, shall here suffice. First, in that he fully
acknowledges all ye faithful Cap. 1. 8. verse 9.
ones to sin. Secondly, in that he promises from the Lord pardon unto us, when
we confess our sins. Thirdly, if it happen us to sin, that Cap. 2. 1.
we have Jesus Christ our Aduocat. These reasons prove that the righteous may
possibly fall into sin, and yet not to be proved children of the devil
thereby: and so consequently, that the Apostle spoke not of all manner of
sinning in the places E.G. cites, but only of that which is in a continual
course, and with a whole consent of the heart. Which consequence also may
directly be proved, by the reason that he renders, why Cap. 3. 8.
he that commits sin, is of the devil: to wit, Because the devil sins
from the beginning. Now his reason is of no force at all, unless there be
hereby granted a resemblance, betwixt the devil and them, in the purpose and
proceeding in sin. Which if it be granted, then cannot this be spoken of the
regenerate, (who have the course of sin broken) but only of the unregenerate,
who keep it whole still: and who professing faith, in an outward show, are
(nevertheless) proved by their daily life, the children of the devil, since
they cease not to sin, nor apply not themselves unto the Commandments of God,
which those that are truly borne of God undoubtedly do. Neither are we
otherwise taught of our preachers, nor do believe, (howsoever this fury was
led by his spirit to write) but according to this doctrine of John, That
Christ came to loose the works of the devil, verse. 8.
in all that be his. And that by this they shall be known to be his: even if
they observe his Cap. 2. 3.
commandments, (that is, labor and apply them selves with all their strength,
to do them) for that it can not possibly be otherwise with them, in that they
(if they be his) have his seed Cap. 3. 9.
in them, that is, his spirit, which must needs bring forth fruit according
to his kind, I therefore they can no more give themselves to the service of
sin. If this man had been well catechized himself, before he fell to
writing, he would have been better acquainted with our profession, then his
book shows him (now) to have been. For their sakes therefore, that are
ready to run after him in this his rashness, whose cases (I protest) I
tender with a christian affection, I will stay here a little while, beseeching
them, even as upon my knees, to grant me for a space, their free attention,
laying aside (for the time) all partial affections. God, who in his free
mercy, and choosing will in Christ, has given me the effectual feeling of
his favor, sealed up in my heart the assurance of his everlasting love, by his
spirit, and has made me worthy in Christ to fight in his spiritual battle
against sin, and in such measure to prevail, as that none living can justly
accuse me, of any such sins, as E.G. says our preachers do maintain, even he
(I say) knows that in no other respect, but only in the earnest desire of
your salvation, I do beseech you, to return unto our Church again, and to
forsake that dangerous way, which that wilful man has set you in. For
Christ's sake, consider whither you are running, and what will be the end of
your race. Are you so earnest, because you would come to eternal life? Christ
knows, my desire is no less then yours: and that for this cause, I am ready
to lay down my life at his pleasure: and do daily deny my self of those
things, which might be commodious to my present condition. But (beloved) I
dare not go with you, as you are now bent because not only, danger is in the
way, but even the dwelling of death also, is the end thereof. Which (if your
eyes have not yet been enlightened to see) consider off now at length, and I
will show it you. First, I perceive your way is appointed you over the
mountain of free will: wherein, because he knew you were subject to the
terrors of wild beasts, to keep further his credit with you, he persuades
you, that you must not account your salvation sure. Then, because Page. 21.
he saw likewise, that the way was not so smooth and fair, but you should
prick your feet often, with the thorns of concupiscence, and raye your
clothes with the clay of intemperate affections, he tells you, those be but
venial sins, against which, you have not grace given you of In his confere^^
with M. Whitaker.
God: so that, it is no matter, if you can escape sinking into the quakemires
of grossest sins. Yea the more to dull your understanding, and take away your
judgment, that you should perceive no danger in all the way that you go, he
has (as I perceive) given you to drink, that sleepie cup of false persuasion,
that the moral In the same conference.
law is abrogated, and so purposes at last to transport you through a thicket
of blind Justification by faith and works: in his conference with M. Eg^r^on
merits, into which, after you are entered, you shall not be able to discern
far before you, until you light on the other side, ere you be ware, upon the
unhappy habitation of death. For he that puts his works to his
justification, falls from Gal. 2. 16. 2^. cap. 3. 10. 18. 25. cap. 5. 2. 4.
5. 6.
Christ, and so is but a dead man. But you will answer (perhaps) that you
worthily go away from our Church, as that, which in no wise, can be the Church
of God, seeing such looseness of life, is even spoken for, and maintained by
the doctrine of our teachers. E.G. tells you thus much in deed: but be not
led by and by, after every word: for I will join with you in this point, that
if this one thing, among all his falshoodes, be true, or stand upon any firm
probability, I will forthwith claspe hands with you, and receive all his other
opinions. How I have already, so far proved this accusation of his, to be
false, as that I have taken away all the shows of reasons, he could bring for
the same, you have now heard in the former part of my answer. For the rest, I
will render you (here) an account of my faith (so much as concerns this
matter) as I have learned it, at the feet of those men whom he accuses.
Which, if it be true, good, and leading to salvation, then is their doctrine
such, E.G. accusation a lie, and therefore you may not refuse to join with us
again.

I do believe that Jesus is Christ: that is, the only and whole Ier. 33. 1^.
1^ cap. 23. 5. 6. 7. Act. 3. 20.
anointed of the Lord to bring salvation unto his people. I do believe (I
say) in this same Jesus, that he is unto me, that same anointed Psalm. 110. 4.
Priest and Heb. 7. 2. 3.
King, which are the two parts of his Mediatorship. The Priesthood of Christ,
is the first part of his office, whereby he is appointed in Heb. 5. 1.
al those things, which are appertaining unto God, so as he can Cap. 7. 24. 2
wholly save all those, that come unto God by him. The effectts hereof are two.
Gal. 3. 13.
Redemption and Romans 8. 34. Romans ^. 24. 25. Heb. 7. 24.
intercession. Redemption is the first effect, whereby he has wrought for us,
the matter of full deliverance from all evils, and of a happiness far Zach. 9.
12. Heb. 7. 24. 25.
more excellent then the first was. This redemption consists in
reconciliation and sanctification. Reconciliation is whereby we are delivered
from the curse, and Romans 5. 10. 11 Ephe. 2. 15. 16. Col. 1. 20. 22.
restored more perfectly into the favor of God. Hereof comes, remission of
sins, and imputation of righteousness. Remission of sins, is whereby all Col.
2. 13. 1. Heb. 2. 14. 15. 1. ^^. 1. 7. 9. cap. 2. 1. 2.
guiltiness and Ephe. 2. 15. ^^
punishment of all sins are removed from us, by his Ephe. 2. 16 Esai. 53. 4. 5^
suffringes. Imputation is whereby in him, through the Romans 5. 19. To. 4. 35.
6. 8. 23. 24.
imputing of his righteousness unto us, we stand just, and unblameable before
God. Upon which sure grounds of remission of sins, and imputation of
righteousness, are founded the immovable fortresses of justification and
adoption. Justification is, whereby we are delivered from all guiltiness Romans
8 33. To. 5. ^7. 18 ^
of sin before God, and accounted Gal. 4. 6. 7. Col. 1. 12.
worthy the merit of righteousness. Adoption is whereby Romans ^. 15. 17. Ephe.
2* 19.
we are accounted the sons of God and heirs with Christ. By this we have two
special benefits. The first, that even al afflictions, crosses, and whatsoever
men call punishments, (which in deed are Psalm. 89. 33. 34.
but fatherly chastisments unto us) shall all turn to the Romans 8. 28.
best and for our profit. The second benefit is, that all the Psalm. 8. 7.
creatures are made subject to our rule, the Angels excepted, which do also
here Heb. 1. 14.
minister unto our health and good. Thus much of reconciliation, being the
first part of our redemption. The second is sanctification, whereby we are
delivered from the tirrannie of Rom 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 6. 21. ^. Cor. 1. 30. c. 6
11. 1. Pet. 2. 24.
sin, into the liberty of righteousness, and therein walk perpetually,
receiving from Christ, daily, new Io. 15. 5. w 16. and Gal. 2. 20. Phil. 4. 1^.
c. 2. 13 Gal. 2. 19. 20.
increases thereunto. This consisieth of mortifying sin, and rising up unto
righteousness. Mortification is, whereby sin is continually slain, that
is, more and more driven Romans 6. c. 8. 10. ^. Io. 3. 9.
out, buried and consumed. Rising up to righteousness is, whereby a holiness,
really inherent, being begun in us, is continually increased. And these
parts of sanctification, having Ephesians. 4. 15. 1^.
reference to the soul, are the same which we call true repentance, but in
respect of the actions of the body, expressing them, they are the fruits
Luke. 3. 8.
of repentance, such as are the sundry parts of obedience. Now true
repentance is Luke. ^. ^. 2. Cor. 7. 10. 11. 12.
a continual renewing of all the faculties of the mind, from evil unto good.
The beginning of this, is sorrow according unto God: (which as the Apostle
says, in the place last quoted, brings forth repentance unto salvation) and
the companion of this repentance, is spiritual war, Romans 7. 17. 20. 21. etc.
Ephesians. 6. 11. 12. 13.
or fight: which is that fight of the mind, as it is renewed against
concupiscence, the devil, the world, and their temptations: whereby it comes
Gal. 5. 16. 17. Romans 6. 12. and the places last before.
to pass, that their lusts are not fulfilled. Hitherto of redemption, the
first effect of Christ's Priesthood. Intercession is the second effect of his
Priesthood, by the which Christ makes all our obedience, being of it self
imperfect, and defiled with the flesh, to be Mal. 3. ^. 3. Romans 12. 1. 1. Pet.
2. 5. Heb. 4. 16.
acceptable unto God, through the merit of his death, and obedience. In this
effect moreover, we do consider the action of his divinity, and of his
humanity. The action of his divinity is two fold: first, that by his spirit,
he might support our weakness, and in our prayers, (when as we know not what
to Romans 8. 26. 27.
pray as we ought) might entreat for us, with sighs that can not be expressed,
that is, might prompt us inwardly, in our heart, according unto God. The second
is, whereby he being the searcher of our heart, knows the meaning of the
spirit, like as he does the imperfections and defilements of the flesh. The
action of his humanity herein, is, to be touched with the Heb. 4. 15. 16. c.
7. 25. 26. 27. Exodus 28. 38.
feeling of our infirmities, and for the same, to apply by his spirit, the
merit of his death and obedience, whereby so, taking away iniquite, he makes
our obedience accepted. Hitherto I have declared how I believe in Christ,
concerning his Priesthood, insomuch as pertains to the present occasion: now,
as concerning his kingly office, measured by the same consideration. His kingly
office is the second Esai. 9. 6. 7. Zac. 12. 1^.
part of his Mediatorship, whereby he applying unto his elect the effects of
his Priesthood, does spiritually psalm. 2. 6. 7. etc Ephesians. 1. 21. 22.
govern his Church, to the destruction of all his enemies, and to the perfect
glory of all his children. The parts hereof are, his spiritual administration
in this world, and the last judgment. His spiritual administration in this
world is, for the Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13.
gathering together of his Church, and preservation thereof, unto y^ last
judgment. This spiritual administration consists of an inward working, ^ an
outward divine governing: (whereof this place requires no further speech) the
inward working or operation, is that part of administration, which is in the
efficacy of the spirit, working inwardly by the outward means of divine
policy, as preaching of the word, ministration of Sacraments, etc. also this
same inward operation is twofold: as tending to the fulfilling of the decree
of election or reprobation: both which again are diverse in Act. 2. 29. 1.
Cor. 7. 14.
infants, and elder persons. In infants, I understand the operation after this
sort, when as outwardly, that is as pertaining to the judgment of the
Church, they are holy, through the grace of the covenant, whereinto they are
entered. And of these, 1. Cor. 12. 13.
so many as are elect of God, are after a secret and unspeakable manner,
graffed into Christ, by the spirit of God. The Reprobate of them, are for the
The 5. of To. ve. 12. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. with the 9. of Romans from the ^. to
the. 24.
guiltiness of their native ^ original sin, cast off for ever, being left
unto them selves. Now in the elder sort, the inward operation is their
vocation or calling. Uocation is that whereby 1. Cor. 2. Ephe. 4. 12.
men are gathered unto the Church. This is accompanied wi^^ distribution of
gifts, and the keeping and increasing of them. But this vocation we find to be
twofold: one common to every sort, wherein both Mat. 1^. 41. 47 Ephe. 2. 19.
reprobate and elect, are brought, as if they were a brotherhood, to one
outward society of a church. But the other is the proper calling of the elect,
2. Th. 2. 13. 14. To. 8. ^8. and the places before.
whereby they are brought unto election. Election is a Ephesians. before. and 17. ver.
Ion. 15. 19.
separation of them from the world, to be citizens together in Christ, and of
the household of God. Their proper gifts are, faith unfeigned, and the fruits of
faith. Faith unfeigned is a faith, whose faculty is altogether a Col. 2. 12.
and 1. These. 1. 3. with Ephesians. 3. 17. 20. cap. 2. 8.
supernatural efficacy, put into the heart, to the aprehending of Christ and
the promise extant in him. The proper action hereof, (or as Paul speaks 1.
These 1. 3. the work of it) is to take Ioh. 6. 29. 35. 47. 50. 53. 54.
hold of Christ, and to receive him applied unto us: whereby he not only
dwelleh in our hearts, as it is in Ephesians. 3. 17. but is also put upon us, as a
worthy clothing, like as the Apostle speaks Gal. 2. 27. The fruits of this
faith are those; which Gal. 2. 23. Ephe. 3. 17. 18
Christ works in his elect, dwelling in them by faith. The chief heads of
which are, Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. with 20. 21. verses. Rom 6. 1. 2. 3. Romans 8. 1. 2. 3.
4. Romans 12. 1. Gal. 2. 6. 7 8. 9. 10. 13. 14. 15. 16. 18. 19. 20. 21. Col. 2.
12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
reconciliation, and sanctification, and so the fruits that respect or follow
either of them. Fruits respecting reconciliation are the fruits of the
spirit, which spring from the certain applying of the same reconciliation.
And those are either respecting justification, or adoption. Those of
justification, are such as like very effects of a true cause, so do they
declare the same justification (for certain) to be applied unto us: such as
are they, which of the To. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Apostle are set down in their order: namely, an entrance into the favor
wherein we stand. The love of God toward us poured out in our hearts, that
is, by the excellent working of the holy Ghost, ple^tifully imprinted in the
sense of our soul. The peace of our conscience before God, spiritual
gladness, and glorying in these benefits. Now the fruits respecting adoption,
are those which do Gal. 4. 6. 1. Cor. 1. 21.
confirm the same yet more certainly unto us. To wit, the ^ Ibid. and To. 8.
23. 24. Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
spirit of Adoption, and hope. The spirit of adoption (which is here a
figurative speech, the cause being put for the effect) is that working of the
spirit of Christ, which Romans 8. 15. 16.
witnesses unto our spirit that we are the sons of God. Wherehence arises
that boldness, that we Ver. 15.
call God our father. And have the Ver. 33. 38. 2. Cor. 1. 22. Ephe. 1. 14.
certainty of the inheritance, so as with a pledge, or earnest penny,
confirmed unto us here, till we be brought to the full liberty, to the praise
of his glory. Hope which is the other fruit respecting adoption, is whereby
from the certainty of faith, we Romans 8. 25. 1. These. 1. 3. 10. Col. 1. 5. 23.
expect with patience, all those things which are to be fulfilled. This
patience or waiting is, the Romans 8. 25. ^ These. 1. 3. Luke. 8. 15. and 11. 19.
Col. ^. 11. Heb. 10. 32. 34. 36.
waiting of the settled or quieted soul, for the full redemption from all
evils, which redemption also I have largelier spoken of heretofore. In this
order are the fruits respecting reconciliation. Those that respect our
sanctification is the gift of right repentance Act. 15. 19.
infused in our hearts by faith, where the right season of the practicing
faculties of holy life, specially toward God and men, is called 1. Cor. 3.
1. 2. ^. 3. 14.
charity, by a figurative phrase, ascribing the whole unto a part. And the
action of this love is, a 1. These. 1. 3. Heb. 6. 10. Col. 1. 10.
laboring in every good work. Which I believe, every Christian man, so far
forth as his life is lent unto him, is 2. Pet. ^. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Ia. 2.
12. 14. 17. 26.
bound unto, not that good works are any causes of righteousness, (for the
Apostle flatly calls them the Phil. ^. 11.
fruits of righteousness) nor yet that we can deserve any thing by them, as
the filthy Papist speaks: but for others, most excellent and necessary
uses, which the holy Ghost sets down unto us in sundry places, and that both
in regard of God and of man. Of God, in showing forth his ^. Pet. 2. 9.
virtuous power thereby, to the Ioh. 15. 8. Phil. ^. ^^. Mat. 5. 19.
praise and glory of his holy name. In regard of man, according to the saying
of James. 2. 18. Show me thy faith by thy works. Which this way have use both
in respect of our selves, and of others. For to our selves they bring a double
benefit: for the present life: in 3. ^^. 3. Iam. 2. 21. 22. 24. 25.
getting a good testimony and approbation of others that fear y^ Lord: and in
2. Pet. 1. 10.
assuring more and more our own consciences of the certainty of our election.
Also toward other men our good works have notable use: whether they be now of
the number of the faithful congregation with us, or else even without the same.
Of those that are within the Church they be beneficial both to the weak and
the strong: to the weak, to confirm and Romans 1^ 19. c. 15. 2.
build them up more. To the strong, in rejoicing them and Phil. 4. 1. 10. 2.
Ioh. 4. Phil. 2. 16.
gladding of their hearts. And as for those that are without, this our holy
conversation shall either 1. Pet. 2. 12.
win them, if they pertain to the Lords election, being (as it were) a hand of
conduct unto them, in the day of their visitation, to bring them to the Gospel
of Christ) or else ^. Pet. 2. 15. ^
stop their mouths, so, as they having no just occasion, by us, to blaspheme
the truth, may be also ^. Pet. 3. 16.
ashamed when they come to speak evil of our profession. Thus (I hope) your
consciences bear me witness, that I soundly believe in Christ both touching
his priestly and kingly office, and have good works in precious account, in
their proper place: yet had I never other teachers for the matter, then such as
that wilful man, whom you would follow, has condemned, and by writing,
labored to make odious both to friends and enemies. So that it is more then
probable, that the cause of the poison which he speaks of every where so
virulently, is not at all in our teachers, but in such uncircumcised hearers as
E.G. was: who for lack of an understanding heart and humble spirit, turned
that into venom, which another man receives the permanent food of life by.
Neither is it marvel, that one and the same cause should have so contrary
effects, through the only diversity of the subjects, or matters whereon it
works, for nothing is more common in the whole course of nature. Let the
sun be an example for all: which by one and the same shine of his beams,
does not only soften the wax and harden the claye, but also most comfortably
fur* there the sprout of the fruits of the earth, and yet horribly increases
putrefaction in all other things, that have not the seed of life in them. His
next division, framed against this doctrine [ that the holy Ghost means him,
to be the servant of sin and of the devil, who willingly with delight
commits sin, not misliking it, nor striving against it] partly is answered,
(as his place of Peter) the rest is not worthy a word of answer, in regard of
the matter, being nothing but a heap of frivolous words, either quite from the
question, or else absurdly begging the question. Only for the simpler sort, I
will take some occasions that it offreth me, to lay abroad some points which
(perhaps) the Reader might wish to be instructed in, for the further clearing
of the controversy. First for the doctrine (which he puts down, with that
poysomous title, according to his accustomed lewdness) I grant it to be
ours: so it be rightly understood. Namely, that by the words, [ misliking] and
[ striuing] be not understood every light prick, or remorse of conscience,
(which even the wicked have, not by contrary affection of their will, (for
they sin with all their 1. Pet. 4. 3. 4.
heart) but by the contradiction of their judgment, which they have by the
light of nature, whereby they can inwardly Romans 2. 14. 15.
control themselves, in committing the grosser sins) but an vnfamed psalm. 97.
10. Psalm. 115. 104. 12^ Romans 7. 15.
hatred and detestation of sin, which the love of GOD has wrought in our
hearts, whereby grows that war and spiritual battle, which Paul
speaks off, and which none but the children of God have in them. As for his
impudent insinuation which in every place he offreth, (as though we exempted
gross continuing sinners, according to his devilish accusation, even such as
make but an hipocritical profession of religion, from the number of the
servants of sin, and of the devil) I will answer it no more, supposing his
book does now blush already thereat. But some will ask, if the regenerat man
do so hate sin as I have declared, how it comes to pass, that he can fall
into sin at any time. I answer, that it falls out by reason of the
unregenerate condition that is in him: since (as I have abundantly proved) our
inherent righteousness is, in this life, but begone in us. And when I speak
of a beginning of inherent righteousness, I mean such a beginning, as has a
daily proceeding and increase, even as it is said, from strength to strength.
Which whosoever feels not in him self in some answerable measure, to his
graces received (I except only the afflicted conscience, during the storm of
affliction) let him not flatter himself, he is not yet in the state of the
child of God. And in this exacting of holy life, our preachers are so far
from being behind E.G. that he is not worthy to be named the same day they
are. For he reckons it sufficient, or to be out of the compass of danger,
if we be able to abstain from such gross sins as he babbleth off in every
place, as though there were no other sins to be spoken off else. But they make
(in comparison) small reckoning of him, that has but so far prevailed: (for
many civil men, for other respects then the reverend love of God, are seen
to abstain from those sins) therefore do they also, with all instancie,
p^^test unto us, that we must resist even the first motions of sin, and go
into the field with our affections every day. And when they acknowledge the
life of the regenerate, not to be without sin, they speak not that, either
to deny good works, or that they think not the good works of regenerate men
to be pleasing unto god (whereby to dull our desire and weaken our members to
labor after them) but only to stop the way of presumption against us, and to
make us understand and see, our uncleanness and impuritie: to the perceauing
wherreof we are blockish, and more then blind. Here hence another question
seems to rise: namely whether the regenerate man can possibly fall into any
of the grosser sins. In a word, the examples of David and Peter do answer yea.
The evidence of which examples E.G. seeing so full against him, devised this
most unlearned and profane shift to avoid it: to wit, that when such are
overcome of their corruption, and so commit such sins, they are destitute of
the spirit of Christ, and loose the grace of Gods children, or of their new
birth and regeneration, until it be renewed again in them by repentance. This
is that monster of often regeneration, which he made show off before in his
second division. An egg very worthy the crow that laid it. But let us see,
what he can say for it, why we should suffer it to be hatched. Peter's example
he subtly ouerslippeth. But David (he says) did therefore pray diligently
when he was overcome of murder and adultery, that God would renew a right
spirit in him, or give unto him a new, a right spirit, and that he would not
take his holy spirit from him: to wit, as he did, for the time he was
overcome of those two horrible sins. And further he says, also he prayed
that God would give unto him a new and clean heart, whereby we understand,
that for the time, the grace of his new birth was lost, and the image of God
was wholly defaced in him. A heavy judgment, that you had no better
understanding. How grossly he abuses here the text, with his (...) glosses, I
hope there is none, that either Psalm. 51.
reading or hearing the text, will not espy it. For whereas David prays God
to renew a right or (as the chiefest translate) a firm spi^i^^ ver. 12.
in him, it is manifest he prays not there, f^r the spirit of God: first,
because in the next verse following, he makes petition concerning the holy
Ghost. Secondly the context and epithete leads, that David by these words,
required one special effect of the spirit, to be wrought in his mind,
namely, of strength and firmitie, to be steadfast in the obedience of the Lord
hereafter. The context I say shows it: for the words are these: Create in me
(O God) a clean heart, or (as some translate) a clean mind, and renew a firm
spirit within me. Nothing is more suitable, then when as the affections are
cleansed afiesh, that in the next work, stablenesse and constancy be added
unto them. But if there were no more, save only the nature of the word
[renew,] it were enough to convince this frenzy of often regeneration: for
that argues, that David prayed not for ye thing, that he was absolutely
without. The like shame receives his cause, in the next verse: Cast me not
from thy presence, and take not away thy holyspirite from me. David saw his
offense so great, and so felt the terror of Gods displeasure in his conscience,
that he was well-^ere the door of despair, knowing that his sins had
deserved, that God should utterly withdraw his spirit from him. Whereupon yet
he cries unto him, that he would not: and therehence, he that is in his wits,
must needs conclude, that it was not. Lastly, whereas upon this petition
[Create in me a clean heart] E. G. gathers, that therefore the grace of his
new birth was lost, and the image of God wholly defaced in David, it must needs
be that the spirit of slumber had oppressed him. For who prays not for this
unto God, every day? And although David had understanding of a greater
foulenes hereby, then every man ordinarily in prayer has, you see that is
nothing to warrant this conclusion, which stands only upon y^ false
principle, he that has not a clean heart, is not regenerate. Thus first you
see, E. G. can show no good reason, why his monster of often regeneration
should be suffered to live. Now will I, on the other side (by the grace of God)
prove, that it ought of right, to dye. First, I reason thus against it.
Whosoever has one continual abiding of ye spirit of God in him, has also o^e
continual state of his regeneration, but ye child of God has one continual
abiding of the spirit of God in him, (as is manifest in this example of David)
therefore he does never any more become unregenerate. Secondly, they that have
both their entrance, and their standing by mere grace, cannot be excluded by
works, but y^ regenerate have both their Romans 5* ^^
entering and standing in that state by mere grace, therefore their fallinges do
not unregenerate them. Thirdly, he that once falls away Heb. 10. 26.
after he is enlightened can no more be restored: the reason is, because there
is no more sacrifice for sin, whereby he should be restored: but, E. G.
grants that the grace of the new birth may be lost, and the image of God
wholly defaced for a time, which is all one with falling away: it should follow
therefore, that such can no more be restored by repentance. Which inconvenience
I earnestly request this man's followers to mark. Lastly, the baptism of
water, is an argument y^ our regeneration is but once wrought in us: for
therefore also is it (being the sign) but once to be added unto us. Whereas,
if regeneration were to be twice or thrice repeated, and wrought in us, then
also the same baptism must as often be repeated and received of us. Thus then we
see, the truth is, that regeneration once wrought in us by the holy Ghost, is
also continually preserved in us by the same, unto the end. And that this man's
doctrine of often regenerating is false, absurd, and extremely dangerous: and
therefore such a monster, as all the lovers of truth, ought of duty unto
God, lay violent hands thereon, that it may not live. Like as he that has
once lost his way, is readier (for the most part) to wander still from it, then
to hit upon the right path again: so in like manner, fared it with E. G. who
having run into the error of often regeneration, labors next to establish
it, with putting clean ^^t the spirit of Christ, in him that was once
regenerate. And therefore now he says: It is manifest in the word of God, that
if we be not stirred up to take heed, we may quench, and so put clean out the
spirit of Christ, we may fall away from the grace of God, we may destroy the
temple of God, we may be broken off from the vine Christ Jesus etc. First let
the Reader note, that the question here, differs nothing in effect from the
last before handled. Which was, That the regenerate might fall from his state
of regeneration for a time: and so employed an often regeneration in the saints.
Which having now (by the grace of God) with sound and clear arguments,
sufficiently overthrown, the force likewise of this must needs be fallen
together with it. So as there only remains, that we examine these places of
scripture, and satisfy the Reader in those things, wherein they seem to make
show of doubtfulnes unto him. It is written 1. These. 5. 19. Quench not the
spirice. and Heb. 12. 15. Beware that none of you fall away from the grace of
God. Again, 1. Cor. 3. 17. If any man destroy the temple of God, him will God
destroy, and cap. 6. 15. Shall I take the members of Christ and make them the
members of an harlot? also Ioh. 15. 4. Abide in me and I in you, as the branch
can not bring forth fruit of it self, unless it abide in the vine, so
neither can you, unless you abide in me. Lastly, in the 5. of Mat. and 13.
verse: If the salt have lost his saltnes^e, etc. The conclusion E. G. makes
out of these places is, Therefore all these things may come upon us, to wit,
we may quench the spirit, fall from the grace of God, etc. Which conclusion
(I hope) shall only show this by and by, that this man was very witty to
beguile him self. But first we might lawfully diminish the number of his
places: for the first place of the Corinths, if it be translated destroy the
temple of God, the word [destroy] is to be understood as an excessive speech,
comprehen^inng the end of a carnal kind of preaching the Gospel: not that
Paul spoke there, of any art, that simply had the force to destroy the temple
of God in his children, but only in respect of it own nature (in which
consideration, every wicked course in the Church of God tends so much as it
may, to the destruction of the whole: but God vpholdeth ^i^ Saints with his
own hand) and therefore Paul threatketh destruction to those that should
offer such an occasion. And according to this sense of the place, the best
interpreters translate it, corrupting or de^^^ing the temple of God: which (it
seems) many conceited Corinthians, as much as in them lay, by their carnal
eloquence daily brought to pass* Thus if E.G. be granted but the true sense
of this place, he can conclude nothing for his own purpose by it. For his
question is, of the depriving of our selves of the true grace of God received,
and this place speaks but of giving occasion to corrupt others. But admit
this place go for his purpose, let us likewise receive all the rest of his
word, without examination, and frame ^^is argument thus in his form:
Whatsoever the scriptures diswadeth us, that may we fall into, but they diswade
us from the evil here specified, therefore we may fall into them. I answer he
must understand by the word [we] a whole congregation generally professing the
gospel, such as were those to whom the Apostle wrote. And such a one (I say)
does consist of two kinds of men, which are called in the scriptures
sanctified, justified, and elect. The first kind, are in deed and tru^ly, such
before God, and in his holy presence, to wit, those whom he has chosen in
Christ, according to his everlasting purpose, and in which, he has not only
wrought an understanding of the truth, but also (anew) seasoned their hearts,
with the spirit of regeneration. Of this sort the 8. Romans entreats And these
are properly the Church of God. And for this number sake, the rest which are
in the Church, as tares in the corn, are improperly and by a figure of the
whole for a part, termed by the name and title of sanctified and justified
ones. This is plain by the Israelites, which though in deed, and in the sight
of God, they were not all ye people of God* yet we know, that all of them bare
the name of the people of God. So Paul calls all the Church of the
Corinthians, ^* Cor. 1. 1.
sanctified ones. So Peter calls all 1. Pet. 2. 9.
those to whom he writes, A holy people, and an elect generation. So Paul
calls all the Romans, Romans 1. 7.
Saints. Again, of these that bear a name with the best are two sorts. One
which hold not Christ our true righteousness and sanctification, in their
heart, apprehended by a true and lively faith, and yet have him not only in
tongue and outward profession, but are besides enlighned by the spirit of God,
in their understanding, and their judgment so formed, as that in some sort,
they Heb. 10. 29. 2 Pet. 2. 21.
show a kind of liking to reform them selves, as if they were made partakers
of the spirit of Christ, whiles that partly in words, partly in deeds, they
will after a manner glorify God, show Heb. 6. 4. 5. Mar. 6. 20.
a certain delight in the exercises of religion, with zeal and fear, and
Gal. 415.
reverence toward the Ministers. But for all that, the seed takes no root
in their heart, neither does the spirit set any new season upon their
affections: so that they are in truth, before the Lord, that sees the heart,
unregenerate still, what account soever they carry among men, or in the Church
of God here militant. The other sort of Hipocrites, attain not so far, as to
have knowledge, and reformation in judgment, much less to reform themselves,
or show any zeal or fear of God, but only content to accompany the Church
in the outward profession of Christ, and services of religion, according to
that our savior said to the Samaritan woman: you worship you know not what.
Notwithstanding Ioh. 4. 22.
because this confession of Christ, is unto the Church an outward testimony of
some inward regeneration, (until there break out of them, some manifest
stubbornness, or open impiety) they are reputed with the rest, regenerate,
justified, and sanctified* Now of these two, there is no doubt, but that the
dangers which the scripture admonishes of, may simply fall upon them: and they
become bereaved even of that they seemed to have: according to those words of
Christ: from him that has not, even that which he Mat. 13. 12.
has shall be taken away. Also as concerning the truly regenerate, I grant, that
in respect of their own strength, they may fall away, so would I have said (if
a certain measure or manner might have been admitted) that they may quench the
spirit, but to put it clean out, or quite to fall away, is not in their power
to will, much less to do. For their standing is not of themselves, but of the
Lord, not by their will, but by his grace, neither is founded upon the sand of
their strength, but upon the rock of his assured promise. Yet cannot
heerehence be concluded that then such admonition should be given in vain of
the Apostle: for as the reprobate were thereby left inexcusable, so the elect
were both stirred up to a greater alacrity and circumspectnes, (seeing the
peril set before them and their own weakness pointed at) as also graciously
exercised of the Lord, to work together with him, in the finishing of our Iud.
^. phil. ^. 1^.
faith and salvation. Example hereof for our slender capacity may be this. A
father sets his young son on horseback, and stays him thereon with his
hand, that he shall not fall: yet while the horse goes, he says unto him,
hold fast (my child) hold fast for falling: although (I say) the security of
the child rest in the fathers holding, (himself being ever ready to slip of,
either on one side or other, not willingly, but through his weakness) yet his
admonitions are not in vain, for they still stir up the childs desire, and
cause a further care of better practice. And this is a full answer, not only
to these places of scripture, but likewise to all others of like nature, that
can be brought for this purpose: namely to the 11. of Romans v. 20. which he
alleges in the 9. division, and the 18. of Ezech. v. 24. with all the rest
that follow, to prove (if his astonished senses had not failed him) That the
holy Ghost does no where teach, the truly sanctified ones to persevere in
that estate unto the end. For in all those his testimonies and examples like as
in these before, he either by gross unskillfulness, or singular maliciousnes,
seduceth his reader, with sophistical deceits: as in the petition of the
principle, both here and throughout his book, taking it still for granted,
that we hold presumptuous sinners for elect and sanctified: which is the chief
thing he should have proved. Also taking words in one signification which have
diverse, as where men are called just and sanctified, that indeed are not so:
and again, taking things as spoken simply, which are but in part, and in some
respect, as where the Corinthians are feared to be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ, and the Galathians seduced, he understands
them to be simply and altogether corrupted and seduced, which cannot be said of
the truly regenerate, but has only place in the hypocrites and reprobate.
Which because E G. so proubly has denied to be the dectrine of the holy
Ghost, let us add yet more arguments unto those against often regeneration,
that this truth may plentifully appear, to have a surer foundation in the
scriptures, then that all the heretical spirits in the world can prevail
against it. And first of these, which he (after his mad manner,) puts down
for our proofs, neither quoting place, nor naming his author, I will make
some (by Gods help) ^oo hot for his handling. First, none that are Christ's
sheep can fall away, Io. 10. 28. All that are truly sanctified are Christ's
sheep, as appears by that whole Chapter: therefore none that are truly
sanctified can fall away. E. G. staggering at the blow, knew not what to say
to the argument of the place, but hunted for his answer in y^ verse going
before it, where it is read: My sheep hear my voice, and I acknowledge them,
and they follow me. And what of this? Here (says he) it is manifest, that
Christ has elect and chosen, only such to be his sheep, which hear his
voice, and obey his word, and so follow Christ in their lives and conuersations.

First it is false and pepish doctrine, to make obedience any cause of our
election, when as Christ plainly shows, their hearing and following of him,
to be signs of their election, putting the only cause of it, in his fathers
gift, in the 29. verse. Then also a child may see, this is nothing to the
question: for we enquire not of the causes, but of the certainty of our
election. The latter part of his answer is in these words: When as therefore
we do hear the voice of Christ and follow him, then may we be sure that we
are his chosen sheep, which can never be plucked out of his hand, nor perish,
but that we shall have eternal life. But when as we refuse to hear his voice
and will not follow him, but our own fancies and evil lusts, then may we be
sure, that we are not his chosen sheep.

How this agrees with the former part of his answer, I refer it to the
reader, and what his crasie head here ran upon, I will not determine. Only this
suffices, he grants in these words, an everlasting certainty of the state
of those that are Christ's chosen sheep, therefore he grants the argument of
the place, and so consequently the question. Thus the Lord can make the enemies
of his truth to wound themselves. Another of the places he brings, I
acknowledge, which is this: The gifts and callings of Romans 1^. 29.
God are without repentance. His answer to this, is, That it was written to
prove, that though the Jews were rejected and reprobated for a time, yet at
the last they should be converted unto Christ, because God had from the
beginning chosen them, for their fathers sakes.

A lier is best known by his shifting: and it is their property, if they can
possibly avoid it by circumstances, they will never speak directly to the
purpose, as knowing they shall then be taken tardie. So E. G. being pressed with
the place aforesaid, tells us a tale of the verse going before it in the
text, that of the Jews shall also some be saved, because they were chosen for
their fathers: and so cunningly passes over the proof of that reason, which
the Apostle yeldeth, and which was now the question. For the Apostle ^^rs^ 28.
having rendered this reason, why of y^ Jews there should be saved, to wit,
because there was of them elected for their fathers sakes: he saw this needed
further proof: seeing men might think their election to be a matter of
nothing, to them that followed not the footsteps of their godly fathers.
Therefore in the 29. verse, he confirms his former reason, by this universal
and perpetual principle, For the gifts and calling of God are such, as he
cannot repent him of. As though he should have answered the former objection in
men's minds, on this sort: The gifts of God (in the 9. Chapter 4. v.) and his
calling, whereby he took unto him this nation, for his people in times past,
are not the gifts and calling of a man, who is apt to repent him of his facts,
but they are of God who cannot be changed, and is subject to no repentance:
whereupon it followed, that their election stood certain and could not be
disanulled by any means. Yet E. G. who presumed so much of his quick sight,
that he durst set down these points, and interpret diverse scriptures,
contrary to the received judgment, and sense of the whole Church of GOD, was
so blind, in espying the consequence of this place, that he asks, how this
does prove, that he can never fall away from God, that is once truly called
and sanctified.

Certainly he shall never judge colors for me, that is not able to discern
one inch before his eyes. But lest he have left any, as dim eids as himself
behind him, I will lend them these spectacles, to make the letters greater:
Whatsoever is done not to be repented of, for abides ever vnremoueably, but
the gifts that God gives, and the calling wherewith he calls his, are done,
not to be repented of, therefore they abide for ever vnremoueably. And so
consequently there is no breaking of any more. The parts are plain, and the
argument (I doubt not to avouch it against any heretic) inumcible. Now to
these arguments I will add two or three me, not as my store: (for I protest I
could fill a (...) treatise with the proofs for this purpose) nor yet as a
thing very needful (considering what has been said:) But for the desire I
have, to satisfy all such, as are not wilfully bent to contention. E. G. has
granted before, That they are certainly Christ's chosen sheep, which hear his
voice and follow him. Now we take all the truly sanctified to be such*
therefore those whom we understand here for truly sanctified are all one with
those, E.G. accounts the chosen sheep of Christ. Hereupon let this be the
third argument, for the perseverance of the saints. They that cannot be
seduced, cannot fall away, but the elect cannot be seduced: (if the word of
Christ may be taken, 24. Math. 24. verse) therefore the elect cannot fall
away. 4. Christ says, 4. 10. 14. verse, Whosoever shall drink of the water
that I will give him, he shall not thirst for ever, but that same water which I
will give him, shall become in him a fountain of water, springing unto
eternal life. Now what he understood by that water, is explaned in the 7. of
John. 39. verse: where it is said to be the spirit, which Christ would give
those that believed in him. Wherhence I reason thus: Whosoever have the holy
Ghost promised to abide in them for ever, shall never fall away, but all that
truly believe in Christ have this promise: therefore they shall never fall away,
and so consequently the state of the saints is unchangeable. 5. That
blasphemous absurdity which before he foolishly charged our doctrine withal,
touching the inward man of the regenerate, shall most necessarily be found the
consequence of this his srensie. For if the spirit of God may be clean put
out in the saints, as he most gros^y grants, how can it be avoided, but that
he makes the devil mightier then God himself? Christ indeed, is that strong
Mat. 12. ^^^
man that many times, that is, in all that are ordemed to life, enters by
force, and drives Satan out of his kingdom. And although Satan also cease
not to assault the Cities of Christ, that is, the saints in who^ Christ
owelleth by his spirit, yea and to batter some pinnacles or towers of the
same, yet that he should be able to take the spoil of it, ^^ cast out Christ
the king, and reign himself in hissteed, is abominable to be thought and
ouermatcheth in measure, the greatest blasphemy of the Papists. 6. The golden
chain of so sure a making, as the linkes can never be sundred, in 8. Romans 29.
30. verses, warranteth undoubtedly this doctrine unto us, since that
justification the lowest link, by the order of working is indissolubly coupled
with glorification, the highest link, for the assurance of possession. To
conclude, what is more firm, or can give greater security for the possession
of any covenant* then does the receiving of an earnest penny, upon the same?
Doubtless, he that receives it, reckons himself as sure of his bargain, as
if he now enjoyed it: and he that gives it, goes not again from that he
has said. If the case be so with men, (who have no faith or credence in their
word, if they be compared with the everlasting truth himself) then how much
more is the perseverance of the Saints, even to the possession of the
everlasting inheritance, certain and sure unto them, seeing God (that cannot be
changed) Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. c. 4. ^^.
has given them the holy Ghost in their hearts, not only for a seal, but for
an earnest penny to abide with them, till the day of their full redemption and
liberty? Thus (I hope) this cause shall need little labor of me hereafter.

From hence E. G. ascends to the high palace of predestination, and there
takes upon him, like a wanton child, more cockedly, then with any modesty
can be declared. For, besides the general view of the glorious buildings,
coming to the marble of Gods unchangeable counsel, and reading the writing of
his secret decree, he first insolently condemns the judgment even of the
chiefest of al such, as God has hitherto given unto his Church, to be
interpreters of his revealed will, and next that, presumptuously sets forth
himself, to be the only true expounder of the same. And thus he babbleth:
First, God has from the beginning purposed, appointed, elected and chosen in
Christ, such only to be in the state of salvation, the children of God, and
heirs of everlasting life, which are in the state of true repentance and
amendment of life, holy and blameless before God, in love and charity, and
so made according to the likeness and Image of Christ. Secondly, God has from
the beginning, purposed, appointed, predestinate, elect, and chosen all such to
be condemned to eternal death, which are not in that state of true repentance
and amendment of life. Whereupon (says he) it must needs follow, that David a
murderer and an adulterer was elect and praedestinate of God from the
beginning, to be the servant of sin, the child of the devil, and in state of
eternal death. But on the contrary, David a true penitent, a righteous and
holy man, blameless before God in love and charity, he was elect of God in
Christ from the beginning to be the son of God, and fellowheire with Christ
of his heavenly kingdom.

To my remembrance, I never read so short a speech, so full of unsoundness. If a
man would examine every word to the farthest, and diligently gather every
absurdity that falls, the words would s^arse surmount the faults in number.
To all that have their senses exercised, they are plain enough, only for the
simpler sort, I will point at the chiefest. First, he calls David the son
of God, which is a fault, in that he durst so boldly use this phrase, contrary
to the custom of the scriptures, which do no where give that title, by those
words unto any, but to the only begotten son of God, who is called [the
son of God] by an excellency. Secondly, so deep was his ignorance, that he
knew no difference between election and reprobation: whereas the former ever
tends to life, and the latter ever to death. So that whereas he says, God
has elected and chosen all such to be condemned, etc. He might as well have
said, The Prince has pardoned such a man to be hanged* Or* The father has
made such a son his heir, to disinherite him. A man would think, fire and
water could not be joined together. Thirdly, pretending that this point of
doctrine, has been hitherto corruptly taught, and that he would teach the
truth, he neglected to set down what predestination is, the description
whereof (notwithstanding) he ought most exactly to have set down: seeing
thereupon rests y^ whole weight of the building. Fourthly, in the former part
of his words, he either makes works the cause of our election, or else makes
election nothing else, but an appointment or decree of God, concerning such
signs as should tell us, who is in the state of salvation. As though a decree
were not rather directly of such things as should be brought to pass, the
things incident thereto, having a more remote consideration. Else can there be
an adiunct, without his subject? Now in the contrary member, he says, God
has praedestinate all such to be condemned to eternal death, which are not
in the state of true repentance. Who then is not condemned in the beginning of
his life? And if every one of us receive Gods special condemnation one time
of our life, where have we our dispensatio^ for that sentence afterward?
Again, a little wit might have served him to have put it down thus rather,
God has praedestinate all such to be in the state of eternal death, etc. For
so the contrariety of his members should have stood (at least) in some
proportion. Fifthly, if when a man does well, he be the child of God, and when
he sins any actual sin (for so I understand his meaning) he forthwith
become the child of the devil, and thus again and again, as often as he rises
up and falls down, it follows necessarily that the spirit of God
dispossesseth ye devil, and again the devil dispossesseth the spirit of
God, from time to time. What raging blasphemy is this? These shall suffice the
reader in respect of my labor: for it is easier to enter into more, then to
know when to make an end. And it is suffi^ient confutation, thus to have opened
him, for a man in this high point, both unskillful, inconstant, absurd, and
presumptuous. The first two whereof, showed him to lack teaching, the third,
earnest rebuking, but the fourth, severe whipping, that he might have learnd,
how he climed any more so high, till the joints of his knowledge had been
better knit, and the sinews of his understanding got more sense. The rest of
that division, is nothing but a continued course of his old shameless lying,
and a begging of that which no body will grant him.

In his next division, where he says, Because they surmise that Gods
praedestination and election, should be sure and certain unto us, although we
do evil, I ask them whereunto men are said of the ho^^e Ghost to be
praedestinate, and elect in Christ from the beginning. If by [ doing euill] he
meant as he shows in all other places, presumptuous and reigning sins, then
he is here in his old vain of lying, for we are so far from this judgment, to
call any elect, that have sin reigning in them, as that we are taught the flat
contrary, to wit, that the elect, after they are called, are no more wholly
subject unto sin, to yield willing obedience thereunto, and to serve sin.
Otherwise if he meant by [ doing euill] any kind of evil, then belike he held,
that every kind of fall or slip does cut of election. But some perhaps will
urge the former sense again, as to overthrow my answer, interpreting
reigning sin, by actual sin, betwixt which they discern no difference. If
there be any so ignorant, they must learn: that every reigning sin is actual
sin, but not contrariwise, every actual sin reigning sin. Like as al
wallowings in mire are defilings to a man's body, but every defiling is not
wallowing in the mire. To slip, and fall in the dyrt to his defiling, is
incident to the carefullest man that walks, but to wallow in y^ mire is
proper unto swine. So experience has taught the dearest children of God, that
they are subject to their defilements and falls, but if any man love to fall,
or lie still, our souls have no pleasure in him. And now to his question, I
answer thus far, as he would have me: that the elect are predestinat to a
^^phe. 1. 4. 1. Pet. 1. 2.
holy and unblameable condition in this life, and further, to be ^ph. 1. 10.
11.
gathered in Christ, unto God him self finally. Which double end of election
concerning man, if E. G. saw not, he was blind, if he did see it, he had no
good meaning to conceal ^^. But from the former end of election, he supposes
he has got a great advantage, and thus he reasons. Those only are
praedestinate to life at a times, that live blamelesly before God at all time
but no man lives blamelesly before God at all time therefore no man is
praedestinate to life at all times* He knew his first proposition would be
denie^ and thus he provided to prove it. For it cannot be said, that there is
then, or for that time, any praedestinatio^ or election unto life, for the
time, when as there is no praedestinatio^ or election unto the sanctification
of the spirit, or unto true repentance and amendme^t of life.

O seducing Sophister. How many pitfals has he made here to catch ye simple
souls withal? First he snatcheth this, as though it were given him, that
every fall or ceassing from holy actions, is a cutting off, of the
sanctification, that so he might conclude, he that is unsanctified is not
elect. But now he must restore it again with shame to his setters on. For
every fall is not a falling away, as I proved before, and a sanctified man is
reputed holy, not in that he never falls at any time, but in the estimation
of the continual tenor and course of his life, for the most part. So was David
a holy man, yea, a man according to Gods own heart. And in this sense is
Ezekiah said, to have cleaued unto the 2. King. 18. 6.
Lord, and not to have departed from him. Though his life was not without some
blemishes of 2. King. 20. 13.
rashness, and 2 King. 23 13.
gross omissions. Otherwise, if there be no sanctification but when there is a
holy action, then sanctification shall be nothing else but an actual holiness,
now if there be no sanctification but actual, then which way is 1. Cor. 1. 30.
phil. 3. 9.
Christ our sanctification? We must bury the righteousness that comes to us by
imputation, in the grave of forgetfulness, with the absurd Papist. If a man
would prosecute the absurdities that rise herehence, he should find no end.
For in these cases, not to walk in the direct path, is never to make an end of
wandering. Again, he makes his sanctification which is (as you hear)
altogether an actual holiness, the proper adiunct and perpetual undivided note
of election, which though it have no ground of scripture, yet agrees it well
with his conclusion, that there is no election at all. Thus you see this clause
[ at all times] must be rased out in his proposition, and so his mutable
predestination proves but a dream. If any man urge y^ place of Paul to y^
ephesians. 1. 4. (which it seems E. G. would have done) to infer y^ particle [ at
all times] by: as because the Apostle says, We are chosen to be holy and
blameless before God, therefore actually at all times, (understanding that to
be spoken absolutely and simply for this life, which is but in some sort and
measure.) You see, that he shall deal but deceitfully. For the holy and
blameless state there spoken of, which the Saints should be in through love,
is indeed imputative, and otherwise can intend but only a measure and
d^^pensation, not a fulness and exact perfection, which is never to be
atteyned to till the day of the full redemption of our bodies: as has been
proved. And so are all those places of scripture to be understood, that exhort
us to perfection, namely, that it is the go^^e which all the race of our life
must tend unto, and the perfectest man can be said but to ^hil. 3. 12.
g^e toward. When it is said, as in this life, a man to be 2. Tim. 3. 17.
perfect, and instructed perfectly unto every good work, there is meant
nothing else, by a perfect man, but such a one, as in regneration is Ephesians. 4.
14* 15
grown to man's state (like as it pleased the spirit of God to speak for our
capacity) who is able by the work of God, to discern betwixt things that
differ, and apply him self to every right way, far above many others, who
in comparison of him, are but children in the faith of Christ. Thus we see, how
many deceiptes were secretly couched in this argument, to overthrow the
certainty of our election. But I trust he has left none behind him, of so
simple judgment and gifts of understanding, as that knows not, a decree, to
be a steadfast thing, such as can not fail, Finally to be accomplished, what
soever falls out between: especially, the God of spirits, that knows all
things that can come to pass, beforehand, ordaining ye same. Yet this
miserable man proceeds, and says: God does from the beginning predestinate,
and elect in Christ, some to stand only for a time in the state of true
sactification and salvation, and then gives them over in justice unto
themselves, and so wipeth them out of the book of life. That hipocrites ever
attain to true sanctification, is false, and follows the form of his old
beggarly reasoning. That they are predestinate to life, is absurd, and like
himself. That he gathers it from some scriptures that make mention of a
putting out of the book of the living, as the 32. of Exodus 33. verse, and 69.
Psalm. 29. verse, utters his old ignorance and childish understanding of the
scriptures. First therefore let the Reader consider, that God writes no books
of memory, but this is only a speech borrowed from the manners of men, and
ascribed unto God for our capacity and comfort: whiles it imprinteth in the
minds of the children of God, that not one of them can be forgotten in the day
of the just, since they are now from everlasting, as plainly set down in the
foreknowledge of God, as if their names were registered in a book written for
that purpose. Therefore says 2. Tim. 2. 19.
the Apostle: The foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are
his. As for his places that mention a wiping out of the book, in Exodus it is
called, [The book that thou have written:] in the Psalm, [the book of the
living.] His just answer might be, that there is not meant the book of
predestination to life, but the communicating of the covenant, which God had
made with Abraham and his seed, whereby they were now, as in a mustre roll
reckoned the only people of God, the Gentiles being excluded. But if by way of
concession, we grant him that place of the Psalm to respect the book of
life, mentioned Apoc. 20. 12. as also any such place of scripture, reporting a
racing out of the ungodly: yet he that is not wilfully blind, may see, that
those places, are not to be taken in a full and exquisite sense, as though any
such as the scripture thus speaks of, were ever written in deed in the book
of life, but only according to the supposall of men, and estimation that the
hipocrite has of him self: so does the scripture in such places answer home,
to his own heart, that he shall be wiped out of the number, among which he
thinks himself so certainly registered and written. Which is nothing else, but
to be declared and laid open, that howsoever he has boastingly borne himself
among the Saints, he was never in truth, of their number before God. In likt
sort John speaks of those that fall away: They went out from us, that it
might 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
be made manifest, they were never of us. And this is (according likewise as I
alleged before, against the hipocrite) to take from him, eue^ that Mat. 13. 12.
which he was supposed to have. This certainly is the uttermost, that can be
concluded out of those places: although it be granted E. G. that in them is
understood the book of predestination unto life. For, that any in deed once
written in the book of life, and predestinate to be saved, can fall away, or
be crossed out of the number any more, is untrue, and impossible as I will
prove. 1. This is a certain place, that the elect cannot fall away: God
speaking by his Prophet of the new covenant, says, I will put my law in their
I^^ 31. 3*
inner parts, and I will write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. How far this reaches to the assurance I speak of,
appears by the opposition of the effects of the two covenants: touching
which, he verse. 31.
says first, that the new should not be like that, which was given unto their
fathers, neither for the form thereof: (for the new should be written in their
hearts, arguing the old to be written but in stone, as Paul also speaks)
neither yet for 2. Cor. 3. 3*
the effect, for they brake y^ covenant, verse. 32. But contrariewise touching
the effect of the new he says, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Which (I say) the necessity of the contrariety enforces as far, as
if the words had been, They shall not break this covenant, nor be separated
from me for ever. My second reason is, from that place of John: If ^. Ioh. 2.
19.
they had been of us, they would have remained with us. Which has this most
apparent consequence, that all those that are of the number of the elect, shall
even so abide for ever. For either the Apostle there, makes it a necessary
conclusion, or else his reason must be nothing worth. 3. This chain can never
be broken which the Lord himself has made: whom he Romans 8. 29.
has known before, those he has predestinate, whom he has predestinate,
those he ver. 30.
has called, whom he has called, those he has justified, and whom he has
justified, those also he has glorified. So that, what is clearer, then that
all that are written in the book of Gods foreknowledge, are predestinate, to
pass through all the middle means, even to glorification. And Paul says
afterward, nothing ^er. 38. 39.
can separate us from this love of God in Christ Jesus. 4. It is written,
concerning that many headed beast, which should so prevail with the people of
that age unto Idolatry: Therefore all the inhabitants of the earth Apoc. 1^* 8.
whose names are not written in the book of life, of that Lamb, slain from
the foundations of the world, shall worship that beast. Now when we see all
those that are written in the book of life, to be utterly exempted, from
peril of falling into Idolatry, every man sees it most equal, that they be
exempted from falling away from grace. 5. If it were possible for those that
are once written in the book of life, to be wiped out again, to what purpose
did our Savior place all his Disciples joy and rejoicing in this life, in this
meditation above all other, that their names were written in heaven? Luke* 10.
20. ^
Where any doubtfulnesse is, there is no solid joy nor comfort. Finally if it
be true that E. G. has hitherto stood in, that ever as a man stands firm,
he is predestinate to life, and when he falls, he is predestinate to death,
then it follows, that he is ever anon written in, and raced out of the book
of life, which is y^ foreknowledge of God: and so it can not be said, that
predestination, is from before the beginning of the Ephe 1. 4.
world, when as this man makes it but a daily decree for this life. The
inconvenience whereof I perceive he saw not, when he set down, that David was
predestinate from the beginning to be the child of the devil when he sinned,
and again the child of God when he repented. Well now at length, let us hear
his conclusion of this matter. Lastly (^ E. G.) we deny not, but that God has
also predestinate some, never to fall away, but to be renewed always by
repentance, and therein to persevere, even to the day of their death. But it
can not be known who are of this number, until we see this grace given unto
them of God, even to their last end. O chaungeable cameleon. Had he
conclucluded a lite before, that that no man is predestinate unto life at all
times? And what is this that he now affirms? Some are predestmate never to
fall away, but to persevere unto the end. A lier (they say) had need of a
notable memory. Touching that he says, we can not know who are of this number
till the end: I see well, he was even over head and ears in popery. But
howsoever he, or any other evil spirits, call it impiety, presumption, and
sawcines in the children of God, to hold their election in assurance, here in
this life, let us never a whit be discouraged, to walk so far in this point
also, as we have just warrant by the word of God. Concerning others, we have
little to say, this business concerns every man's self. And if it did not
greatly concern every man's own self, the Apostle would never so
vpbradingly, have bidden y^ Corinthians, enter into this examination of
themselves, saying, Try your own selves whether you be in the faith, ^. Cor.
13. 5.
prove your own selves, do you not know your own selves, to wit, that Jesus
Christ is in you? except you be reprobates. Hitherto also makes S. Peter's
exhortation, that we would 2. Pet. 1. 10.
make our vocation and election sure unto us, that is, confirm our minds
therein by a holy life. Of the notes to examine our selves by, I have spoken
hertofore more exactly, page 75. 76. where are described the several fruits of
our reco^ciliatio^. Briefly, like as by good works indeed, we acknowledge
sanctification, and from sanctification ascend to faith: (as which can be no
more separated then the fire and his light) even so, from those sure effects we
gather our effectual calling, from that calling we conclude our election, and
so our predestination in Christ, as firm, (through the infallible connection of
canses and effects) even as the throne it self, of God is firm and immovable:
and here fastening y^ anchor of our hope which never makes us ashamed, we are
carried upward, and foorthright still we fare, amids ye tempests of all
temptations (being ever conquerous through the spirit of God) until at the
last, we attain to the desired glorification.

His exhortation directed unto us, wherein he boasts to minister sure matter
of sound comfort for our relief, (as though all our Ministers do comfort us
amiss) as it received proportion and form from the prince of pride, (who
makes his instruments surpassing all others in the height of their own
conceit) so the matter of it, is as a weight of lead, specially for the
afflicted conscience, to sink it down to hell. For when the soul now
already humbled and bruised with the sense and burden of sin, shall receive
this news, that there is no allowed harbor for her safe comfort and
rejoicing, til she can attain to that stately ability of standing, as never
more to commit any thing y^ she knows to be sin, to what extremity shall
she be brought hereby? How shall she avoid the jaws of hell and despair?
(especially having already before her eyes, the terrible experience of her own
impotencie.) And he that stands firmest* can herein find no comfort, seeing
no certainty is gran^^d him, so long as his conscience can tell him of any
sin: for this man says plainly, That condemnation abides for him so long,
until he have by Christ all the works of the devil so loosed in him, that he
sin not. Which words show more fully the reach of his meaning, if they be
wayed with that, which a little after he utters: We may be ^m. ^. 32.
bold by the example of Christ's Apostle, to affirm, that no violence either
heavenly or earthly, no death, no persecution, no sword, no power or force
whatsoever, shall be able to separat us from the love of God, in our Lord Jesus
Christ, that is, shall be able to force us to sin wittingly. Here his wholesome
gloss upon the text, tells the reader, how little grace was in the man.
Besides a child cannot be deceived, that reads y^ place, but must see, that
there the Apostle speaks of the love, (not wherewith we love God) but
wherewith God loves us in Christ Jesus. Now in that he has framed it thus for
his purpose, it declares, that I have not charged him amiss hitherto, in
saying he affirms the regenerate man to have a full and absolute power to
withstand sin. Which as I have (by the grace of God) plentifully confuted
heretofore, so yet can I not, but by this flat place, press him moreover and
that worthily, with these his own absurdities and contradictions. First if the
regenerate man's ability be so great, that nothing can constrain him to sin,
then it should follow, that he cannot sin wittingly at any time, for S. Paul
plainly enough teaches, ^m. 7-15. 18. 2. 23.
that his will is, ever to d^^ that, he knows God has commanded him, and
every one of us feels this most certainly, in his own experience to be
true. Secondly, if this doctrine stand, then election is always at one stay
with the regenerate, his perseverance never fails utterly, the spirit cannot
quite be put out, and so that fair puppie [often regeneration] needs no
other violence then such, as the hand of him that begot it, brings here unto
it. And to conclude, thus we see in true consequence, al other foundations in
his book rased to the ground, for the establishing of this own brown paper
building, of man's absolute ability: which having now already, put the fire of
Gods word unto, it suffices me here, to behold the flame thereof.
Thescriptures which he wringeth, will not yield him one drop of liquor to
quench it. He fails still in this common fallation, to took that for simply
and in all respects, which is meant but in a measure and in some respects. So
for the place of the Philippians, because Paul said he was Phil* 4. 13.
able by Christ, to behave him self in all states of life, whether in fulness
or hunger, abundance or scarcity, this man will understand it, of every actio^
throughout Paul's life, and of an absolute power to perform the same, even as
he would. In like sort deals he, with the other two places, 1. Cor. 4. 4.
and 2. Tim. 4. 18. In both which, Paul speaks, concerning the offices and
duties of his Apostleship. I know nothing by my self. And, The Lord shall
deliver me from evil Romans 7. 19. phil. ^. 12. 1^.
work. For concerning the particular actions and practice of all his life,
these places of his frank confession shall for ever stand untouched, I do not
the good that I would, but the evil that I would not. And, I have not yet
attained the mark, nor am not perfect. Beside what soever may be said for
Paul's holy life, yet he reasons absurdlie from him to us: as if he should
have said: A man can carry a hundredth weight, therefore a child can do the
same. The 1. Ioh. 5. 4. hurts his cause: for the beginning of the verse is,
whosoever is borne of God, overcomes the world, which we acknowledge, namely
the work to be a doing, even from the first day of our effectual calling. The
other part of the verse is, and this is the victory which has overcome the
world, to wit, our faith, wherein if his eyes had served him, he might have
seen, that our present victory is placed, not in actual, but in imputative
righteousness only, that is, in such righteousness as we have in Christ by
faith: which surely should not be, if we had here an absolute power. And
whereas he says, there is nothing so hard or strong, which (by Christ) we
shall not be able to perform and overcome: he says truth: but the question
is not between us, what we shall be able, or how much we shall attain unto
finally: But whether our strength be at full to do good, and our power absolute
in this life thereunto. I have granted before, not only an imputation, but
also an inchoation of inherent righteousness, in all that are truly
sanctified: which though it be not in like measure with every one, yet is it
in a true measure in the weakest, and such, as has continual increasing in
this life, our inner man prevailing more and more, and our old Adam consuming
still in strength, till finally at the last point of death, it cease to be
at all: and we in the blessed resurrection with perfect bodies, receive the
crown of life: which thing God has promised unto us saying: he that
overcomes and keeps Reu. 2. 2^.
my works to the end, to him will I give the crown of life. The which
notwithstanding this our endeavor and study obtains not. for neither do we
labor and contend thereunto by our own strength, (but it is by Christ that
dwells Gal. 2. 20.
in us) neither yet accomplish we our course by any one receipt or measure of
gifts, but by daily obtaining of supplies by prayer: according as we are
commanded. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knock
and Mat. 7. 7.
it shall be opened unto you. Therefore as the middle graces and means come to
us, by the mere free gift of God, so of necessity, the ^^^all crowning of them
must be reckoned: that all the glory may be the Lords, who as he has not
spared, to give his own son for us, so he will Romans ^. 32*
not fail to gratify us in all things, with him. There is the goal, and
this is the race which we are set to run in, unto the same. Which course
because we can not so steadfastly hold on, but that we do receive slips and
soiles often times, our Savior e^tsoones purges us with his everlasting
sacrifice, and makes up our breaches by imputation of his unspotted
righteousness. Thus as we have our enemies, that always may annoy us, so yet
we have our captain sure, that ever will deliver us. Now if any man, hard to
be persuaded, will here stand questioning, why GOD restores us not in one
moment, but commits us to this battle, with Satan and the flesh, whilst
we remain in this life: the reasons are at hand: first to beat down our pride
and to humble us, that when the natural ticklinges of our proud conceiptes
would arise, from the knowledge of our favor with God, the present sight of our
remaining corruption, might strike down our tails again as the Peacocke
does, at the beholding of his foul feet. Secondly, for that it is the
pleasure of God, thus by our weakness, to bring 2. Cor. 12. 9.
his power to perfect manifestation, whilst the foyles of sin shame us, even
as the despitefull buffetings of an adversary, and force us ever anon, to
run for rescue: whereby we continually testify, that the power of the Lord
only saves us. Of this our condition, the conducting of y^ children, of
Israel into the land of Canaan, is a lively picture. We doubt not, ye Lord
could have brought his people to the promised land, without battle: But
because the land of Canaan, was a figure of our heavenly country, it was his
pleasure, that they in daily conflicts, should be found conquerours, yet by
his might: for so it was told them, The Lord shall fight Exodus 14. 14. Ios. 6.
for you. A goodly testimony thereof they had, at the winning of Jericho,
whose walls fell down at the sound of the trumpets compassing them. Which
has a comfortable proportion, with the victories that Gods children have in
their spiritual battles: the prayers and groninges of the faithful, being
no vain or idle noise, flying about in the air, but like those pearsing
trumpetes, at the sound of which, the strong walls of Jericho were ouerthrown.
moreover, after God had brought the Israelits into the land of Canaan, he left
amongst them, the Philistians, and other enemies, to the end they might not
grow secure, and that their faith might so be tried, whether they would truly
cleave unto the Lord, or be drawn away after strange Gods. In like sort has
he placed us, to sit with him, in the heavens in Christ, and Ephe. 2. ^.
mean time, here has left us, the remnants of sin, as enemies to fight
withal, both to exercise our faith, and advance his glory. In the
understanding of this, is sure matter of sound comfort, wherein (I am sure) all
the children of god do rest, with great relief unto their chased souls, in
this life. That E. G. felt it not, nor contented himself therewith, I leave it
to the Lord, in his time, to reveal the cause.

An Admonision to the followers of Glouer and Brown.
Understanding the knitting up of Glouers exhortation, to be directed
(especially) unto his followers, I willingly do observe the same course, as
one that in the earnest desire of my heart do account nothing too dear that I
might compass, to do them good withal. And first I address my self to
those that have tractable minds among them, such as in whom, the Lord has not
shut up all way of entrance, but that do yet, willingly lodge this thought in
their hearts, namely, that they are men, and may err. Beloved in Christ Jesu,
of what value, E. G. admonition put in the conclusion of his book, has been
with you, hitherto, I know not, What estimation it ought to have, either
touching the doctrine of our church, or yet the behavior of such, as we take
to be worthy Ministers in the same, I refer it unto you, now again a fresh
to be considered. If he have been found, in the trial of these printed
points, a man of good report, then give him credit in the rest, which as yet
are not brought to light. But if his perfectest pollishinges, which (no doubt)
he first adventured to the vewe of the world, be found (as has been proved,)
false, heretical, and popish: and set out with such arguments, as in proving
one assertion, confute an other, yea almost every a^^e^tion, so put down, as
one part overthrows an other (if it be not greatly helped, by a favorable
reader,) how much stands it you in hand, to bethink you, of some convenient
time, and way, to despatch your selves of all his snares? I know not all the
unsound conclusions he has left in writing amongst you: I have heard there be
many: and his conferences with M. Whitaker, and M. Egerton do notoriously
prove it. Me think, howsoever in some less matters your judgment might fail
you (a thing incident to the chiefest) yet, that you should not have taken so
slight marks of your way, as not to discern your selves, carried backward
into Egypt again. Which I speak not (beloved) so much to reprove your
oversight committed, in this behalf (for with trembling I consider mine own
frailty also) but to stir you up, now at length again, to reuiew your
estate. It may be, when you first resolved, to take that part whereon now you
stand, you neither discussed all the contrary arguments, nor foresaw all the
dangerous inconveniences, that time (through the long patience of God) has
now offered unto you. It was hard, (beloved) that you could be drawn, to
sunder your selves from us: more hard, that you did it, with bitterness and
reuiling: it should now be stoninesse, if you would despise brotherly to
commune with us, who have hitherto in some measure of patience, and love,
endured all your former dealings. Go too then: what gains has your departure
brought unto you? I mean what sincere holiness? What profound judgment? What
spiritual peace and rest unto your souls? I confess E. G. talks of more
holiness then we dare profess, but the question is whether he practiced so
much, so much (I say) either as his writings require, or as we by the grace of
God, in these our lives attame unto. You know he writes* that those that Page.
14.
have put on Christ, have strength and power, to abstain from sin, and keep
the commandments, and that a man is not yet justified, but page. 23.
condemned, all the while he is subject to sin against his will. Now what
case was he in, by his own rule, that ^inned wittingly when he wrote his
book? For unto him, so exercised in reading the word, as he would seem, this
place could not be, but as common as his name: Admit ^. Tim. 5. 19.
no accusation against an elder, without two or three witnesses. Judge ye now
whether he was grossly overtaken with the transgression of this canon, who has
accused not one, but all the elders of our Church, for poisoners of souls, and
horrible blasphemers of God, without offering one testimony, or producing one
witness for that he says. And albeit we be such, as acknowledge gladly our
lives to be hid with Christ in God, yet we doubt not (let the glory be the
Lords) but in daily mortification of our members, and striving after the way
of life, to be set in trial, against the proudest iusticiarie in the world:
though we hang down our heads before God, and are even nothing. Yea, I trust
(beloved) I may speak it, without all just suspicion of vain boasting, that
there be amongst us, that have attained further in Christ, then the abstaining
from such gross sins as this, and have testimonies far above the report of
your leaders life: though they dare not, neither may, profess so far as he.
But Satan prepared him, an easy entrance into this presumption, when he
persuaded him, that the first motions were no sin, and that the lesser sins
were venial. A trewantly scholar, may compare with a better then himself, in
soon learning out his book, if he may have liberty to tear out so many
leaves as he lists. This is also the case of the papists. As for exact
knowledge, or deep judgment, if you suppose your selves to have attained
any, since you went from us. O look back again (I beseech you) it may be
(if you look earnestly) you shall now perceive it otherwise. I am sure
(beloved) you hate the house of bondage, and detest the rules of the Egyptian
worship, which some of you (perhaps) have known, some have heard your fathers
report off. Think you then the dealing of E. G. toward you, to be
tolerable, that nousleth you again in the laws of Egypt, and gives you to
drink (that I know of, partly by his public, partly by his private writings)
six of the chiefest ingredients of that cup of the mother of fornications?
Mark them now again, and consider them better. 1. That Conf. with M. Whitaker.
the first motions are no sin. 2. That there are sins of their own nature,
venial. 3. That His printed book.
there is to the regenerate no assurance of our salvation. 4. That the
regenerate have full free will, and power to keep the commandments. 5. That
Gods predestination stands not eternally, firm and unchangeable, without
all regard of works. 6. That we Conf. with M. Whit. and M. Egerton.
are not justified by faith alone, but by faith and works. To these, being
maine grounds of popery, he adds of his own. 1. That the ten commandments
are abrogated. 2. That Conf. with M. Whitaker.
love is come in place of them. Now what love he meant, that should be
distinct, from the love required in the commandments, I commit it here again,
unto your selves, to chew upon. But to come unto the man, that first led you
out into the wide field of error. Are you made wiser by him, according to ye
wisdom of God? Let not affection beguile you, but judge with righteous
judgment: and (me seems) this may be a rule sufficient, for the present, to
try your case by Questionless, if your knowledge have proceeded on unto
better, then ye things you have learned, since your departing tend not to the
overthrow of any truth, you had received before, but to the enlarging and
fuller garnishing of the same: otherwise you must needs confess your gains
to be loss, and all your winninges your spoil. Now this (sure) you had
learned: as by all means, to seek the gayning of your Mat. 1^. 15.
brother that has sinned, so likewise freely and simply to forgive him, those
quarrels and offenses Ephe. 4. 32. Col. 3. 13.
you have to lay against him, in like manner, as God in Christ has forgiven
you. But your teather since that has taken you out a contrary lesson, if you
mark it well: namely That you must never forgive your brother having offended
Ans. to M. Cartw^ightes letter, pages. 37. 38.
you, except he first repent thereof, and seek reconciliation. Consider now
whether this hold any proportion with the Lords merciful dealing toward
you. Did he withhold your pardon till you repented? Or did he not rather give
it you, whilst you were his enemies? Romans 5. 8. ^^.
How in the mean time (if your brother persist a space obstinate) can you
pray, Forgive 1. Cor. 14. 40.
us our trespasses, as we forgive etc. Secondly, you knew this Canon, Let all
things In his order of studieng, ^^^* ^itle, against parish p^. etc. and A^^t^
M. Cartw^^ghts letter. Page. 14. 28.
be done comely and in order. Suppose you to keep it, and embrace his doctrine
also, who says. Any one of a Church may excommunicate, if the rest will not
join with him. Consider of what consequence that may be: seeing diverse men
judge diversely, and one man in a multitude (many times) esteems of a thing
contrary to all the rest: and that falsely too. Thirdlye, mark this assertion:
One default of a congregation in separating the Ans. to M. Cart^ let. Page 8.
unworthy, may disanull it for being a Church. Can there be a readier knife,
to divide all the Churches in the world withal? But you know it is false, as
is manifestly proved, by the example of the Church of Corinth, who, though 1.
Cor. 5.
they had not separated the incestuous person, yet Paul even then, acknowledged
them for a Church of God, and sanctified ones in Christ Jesu* 1. Cor. 1. ^.
If he say, this was only a negligence in the Corinthians, which they afterward
amended, he shall help his cause nothing thereby, for in the place I have
quoted, he makes negligence of force sufficient to disanull a Church.
Wherefore either Paul was to be blamed, that called ye Corinthians in this
case, a Church of God, or else he was a dangerous Scismaticke, that taught this
point of doctrine contrary to him. 4. Whereas he holds, that this outward
discipline is the covenant between God and us: if you mark the Page 8. 18. 2^.
print of his foot well, you shall see that he went not right forward here as
you believed, but was haled backward into the den of Popery. For Habac. 2.
4. Romans ^. 17. Mark. 16. 16. ^o. 1. 11. 12.
not by works, but by faith, is the covenant kept on our part. I know he
practices some proofs to the contrary afterward, but as one miserably
ignorant of the difference of the two covenants. T^^^. against parish Preach.
last lease. Ephe. 2. 20.
5. He accounts discipline the groundworke of the church, in which doing (you
know) he puts it in y^ place of Christ himself, whereby (therefore) it is
become an Idol unto him. 6. So far he proceeds in seducing, that he says,
Under the title (Against parish Preachers, etc. and in his book of the life
and manners of true Christians.
the wife ought to go away from her husband, (if he will not go with her) in y^
case of want of this discipline: and (which makes his fault y^ worse) he
pretends ground for this, in the 1. Cor. 7. 13 Which place gives liberty,
only against an unbelieving party, which will not be persuaded to embrace the
Gospel of Christ, nor in any wise to depart from Idolatrous worship. Now what
is this to enforce her going from him, only upon want, or bondage of the
outward discipline where they dwell. But of this man's absurdities hitherto, his
time comes shortly to be better known. I hear besides, that there is one
among you, who whispereth already in corners, that we must not believe in the
holy Ghost. Is this to increase (beloved) and to abound more and more Phil. 1.
9. Col. 1. 9. 10.
in all judgment, according as the Apostle exhorts us? Or is it not rather to
go backward, and to loose even that you had attained unto? Now to the last
point, concerning your peace. I mean not here the outward peace, but I offer
again to Romans 5. 1. 2. 3.
your view, the peace of your conscience, eue^ the inward rest and repose of
your souls with God, in respect of this strange course you have lately
undertaken. Whereof because you are best privy in your selves, I refer it also
most unto your selves. Only of those things, that in this respect, have bin
apparent to all men's eyes, I will briefremember you. This is easily granted of
all that know God: what course of life soever has the approbation of Gods
cheerful countenance shining into the conscience of the practiser thereof, it
is such, as being founded on the sure word of God, is the more constantly held
on, and continued unto the end. For the spirit within, and the word without,
joining to the testifying and teaching of any truth unto us, bring us to such
peace and comfort with the Lord, in the practice of it, as makes us more and
more assured thereof, and so the firmelier to persevere therein, even unto the
end. Contrariwise, that course or demeanor of life, that has any other
foundation then this, as it shall never be confirmed by that inward
approbation, so is it exceedingly subject to continual changes and reuoltings.
If we shall therefore conjecture of your inward peace, by the stedfastnes of
your outward deporting, and carrying your selves, in this your separat course, I
suppose, we cannot deem, that y^ peace of God has possessed your minds this
while. This (as In the title (Against vain logic, etc.
you know) your great leader has writ, and not hitherto recanted, that lodgick
is an unlawful Art for Christians, being forbidden by the scriptures, so that
he calls it a Heathenish fopperie, In the title (Against their curious
method^^* etc.
and exhorts to leave and beware of it, as though the end of it led unto
death. Mean time, himself uses it as well as he can, in all his book, Of the
life and manners of true Christians. And in his answer to M. Cartwrightes
letter, yea and of late, admitted reasoning by Sillegismes in his own order*
put down in writing before for the form of the conference. Let him not here
bleare your eyes with this foolish saluing of the sore, That where he has
practiced logic himself any way, there he has done it, but to foil us
with our own weapons, and as forced thereunto by our subtilties. It does but
declare his divinity to be pitiful: for whatsoever is indeed unlawful, and
simply forbidden by the word of God, ye same by no circumstance, time, nor
occasion, can be made tolerable, while that word endures. Secondly, whereas
he once In the title (Against disordered preaching at Paul's Cross.
provoked you all, to flee out of England, if you loved (as he said) your
salvation and safety, and would not be guilty of tempting God: Of later time
again, by priuater writings and his own practice, he has counseled a
resorting to our Sermons. How many of you, have been distracted thereby, I
leave it unto your consciences, whilst some (perhaps) received it, othersome
thought strange and refused to give ear unto that counsel. Look also upon
his late subscribing, by your selves. Lastly, that I exceed not my purpose in
length, be think your selves, what glue he may have to set these two together.
No Ans. to M. Ca^t. letter, page 39.
part of church discipline can be wanting, but the church does straightway go
to ruin thereby, (for he says, it is the life of the church.) And again,
There may be a true church of Coafer. with M. ^. and M. E.
God without the presbytery. Now therefore beloved in Christ Jesu, since your
going out with this man, has had so hard eue^t in many of you, as to bring you
to the unrecoverable rocks of E. G. and leads eue^ the better sort, (whom
Gods judgment has not as yet hunted forth so far) to a manifest decaie of
true judgment and understanding, joining thereunto, the fearful companion of
uncertainty, and restless course of life, forsake whilst yet there is time,
such accursed leading, and return to us your brethren again: who, whilst you
hold firm the foundation with us, will never shrink you. And of this, it
stands you in hand the rather to have care, as your contrary dealing
hitherto has so apparently damnified, the just cause of Christian discipline.
Men of any judgment and exercise in the scriptures may easily perceive, and
do report, with what spirit Brown has cride for discipline. The greater
number being of little judgment, condemn all for him. O deep reach of Satan,
the father of subuerting subtilties. But hereof, I mean not to make this my
place of complaint. Thus much (therefore) unto those, of whom there remains
hope. The rest I have nothing to say unto, but this: there will be a day,
wherein the Lord will make it manifest, he never sent you: and require the
blood of his saints, which you have caused to be spilt, at your hands again:
and that most justly.

PSALM. 8. 2. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, have thou ordained
strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and
auenger.
Praise and thanks, be unto the Lord our God, for evermore.
Faults escaped.
Page. 53. Line 30. for while, read why.

Page. 93. Line 29. read abides for.

Page. 103. Line 3. for work, read word.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf 1586.


