A SHORT TREATISE, OF the cross in Baptism contracted into this syllogism.

No humane ordinance becoming an Idol, may lawfully be used in the service of
God. But the sign of the cross being a humane ordinance is become an Idol:
ergo. The sign of the cross may not lawfully be used in the service of God.
Amsterdam Printed by I. H. 1604.

The latin avthorities Englished.
1 They which will treat of all sorts of Idolatry, must needs take the name
of an Idol in a larger signification. By the name therefore of an Idol is
understood: whatsoever besides the true God a man does propose or frame to
himself to be worshipped, either simply, or in some respect.

2 For Idols or images have greater power to corrupt a silly soul, in that
they have a mouth, eyes, ears, nose, hands, feet, then to correct it, in
that they neither hear, smell etc.

3 The sign of the Cross which is made in the forehead, or in the air, is
sacred and venerable.

4 We adore the sign of the Cross, by which we have received the Sacrament of
salvation.

5 The christians from Christ's time hitherunto have worshipped with the highest
love, both the wood of the Lords cross, and the sign of the cross: with
which they daily fence themfelues.

6 Defend me Jesus, from all evil vices past, present: and to come, by the
sign of holy cross: and by the in estimable price of thy just and precious
blood.

7 If thou seek any law for this in scripture, thou shall find none. Tradition
is avouched to be the author, custom the confirmer, and faith the obseruer.

8 At every passage, at every setting forward, at every cominge in and goeing
out, at putting on of our clothes, shoes, etc. We stamp our forhead with the
sign of the cross.

9 And with often crossinge guard thy for head, that the destroyer of Egypt
find no place in thee.

10 Christ's followers do by the sign of the Cross, shut out the unclean
spirits.

11 The Cross guardeth the mind, it takes revenge on the devil, it cures
the deseases of the soul etc.

12 Whose virtue, perfecteth all sacraments: without which sign nothing is
holy, nor any consecration tak^th effect, and whosoever are the Ministers of
the Sacraments, whatsoever hands do dypp or annoint the comers to Baptism,
out of whatsoever mouth the sacreed word do proceed, the authority of
operation does by the sign of the Cross, make effectuallall Sacraments.

OF THE SIGN OF THE Cross in Baptism. The use of the Cross in Baptism is
not a thing indifferent, but utterly unlawful. For this reason.
IT is against the Apostles precept 1. Io. 5.21. PROOFS OF THE MAYOR.
Babes keep your selves from Idols. For the explanation whereof two things
are to be scanned first: what is meant by an Idol. Secondly: how far we are
to keep our selves from the Idol. An Idol is whatso ever besides God is
worshipped with divine honor.
quicquid preter deum diuino colitur honor: and though some restrain an Idol
to a visible form: because it is derived of apotou eidous ^et as a learned
writer observes Zanch. de redem P. lib. 1. cap, 17, Ths. 5:
Qui de omnibus Idolatry generibus acturi ^unt, latius nomen Idoli accipiant
necesse est Idoli igitur nomine intelligiur quicquid homo tanquam deum vel
^^mpliciter vel katati sibi extra verum Deum proponit fingitque colendum.
Neither is this spoken without good rea^^n, for nothing is properly an Idol,
as it is a visible form* but as it is religiously worshipped.
quate ^^s est visibilis forma, sed quatenus reli^^ose colitur If therefore it
be worshipped it may be an Idol though it be no visible shape otherwise the
worshipping of Angels and the souls of the just men were no Idolatry, seeing
these are invisible spirits. and therefore the sign of the Cross. If it be
religiously worshipped, may prove an Idol though it be transiens quiddam a
thing vanishing in the Air and no permanent form. For as that learned Zanche
speaks there is a duplex A twofould Idol the on real the other imaginary
conceived only in the mind
Idolum, the one real the other imaginarium et tantum mente conceptum.

For answer to the Second question. Men may keep themselves from Idols two
ways viZ. a cultu, et ab vsu Idoli from the worshipp, and from the use of the
Idol. For the first, How far we are to keep our selves from an Idol, 1 Cor.
10.15, to 23.
S. Paul is so strict that he allows not the christians so much as to be
present in the temple at the Idolatrous feasts, though they did it without any
internal opinion, or external action of worshippinge the Idol.

But John in this place does not speak s^ much of the worship as the use of
the Idol for (as Aug. in psalm 113. well observes) the Apostle commands
vt caueant non tantum a cultu simulacrorum, sed a simulacris ipsis. that they a
void not only the worshipp of the Images, but also the images or Idols
themselves.

Now the use of an Image, or Idol, may be civil or religious, and both of
them public or private.

That an Image, even such an Image as is Idolatrously worshipped, may be made
and retained for cyvill respects of ornament, story or such like: we make no
question. though the tollarating of them in open and public places, even extra
cultum be offensive and turn into a snare, as Gideons Ephod was to his
posterity: when it was abused to Idolatry. And upon this ground we yield,
that though the Cross be apparently an Idol, yet in Princes Banners,
Coronations, Coin, Crown, or any other cyuill respect it may have a lawful
use. But that any thing of man's deuisinge being worshipped as an Idol should
be used religionis ergo and in the worshipp of God, seems directly against S.
Io^^ precept, for, how do I keep my self from the Idol, or how do I sheew
my Zealous d^testation of that filthy Idolatry: when I r^tayne it: and use it
so honorably, as in the Temple, in the Sanctuary, in the service o^ God. Which
interpritation of this place of S. John, the Church of England Homil. ^ga,
peril of Idolatry part 2
does on the warrant of Tertullian approve and comend.

And this point is further strengthened by the second commandment: Exodus 23
and 34 13 Deuteronomy* 7.5, Ps, 16, 4
which forbids not only to worshipp: but even to make any Image, or any
similitude whatsoever, to wit, ad cultum, or for religious use: as according
to the scripture the best Calvin, insti. li: 1 cap. 11 V^ ^in. cathe. in
expos^t, secundi, precept. Petr. Martyr loc comclas 2 cap 5; sect 22 Hooper in
2 precePt. Zanch: de redemp^ ^. lib 1 c^p. ^5
interpret^ors, partly against Images in Churches, partly on the words of the
precept do most naturally expound it. for suerly, if Idolatry it self as
amost execrable thing be forbidden, then all occasions and means leading
thereunto are likewise prohibited. And what stronger provocation to that
spiritual whordome: then erectinge Images in the place of Gods worshipp? Plus
Babington on the 2. commandment. Perk. set: cause. ca, 21 Allen on the 2 Com.
Dod on the 2. com,
enim vt rectu Avgustinus in psalm. 113. Valent simulacra ad^uruandam infelicem
animam, quod os ^abent, oculos habent, aures habent, ^ares habent, manus
habent, pedes ha^ent, quam ad corrigendam quod non ^oquentur, non videbunt, non
audient, ^on odorabunt, non tractabunt, non ^mbulabunt.

And therefore without doubt the mea^ing of the commandment is to bind ^he
Church: from all such snares and al^uerments to sin, and therefore does
Au^ustyne in quest. supro Leuit. q. 68. well ^onclude from this commandment
that ^uch making of an Idol can never be just or ^awfull.

Now if no similitude at all be tollarable ^n Gods service, then much less any
that ^ath been and is worshipped Idolatrously.

Tertullian against the Gnostickes: ac^ompted them Idolaters not only which
wor^hipped, but those also which made and retained Images (nemppe ad cultum or
for holy use) and in his book de Idolatria, he vehemently reproved the very
makers of Images, though they did not themselves worshipp them, which sheeweth
in what execration the primitive Churches held any religious use of an Idol.

The like we may find in Epiphanius ad^ Iohannem Epu^m Hicrosal. Where he
reports, that finding an image of Christ, or some Saint, hanging at a Church
door, he^rent it in pieces, avouching that to hang a^ picture in the Church of
Christ, was contra autoritatem scripturarum contra religionem christianam:
contrary to the authority of the scriptures and the christian religion.

From hence I conclude, that if the godly fathers were so vehement against
erecting^ Images of Christ, and of Saints, even a^ that time: before any
worshipp was given unto them. Much more would they withstand it now after men
have made Idolles of them. And if they would not suffer an Idol so much as in
the place of Gods worship: would they endure themselves to use such an ^doll as
the Cross: in the service and sacraments of God. Their Zeal against that
spiritual fornication: would never permit them so highly to honor, such an
execrable thing: neither was their Zeal herein without ground of knowledge:
For the spirit of God in Psa. 115.8. speaking of Idols, They (says he) that
make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that trust in them. Where a
plain difference is made: between makers: and worshippers of Idols: and both
condemned, as curssed transgressors of the law, shall any then make the Idol
of the cross and that religionis causa and yet be innocent?

Qu^stionlesse by David's Psa 16, 14
example we must make no mention, that is keep no honorable memory of an
Idol, and therefore with out doubt: not give it so much honor as to use it: or
the memorial thereof in the house of God, and in his holy worshipp, but as
Isai says Isai 50.22
, We must pollute the relics: and the very covering, and ornament of the
Idol, and cast them away as amenstrous cloth, and say unto it get thee hence.

PROOF OF THE MINOR
Now if any doubt whither the sign of the cross be adored: and so made an
Idol, let him well consider the tract of Bellarmine de a doratione crucis,
where distinguishing the Cross on which Christ was hanged, from the similitude
thereof he says, other crosses like to this, are accounted sacred Images
cetere cruces illi similes inter sacras imagines numerantur and after he
distinguishes those similytudes of Christ's Cross into the Image and sign of
the Cross, so that if the Image of the cross be taken for an Idol (and who
knows not that it is the universal Idol of popery: and to be adored, even
cultu^latrie (which worshipp as they themselves hold is due only unto God) the
sign of the cross must needs be taken for no better. Besides the same, De
Image lib, 1^ 3^.
Bellarmyne having as is said distinguished the cross: into three sorts: the
cross, the Image of the cross, and the sign of the cross, he lays down
this doctrine generally of them all, omnes cruces adoramus and perticulerly of
the sign of the cross he says, we adore all crosses de Imag. lib, 2 cap. 29.
signum crucis quod in front vel in aere pingitur esse sacrum et venerabile.
To this agrees Portiformus Sarisb: 4 where it is thus professed adoramus
crucis signaculum per quod salutis sumpsimus sacramentum.

And that the Image and sign of the cross is of one, and the same account
with papists, appears evidently as by diverse: so perticularly by Heart: For
Docter Raynoldes Confer: with Heart Cap; 8: diuis-4
sheewing that the Church of England, has justly left the sign of the cross
out of the supper for the Idolatry thereof, does prove that it is worshipped as
an Idol, by such testimonies as indeed belong to the Image of the cross,
which Heart no way excepted against, does imply, that look what estimation they
have of the Image: the same they have of the sign, and what honor is due to
the one: is due to the other. For in very deed, they carefully teach, Andra.
orthod: e^pli lib 9. Bellarm. de imag, l^b, 2 cap, ^0 Tho. Aquin part 3. q. 2
art. q^art. and d^uers other
that it is not in regard of the matter, wherein the cross is painted, or the
color whereby it is shaddowed, but only an^ simply for the expressing of the
liknes o^ Christ's cross, and for the representing o^ Christ crucyfied (which
the sign performs as well as the Image) that the adore the cross with the
same honor, that is due vnt^ Christ himself. And this no doubt was the
meanning of Aquinas when he says the every effigies or liknes of the cross
(whereof the sign is one) is to be adored cul^latrie and Costerus does avouch
that the same worshipp is due to the sign, Ibidem
as belongs to the very cross of Christ, when ^ says (though falsely)
Coster. En^h^^, cap 11,
christiani a Christ temporibus semper summa venerati^ne coluerunt ipsum signum
dominic^ crvcis et signum crvcis qvo se qvotidi^ maniunt Mark that the sign
of the cro^ is worshipped summa veneratione with t^ highest degee of honor, and
as O^thod. expl^ce. lib, 9:
Andra^^s in express words says in the same man^er, that the Image of Christ
himself is ^orshipped, then the which what can be ^ore clear to prove that not
only the Image: ^ut the sign of the cross is by the papists ^ost
Idolatrously worshipped?

If any say that to the sign of the cross ^one boweth the knee or vaileth the
bonnet, and therefore it is not adored. I answer. First that adoration is
interne and externe: and ^he externe adoration is therefore Idolatry, because it
proceeds from the interne, as ^ancheus Zanch: de redempt. lib 1 ca: 17 These: 5
very learnedly, and largely, ^eeweth.

If a man invocate to an Angel or give a ^y honor internal to a creature,
shall it not ^e called Idolatry, Ephe. 5.6 Colos. 3 5
exceept he bow outward^ unto it? How then does Paull say that co^etousnes is
Idolatry? For a rich man does ^ot outwardly worshipp his goods, yet because he
gives unto it interne Mark 10 24 1 Timothy 6 19 Luke 12: 15
confidence which is due unto God, it is truly called his ^doll, as unto the
Sardanapali Phii 3.19
there belly is termed there god: Right so the Papists ascribinge to the sign
of the cross, that honor and confidence which belongs to God, do make it an
execrable Idol: and so most unfit to stand in the sanctuary, or to be annexed
to the holy things of God. For first they ascrybe unto the sign of the
cross: power and virtue, to mcryt pardon at least for venial sins, quest,
disputat, de venal pecto
as appea-reth by (r) Tho. Aquinus (s) Bellermine and (t) Rhemistes.

de effect sacrument. li 2 1 Timothy 4 sect 13.14 Bellar. de effect sacr. lib 2.
cap, 31 Unto a rude clown whose dull understanding cannot reach to higher
things, this only (says h^) suffices for his sa^uatio^.
Also it is held to partake of power efficient, and imediatly (v) operative, and
that t^ convert sinners Marshal de cruce fol. 114 115. yea to gain salvation,
Hosius (x) contra Brent. p. 227. and generally the whole rabl^ of Romish
Doctors do teach to putt great affiance in this sign for chasing away devils,
and curinge diseases, and sanctifiynge both man, and other creatures, to the
use of man.

Secondly, I say indeed they do give outward, as well as inward worshipp to
the cross. For it is apparent that they invocate it in the same manner, that
they invocate saints when they say per crucis hoc signum fugiat procul omne
malignum by this sign of holy Cross let evils all fly far from us.
Again, by the sign of the holy Cross, In officio sanct. cruce printed in
English anno 1599.
from our enemies dcliuer us o Lord our God Also in another place, victorious
Cross and admirable sign, make us triumph and joy: in heavenly courts
divine. Yea in prayers they join it with Jesus Christ, as in officio missae is
to be seen, where they supplicate: By the mercy of Jesus Christ, by the a^de
and sign of the cross, by the intercession of the blessed virgin,
^per mise ecordiam Jesus Christi, per aux ilium et signum crucis, per
intercessionem beat Mariae etc. They couple it also with the blood of Christ
in these words defend me Jesus ab omnibus vitiis, malis preteritis, presentibus
et futuris, per signum sanctae crucis, hor. present ad us^m sarum Parisijs
impre^s. anno 1498.
et per inestimabile pretium iusti et pretiosi sanguinis tui. All which does
most manifestly prove, that among the Papists it is religiously honored ^oth
with inward confidence, and outward reverence. And therefore if their Idols
may in no sort be annexed to the service of ou^ God, the cross in Baptism
ought necessarily to be crossed and cursed out of our liturgy Neither is it a
sufficient answer to say, tha^ the cross amongst us is neque numero n^que vsu,
the same that theirs is, and thoug^ their cross be an Idol, yet ours is not.
For when God commanded his people to break^ down the Images of the heathen
and to extinguish the very name of them, had they performed that charge if they
had burnt al^ the Idols of Canaan, and afterward mad^ new of the same form,
and to another vse^ though not Idolatrous: yet religious? or how have we
discharged our duties and sheewe^ our detestation of that filthy Idolatry, if
having defaced all the popish crucifixes and Idols, we erect them new in our
Church though not to worshipp them, yet to any other holy use whatsoever. It is
true that our cross and theirs is the same, both in name, and form, but not
in use, for then were it Idolatrous, now I do not say that the church of
England, does commit Idolatry: but that it ought to abstain not only from the
Idolatry or worshipp, but even from all religious use of such human
ordinances and inventions, which others have and do Idolatrously adore. For,
if to erect crucyfixes, and other popish Images for holy use be (contrary to
the commandment) a keeping of an honorable memory of the Idol, Exodus: 23.15
Deuteronomy: 12:3. Hos. 2.17.
how can the religious use of the cross in Baptism being as well an Idol as
any of their Images be retained without breach of the law, Babes keep your
selves from Idolles.

objection.

The sign of the cross in the first institution was free from superstition
and Idolatry, and if the abuse which grew after be removed why should it not
recover his ancient use and indiffrency, like as as the bread in the Lords
supper which the Papists do religiously adore?

Answer. Of this nature are Churches, Pulpets etc. things of necessary use
and warranted by God himself. but the reteyning of the brazen serpent was nowhere commanded.


There is great difference between that which God has created and commanded
and that which man has ordained, for (...) one is necessary and no abuse can
alter t^ nature of it, the other indifferent and by ^buse may become unlawful;
and therefo^^ Hezekia did worthily break the brazen se^pent not seekinge to
redress the abuse of i^ Now howsoever Bellarmyne would insinu^ that the cross
is founded on scripture, y^ the weakness of his arguments do bewray the
unsoundness of the matter, aut enim sgnum crucis habere vim speritualem
Potissimum ex instituto Dei li. 2. de effect: sacra. et li. 2. de Imag ca: 29
conatur venerationem, crucis scripture autoritate stabilire de coronami!.
and therefore Tertullians judgment is to be preferre^ which plainly says, that
there is no warran^ in scripture for it horum inquit (7) si legem postules
scripturarum nullam in v^nies, traditio tibi pretenditur autrix co^suetudo
confirmatrix fides observatrix

Now it is further to be noted that a double use of the Cross is mentioned in
antiqu^tie, one civil, the other religious, against the former we do not
dispute yeldinge all reverence, to those christians which by that not^ sheewed
their reioycinge and glory, in that which the heathen counted their shame, bu^
now, that abuse has turned both the Image and the sign of the Cross into an
Idol, it seems thereby to be made execrable. For Gideons Ephod being first
a ciull monument of victory, when the people went a whoring after it, was it
lawful for the Magistrate to erect in the tabernacle or sinagogue though not
the same, yet the like, both in name and form to any religious use? would it
have sufficed to say this is not the same Ephod that Israel makes an Idol of
neither is it set here to be worshipped (for your brethren do grevously
sin therein) but only to keep ^n mind they great victory that God by Gideon
gave to Israel? Right so the cross used by the ancients to sheew that they
were not ^shamed of Christ crucified being merely ^yuill, and yet expressinge
a most christian ^esolution, having been abused, yea, continu^ng to be
worshipped, both in imagine and ^n signo, it see^eth that this filth has made
^t unfit, on any pretense of restoringe it to his ancient use to be annexed
to the holy things of the sanctuary: especially wh^^ their are so many
papists that superstition^ a^use it among us. Now for the religio^^ use of the
cross by the auncientes, it was n^uer free from sin and superstition as
afte^wardes is sheewed, and if it were, yet it bei^^ an human ordinance, and
now not only ^bused to Idolatry, but becominge it self ^ most abominable
Idol, no water can clen^^ it, nor any pretext purify it for the holy se^vice
of Jehovah. But in very deed to spea^ as the truth is, the cross is retained
among us with opinion very superstitious and er^^nious, for in the late Canons
it is said, th^^ the child Canon 30.
is thereby dedicated unto the s^^uice of him that died on the cross. What
(...) this but to equal man's ordinance with God^ and to ascribe that unto the
cross, which (...) due unto Baptism? a conceit fitter for ignarant papists,
then learned christians (...) assent unto. Neither do we use it as the
au^cientes did, for Cyprian, Augustine, Chris^stome and others, Turtul^. de
bapti; ca. 7.8 Eusebius. li 6, ca. 48, Innocent 1, epist, cap. 3. Rab. ma^de
insti. cleric. cap, ^. Durand. de ritib. eccles. li. 1. cap. 20,
it is apparent that thos^ times did consecrate the elimentes therewith and did
not cross the child's forhead at all, ^ut referred that unto the Bishopps
confir^ation, so that our crossing the Infants for^ead and not the element of
Baptism, is a ^eere novelty without any warrant of that ^ntyquitie, Our use
of the cross a Noveltie of some 60-years standing.
neither will that place of Tertul^ian de resurrectione carnis prove the
contrary. The flesh is washed that the soul may ^e purged, the flesh is
anointed, that the soul may be consecrated, the flesh is signed, that the
soul may be guarded, the flesh is ^hadowed by the imposition of hands, that
^he soul may be by the spirit enlightened, ^he flesh does feed on the body
and blood of Christ, that the soul may be filled and far^ed of God. In which
words he ioyninge to^eather diverse ceremonies of the christians, ^oth indeed
mention the signinge of the ^aithfull, but it may as well be referred to
^onfirmatio^ expressed by imposition of hands ^s to Baptism, understood by the
washinge ^f the body, and that one better reason, for it is more than probable
that the sign of t^^ cross was not yet used in Baptism, se^ing Justin Martyr
in defens. ad Antonin a and Tertull. de Baptismo et de corona miltis, As for
Martial his epist are justly suspected:
do describe the form of Baptism vse^ in those times and yet make no mention
o^ the cross therein, which in all liklyhood the^ would not have omitted if it
had been vse^ therein especially Tertullian, who in that very place speaks of
the cross, as used out o^ Baptism in the ordinary blessing of them selves.

objection.

But the sign of the cross is not used i^ Baptism, but when baptism is
ended.

Ans. If you take Baptism only for tha^ dipping and sprincling of the party
it is tru^ and so none of the popish additions, whereby they defile that holy
sacrament are in bapti^me, for those which Apud Bellar. Baptis^ comitantur are
not impious, but if you tak^ baptism as indeed we do: for the administration
of that sacrament, then both the prayers before and the prayers after, the
actions after the dipping: do all indifferently belong to one and the self
same thing, yea it is all vna et) on continual action of the administration of
the ^acrament.
continua actio administrationis sacramenti.

Sure it is that it must be said to be, either in baptismo extra baptismum aut
nullibi, if it be out of baptism, In Baptism or out of Bapr. or no where,
how is it by common consent of all, said to be signum crucis in baptismo.

Object. The sign of the cross is very ancient.

Ans. So are many other popish traditions. And if on that ground we are to
retain it, why do we not give the baptized milk and ho
lactis ^et mellis concordiam. Why do we not bring offerings for the dead. For
Turtullian the first of the Fathers that ever mentioned the Cross: does
establish these, and the sign of the cross by one and the self same
warrantie. Besides, if upon the fathers tradition we use the cross, then must
we receive and use it as they have delivered it unto us that is, with opinion
of virtue and efficacy, not only in the act of blessing our selves, an^ in the
expelling of diuills, but even in t^ consecration of the blessed Sacramente^
For the first, Tertullian is w^nes de coron mil
(...) omnem progressum, ad omnem promotum^ ad omnem ad (...) ad vestitu^ et
calce atum, frontem crucis signaculo ferimi^ For chasinge of devils, Ierom
councelle^ Demetrius to use the cross. Ep^stol. 1 ad Demetriam.
Et crebro ^9 inquit signaculo crucis munias frontem tua^ne extermmator Aegipti
in te locum reperia^ Lactantias (de hoc signo scribens) lib. 4 cap. 17
ait clirit^ sactatores, inquinatos spiritus, signo passioni^ excludere
Chrisostom: in psalm. 108. (11^ crux inquit munit mentem: ea Demones v^^
cilcitur ea tollit morbos anime.

But these superstitions are small in regard of that efficacy which in the
sacraments, a^tiquitie ascribed unto the cross, for Cypr^^an (being the
auncientest that makes mention of the cross in Baptism) speaking of (...)
(12) cuius vertus omnia peragit sacramenta^ sine quo signo nihil est sanctum,
neque aliqu^ consecratio meretur effectum. and again, Cyprian de pa^o^e.
Qui cunque sunt sacramento ruin ministri, quale^ cunque sunt manus que vel
mergunt acceden^es ad baptismum vel vngunt qualecumque ^ectus de quo sacra
exeunt verba, operationis ^utoritas in figura crucis omnibus sacramentis
^rgitur effectum, Augustine in Ioh: tract. 18. Quod signum inquit nisi
adhibeatur sieve ^ontibus credentium sieve ipse aque qua regene ^antur five oleo
quo chrismate inunguntur sieve ^crificio quo aluntur nihil eorum rite perficitur
^t were superfluous to rehearse the rest. But ^ereby it is evident that the
religious use of ^he cross, was even at the first sinnfull and ^uperstitious,
neither can it be sheewed, without admixtvre of supertition:
that ^uer it was used by the Fathers, religionis, ^go sine admixta
superstitione, and this in^entio^ did noe sooner creep into the sacra^ent but
it drew unto it self such supersti^ous conceit of efficacy and necessity,
that without it, the means which God appoin^d for the consecration of the
elements see^ed over weak, yea, vnauailable according ^s some Latly in Surey a
child^ rebaptised because the cross was omitted,
amongst us account not their ^hildren lawfully baptized, yea, will have them
rebaptised, if the cross have been omit^ed, out of which may be observed,
first how dangerous a thing it is to bring in any h^mane invention into the
service of God, si^^ in the very pure age of the Church, it w^^ punished with
such a spiritual curse of ho^rible superstition.

Secondly, though at this time popery w^^ not hatched, yet the mystery of
iniquity w^^ then a working, and the beginning as it were of the whorish
fornications was found eve^ in the Fathers times, so that, as worshippin^ of
Angels in Paul's time, Colos: 2.18:
prayers and oblations for the dead in Tertullia^s time, be righ^ly counted
popish and Antichristian, thoug^ as yet that monster was not borne. So this and
other Ceremonies ratified by the popish Canons and constitutions, may well be
taken for popish and Antichristian, even in the Father times, seeinge they then
made away for the beast, and since have received further impl^^etie and
authority from him: Esai. 52, 11,
wherefore to conclude as Isai exhorts Gods people, to keep^ themselves from
the rites and pollutions o^ the heathen, saying, depart depart ye, go o^^ from
them and touch noe unclean thing. So the spirit in the same manner charge
the Church not to meddle with the corruptions of Antichristian Babylon, Apoc,
18, ^
but go out of her my peoplc says he, that ye may not be partaker of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

The fear of which curse does keep us from all the superstitious and
Idolatrous ceremonies of that whorish sinagogue.

Faults escaped.
page 10. signum, for lignum, page 11. invoke to, for invoke, 15 inventions
of, for inventions.


