Cupid retire,
What woulst desire?
Our flaming hearts
are both a-fire.


THE TWO LANCASHIRE LOVERS, OR The Excellent History of PHILOCLES and DORICLEA

This holy vow
Makes one of two.
LONDON. Printed by E.G. for R. Best and are to be sold at his shop near
Graies Inn gate in Houlbourne.



THE TWO LANCASHIRE LOVERS: OR The Excellent History OF PHILOCLES AND DORICLEA.

Expressing The faithful constancy and mutual fidelity of two loyal Lovers.
Stored with no less variety of dicourse To delight the Generous, then of
serious advice to instruct the Amorous.

By Musaeus Palatinus.

Pereo, si taceo.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin. For R. B. or his Assigns. 1640.

TO MY TRVLY GENEROUS and ^udicious Friend, ALEXANDER RIGBY Esquire. Clarke of the
Crown for the County Palatine of Lancaster; the perusal of this History;
wherein the Subjects of love and loyalty are recorded, to the honor of their
Country.
SIR, I here present you with two native Plants of your own Country; Branches
derived front a fair and flourishing Family. Give them entertainment according
to their merit; whose memory redounds highly to their Countries glory.

really Alexandro-philus.

The Argument, with the Division of this History.
IN the first Chapter he treats: I.
Of the Descent and Parentage of Doriclea.
II.
Of the Education of Doriclea.
III.
How her Parents, treasuring their hopes, and addressing their cares on her
sought to bestow her.
IV.
How Camillus became her Suitor, and how she rejected him through distaste of
his breeding.
V.
How Mardanes a rich country Chuffe solicited her affection: and how he
labored to procure her love by indirect means; when the proffers of a fair
personal estate could not do it.
VI
How Philocles, whom her Parents had entretained for her Scholemaster, took
occasion privately, but shadowingly, to impart his affection to her: and with
what seeming scorn his moiton was received.
VII.
The discourse Doriclea used next day at Table, being encouraged (...) her
Parents indulgence: alleging by way of argument, that she wond^ red how Julia,
Augustus his Daughter, could detract so much from her Princely descent, a^ to
entertain least thought of loving Ovid; and how a Schoolmaster durst attempt
the solicitancy of an Emperors Daughter.
VIII.
The fear Philocles was in, lest Doriclea should discover his suit to her
Parents. Which Doriclea, though she had made choice of that argument, only to
affright him, never intended, being more affectionately disposed then either
her appearance made show of, or any expression had as yet discovered.
IX.
The intercursive Letters passing betwixt Philocles and Doriclea: and how she
begins to impart by Pen, what she had before conceipted in thought: and how she
desired nothing so much as the accomplishment of their love, so privacy might
give leave.
X.
What Plots Doriclea devised to partake in private meetings and treaties with
her Philocles: and how by the jealousy of Euryclea, her Mother, she was
prevented.
XI.
The passions of Doriclea: and how she conversed with her own thoughts in the
election of her love: inveying against such ungrounded fancies, who measure
affection rather by strength of alliance, portion, or any other respect, then
the pure effects of love.
XII.
How Doriclea, being deprived all means of imparting the constancy of her zeal
to Philocles: having neither the benefit of Ink nor Paper, to discover her
loyal intimate thoughts to her faithful lover: she supplied that want with
her Needle, sowing her mind in Letters of Gold, and returning them in the
border of an Handkerchiefe.
XIII.
Philocles restraint, with those passionate effects, which their enforced
absence one from the other produced. He finds love ever most violent, when
farthest divided from his Object: yet amidst these disgusts he advises her to
patience in his restraint. Confirming himself so individually hers, as nothing
may abridge the accomplishment of their desires, but death.
XIV.
Doriclea understands by an aged Hermit, of Mardanes practice: how he intends
to enjoy her by indirect means. And how the Spells of Spurcina, the
Inchantresse, with whom Mardanes contracted, were ever frustrated by the devout
morning exercise of Doriclea: signing her self every morn in her going abroad
with the sign of the Cross, a sovereign receipt against Spurcina's charm.
XV.
How Doriclea practiced with Mellida her Maid for her escape. How she sought to
delude her Mother: her prevention: And how Androgeus her Father became enraged
upon the discovery of her affection.
XVI.
How Mellida one morning unwarily lets fall her Glove; whereon Spurcina the
Inchantresse practices; supposing it to be Doriclea's. Mellida falls in love
with Mardanes: and discloseth her passion to her Mistress: who promises her
best assistance.
XVII.
Mellida's passionate love.
XVIII.
Philocles procures his liberty: and by a faithful Messenger, though to his
apparent danger, privately acquaints Doriclea with his delivery: and assigning
her a place whereto she might safely repair, if she could possibly make escape.
XIX.
Doriclea by the advice and assistance of Mellida gets from her Keepers: and in
her flight by night loses her way: but coming by chance to the Hermits house,
where she took that night her repose: as, she had formerly been directed by
him, she received much comfort from him, being conducted to the place which
Philocles advised her to.
XX.
The great content and joy which these two long divided Lovers conceived one of
the others presence: The relation of their former griefs being an addition to
their present joys.
XXI.
They take the advice of Solinus that faithful Hermit, what course were best
to take in a case of such extremity: he advises the privately to solemnize
that Rite, which their long affection had confirmed in heart.
XXII.
How these constant Lovers were hindered upon the very point of Solemnization of
their Marriage, by the intelligence and pursuit of her incensed Father
Androgeus: who with a strong prepared troop entered the house where these two
unfortunate Lovers sojourned: And how, by the Hermits device, Philocles to
prevent his fury, was privately conveyed.
XXIII.
Androgeus brings back his Daughter; the entertainment given her by her Mother.
XXIV.
Doriclea labors to free her Mother from all jelousie touching her love to
Philocles; pretending, that he had voluntarily made himself a banished man to
his country, through fear of their fury and enmity.
XXV.
Philocles writes a Letter to Androgeus, as directed from beyond the Seas:
wherein he humbly craves his pardon, for his too bold attempting his Daughters
affection. How his present austere penitential life shall witness to the
world his repudiation of all light love. How his devotions now were reserved
for Heaven, and had no communion with Earth. And that the choice he had now
made, should during life admit no change.
XXVI.
Doriclea falls (or seemingly falls) into a Fever; each day seems to increase
her distemper. Eschites, an experienced Physician, is sent for to apply his
best art in a case of such extremity: but he, an intimate Friend to Philocles,
made show as if he despaired of her recovery. And that no malady arising from
fancy, could without enjoyment of the Object loved, receive remedy.
XXVII.
The Parents of Doriclea conceive incessant grief for their distempered
Daughter; they bemoane their neglect of Philocles, and dis-esteeme of his love:
but they find no hope of relief to their languishing Daughter, seeing the
means of her cure was reported to have entered a Regular Order.
XXVIII.
Eschites undertakes, upon the promise of their acceptance, to use his best
endeavor for calling Philocles homeward; and that he is resolved, how
Philocles time of Probation will be quickly relinquished, when he shall hear
least hope of enjoying his Doriclea's affection.
XXIX.
Androgeus hears how Philocles, besides his other native endowments, was
descended of a generous Family; which inflames his desires more to see him
return into his Country. He vows never to oppose this solemnity, so his
presence may cure her infirmity.
XXX.
Philocles returns home; and is accepted by the Parents for their Son in
law: this revives their seeming distempered Daughter; yet fearing still a
relapse of her Parents acceptance, she feignes the continuance of her distemper.
XXXI.
The Marriage is solemnized; and with such privacy, as known to none but their
own Family. Valeria, who was supposed to be Euphilus Page, discovers her self
to be Philocles Sister; with whose consent Euphilus marries her, being long
before privately affianced to her.
XXXII.
The occasion of this private solemnization: and how Mellida, by the advice of
her Mistress Doriclea, assuming her name and habit, writ to Mardanes, how she
preferred him in the choice of affection before any other; acquaintiug him how
in a private disguise to prevent danger, and her Parents displeasure, she would
meet him, when and where in a lawful Nuptial way, he might enjoy her.
XXXIII.
The Plot holds; Mardanes rejoices infinitely at his unexpected happiness;
thanks his Spurcina for her well-spell'd practice; and infeoffes his unknown
Bride (though much against his will) in his riches.


THE TWO LANCASHIRE LOVERS; OR THE EXCELLENT HISTORY OF PHILOCLES and DORICLEA.
CHAP. I.
Of the Descent and Parentage of Doriclea.
Near to that ancient Town of famous and time-honoured Gaunt; for her
antiquity of Site no less memorably recorded, then for those eminent actions
of her princely progenitors, renowned; there sometimes dwelled one Audrogeus, a
Gentleman of approved esteem: having borne offices of account and quality
under his Sovereign: wherein he ever demeaned himself to persons of all
conditions with such equity and equality, as none knew him, but accounted him
an honor and ornament to his Country. This Gentleman took to wife one
Euryclea, of good descent: a woman excellently endowed with many choice and
select virtues: so as, those exquisite parts wherewith she was graced,
expressed to her Country the native worth of that family, from whence she
descended. These two, amongst other worldly blessings, wherewith Gods
providence had singularly enriched them, were made happy in an hopeful
progeny. And of th^se, in a virtuous, discreet and religious Daughter called
Doriclea; one, whose fame admitted no blemish; whom as Nature had beautified
with many extraordinary graces, so her careful Parents were no less ready to
adorn those native se^ds, with such Education as might accomplish those
promising beginnings. For which purpose, They provided her of such Masters, as
might fit her in all generous Sciences. One for music, dancing, and a proper
or graceful posture; another for her Needle; another for knowledge of the
Tongues. Nothing was awanting her that might confer the least light or luster
to so fair and well-composed a temper. Nor was she less apt to receive, nor
firm to retain whatsoever was taught her. For she was of a docile and
industrious disposition: affecting nothing more then to learn, nor distasting
anything more then to glory in ought that she had perfectly learned.

Nor was it strange that so much care or cost should be bestowed upon her:
considering, she was the only daughter, and consequently the darling of her
Mother. One, in whom she treasured many fair hopes* and for whose future
preferment she enlarged a provident care. For high were the aims at which they
levelled her Fortunes: being as curious in their choice, as she in her prime
flower of youth resolute, never to exchange her estate.

Her desires were confined to an harmless ambition of knowledge: she measured
no day without a line: bestowing so well the Lamp of her life, as she was ever
casting forth some light or other to enlarge the Prospect of her inner house.
For the highest pitch of her emulation was, in a pious imitation of such as had
descended from her house, to accommodate her more knowing abilities. In a fair
resemblance of that noble Roman Virgin, who made this her resolution: That her
Life and Knowledge should manifest to the world, that she was the true
Daughter of such Parents: and that her house received no derogation from her,
from which she had her beginning. Truth is, her Family, as it was worthily to
be ranked with the best: so had it brought forth many eminent scienes, whose
thriving plantation had conferred much honor on their Nation. Amongst which
ONE, who though he seemed a professed Favorite to all youthful pleasures; and as
sociable in his ways, and pleasantly discursive as if he had been a
downright Agent of the time, preferring his pleasures before any other
private mental employment: yet did it appear unto the world, that he en^oy'd
more divine parts then a vulgar judgment could either judge or take notice of.
For sundry excellent Works tasting both of Lamp and Judgment were by him
composed, though under an others name published: which expressed the ability of
his pen, and the affected privacy of his mind.

Nor could she reflect upon the excellence of their parts who had derived
their prime beginnings from her House: but out of a virtuous emulation she
held it a derivative duty to imitate them: though not in such exactness as
might seem to equal their perfection: yet in a well disposed Zeal to fit
herself with the best accommodations and provision she could, to draw near
them in imitation.

Nor is it to be doubted, but native seeds and sprinklings of goodness
propagate themselves to posterity: and beget in their successors not only a
desire, but ability to imitate and retain, what their Predecessors in their
commendable lives expressed. For though Wit nor Learning be no feffements of
Fortune: yet shall we find in the posterity of prompt and pregnant Parents,
most commonly resemblances of that quickness and preparedness in their
children, which being seconded by constant and continued desires to imitate
whatsoever they see worthily observed, or observably presented: ( Will and
Power becoming such equal concomitants and assistants) cannot but produce
some notable effect: as might be instanced in none better then in this our
Doriclea; who directed all her actions to the improvement of her honor, as in
the whole Course of her Education you shall perceive hereafter.

CHAP. II.
Of the Education of Doriclea.
MInes low laid are ever the richest: yet the purest Ore, retains something of
Earth, till it be refined. There is no Creature so pregnant, or for native
parts so enabled; but wanting the refinement of Education, all that precious
Ore which it derived from Nature is but in the lump, till Education have
searched, purged and refined it from all those moldy and brackish mixtures or
interveynings of Earth: that native source from whence it produc^t its first
form.

Never did Nature bestow her gifts in an ampler measure nor fuller manner then
she streamed them upon those noble Roman Matrons, Cornelia, Aurelia. Lelia,
Paula, Portia, Octavia, Sulpitia, Virginia, Lucretia: Excellent were their
endowments: full of genuine worth their natural ornaments; yet had all these
lost much of their beauty, had they rested so and derived from Art no luster to
accomplish that beauty.

This moved the Parents of those virtuous Matrons, to ripen these seeds which
Nature had so freely bestowed, with these graceful beamelings of Art, to
perfect that which Nature had planted, and accomplish what so loving a mother
had molded.

Never had that brave Berenice won so much ground, nor gained such command in
the eye of her beholder; Neither had that stately presence of majesticke
Sophonisba made an imperial heart captive to her smile; Nor that
love-attracting Cleopatra soveraigniz'd so much upon such princely Commanders:
had not something more then the gifts of Nature accompanied them. These, as
they had a sufficient portion of beauty to take the Sense: so had their
Education so exactly polished those outward parts, as they wrought strangely
upon the Conceit. For to be seen in Music; to express a singular grace in
the Carriage of a dance; to discourse with an unaffected eloquence; to have
judgment to distinguish of those divine airs and active strains of Poesy;
Lastly, not only to relate* but to reconcile difference in relations of
History; These are they, which far above all outward Faires attract love, and
promise a Continuance so long; as no new Choice may procure ^ Change: nor
suffer the least surreptitious Conceit of any foreign fancy to seize on their
enamoured breasts: having made such a virtuous and divine Choice, as it were
impiety to dream of a Change.

These were the principal motives which induced Androgeus and Euryclea, the
tender Parents of Doryclea, to provide for her such Masters as might accomplish
her by their Principles of breeding, in such distinct knowledges as might best
suit with her condition; and express her with most winning grace in the sight
of such with whom she consorted.

Nor were these, to whose direction she was committed, more serious in
teaching, nor exact in practicing, then she was quick in receiving, and firm
in reteyning.

For her Muslcuke, though naturally she stood not affected to it* being rather
addicted to retyrednesse and privacy; yet seeing it was her Parents desire, she
declined from her own will, to satisfy their command to whom she ought
herself. And herein she grew such a proficient, as none with more variety
and less affectation ever wrought upon the affection.

Yet would she never be moved to discover her perfection in this kind, in any
public place: so far she was from ostentation, and so humbly affected, as
whereinsoever she was praised, she imputed it to an over esteem of their
opinion who praised her; reteyning ever that modest conceit, or rather
disesteeme of her own abilities, as ever redounded more to her honor.

To repeat sundry Cantzonets and enlivened measures composed by herself (were
it not too digressive from the Scope and Object of our History) I should here
address my pen: But my aim shall be rather briefly to shadow, then to draw
out to the full body the presentment of so excellent a piece.

Howsoever, those who were of judgment have confirmed thus much for her: That
never was instrument married to voice with more harmony, then it was, when
exercised by Doriclea.

Nor was she less graceful in her Posture or Carriage: retayning such a
modest-virgin state; as those who observed her, could neither tax her of
scorn, nor of too careless neglect. Affable she could be without being
childish: and keep her distance without arrogance. Never could there appear
more graceful state in a more humble heart: desiring ever rather to serve
others in their virtuous designs, then to observe others rendering her praise
for her deserts. Neither was she so carried away with these, as to forget what
might better sort with her quality, and what might longer attend her, then
these Eare-charming airs of harmony.

For her Needle, she made Dorcas her Pattern: she was ever tasking herself to
some work or other: wherein she made Charity her object, by preparing for the
naked a Cover.

Lastly, for knowledge in Tongues (though most men be of opinion that one is
enough for any woman) she profited so exceedingly, as she retained the very
accent and sound with such propriety, as she became more easily to be admired
then imitated; and herein more admired, by how much her Elocution was free,
native and unaffected.

Thus in all these became Doriclea an incomparable proficient: so that, as she
brought with her into the world an excellent disposition in affecting what was
good and meriting applause: so had the improvement of her Education so
accomplished her, as no expression received life from her, which deserved not
due praise.

CHAP. III.
How her Parents, treasuring their hopes, and addressing their Cares on her,
sought to bestow her.
NAture is no less ready to advance, then produce; to bring up, then bring
forth; to take care for their well-being, then their first being.

This we see exemplified in every Creature, who out of a tender-native
intimacy, prepares for the supportance, succor and sustenance of those young
Ones who are bred of her.

Which Care extends and dilates it self more amply to Creatures endowed with
reason: who, as they are the noblest of all others in respect of their Image
and feature: so are they more apprehensive of the necessities of their own by
course of Nature.

It is true indeed what that Divine Moral sometimes observed, far more
certain is a Parents care then the share of his Comfort; yet, so delightful
is the constancy of this care, being directed to them, and for their
improvement whom they so tenderly love, that their Care becomes a Solace, their
watchful Providence a cheerful Expense of so many choice and select hours
for the advancement of their own.

This induced the Careful Parents of our accomplished Doriclea, to bestow
their best endeavors in providing a Convenient match for their Daughter; in
whom they had treasured so rich hopes, as her reverend fear and filial
obedience promised nothing less then much comfort to their age, from those
prime expressions of her youth. Neither were the favorites of her fame
(mounted on the wings of virtue) less slow in performing those fair Offices
which so excellent a Creature merited. For as her irreproveable demeanure,
retained ever amongst her familiars, passages highly conducing to her honor:
So those, who knew her not but by report, retained no less strength nor vigor
of desire to court so incomparable a Mistress, whom the fame of her virtues with
other personal indowments had so fairly displayed.

Beauty, said the ancient Lyricke, could not want Corrivals: but when Virtue
presents herself to make the house beautiful throughout, it cannot but
attract many Surveyers. Unless the judgments of men become so miserably
deluded and distracted, as that young debaucht Gallants was, who could not
endure the presence of his Mistress because she was virtuous.

But pure and refined judgments who make their Choice not wholly by the
outward semblance, or that skinne-deepe beauty, which the winter of age no
sooner rivels, then she surrenders her glory: but by those inward perfections,
which would make Zenophanes himself to be a wooer: fix mainely upon that
which makes fancy truly happy. And both these might a stayed affection find
stored and treasured in Doriclea: Being such an one, as to describe her truly,
she was fair without art, and in that native beauty, retained such a winning
favor, as she did nothing but what did infinitely become her. Tall she was
not, but of that equal stature, as her well-tempered proportion could neither
tax her of too much, nor accuse Nature of taking her measure too little. To
use Hyperboles, I hate it: yea, and in so exquisite a Subject, as the spreading
fame of her own actions might seem Hyperboles unto others, holding themselves
so unfit to aspire to such perfections: or too far short to retain the least
hope of seconding them in any proportionable measure of imitation.

But howsoever, the careful Parents of Doriclea aimed at nothing more then to
bestow her on some person of quality, that in an equal line of love and merit
their affections might close: and make every day sound like a marriage day in
the joint Correspondence of their affectionate Choice: Doriclea, ever endowed
with a native modesty, pretended to her Parents the tenderness of her youth,
or her indisposition to health, purposely to protract time: whereas, indeed, it
was the averseness of her mind from a married life: desiring rather under the
tender tuition of her Parents to bestow her youth, then to fix her fancy on
any. For that constant affection she retained to privacy (as I formerly told
you) rebaited the heat of Loves assaults. Neither did she desire without much
instancy to frequent any public meeting: but rather to exercise her mind in
reading or discoursing with some of her intimate acquaintance; with whom she
lived and conversed in such sweet and familiar manner, as their delightful
Society estranged her thoughts from the thought of a Lover. But her Parents,
ever harping upon one string; expounded all this averseness and declining of
hers to a modest bashful shame, which would in time wear out, and set a
better face upon the proffers of Love. And sometimes they would not stick
privately to take their daughter underhand advising her to entertain a
Fortune whilst it was tendered; and how it was their sole Care that she might
be advanced and preferred to her liking. How they grew old, and to leave her
to the wide World, could not choose but perplex them. Then would they nominate
diverse young gentlemen, whose estates and descents might deserve her
entertainment. But no Rhetoric could be more dissorting or discording to her
ear. The discourse of a Nuptial rite was so disrelishing a note, as there was
no air she affected less; apprehending such content in her present virgin
state, as to live and dye ther^in, she desired nothing more.

But this must not serve her turn; privacy must give way to fancy: a retired
Lawne to a discourse of Love. By her Mothers provident Care, she must learn to
study the care of a Mother; Otherwise, this estranging her thoughts from giving
way to fancy, will be interpreted a peevish kind of pertinacy.

Suppose her then rather out of an enforced direction, then any freebred
affection, entering parley with a Suitor; whose quality how unequally it suited
or sorted with her disposition, in whom Art and Nature had wrought such
perfection, you shall perceive hereafter.

CHAP. IV.
How Camillus became her Suitor, and how she rejected him through distaste of
his breeding.
CHoice begets Care: in which Choice, it many times happens that the best are
rejected, while persons of meaner condition are admitted. You may imagine that
Doriclea cannot want for store, being so excellently accommodated both for
outward indowments and promising estate. Where Portion and Proportion meet,
they cannot but be attractive Objects to any one that either affects profit or
pleasure. For the Worldling, as his first love-question is, What h'as she?
wherein if he fail in his expectance, his affection is so weakly feathred,
as his flight is but short, because his desires of having were long. So the
voluptuous or sensual Amorist, who makes sense to usher judgment; his only
question is; Is she an handsome wench? His fancy is in his eye. He cannot
have enough of beauty; wherein should the object whereto he is presented, be in
any sort defective: his love as it derived his first light from sense: so it
expires at first sight. He will not give his judgment leave to converse with
her; to see what inward beauty may inwardly accomplish her.

A feather of this wing was our penne-feather'd Camillus, whereof we are now to
discourse: a right Lapwing, who had left his nest before he ^^ad shaken the
shell from his head. Howsoever, on he must to be a Suitor, before he has well
learned how to spell Lover. Something of Sense he h'as in him; and this
informs him, that love is a fine thing: but what use to make of that Fairing he
knows not. A fault, I must confess, so epidemicall, as to many marriages
become infected with this Colts-evill. This made that experienced Sage
complain so much of these indiscreet haire-brain'd Couplings, that I wonder,
quoth he, that every Age begets not a new Bedlam.

This Camillus, being one whom Fortune had more favored, then his Parents
Education had qualified, became admitted amongst others of the same List, to
this too deserving a Choice for such a Changeling. A right Changeling! Not for
Changing his affection to his Choice: for he had never as yet attained to such
happiness, as to aspire to the Title of a Servant, or to be styled the
deserving favorite of a Mistress. But in that he seemed as if he had been
changed in the Cradle: for so unlike he was to those from whom he had
descended, as never appeared any Sprigge more ingenerous, derived from so free
and fruitful a Stock.

This unseemely lover, or amorous Lubber, being put on by his mother to advance
him forward to this match; addresseth his ill-speeding course to our
incomparable Doriclea: and as one, who had never been bred in the Court of
Complement, nor of Manners neither, in his rusticke way thus accoasteth her:
and that I may less err in his dialect or form of speech, I shall use his
own country tone, though I cannot so well personate his posture, which no
doubt, conferred on this Swaineling no less honor.

Camillus Speech to Doriclea.
YAw, Iantlewoman, with the saffron snude, you shall know that I am Master*
Camillus, my Mothers anely white boy. And she wad han you of all loves to wad
me: And you shall han me for your tougher. We han store of goodly Cattle: for
horn, hare, and leather, peep here and peep there, aw the wide dale is but
snever to them. My Mother, though she be a vixon, she will blenke blithly on
you for my Cause: And we will ga to the Dawnes, and Slubber up a Sillibub: and
I will look babbies in your eyes, and pick silly-cornes out of yaur toes: And
we will han a Whiskin at every rush-bearing; a Wassell Cup at yule; a
Seed-cake at Fastens; and a lusty Cheese-cake at our Sheepe-wash. And will not
aw this done bravely, Iantlewoman?

How this strange kind of wooing might promise it self any hope of winning, I
leave to your judgments who know the Art and Posture of Suting: but how it
relished her discreet ear, may sufficiently appear by this answer to her
home-spunne Suitor.

Doricleas answer to Camillus.
PRetty Servant! you tell me your mother sent you to wed me; but of all loves
you must stay till the banes be asked: and perchance before the third time of
asking you will be of an other mind. Fie young Gentleman, will such a brave
spark as you, that is your Mothers White-boy undo your hopes, in marrying
such a Country Joan as I am?

Besides, what know you but I may prove untoward, and that will bring your
Mother to her Grave; make you (pretty babe) put finger in the eye, and turn the
door quite off the hinges. Nay, besides all this; how will you brook to hear
shriking of a Child, and rocking of a Cradle? The scouling of a wife, the
scoulding of a Nurse, with a pad in the straw, and a nest of hornets buzzing
through all the house? Return then my sweet amorous Servant, the same way you
came: be wise before you leap, and then I hope you will not leap at all.
Marriage is a mad age, how can it then sort or suite with you, that has so
much Sage in your pate? Be a good Child, and keep your self from the rod,
and I hope I shall never bring you to so unhappy a Lot.

Simple Camillus took this for good Counsel: nor did his weake-fledg'd fancy
inspire him with any fresh reply: home he goes to his mother like a
soone-rebaited Suitor: for as his affection received life only from an others
direction: without any preceding grounds of discretion, so it as quickly
expired, being so weakly and Childishly grounded.

Upon whose departure, Doriclea begun thus to expostulate with herself not
without pleasure, this rude encounter of her white-liver'd suitor: descanting
on all his uncivil passages in this manner.

What an excellent purchase, Doricleas expostulation touching Camillus.
Doriclea, might thou enjoy in this Gooseling? One of competent fortunes; and
of a disposition so pliable, as one might easily mould him to their own bent.
One, that no question, some of our wanton Gallants would not stick to admit;
nor be dainty to entertain for a Servant; nay, for a Consort; merely to
shroud their own shame, or to maintain their bravery with the revenues of his
decreasing estate. He would supply the place well enough of a servile Usher,
with an affected grace to carry her Misset; open her pue; go before her in the
Street, and keep his distance; or conduct her more peculiar Servant by a
posternegate to her licentious Lodging. But are these the fruits of wedlock?
Must an husband be made a stale to sin, or an inlet to his own shame? O no
Doriclea! Virtuous affection cannot incline to such pollution.

Those, who make Choice of Husbands, purposely to make them their slaves, are
domesticke Tyrants. Those, who make choice for profit, make filth and ordure
their sole object of Conjugall honor. Those, who receive a Servant into their
bosom, because he is eminent in place, make local precedence the ground of
their fancy, which cannot but close in distaste, when an higher Corrivall shall
ascend his place.

But none of these merit the style of love. H^avens bless me! How should the
reasonable Soul (unless all his prime faculties were drowned and drenched in
the lees of sense) affect such a Swad, whose elocution sucked from the dugge,
and whose formality t'ane from the Cow-sheard, taste so little of love, as
discretion would not endure to bestow on it so pure a name? For say, Doriclea,
is it possible to purchase fancy with a sheepish story? or with a foolish
relation of. what fortunes had dropped down upon them? And such was Camillus his
encounter: proper ornaments for a Suitor.

Well, if ever fancy seize on me; which is, as yet, far estranged from me, I
hope to fix on such a Choice, as these weak respects shall never appear to
be the sole aim of my affection. For to love, where Discretion bids me loath,
were an unhappy fortune: such a marriage day, were a Tragic day; introducing
no other Scenes then presentiments of discomfort to an unfortunate Consort. But
why do I suffer my thoughts to converse with love; seeing I have had so little
familiarity with it all my life? Hitherto have I been devoted to privacy;
wherein I have ever reaped such absolute content, as to forgo it, or with some
other condition to exchange it, were to lose my self, and deprive an enlarged
mind of that freedom which the whole Empire of love cannot afford.

Thus expostulated Doriclea with herself, touching this affectionate tender of
Camillus. Whose choice indeed her Parents did not much approve; because his
shallow Conceit made him altogether incapeable of love. So as, Doriclea might
well enough dispense with this Match: and live in expectance of a more equal
and generous Mate.

CHAP. V.
How Mardanes a rich Country Chuffe solicited her affection: and how ^e
labored to procure her love by indirect means; when the proffers of a fair
personal estate could not do it.
WEalth is ever a strong Agent for enforced marriages. Whereon there shines
ever an ominous star; there sits still an heavy fate. But whence comes this;
but either from avaritious Parents, who prefer fortunes before all other more
deserving abilities: holding him only worthy to be their son on whom the
Sun does shine? or from the wanton affection, or too profuse expense of
light Mistresses; who make Choice of rich Servants to make Sponges of them?
Their long bestowed providence must be employed in affording to their
disdainful Consorts, excess of maintenance.

And these kinds of coy Amorists, for most part, use to articulate and indent
with those they intend to marry; in what rank they shall be maintained; how
accoutred; in what manner accommodated; what place they may by right challenge.
Coach and Caroach gaudily distinguished, must be forthwith provided: a
Summer House sumptuously furnished, with such conveyances, as her rich Chuffe
might visibly see, were not his d^luded eyes ever fixed on his Hidropick Chest,
what she intends hereafter, by those private passages contrived in each corner.

But neither did the Parents of Doriclea stand so much engaged to any wordly
respect, as it had power to attract their affections to it; nor was Doriclea so
earthly-bred, as to make Fortune the sole and absolute Object of her fancy:
which might be instanced in nothing more fully then in the entertainment of her
next Suitor, whereof we are to discourse as it falls now upon our History, in
this manner.

There was one Mardanes, a rich Grazier; one, who had all his time fed on the
better side oth' bush. This rich Chrone, who made an Idol of his Coin, made
suit to Doriclea, to obtain her love. Rich and mighty proffers he made her;
pretending to throw himself and Fortunes at her feet, so he might enjoy her.
Neither did her discreet Parents much oppose it, nor incline to it, but referred
all to their Daughters choice: preferring her liking before any other temporary
proposition. But how weakly this Mardanes proceeded, and how unprosperously he
succeeded, shall appear by the issue: which fell so crosly to his expectance,
imagining his rich and plenteous estate to be an Adamant attractive enough to
the dullest fancy, as he inverted the means of proceeding directly, to an
odious and impious practice; seeking to procure her love by means of Sorcery.

Suppose him then first, after his long sollicitancie had received a repulse,
contesting in this sort with his affections: the grounds whereof as they were
weakly planted, so were they as unhappily closed.

What; Mardanes Passion upon his Repu^^e.
rejected Mardanes? Has thy worldly policy improved thy fortunes so meanly, as
to be contemned in such just and ample proffers of fancy? What would she
desire, if any mortal store may raise her to an happiness of estate, which
she may not enjoy in making her choice of thee? Yea, but there i^ such a
disparity in years, as her smooth youth cannot endure these deep furrows of
age. Paritie ever begets best liking betwixt either party. Whereas her fresh
flourishing Prime would brook ill to be embraced by thy seere and saplesse
arms. Besides, were she never so loyal to thy bed, rumor would not be
silent: conceits would be working, and jealous fears in every corner stirring.
Report would impeach her, were her continent desires never so restrained, nor
to thee confined. It becomes her then, as she tenders her honor, to make
choice of such an one who may more equally suit her, and with a fresher and
more agile youth better content her.

Well, then this is all that can be objected why thy suit is not received, thy
proffers accepted; thou art old and declining, Mardanes; this age is a terrible
bugbeare in the eye of fancy. The desire may be strong, but the Lamp is
quickly in the snuff. There wants oil to feed it: and if it should cast forth
some sparklings, it is soon extinguished.

By this I gather, it were wisely done in my particular, if I labored to
smother this secret flame, before it increase or break forth in more violence.
For by marying one who expects more than she can find, thou may find that
which thou never expected. Take heed then lest thy own Dogs know thee not when
thou come home. It is thine own fault if thou fallest into Actaeons fate.
Thy blood is yet uncorrupted, yellows has not tainted it. Thou deservest well
to lose the liberty of thy present estate, by making thy self a Slave to one
who holds thee unworthy of her choice.

All this works much with reason; b^ who knows not, but a small portion o^
reason weighs heaviest in the scale of affection? I confess, I am blameworthy
in my pursuit of such a Mistress, whose fancy (...) so far aliened from me,
as she relisheth no air worse then what I breathe, no place worse then where I
remain, no Motion worse then what I make. I know likewise* no Receipt to be
more sovereign, no Cordial more useful, then that approved Experiment of an
amorous Artist: When ^ Man bleeds at the nose, and through abundance of blood
is brought in danger of his life, the Physician lets him blood in his arm, to
turn the course of the blood an other way. If love issue out in too violent a
stream, it is to be cooled by a temperate expostulation with fancy: or else
by fixing our eye upon some more attractive Object, divert the course of that
madding passion. An excellent Rule, but who can follow it? The Lover is ever
blinded with affection toward his beloved. Nor was there ever yet so discreet
an Elder, that could both love and become wise together. Excuse then or
condemn me who will; seeing I am thus far imbarkt in Loves adventure,
though my aged fancy may bear the name of Dote^ age, I will on, or perish with
dishonor.

This strong resolution of Mardanes brought him on to a desperate experiment,
as the sequel of our History shall discover: mean time, we will return to
our late-solicited Doriclea, and see what plight she is in, since the rejection
of this violent Suitor.

Doriclea having returned Mardanes her express answer; and that with such
modesty as beseemed one of her quality; beseeching him to excuse her, in that
she could not entertain so deserving a Servant, to whom she stood infinitely
obliged for his love, seeing her disposition was altogether averse from the
least thought of marriage: but if ever she affected that state, as her hopes
could never aspire to such fortunes as he had proffered, so she meant to fix
her fancy where it should with equality of years be suited. And so wishing him
all happiness (the highest period of his unhappiness) retyring to a private
A^bour, she dismissed her discontented (...). In which retirement, recollecting
these distinct passages and passions of her two relinquished Lovers, she
expressed her self thus. Doricleas Resolution.


Doriclea, thou have here kindness profferd thee in abundance. One presents
his suit, and brings with him plenty of youth, fortunes, folly.

An other, no less rich in years then estate, cloyes thee with golden
Mountains of inducing promises: but my rest is already set in the neglect of
both these. Fortunes, though youth promise them, cannot engage me, where youth
is clothed with folly. Nor shall proffers of honor or preferment surprise me,
where disparity of years may beget in our minds the like inequality. As
Virtue is my Object: so I doubt not but if ever I change my state, she will
find a Consort for me, that may improve my content.

By this time had her Mother entered the Garden, into an Arbor whereof her
Daughter had retired: so as, hearing her Mother call her by her name, she came
forth unto her; and upon her demand, imparted unto her the answer she had
returned to Mardanes: wherewith her Mother, though she seemed at first to
dis-relish it, was inwardly well pleased, desiring rather that her Daughter
should bestow her self on one, whose youth might suit with her content, then
such an one, whose fortunes though they were great, yet might his age beget in
her fancy a contempt.

CHAP. VI.
How Philocles, whom her Parents had entertained for her Schoolmaster, took
occasion privately, but shadowingly, to impart his affection to her: and with
what seeming scorn his motion was received.
AMongst others whom the Parents of Doriclea had entertained to instruct their
Daughter in good literature, with other useful Principles sorting well with
the accomplishment of one of her quality: there was one Philocles commended to
them; whose singular parts deserved approvement with the best. For he had
bestowed much precious time, not without answerable profit and improvement, in
the University. Where he became for his time such an excellent Proficient* as
much was expected from him: nor had he doubtless, frustrated their expectance,
might he have been partaker of his desires; in residing where he wished, and
planting where he so much profited. But his course of Academick Studies became
diverted, being called back into the Country. Where he continued not long,
till he was preferred to the Family of Androgeus. During all which time, he
demeaned himself so commendably, as there was none of what quality so ever,
but conceived infinite delight in his company. For his discretion had
sufficiently informed him in the distinction of times: when to be grave and
serious; when pleasant and ingenious. And though he knew how to argue
Syllogistically, and play the Sophister wittily: yet so modest was he in the
whole time of his reside there, as he was never observed to press any
Argument, no, though urged, without much instancy.

A rare quality in a Scholar: who, for most part, is apt to make Logic his
Subject in each society. Whereas discretion will rather moderate too
unseasonable-vehement reasonings in that kind, then become too forward a
Champion in entering the List upon every unnecessary occasion.

Neither had Philocles, of whom we are now to discourse, possessed himself more
strongly of the opinion and good conceit of the Parents of Doriclea, who had
taken a special observance of the care, ind^^try, and singular modesty of this
her Tutor: but that tender tinder of affection became likewise to sparkle a
little in that pure Virgin-bosome of Doriclea: Albeit, so composed were her
thoughts, so divinely moderate her de^ires, as she chused rather to smother,
and therein suffer for her fancy, then engage her unadvised affection to a
public discovery.

In the same manner did our Philocles suffer; for so constantly had his liking
seated it self on the towardly disposition of Doriclea, as now upon the
expiration of the years of her tuition, instead of a severe Master, he becomes
a sincere Lover. Long had he expected what the issue would be of her late
Suitors affectionate encounters: wherein Doriclea had been ever desirous to
take his advice: whose counsel, doubtless, would conduce weakly to their
avail: and having now perceived, how lightly she entertained such ignoble
Servants: and that her discreet fancy seemed rather to aim at personal worth,
then the rubbish of Earth: He imagines a fair opportunity to be now offered
him of imparting his mind freely to her, in whose purchase he might find
stored an incomparable treasure. Revenues he had none to proffer her: having
the constant fortunes of a Scholar; which like two Lines meet together in one
Center, equally closing in the fate of a younger Brother. Yet observe his
modesty! Many times had he resolved to discover his love, which some contrary
passions ever prevented. Sometimes hoping he might prevail, and enjoy what he
sought: other sometimes, wholly despairing to reap what his care had sown. Now
would he prepare himself for a set speech; but no sooner came he in her
presence, then as one driven to an exta^ie, and wholly deprived of the benefit
of memory, he only discovered his fancy by the intentive fixing of his eye:
other language he could find none: silent admiration was the sole Orator of
his affection. At last, recollecting his love distracted thoughts, and
bethinking with himself, with that amorous Youth in the Pastoral, how she
whose fancy he besought was but a Woman: and that an unkind repulse was the
worst entertainment he could possibly expect, he takes to him heart of grace
and after many cold qualmes to perplexed Lovers best known, with the best
boldness he could, he thus encountered her.

Scholar shall I call you, Philocles Speech to Doriclea.
or your Masters Mistress? Your years of tuition are now expired: your years
have taught you now to learn Woman. And shall I receive no guerdon for my long
attendance, save only an acknowledgement of my Service? A great part of the
prime of my youth have I here bestowed in your Fathers house; where mine
highest care was your proficience: nor did your increase in knowledge fall
short of my expectance. You have read, how Jacob for his seven years service,
received from Laban his Leah. Wherewith Doriclea interrupting him, said; And if
my Father had any such bleare-ey'd Daughter, you should have my consent to
enjoy her. But pray you good Sir (quoth Doriclea) whence comes this
discourse, or whereto direct you it? H'as my Father fallen in any manner short
of what was promised you; or deducted ought from that annual Pension he
conferred on you, that you should thus upbraid us in any disregard to your
service? No, Mistress, (answered Philocles) I have amply tasted of his
bounty; his liberal exhibition toward me, has far exceeded any abilities
in me of requital. If I have any cause to complain, the ground thereof
arises from your neglect, and so you may be pleased to conceive it. From mine,
said Doriclea? Good Sir, show me in what particular, I have neglected any
office of respect to your deserving self! Of all vices, I must ingenuously
tell you, I have ever constantly hated that of ingratitude. Conscious I am,
Heaven knows, of too many; yet of this, my thoughts have been ever so freely
cleared, as I cannot remember wherein you may pretend any just cause of taxing
me in this nature. O yes Mistress, answered he! I have taught you what I
perceive you were as apt to forget, as you were at first to get: and in
forgoing that one only Lesson, you have employed a neglect of my instruction.
You may well remember, for it is not so long since you got it by heart, how I
told you the signification of Amo, and how you were to decline it. Neither have
I forgot it, so far* said she, as I mean to make use of it. For the Active I
shall ever generally approve it: but for the Passive, I never mean to
entertain it. What may Amo then signify, quoth Philocles? I love, said
Doriclea; and why do you decline, quoth he, from so sweet a signification?
Because (answered she) it was one of your first Lessons to teach me how to
decline it. Herein I do but observe your Lesson, and is this in me any
transgression? No, Doriclea, No, said Philocles; but my desire is that you
would exercise the fruit and effect of that Lesson. I will not tell you how
much he loves you, who first read that Lesson to you. But were there
transparent Lights in his Bosom, you might easily discern, and consequently
affirm, that there were something in him who deserved your affection. Deserved
my affection (answered Doriclea) Surely, I doubt not, but my Fathers care has
provided a better Jointure then a Schoolehouse for his Daughter. Trust me Sir,
if this be your Guerdon which you expect for your care and serious instruction;
I am very likely, for my part to prove unthankful still: your motion falling
so far short of all hope of promotion. Nay, I must tell you, Sir, that you
have so deceived my opinion, as where before I bore your person all respect, as
to a serious and industrious Master; your uncivile presumption (for a better
title I cannot bestow of it) shall henceforth teach me to dispense with that
respect: and if you seasonably desist not, make my Father acquainted with your
boldness. In such scorn I hold your Motion, as I can find no passion strong
enough to encounter with your indiscreet affection. With which words, as one
seemingly above all measure, irreconcileably incensed, she departed: leaving
her disconsolate Philocles to converse with the Air: or like a melancholy
Scholar, to enter parley with his own sullen Saturnine thoughts. But so
strangely became he divided from himself, as the very Organs of his Tongue had
lost the faculties of speech: his eyes, as if affrighted with some Meteor,
stood staring, without distinguishing the Object they fixed upon. All was out of
order with this amorous Scholar: till at last taking a little breath, he vented
his dis-passionate griefs in this manner.

Is it so, unhappie Philocles? Philocles Passion.
Must thy true affectionate care of her honor, receive so harsh an answer?
Will she show no less height of hate, then thou reteines heat in thy love? And
whence the ground of her disdain? Thou taught'st her the Rule to love, but
she never means to practice that Lesson. Thou have that Cloud of a Scholar
hanging over thee Philocles, which darkens the height of love. They must be
accommodated in all parts, that shall merit her love. Camillus she could not
brook, though young and rich, because he was a Fool. Mardanes she could not
endure, though wise and rich, because he was too old. And Philocles she will
discard, though neither too old, nor altogether a Fool, because he is not
rich. Well, Doriclea, my desire shall ever be, that thou may prosper: and
enjoy in any complete Gallant whom thou shall affect, more then thou can in
the society of a Scholar. Yet, me thinks, that name should not be of such
contempt, that the very tender of my affection should beget thy discontent. It
is a strange requital, to render hatred for love: c^vill respects deserve
freer courtesies. My hopes are not yet so desperate; nor my studies hitherto so
unfortunate, that they should expose me to such neglect. Why then should she
bestow on my affectionate devotion, no better title then Uncivil presumption:
seeing privacie freed me from the one; and my humility from the other? But all
this suffices her not: her enraged passion mounts yet higher above the banks.
She has denounced on thee a sentence, if thou de^^st not from thy suit. Her
Father must be made acquainted: and consequently thy future hopes derived from
his favor, expired. And herein have you charmed me Doriclea; I shall surcease
to express, what my thoughts shall ever reteifie. Nay, I will turn dissembler
with mine own heart: and learn to decline from what I love most. You shall
have no cause hereafter to tax me of boldness: in the company of those you
better love, I shall hold my distance; Rejoice when you are pleased in the
presentment of a deserving Su^ter* and heartily wish your minds may close in
one harmonious Consort together. And if this will not expiate my offense, I
will go further, to regaine my peace. An Academick life shall receive me, which
may in time restore to me that liberty, which since this my occasional reside
in the Country becomes unhappily estranged from me.

This said, he retired; bearing the clearest countenance that so troubled a
mind could bring forth: resolving never to renew his Suit; but if he could not
wear out those impressions of love, which had writ such deep Characters in
his heart, to remove the occasion by dividing himself from the Object of his
affection: and exchanging a Country love with an Academicall life.

CHAP. VII.
The discourse Doriclea used next day at Table, being encouraged by her Parents
indulgence: alleging by way of Argument, that she wondered how Julia, Augustus
his Daughter could detract so much from her Princely descent, as to entertain
least thought of loving Ovid; and how a Schoolmaster durst attempt the
Sollicitancy of an Emperors Daughter.
PErplexed Philocles could not conceive more passion in Doriclea's disesteeme;
then Doriclea apprehended motives of content from the affection Philocles had
professed. Yet to cloth fancy with policy, both of these must stand at equal
distance: and express not so much as the least beamling of their true zeal in
presence. For Philocles, he durst not, being already charmed with her thre^ts:
and for Doriclea, she would not, to try what temper he was made of. A
dangerous hazard, I nust confess it is, to t^ifle thus with love, and by
playing with the flame, to endanger the fndging of their wings: but so well
composed was Doriclea, so virtuously loyal her affection, and that winged with
such continent desres, as they ever impaled themselves within tle lists of
modesty: Yea* she would not stick sometimes to give liberty to the quickness
of her conceit: by making choice of some discourse purposely to amate
Philocles: and shadowingly pretend a discovery of his late proffered and
professed fancy. As it chanced one day, when her Parents and her self were at
Table together, where through a native tender indulgence which they had ever
shown to their Daughter, she had liberty to express her conceit upon any
Subject. By means of this liberty, which she always used with much modesty,
she took occasion to enter into a discourse by way of argument, touching the
familiarity which appeared betwixt Augustus his Daughter and the Poet Ovid:
wherein she proceeded in this manner.

Amongst all other occasional Subjects, wherein my small Reading has informed
me; there is nothing that occurres unto me more strangely then that boldness,
which I find in that ingenious Ovid, with the Emperor Augustus his Daughter.
How a Poet, who^ even that wisest of Philosophers, Plato himself, had long
since banished his Commonwealth; and whose height of fancy some of our ancient
Sages have esteemed a mere frenzy; holding Poetry to be the Devils wine: and
a Poetical Dimension such a distraction, as it infatuated the understanding,
and deluded the conceit with deceiving shadows of opinion; How he, I say,
durst attempt an assay of such importance; by imparting his love, where he
ought so much of duty: or conceit himself worthy the least beamling or
reflection of such a fancy. Again, how she looking on that imperial House from
whence she came; those eminent Allies with which she sided; those many eyes
which darted o^ her; the distaste which so commanding a Father could no less
than apprehend upon so unequal a familiarity; would debase her thoughts so
much, as to stoop to so base a Lure: as the highest pitch was but a Poetical
fury, an intranced rapsody, which would suit incompetibly with a Princes fancy.
No, what is more, a mere Pedanticall Schoolmaster; for so I have read, he
was; whose highest aim was his Sovereignty in correction: and this ambitious
Swad to assume to himself so much immerited state, as to press into
familiarity with his Emperors Daughter; or she to entertain such ignoble
thoughts as to accept of the protests of so undes^^ving a servant, is almost
above the pitch of imagination to conceive; or opinion to believe.

Why Girl, said her Father? was it* hold you, so contemptible a thing in those
days to be a Schoolmaster? Pray you tell me, what do you think of some of
our most eminent Princes, who have in former times been Schoolemasters? yea,
and with a voluntary dereliction of all regal state, port, and magnificence,
preferred that pedanticall state before the glory of a Diadem? Dennis,
Dionysi^s, and Seleuchus were in their times equal to most Princes for
eminence of state, absoluteness of command; extent in the limit of their
Sovereignty; yet did these hold that condition which you esteem so despicable,
equal in content to that Princely honor which before they retained: yea,
incomparably more happy did they account themselves, in relinquishing the one
for acceptance of the other, then if the most famous Conquest that ever Earth
was witness of, had recorded their regal names in the Annals of honor.

This it was which moved Seleuchus that victorious Prince, upon reflex had to
those many miseries and insupportable cares accompanying a Crown, so
confidently to say, that if a Man knew with what cares a Diadem was clogged, he
would not take it up though it lay in the street. Nor was this the singular
opinion of one; for when the Romans had despoiled Antiochus of all Asia, so
lightly laid he it to his heart, as he gave them great thanks, saying, they
had rid him of many insupportable cares: yea, and of many bitte^ invectives
beside; being at one time saluted ^ glorious Prince, and a furious Tyrant. Nor
did these bear those mutable overtures wit^ minds less composed, then if
highest fortunes with general voice and vote had been^ on them conferred. So
as, a Philosopher perceiving Diony^ius to sit merrily in the Thea^^ after he
was expulsed his realm^, condemned the people who banished him.

It is true Father, said Doriclea: but I am half persuaded, that none of these
whom you have named, would have cared much for a private life, had they not
been deposed. To act the part of King and no King, (...) an heavy task: High
spirits can hard^^ brook it; and for ignoble minds, wh^ prefer, like an
other childish Honorius the safety of Roma their Hen, before the safeguard of
Roma their City; they are n^ to be much pitied for what they lose, because
they are altogether insensible of their loss. They who could forgo a Kingdom^
for a School, never deserved the Title o^ a Prince. Indeed, some of these
there were who deprived of their Scepter* made^ Schoole-house their harbor;
but for wha^ end? Merely to exercise their tyranny on Children, as they had
before practiced on Men.

Girl, your judgment is too rash, said Androgeus; did not Dioclesian, whom
you even now named, voluntarily relinquish the flourishing'st Empire in the
world? He was neither expulsed by force, nor deposed by private consent: his
desertion of an Imperial life came from his own choice: being weary of so
pressing a burden, the weight whereof winged his resolves for a private
condition. But pray thee Girl, whence came the occasion of this argument?
Truly Sir, quoth she, from no great ground; and I am glad at heart, that having
taken so slight an occasion, it has so nearly closed it self in a digression.
For my Argument took first breath from the boldness of a Schoolmaster in
attempting, and the lightness of his Scholar in consenting. The one too
confident of his own parts; the other too unmindefull of her own worth. The
first too opinionate of his own desert; the latter too forgetful of her own
descent. Which Subject, presuming on your patience and fatherly indulgence, I
made choice of, being the very last which occurred to my reading; which moved
me the rather to revive it, to hear what might materially be opposed to it.

CHAP. VIII.
The fear Philocles was in, lest Doriclea should discover his suit to her
Parents. Which Doriclea, though she made choice of that Argument, only to
affright him, never intended, being more affectionately disposed, then either
her appearance made show of, or any expression had as yet discovered.
IT is not easy to imagine what cold qualmes came over Philocles heart in the
disputing of this Subject: so as, if the Parents of Doriclea had suspected
ought, they might easily have gathered by the going and coming of his color,
that there was something in the wind that wrough such strange effects in his
countenance and gesture. All which proceeded from an imaginary fear, doubting
much that Doriclea had discovered his too bold suit to her Parents: Or if she
had not already done it; this very Argument whereof she took so free an
occasion to discourse, was an introduction of what she meant to discover
hereafter. So as, many times in private would he fall into sundry passions:
sometimes reproving his own presumption, in presenting his love to one who was
so far above the sphere of his affection: other sometimes he would minister
to his amated spirits some small semblances of hope; as if she were not the
same she seemed; but that her fancy, howsoever shadowed or shrouded for the
time, would break forth into other expressions, then what her virgin modesty
could yet impart. Which deceiving opinion (as he judged it) he would straight
labor to divert, and condemn himself of egregious folly to promise himself
hope to obtain: seeing all passages of prevailing in his inconsiderate suit,
were shut up by his Mistress disdain. For to impart his thoughts to her any
more upon that subject, he resolved fully never to attempt it: desiring nothing
more then that his former folly might be remitted; and all occasion of
discovery prevented: upon which condition he would willingly surcease from
those motives of love, which had so strongly wrought on the faculties of his
mind.

Nor did he see any means to unrip his thoughts to an other, being so far from
hope of success* as now it became a sufficient task for him to prevent danger.
For as the bent of his fortunes at that time confined themselves only to the
spirit of hope: so was his hope probably like to expire, should she whom he
held so dear, make the least discovery of what had passed betwixt him and her.
It behoved him therefore to apply himself to another design: and recant his
familiarity with love: which might both endanger his fortunes, and deprive him
all hopes of aspiring higher.

Thus, as the precious stone Diocletes, though it have many rare and excellent
soveraignties in it, yet it loses them all, if it be put into a dead man's
mouth; fared it with Philocles, who though he were excellently endowed, richly
qualified, and for elocution generally approved; yet all these disheartened by
want of hope, lost all that luster which they formerly retained.

For though at retired hours, and at such times as he found his Muse most
propitious, he composed diverse amorous Poems, apt motives to stir up fancy;
Yet so much was he discouraged, as what his resolves were sometimes addressed
to present, his latter thoughts ever retracted

Howsoever, his melancholy walks, affecting nothing more then privacy,
discovered to his Mistress the effects of his fancy, who was so far from
disclosing what might redound to his dishonor; as those arguments whereof she
sometimes took occasion to treat, were only urged to affright him, but in no
case to prejudice him: being so tender of his welfare, as whatsoever appeared,
nothing was by her intended to decline his choice, or to give him just cause of
change. For so full of virtuous remorse was Doricleas pious heart, as it was
more affectionately disposed, then by any appearance was yet discovered.

For as the Juniper tree makes the hottest coal, and the coolest shadow of
any tree: For the coal is so hot, that if it be raked up in ashes of the same,
it continues unextinquishable by the space of a whole year: So this divinely
sented creature (to hold nearer resemblance with the Juniper) though the heat
of her affection had been long smothered in embers, and discovered no visible
flame; yet did it retain her vigor still, and by so much more violent when
iffuing, by how much longer before it came to appearing. For love inwardly
shows his heat most, when outwardly discerned least. And such was Doricleas
case; though she restrained her eye from fixing on that Object which it
desired: and her heart to entertain that guest which of all others she most
prized, yet could not her discretion make such a fool of love, as wholly to
bury her thoughts from more discerning eyes. Truth is, though no profession
seemed more contemptible then that which he held: yet in her conceit, no
vocation more pleasing, being professed by one to her own thoughts so loving;
with her own desires so complying. Little then needed Philocles, to fear that
she would discover any thing to her Parents to his prejudice: seeing she so
inwardly affected and equally approved what he had propounded, as nothing did
more infinitely content her, then at vacant hours to recollect those words
which he had delivered to her. Neither was it her desire to tyrannize over her
late-captiv'd and inchained Servant: whose freedom lay it in her power, should
be confirmed with as ample and authentic a Charter; as true love and constant
devotion could enjoyne her.

But all this little allayed those incessant cares and fears of poor
Philocles: who every day expected a discharge, when he should be deprived of
the place he bore, and consequently of all future hopes of renewing his suit, or
enjoying that prize which he so infinitely valued, as the sacrifice of his
life he held at a low rate to seize him of the incomparable purchase of her
love.

This moved him one day, after a sad recollection of his thoughts, to meditate
of his present condition, Philocles relation of the unhappiness of his
condition.
and of the ground of his distemper in this pensive manner.

How is it Philocles! how fares it with thy distracted thoughts! most miserable
of all others is thy condition; meriting most, yet can partake no compassion.
Should thou discover thy griefs, thou exposest thy self to danger, and by
concealing what thou seelest, with fresh fuel thou feedst thy distemper,
unhappy then art thou in suffering what thou dare not disclose: and no less
unhappy, in making those thy enemies, on whom thou depends, by discovering what
thy intimate thoughts desire to make known.

How sweet and safe was thy condition, when Philosophy was thy mistress: and
and the Liberal Arts those brave Competito^s which contested with thee for
preeminence? Light-feather'd Love was then no Lure to catch thee: nor beauty no
bait to ensnare thee: Nor all those amorous delights which fancy tenders,
motives to delude thee. Spare commons became professed foes to light affections.

Lectures of Philosophy admitted no Audience to loves treaty.

But such is the mu^able disposition of the mind: that no condition relisheth
worse then what it presently injoyes. For could man value an Academicke life
when he partakes it, at that estimate which he holds it when he foregoes it,
he would not make exchange of that present state with the treasures of the
age: nor lose an hours contemplation for the enjoyment of an Empire. O unhappy
Philocles! and by so much more unhappy, in being once happy. In those prime
slourishing days, wherein knowledge was the height of thy ambition, thou
could freely without anxiety, and though rationally, with much liberty,
discourse of a disdainefull Mistress. Slight the frowns of an imperious Dame,
and make it a wonder, how a little painted Earth, more purely refined then
other inferior moved, should surprise a Conceiving soul, by making the
miserable sufferer present himself a true Malecontent: with an hat without a
band over-brimming his eyes, an unfashionable habit, as if he scorned to suit
with time, and that unbrush'd: an head, as if newly fetterd with Medusa's
locks, and that unkemb'd. This made me put on the Countenance of Dem^critus,
and weaken my lungs with laughter. And must I play the madmans part, and
discover my self to be the very same personal Actor! well Philocles; herein
thou may read a Lecture of humility unto others; by disvaluing thy own
strength: and submitting thy self to others Censure, who formerly were so
forward to tax others of the same Error.

Mean time, what powerful effects have all these fruitless passions wrought?
Increase of disdain; decrease of esteem: and fear in thy self of
discovering thy aim? Well, Doriclea, did you but know, as your discretion has
sufficiently informed and improved your knowledge, what your unworthy Servant,
unhappy Philocles, has lost in offering his Sacrifice of love unto you; you
would suffer the worst of extremes, rather then suffer him to perish, whose
life, freedom and fortune depend all upon your affection. But be it your lot
to soveraignize over me, while with resolved patience; and a mind better
composed then for any affliction to shake, I embrace my own ruin with a
smile, while you close the period of my hopes in a frown.

All this, unknown to him, did his Doriclea hear; who had much to do, upon
the relation of his unhappiness, to hold her peace. But with what an open and
affectionate breast she received his Complaints, and with what constancy she
retained them, shall appear hereafter by those impressive effects which were
wrought in her, and derived from her, by them.

CHAP. IX.
The intercursive Letters passing betwixt Philocles and Doriclea: and how she
begun to impart by pen, what she had before conceited in thought: and how
she desired nothing so much as the accomplishment of their Love, so privacy
might give leave.
GOod news, when they come unexpected, are ever with the best welcome
entertained. This our Love-perplexed Philocles well understood, when after so
many cold sweats, and distempered passions, which the height and heat of his
unfeigned love had brought him to, he begun now at last to perceive, that a
storm may beget a Calm: and that the frown of a Mistress may arise from the
brow without least privity or intention of the heart. Which pleasant and
unexpected overture, not to trifle out time, nor delude the conceit of our
amorous Reader, who, no doubt, longs to hear of so fair a Conclusion, to such
unpromising premises, happened thus.

Philocles, who had never all his time before, entered into such a league of
familiarity or acquaintance with love: and now fully resolved to bid adieu to
all such dis-passionate treaties as make fools of the wisest men: after a
melancholy turn or two in a solitary walk, which since the first presentment
of his love to Doriclea, at retired hours he usually frequented: entering his
Chamber, and casting his eye aside, he might find a paper close by his deske,
wherein were these words contained.

Doricleas first Letter to Philocles.
Sir;
THe very last time I saw you, me thought you wore your band more like a
Scholar then a complete Lover; which implied, that you were loved and knew
not. Now, I would not that you made too large a construction of this: I am not
she that will tell you she loves you: and if perhaps, I did, you would not
believe me. For I have given you no cause as yet to conceit so. Nay, reflect
upon your person and profession, and if you be any good Sophister* you cannot
choose but conclude from such apparent premises, that it is impossible I should
love you. And yet, I would be loath to be accounted such a fool, as to speak
all that I think. Trust me, Sir, I was once resolved never to love, but if I
did, never to love you: now what have you done that could alter me? Must I
believe, you, because you told me you did love me? Be all your pro^ests
Maxims, that I should hold them for authenticke? And yet Scholars have ever
been accounted simple: were it not a sin then, not to believe you? That
experienced Sage could style you Foxes in the School, but Sheep in the world:
And shall I hold you a dissembler? No; I am persuaded you speak as you think:
but what is all this to me, or wherein may this beget hope in you, seeing you
must not have all you love? Well; God forgive you, I will not dissemble,
whatsoever you do. Let me hear you once again treat of love, and you shall
see how I will slight you. If your discourse like me, trust me, I will not be
angry; howsoever, it shall not so much offend me, as to make me accuse you to
any such wherewith I formerly threatened you. To conclude, though Love be
seldom grounded on Reason, return me but reason why I should love, and why I
should make you the object of that love, and as I live, Philocles shall find
me a loyal constant Doriclea.


Never did hopeless Prisoner receive more content from the glad report of an
unexpected reprive, after the heavy sentence of death pronounced, then revived
Philocles did in the perusal of this Letter. He now recollects his dispersed
and dispacarled spirits: and bethinks with himself what were best to be done
upon so fair an opportunity offered. He resolves therefore, to prevent
jealous eyes, to address his mind to her in writing to this effect.

Philocles answer to Doricleas first Letter.
Mistress;
HOw much those lines sweetened with your character, have transportedme, my
indearedst thoughts cannot impart unto you. To give you a reason why you should
love me, I can give you no other, but that my heart tells me I deserve you: and
that humanity injoynet you to love me, seeing I hold my life an easy sacrifice
to enjoy you. Be it your goodness to believe me; I will sooner surcease to
live, then from expressing those loyal arguments of love; which your virtues
deserve, and which I with no less constancy shall observe. I could never yet
dictate either by tongue or pen, what I first conceived not in heart I told
you, that your self was my booty; the portion I expected, your virtuous
beauty: and if you pleased but to crown my hopes with your consent, our
mutual choice which should never admit change, might make us both equally
happy.

To tell you that either my Fortunes or descent did deserve you, were to
labor, and that fruitlesly, to delude you. But let me become an Abject in the
eyes of fame, an Object of contempt to the world, if my faithful devotion and
observance supply not that deficience. For my descent, as I will not boast of
it, yet whenever your parents, after passion digested, shall examine it, they
will find it neither so ignoble as to despise it, nor so meanly strengthened,
as to reject it.

But what are these, compared to the purity of that affection, which combines
hearts and hands: And with a sacred cement so knits and contracts minds: As
those who were before divided, by means of this holy league became so united,
as nothing so much as their presence could content them, then which, nothing
before did more distaste them! were my fortunes never so poor, yet seeing my
fancy appears so pure, account him worthy to deserve you, who will hold
himself unworthy of that life, which shall not be employed to serve you. These
are all the reasons of Love, which you can expect from

Your loyal PHILOCLES.


Thus became Love a present and pregnant Secretary.

This object of fancy made the task easy. Letters know not how to blush, which
cause them commit to paper, what a bashful tongue could not so well deliver.
Besides, this diverted all occasion of jealousy in a meare-looking family.
Which they before all others most doubted; fearing to be prevented, now when
their loves begun to be ripened and settled: which would so perplexe the
Scene, as this Comicke introduction might casually close with a fearful
Conclusion.

Albeit, so free from the least suspicion of any light or ungrounded affection
which Doriclea might any way harbor, were her Parents; as many times they
would give their daughter liberty to ride abroad, and visit her friends. In all
which freedoms she expressed such modesty, as Envy could nothatch the least
occasion of jealousy from so composed a behavior.

Yet, a greater desire she reteyn'd to stay at home, since her affection
begun to be settled on Philocles, then before: many times pretending an
indisposition of health, or some other minted excuse, to prevent her journey,
by remaining there where she had planted her fancy. But so tender were her
Parents of their daughter; being, as she was, indeed, naturally tender: as
they desired she should change the air, fearing much that her long stay or
retiredness at home might enfeeble her health* And this their resolve now and
then closed well with her liking, having Philocles assigned her for her
conduct: whose society, out of a modest policy, though she seemed with all
indifferency to admit: yet how much that cheered her heart, I appeal to all
such constant and affectionate Lovers, whose fancy h'as been crowned with such
opportunity: and whose Iourneyes have been so incomparably sweetened with the
Society of a Mistress; whose conference had power enough to shorten the hour;
allay the difficulty of a troublesome way; and to entertain every object with
such occasional delight: as nothing could more cheerfully nor intentively
work on the Conceit.

But howbeit Philocles had sometimes the happiness to attend his Mistress; He
was enjoined to a short return, which could not but beget an equal proportion
of passion in them both: In him to be divided from her presence whom he so
entirely affected: In her, to be dispossessed of those unvaluable joys which her
affection had in his Society treasured. But their personal absence was ever
supplied by other remonstrances, not only to renew what was already begun, but
to prepare way for accomplishment of that, which with joint consent they
desired might be solemnly done. Intercursive Letters were ever passing betwixt
them: and that in so quaint and cunning a Character, as interception, though
seconded with a nimble construction, could hardly extract ought that might
discover what they intended: or apply ought that might occasionally prevent
what their grounded affections had resolved.

For sometimes, he would write in the person of another Suitor, to free his
lines from suspicion: sometimes he would feague under the title of that
imaginary Suitor, that he was rejected by her: which to prevent, he would
revive those protests of love he had formerly professed. And to instance
these, and display the subtilty of a Lover, peruse this Letter, which under the
feigned Name of some dis-esteemed Suitor, he thus addressed to her.

Philocles second Letter to Doriclea.
DEarest, let the presentment of these lines renew my suite; and in the
perusal of my passions, let this be your maxim: that it rests in your
affection or rejection to make me happy or unhappy in my state, your Zeal to
goodness, amongst these many gusts of extremes, assures me, your pious and
well-disposed heart cannot but entertain remorce to a Servant so loyal, as
he holds the intyrest tender of his life, an easy purchase to time, but an
easier sacrifice to fate, to purchase your love. Let me joy in enjoying you,
and let me be deprived of all joy if in every subject I close not in your
content, to make our mutual joys more truly absolute. Amidst these, hope and
fear do equally encounter me; it is in your discreet breast to banish the one,
by returning assurance of the other: and by checking the latter with a frown,
to give encouragment to the former with a smile.

Your year of mourning is now expired; receive him into your bosom, who will
hold you so dear, as your comfort shall never expire. My long neglect of
attending you, proceeded from the discouragement I received from you at my last
being with you: but I am persuaded that assurance your own hand has plighted
me, will induce you to recollect your thoughts, and revive those sacred ties,
which are so firmly united, as by death only to be dissolved.

Let but one line redart one small beameling of love, and winged speed shall
enliven my desires for those parts, and style me in the fruition of you,

Your long trusty, now happy Servant*


How much these plaide, nay pleased the imagination of Doriclea, it is not easy
to conceive. Smyling with her self at the Conceit of Philocles, in seeming to
fear what he feared not; and pretending the affection of a Suitor whom he knew
not. Nor was Doriclea less prompt in addressing her affectionate thoughts to
Philocles, but still after his Copy; for either would she make bold with
subscribing Mellida's name to her own Letter: or counterfaiting some other
Character, to express the intimacy of her desires, and constancy of her vows
to her selectedst Lover. Nor would she enlarge herself too much; lest by some
Circumstance or other she might discover what her private thoughts would not
have disclosed, for the true and unvaluable estimate of her honor.

Yet did not her pen drop less love for the contractedness of her line:
Each Syllable had his Emphasis, as may appear by this amongst others, which
she sometimes wrote unto him to solace his pensiveness.

Doricleas second Letter to Philocles.
Fail not, faint not, fear not: I am ever the same I have professed,
constant. No line can limit my love; no distance divide my heart. Mean while
lodge these lines in thy bosom till I see thee.

Cold North, hot South, clear East, wet West
Shall never divide me from thy breast;
On this then, Dearest, set thy rest,
I am the same that I Have professed;
Mean time, sweet fancy, use thy charm,
Till sleep enfold us arm in arm.

No day past without some memorial of this kind. A strong motive to love;
re-conveying to the memory, what personal absence might raze forth without
revivall. This it was which wrought so strongly on the enlivened spirit of
Mark Antonie: as there was nothing that made him so great a stranger to arms,
which he naturally affected: nor estranged his affection more from his Octavia,
to whom by conjugall love he stood obliged: nor divided him more from the care
of securing himself, then one line coming from the hand of his Cleopatra.
Though her majestic state begot an admiration in her beholders; a strong
impression in the wounded hearts of her lovers. Though her eye retained a power
to command love; and subdue the commandingst Conqueror with a look. All these
soveraigniz'd not half so much on Antonies affection, as those amorous lines
he received from her, writ in Crystal, Amber, Amethist, and Ivory. Not a line
but contained a loves charm. No model which ever fancy devised, or the
imagination stamped; which subtle Cleopatra presented not to make a Commander
her Thrall; a Conqueror her Slave.

Those secret delights of love which modest ears would scarcely have received;
nor shamefast eyes perused, were into his conceit freely instilled: to decline
his affection from those, whom he ought to have loved best: and to engage his
heart to her, whose embraces he should have dis-relished most. Thus did she
cast forth her lines for lures, to seize on one of the highest flyers, that
ever perched Roman stem: becoming her own witty Secretary, to ensnare the
fancy of her deluded Antony.

But more modest were the lines of our two Lovers; and far more virtuous
their aims. Reason became no captive unto sense. Neither did the conceit of a
Nuptial night so much transport them, as to deprive their apprehension of the
end for which honorable rites were first ordained. This, Philocles
sufficiently expressed, when at such time as after Doricleas return home,
having no good opportunity to impart his thoughts more freely to her, he
commended these lines to paper, which he privately conveyed into her pocket.

Philocles third Letter to Doriclea.
Dear One, what I sometimes professed, shall be ever in my loyal love to you
faithfully expressed. What, though opportunity for the present bar us from
conference, our eyes shall witness that unfeined love that is betwixt us. And
in approvement of it, subscribe under these few lines, but these words, I will
be ever your faithful Consort: And you shall perceive, ere long, that a fair
opportunity shall give freedom of enjoyment of our loves. Where we way freely
and virtuously enjoy one the other; and with continual comforts partake the
benefit of our lawful loves to Gods honor. Mean time, write these words
under this, my dearest choice, so shall my constant love pronounce me yours
without change.

The Match is made with joint consent,
Only subscribe, I am content:
Where naught but Death shall e're divide
Your dearest consort from his Bride.

Nor need you doubt but Doriclea upon perusal of these lines, was as ready to
s^bscribe, as he to propose. So loyal were their chaste loves, so constantly
united their minds. Yet were they no such Novices in the School of Love; nor
so incapable of those effects which pure love might bring forth: as not to
aspire to some higher degree then yet they had attained. Yea, even virtuous
Doriclea, who never heard any light discourse without a modest blush: nor had
given harbor to a wandering thought without a seasonable reproof, desired
nothing more then the accomplishment of their love, so privacy might give
leave. For that tender filial zeal which she bore to her Parents made her
resolves more doubtful; and time more protractive; then her desires, were she
her own Guardian, could freely give way to. Howsoever, to free her faithful
Philocles of all fear; and to confirm him in that which he did most desire:
with as much convenient speed as the opportunity of that time would allot, with
a prepared hand and an affectionate heart she subscribed to whatsoever his
virtuous requests had propounded.

CHAP. X.
What Plots Doriclea devised to partake in private Meetings and Treaties with
her Philocles: and how by the jealousy of Euryclea, her Mother, she was
prevented.
SHort restraints seem long, where hearts are divided from those Objects which
they love. Though at times of repast, and some other hours of the day,
Doriclea might enjoy the presence of her Philocles, yet through the intercourse
of her sundry Suitors, who now like golden showers came daily falling and
distilling into our Danaes Lap: they were barred that freedom of discourse
their bequeathed hearts so much affected.

Nor could it do less then perplexe the troubled thoughts of Philocles, to
see his Doriclea so daily courted; ample promises of high preferment, with
other titles of honor, dangerous baits to catch a Woman, proffered: so as, if
she were not all the constanter, howsoever she had largely protested, he was
verily persuaded her Mai^en Castle could not long hold out. Every kiss was a
killing to him; and by that, judge how often he might be killed every day! He
many times thought of that Poetical Proverb: L^^s are Loves-portels, to sly
Wooers known,
Which once surpised, the Fort is quickly won.


Yet patient Philocles! he must say nothing, whatsoever he think. His eyes
must partake in the sight of their wooing dalliance; and glad he may do so, to
prevent the worst. And sometimes these silken Suitors will vouchsafe him that
honor to supply a place in their amorous pastimes; as in making Gooselings in
the fire, or drawing of gloves, or such like harmless toys, to pass the
night away. Nay, sometimes they employed him further, in returning a message to
Doriclea; a task which suited best with his liking, but no doubt would loose
much of his spirit in carrying. For to be a second Porter of Bellerophons
Letters could not sort with his disposition, who had casten his lot, and found
one equally closing with him ^n affection. But all these servile employments,
as he conceived, were imposed him, purposely to humble him. Albeit, such trials
needed little, being one of such temper, as his thoughts were far above an
inferior Sphere. For as he beheld nothing in this Theater of Earth, worthy
affecting, but his Doriclea: so he conceipted so well of his choice, as he
rested confident, such an excellent piece could not find a breast to entertain
a change. And his opinion was truly grounded: for howsoever his Doriclea might
seem out of a desire to give her Parents content, to converse with these jolly
Wooers, and to leave them in suspense, lest an absolute rejection of them might
procure their distaste; we have ever made it a constant Maxim, Where the eye
is, there the mind is: which might well appear by the behavior of this
constant Maid: who, though she seemed amorously to converse with these, had her
eye ever fixed on her Philocles. But all this was not sufficient to her,
unless she might enjoy the presence of her Dearest; from whom to be divided,
even in private treaties or parliance, was no small affliction. Suppose her
then contriving sundry plots to partake in what she did so infinitely desire.
Love is ingenious in devising, but many times not so prosperous in succeeding.
Private meetings, purposely to relate their affections, with means of
preventing of what her Parents, for ought that she knew, might be intending;
was her aim; further she aspired not: for so pure and undistained were her
thoughts, as they hated to mix themselves with any irregular desire.

Now to bring to pass what she sought; many evenings would she pretend some
one business or other, to stay below behind her Mother: but so light was her
occasion, as her Mother perceived, that it made her more jealous of her
excuses. Seeing then these would not do; she made use of a Trap-doore within
her Chamber; intending to come down by it, and so enjoy the benefit of time.
But none of these plots would hold; for Euryclea, who by some private
intelligence, or what other ill office I know not, receiving notice of her
Daughters practice; one night when Doriclea suspecting no harm, was to come
down by the Trap-doore, as she had formerly done, was received below by her
Mother instead of her Lover. Which how it perplexed this unfortunate Doriclea,
exceeds the art of any Pen to express: being not only deprived of that
beneficial opportunity, with an evening treaty, to crown their fancy; but
engaged to a just censure or opinion of jealousy. Which her Mother had good
cause to conceive; seeing what private advertisements had informed, she found
so apparently confirmed. Imagine then incensed Euryclea, who prized nothing
more then her Daughters honor: nor distasted ought more then those imputations
which censure might justly cast upon her, taking up her Daughter in this manner.

What Girl, is your modest seeming come to this? H'as our care, our too much
care of your preferment, made you forgetful of your honor? Have you either so
mean an opinion of your self; or so weak a conceit of our love, as to suffer
your desires to mount no higher, then to be the affectionate Mistress of a
Schoolmaster? H'as your breeding begot in you a neglect of what you are, or a
contempt of that duty which you owe? Be your actions so dark, as they must have
the night to shelter them? Must your Fathers Family receive a blemish by your
infamy? Is this the hope we treasured in you, the comfort we expected from you?
Little, did either your Father or I imagine what you meant by that quaint
discourse you occasionally vented at the Table; in talking of that immodest
love betwixt a wanton Poet and Augustus Daughter. It seems you delivered that
Argument only to try us, whether we stood affected to such a profession, on
which you had pitched your wild affection. Simple Girl! conceive remorse in
time; do not undo your Fortunes; there is none yet that can (such is my too
indulgent hope in you) justly traduce you; unless the eyes of this Family.
Redeem their opinion; be more tender of your reputation. There is no portion
proportionably comparable to the gage of honor: which perished, you are lost
for ever. No treasure so precious as a continent soul; nothing more to be
loved, and nothing harder to be redeemed, being once lost.

It will grieve me, to hear your self grieved with the relation of an ill
report. You may be confident I shall take small pleasure in the discovery of
this nightwork. Well Girl; those relenting tears promise amendment: how soon
is a Mothers anger appeased? I shall be ready to salve all, so I find a desire
in you to amend all. I will not make your Father, your too passionate Father
acquainted with it; neither will I show in public any displeasing countnance
toward your too presumptuous Philocles. All shall be carried with that equal
and fair temper, as you shall have cause to say, that never indulgent Mother
did more ^ender her Daughters honor: nor could use more connivence, where she
found the least hope of repentance. Retire then with all privacy into your
Chamber; I shall charm your Maid that she discover nothing. Only let this be
a warning unto you henceforth, never to expose your honor so freely, as to
give occasion to the family to speak lightly of you. For as honest repute is
the highest prize; so it merits of it self such approved praise: as were your
actions never so private, the eye of piety would survey them and crown them.
Neither can any device find such a shroud or shelter for vice, as the piercing
eye of fame will not discover it, and display the Actors when they least dream
of it. Be then what you have so long professed, virtuous; you cannot improve
the Family from whence you came, better: nor confer on your maiden years
more true honor. This if you observe, it will give us cause to bless you, and
second the continuance of our care, in providing a Match for you that may
equal your birth and fortunes: yea, and to close all in one, confirm the
opinion of your own fame, by leaving to your posterity a president of your
surviving goodness.

With these words, seeing her Daughter lodged in her Chamber, she departed:
leaving poor disappointed Doricl^a to sum up her discontents, and to ask her
Pillow counsel in cases of such extremity, what were best to be done. Whom now
you may imagine turning and tossing in her bed, without taking any rest:
desiring rather to be deprived of what re^resheth and nourishes Nature most,
then to be rest of so sweet an opportunity of enjoying his presence, whom she
prized best.

For though she sought her Parents minds to please,
Her highest thoughts were fixed on Philocles.
But the day must now supply the night, with our Doriclea: by contenting her
self with the sight of him, in the presence of her Parents, whom she in
private conference so much desired to enjoy. Their distance must admit no
conference: all their language now must be delivered by the eye: ready no
doubt to express by a look, how much their united hearts stood engaged to
love. Those Hesperian Daughters never kept their golden fruit with more
vigilance, then restrained Doriclea was by her Mothers jealousy. So as, though
her unfeined love devised many plots to possess her of that which she so much
desired, yet by her Mothers intelligence was she ever prevented. Howbeit, she
ever bore fair with Philocles: never so much as discovering any discontent
toward his person: nor at any time reproving him for his presumption; in
aspiring so high as the procurement of her Daughter^ affection. Albeit, one day
taking him aside, she told him; that she conceived it to be a far better course
for him, to return to his former Academick life: and that he lost but his time
in the Countr^y: especially, seeing for the present they had no employments for
him, that might any way improve him, nor answer those hopes he expected, nor
parts deserved: yet if occasion should afterward fall forth that it lay in
their way to advance him: he should not fail in obtaining the best means
that their assistance or furtherance could possibly procure him.

But little wrought these with Philocles: he preferred one Mistress before
nine Muses. His highest of humane Philosophy rested in the affection and
contemplation of her on whom he had fixed his fancy. Nevertheless, he
expressed himself thankful for so unwelcome a tender: pretending ever that he
expected daily to receive notice when some place might fall, and then he would
neglect no more time but address his course that way; which he hoped e're
long would offer it self in such ample manner and measure, as might highly
conduce to the improvement both of his credit and profit.

Mean time, he hoped, his demeanure should not be such, as might make any
place where he so journed for the time, weary of him. And that he would choose
rather to undergo the poorest life, then be confined to that place, where his
carriage might not merit love. But little did these reasons satisfy jealous
Euryclea; who labored to prevent the worst, by dividing Philocles from her
presence whom she tendered best. To whom we must now return, and see what
extremes she is brought to; who in this her languishing plight intimates her
griefs; and in a secret repose, to give more vent to passion, imparts her
discontents in this private pensive relation.

CHAP. XI.
The Passions of Doriclea: and how she conversed with her own thoughts in the
effecting of her love: inveying against such ungrounded fancies, who measur^
affection by strength of alliance, portion, or any other respect, then the pure
effects of love.
Griefs never come unseconded: love-surpriz'd Philocles could never lament
more the inequality of his fortunes, which made him unworthy the embraces of
his endeared Mistress, in the opinion of her Parents: then this division from
him whom she so entirely loved, troubled the dis-passionate mind of Doriclea.

Her unsociable disposition now discovered her affection. Dark-shady Launes
agreed best with her humor, where in some private Spinet, conversing with her
own thoughts, she used to discourse of the effects of her love, in this manner.

How far art thou divided from thy self Doriclea? Are all passages now stopped
up, of partaking his society to whom I have engaged my heart? Can Children
esteem this for tender love, which deprives them their sight whom they only
love? Alas! do they hold it a matter of such indifferency, to dispense with
fancy? Admit I have made choice of him for my dearest Lover, whom my Parents
provided for my Schoolmaster, must this deserve such strict censure, as to
divide me from the presence of my Tutor? This were to make a Truant of a
Scholar. Must none marry but with their equals? None rich, match with poor
fortunes? What will become then of poor virtue? She may live a single life,
and never partake in the society of love. Silken vice, be it never so deformed,
must be honored: she cannot want preferment, nor choice of Suitors, nor
variety of Admirers, because wealth h'as advanced her above the rank of
inferiors. Our Wooers now adays must be rich, or our Parents will entertain
them with a frown. Mean time, what discontent attends such hopeless
marriages, where fortunes make up the match, while their affections never meet?
Do^es Loves essence consist in outward substance? Was it this that made Leander
cross Hellespont, and intombe his dying hopes in the waves? Was it this that
moved love-seazed Orpheus to encounter all hazards for his captived Eurydice?
Was it this which exposed long-divorced Ithacus to all adventures for his
constant Penelope? Was it this which engaged trusty Telamon to such perils for
his Hesione? O no! It was true love which drew them to those extremes. And yet
did these rarely ground their affections upon equality of descents or fortunes.
Their choice was better planted, and therefore continued longer. For alas, what
will honor do to a discontented heart? She that is so matched receives small
joy from the Title of a Lady, when this naked style h'as bestowed her on One
she cannot fancy. Ungrounded are these affections, and so weakly to be weighed,
as I shall ever choose to inveigh against them, who hold it sufficient glory to
enjoy precedence: mean time, discontent becomes their Chamberlain: seeing,
neither style nor estate can reconcile an enforced love to a loathed bed. O
consider you this, reverend Parents, who enjoyne your Children to live where
they cannot love!

This it is, believe it, which makes modest minds too often transgress, by
conforting with unlawful loves, and mixing with those, whom sensual affection
h'as made choice of in exchange. Enforced loves beget straying eyes. They find
nothing at home worth affecting, which makes them with Dinah to go abroad, and
with too prepared a boldness to impaune their honor. O retract then your too
severe commands, who enjoyne your Children such Tasks, as affection cannot
bear, nor freedom of mind embrace, without a resolved distaste! It is better
seasonably to forgo what we cannot like; then seemingly to approve what we
cannot effect, and then repent too late. For my resolves, I hope, they shall
never close in any other period then this: That it shall be my constant scorn,
to measure affection by strength of alliance, which to divided hearts can
afford small as^istance; or portion, which without a love-inducing proportion,
begets the enjoyer naught but affliction; nor any other respect, be it never so
gracious or specious to the eye; but that only which conveyes pure and
effectual love to the heart. Never let Parents think that any other affection
can prosper: seeing it is not grounded on that foundation, which tenders the
mind true solace and contentment. Albeit, such who make their choice by the
eye, receive only direction by sense; and such a love neither deserves
approvement, nor to offer it self to others for a president. But where reason
and affection meet, there such a sweet union and communion of minds close in
the enjoyment of one the other, as nothing can dissolve that individual tie
save only the discharge of that debt we owe to Nature. Yea, but will provident
Parents say, there is more required in solemnizing a marriage, then only bare
love* It is true; yet where love is truly grounded, it will ever find a state
competent to the mind, or a mind competent to the state. It is impure love
that proves poor. Affection cannot want: a very little suffices where love
reigns. Whereas greatest means prove mean fortunes, where affectionate
minds are wanting to manage those fortunes. O let me then enjoy my choice,
and it is not in the world that shall make me desire to change. Rich am I above
comparison, enjoying the freedom of my affection. Miserably poor above
relation. being deprived of loves fruition. Either then give me liberty to live
where I love; and to become seaz'd where I have engaged mine heart: or let me
be restrained for ever, rather then so espoused where I needs must hate. O my
dearest Parents! reflect upon your own condition, when your unriper years
gave first motives to your glowing thoughts of affection. Did you only value
means? Was portion the ononly lure? Could nothing work so strongly on fancy,
as fortune or outward ability? Yes, yes; more purely were your undefiled loves
grounded, and more successively graced, then with the refuse of Earthy Oar to
be only gilded. Look then down upon us; we are of the same mould; if our
temper were impu^er, we should less deserve the privilege of your favor.
Since we resemble you in our desires, second what we desire, and account of us,
as you shall value the estimate of our deserts.

Howsoever Doriclea, be it thy assay to retain the good opinion thou have
purchased from thy Philocles; his constancy h'as deserved thee; his demeriting
parts every way equal with those fortunes thy friends may confer on thee.
Mean time, endure the averseness of thy Parents with patience, so may the
effect crown thy hope, and minister thee seasonable relief, when all visible
means deny help.

Thus conversed Doriclea with her own thoughts; thus with much privacie
discovered she her own passions. Resolved to endure whatsoever fate or fortune
might inflict, rather then forgo the choice of her Philocles, whom she before
all others did affect. But how much she became deprived of all means to
express the love she professed, and which remained so constantly fixed, as
nothing but death could divide it, the Chapter ensuing will declare: where you
shall find nothing so constant an attendant to love as care: nor no distemper,
when brought to extremes, more desperate of cure.

CHAP. XII.
How Doriclea, being deprived all means of imparting the constancy of her
zeal to Philocles: having neither the benefit of Ink nor Paper, to discover
her loyal intimate thoughts to her faithful Lover; she supplied that want
with her needle, sowing her mind in Letters of gold, and returning them in the
border of a handkerchiefe.
SO jealous was Euryclea grown of the love of her Daughter and her amorous
Scholar: as, though she prevented all means of familiar conference or treaty
one with the other, yet she still doubted the worst: wherefore finding her
Daughter one Evening privately in her Chamber writing, and perceiving the
character by the first blush, and too hasty subscription of her Letter: to
Doricleas small comfort, she thus encountered her.

What, Girl, will this never be left? Will your Mothers instructions receive
no place? Is there none for you to love, but whom we dislike? Trust me,
Daughter, this will neither redound to your comfort nor credit? I pray you,
what hopes may you look for at his hands? Will his unprocured revenews
maintain you? Or his Philosophy feed you? Or the lean hopes of some fat
Advousion hereafter sustain you? Las, do you not see how a Scholar is but made
an instrument of necessity: and after he h'as done his work, like an old
decayed Servingman to be discarded; or if he stay, to be fed with reversions;
or take his repast without fear of a surfeit, at a Philosophers dinner? Prevent
then this foolish love: which, lest you should hereafter signify by the least
line, I shall remove all occasion: for Pen and Paper you shall have none to
express your inconsiderate affection: the period whereof may bring you to a
too untimely affliction. Nay more; assure your self, that the next time
wherein I shall observe the least semblance of your unseasoned love, I shall
divide you beyond the distance or limit of any line. No pretended excuse shall
satisfy me, to induce me to suffer him to sojourne any longer within our
gates. Resolve then what you mean to do; fix not your distempered fancy on
him whom you cannot have. Submit your affection in all obedience to our choice.
In vain it is to oppose us, seeing you labor to intercede for that which you
can never receive from us. I have hitherto shrouded your too forward fancy: and
casten such a veil before the eyes of the Family, as no dishonor yet h'as
touched you. Compassionate my care, and requite it with a constant desire, to
effect what we most affect: by setting your rest on such a choice, as may, when
God shall send you one, support your charge.

Thus was poor Doriclea deprived all means of imparting the constancy of her
zeal to Philocles. No treaty could she partake with him. No line of love could
she address to him. Eyes only were those Messengers of love, which so redarted
affection, as the Optic part returned a legible Lecture of a constant
assurance one to the other. Yet would not this suffice loyal Doriclea; now
must she skrue her invention to the highest Pin, and by some other means
supply the expression of her Pen. Which the pregnancy of loves art quickly
performs. For having neither the benefit of Ink nor Paper, to discover her
loyall-intimate though^s to her faithful Lover, she contrives an other way to
express what she did so unfeignedly profess: and in so modest and composed a
manner, as the subtilest part of jealousy could not unrivet the secrecy of
such a Letter. Her Plot is then to supply that want with her Needle, sowing
her mind in Letters of Gold, and returning them in a curious border of needle
work, so neatly and artificially shadowed, as it was not in the power of art
nor strength of fancy to discover it.

And amongst other curious devices which loves invention composed, she
addressed this, in that manner we have expressed.

Doriclea to Philocles.
MY Pen a Needle now must be
To manifest my love to thee;
While every stitch shall sting my heart
Till it take harbor where thou art;
Where landing, may it dye a shore
If e're we live divided more.
What strong and impressive memorials these and such as these were to our
constant Philocles; I leave to your judgments, experienced Lovers, who have
suffered under the malevolent quality of such a Planet: where restrained of all
opportunity, your Mistresses invention found way by some ingenious device or
other after this manner, to discover the constancy of their affections. Truth
is, as there is no passion which sooner works distraction then a depriving or
distancing of us from the object of our affection: so is there no such motive
to the conceit; as this conflict of love. How witty it is in contriving? How
various in those numerous delights which the height of that fancy is ever
working? No difficulty, but love will encounter it; no extremity, but she can
digest it. There is no action meriting honor, that can be achieved without
labor. Infinite were those tasks, and those full of jeopardie, which were
imposed on Alcydes, before he could be seized on his tyrannizing Omphale. Nor
were the affections of loyal Mistresses of less pursuit in their real
expressions to their Servants. What vast unfrequented deserts, unknown to any
other inhabitants but wild Beasts, have their tender virgin-feet traced, to
find out those whom they loved? What strange disguises have they taken; what
eminent fortunes have they forsaken; what honors rejected; what powerful
friends disclaimed; to enjoy one only friend, whom they so highly preferred, as
by their personal seazure they held themselves sufficiently enriched?
Instances we might here bring forth such store, as might make up a story of
themselves with out any other intervening discourse. But omitting others both
foreign and modern, in reflecting upon our constant Doriclea, we shall find
such noble constancy and masculine spirit in her, as every Act shall present a
sufficient approvement; and publish her by the impartial verdict of time,
worthy that applause which the relation of that age h'as given her.

For as there was none which ever showed more constancy to those they loved; so
was there never any who with a more composed temper encountered those affronts
which either friends or fortunes cast upon her. Bearing all occurrents with so
sweet and pleasing a smile, as even her very professed enemies (being, I must
confess very few, though virtue must ever have some) suffered with her,
turning their passion into compassion, the heat of their fury into a relenting
admiration of her fancy: which became so equally tempered, as no distaste could
alter it: being no less ready to enter the List to enjoy her love, then to
obtain the conquest of enjoying his love, in whose bosom she desired only to
live.

Thus was our Doriclea resolved to suffer, and to joy in her suffering, that
she might enjoy him; to whose affection as her thoughts were devoted, so no
hour passed, wherein she was not contriving by one means or other, for their
honest loves to be clothed and closed with honor.

CHAP. XIII.
Philocles restraint, with those passionate effects which their enforced
absence one from the other produced. He finds love ever most violent, when
furthest divided from his Object: yet amidst these disgusts, he advises her to
patience in his restraint. Confirming himself so individually hers, as nothing
may abridge the accomplishment of their desires, but Death.
BUT return we now to love-restrained Philocles: who, as he was confident to
prevail, so he remained ever jealous of Eurycleas affection to him. Nor could
that smooth carriage which she pretended, free him from suspicious thoughts.
For in his private retire, when divided from the eyes of men, would he many
times recollect himself, and argue the promising effects of this amorous task:
as if he were made sole Moderator of his own affections. Sometime^ would he
object to himself those inevitable perils, whereto he engaged his hopes and
fortunes, by putting himself on an assay o^ such difficulty: and which
probably might encounter with such diversity of rubbs: as hi^ weak means would
prove insufficient to remove them, and without much patience, the poor man's
supportance, too heavy to bea^^ them. Othertimes, he would be so far from
objecting these fears or encounters of friends^ as he stood irrevokeably
addressed to go (...) with what he had begun. Nothing could divert him;
affection had so steeled him; and (...) meditation of the worst that might fall
ha^ so prepared him; as come what could come* he was resolved to slight all
difficulties, esteeming the conquest more glorious, by how much the combat
seemed more dangerous. Yet again would he draw back a little and call (...)
mind those passages of her Mother Eurycles in laboring to dissuade him from a
Country life, and advising him to return to his forme^ Academick condition.
Surely, quoth he, thi^ motion aimed at something. It was not (...) of a desire
of my proficiency in learning, bu^ to divide me from the Subject of loving. She
saw something which she liked not, or such useless persuasions had never been
delivered. Well, I know not, what to conclude upon such suspicious premises:
but sure I am, that a poisonous Snake may lie hid under the sweetest herbs.
Those waters are not from peril freest, which run the smoothest. And too
forward a Spring is ever nipt the soonest. Though the Fish Sepia bewray her
subtle encounter by a black color, which she casts out to cover her: others
can go less disguised, and consequently less suspected, yet more dangerous
are these, because they delude most, when they are least feared; surprise
soonest, when we are least prepared.

Neither were these diversely perplexed resolves of his, without cause, for
whether by some ill offices done him, or by some Letters intercepted which came
from him, or some other marks or tokens of love observed betwixt them, her
incensed Parents upon complaint made how Philocles had labored to inveagle
their Daughter, and against the laws of the Kingdom, sought privately to
convey her, he became restrained: which was so far from amating his spirit,
as he applied all these extremes as sovereign Cordials: fearing little, but
as it was his hard fortune to suffer much for her: so her noble disposition
would not be slow in returning a fair requital, to recompense those many
occurrences which he encountered for her.

Yet in this restraint, would he many times, and that not without a strong
conflict, break out in the discovery of those passionate effects, which their
enforced absence one from the other produced. O, where shall I live, said he,
being deprived of her presence whom I only love? O how sweet were this
restraint unto me, were I not restrained from her whose presence would give me
liberty? How easy are the fetters of love? How unwelcome that liberty which
divides us from those we love? Yet was my former freedom in this more
grateful to me than this restraint: in that I was admitted to enjoy the sight
of her, from whom I am estranged by restraint. Neither can this dis-passionate
censure of her incensed Parents in procuring my commitment, work half so
effectually upon mine extasied thoughts; as the grief I conceive for my
dearest Doriclea: who, no doubt, upon the hearing of these news of my
restraint, will become so perplexed, as the conceit of her discontent afflicts
me more, then whatsoever her angry Parents may inflict. For time may appear
their fury, by reflecting on themselves, and weighing the co^stancy of our
united fancy: but should my present thraldom beget her distemper, my hopes
were lost and perished for ever. And what may I expect less from one so truly
loyal! No doubt, but she h'as found as well as my self the real proof of
that experiment. Love is ever most violent, when farthest divided from his
object. So long as we have liberty to enjoy in seeing, what we may not more
fully partake by enjoying, yet our eyes afford us some solace, to allay those
extremes of love with the fruition of their presence. But when deprived of
that benefit; and to supply the comfort of such an incomparable Object, we must
make Grates and Spider-woven walls our pensive Consorts, would not imagination
hold it above humane suffering? No, no; while we live, we are made to be Actors
of passionate Scenes on this Theater of love.

Should all on Earth enjoy what they desire, Earth would become the period of
their desires: further, poor mortals would not look, should they enjoy
whatsoever they like. Resolve then Philocles, patiently to bear, what thy
impatience cannot cure. And amidst these disgusts, advise her to patience in
this thy restraint; that her anguish give not fresh fuel to thy discontent. Be
it thy care, that she suffer not in thy cure. One is enough to perish, and too
many by one; could misery fix on a lesser Subject then one.

Setting then Pen to Paper, and accommodated by a convenient Messenger, in this
manner he imparts his mind unto her.

Restrained Philocles to Doriclea.
GRieve not, my Dear, that I am here restrained,
Mine heart lives the^e, th^^gh I be here confined;
Cloth that is died in grain can nere be stained,
Nor can occurre^ts shake a constant mind.
Let me in thee but such a freedom fi^de;
And ^en let Fates, Fri^nds, Fortunes, all repine,
I shall Doriclea's be, Doriclea mine.
Thus confi^ming himself so individually hers, (though divided from her, by
means of hers) as nothing may abridge the accomplishment of their desires, but
death: with a cheerful brow he dissembles with grief: employing these tedious
hours of his restraint in reading the stories of discontented Lovers. Where he
found some in the way of enjoying of what they most affected, and suddenly
Ixion-like deceived with a Cloud. Others as deeply plunged in despair of
enjoying what they loved, and these above expectance found their desires
crowned, where their hopes were nearely expired. And of these he made use as
occasion served: sometimes to humble his hopes, lest they should mount or
aspire above themselves. Again, were his hopes depressed; with other instances
he found them raised: and these were the most usual consorts wherewith he
conversed, in those retired walks whereto he was confined. But how heavily his
constant Doriclea took his restraint, it is not easy to express: being not
only deprived of his presence, the highest benefit which was admitted her: but
equally suffering with him, conceiving how those extremities which he now
suffered, were inflicted on him by her enraged Parents for the love which he
bare her. These wrought strange effects in her passionate thoughts. Laboring
sometimes by means of Friends, other sometimes by private policies, his
freedom from durance: but the issue never seconded her desires: so as, she
resolved to impose that upon her self freely, what her Philocles was enforced
to suffer of necessity. But from these extremes we must now descend to other
occurrents: and leave these two divided Lovers, to the relation of their own
griefs, with this constant resolve; that nothing may divorce their loves, but
their graves.

CHAP. XIV.
Doriclea understands by an aged Hermit of Mardanes practice: how he intends to
enjoy her by indirect means: And how the Spells of Spurcina, the Inchantresse
with whom Mardanes contracted were ever frustrated, by the devout morning
exercise of Doriclea, signing her self every morning in her going abroad with
the sign of the Cross; a sovereign receipt against Spurcina's Charm.
WIth what distaste our ancient Suitor Mardanes took Doriclea's rejection, we
shall easisily gather by this story which happened in this manner. This
contemptible worldling having sought by all means to enjoy his Mistress; who
made the object of her thoughts of far ampler extent then riches; but all in
vain: for besides their inequality of years, their disparity of dis^osition
would ever run discord, and disrelish nothing more then union: to show the
unworthiness of his debaucht mind every way, what his fair proffers could not
procure, he means by indirect ways to effect. Which by the notice of an aged
Hermit became happily discovered.

D^riclea, now in her voluntary retire, used to converse with very few: only
sometimes it was her custom to repair to a pleasant sovereign Spring, to
bathe her self according to the season of the year: near which there lived
an old religious Hermit: a man of a strict and rigid life. To this devout man,
had Doriclea often resorted, and with him conversed: from whom she had received
much comfort, as she her self confessed. So as, coming one day occasionally
to him, he imparted his mind fully and freely to her; which fell forth happily
for her, as you shall hear hereafter.

Daughter, The Herm^^^ Speech to Doricle^.
quoth he, you are now in the prime of your youth; incline then your ear to
one who h'as now attained ripeness of age. I have been young as you are, and
no doubt but addicted to like youthful vanities as others were. All which my
aged sorrow must now rinse with tears. But let me tell you, of all those
conflicts which I observed to be hottest, I found none more violent then the
moderation of fancy. This was a Subject fit for youth: for other affections,
they did not so much as attempt, much less taint so fair a feature. Nay, so
wild is fancy, that unless it be timely curbed, it incurres that infirmity
which cannot be cured: and unless seasonably checked, it makes choice of those
which deserve most to be rejected. This, I shall little need, Daughter, to
apply to you: for your modesty promises far more discretion in fancy. Yet I
must tell you, I hear what I abhor to relate. Wherewith abruptly breaking
off, he demanded of her whether she knew not one Mard^nes? Very well, answered
she; he was pleased sometimes to be my Suitor. It is true, said the Hermit, and
he intends ere long to be your enjoyer. Mine, quoth she! Nay be patient, said
the Hermit. I must tell you, he h'as engaged himself in a desperate course to
enjoy you. Your repulse barred him of his aims; now his practice is to enjoy
you by indirect means. My Grave shall first receive me, answered Doriclea.
Nay, this is the violent strain of a Woman, said the Hermit; you will rather
dye in the expression of a passion, then incline to any receipt to cure that
passion. Pray you hear me. This evil Man, whom you so slighted, h'as lately
contracted with an hateful hideous Hag, to practice on your person, by
receiving something from you, that may indirectly procure him your affection.
No longer since then yesterday, was it my fortune to be gathering Simples near
Penell Hills; In Mapalia, circa oras Penellicollis sito, tetorrimae illius
regionis venifices convenorunt, ubi quo iturse, quid perpetraturae, statuerunt.
near which place to a private Graunge had resorted sundry persons, and some of
these of seeming quality, but all of them miserably exposed to that hateful
profession. Where each discovered unto other whither they were to go, and what
feats they were to do. Monstrous were their practices: most of them aiming at
blood: and merely for revenge without hope of benefit to themselves. Others,
though not so cruel, yet no less unjust in their attempts; were to practice
plots and projects of love, which in short time should fall into such tragical
hate, as nothing should compose the quarrel, but the Actors life. Amongst
which I heard one, whom the rest of that miserable Meniey, as I remember,
called Spurcina; an ougly deformed Gamar she was: and she disclosed what she
intended to do, being what she was persuaded to by one Mardanes; which was,
that she should repair daily to your Fathers house, and by some means or
other, as by practicing on something you might wear, or some money you might
bestow, to procure him your love. And this she resolved to put in present
execution. And this must you prevent by serious devotion. Let not the morning
air breath on you, nor the rising Sun shine upon you, before that victorious
sign of the Cross has armed you. Such receipts will frustrate these
deceipts: they cannot surprise you, so devotion accompany you. This armor
will shield your honor: and make that Inchantresse fail in her fruitless
labor. I have now told you what you are to do: thank your self if you be
deluded: seeing such means are proposed to you, to prevent it. Mean time,
dear Daughter, my blessing rest upon you, as my prayers shall be for you, my
entirest wishes with you. Desiring, that you may find such a choice as their
virtues may cheer you; to which happy choice I commend you.

Thus after a reverend salute, and humble adie^ by Doriclea to this ancient
Hermit; they both retired, but several ways. He to his Cell, she to her
self: where imagine her, upon a due and serious discussion of every
particular, touching the strange relation of that reverend Father, unloading
her troubled breast, full of perplexed passions, after this manner.

Unhappie Doriclea! is thy fortune such, as thou must not only be divided from
those thou love, but by indirect means coopled to those thou loathest? What
have I done, that I should thus incense those Superior powers against me? Have
I at any time dishonored their temples: or clothed my vices with pretended
virtues? Have I violated my faith: or where I professed love, proved false?
Have I ^^boured to delude a simple lover: or gloried in the conquest of my
inferior? H^ve I not performed those sacred vows which piety enjoined me: or
neglected that office which charity exacted of me? Were my professions of love
directed for lucre, wanton dalliance, or pursuit of honor: or have I fashioned
my habit to the fancy of the time, to please mine own humor? Did I ever cast
out any light lures to catch a cock-brain'd lover: or expressed my self to the
deservingst Suitor, too liberal of mine honor? Have I made the public
street my Gallery: or desired unlawful looks to seize on my beauty? H'as my
example given others liberty of offending: or afforded least hope to a light
wandering eye of purchasing? Have I accompanied any presence with disdain: or
requited any pious office with neglect? Did I ever wish any ones hurt: or
requite true love with undeserved hate? Yes, yes, Doriclea, herein have thou
offended. Had thou loved Mardanes, he had never betaken himself to unjust
practices. And must I either then love where I cannot affect, or make those I
reject, practice what humantiy would detest? Injurious Mardanes! Had thou
none to exercise thy spells nor enchantments on, but such an one who is not her
own? This is impiety above president. What were it to enjoy, where thou can
never partake any joy: or enforce her thine, whom Magic incantation, no
sincere affection h^as confirmed thine? And this were thy case, Mardanes, in
enjoying me. It is no sorcery can beget true fancy. Where indirect means
procure love, tragic events produce hate. Desist then, unhappie man, from
these assaults, which shall redound to thy shame, and cl^athe thee with infamy
in succeeding times. Those hellish consorts, with whom thou conve^sest, nay,
miserably contractest, are soon discomfited, when a more commanding Power
shall countermand it. Pitiful practices! where should the innocent'st soul
find succor; or a succourlesse Maid harbor, should these receive effect to
the desire of their Author? So limited then is their power, as they can
practice nothing that is impure, upon a soul divinely pure. Practice then,
Mardanes, what thou can; thou shall never enjoy what thou would. I am
better fortified then to be so surprised: stronger fenced then so foiled. Nor
shall I cease to render thanks to him by whom I am, and by whom I am so well
prepared: next under him to that devout man, by whom I am so well informed. Nor
need I fear to be subdued, being so supported: nor relinquished, being so
supplied.

Nor were her resolves with less constancy seconded. Early and late offered
she up the sacrifice of her Prayers. Constant was she in her care; to prevent
all insuiug harm. Those ^sefull directions which she received from that old
Hermit, she freshly retained. Which so far prevailed, as by her devout
morning Exercise (being the season which the Inchantresse most commonly used,
ever hoping to take her unprovided) those odious fruitless Spells became ever
frustrated. All which, Spurcina the Spell-woman afterward confessed: when
after her conviction for offenses of more high and heinous quality, she
publicly attested: that though by the procurement of Mardanes she had sought
early and late to practice upon something received from her: yet could she
never effect her own desires, though she had matter enough to work on, because
Doriclea signed her self every morning in her going abroad with the sign of
the Cross: which that ancient Hermit, whose name the Sorceresse could not
endure to hear, had prescribed for a sovereign receipt against her Charm.

Thus lived Doriclea every way assailed and assaulted; but never vanquished nor
discouraged. Far more did she fear the welfare of her dear restrained
Philocles: then the subtilty of these enchantments. His liberty she preferred
before her own safety. Yet so far was she from procuring what she so entirely
desired: as the continued jealousy of her Parents declined^ her hopes from
ever effecting what she so much labored. For to intercede her self for his
liberty, she durst not; le^t it should increase their suspicion: and to intru^^
any other in that suit, she had found it so fruitless, as it made her despair
of all success. To a private retired walk enclosed with sweet breathed
Sycomours, twice a day she usually repaired: where divided from the noise of
the world, she would passionately converse with her own thoughts, and propose
sundry devices for the freedom of her Philocles. Wherewith her fancy became so
infinitely pleased: that though none of these took effect, yet i^ contented her
to imagine how she might by such means procure his liberty: whereof he
remained deprived for his loyalty. And in thi^ retired shade, o^ Elysian Grove:
for Art and Nature had expressed their distinct workmanships in it; sometimes
should she chance to find the Witch Spurcina, which confirmed what the Hermit
had affirmed: but being demanded by Doriclea, what occasion she had there: her
excuses would appear n^ less lame than her self. Sometimes pretending that
she came thither to gather some Herbs or Sallets: or else perceiving
D^^^clea to be walking there, she came to beg some relief at her charitable
hands. But neither of these was her errand; but to practice what she intended,
by some linen or woollen tha^ might fall from her: which, though she no less
maliciously then opportunately received, and by them practiced, yet were her
Spells ever defeated, her Charms frustrated by the ince^^ancy of her devotion,
as has been formerly related.

Thus Love's exposed to a twofold harm,
A Parents fury, and a Witches Charm:
The first she cures by giving way to time;
The last she frustrates with an Holy Sign.
THe incomparable Ba^clay in his Mirror of Minde^, c^p. 8. discovering Norway
to be a rude Nation, and with most men who have conversed or commer^^d with
them, held infamous for Witchcraft: They, by report, (says he) can sell
Winds, which those that sail from thence do buy, equalling by a true prodigy
the ^abulous story of Ulysses and Ae^^us. And these ^enell P^ggs, have affirmed
the like, upon their own Confession.

CHAP. XV.
How Doriclea practiced with Mellida her Maid for her escape: How she sought
to delude her Mother: Her prevention: and how Androgeus her Father became
enraged, upon the discovery of her affection.
LOng had Doricleas languishing thoughts breathed after the sight of her
restrained Philocles: but her Parents jealousy of the one side, and the
distance of miles which divided him from her on the other side, so disheartened
her hopes, as what she one hour intended, the next hour she reversed. But yet
this would not so content her: love cannot be so satisfied. She finds her
self divided from her self, so long as she becomes removed from her
Philocles. On then she must, though all difficulties should oppose her: friends
dissuade her: no hope of obtaining her purpose, encourage her. And now to
expedite this Assay, she finds none fitter to commend her practice to then her
Maid Mellida. A witty Wench, who knew well enough where her Mistress shoe
pinched her: which if the Last of her invention could ease, she held it one of
the best services that ever she could do her. And to her did Doriclea
communicate her thoughts and counsels in this manner.

O Mellida, thou know, and I blush that thou know, how my affection h'as
been long time fixed on Philocles; and now thou see, how he, on whom I have
set my rest, is divided from me. O advise me then how I may enjoy his presence,
whose absence ^s to me death. Alas, thou see what discontents attend my
unhappy state, while I am here by jealous eyes prevented, from enjoying what
before all other things I have preferred. Deluded eyes may imagine that I have
the world at will; because I am mine own Mistress: and want in nothing that
may outwardly solace me. But little know these, how in enjoying what I have, it
augments my discontent being deprived of that which I once had, but now have
not. Address then the best advice thou have; to afford me some comfort amidst
these extremes. Without hope the heart would burst. Hope I retain, but in
small measure, (...) from thee Mellida, I receive succor. F^r ^ am barred all
opportunity; watchful eyes being ever set over me: which continually labor my
prevention, for repairing to him who is the ^ole object of my affection
Commiserate then my case, good Mellida, and devise some means or other for me
to enjoy his sight, without which I am lost ^or ever.

Lost for ever answered Mellida! God forbid Mistress, that I should suffer
that, if it be in my power to prevent. I had thought dying for love had been a
thing quite out of request, in these days. But since our too kind hearts are
made of such soft temper, some Salve must be provided either to harden them,
and so make them less sensible: or procure the means to bring them to enjoy
what they so much desire, and so make their sufferings more curable.

Thou examines and searchest the ground of my grief, and understandest the
means how thou mai^t make the unhappiest Woman alive infinitely happy. Prepare
then by applying, what thou perceivest may soonest cure: there is no task so
difficult which ^ shall not with a free embrace sustain, so I may but partake
what I so incomparably desire. You do well, answered Mellida, thus to arm your
self against all difficulties: but surely you shall little need to stand in
any great fear of what I shall enjoyne you. I know little yet what may in time
befall my self: and then I must submit my self to others advice, as you now
vouchsafeto do to mine. For indeed the very wisest in business of this nature,
are ever found the greatest fools* when they come to advise themselves. But
Mistress, you have ever heard, how Love delights in nothing more then in
playing the dissembler. AnteMasks are ever ushered in by Whi^^lers. And this
part must you act, o^ I know not what way else to supply you. Love is
personated with most grace, when it entertaines a disguise. And this habit must
you undertake: and now when I think of it, you may furnish your self with a
convenient disguise; you know Proclus our Page, put upon you his Su^t; I shall
procure you it, when he is asleep. With which you may privately and without
suspicion convey your self. And if your Mother inquire of you, I shall
acquaint her, that you are at rest: and so prevent all present discovery for
one night: mean time, by the benefit of silent night, and the conduct of your
constant friend Alcaus, you may in time come where you would be: while I am
left to the mercy of the winds. For what may I answer for my self when you are
gone? Well, I will hazard a service for your content and solace: I shall hold
my self happy in my endeavor, so you ^n this assay do but prosper.

Doriclea needed no quickner to this motion. Winged are her desires to second
Mellidas advice. And having now fitted her self with Proclus Suit, toward
Alcaus her conducter she hastens her course. Who expressed himself very ready
to do her any friendly office; becoming her Guide, in directing and
accompanying her to her dearest Friend. But as ill success often attends best
designs, these two were unhappily stayed by the Watch, upon this occasion. A
Gentle woman's Daughter of good quality and great fortunes that very night
chanced to be stolen away: upon which occasion, pursuit was made: and especial
direction given, that if any person should suspiciously or unseasonably pass
by the Watch, they should be stayed and examined. And such was the fate of
unfortunate Doriclea; who surprised when least feared, must of necessity with
her Conducter, remain under the Constables hands till the next morning: for
truth was, the Officer (by what accident^ I know not, but you may partly
imagine) was held altogether unfit that night to examine them, which of all
others, happened the worst for her advantage. For the very next morning betimes
were all places set for staying of Doriclea, by express direction^ from her
Parents. So as being found upon search, the poor amorou^ Girl was stripped o^
her Pages habit, and re-attyr'd in her own* Neither could Alcaeus, without much
meane^ and mediation of friends, procure his peace. You may suppose with what
discontent our disappointed Doriclea returned to her tedious ^^dging^ sorrow
was her best melody; and her choicest music an incessant Lachrymae. For
though her restraint was before sufficient; and her Mothers eyes too too
vigilant: yet now were their ^ares and fears more numerous than before, which
beget far more intention to this charge then before.

Many times would she relate her gounds of discomfort to her Mellida; who,
poor Wench, became so discouraged by the sinister ^^ccesse of her Plot: as the
best reply she ^ould now shape to her unhappy Mistress; was either silence:
or, good Mistress be content, there is no hope to escape. Learn to forget him,
seeing you must not enjoy him. But this wrought no effect upon her affectionate
desires. One assay she holds not sufficient enough to express her love to him,
whom ^he esteems so dear. One night therefore, being impatient of her
disconsolate restraint, she^ practices with an aged Woman, who was her Mothers
hen wife: to change apparel with her, hoping to receive better success under
that disguise, then her late Pages habit. But so well was this old Woman
charmed by her Mother, as she became Doricleas discoverer: so as, her Mother
meeting her, and pulling off her Muffler, this device received no better speed
then the former. Thus was Doriclea ever practicing, but never prospering. Nor
was her fancy so lightly fixed, as to give over upon receipt of two foiles. As
she was constantly planted in her affection; so she made it her usual task, to
labor after the enjoyment of him, to whom she was so nearely ^ngaged in her
loyalty and devotion. Rich ^ooties sweeten the greatest difficulties. A
low-creeping spirit, deserves not to enjoy the benefit of fortune. Nor that
love which is waited on by pusillanimity, the just reward or recompense of
fancy. And this was the resolution of constant Doriclea; who, though none more
observant of Parents command; nor tender of her fame; yet her Philocles mu^^
not be forgot.

His restraint from her, and her division from him work such strange effects,
as sleep^ becomes a stranger to her. Nightly she as^^ her pillow counsel how
she may attain wha^ her longing desires so much affect: and she resolves once
again to put in practice what h^ unhappy fortune had hitherto crossed her in*

Suddenly then one night, when she ima^^n'd all the family, save only such as
she im^loyed in this plot, to be fast asleep, she pri^^ly departed forth of
her Chamber ^in^^ding by that means to make escape. (...) ^a^ents eyes are
ever vigilant: and their eare^ ^f ^uickest hearing: especially, where the ^east
jealousy begets in the^ a thought of fear^* or enjoynes them to a seasonable
preventin^ care. This might appear well in Eurycle^ who the very same hour
lying waking, an^ hearing the entry door creek, presently arose, and lighting
of a candle, repaired to her Daughters lodging; where drawing near to her
Daughters bed, instead of her Doriclea she found a Mamme^ or feature so
artificially made up in her night attire, as in represented her Daughter to
life. Bo^lster'd up was this Puppet with Pillows, as if Doricl^^ had been
^itting up on end in her bed: which at the first ^ight deluded her inquisitive
Mother, imagining that it could be no other but her Daughter. So as, calling
upon Mellida, she resolved to return to her chamber. Mellida, who all this
while lay shaking and trembling in her bed, doubting that she might be called
in question, upon Doricleas discovery: as one betwixt sleeping and waking,
asked who was there? And perceiving it to be E^ryclea: oh Mistress, quoth she,
^what h'as distempered your rest, to be out a bed at this unseasonable time of
night? Mellida, said she, y^u take great care of your Mistress, to suffer her
to sit up in bed and ^atch cold after this manner. And drawing near the bed,
to put her Daughters arms and higher part of her body too within sheets:
perceiving it not to be her Daughter: but a Baby-clouts only to delude her. It
is not easy to declare what extremity of passion she conceived: sometimes
accusing Mellida to be guilty of the practice: threatening her with the severest
punishments that Law could in^^ict, if she told her not forthwith whither her
Daughter was fled. But she, dissembling Girl, pretended that she was never
made acquainted with any such plot: seemingly wondering, what time her Mistress
could have for making up any such piece, without her knowledge. And to allay
Eury^l^as fury toward her, as one compassionating her case, she admired how
any one could practice to delude their Mother in such manner* ^having been
ever so tender of her welfare.

While they were thus debating Doriclea's escape, they might hear one rusling
below: which Euryclea observing, she run haftily down, imagining to find
some of her servants made priv^e to this plot, and by that means to reskue her
Daughter. But far above her expectance, she finds none other but Doriclea: who
having forgot the key of the Court-gate by which she was to go forth, was
turning back to fetch it. Who meeting with her Mother, what an unwelcome
encounter she received, I leave to you to judge: being far above the art of
passion to express. But Doriclea set as good a countenance on the matter as
possibly she could: telling her Mother that she did but only this to try her.
And that if she intended any such escape, she would have been better provided
then it appeared she was. But all this satisfied her Mother nothing: for to
increase the long-grounded jealousy of her Daughters affection toward
Philocl^s: whereof she had received so many appa^ent arguments and
demonstrations, as nothing could be more probable, being to every observing eye
visible: chancing that very night to search her Daughters pocket, she found a
Letter bearing Philocles character, directed to her in this manner.

Philocles second Letter during his restraint.
DEarest, look on me, and with an impartial eye and compassionate heart tell
me if any one ever suffered more in the delay of her enjoyment whom he prized
most: or suffered more in the burden of their indignities whom he valued least.
What sad omino^s star is it that so misguides me, or dark sullen cloud that
hangs over me, as to live still thus divided; and by an injurious restraint,
divorced from that only object where my thoughts are affianced, and the
constant zeal of a truly-loyall Servant devoted? I (...) daily traveling in
pursuit of you, yet fruitless in my pursuit; some sinister occurrent or other
estrangeth me from you. Did he ever live, that did more unfeignedly love; or
could more readily and really sacrifice his life for the purchase of his love?
And what solace to recompense so faithful a service? Shall my harvest, where I
expected so good a crop, requite my long-languishing hopes with tares: and
close the unhappy Scene of a lingering life with fruitless tears? O reflect on
these, and expedite his bliss, who never yet could paint out his griefs ^ith
deceiving colors; nor delude the Object he affected, and to whose sole choice
^e stood affyed with feined ay-mees: nor di^^ate with tongue, nor express by
Pen what he first conceived not in heart.

Confident I am (nor is my confidence grounded on weak presumptions) that ^^ny
off^cious Agents, whose parti^ular aims made them Rhetorical Counselors,
interposed themselves to divert our choice, and offer to our affections reasons
of change: yea, such who applied these dangerous receipts to us both: to work
their own ends the surer, and ingratiate themselves with us both, under a
friendly pretense but forged color. Our own bosoms when they shall become
unlocked each to other, may one day mutually discover; and smile with pleasure
at such a selfe-loving deceiver. B^t the wind, I hope, is got into another
Coa^t. So as, I doubt not but your discretion will henceforth prefer a constant
choice, before (...) inconstant trust. I have prepared the way (and that by a
Reverend one, in whom life and learning do equally shine) to consummate
whatsoever has been so long proposed, and as I hope, mutually concluded; so
you be but pleased only to breathe on these lines with your pious modest
assent, and confirm me, which, of all things earthly, may only cheer me, in
being, and happy in so being,

inviolably Yours.


So numerous were these private plots, confirmed with amorous Letters, as
Euryclea could hold no longer from imparting these passages to her passionate
Husband Andr^g^us, who became so enraged upon this last discovery of her
affection, as he could contain himself within no bounds of patience. So as
Doriclea could not be half so serious nor s^^icitous after the pursuit of her
restrained Philocles; as Androgeus was to chastlse that too much freedom of
his inamoured Daughter. It chanced, that as he walked one evening not without
much discontent; he might hear^ the voice of his Doriclea, from a private
Arbou^ near adjoining. Whereto drawing near and giving good attention, he
might understand what grief she conceived, in procuring her Parents
displeasure so highly against her; wherewith she seemed so infinitely
afflicted, as it struck tears in the old man's eyes: so as drawing nearer the
Arbor, with purpose to comfort her, he accoasted her in this manner.

How now Doriclea, what mean these tears? Want you ought that may conduce to
your content? Is out love either so cold, or our care so light, as either of
these should be occasion to you of tears? These, trust me, are no pleasing
airs to the ear of a Father, nor suiting with the condition of a Daughter.

Lachryme, replied she, should not only be in the eye, but stamps of more
retentive sorrow in the heart. A Pilgrims passage is such a passionate
progress, as it cannot be pursued without sobs: nor continued without sighs.
I have found sufficient occasion for that Music: nor can I eye that place,
which may afford other melody. A continual Sinner and a rar^ sigher promises
small comfort hereafter. Our days are but few and evil. Not an hour without
some crime to accompany it. Let the Soul never receive her surfeit of
sorrowing; till she h'as first found in her self a loath to sinning. But in
these, dear Sir, there is nothing that reteines in it more sense; then the
remembrance of my disobedience. Your discontent h^as begot in me the deepest
impression; nor shall I desire longer to live, then my endeavors shall not be
directed to regaine your opinion. Your frown has been ever my greatest
fear: which if my too liberal youth h'as too carelessely incurred: relinquish
me for ever, if my penitential tears shall not labor to redeem. More would
I speak, if my constant zeal and reverence to your person would permit. Be it
yours to command: Doriclea's to obey.

This divine Rapsodie wrought so strongly on Androgeus, as it were hard to say,
whether she was more ready to crave pardon, or he to grant it. Soon was his
passion allayed, and to compassionate tears resolved. More he could not wish
then she had professed: nor she in the office of obedience perform more then
he expected.

CHAP. XVI.
How Mellida one morning lets fall her Glove; whereon Spurcina the Inchantresse
practices supposing it to be Doriclea's. Mellida falls in love with Mardanes:
and discloseth her passion to her Mistress: who promises her best assistance.
MArdanes all this while desisted not from in^tigating Spurcina to put in
practice her impious design: in pursuit whereof that hideous Hag was no less
forward, then if the issue or success thereof solely imported her self. And
now at last she holds her self persuaded that she h'as got her purpose, which
happened upon this occasion. Having, as her usual custom was, many times
repaired to that private walk, which Doriclea so much frequented, it chanced
one day as this Beldame was entering the walk, she might perceive with her old
^^mmie eyes a Gentlewoman, whom she took ^or Doriclea, hastily leaving the
walk, and with more haste than good speed, as one fixed upon some present
occasion, letting fall her Glove. An happy opportunity, as Spurcina thought, to
effect her malicious design. With much joy therefore she returned, acquainting
Mardanes the prime agent in this hellish bu^^sse, what good means she had now
to bring her purpose about: which she promised him to effect with such speed,
as his own desires ^ould not wish more haste: nor his privatest thoughts
better success. For, said she, I shall by my secret art, make her more eager
in the pursuit of your love, then ever yet you were in pursuit of hers. Which
so transported this love-besotted Mardanes, as his imagination became now
wholly fixed and fired in the ^onceipt of his marriage-night. Sometimes
thinking what sweet parliance his enchanted Doriclea would use to him; with
what amo^ous embraces she would express her love unto him; with what variety
of winning discourse she would entertain him. Surfeiting more after this
manner with the conceit of it, then if he had obtained the real fruition of
it, wherein his deluded thoughts might seem to close with that opinion of the
Poet: No doubt, but the fancy of a marriage-night
Presents far more then the actual delight.


And so it fared with Mardanes: nothing now pleases his palate but the
imaginary pr^sentment of his Doriclea; of whom he hold^ himself as good as
possessed, if all prove (...) which his Sorceresse h'as professed. But as the
Devil h'as been still a Lier, so he present^ himself to her a cunning
dissembler: Doricle^ must be reserved for an other Owner: a mo^^ deserving and
complete Lover. Howsoeve^, this Inchantresse Spurcina blesses the morning that
gave her so fair an occasion. And (...) she conceives her self to have
happily found it, so she no less speedily practices on it: supposing it still
to be Doricleas, the sole Obje^^ of rejected Mardanes.

Great and unsearchable is Gods permission^ in suffering practices of this
condition. Wh^the^ it be to deter others by these example^ not to be too
secure; but ever watchful, seein^ every hour presents an enemy so
deceiptfull* Or else to try and search the constancy and faith of his beloved
Champions: who, li^^ pure gold, are ever more and more refined; when they are
thus tried, and by Satan's Ministers buffeted. Yet is their power so bo^nded and
limited, as though they work on the flesh, yet can they not touch nor taint the
^ou^^ whose dignity is such, that as it became redeemed with the highest price,
so it become^ secured by adhering to him that bought it^ from the injury of
their power. True it is, that some fall away, and that miserably, by lying
themselves open and giving way to the Devils ^^btilty: who under many forms
and semblances insinuates himself to their knowledge: and by this means
seaseth on their deluded weakness: bringing some to lay viol^nt hands upon
themselves: others to re^ounce their ^aith: others to labor by all indirect
means how to procur^ the effecting of their unlawful desires. But who are
these, but such who have left God by preferring the counsel of the Witch of
Endor, before the divine wisdom of their Maker. And justly do such suffer, by
dereliction of their Creator, and in a violent way exposing themselves to
inevitable danger.

Now, what strange effects Spurcina wrought by practicing on poor Mellidas
scattered Glove, shall forthwith appear. For what private Spells, Charms, or
Incantations she had used, Spurcina and her Familiar know best: But unhappy
Mellida must feel the b^unt of it. Poor Wench! She now feels what she never
felt before: a strange rising at her stomach with an infinite desire to see
Marda^^s. Whatsoever she sets her eye on, she verily thinks it presents the
feature of Mard^nes: and in that lovely manner, as her very heart leapes for
joy with the conceit of enjoying so accomplished a Lover. Poor
accomplishment! For what part had Mardanes in him that might deservingly beget
love; or merit the acceptance of a Mistress? But s^ so miserably had
Spurcina's inchantment^ wrought upon her bewitched fancy: as N^cissus, for all
his lovely proportion, seemed ^vulgar Object, no, a contemptible Subject* being
compared to her Mardanes person Which in a passionate expression to her self
being jealous that none should over-heare h^ she discovered in this manner!

What in love Mellida? Nay, I know no^ it is a thing I was never hitherto
acquain^^ with; and if now, too soon. I know (...) well what to think on it;
but if Mard^^ be not a proper handsome man, I am (...) deceived. I remember
well he made some times love to my Mistress: and I wond^ much she should so
neglect him, being (...) complete a Gentleman as all Europe, in (...) conceit,
cannot compare with him. (...) what is all this to thee Mellida? Can th^^
either think so well of thy self, or so men^ly of him, as to imagine that he
will fall (...) from the Mistress to the Maid (a fa^^ must confess, too
common) or step from (...) Canopie Curtain to a Trucklebed? No Mellida;
content thy self with brown^^ bread: such a dainty dish is reserved for
choiser tooth. And yet me thinks, if a goo^ conceit of my self do not mad me;
I fin^ something in me that may deserve his lo^^ and merit the title of a Wife.
If Marriag^ were only to be made by equality of blood, or fortunes: many good
faces would be enforced to bestow their beauties on poor Husbands: yea, many a
well-natur'd Girl might wed this year, and beg the next. I have read in my
time, how Jove fell in love with his Milke-maide l^; Apollo with Daphne;
Neptune with Hesione; Theseus with Ariadne; Perseus with Andromeda; Alcides
with Omphale: and is there any such disparity betwixt Mardanes and Mellida?
Well; as I mean not to be too confident, neither is there cause that I should
utterly despair. Good fortune h'as before this fallen into many Wenches laps
unexpected, and why may not the like befall me? None of these bore more true
love to their Suitors, then I do to my Mardanes. And, oh, that I might call him
mine! For I fear much, in becoming less than mine, I shall become less then
mine own.

And just as she spoke these words came in Doriclea; at whose presence a fresh
vermillion dye bestowed a new complexion on Mellida. Which her Mistress
perceiving, having had experience of the very like p^ssion in her self,
demanded the cause. And she, though at first seeming dainty, framing many
apron-excuses, but so far from purpose, as she had far better said nothing:
begun at last to disclose her passion to her Mistress; acquainting her how she
was infinitely in love with Mardanes. Whereat Doriclea could not ch^se at f^st
but smile, asking her what she could see in him, that should move her to fall
in love with him? See in him, answered Mellida! well, Mistress, quoth she, you
made a strange choice, when for Mardanes you took Philo^les in exchange. Why,
pray thee Wench, said Doriclea, do thou hold him for so proper a man? I
trow, I do, answered Mellida; and upon condition I might enjoy him, and
purchase his favor; were he the poorest Beggar alive, I would not change my
state with the greatest Emperor. Sufficiently could not Doriclea admire this
strange humor in her Maid: and the more, in regard she never found her
formerly affected to love any: but of all others Mardanes, from whose affection
she had sometimes dissuaded her self, when he was a Suitor to her. And a
purpose she had to have chid her, for her too much forwardness: but perceiving
pearled tears trickling down her cheeks, she quickly altered what she
intended. She found them both drawing one yoke: to allay then her discontent,
she became her Physician, who in her own respect was no less a Patient.

Nay grieve not woman, quoth Dori^lea, for the matter. Since thou art now
f^edg'd in birdlime, thou must seek means how to unwinde thy self. Thou have
been ready in my greatest extremes to afford me thy best advice, and to
^ngage thy self to peril for my sake; so as I cannot choose but reflect on
thee, if at any time I look upon my self. Two things then I must advise thee
to; or never expect success in this amorous enterprise; Silence and Patience.
Do not discover thy affection to any: restrain thy looks when thou art in his
company. Next this, be sure thou show no impatience, if at any time crossed in
thy expectance. Thou see how many sharp encounters I have grapled with: and
little nearer a conquest then I was at first: yet must I not suffer my hopes to
be so extinguished. No task can be long, where hope pretends a purchase of
love. Look up then Wench, cheerfully; let not the subtilest Artist draw from
thy look, the least blush of love, or line of fancy. Wing thy desires with
hope, that hope may crown thy expectance. And proceed in a temperate pursuit,
since thou can not dispense with thy choice; in which assay I faithfully
promise thee my best assistance.

This could not choose but highly cheer loveinveigled Mellida^ to find her
Mistress her directresse: by having her for her adviser who formerly was
advised by her. But so strongly did those amorous Spells work upon her, as these
rays of comfort shone not long upon her. Impatient was her unbounded affection
of delay, which drove her into passion above measure; as by this sorrowful
(...), whose choicest melody is lachryma, you may perceive hereafter.

CHAP. XVII.
Mellida's passionate love.
PAssions of the mind are not wholly suppressed, when they seem restrained.
Of all which, none work with more contrariety, then those which arise from a
troubled fancy. Love runs with too strong a current too firce a torrent to be
staid at an instant. This, poor love-inthralled Mellid^ felt too well
experienced in her, when that* which so lately seemed to cheer her most, does
now most afflict her: nay, even that which so seemingly afforded her the
soveraign'st cure, now becomes the only producer of her care. Such strange
effects had these Spells of hateful Spurcina brought forth; as all was struck
out of order, though at the first appearance nothing but promised all success
to the undertaker. But miserable were those distractions which her enchantments
bred through the whole family; but principally on Mellida, who now overcome
with a deep jealousy; imagined, that whatsoever Doriclea her Mistress had
professed, were expressions merely dissembled. And that her real love toward
Mardanes was such, as she would prove her Corrivall rather than Assistant, by
interceding for her self in this amorous employment. Which groundless
suspicion of hers received life from that which if her deluded thoughts had not
misguided her, might have discovered to her, how infinitely she stood bound to
her Mistress for her love. For discreet Doriclea perceiving the passionate
affection of Mellida; and desiring nothing more then to bring her in a way of
enjoying, of what she was so eagerly pursuing; resolved of a course that might
expedite this design: and this was, to express all shows of affection to
Mardanes: as if she intended nothing more then to retain him her constant
servant, whom she had formerly rejected: and to redeem that neglect with such
arguments of love, that the world might take notice that he and none but he was
the man whom she affected. Which relation (so ready is fame to disperse her
self upon every occasion) no sooner vented it self abroad, then her Parents,
supposing her love to be now declining from Philocles, infinitely rejoiced. Nor
was ensnared Mardanes less transported, hoping e're long to enjoy what his
desires had so long pursued. But with this was jealous Mellida no less
afflicted: imagining that no hopes could accompany her suit, where her
Mistress affection had taken place. Thus in this Comedy of Errors were all
things confusedly carried, and by as doubtful an issue attended. Mardanes
loves Doriclea, and he is loved by M^llida: and Mellida thinks Mardanes loved
by Doriclea; when all her task is, how she may espouse Mard^nes unto Mellida.
Again, Doriclea's Parents think, that their Daughter h'as relinquisht
Philocles, and solely fixed her affection on Mardanes; whereas the show of love
she pretends to Mardanes; is only to prepare a way for her enjoyment of
Philocles.

But this little contents distressed Mellida: she collects by what she sees,
the aim of what she most fears. Her poor simple heart is so far from
dissembling, as she verily thinks these Love-signes and tokens of her
Mistresses, cannot but proceed from the heart, and what hope then left for her
to enjoy her Sweetheart? The medit^tion of these drove her into such extremes,
as in the most disconsolate manner that ever accompanied perplexed Lover, she
discovered her discontent, with as much privacie as the retiredness of the
place could afford; that the Air might be only witness of her grief, while
she became her own relater.

Unhappy Mellida! had thou none to make choice of, but one who does despise
thee? None to impart thy thoughts to, but one who will deceive thee? Alas! thy
fortunes must not aspire to such happiness, as to enjoy the embraces of
Mardanes. One of higher state prevents thy suit. He and thy self have now got
one Mistress. Poor rejected Mellida! What Sanctuary may thou retire to? Or
what affectionate friend may thou impart thy mind to? It was not done like a
loving Mistress to promise her poor Maid assistance: and to betray her
trust, where she reposed most confidence. She might have dissuaded thee from
thy choice, by acquainting thee how she meant to enjoy him her self: and so
discouraged thy hopes at the first, rather then thus delude thee at the last. I
should have quickly desisted, though the loss of my love had shortened the line
of my life, had I but known how she stood affected. But under so fair a
semblance to shroud a dissembling countenance, and make a show of affection,
when it is gilded with treason; should I freely remit it, Loves Soveraig^e
would not so easily pardon it. Alas! what a poor conquest h'as Doriclea got,
in her competition with Mellida? who had never attempted what she now
affects; had not Doriclea first rejected, whom she now esteems. The ground
of Mellida's loving, was Doriclea's leaving. And can she now have the heart to
love, whom she did sometimes leave, because what she did so scornefully leave,
Mellida begins now faithfully to love? Did her distaste beget my love, and must
my love now beget her distaste? Well; this do'es meanly requite me, if she
would remember what fidelity she h'as found in me. There was no night so dark,
no task so hard; which with a free bosom I entertained not, so she might enjoy
what she had not. Philocles then was the only man in her eye, and I her Agent
which she wrought by. Proper parts were the Adamants of her affection: and
these she found in none so well to life portrayed as in her Philocles. Mardanes
was then a rough-hewen Swain, whose presence she so much hated, as she
estranged her self from that place which he frequented. And must he be now
entertained, because he is by poor Mellida affected? Well, I am glad that the
love of her Maid h'as changed her mind, and advanced him to the choice of a
Mistress. Let my loss be his gain; my deprivall of what I desire most, the
enjoyment of her whom he expected least. The ruin of a poor Maid is all that
she can have; which cannot redound much to her honor, seeing she, on whom she
so much relied, and to whom her secret'st counsels were imparted, became the
only instrument to undo her.

Doriclea having overheard some of these distempered passions of lovesick
Mellida, could contain her self no longer; but interrupting her in this
manner, resolved by a contrary cure to allay the extremity of this distemper.

How now Mellida, h'as love so distracted you; or too much liberty of enjoying
your own desires so much entranced you; as to become thus forgetful of what
you are, whom you serve, or whose affections you so highly deserve? Must my
endeavors addressed for your good be so interpreted? My desire of your
advancement so recompensed? Is your conceit so mean of me, that these
expressions of my love and familiar respect to Mardanes proceeds merely from
my own affection, without relation to your self? Or, that I did purposely
leave him, with a resolution that whenever you made choice of him, I would
love him? Trust me Mellida, this distempered fancy tastes of a frenzy. These
humors will make your constant'st friends your professed foes. Shake off this
jealousy* lest it become thy mortal enemy: I am the same I have professed,
nor will I fail in ought I have professed, so thy ill-grounded suspicion
divert not my aim; which effect is it produce, blame thy self. I know well
there is no way for thee to attain thy desires but by this means. He must
first take knowledge of their love, who love him not, before ever thou can
enjoy him who loves thee not. Doriclea must take upon her the person of
Mellida, and Mellida be taken for Doriclea, before ever Mardan^^ make his Bride
of Mellida. What I intend, I will not yet discover: only let me advise thee to
restrain (...) indiscreet humor: persuading thy, self that Mardanes had
never received a graceful countenance from Doriclea, but in hope of advancing
Mellida. And that my better thoughts are so far from domineering in thy ruin
(which were a poor conquest indeed) as it shall be my principal ai^e to
prevent it, so thy indiscretion cross not my design. Let it suffice thee,
that though it concern thee most, thou may be seen in it least. So present
I am in others affairs, so weak in mine own; as I am confident, unless some
unexpected opposition divert me; in such a successive manner to manage it, as
the issue shall conduce to thy profit, my credit, in so fairly carrying it, as
it may express the affectionate office of a Mistress to her ^ervant.

These last words comforted poor Mellida's dejected heart so much, as those
seeds of jealousy which she before conceived, are now suppressed. With
destilling eyes she acknowledges her self bound to so kind a Mistress: who
interposeth her self for her preferment. She laments nothing more then her
late suspicion: which, as it was planted on weak grounds, so her humble desire
is, that her Mistress would forgive and forget it, as she seriously vows
never hereafter to harbor it. She submits her self wholly to her direction in
this high project of her affection. Wherein, if her endeavors prosper, ^he
becomes her obliged creature for ever: if otherwise, she will become humbly
thankful, seeing her affectionate endeavors were no less, though they proved
less useful. This said, they retired, for the closing of the day approached;
which gave more freedom to Doriclea's working thoughts to contrive what might
close best with these impatient desires of her Maid, and what might procure
content to her self; which seemed as yet so far divided from all hope, as
there appeared not yet so much as the least opportunity to afford them help:
though more hope of success to her Maid then her self, wherein she rejoiced
no less then for her self. But strange occurrents oppose themselves to her
designs: so as, whatsoever at the first view promised no less than a
prosperous close, became, as you shall hereafter understand, darkened with a
Cloud. Albeit. Doriclea's constancy appeared such, as the difficulty of no
task, could deter her resolution to attempt.

CHAP. XVIII.
Philocles procures his liberty: and by a faithful Messenger, though to to his
apparent danger, privately acqaints Doriclea with his delivery: and assigning
here place whereto she might safely repair, if she could possibly make escape.
LIttle did Doriclea expect in this her pursuit after Mellida's success, that
she should hear such good news of her Philocles liberty, which he procured
upon this occasion. Diverse Persons of good quality were so taken with the
pleasing discourse and company of Philocles, as they usually resorted to him,
being admitted by his Keepers freely to come and converse with him. Now it
happened one day, in these their accustomary visits, that his visitants were
pleased to use a little more freedom in a sociable way, then they had formerly
done. Which, whether it was purposely intended or no, I know not: but brim^ing
healths must go round, and such noble Friends remembered, as in common civility
must not be neglected. Which Philocles, (though naturally most abstemious)
observes for company sake, lest he should be taxed of an unsociable
disposition, in refusing what was generally entertained. But with such hot
pursuit were these Bacchanals exercised, as his Keepers brains were so mudded
and in Lethe steeped; that they had far more desire to take one Nap with
Morpheus, then to taste one Cup more with Bacchus. Which strange distemper
appearing more in these then any of all the company, some have imputed to
Opium, put, as was thought, into his Keepers Cups, to bring them asleep, and
by that means to expedite his escape.

Howsoever it happened, Philocles having first taken his civil adue of those
Gentlemen who purposely came to visit him: and to prevent all occasion of their
accusation, privately betook him for a little to his Chamber; and afterward by
the assistance of an under-Porter who ever highly respected and honored him,
he was let out by the Porters Lodge; and shortly arrived where he intended at a
friends house of his, where he was kindly and hospitably entertained: having
formerly upon diverse mutual offices betwixt them so strongly engaged one
another, as no respect could be too entire, no undertaking too great, wherein
either might tender to other the professed curtsie of a votive Brother. But as
there is no earthly sweet but h'as his sour accompanying it: so infranchis'd
Philocles could not rejoice ^o much in his delivery from restraint; as he found
cause upon his friends report to conceive just ground of discontent. So
strangely be all our inferior joys interveyned with griefs: as no day so
clear but it may close in a Cloud. And so it fared with perplexed Philocles,
whose late-enjoyed freedom brought him the saddest news that could ever
possibly enter any true Lovers ears: for he heard, how his Doriclea, since his
restraint had estranged her affection from him, and fixed it on Mardanes, her
sometimes rejecte^ Suitor; and that their nuptials were to be solemnized soon
after. Pleasing were his former Fetters to these tidings: each faculty had lost
his function, every Organ his motion, and could find no answer to such a
relation.

Small fears find tears, which may supply a tongue,
Small griefs are speakers, when great griefs are du^be.
But recollecting himself, as one u^^illing to give such way to passion, as
not to moderate it with reason: after an enforced smile, he addresseth himself
to his friend in this sort.

Trust me, firm friend, I can scarcely give my theughts leave to conceit or
harbor the least jealousy of Doriclea's inconstancy. Nay, so well am I
persuaded of her loyalty, as I verily think she would rather give way to the
extremest encounters of faith, then admit of the least breach of fate. No;
Doriclea's vows cannot so easily be infirnged; nor those divine virtues which
adorn her, so blemished: nor those strong ties betwixt us, so dissolved. God
grant it prove so, answered his friend; as I hope it will. Reports are commonly
deceiving, so as you do wisely not too credulously to incline to them. After
such discourses as these, his friendly Host brought this perplexed Guest to
his Chamber; where after some merry passages purposely occasioned to allay his
discontents, he left him to his rest.

But he left him to that which he could not get: for on two several tasks he
bestowed this tedious night: the one no less pleasing, then the other
dis-relishing. For the former part of the Night, he bestowed on the thoughts of
that familiar conference, amorous, but harmless dalliance, sacred vows,
immutable seals, mutually passed betwixt them. These made the hours of sable
night, so delightful, as no Euphuus golden slumber could so infinitely cheer
him. He was wholly extafied with the grateful remembrance of these imaginary
fancies. But leaving these, and reflecting on those which he so lately heard
related: he found hours far longer in their progression, then the other
were, running so pleasantly upon that harmonious descant of affection.

Doriclea, false, said he! may that tongue be ever silent that shall utter it;
that injurious conceit a corrasive to it self, that shall believe it. And yet
these relations cannot be so generally dispersed without some ground.
Opportunity may do much where Parents assent gives way. Thy restraint,
Philocles, and discontinuance in thy suit might work strange effects. He is
rich who is thy Corrivall: and Women must love to live, as well as live to love.
Thy impoverished quality is a mighty eyesore to fancy. Wealth is a good salve
for age: and though she cannot affect him as he is, she may hug him for what he
h'as. Marriages go not altogether by joining of hearts but hands. His store
will so highly improve her state, as it will enforce fancy, and raise her to
what thy fortunes may not aspire, the title of a Lady. And yet me thinks all
this should little moye the constant and loyal breast of Doriclea. Heavens
cannot choose but frown on breach of faith: which is ever attended by an heavy
fate. Yea; but admit she be compelled; what means may she find to resist it?
Parents will is a command: and as she h'as ever borne the modesty of a Maid,
so h'as she retained the duty of a Daughter, and obedience of a child. Parents
command then might far prevail with her: seeing obedience was ever so much
preferred by her: as all fears had been before this time prevented, had not
this parentall sacrifice restrained her. Well; be it so. Patience shall be my
Crown: my prayers for her success. No grief, shall so much surprise me, as
the desire of her happiness shall delight me. Mean time, I will suspend my
judgment: and expect better then I hear: but if the issue second this report,
I hope soon after that an everlasting retire from Earth shall cure my care.

Thus passed Philocles the lingering night, estranged from nothing more then the
thought of rest. At last perceiving Aurora's dishevelled tresses, dispersing
her golden beams through every corner of his restless room; he leaps out of
bed, and having made himself ready, and performed those morning vows which
his devotion had enjoined him; He sets Pen to Paper, and like a poetical
Lover, in an amorous manner, addresseth his last nights supposed vision, to his
^oriclea: making a dream of love, by shadowing those jealous fears for the
loss of his love in a Dream.

Philocles supposed Dream of Doriclea.
WHat sacred Spells my throbbing heart surprise!
Sweet dew of sleep has quite forsook mine eyes.
Some startling dreams I have, which more appall
My Soul^, then if I had no sleep at all.
Sometime I dreaming see, and sigh to see,
A Sable-sullen cloud hang over me
And menacing a storm: thou full of f^ares
This to prevent, resolves to pearled tears:
But more thou weep'st, the more provoked thouart,
The fight whereof wounds my relenting heart.
Now do I see my Dana in a tower
Tempted untainted with a golden shower.
Now my fair Semele, feeding loves-flame
In her pure breast, consumed with the same.
Which visions were but shadows of thine,
Or mere conceptions of Prometheus shrine,
Which once enlivened by an heavenly fire,
Might to a numerous Family aspire.
Sometimes, me thought, Isickles sought to sip
Ambrosean Nectar from thy roseat lip;
And this I checked, and did incensed seem,
Telling Old Age, frost would not suit with green*
Which just reproof, me thought, thou entertained
With a sweet smile, the gole at which I aimed.
Whence overjoyed, I culled thee, where thou stood,
But like Ixion, I embraced a cloud.
My sacred Genius succor me, and keep
My waking thoughts from such an ominous sleep!
Yet in these Dreams more comfort did I take,
Fed with conceit, then when I did awake;
For dreaming, I enjoyed thee; but that bliss
By waking vanished; while I breathed out this:
"The Dorian strain was once the best melody,
"Had I Doriclea now 'twere so with me!
But since to embrace thee, dreaming still I seem,
O that my life were a continued Dream!
But this dreaming vein did not hold long with him: he resolves to acquaint
her in an other strain; and tell her truly that he was waking when he wrote
it. And the Character of this Letter must express the benefit of his freedom;
signifying unto her, how his late restraint was now changed into liberty; which
privilege he had rather for ever lose, then be deprived of the continuance of
her fancy. To expedite this affectionate design, he directs his Letter by the
conduct of a faithful Messenger, though to his apparent danger: acquainting
Doriclea with his delivery: and assigning her a place whereto she might safely
repair, if she could possibly make escape. Delay he holds dangerous: he
accounts opportunity the sweetest companion to fancy: desiring nothing more
then that she would continue what she h'as professed, confirm what she h'as
vowed, and consummate what both divine decree and their own united hearts have
sealed: closing his Letter with an amorous ^assion, after this manner:

Infranchis'd Philocles to restrained Doriclea.
Dear, sign this with your hands, else in a word
I sail, aye me, for Ireland with my Lord,
Where sails are righes, Seas, tears, while the friendly wind
Shall bring you word, I left mine heart behind.
But if you shall me for your Consort take,
I^le march through ranks of Furies for your sake.
Return me answer then as may become you,
"Pistols nor Poniards shall not keep me from you.
This was a strong Resolution, which (...) winds up with as loving a
Subscription.

This Term from travel am I staid,
To make my Consort of a Maid;
Confirm then, Deare-one, Heavens decree,
And make exchange of hearts with me:
Which done, this Posie shall he thine,
Which is and must be ever mine:
"To live, and have no heart were strange,
"Yet have I none but by exchange.
Thus writ passionate Philocles, which came shortly after to the hand of his
Mistress, who how joyfully she received the report of his liberty; but how
passionately those imaginary grounds of his jealousy, shall appear in the
progress of our Story.

CHAP. XIX.
Doriclea by the advice and assistance of Mellida gets from her Keepers: and in
her flight by night loses her way: but coming by chance to the Hermits house,
where she took that night her repose: as, she had formerly been directed by
him, she received much comfort from him: being conducted to the place which
Philocles advised her to.
WHen Doriclea had perused this Letter directed to her by her dearest
Philocles, it is not easy to express what infinite joy she conceived in the
delightful perusal of those lines which signified unto her the happy occasion
of his liberty: yet could she not choose but bite the lip when she read those
dreaming fancies of his, shadowing forth his jealousy. The comfort the
conceived in the former, was made bitter by relation of the latter: which
enforced from her this just ground of complaint, which she breathed forth in
this manner.

How is it Philocles, that the Heavens should thus look on thee, in freeing
thee from restraint, and thou unthankful for so great a benefit, thus to abuse
the privilege of thy liberty? During thy restraint, for ought that ever I
heard, thou harbored not the least conceit of jealousy: and now when thou
enjoyest the freedom of air, and stands dis^ingaged from a captives care;
like an habituate prisoner, whose long restraint seldom makes him better, thou
picks a quarrel before offense be offered, and hatchest suspicion where none
can be justly grounded. For tell me; pray thee, tell me, dear Philocles;
wherein have I ever given thee occasion to tax me of inconstancy; or in my
bosom desired to lodge any one beside thee? Have I not neglected all my
fortunes, nay, my zeal to those whom I prefer before all fortunes, to bestow
my self upon a Scholars fortunes? If either rich youth or age could have
wrought on Doriclea's fancy, she might long before this, have prevented all
grounds of jealousy; and been a Mistress of an ample Family. And yet you are
cunning Philocles; you will not plainly say you suspect me, for that were to
tax you of too palpable jealousy: but you must shadow all under a dream: and
make visions your arguments of fear where you imaginarily see Old Age courting
me; a rich fortune besieging me; and my too easy Fort sore straightened by his
golden battry. Well, Philocles, God forgive you; you have hither to had
sufficient experience, how much my disposition has scorned to be taken up by
such prostitute affection. If Gold would have done it, your loyal Doriclea
might before this have enjoyed it. No; no; these were no motives to me to
inchaine my fancy: or with a yielding hand, but a dissembling heart, to engage
my person to such a subject of folly.

O disburden your self, Philocles, of these conceits: they so ill become you,
as nothing makes Philocles so unlike himself: nor chils my affection more
toward him, who is my second-selfe. I have not begged much at your hands,
since the time we so firmly united our hearts: all I entreat of you is this,
and it will redound to your own hearts-ease as well as mine: to discard these
injurious conceits toward your own, by reflecting on her who can be no less
then yours, if her own.

And trust me, dear Sir, you may thank God, that you remain seized of such a
heart, which is not apt to take offense where such good occasion is offered.
Some cautious Girls, if they had but perceived the least inclination to
jealousy in their amorous Suitors, which your own Character h'as sufficiently
discovered in you, they would in time have prevented that mischief which might
have incurred; and collected what domineering jealous Husbands they would have
shown themselves being once married, having expressed themselves such suspicious
Batchlers, when they were unbestowed. But love finds an easy shroud for the
highest crimes: nor can Doriclea interpret Philocles Dream any otherwise then
an unbounded affection breaking into extremes: which, when it cannot with
sufficient freedom impart her strength by day, borrowes of the night to
discover in a dream. And who can blame such vigilant love; when the eyes
though they sleep, the heart keeps true Centinell, lest fancy should take her
opportunity and make her escape? Free leave then do I give thee, Philocles, to
dream still of me; but so, that thy dreams do not suspect me. For so might
thy deluded imagination, which is seldom attended on by reason, present to
thee what is false for what is true: and make thee credulously believe, that
inconstancy may accompany true love. Surcease then from these, as I shall
sooner cease to live, then withdraw my love from Philocles.

Thus discoursed constant Doriclea with her Philocles, in the absence of her
Philocles. But least she might forget her self by neglecting what her dearest
choice expects: after such time as she had rewarded the Messenger, who brought
her that Letter, and that to his apparent danger, had not the late conceit
which Doriclea's Parents conceived of their Daughters declining her affection
from Philocles secured him, and given him freer access unto her: She, I say,
prepares to second her Philocles desire, by accommodating her self with all
conveniences, and addressing her course to that place, whereto Philocles in
his Letter had given her directions to repair. Defist then she must for the
present, from spinning Mellida's love-threed: that she might weave up her own
the better: for though the furtherance of Mellida's suit was dear unto her:
desiring much to have her seized of those ample fortunes of her undeserving
Lover: yet her own case must be first preferred, being urged by such
importunity, as she held it fitting then or never to discover those true
effects of fancy.

By the advice then and assistance of Mellida; whose wits were ever more
pregnant in devising for her Mistress then her self, and to whose virtuous
love she wished no less success then to her self; Doriclea gets from her
Keepers, being then more secure of their charge then before, in regard her
Parents became less jealous of her love to Philocles then before. Dark was the
night, which promised her more security: but an inconvenience she finds in it:
for in this her flight by night she loses her way. Up and down she wand'reth,
and wandering, wooeth the Stars, that they would afford a distressed Maid, some
small beamelings of their light, to guide her to that place where chaste love
had treasured her richest prize. But many bypath she took, ever traveling,
but little nearer approaching the place, at which she aimed: which deeply
perplexed her love-inflamed mind. Till at last, (so propitious were the Stars
to their vertuously-grounded loves) coming by chance to the Hermits house, she
took that night there her repose.

Next morning early, for little power had sleep upon her fancy; she acquainted
this aged Father with the whole passage of her intendments: F^r^t, how she had
received knowledge of Philocles liberty, with what desire she had to observe
the time which he had limited, with the place which he had proposed for her to
repair to: humbly craving of him, that as she had been formerly directed by
him, he would be pleased to continue his care, by affording her his best advice
in a case of such necessity, as the issue made her of all others either most
fortunate, or most unhappy. And that he would not ^mpute this her private
departure from her Fathers house, to any act of immodesty, but to the constancy
of her affection, which had exposed her to all extremity.

The good old man, who had ever tendered her welfare; could not forbear from
shedding tears, in hearing her express those passionate overtures and
passages of her love: with what desperate adventures she had encountered to
partake, what her virtuous desires so unfeignedly sought. But affection must
have a more sovereign balm applied to her, then any effeminate passion. Eyes
compassionately w^eping without a brain effectually working, can bestead poor
Doriclea nothing. First then, he proposes the way for her to obtain what she
would: which he strengthens with such able directions, as being well observed,
they promised nothing less then an happy arrival at the place whereto she
aimed: with a prosperous conclusion to their long delayed desires, having there
arrived. And to encourage her the more, he applied these receipts unto her
which so infini^ely cheered her, as her confidence readily winged her enlivened
fancy with an undoubted assurance of success.

Daughter, The Hermits Speech to Doriclea.
it had been well you had made your Parents command the line to have directed
your love. But since your affections are so firmly united, as not to be
divided: I hold it an office of piety to effect, what virtuous loves so jointly
affect. Thus long have I had experience of you, and I have neith^^ seen nor
heard any immodest expression fall from you: this confirms me, that you are no
less then what you seem: not pretending to be what you are not, but in
desiring to approve your self what you seem. This those fair outsides fall
short of, who affect nothing more than to appear most, what they inwardly
profess least.

For these whos' ere they be* seem thus to me,
They be and seem not, seem what least they be.
For goodnesse-sake estrange your better-disposed thoughts from these painted
Puppets: who may be aptly resembled to the Zibethum, which naturally yields a
sweet perfume to others, but reteines a stinking sent to it self. Let those
preciou^ odours of your virtues not only afford sweetness to others, in
proposing an example worthy imitation: but to your own heart, which cannot
fly from it self, but must one day return as it do'es now retain, of
whatsoever it has received, a true naked impression. You have now entered the
Maine: where you shall graple with many contrary winds, and surging waves.
Report, like an ill-winde, will be quickly raised: and this may happily
disperse a light fa^^e upon all your actions. As first, this private retire
from your Parents, and making your self carver of your own affections without.
their consent, may beget you a strange opinion in the world. Men will judge all
is ^ot well; more then pure love drove you to ^^ese courses. Waves likewise
there will be to menace your ruin. Divided passions to perplexe you, and
inthrall your late-enjoyed freedom to the worst of extremes. Yet, what of all
these? The roughest winds of infamy to a pure and undefiled mind can do no
injury. Nor all those natural inbred passions which breed distempered spirits
most disquiets, can annoy the rest of that Soul which is fixed on the exercise
of piety: and makes her triumph over her own affections, her highest victory.
Observe this rule, Dear Daughter, and these intended Spousals of yours shall
find an happy period: and after so many violent winds of infamous tongues: so
many turbulent waves of swelling passions; you shall find that calmness, as
neither that lowness of fortune which may hereafter encounter you, shall amate
you: nor all those contemps which injurious disdain may throw upon you, an way
disturb you. I have shown you the best road, which if you hold directly, you
cannot but arrive safely.

Doriclea having received much comfort from these instructions of the Hermit:
and encouraged too with the promise of his conduct to the place which Philocles
advised her to: after a small repast (being enough for a stomach inflamed with
love, to digest) she addressed her self to the short remainder of her journey;
which though short, had appeared long to her longing fancy, had not the
difficulty of the way been sweetened with the Hermits company: by whose happy
convoy she soon arrived, where her desires were lodged, and where she found
her Philocles safely reposed.

CHAP. XX.
The great content and joy which these two long-divided Lovers conceived in one
of the others presence: The relation of their former griefs being an addition
to their present joys.
NO calm so cheerful as after a storm; no harbor so grateful as after a
rough Sea. The least beameling breaking forth of a Cloud appears like a more
full and glorious light. This experimentally felt these long-divided Lovers,
who conceived such infinite joy and content in the sight of one the other: as
their first encounter for want of expression closed it self in silence,
wanting a tongue to discover what delight their intranced apprehensions took in
one another presence. Looks now were to supply more discursive Organs: gladly
would their affectionate breasts unfold themselves, and relate those many
occurrents which their true loves had passed and with comfort vanquished: but
their desires must be first feasted with eying and intentive looking upon one
another. This must be the pleasing prelude to a more delightful Scene: at
last, affection laboring of too strong a passion, to be enjoined a perpetual
silence, broke forth on Philocles behalf after this manner.

Ah Doriclea! which taking accent so transported him, as not an other word for
a long space came from him. Am I in a Dream or waking? Can I imagine any
mortal capable of such joy? How plea^ing now is the memory of my restraint? My
long division from thee, my dearest Doriclea, whom I preferred before the
world? For to be ever happy so surfets the conceit, as it dreams of no other
state: a small storm to him who has ever enjoyed a calm, seems like a
tempest. Whereas my present condition makes me more sensible of my former
affliction. I was deprived of thee whom I incomparably loved. From all civil
curt'sies, save such as I received from strangers, excluded. All hopes of
future advancement, by thy Parents distaste, estranged. A Grate became my best
prospect: the World my story: where I saw no action of sorrow presented more to
life, then my own misery. O how the relation of our former griefs become an
addition to our present joys! Before I had none to converse with, but such
pitiless Guardians, as rejoiced in my restraint. Tedious were the hours of
my life, because divided from the object of my love. Terrors I encountered with
daily: passions I wrastled with hourly. No receipt found I to allay my grief:
none to impart my woes to, but such whose hearts were iron-temper'd like my
Grate. O what an exchange have I found, in being freed from what did so
inthrall me: and in being restored to her presence, which of all earthly joys
does only revive me! O my Doriclea, how many fearful visions have startled me!
how many distempered Dreams have disquieted me! And whence proceeded all these
but from that love and fear equally working, and no less sundry effects
producing, which had taken such strong possession of me, as not to be removed
without enjoyment of thee? At which, Doriclea interrupting him, after a more
cheerful recollection of her overjoyed spirits, said unto him.

O my dear Philocles, I am an eyewitness of your distempered dreams! You
know well what the Contents of your last Letter discovered: trust me, I will
not chide you, for I can find no such language in my tongue: but I would not
for a world have you think waking, what you suspect dreaming.

Philocles calling to min death purport of that paper of Verses he had writ
unto her: and how much his too affectionate fear had made him transgress:
desiring her pardon, by imputing that error to report; acknowledged his fault,
and condemned that too liberal relation of erring fame. What relation might
that be, my endeared Philocles, answered Doriclea? H'as fame reported to you,
that since your heavy restraint, I have been too liberal of mine honor, or
admitted too much freedom to an intrusive Suitor? Have I slighted you in any
discourse, or preferred any other in your place? So indeed, report went,
replied Philocles; that your sometimes rejected suitor, rich Mardanes, had
obtained your affection: and that your marriage was to be shortly solemnized.
What, Mardanes, answered Doriclea? Nay, then me thinks you should have holden
your self safe enough: for of all men, to engage my fancy to an Earth-worme,
whose ambition consists in having, but never in enjoying: and who prefers this
poor rubbish of Earth before the treasure of a divine mind, my firm
resolution has been ever so far divided, as I should loathe my self to be
so matched. Panarchus sometimes propounded a Riddle, and it was this: How a man
and no man, can with a stone and no stone, kill a bird and no bird, sitting
upon a tree and no tree? And Athenaeus makes the answ^r; ^^at an ^^uch is the
man, and a (...) is the bird, Fennel is the tree. Surely, I had rather
contract my self with the first, and with modesty I speak it, content my self
with the second, and make Apoll^'s bird of the third, then tie my (...) to such
a barr^^ tr^^. And howsoever the wise Si^onides truly concluded, being one day
asked, whether virtue or riches were o^ more reputation; that the virtuous did
more frequent the doors of the rich, (...) the rich of the virtuous: meaning,
that virtues constant attendant was poverty, many times enforced to beg relief
at the g^te of a vicious but rich family. For thy (...) Philocles, did I choose
thee* other poor respects were so far from working on my fancy: as they never
received entertainment in my thoughts. I have ever accounted poverty a sweet
companion, where con^ent was the Guardian; piety her Darling. Vice (...) she
never so richly ^ndowed, dies poor: whereas virtue be she never so much
impoverished, appears rich. O how much then did my dear Philocles fall short
in the merit of his opinion, in imagining his betrothed Doriclea could weane
her affection where she loved so much, to plant it on one whom she valued so
little? But Doriclea h'as an excuse in store for' her beloved Philocles: I
know, Dear one, it was thy unfein^d love which begot this fear. Had not thy
thoughts been fixed on me waking, I had been least in thy thoughts when thou
were sleeping.

Thus did these two loving Turtles rejoice in their meeting: wherein the Hermit
took no less content: observing how their loves were grounded on virtuous
ends, which could produce nothing less then prosperous effects. With many
pleas^nt stories did h^ delight the ears of these two affectionate Lovers:
describing the happy success of such, who preferred virtue before wealth: and
how love could not want where there was no want of love.

Yes, The Hermits discourse of the purity of Love.
reverend Fa^^er, said Doriclea; there may be a want in the eye of a worldling.
Yea, Daughter, replied he, but that worlding cannot be properly said to love.
Amphiaraus loved Eriphile, Eriphile Amphiaraus; but what moved Amphiaraus to
love Eriphile but luc^^; what induced Eriphile to love Amphiaraus but hope of
honor? Now, how could these continue long, being so irregularly planted; where
either the ambitious style of a Lady, or desire of money gave first conceptions
to their fanoie?

Who makes the object of his fancy Gold,
Grows cold in fancy when his mony's told.
And she who faignes to love, to live a Lady,
Is honors (...), I know not what she may be.
Nor is the purity of love to be stained with any earthly thought: many pretend
love, but they cl^athe it with an undeserving name: (...) declines from that
purity, wherewith it (...) endowed, by exposing it self to an immodest
liberty, from which it should be ^tranged. Love should have staid eyes, to
aff^^t nothing less then wandering. A discreet ^are, to h^are nothing that may
to lightness be inclining. Achas^^ touch, to embrace noting that may be
wantonly moving. A modest speech, to deliver nothing that may be any way
corrupting. And in every part to well composed, so gracefully disposed, as ^n
in^^^d (...) love to piety may be clearly (...) This deserves well the title
of love * whatsoever transgresses these bounds, admits no such app^llation,
but rather to be dis^layed by that badge, which may best set her forth to her
greatest dishono^^ and imputation. This (...) rightly weighed, who laboring to
deb^azon love and lust in their proper and dist^nct liveries, descanteth th^s
upon them, entitling his Poem, Loves Description.

Love, what is thy name? a ph^ensie* whence thy birth?
From Heaven; how comes it then ^ho^ lives on Earth?
I live not there; yet e'ch us^^ps thy name:
It Is true inde^^, but hence r^dounds their shame!
I live not there, ^y Nat^r^'s pure and j^st,
But lust lives there, and love's a foe to lust.
It was great pity, said Philocles, that you, Father, who can discourse so
contemplatively of so divine a subject, would never yet actively practi^e it.
So Scholastically to reason of love, and be never a Scholar in the School of
Love, begets in me admiration.

O I confess, and with trickling tears, said the Hermit, that my youthful
follies exceeded all number, so long as I sojourned in the world, and became
there a wanderer. I could not walk in any street, but I encountered many
mistresses: for pride, trickt and trimmed up in a gorgeous habit, infinitely
took me. Licentious liberty peeped in at my window when I was at st^dy, and she
surprised m^. Luscious fare prepared me delicious viand^, and these estranged
me from sobriety. Sloth whispered to me in my bed, the sluggard^ Lullabe, with
yet a little, and yet a little, and this belulled me. Wrath sparkled in my
vein^^, and spurred me on to revenge, and made me apt enough to forget ought
that did most concern me; but to imprint in my memory, the thought of an
injury. Envy revenged her self justly on me, and made me pine away at the
very sight of an others prosperity. And Covetousness, that age-benummed sin,
made me desire most when I needed least, and so besotted me. Nor could I shake
off these, till I shak'd off my self by leaving the world, which harbored
these. But within one half Apprentiship, I blushed at those vanities I
formerly affected: and by a private retire from the world, found what the world
was while I was in it. Many were the conflicts I must freely confess, which I
suffered, before I could wholly leave it. Yea, delights above conceit,
presented themselves to my fancy, soliciting me to love it. And with these I
long contested, and at last conquered, but with such difficulty, as I many
times failed, and had been quite (...), had not a more assisting hand guided me
in the ^ignt; and crowned me in the Conque^^. Since which time, I have ever in
a contented privacy remained: known too much to the world to affect it: nor so
little to my self, but that my in firmities humble me in it. Many, too many,
heaven knows there be, who profess this regular course which I have
entertained: but their profession is but how to delude the world: by bleering
the eyes of men with a pretended sanctity: and under this veil cunningly
shroud their base hypocrisy. And One of these have mine aged eyes seen in
these later times.
A professed Gallant in his prime: and one who delighted in nothing more then a
fantastic dress: sufficiently conceipted of his own parts: yet strip him
naked, he was neither good Moral, sound Christian, nor Philsopher. Yet did
this dainty youth, when fortune begun to frown on him, and vanity, for want of
maintenance, to leave him: pronounce his divorce from the world. In a Rock he
imm^res himself: Herbs and Roots must be his Viands: cold Spring water his
Wines: the Woods his Walks: Beasts his Consorts, and Birds his Quiristers.
None must serve him, but an old decrepit Woman, whom Nature had so disabled, as
she could (...)

Thus discoursed the Hermit, no^ were his two hearers less delighted with this
relation of his E^emiticall condition: but the night ^unning now far on, after
a little repast they betook themselves to their repose; resolving next morning
to conclude of some course, to consummate their love, the very conceit where
of made the lingering night seem long.

Thus had Loves Cement closed their fancies so,
As two hearts lodged in one, and one in two:
And like two lines that in one Center meet,
Though different in motion, took one s^at
CHAP. XXI.
They take the advice of Solinus that faithful Hermit, what course were best
to take in a case of such extremity: he advises them privately to solemnize
that Rite, which their long affection had confirmed in heart.
SCarcely had Phoebus mounted his Eastern Chariot, or displayed his golden
locks to the blushing Morn: till these restless Lovers desiring nothing more
then lawfully to en^oy the fruits of their long-continued loves: repaired to
Solinus that faithful Hermit and their constant Assistant, to receive his
advice what course were best to take and securest to pursue in a case of such
extremity; the prevention whereof might frustrate their hopes, and with a
sullen Cloud darken their fancy. The Hermit they found walking in a private
Garden: fixing his thoughts on higher contemplations then worldly love. Who,
upon their coming to him, and hearing them so desirous of his advice, imparted
his mind to them, in cropping a sprig of Time. This, I do* now, said he, may
serve you for an useful Emblem. Time must be taken while Time is. This herb
smells now sweet and redolent: But should it wither, and lose her strength and
vigor, it would soon lose her beauty too, which consists in savor. There
has been ever more advantage in dispatch then delay. Since then your hearts
are so nearly linked, as nothing can divide them: To prevent loose love, which
goodness hates: and embrace chaste love, on which virtue smiles. As likewise,
to secure your affections from surprise: which, no doubt, Doriclea, your
Parents will by all means labor to assay: my advice is, that with all privacy,
whereto this very place gives opportunity, you solemnize that sacred Rite, to
do fancy right, which your long affection, to which my daily Orisons shall wish
all success, has already confirmed in heart. For let me speak freely to you
both: fancy becomes a frenzy, when it is not restrained by grace. And love too
long delayed, may become polluted, and so lose that unstained purity, which it
formerly retained. Private familiarity accompanied by opportunity become
dangerous Inlets to youthful fancy, (...), I have known in my time, many a
loyal Lover deprived of their hopes, by (...) Web, and protracting (...) too
long. Had too provident Virginius accepted of Ioili^^, hi^ Virginia had never
incurred that unjust sentence of Appius Clau^^. It may be after a little time,
when your Parents, Doriol^a, shall see no means to remedy it, they will admit
of it. Mean time, you (...) prepare your selves to suffer whatsoever the
weight of a Fathers displeasure can lay on you. Small hope is there to
reconcile you; till time, the best canceller of injuries, atone you. Nor
should I have inclined to engage my self in any such advice, as in this
private manner to solemnize your Nuptial Rites without their consent, but that
an inconvenience is to be preferred before a mischief. Having in this sort
delivered his opinion, and by his advice made way for the happy enjoyment of
their affection: he made show as if he would return back to his Cell; saying:
Now, dear Daughter, you need no more the conduct or counsel of your poor
Hermit: Nor you, my Son, the unnecessary presence of an Old Man, who can
afford you no help, should you be pursued by hate, nor supply your want,
should you need relief. Privately then, with your leaves, will I retire to my
Cell: where, though I be divided from you, my poor devotions shall remember
you. But neither of these true Lovers cou^^ endure to hear of his departure
from the^ desiring him, that they might partake his fatherly blessing, and
enjoy his presence in (...) solemnization of those Rites which they intended
the next day to consummate, according to his advice. For alas, said Philocle,
your grave and discreet counsel may be stod us highly both before and after.
For us tws, we know only how to love: but how to provide for our safety in a
case of necessity, o^ wits would be to seek: and our brains too shallow, to
contrive. I cannot be ignorant, how many pursuing eyes, and revenging desires I
have hunting after me. For D^ricle^s Parents cannot be more incensed against
(...) then those Wardens from whom I escaped, ar^ enraged toward me. No Watch
nor Wa^^ must be unlaid to seize on me: no device* un^^sai'd to surprise me.
And whom have I to (...) to, but to the arms of Love; a weak, though willing
defense to preserve my life? And wh^^ more, said Solinus, can an aged Hermit do
for you; whose staff is his only strength, and whose prayers the richest
presents he can offer for your redress? And what better Armor, answered
Doriclea, in the time of danger? Besides, your advice may usefully import us in
directing how and in what manner we may bestow us, to prevent peril, which as
my dearest Philocles truly affirms, is every where enclosing us. I know my
Fathers passion to be hot, but his nature to be good. Our retire for a time*
may not only for the present secure us: but by the power of interceding friends
reconcile us. Which, for the instant were impossible to effect: or by the most
persuasive ways, to allay their discontent: seeing my Parents hasty nature,
will for the present, admit no Moderator. The good old Man was persuaded by
these reasons, to stay one night longer with them: which he, indeed, the rather
desired to do: wishing some fair conclusion to their resistlesse affection:
and to become a witness himself of the consummation of that Rite, which these
two Lovers had in such strong pursuit, accompanied ^ith an eager, but a chaste
delight. Nay; this discreet Hermit employed his conceit a little further:
contriving a course how and where to place them for the present: till the
storm were over-blowne, and a calmer season might promise some respite to
their fears. For that private Graunge, wherein they then sojourned, could
neither be so secure, as to privilege them from search: nor so remote from
jealous eyes, as to ke^p them any long time unknown. And a near Ally unto
Androgeus dwelled not far off, who, upon the least notice of Doricleas retire
to that place, would soon acquaint her Father, and prevent their enjoyment by
a speedy surprise.

So serious was the poor He^mits care, as these two Lovers could not be more
faithful in their fancy, th^n he was careful for their safety. Nor was it
(...), that his (...) should have been either lesser, or his advice weaker,
amidst such perillo^^ (...) you shall understand hereafter.

CHAP. XXII.
How these constant Lovers were hindered upon the very point of solemnization of
their marriage, by the intelligence and pursuit of her incensed Father
Androgeus: who with a strong prepared Troop ent'red the House where these two
unfortunate Lovers sojourned: And how, by the Hermits device, Philocles to
prevent his fury, was privately conveyed.
NO nights longer then those of Lovers: and of those, none grievouser then that
preceding night to their Nuptials. Right plea^ing was the Hermits advice unto
them: which, next morning, long before any Canonical hour, they addressed
themselves to put in practice. Those hearts, which had been so long (...),
expected now, nothing more* then to see those Rites accomplished; and which
they (...), Heavens would propitiously look upon, though her Parents dissented.
Hourly they expected the man that should perform it: who, at last there
arrived, to solemnize what they expected. Nothing was wanting that so private a
place could afford them. The Hermit must personate her Father, to bestow her on
Philocles, her dearest Lover. No Clarks they needed, their own naked breasts
would confirm, whatsoever the Priest should pronounce. But hear, O hear, ye
dis-passionate Lovers, and hearing, resolve your eyes into tears! Then, even
then when the^ should hand in hand go up to that sacred place, which admitted
no ^eet but thos^ of peace; they might hear resounding in their ears, nothing
but allarms an noise of war. This pitifully affrighted that small assembly:
howbeit, so strongly steeled with resolution was Philocles fancy, as with much
confidence he willed the Minister to go on; and if any were to incur censure,
he would be the man, who would interpose himself betwixt death and danger. But
by this time had a strong Guard enter^d the House, the noise of whose ^ury so
increased the poor man's Pal^^y, as he could go on no further for a world. Thus
were these constant Lovers hindered, upon the very point when their
Marriage-Rites should be solemnized: which came to pass by the intelligence
and pursuit of her incensed Father Androgeus: who with a strong prepared
Troop, well-armed against any one that should make resistance, in a furious
invasive manner ent'red the House (Hymen's dishonou'd house) where those two
unfortunate Lovers resided. An unhappy so journall; where such Comicall hopes
become wholly Tragical! And mount will Androgeus with all his company, there
is no remedy Which Philocles perceiving, as one resolved rather to embrace
death, then engage his fame to an ignoble life; or to accompany that miserable
life with discontent* on he intends to go against all assailants, and in the
presence of his Doriclea against the daringst Combatant bid defiance. He
esteems him unworthy the purchase of such a prize, who will suffer his
thoughts to be seaz'd on by any Panick fear. Death, he knows, to be the
companion of mortality, and to be afraid of that which he must necessarily
endure, he holds worthy of no better name then a cowardly care. He observes,
how fortune h'as been ever his professed foe; valor then must be his friend. And
armed with this spirit, down he resolves to go, but is staid by Doriclea; who
was now become all Niobe; Limbecks were her eyes of tears; a Furnace was her
breast of scalding sighs; a constant Fever surpised her joints; yet with these
did her sweet condition enforce a smile and with this, mixed with a pearled
^eare did she beg this Boon of her dear Philocles.

Do not, oh do not, dearest Love, cast your self away; by exposing your life
to such apparent, nay, inevitable danger. One i^ enough to perish; and let me
be that one to secure my Philoaltes If not, let me become an Advocate for my
Philocles. A Father^ hand will spare his Daughter: and, perchance, for her sake
pardon her Lover. Trust me, Phi^ocles, you shall not bouge a foot; your
wrestling is in vain with Doriclea; perish with me you may, without me you
cannot. The whole World would exclaim against me, and tax me of a key-cold
fancy, should I suffer you even before mine eyes to oppose your self against
my Fathers fury. Be advised then, my dearest Philocles, you shall not go; trust
me, you shall not go. Death and danger with naked breast will I sooner
encounter, then engage your safety to the remorselesse hand of my Father.
Retire then, and let me be your Advocate, wherein should I fail, my extremest
fate can be no worse then I expect it.

With which words leaping forth of his arms, with a virile spirit, she went
down stairs: where she met her furious Father coming up. Who, upon the very
sight of her, was so incensed, as scarce any persuasion could (...) so (...)
him, as to hold his (...) hand form inflicting too seve^e (...) punishment on
his Daughter. Who, a^pearing as one nothing at (...) and (...) above all others
to have her (...) Philocles secured which she conceived by protracting time in
this (...) expostulation with her Father, to be best effected: in a composed
modest manner after such time, as with (...) humble knee she had begged pardon
to beget more compassion an equal hearer, she in this sort, addressed her
self to her enraged Father.

Dear Sir, (...) Speech to her Father.
look on me, or I am lost for ever. It is true, I have justly incurred your
displeasure: and I am sorry for it, and with the sacrifice of my dearest life,
would I seek to redeem it. I have transgressed those religious bounds of
ohildelike obedience, and not only engaged my self but One, whose welfare I
prefer before my self, to infinite dangers. Yet cast me not off for this. If
you would have me live, let me enjoy him whom I love. Let me but partake in
your blessing, I shall expect no other portion: the free fruition of my fancy,
shall be unto me an ample fortune. Alas! what comfort would a Father reap in
the matching of his Daughter: when an enforced uniting of hands should beget a
dividing of hearts: and make her such a miserable Bride, as she shall wish her
Bed changed into a Grave? That Bridal feast, her Funeral, to invite a
mournful guest? And this were Doricleas case, to impaune her virgin-state to
such a curse. O then, by these unfeined tears, this humble-bended knee, your
poor distressed Daughters prayers, look on me; and make me his, who do'es so
entirely love me! And less, dear Sir, you cannot make me; since my faith h'as
confirmed me his, which cannot be dispensed by me. For such Sacred Vows are
too strong ties to be loosed: Our p^re Vows of love, are Signed above
being recorded in Heaven, where such contracts can never be cancelled. Injoyne
me what you please, so you injoyne me not to leave Philocles: for sooner may
Doricles leave from being her self, then leave his love whom choice without
changeh'as confirmed my second self. If the true obedience of your lowly
Daughter may expiate this offense (and alas this offense is only love) that
Task shall not be by a Father imposed, which shall not be by a Daughter freely
embraced.

This Speech wrought more remorce in her auditory, then in her Father; as may
appear by his discontented answer.

Doriclea, but my Doriclea, I shall never account thee; (...) Answer to his
(...)
tell me, can thou look on thy Father, thy dishonored Father, and not blush
at so egregious an error? Shall my Family receive an ignorminious brand from
my Country, through thy loose and irregular liberty? Is there no remedy, but
my gray-haires must be brought with sorrow to their grave? Have I bred thee,
Viperlike, to destroy me? Go on, and see the issue of it. Prefer the love of
Philocles, before the blessing of Androgeus. Disclaim that obedience thou
do owe me; bestow thy self on him, who of all others is most contemned by
me. Thou can not contract this unhappily spun thread of life, before the
Destinies will. Mean time, expect revenge; for believe the indignation of a
Father, who intends to take a full revenge of this licentions affection of that
inconsiderate Philocles: and make him glad to relinquish his suit, by
entertaining the meanest state, to secure his life. ^eserve then those knees,
for whom thou reservest thy self; those easie-enforced tears, for him who thou
preferrest beforethy self; those undevout prayers, to continue his love, whom
thou meanest to make thy second-selfe. But this fruitless expostulation
foreslowes my revenge; I will see if I may find the trace of this bold
Libertine; whose pleasing oratory h'as so deluded thee: whom having found, I
shall shortly divert the current of your fancy, and by a legal course deprive
him of future liberty.

And presently upon these words, neither Doricleas ^^^yers nor tears, nor the
persuasion of his entirest friends could so far prevail with him, as to
keep him from ascending the stairs. But ^uch good opportunity had these
passionate debates below given to that discreet Hermit above, as by his device,
Philocles, to prevent his funy, was privately conveyed: so as, what Androgeus
expected; co^ld not be pursued. None finds he above but the old Hermit, and
that intended agent for solemnizing their Nuptials, who was as full offear as
Andro^eus was of fury: but wisely pretending himself to be one of the Family,
he passed by him without much inquiry.

So unexpectedly was this pleasing Morn darkened with a sullen Cloud. Two
friends, then which none more dearer, must be divided; all occasion of recourse
one to another* henceforth debarred; this faithful Hermit, who addressed his
discreet care for their cure, to his Cell confined. Thus must me leave all
things dis-joynted and out of orders a discontented Father contesting with his
Daughter; a dis-passionate Daughter laboring to appease her Father: all whcih
have power enough^ to perplexe a Family, and beget rumou^ in a Country, as you
may hear hereafter.

CHAP. XXIII.
Androgeus brings back his Daughter; the entertainment given her by her Mother.
Unwilling was Doricleas mind, but unwinged must not be her speed to depart.
Leave her Philocles she must without taking leave. For having labored (as was
formerly expressed) to appease her incensed Father, but all in vain; she,
before she could come into the room, (that sorrowful room) wherein she had
left her Philocles, by the device of that discreet Hermit, to prevent Androgeus
fury, which admitted no treaty, was he conveyed, and with that privacy, as he
became priviledg'd from discovery. Along now must Doriclea go with her Father:
who, desiring nothing so much as to surprise her conveyed Lover, but prevented
of what he most expected, he holds himself for the present sufficiently
content with the reskue of his Daughter. Whom he hoped to reclaim from this
madding affection (for so he conceipted) by one means or other. A days
journey, at the most, they had scarcely traveled, till Androgeus with his
Company arrived where he defired: and bringing his perplexed Daughter in his
hand to her Mother, to this effect he recommended that charge unto her.

Euryclea, I have brought back at last your dainty Daughter; and prevented what
her wild fancy was incurring: she desired much to be our late Pedant Philocles
his Bride: all things were prepared to accomplish what they intended; and had
not timely intelligence ^^ustrated this design, she had to both our
discomforts been unworthily married. It was my aim to have intercepted
Philocles; who, since his escape from prison, has been more forward in the
pursuit of his desires then before: but how, or by what way conveyed I know
not, him I could not find, so ready was some f^^end of his to expedite his
escape. Now must I recommend this charge to you, Euriclea, as you tender our
honor, and the reputation of your Daughter, to retain a more circumspect eye
of her Walks then you have hitherto done. Let such attend her, as will not be
deluded by her. Mellida h'as been too much her friend: whose indiscreet
counsel, had it succeeded, had made her self her only foe. Abridge not her
liberty, so you be consident of her company. Too much privacy may hurt her
health: as too much liberty revive her love. Time may wear out these prints of
youthful fancy. Employment or delightful company, being such as may suit with
virgin modesty, may find power to discampe these dangerous Assailants, which
so mainly work upon the inward quiet of hte mind. I make little doubt,
Euryclea, but your kind heart will be too tender, to inflict on^ her any
heavy censure. Be it as you please, seeing to your charge, care, and cure,
^^^cely recommend her.

So tenderhearted was Euryclea, that at the very first sight of her Daughter
she could not refrain from tears: often did she feine anger, and with a
furrowed brow foreshow a tempest: but her tears were in earnest her anger in
jest. Yet desirous to school her, and in such manner as her discretion
conceived, would leave the deepest impression in her she receives no other
entertainment but this from her Mother.

Disobedient Girl, what fair fruits have our deceiving hopes produced? How
often have I colored thy private escapes, and enjoined this whole Family not
to publish thy folly? What pleasing promises have I received from thee, that
all should be amended, Philocles undeserving love rejected, and those Suitors
entertained, whose fortunes might raise thy preferment? And what re^quit all
have thou given thy Mother, for her care, too ^^nder care, on thee conferred by
her? Now it is in vain to stay the tongue of Rumor: the whole Country
resounds with the report of Doricle^ and he wandering Lover. And how gladly
would I be to still this report* to ^ecover thy repute! Well, there appears
yet a little hope, which relyes on this one and only help. As good fortune
was, all this time Mard^nes h'as been abroad, and so far remote from us, by
reason of his occasions elsewhere calling him, as this report of your ^traying
course may happily yet be concealed from him. Let then that love which you so
lately pretended, be continued. Once again, let a Mothers tears or threats
prevail so far with you, as to estrange your thoughts from him* whom you
must not affect. Be persuaded, Girl; let not poverty come in at one door,
while love goes out at the other. Let not your fame receive a blemish from your
indiscreet choice: with our blessing you cannot enjoy him. timely then
relinquish him: I will not have too strict an hand over you; so tenderly
presuming am I of you. An hard, and harsh task were it for me to enjoyne you
ought that might deservingly beget your discontent. Tender then a Mothers care,
and prevent her fear: her care to procure your good; her fear lest you should
prevent her (...) only re^eeme the time you have lost; but regaine our esteem,
with the ample interest of our love: which you have so strangely forfeited, as
it rests in your obedience only to repair it.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Doriclea labors to free her Mother from all jealousy touching her love to
Philocles: pretending, that he had voluntarily made himself a banished man to
his Country, through fear of the^^ fury and enmity.
NO sooner had Euryclea thus expostulated the cause with her Daughter, then
Doriclea, desirous out of a pious duty, to satisfy her Mother; whose passion,
tempered by a natural affection, seemed something allayed; labors to free her
Mother from all jealousy, whereof she had received too inducing motives,
touching her love to Philocles: and that her defense might appear ground^d
upon sufficient reasons, she proceeds in this manner.

Dear mother, (...) speech to her ^other.
I must confess, (and with tears of pious sorrow I lament it) that my
indis^reet affection h'as exceeded those bounds which maiden modesty should
have ^ept: by giving too free scope to my own fancy: but let not these be any
motives to decline your good opinion from me. There is no offense so great,
which repentance may not exte^^ate. And now to remove all occasion of
jealousy, believe it Mother, that never any arguments of love shall be
continued betwixt us hereafter. For the fear of your fury, h^as diverted our
fancy, and made discontented Philocles a banished man, and that by voluntary
censure, to his native Country. It is true; our amity begot your enmity; our
love your hate. But now, believe the true relation of a Daughter; that air
which he here breathed, grew distastefull to him, through the distaste you
conceived against him. A voluntary exule is he become, and h'as constantly
vowed to entertain that condition, which shall free his youthful mind from
light affection. Indeed, had not m^ Fathers seasonable coming prevented what
our resolves had mutually intended; Neither might he without my consent have
enjoyed that liberty: nor my self been so freely at your dispose as now I am.
But since the Fates would have it so, I shall not only study to obey your
commands, in whatsoever you may be pleased to impose: but infinitely rejoice in
performing whatsoever your Parentall awe shall enjoyne.

Philocles appeared no such (...) to my fancy, that might any way make me to
foreslow the discharge of my duty. Yet must I needs confess, dear Mother,
such was his virtuous love as I could not less express my self then tender
him a grat^full requital for such ample testimonies of his constant affection.
Then with your favor be it, that I retain so thankful a memory of his
professed fancy, as for the present to affiance my self to none: love, though
(...) be countermanded, it cannot for the present be extinguished. Mean time,
as your tender care h'as been and continues ever for my future advancement: and
that Ma^^^nes must be the man, whom you hold ^^tingst for my choice: so far
shall my Countnance appear free from strangeness; my entertainment of him
from niceness, as he shall find no cause of dis-respect from me, nor ought
that may dishearten his hopes in pursuit of me. Nay, so entire shall be my
obedience, as were the disposition of Mardanes like that of Margites, of whom
it is said, that he never plowed, nor dug, planted, nor reaped, nor in
private affairs advised, nor discreetly conversed, nor did any thing all his
life long that might tend unto goodness, but wholly unprofitable to the world.
I should with a free embrace receive him. because your commendations did
present him, and your obedience enjoyne me to love him.

This ingenuous ac^nowledgement of her offense, and expression of her
obedience, infinitely over-joyed her Mother; but above all others, the rel^tion
of the travel of her Lover: imagining, that all occasions now were removed:
and no fear at all that their loves should be here after re^ued. But
whatsoever Doriclea pretended, old love could not be so banished. Love she
must, but seem to dis-affect her Philocles. Have she must, but seem to affect
M^rd^nes. And so far from coyness must she seem as she must have a smile in
readiness whenever he comes in presence. And the freedom which her Mother
gave her, being now secure of Philocles, ministered occasion to Doriclea, to
invent many quaint devices to engage more strongly her distasted Lover Mardanes
to her pretended affection. Whereof he persuaded himself to be so firmly
possessed, as nothing had power to alien her love from him: so as, he began to be
so far presuming thereof, as the very least distaste which she might seem to
offer him, received a very harsh construction from him.

This might appear by one occasion which happened casually, and it was thus.
Doriclea, to allay those pressing discontents which surprised her amorous
thoughts; would make it her pleasing task now and then to play with fancy: and
to discover sundry apparent arguments of her unfeined good will toward
Mardanes, the better to expedite those desires of love^^nwreathed Mellid^, and
to ^^teine that constant zeal which she religiously professed to her
Phil^cles: diverse private meetings, accompanied with some of her more familiar
Consorts, would she purposely appoint to pass an hour or two away (and
tedious had the passage of those hours been* had not some merriment allaid it)
with her late-created Servant; Marda^es. And one time above the rest, she had
prefixed him time and place for giving him a more private meeting; but by what
occasion I know not, or whether it was not purposely done to delude him, or to
try his temper; but he either mistook the Sign where they should meet, or she
appointed a place where there was no such Sign: but meet they did not; upon
which disappointment being infinitely netled, and presuming whatsoever he writ
unto her, would be accepted, in this domineering way, he declared his spirit.

Mardanes Letter to Doriclea.
Mistress;
HOw injuriously you have shown your self to me in this your last days
fail, my lines can hardly deliver; much less express that irreparable
Discontent which I suffer. Boys might be easily without offense deluded, as I
was by your To prepare a smoother passage to her love-pretended (...), She
deluded (...) with a count^^seit S^gne
Sign, the like whereof was never yet there founded. But you reply; you were
there, but I was gone. Trust me, Mistress, I stayed there till seven oath,
Clo^k, which was a whole ^oure beyond the time limited: and finding no such
Sign as you named; you may imagine, if I were sensible of so apparent wrong,
it could not choose but work strongly on me. By this, I seriously vow, you have
lost that Love, who would have sooner ceased to live, then fall short in ought
that might have conduced to your love. This is the resolution of

your dis-esteemed Friend.


An other of the same stamp^, bearing the like style and state, was this;
wherein, (though in a milder temper) he takes occasion to tax her of neglect,
in this manner*

Dearest;
EIther were your occasions so many as they did strangely perplex you, or else
I was strangely slighted by you. Trust me, Dear One, your own business could
not more trouble you, then your neglect of his service and true affection
distasted him, who so firmly dedicates himself to you! Believe it, this was
an unexcusable ^rrour, not to deigne (...) i^ so much (...), as to (...) him
with your place of abo^^; the time of your stay in Town: nor where ^e might
with convenience wait on you, to accommodate your affairs with his bes^ advice
and assistance. You cannot possibly conceive less, then that this was a great
trial of patience: To appear there disesteemed, where he stood most fixed.
Admit he be aged; grave years beauti^i^e with gray hairs are more to be
honored then neglected: nor may your privacies be with less alacrity
seconded, then if they were with more youthful blood inflamed.

Let your more serious eye look upon these, and I appeal to the justice of
your self, without any other Refer, whether these have not sensibly and
strongly wrought (to your own bosom, I say, I leave it) upon

your truly approved and affectionate Servant.


This was Mardanes Letter to Doriclea* which she might rather have taken for
some Challenge, then any Love-present. But this wrought no great alteration
upon Doriclea's tho^ghts. The los^e of his love with which he threatened her,
could not much perplex her, seeing, his hat^ closed best with her desires: for
of all men, whatsoever she pretended, Mardanes she most hated: but in the
pursuit of her aims, she surceased not to discover all expressions of fancy
that might any way promise him success, that, what she intended for Mellida
might be sooner brought to pass. Neither was his spleen so much incensed; n^r
his spirit so enraged: but at their next meeting those furrows which before
appeared on Mardanes brow for his disappointment, was quickly smoothed. One
smile, and that Heaven ^^owes, enforced, had power enough to clame that storm,
and beget in his amorous thoughts a longing desire to please. Many brave
presents would he send her; sundry rich gifts would he bestow on her. All which
she returned unto Mellida, for happy presages of what was to ensue. And in
giving her these Tokens, she would usually say: How now Mellida! This is no
lean love. Happy were my poor Mistress, if she might receive but the least of
these remembrances from her Servant. But alas! Mine is too far divided from me:
di^tance of place bars us all hope of recourse. Why Mistress? In what better
case am I then your self? I love one, and he loves me not: and you love one,
who hates you not. I may every day see mine, but I am never any whit the nearer
enjoying him. You; though you may not see him; in your desires you enjoy him:
and partake in more freedom of love with your Philocles, then ever I expect to
do with my Mardanes. Never expect, Wench, replied Doriclea? Why, pray thee,
what accomplished parts do thou see in him, that thy love should not deserve
him? Did thou ever hear any one so highly taken with him, but thy self?
That Is no matter, said Mellida: but I am sure a nea^er personage is there not
in mine eye, in all the World. And how far would poor Mellida go, to receive
one pleasing smile from him? That were an excellent precious Pilgrimage,
answered Doriclea. Surely, Wench, thou would gladly play Pilgrim, to
undertake a journey for such a Lossell. But thou do weil to be constant, nor
shall I ever persuade thee to change thy choice. Change my choice, said
Mellida^ No, may I sooner change to Earth. Alas! my desires are not great: nor
my ambition high. Might I but be entertained to be his Handmaid; to attend him;
though as his unworthy Consort I might never enjoy him: this would in some
measure content me. yea, quoth Doriclea, but this perchance, would in time
beget in thee discontent. Discontent, said Mellida, and be in the presence of
my Mardanes; how could that be! By seeing other Creatures of the same Sex,
answered Doriclea, received, while thou were it rejected. Indeed, said Mellida,
I should hardly endure to see that: No earthly cross may half so bitter prove,
As to admit Corrivals in our love.


And yet, me thinks, I should never love him worse: seeing, I could conceive no
other cause of their too much love, but his perfection* And were it reason that
I should hate him, because others love him: or fall short in my esteem,
because others did so highly prize him? And yet, I must confess, I could not
well suffer another to become too familiar with him. Patience could bear no
more then it could: and a breast I have ready to embr^ace any injury, rather
then digest such apparent grounds of jealousy. Thus privately used these two
to bestow some hours of the day in discourse: wherein Doriclea ever retained
so admirable a temper: as no extremity of passion was ever seen outwardly to
work upon her. Love she could, and constantly: forego the presence of her love
she could, and modestly. Expectance in this only made her happy: this combat
with contrary fortune would not hold out still; she at last hoped to obtain a
victory: and therein more glorious, in that her bickrings were more grievous. A
suspicious sigh must not leap from her; nor an amorous ^eare betray her: her
own heart must be the treasur^ of her care, till patience crown her hopes wi^h
a more sovereign cure.

Neither was she more discreet in her love, then he persuasive in his line: for
now you must suppose him estranged from his Country, divided from all thoughts
of fancy, and if you will believe his own hand, such a strict Convert, as
Doriclea may have small hope to make him (...).

CHAP. XXV.
Philocles writes a Letter to Androgeus, as directed from beyond the Seas:
wherein he humbly craves pardon, for his too bold attempting his Daughters
affection. How his present austere penitential life shall witness to the
World his repudiation of all light love. How his devotions now were reserved
for Heaven, and had no communion with Earth. And that the choice he had now
made, should during life admit no change.
PHilocles must be now accounted a forrainer, to his Country a stranger;
exposed to winds and waves, and divided from his friends. Nay, since his
supposed arrival, he pretends his induction into so strict a profession, as it
proclaims him to the World an Alien to all youthful affection. But what
Harbor received him, or what place this was which harbored him, or what
Profession it was that admitted him, appears not fully by any Relator:
howbeit, what he was, and what he resolved to continue, may appear
sufficiently by his own Letter.

Philocles Letter to Androgeus.
FOr exiled Philocles to write a Letter to incensed Androgeus: and this to be
directed from beyond the Seas, may seem strange; and yet know, noble Sir, that
this is true. He, even he, who sometimes affected irregular love, h'as now
betaken himself to a regular life: and in this his poor mendicant pro^ession,
humbly craves pardon (and be it your generous pity to incline to his suit) for
his too bold attempting your Daughters affection. It was l^^e, and that
seasoned with as much virtuous constancy, as youth could afford. But know now,
dear Sir, that his present austere pe^itentiall life shall witness to your
self, whom he h'as so highly offended, and to (...) whole world, wherein he
h'as too long youthfully sojo^rned, his repudiation of all ligl*^ love. And too
long, Heavens know too long, h'as he there lived where true discretion could
find nothing worthy to be entirely loved. For what shall man find there but a
Tragic Theater hung about with Arras presenting a numerous confluence of
fears and cares? All complete Actors, but their Play-bill bears no better
style then A Comedy of Errors. To see a Man turn himself into all sha^es like
a Cam^lion, or as Proteus, transforming himself into every prodigious form:
to act twenty parts at once for his advantage; to temporize and vary like
Mercury the Planet, good with good, bad with the bad; to form himself to all
religions, humors, inclinations; to fawn like a Spaniell, rage like a Lion,
bark like a Curre, fight like a Dragon, sting like a Serpent; as meek as a
L^mbe, and ^et again grim like a Tiger, weep like a Crocodile, insult over
others, and yet others insult over him; here to command, there crouch,
tyrannize in one plac^ be b^ffled in another; a wise man at home, a fool
abroad to make others merry. Then to reflect upon the indignity of the Age. To
see a Scholar crouch and creep to an illiterate Pesant for a meals meat. For
there is nothing, from which Learning receives more dishonor, then to have her
freedom engaged to another Trencher. A Scrivener better paid for an
Obligation, then for a studied Sermon; a Faulkner receive better wages then a
Student; a Lawyer get more in a day, then a Philosopher in a year; better
rewarded for an hour, then a Scholar for a years study: He that can paint
Thais, play on a Fidle, curle hair, etc. sooner get preferment then a
Philosopher or a Poet. And is not this a dainty Theater to win the heart of a
discreet Spectator; where Love and Hate are like the two ends of a
Perspective-glasse: one multiplies, the other makes all things less? O how
rightly did that modern Stoic invey against those inhumane qualities in Man:
which, if he did but see into himself, he should find so unmanly, as they
made him altogether unlike himself! Ch^y^. in Hom. 6. in 2. ^p. ad Cor.
How shall I know thee to be a Man (said that Golden-mouthed Divine) when thou
kickest like an Ass, neighest like an Horse after Women, ravest in lust like a
Bull, ravenest like a Bear, stingest like a Scorpion, rakest like a Wolse, as
subtle as a Fox, as impudent as a D^g; shall I say thou art a M^n, that h'as
all the symptoms of a Beast? How shall I know thee to be a Man, by thy shape;
that affrights me more, when I see a Beast in likeness of a Man? And what did
poor Philocles encounter withal, so long as he conversed with the World, but
Creatures of this condition? Well then might mine eye, my strangely deluded
eye, be made the sense of sorrow, because the sense of sin. Naught could I
see but did wound me: no pleasing Object but did pollute me. Only my thoughts,
dear Sir, were so free from harboring one light conceit of your virtuous
Doriclea: as I saw in her that goodness as disheartened any loose attempt. And
may your Age receive that comfort in her, as those easy errors which too
deservingly bred your distaste, may be redeemed by a fuller furplusage of
content. My desire shall be only this, that you would not decline your
affection from her, for her sometimes bestowing so much undeserving respects on
me. Divided am I now from her, and all the World: and who knows but that I was
thus prevented in my love, to the end I might be weined in my love from the
World? Admit then my Plea; and let it receive place: seeing my devotions are
now reserved for Heaven, and retain no communion with Earth. Love was never to
converted Philocles so familiar, as it is now a stranger. It now re^ts, that my
best prayers ever accompany you; and that my tears wash off those wrongs I
have done you. Be it your piety to have mercy, and to look on Philocles
resolve, who h'as set up his rest upon this stake, that the choice he h'as now
made, shall during life admit no change.

Philocles.


This good Androgeus expounded, to be that new course of life or religion, or
whatsoever else he had so lately professed: but constant Philocles had another
meaning, which he ever expected time would bring to perfection. Howsoever,
Androgeus was not a little cheered in the perusal of this Letter: the Contents
whereof so well freed his suspicious thoughts from this mortified Lover, as he
could not contain himself from expressing the joy he conceived, which to this
effect he discovered.

Well done, Philocles! In this course thou have taken, thou procurest thy self
peace; and us rest. Thou have done rightly to disesteeme fancy, and to
prefer thy private Study before such a vanity. There is no comparison
betwixt pure devotion and light affection. Content is of ampler extent then the
whole Continent. And if my serious care prevented thy indiscreet love, be it
thy love, in thy private devotions, to remember my care. Thou ^aist, thou have
now set up thy rest; and in this thou have done right. Wordly love and Heavenly
contemplation suit ill together. Thou could not here enjoy whom thou lovedst
with our consent; thou did well then to relinquish her love, the purchase
whereof might beget thy ensuing discontent. How happy had many bin, if they had
been so prevented: for so had they never tasted those miseries which they so
unfortunately incurred.

As Androgeus was thus privately discoursing of Philocles late profession,
which he conceived to be so sincere, as all occasion of further renuall of his
Daughters love and his was wholly removed: Euryclea came to him, to whom he
read the Letter which he had received from Philocles. Wherein they equally
joyed; while Euryclea related to her Husband the free entertainment which their
Daughter, upon her direction, had given to Mardanes; and how she feared not, if
they gave approvement to it, but that would be very shortly a Match. And
though, said she* there be a disparity in their years; that will beget our
Daughter more esteem. And a good life with an Husband exceeds all youthful
love. And yet I must tell you Husband, said E^ryclea, if his harsh disposition
should either ^^get in him a jealousy, or any other unbeseeming quality, I
should choose rather to go to her Burial then her Bridal. For, poor Girl,
her good condition would brook so ill that surly humor, as it would discourage
her for ever. And I have heard his disposition was none of the best: and what
were it then to enjoy all his estate, and want the comfort of a contented life?
Our care h'as neither been so weak, nor Gods providence so small; as that the
Portion we intend to confer on her, may not procure her such a Match, as may
suit with her desires both for competency of estate and equality of years. And
for my part Husband, said she, I never knew any Match made up for wealth only,
that ever begot comfort to the party. And you your self know Husband, that
when at first I preferred you in my choice, the very least thing that wrought
upon my affection was your wealth: and yet have we had ever enough, and so much
the more, in regard we thought love in those days to be enough. How is it,
Euryclea, said Androgeus, that you ^lead so much in defense of poverty, and
would not admit of Phil^cles. who was none of those who had superfluity? One
must make a virtue of necessity, replied Euryclea. I know Philocles, to be
poor enough, and to love Doriclea enough. But our Daughter was not to ground
her love on every poor Lover, for that might have mad^ her a poor Liver: but
so to plant her fancy, as neither the undeservingnesse of the man might beget
in her a neglect of duty, nor a coldness of affection by means of poverty. To
divert then the current of her love, I made choice of one for her, who had
sufficient whereon to live. That by comparing the want of a Scholar, with the
wealth of a wordly improver, she might the sooner di^cerne her error, and
betwixt these two (...) out one, whom she might both approve and love: and
express himself worthy her choice, by his fair and affable temper. Yea, said
Androgeus, but it was dangerous to give opportunity to fancy; which it seems
you have done to Mardanes already. Alas, good Old Man, answered Euryclea, there
is small doubt but his years have so tempered him, as in affairs of love, his
moderate desires rather aim^ at a Consort then a Play-fellow: one to cheer and
comfort him, then with light dalliance to solace him. And could you then endure
one in the prime of her youth, whose posterity should be the comfort of your
age, to close in such unequal embraces: and by living where the does not love,
make her grieve that ever she did live? No, Androge^s; no, replied Euryclea; my
desires are that she may live, where just grounds of discontent may never give
her occasion to grieve. And this, I think, she very hardly will find in
Mardanes; for as (...) richest treasure closed in a Chest, affords (...) small
comfort to the Owner; when to his ^wn he becomes a Prisoner: so all outward
substance, be it heaped up in never so much ^bundance, can scarcely minister
the least portion of content to a mind engaged to all hea^inesse. But our
Girl shows no such thing; for if she dissemble not, (and I verily think her
condition will not admit it) since my direction, she h'as professed more love to
Marda^^s, then any other that ever suited her excepting Philocles. Nay, she
will not stick sometimes to say, that her unmannaged youth ^ands in need of
such a Tutor: and that since Philocles absence and reliction, reverend age was
the most taking Object to her affection. If it be so, said Androgeus, the Girl
shall have her mind: but I am persuaded, when fresh youth comes in the
presence of age, though she pretend r^verence to age, she will ^incline rather
to embrace youth.

Thus discoursed her Parents of their Daughters love, but were far from
diving into her heart, to search out for whom she reserved her constant love.
But love she must; for tender is their care to bestow her where both person and
fortune may give her content.

But all is not Gold that glisters; nor all winners that are Wooers. For though
she have an enforced smile for Mardanes, she reteines an heart full of care for
the safety of her Philocles.

CHAP. XXVI.
Doriclea falls (or seemingly f^ls) into a Fever; each day seems to increase
her distemper: Eschites, an experienced Physician is sent for to apply his best
art in a case of such extremity: but he, an intimate friend to Philocles, makes
show as if he despaired of her recovery. And that no Malady arising from fancy,
could without enjoyment of the Object loved, receive remedy.
WHo knows not how to dissemble, he knows not how to live. But if that Art
(...) receive approvement, Love and no other Obj^ct should be the instrument.
This (...), who now (...) (or seemingly falls) into a Fever. Long is it now
since Philocles absence; but longer to her conceit then any other: having not
as yet heard from him since his departure from her. From the benefit then of
fresh air, which could not choose but infinitely cheer her, she retires:
making her self a stranger to those Groves and Gardens wherein she walked; and
betakes her self to her Bed, where she privately expostulates with fancy,
recalling to mind wherein soever she had suffered. A violent Fever within some
few days after strongly seized on her: which whether it was seeming, or so
indeed, I will not here dispute, but each day to the great grief of her
Parents, seemed to increase her dist^mper. Sleep was a stranger to her eyes;
meat distastefull to her palate, and loathing to her stomach. A great desire she
had to be private: pretending, that much talk distempered her brain: and
willed her Maid to keep the Curtains ever closely drawn, saying, that
nothing weakened her eyes more then light. Mellida, who knew best next to her
own breast, what most disquieted her, when she was at any time sure that none
could over-heare them, whether it were to cheer her, or to impart her own
griefs unto her, would use in this manner to converse with her.

Good Mistress rouse up your spirits, do you think lying in Bed will serve the
turn? But if you will not be so much a friend to your self, I pray you
befriend your self for my sake. Alas, all this time while you lie sobbing and
fighing here, my Suit to Mardanes grows cold. And I must tell you a secret too
Mistress; but none must know of it, for if they should, it might be a great
blemish to my credit. Truth is, as truth ever goes farthest, that since you
fell into this distemper I became mine own Solliciter: but I made bold still
with your name. And in very deed, (this you may think to be an immodest part,
but I am sure it came from a loving heart) I sought in my Letter directed in
your name, to know the time when he would make me his own.

Fie, Girl, answered Doriclea, thou have spoiled all: proffered love had never
yet good savor. And in the mean time thou have brought me upon the stage in a
dainty fashion: by making Mardanes believe that I am liberal enough of my
reputation. But, pray thee, Wench, what answer receivedst thou? Nay, Mistress,
said Mellida, you shall know all; but I pray you impute it to my too much love,
if my love h'as wronged your name. But the harshest answer did I receive from
him, that ever poor Wench received from any one, loving so dearly as I did.
And with that, opening her bosom, she pulled forth a Paper, which she reached
to her Mistress, containing this Answer.

DOriclea, after this manner to importune me suits not with Maiden-modesty; I
shall close in an equall-line, sorting with our joint desires, when I shall see
mine own time: and may meet best both with your occasion and mine own. Mean
time, trust me, this importunity ^ather duls then sharpens fancy. So re^^s he,
who will ever rete^ne a true estimate of your honor.

Dericlea could not choose but smile, though her heart were ill at ease, to
hear this insulting humor of deluded Mardanes: but at first ^he knew not well
whether to be angry at her Maids forwardness, or to pity her weakness: so
as, raising her self a little in her ^ed she used these words unto her.
Surely* Mellida, thou caust not possibly be so simple as thou make thee. Thou
have now made a (...) hand of it: to make thy own Sweetheart believe that
without his love I cannot live. Thou have brought mine honor unto the Stake:
and I must in hope to get thee an Husband, be thought, nay be rumored, that I
beg one. Nay, it is very likely that he will now out of his Pesantly condition
flight my affection, because too freely offered: or conceit strangely of my
modesty, and with much easiness cashiere me: and what then will become of
thee? All ways then are stopped; all means prevented; when I my self, who
sought by pretending love to him, to match thee to him, shall be so contemned
by him, as he shall hold me unworthy of him.

Alas, Mistress, answered Mellida, pardon my kind heart, that could hold no
longer then it could. Had I loved less, my modesty had been more. But truly
Mistress, I am so troubled with fantasies sleeping and waking, that if I have
him not, I shall not be long mine own woman. Yet rather Mistress, then you
receive any dishonor by my indiscreet love, I shall write in your name how my
mind is altered, and that I never bore him so much love, as now I bear him
hate; I care not* I will do it, rather then displease you; though it should
break my heart.

Doriclea pitied much ^he Girls humor* willing her by no means to discover
the lea^ token or semblance toward Mardanes o^ displeasure. And that so soon
as she should be able to leave her Bed, she would spare n^ labor nor
profession of favor to purchase her desires. But she held it fit to use some
small intermissions to make him sharper: for such Haggards, said she, are soon
cloyed; they must then see their Game seldom, and by rare and easy flights
become sharpened. Hawks full gorged will stoop to no Lure, nor seize on no
Prey. No more will thy ancient Sweetheart, if he find thee too playable to his
Call. Nothing cheered Mellida so much, as to hear her Mistress so well
appeased: resolving to be only directed by her: what issue soever should befall
of her love.

But as they were thus diseoursing, the Parents of Doriclea came into the
Chamber, bringing with them one Es^^^^es, an Artist of known experience,
approved judgment, and in his Profession of such honest employment; as his
chiefest (...) was his Patients cure: scorning nothing more then to spin out
time, or to practice Plobotomy upon his Patients (...), or to magnify his
Cures with Moun^^bank Bills* Such an one was this judicious Physician, who^ they
brought to their Daughter, as to his Profession he was an honor, and to his
Country under God, a sovereign succor. Him therefore they besought to apply
his best receipts, and to exercise the height of ^is Art in a case of such
extremity: as they should be ready to grati^ie his care, her cure, with an
ample expression of their love. But promises of rewards were the lowest of his
^otives: his greatest gain was in his account to do good. And because delay
might prejudice his cure: drawing near to her Bedside, and taking her gently
by the wrest of her (...), felt her pulse; which, though for want of natural
rest, discovered some distemper, yet ^ould not he gather either by Pulse,
Urine, or any Symptom, that she could be seized on by any violent Fever.
Imagining then (and his imagination hit right) that there was some other
private distemper which wrought extremely on her; and purposing to search out
the quality of her disease, if either Art or industry could effect it; he
requests her Parents absence with the rest that were in the room, pretending
that he was to try an experiment, wherein the privacy of his Art would not so
fitly comply with their presence.

And now the Room being voyded, Eschites taking herby the hand, Eschites Speech
to Doriclea.
said thus unto her. Mistress, if I have any judgment, as my long experience
should teach me some, you may be a Physician to your self, if you please. Nay,
it is in your own hand to kill or cure. I do not know your meaning (answered
Doriclea) but surely, Sir, you have no such strange conceit of me, as to think
my self so much my own foe, as not to cure my self if I could. I have not,
Mistress, said he, but my skill fails me* if you may not do much if you
would. I pray you let me ask you one thing, Mistress; are you not strongly
troubled with imaginations? I have a fantasy, quoth she, as others have, and
that must needs according to the nature of it, be discursively wandering here
and there, but never fixed on any one Object. I will burn my Books, said
Eschites, if that prove so. Come, Mistress, I must be round with you; your
mind h'as begot in your body this distemper: your blood had never been
infected, had not your mind been first to love affected. Be then so much a
friend to your self, as either labor to forget him: or by imparting your
thoughts more freely to your Parents, to enjoy him. This is the best receipt
that Art can apply to you; which if you reject, dye, and who will pity you?
Doriclea wondered much how Eschites art could possibly so soon make him of her
Cabbinet counsel; as so quickly to discover her infirmity. B^t long it was
before her modesty would admit any such discovery. At last, with a winning
kind of reluctance, after a Vermillion blush, which played the shamefast
Harbinger to prepare way for what should come after, she disclosed her grief
freely to Eschites, De^iclea discovers her grief to Eschues.
in this manner. Sir, so presuming am I of your secrecy, as a poor Patient
intends to make her Physician, her Secretary: nor am I less confident of your
care then your cure: of your care to keep my counsel; then of your desire to
cure my Malady. I shall here relate to you, what I meant to have buried with
me. It is true Sir, there is one that I have lodged near my heart, and remove
him I cannot; and enjoy him I may not. Nor will I conceal from you any thing:
the Man who h'as taken this place is Philocles, now a banished man to his
Country; which censure he h'as voluntarily incurred and cheerfully embraced
to decline my Parents fury. And his absence it is, Sir, that h'as begot in me
this infirmity. No sooner did Eschites hear Philocles named, then he rejoiced
much to have so fair an occasion offered him, both in respect of his Patient
whom he desired to recover: as likewise for the advancement of his friend
Philocles, whose former acquaintance had engaged his respects more then any
other. To palliat all things then with more art: he intends to work a cure
without applying any medicinal receipt: and this must be by Argument, for
otherwise he knows not how to effect it. And now a fit opportunity is given
him: for this persuasive receipt must not be ministered to his Patient, but her
Parent. Who desirous to hear what the Physicians opinion was touching their
Daughter, came in the very instant; which prevented Doriclea from imparting her
mind any more at that time to Eschites. Androgeus beckning often to the
Physician, demanded of him what he thought of his Daughter, and whether he had
hope to recover her or no. Eschites withdrawing himself a little from her bed
side, and taking her Parents aside, begun freely to discover his opinion of her
in this manner.

Sir, (...) opinion of (...)
as it h'as never been my use in the whole course of my profession to delude
my Patient with vain hope, where I found my receipts could afford no help: so
I must ingenuously tell you what I think without flattering you: in cases of
this extremity, I find small hope of recovery: unless her youth be a means
to repel the malignity of this humor. Nature is much weakened in her. Her
sleep, which is the very dew of the brain, h'as left her. Nourishment will
she take none, and if she did, yet by reason of obstructions in the Orifice of
her stomach, it would not digest with her. So as, should I apply purgative or
ligative medicines unto her, yet would they work small effect, by means of
those indispoed humors which have got dominion over her. Shall I tell you my
mind freely? It is not in the virtue of herbs that may return her remedy:
her malady proceeds from fancy: which must receive (...) from the Object it
loves, or no hope of recovery.

Having delivered his opinion in this sore, he took Androgeus and Euryclea by
the hand: desiring to know of them whether their Daughter had not at any time
professed love to some Gentleman or other in those parts: or whether she had
not discovered so much unto them? yes, answered Androgeus, ^he doted too much
upon one Philocles, whom I here retained for her Schoolmaster: one of knowing
parts, but weak fortunes. Then it seems, said Eschites, you crossed her in her
desires. We did indeed, answered Androgeus; for we conceived that such a
marriage would (...) highly to her dishonor, to marry a poor private
Scholar: and therefore sought to decline her affection that way. Which, like
an obedient child, she h'as since that time done; and observed our directions
with that care, as an ancient Gentleman, and one whom you well know, whose
rising fortunes may highly advance her, h'as lately renewed his suit unto her:
whom she with all fair respect entertaines. So as her former indiscreet fancy
seems wholly banished: and consequently her Malady, if it should proceed from
any such occasional fancy, perfectly cured. Alas, replied Eschites, what your
Daughter may pretend is one thing, but what she intends is another. Affection I
must tell you will be hardly forced: whatsoever her filial obedience may
enjoyne her; love reteines too much sovereignty to be so countermanded: or to
extinguish that heat which it first cherished.

Thus he, though he professed no such matter, but as an Artist should in
delivering his opinion touching their Daughter, expressed himself an intimate
Friend to Philocles, by making show as if he despaired of her recovery, closing
his judgment with this Maxim: That no Malady arising from fancy, could
without enjoyment of the Object loved, receive remedy. Which much perplexed her
sorrowful Parents, conceiving by Eschites relation, that the image of
Philocles had stamped so deep an impression in their Daughters affection, as
the ground of her distemper arose from being so imperiously divided from her
Lover.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Parents of Doriclea conceive incessant grief for their distempered
Daughter; they ^emoane their neglect of Philocles, and dis-esteeme of his love:
But they find no hope of relief to their languishing Daughter, seeing the
means of her cure was reported to have entered a Regular Order.
DOriclea could not more passionately suffer in this her amorous distemper,
then her Parents did for their daughter. Tender was their love, and incessant
was the grief they did conceive. No means was left unassaid; no cure
unpractised, to regaine her health whom they so dearly loved. But all
experiments were in vain: the more they labored, them ore she languished. So
as little could be expected, but that this her increasing distemper would bring
her e're long to pay her debt to nature. This moved Androgeus and Euryclea the
tender affectionate Parents of sick Doriclea, to bemoane their neglect of
Philocles, and dis-esteeme of his love, which her Father one day discovered
with a pensive heart, and passionate voice in this sort.

O Euryclea, how well have we deserved to suffer this affliction, in neglecting
Philocles and his honest affection? Admit his fortunes were poor, his
conversation was virtuous, his life blameless, and his love to our Daughter
loyal and religious. Were we to contemn him, because Fortune had not so
freely imparted her self to him? Was love only to be weighed by means,
without respect to those inward endowments which confer the best beauty on
man? What comfort might we have reaped in seeing them live in constancy of
love: and composing their minds to their state; to bestow the residue of their
days in content? A^ must not be neglected, whom Fortune h'as not favored. It
is blind love that is directed by such a deity. And too tyrann^^^ are those
Parents to their Children, who labor to enforce their affection.

It may be, said Euryclea, that her distemper, for all this opinion of her
Doctors, r^ceives ground from some other grief. For I verily think, Doriclea
could not so dissemble with us, as to pretend love to Mardanes, and retain
such a constant remembrance of Philocles. Let us call forth then if you please,
her Maid Mellida; who knows her mind best, and we shall perceive by her,
whether her fancy continue toward Philocles or no. Mellida, who sorrowed no
less for her Mistress sickness then any: for her distemper wholly declined
her hopes from enjoying her Mard^nes: acquainted them, how those little short
sleeps she had, were full of distractions: and how ever and anon she called
upon Philocles. Which so confirmed them, as they presently gathered that his
absence had begot this distemper in their languishing Daughter: which highly
aggravated their sorrow. Gladly would they recall him, so they might regaine
him, but they find no hope of relief to their weak Daughter; seeing the
means of her cure (the sole cordial of her care) was reported to have entered
a Regular Order. No hope then remained for her recovery* being so deprived of
the Object of her fancy.

While they were thus discoursing and descanting of their grief, one below
called for Mellida; which was a Messenger indeed from Mardanes with a Letter
directed to Doriclea: the issue of whose motion her Parents desired much to
partake. So a^, presently upon Mellida's going in to her Mistress to deliver
this Letter, they went in after her, but with that privacy, as upon the
delivery and perusal of the Letter, Doriclea knew not they were there. The
Contents of this amorous Scroule were these.

DOriclea, you may expect that these lines should have been prevented by ^y
personal attendance: and trust me so they had, could I have dispensed with one
occasion which requires present dispatch. Let not the least conceit of
disloyalty pre-possesse you. I will sooner perchance then your own opinion can
assure you, se^ you, to consummate our joys, which, by how much the longer
delayed, in our fruition will be more sweetened.

Alas, good Man, said Doriclea! how he troubles his brains to no purpose? As
if his personal presence could do me any good, or procure me ease! No, no;
unless he were transformed into Philocles; and then the enjoyment of his
feature would do me an infinite pleasure.

Surely, said Mellida, I could with with all my heart that we had them both in
their own proper shapes: I know who would be the more precious pearl in my
eye. Well, replied Doriclea, God send thee much good of him, when thou shall
have him. And if I recover my health, whereof as yet I find small hope, I
should make little doubt but by a device I have, to possess thee of him. I
pray God you may have your health restored you soon, said Mellida; for I am
sure you cannot suffer more in your Fever, then I my self do, till I be made
happy by the free enjoyment of Mardanes favor.

This discourse seemed strange to Doriclea's Parents, for they little knew what
their Daughter intended by that device: howsoever, they now perceived that the
love she pretended to Mardanes was not real, but dissembling: and that
Philocles was the Man who was only interessed in her heart: and that without
him she despaired of health. Which could not choose but strangely perplexe her
affectionate Parents; who now, so they might become confident of their
Daughters recovery, would easily incline to Philocles fancy. But they were out
of all hope to procure her health by this means: seeing, retired Philocles was
now to his Country a stranger, and had entered a strict religious Order: which
assured them, that he had now disclaimed the title of a Lover.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Eschites undertakes, upon promise of their acceptance, to use his best
endeavor for calling Philocles homeward; and that he is resolved, how
Philocles time of Probation will be quickly relinquished, when he shall bear
least hope of enjoying his Doriclea's affection.
Weakened daily became constant Doriclea, by means of this her languishing
distemper. For now her stomach, by feeding on those fancies which her loyal
love to Philocles usually suggested, was so sated: as other nourishment she
could admit none: unless such Julips or Cordials as required no strong
digestion: so well became Nature sustained with the very conceit of affection.
Nor is this much to be admired; for if that Maid of P^i^tiers could abstain
so many years from all sustenance, and be surprised by no such fancy; what may
we imagine of Doriclea, whose digestive parts were so well satisfied with the
thoughts only of her dearest Philocles, as no repast could comparably delight
or refresh decayed Nature, so much as the very conceit or apprehension of his
affectionate feature.

Her Parents desirous to try all means to allay her grief, and to banish the
memory of her transplanted friend from her distempered mind: sent for such
neighboring Maids as formerly kept her company to come to her: and to invent
one sport or other to pass away the lingering night, or to tell Tales to solace
her troubled brain, which for want of sleep, was much distempered. And many
pleasant pastimes would these Country Girls find out, purposely to cheer
her. While one amongst the rest drawing ^eare the Bedside, and taking Doriclea
by the hand; Good Lord, Mistress, said she, what a stir you make with this
love? I am sure for my part I am troubled with a thing as like love as can be,
and whether it be downeright love or no I know not: but every night there
appears to my fancy, a dainty proper young Man, but of what Country I know
not* and to my knowledge, waking I never yet saw him. But trust me Mistress, I
wondrously love him: and if he be no Hob-Thr^sh nor no Robin^ Goodfellow, I
could find with all my heart to sip up a Silly-bub with him in my Fathers
Broome-pasture. For I shall on my conscience never love any one half so well.
And yet I know not whether I shall love him when I am waking so well as when I
am sleeping: nor do I know whether I should know him, if I should see him: and
yet every night I infinitely love him, and could choose to live with him, if he
be flesh and blood, as I hope he is; for else I should not for all the world
endure him.

Doriclea could not choose but smile within her self to hear this simple
Country Girl discover her imaginary love in this manner. While an other as
simple as the former, but a more real and substantial lover, stepped forth; and
as one angry that her fellow should spend so much time in discovery of a
Dream, or a dreaming fancy, she proceeded in this sort. Sister, what makes you
thus trouble Mistress Doriclea's ears with a story of a Cock and a Bull?
Dreams are but fanci^s of the brain: and a thousand nights have I had such
Dreams: and me thought took great delight in such a yongsters company, that I
car^d not a Chip for next morning. But I pray you Mistress Doriclea hear my
Fortune: for I love in good earnest; and if he be a just Man of his word, he
loves me too. Climenes is the Man, I am not ashamed of my choice: a proper
Dapper Youth, and h'as won the best prizes from Admetus, Melintus, Palemon,
and the activest Youths of all our Parish, at our Summer-Games two years
together. And my Father, good Man, h'as promised him, that if he come away
with the prizes next year again, he will bestow me on him. And I could wish
with all mine heart, that I were his now; for a whole year will be too long to
languish in love. But one thing now above all others, there is, Mistress, that
grieves me; and it is this, Our Neighbors say, he will never have a Beard; and
what a rivell'd Russeting will he look when he comes to age? But if Nature will
not be so bountiful to him, if there be a Beard-maker in all our Country, I
will want of my will but he shall furnish him. Your case is happy in comparison
of mine, said the third Girl; one of you loves, and you know not whom; another
loves, and may enjoy whom she loves: but my Fortune is harder: for AEgon
professed as much love to me, as ever Suitor did to Woman: and I knew nothing but
that he thought as he spoke, and would perform what he had promised. But
^waines can dissemble as well as greater Men: for going the other day to our
Parish Church, ^ might hear the Banes of Marriage publicly asked betwixt
AEgon and Leucippe: so as, all those professions of love wherein he ^ood
engaged to his M^tilda, must now be renounced, and a new love entertained. And
yet, Mistress Doricle^ I were a Fool to lay that to my heart, which another
lies to his heel. A disloyal Man should never break the heart of a wise Maid.
He that can so easily leave his old Love, may stand in need of the least grain
of it if he live. Mean time, I hope if I live, to enjoy one who shall more
constantly love. Thus discoursed these Country Girls; and much content took
Doriclea in this relation of their simple loves. But her Father and Mother
coming in, prevented all further discourse, for that time. Their Daughter they
found still languishing: small or no hope of recovery ministered least comfort
unto them. Many times they wished, that they had not opposed her affection, but
inclined to her will; for so they might have enjoyed what now by all
probability is very likely to be taken from them. And as they were thus
bemoaning their sick Daughter, who daily grew weaker in strength, but stronger
in her distemper; Eschites came into the Chamber, enquiring how it was with
her? Drawing nearer and nearer to her end, answered her Father. Small hope of
amends appears yet. Nor will any probably appear, to my judgment, said
Eschites. No cure can be possibly effected, till the cause be removed* And
though the cause of her distemper be too far removed, as the case now stands,
the cause must be restored, or no recovery to be expected. Androgeus desiring
to know what he meant, requested him to explain himself. To whose
satisfaction he willingly inclined, and in a grave demure manner, imparted his
mind freely to them: discovering both the grounds first introducing, and
receipts most sovereign for curing her distemper.

Sir, Eschites Speech to Androgeus.
you may remember, how forth of experienced grounds of Art, I sometimes told
you, which they shall find true that have near relation to you: That no
Malady arising from fancy, could without enjoyment of the Object loved, receive
remedy. And though love rarely work such effects in these days: yet, too near
an instance you have here of your own, who confirms what powerful, nay
incurable distempers the quality of love produces; not only in the affections
but constitutions of such who have received such deep impressions of love, as
they must seize on the person they effect, or cease to live. Too long have you
deceived your selves with flattering hopes, expecting that either by strength
of Nature, which you may perceive much enfeebled in her, or by Physical means,
which I told you could smally benefit her, she might recover health. And now
you see, how far she is from seconding your hopes: as every day promises
nothing but a decline from worse to worse. To prevent this, if you expect ever
to see her in health again, give way to my directions: let her enjoy what she
h'as so unfeignedly desired. It is Philocles that must perform this Cure, or
effectlesse is our Art, fruitless our Care. Let him then be called home, whose
return gives me assured hope of her health.

Alas, answered Androgeus, if that were possible to be done, we should easily
incline to such a motion: but as he is not only divided from us, but entered a
strict-austere Order, there is small hope that ever his purpose is to return
hither. For since his departure hence, I received a passionate Letter from him:
wherein he not only humbly craved my pardon for his indiscreet pursuit of my
Daughters affection, but advertised me of his late Conversion. And how that
course which he had now embraced, had aliened his thoughts from all light love;
and that the choice he had now made, should during life admit no change.

Very like, said Eschites; But I pray you how expound you that Clause? His
Choice, no doubt, which he meant by was your Daughter, which he never intended
to change. Come Sir, Discourses in affairs of this nature should be used as
preparatives of what may succeed after: you desire your Daughters health, and
you perceive the means to effect it: but out of a scrupulous fear you doubt
the way is diverted. What say you unto him that shall expedite the way: and
make you happy (if nature be not too much debilitated) in her recovery? We
shall be defective in nothing that may further it, nor ungrateful to
whomsoever shall labor in it, said her Parents. With which words Eschites, who
tendered nothing more then the advancement of his affectionate Philocles,
became so encouraged, as he undertakes, upon promise of their acceptance, to
use his best endeavor for calling Philocles home-ward.

O said Androgeus, fruitless will be your endeavor in an assay of that
nature! Religious courses must not be so soon diverted: Fancy can now have no
place with him, I am persuaded. So as you may to more purpose desist from any
such enterprise, then go on with it. Be not so definite in your opinion, nor so
constant in your fears, answered Eschites. Admit his thoughts have entertained
any such conceit, it is very likely he is not settled in it: and then I am
resolved, how Philocles time of Probation will be quickly expired, and his
purpose soon relinquished, when he shall hear the least hope of enjoying his
Doriclea's affection. Howsoever, recommend the carriage hereof to my care, and
impute the error to my neglect, if I fail in the cure.

CHAP. XXIX.
Androgeus hears how Philocles, besides his other native endowments, was
descended of a generous Family; which enfl^ames his desires more to see him
return into his Country. He vows never to oppose this Solemnity, so his
presence may cure her infirmity.
OPportunity now had offered it self to Eschit^s to befriend his
dearely-respected Philocles: and Fortune opened her bounty to Philocles to
ingratiate himself by the interceding of Eschites. Neither was Androge^s less
serious to accomplish what his promise had engaged him to perform upon the
undertaking of Eschites. And greater reason he finds to comply with such a
motion then before: in regard he hears how Philocles, whom he so much
dis-esteemed, as he held it to be a disparagement to his house to incline to
any such obscure Match; besides his other native endowments, which well
deserved the best of fancy, to be descended of a generous Family, which came
to his ear upon this occasion.

A Gentleman of quality chanced to come into those parts to enquire of
Philocles: with news that fair fortunes were lately befallen him by death of
his Uncle; who had conferred on him his estate, by adopting him for his Heir.
And thither was Euphilus, for so was this Gentleman called, directed, to impart
these tidings to his affectionate Philocles. These news came to the hearing of
Androgeus, who desiring to become better satisfied touching his descent and
fortunes, repaired to Euphilus, to whom he addressed himself in this discourse.

Sir, I understand you are a stranger in these parts, and have taken your
journey hither to enquire after one Philocles: you may be pleased to know that
one of that name sojourned sometimes here with me: but whether the same whom
you desir^ to find, I know not: but by his description you may become better
satisfied.

The Gentleman whom I so much desire to see answered Euphilus, was of a middle
stature, black hair'd, and sanguine complexion; and to this Coast, as his
friends are informed, came he; where he was placed in a Gentleman's house, to
teach, and educate his Children. For though his fortunes promised fair upon
some expectance hereafter; yet his present means were so short, that after
some short stay in the University, he retired into the Country: for so
free-bred and truly generous was his nature, that he could not brook
beholdingness, nor rely on others dependence. And I must tell you Sir, during
all that time wherein we remained together, and equally communicated our
Studies one to another, such infinite content we mutually conceived in one and
the others company, as nothing appeared either so grateful to me, nor so
delightful to him, as the fruition of this Society. So as in time we became
Sworne-Brothers: no less friendly then freely imparting what either comforted
us, or by any other occurrent crossed us, with such confident familiarity to
one another bosom, as our comforts by partaking one with the other became
highly augmented; and our afflictions, if any such befell, sweetly allayed.

This was an excellent argument of unfeined friendship, said Androge^s, and
such as deserves approvement with good men. It is true, replied Euphilus; but
this happy amicable condition of ours could not promise to it self any firm
nor fixed continuance: for as his disposition became disheartened by some
occurrents, so was he enforced to discontinue those Academick Studies wherein
he had so commendably profited; and to embrace a life much different to his
humor, by accepting the government of a private charge, as his friends have
been since informed: a course, I must ingenuously tell you, which his nobler
thoughts sometimes highly scorned: but there we hear he was planted, and
purchased that good opinion of the Family where he resided, as nothing could be
accounted too dear for one whom they so dearly loved.

There is none that can more truly witness the truth of that relation then my
self, answered Androgeus. For into my Family (as by your description I am
satisfied) he was hospitably received, affably entertained, where he for a time
lived, none more beloved. But all this could not content him; for his more
ambitious thoughts could not contain him, but out of a presuming confidence
from his too familiar entertainment in this manner, he attempted the affection
of my Daughter; my only Daughter; one in whom I had treasured my hopes: and her
he solicits with such instancie, as her indisereet affection begun to incline
to fancy. Fortunes she had profer'd her, which might highly advance her;
Suitors of eminent account, approved repute, ancient descent in their Country;
yet could not all these decline her resolution from that whereon ^he had so
strongly fixed and firmly fancied.

Imagine then, good Sir, how this could do less then highly perplexe her too
careful Parents; and consequently incense them against his boldness: who out
of too much presumption, desisted from those grounds or principles of
education, to work in her easy disposition moving impressions of affection!
This resolves me nothing, replied Eu^hilus, where now Philogenes may remain;
whose fight I so much desire to partake: and to whom I am to impart such
tidings as mainly concern him, and which by the just decree of Heaven are very
like highly to improve him.

I must tell you, said Androgeus, and sorry am I that I must be enforced to
tell you so much, that the goodness of his nature and sweetness of his temper
was such, as conceiving the distaste we took at this his presumptuous attempt
to be great, and our indignation irreconciliable: he voluntarily left these
parts, and as he h'as since further informed us, devoted himself to such a
strict-regular course, as now he dis-esteemes all light fancy, and made
devotion his choice.

Your usage, it seems, answered Euphilus, drove him to these extremes. And
unthankful you to requite his virtuous affection with such disdain. For I
must tell you Sir, though I make no question but your Family is ancient, your
fortunes fair and eminent, yet had you known his fame and Family, as well as
you were acquainted with his fancy, you would have held it no dishonor for
Philogeues to match with your Daughter.

Androgeus desired much to hear of his descent; which his faithful friend
Euphilus related in such manner, as it begot tears in the Old-mans eyes;
repenting much that he rejected one whose nobler parts so well deserved, and
whose generous and ancient lineage seconded those excellent endowments wherewith
he stood graced. And thus continued these two their discourse, till such time
as one came to Euphilus, acquainting him how a Page below would speak with him:
which broke off their conference for that time: resolving next day to meet
again, and to conclude of some course, that if too strict a tie had not
engaged him, he might be recalled, to enjoy what he so much affected, and what
his own fame, family, fortunes, and fancy, so well merited. Whereto sorrowful
Androgeus replied, that a Gentleman of good account, and eminent in his
Profession, meaning Es^hites, had undertaken something to that effect, but
whether likely to produce any good end or no he knew not.

Mean time, Euphilus goes down to the Page which staid below for him; to whom
he delivered a Letter written, as this Page pretended, by one Albanus an
intimate acquaintance unto Euphilus, the Contents whereof were these.

Firm friend, V^l^ria in a disguise, seconded by a counter^eited Letter from
Alban^^, presents his Servic^ to Euphilus.
my resolutions are now fixed for Travel; and something I desired to leave you
as an argument of that constant love I bear you. Receive then this Page, and
retain him for his sake, who could not send you a Token which he did more
esteem, nor what his endeavors will more deserve. Your disposition I know to
be mild, which will comply well with the easiness of his condition; and whose
approvement may hereafter win more ground on your affection. Trust not Albanus,
if your further trial of him confirm ^ot what I have promised for him. The
Winds call me, the Mariners hasten me, so as I must contract my lines while
they spread out their Sails, closing in this our absence, one from the other,
with this constant Subscription of

your affectionate Brother.


Now, what was meant by this Letter, our History must not as yet discover. Let
it suffice, that this Page was his own Secretary; and had lodged Euphilus so
dearly in his thoughts, as he accounted it his highest earthly solace to be
admitted to his service.

Return we now to Androgeus, whom we may suppose, upon this relation of
Philocles Fortunes and Family, to have his glowing desires more inflamed to see
him return into his Country. But doubtful he remains ever to enjoy so much
happiness: for the Sea, as he understands, h'as divided him; and his late
regular profession so confined him: asif his desires stood so affected yet
could he see no possibility to have it effected, seeing those vows (as he
conceived, but herein deceived) could not so easily be dispensed. And highly
did Androgeus admire the modesty of Philogenes: who never all the time that he
sojourned in his house, would discover so much either touching those
possibilities which now his fortunes had conferred on him, or that lineall
descent from whence he was derived. An undoubted argument, surely, of a noble
mind; which desires rather to display his descent by actions of desert: then
arrogantly to boast of the House from whence he descended; and by his ignoble
expressions to debase that honor which was lineally derived. For what is it to
glory in gilded Earth; or to magnify ones self in the generosity of his
Race: when Virtues, which should be the best Signals to distinguish a noble
Stock, have lost their impressure in him? For better is it to be ignobly
derived, and virtuously accomplished; then Nobly descended, and viciously
affected. And as every thing reteines his degree of dignity in goodness: so
holds it the same degree of illness when it is abused: for honor never looks
so unlike it self as when it is disparraged. But where descent and desert
meet, they present such a comely structure; as it becomes an imitable president
of honor. And in these did Androgeus seirously reflect upon Philogenes. So as,
a double respect may seem mutually to engage him: a constant care of his
Daughters cure: and a desire to have her so matched, as fame, fortune, and
family, with such loyal arguments of fancy may jointly meet.

He vows then never to oppose this solemnity, so his presence may cure her
infirmity. This induces him to wish all fair success to Eschites faithful
endeavor; the prosperous issue whereof (though encountered with some rubs) you
shall understand hereafter.

CHAP. XXX.
Philocles returns home; and is accepted by the Parents for their Son in
law. This revives their seeming distempered Daughter; yet fearing still a
relapse of her Parents acceptance, she feignes the continuance of her distemper.
NOw had retired Philocles by the means of Eschites, received word of his
dearest Doriclea's distemper: and privately, how he conceived that his return
from that fruitless retire, would not only free her from further danger, but
be a direct way to accomplish his own desires. So as, there was nothing more
expected then his speedy repair by her Parents: which, (if he intended not to
stand in his own light, and prevent all promising hopes to do himself good)
he wished him not to foreslow, least delay might increase her distemper, and
consequently abridge his hopes of aspiring higher. But such inducements little
needed to hasten with winged speed the return of Phil^cles. Nor could he at
first imagine this relation of his friend Eschites to be any thing else but a
dream, or some practice to surprise him: so as he seemed doubtful what to
resolve, protracting so much time till he had expostulated with his own
thoughts: by offering unto them a survey of those dangers he might probably
incur, with those incredible comforts, which if these relations proved true,
he might assuredly partake.

Happy, thrice happy art thou Philocles, if these news be true which come from
thy Eschites! But can thou expect so present a calm after so rough a
tempest? Were not all her friends lately opposed against thee, and so incensed
at thee, as nothing could appease their fury but thy captivity, nay thy blood,
if they could have seized on thee? And were these deep Characters of their
boundless passion writ in Sand, that they should be so quickly razed: or their
vowed revenge so easily forgotten, that it should be so speedily extinguished?
Well, I know net what to think on^t! These lines writ by my dear Eschites
makes me confident: but those experienced practices of her incensed friends and
my implacable foes makes me more irresolute. I am assured, that Eschites would
not engage his Pen to one line, that might endanger my life. And I know this to
be his own Character. Besides, to make his relation more probable, he here tells
thee of Doriclea's distemper, and how her Fever took her upon thy departure
from her: and how thy return, if his judgment fail him not, may recover her.
Be it then unto death, I will encounter with the worst of danger, so my
presence may restore her, and cure her distemper. Pretended fears are mere
shadows to loyal fancy. They cannot strike that heart which is truly struck
with love. And I appeal to thee Doricl^a, if mine be not truly wounded. Be my
^eturne then for thy safety, and I shall hold my desir^s crowned in perishing
for thee.

This said, in a private disguise he addresseth himself for his return; to
the end he might with less suspicion repair to his firm friend Eschites, and
upon further conference with him, be satisfied whether the Coast were clear or
no. And in short time might he make his return, seeing, whatsoever he
pretended, his distance was not great by means of his retire. For as yet he
had not crossed the Seas, nor taken any other Order then the constant profe^^ion
of a Lover: who had made Doriclea his Saint, to whom he was so devoted, as
wheresoever he sojourned; his engaged hear^ could not be divided from that
object where^^t was so inseparably united.

But the ways of love, when they promise most smoothness, are ever
encountered with sundry difficulties. This our Philocles felt, who in his
return walking one evening on the Seashore, to refresh his spirits with the
air of the Sea, was had in suspicion by some Seafaring-men for a Spy, and
restrained that night by command; with a purpose next morning to bring him
before a Justice, who had given direction upon notice thereof, that he should
be safely guarded, and early next morn he would take examination of him: and
upon what occasion he took such serious survey of that Coast and Vessels within
the Road. Philocles, as it fortuned, having been formerly acquainted with this
Gentleman who should examine him (for they had been Coacademicks) and fearing
much lest these delays might either be interpreted in him a coldness of
fancy, or toward his approved Eschites an opinionate jealousy; to hasten his
departure thence, he prepared his way to this Justice, in these lines.

Sir,
L Awes which should be lines of life, to direct, to support, and steer the
course of an injuried Supplicant, are for most part become Spiderwebs to
e^wreathe and enwarp the smaller, to give more liberty to a powerful Offender.
See the misery of time! But to recall my self, this is not the error of time,
but of man. Where a direct eye becomes squinted by respect; or bleared by
receipt; or quite put out by a prej^dicate conceit. Dangerous aims are these
to a well-governed State. Where Religion shapes it self to Policy, and candid
pretenses cloze with impiety. As you are Man, observe that Goldenmeane, which
returns the best Character of Man. The fairest path that conducts man to
immortality, is ever on this Theater of Earth, to remember his mortality. And
the nearest resemblance that Man can have to his Maker, is to mix Justice with
Mercy, and to reduce them to ^n equal temper: by exhibiting them to all in a
proportionable ^easure. ^ilies among Thorns are Beauteous Objects. Be you the
same in this World of Weeds. So shall your name flourish, and have a report
behind you better meriting praise; then emi^ency of state, or preceden^y of
place.

These Paper Presents are but weak reflections of stronger affections: yet being
the best Sacrifice of a friend and no Spy, (unless it be in the scrutiny of
his own heart) they deserve the higher place in your esteem.

Mean time, express your self what your Country expects from you, the State
requires of you, and for which all good men will love you: which shall be the
most assid^ate and affectionate wish of him, who remains

the constant honourer of your virtues, Philocles.


This Letter infinitely pleased the Gentleman; but when he found it subscribed
to by Philocles, the Character pleased him so much the better. In a word, so
far was he from entertaining him as a Spy, as he familiarly embraced him in
the arms of a friend. His Guarders were soon discharged: desiring nothing
more then to hear the relation of his fortunes. Which done, after his earnest
invitation to stay longer with him, he accommodated him with whatsoever might
necessarily befit him: and with a friendly dismission wished him all happy
success in his love-assay.

The next evening, he privately came to his constant friend Eschites his house;
with whom he freely conversed, being satisfied by him that all things were very
like to second his expectation: and how nothing was more desired then his
speedy and happy arrival. Yet, he told him withal, that he held it fitting
that he should not presently approach the presence of his Mistress, least she,
who was not as yet wholly recovered, by being overjoyed by his presence, might
make relapse into her sickness: which to prevent, he intended to prepare her
by degrees, to the end his unexpected coming to her, might through an
immoderate passion of joy, less occasion her distemper. Mean time, while this
approved Artist was preparing way for his securer access to his Mistress, he
neglects not that office which amity enjoynes him to perform to his Friend.
For having heard where his faithful friend Euphilus lodged, whom he so
intimately loved; and that for his cause he was there arrived* he could not
choose but express those loyal devotions which his love so much deserved, and
what his travail for his sake had so well confirmed. It is not easy to relate
what incredible joy and comfort the one conceived in the others presence:
wherewith Philo^les seemed so intranced, as in the end not able to contain
himself any longer, but out of the affluence of his joy, he burst forth in
this manner.

Dear Euphilus, I now perceive well that the influence of those Divine Powers,
whose eyes are ever fixed on us, knows best how to attemper our greatest
discomforts with rays of solace. Long it is not since we were divided, yet
during that small distance of time, never did poor mortal encounter with more
extremes, nor taste less of hope, nor partake less in help. Enjoined I was
to live where I did most loathe; and to be estranged from that place where I
did most love. Divided I was not only from my fancy, but restrained of my
liberty. Those whom I honored most for her dear sake whom I loved best,
published themselves my professed foes: desiring nothing more then to have me in
pursuit; yea, and if the Laws would extend so far, to bring me within the
compass of my life to recompense the constancy of my love. Yet behold! how by
the Divine Clemency this storm is cleared; these menacing Clouds dispelled;
these foggy vapors dispersed; poor Philocles released; his captivity to
liberty reduced; what he least expected now freely offered: and that humane
comforts might come linked, as my former discomforts came not singled: behold,
a double blessing invirons me! The presence of a firm Friend, with the
fruition of a fair Mistress.

Euphilus no less rejoiced in the enjoyment of his Philocles; to whom, after
he had related the occasion of his repair to those parts, and mutually solaced
themselves in the repetition of their former pleasures and studies: A Messenger
from Eschites cut off their further discourse: for now was Philocles summoned
to a more amiable task; the delightful visit of his Doriclea. The absolute
comfort whereof is more easily conceived, then delivered: for in discoveries of
this nature, Imagination ever becomes the best Painter. Let it suffice, that
their first salute closed it self in silence; discourse was supplied with
long-languishing looks. Tongues had theit ties, while affection became sole
Prolocutor for the heart. One that had seen Philocles, would have thought that
he had been some professed Artist: and that he was gathering the symptoms of
her Malady by the motion of her pulse.

And for Doriclea, though she durst not well forget her Fever for fear of her
Father, yet she found in her self no such distemper, but she might leave her
Bed, and admit the style of a Bride, so this dissembling love-errour might free
her from censure. Nor need she much fear her Parents displeasure; for so
propitious a Genius h^as breathed on Philocles, as in this his return home,
Hymen is ready to pron^unce his doom, being so well accepted by the Parents
for their Son in law. This so revives their seeming-distemper'd Daughter, as
her Doctor may safely leave her, seeing Philocles presence secures her from
danger.

A silent expression, gives the pregnant'st testimony of a deep grounded
affection;
where every l^o^ darts forth love; no other parliance was afforded to these
two extasied lovers: unless a trickling tear drained from the exuberance of
love, stole innocently from Doriclea, to discover that passionate impression,
wrought in her amazed thoughts through affection: thus were loves lines legible
in both their eyes; and their eyes sole intelligencers to their thoughts.

Much had restored Philocles to speak to D^riclea: no less, had restrained
Doriclea to impart to Philocles. Joys had their fresh supplies; as if some
golden dream had imparadis'd their thoughts with some glorious vision; the
conception whereof could not be delivered, till a sacred Rite had really
confirmed, what their united hearts had mutually vowed.

Yet like a discreet jealous Girl, fearing still a declining of her Parents
acceptance, which might beget in her a relapse, or some further inconvenience,
she feignes the continuance of her distemper: which soon after becomes
clearly removed by her Parents cheerful approvement of their loves, as you
shall hear hereafter.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Marriage is solemnized; and with such privacy as known to none but their
own Family. Valeria, who was supposed to be Euphilus Page, discovers himself
to be Philocles Sister; with whose consent Euphilus marries, being long before
privately a^^ianc'd to her.
FAncy, which had been so long in conceiving, must now come to her full birth
and perfection: And that which before breathed only in desires, must now
cheerfully aspire to action. Suppose we now Doriclea to have shaken off her
Fever, left her Chamber, to prepare her self for those loyal and lawful
embraces of her constant ^over. Her Parents to enlarge the extent of her
comforts, rejoice no less in their Son, then she in her Spouse.

All things are provided, nothing neglected that may comply with the content of
two enlivened spirits so affectionately united Hands could not be wanting,
where hearts were so jointly knitting. Nor could there want a full Consort to
cheer their assistants with complete harmony; when these two affectionate
Consorts so gracefully appeared in Hymen's livery. What would you have more to
life expressed? The memory of their forme^ discomforts becomes quite, exiled by
this presentment. Here might you see loves Metamorp^^o^is lively acted, and by
such persons, as their ^^^ractive features bestowed an infinite grace on
whatsoever they presented. But Love admits no Rhetoric; unless it be that
which the Orator held the sole ornament and accomplishment of an Oration, which
without any other adjunct completely closed it self in Action. To make an
abstract then of all, conceive our late distempered Doriclea now recovered (and
perchance her feigned ^ever discovered,) her dear Philocles now resto^ed, and
in a new state ready to be invested, her distasted Parents now attoned, and all
things so well composed: as this long-desired Marriage is now to be solemnized;
and with such privacy, as known to none but their own Family. Mellida, who
every foot, no doubt, thinks of her own Sweetheart must be the only Bride-maide
to her Mistress: and faithful Euphilus the only choice Consort that must wait
on Philocles. The way with flowers is privately paved; no Guest invited but
what their own Family afforded; all things were with much secrecy carried, and
to good purpose, as shall be hereafter declared.

To the Temple they come, where these Nuptials are with all privacy celebrated.
And here Dorielea's Father takes his Daughter by the hand, and plays the best
part that joyful Doriclea could ever receive from a Father. Which Rite being
thus solemnized, and the Married Couple with their few Attendants homeward
returned: an other occasion of infinite joy unexpectedly arose from this
auspicious meeting.

After dinner, Philocles with his dearest Doriclea, took along with them in
their company his loyal and constant friend Euph^lus to recreate their spirits
abroad: to whom Philocles imparted himself in this sort.

Dear Friend, though every minute of time be this day incomparably precious to
me, being only to be employed in discourse with my Choice: yet must I reserve
ever some hours for your self, from whom I have received not only contentment
in my youth, when our Studies were communicated together, but from that
continuate profession and expression of your love; all which confirm me yours
so long as I have life. You have been this day a witness of my long-expected
happiness: nor could I have one, to whom I stood more indeared, in all the
world to witness it. And I should hold my wishes highly crowned might I have
you seized of her whom you sometimes so much affected. I mean Valeria, one,
who though my Sister, preferred you in her conceit far above her Brother.
And I must freely unbosome my self to you; it did not a little content me to
perceive such arguments of mutual affection betwixt you. But perhaps,
E^philus, your disposition becomes now estranged from those thoughts. Either
her mean fortunes could not content you, or some averseness in her friends
distasted you; or some better hopes of preferment have so possessed you, as
Ualeria h'as lost that place in your heart, which she sometimes had, and
consequently, poor Wench, must be content against her will to forego, what she
so entirely desired, and leave you to a Choice whom you better deserved.

You retain a worse opinion of me, Philocles, then my true zeal and affection
to your virtuous Sister ever yet expressed. No, my noble friend, Ualeria never
found Euphilus inconstant to this hour. I have preferred her in my choice, and
fortified my resolves against a change. Nor was it a weakness in her fortunes
that declined my love: but the mean estate of a younger Brother which could
not supply us with means how to live.

This was discreet love, answered Philocles; those who truly love, make it the
least of their fears, how they may afterward live. But if that be the only
let, I shall easily supply that want. I have not prized your love at so low an
estimate, as to account you worthy so near a gage as Brotherhood, and then
exclude you from sha^ing in my estate. My Uncles providence shall be unto us an
equal purchase. Be not so unadvisedly modest as to refuse it; you shall accept
it, with her love to boot who may deserve it. And when your rising hopes shall
better furnish you, then may your modesty requite it.

This free and friendly offer forced Euphilus to reply with silence: which
Philocles observing; What, said he do you take this curtsie so strangely, as if
it were not an inherent office of amity, for friends to have dependence one of
an other in cases of necessity? Trust me Euphilus, were you in my case, I
should make bold upon the same terms, to become a sharer with you in
whatsoever fortune with a more bounteous hand had bestowed on you. Neither
shall your desires be foreslowed; for with your Parents leave, my dear
Doriclea, within few days shall our speed be winged homeward, to consummate
that which you and my Sister have so long wished, and from which my aged Father
has not much declined.

Delay, answered the Page, breeds danger; and marriages are the merriest, when
they come together. Pretty Wagge, replied Philocles, but where must we find a
Bride? The least fear of a thousand, answered the Page; no doubt, but if my
Master will find a Bridegroom, and you prove as good as your word, the Page
shall find one to make a Bride. Wherewith, Valeria, who was supposed to be
Euphilus Page, discovered her self to be Philocles Sister: with this excuse,
how it was fancy, with a fear (for so report told her) of a foreign
Intruder: both which, put upon her that disguise, and pressed her to that
adventure: and no immodesty (though too enlarged a love may wear that Livery)
that first put that habit upon her. A general joy was conceived upon this
discovery. For Philocles could not rejoice so much at the sight of his Sister,
as his Sister did in the enjoyment of her Brother: nor Doriclea in this mutual
joy of them both, more then amazed Euphilus in this strange Metamorphosis of
his Page to his Lover. The relation whereof cheered not a little the old
Couple, Androgeus and Euriclea: who provided a new Festival for this
unexpected Nuptial. For, with Phllocles consent, to their incomparable
content, was ^oyall Euphilus married to his loving Sister; being long before
privately affianc'd to her. This occasional Solemnity, made a second days
private Jubilee in the whole family.

For the night, we leave it to the free and lawful embraces of these
affectionate Lovers: w^ admit no light lines to disclose the freedom of Loves
Laws. If Phidias had a Curtain for his Picture; well might these livelylovely
features shroud their delights from the too inquisitive eye of a wanton censure.

CHAP. XXXII.
The occasion of this private Solemnization: and how Mellida, by advice of her
Mistress Doriclea, assuming her name and habit, writ to Mardanes, how she
preferred him in the choice of affection before any other; acquainting him how
in a private disguise to prevent danger and her Parents displeasure, she would
meet him, when and where in a lawful Nuptial way, he might enjoy her.
YOu may imagine there was some occasion of the privacy of this Solemnization:
and you shall hear the cause which induced it.

Happy Doriclea (for now h'as she attained the height of her desires) was not
altogether forgetful of poor Mell^da's distress, in the seazure of her own
happiness Something must be done, or this foolish-en^mour'd Girl is quite
undone. For you may be confident, Mellida could not play well the Bridemaid,
but she must sigh how to be made a Bride. Tears are too sweet a food for
afflction. And none ever felt it in an higher degree then she did; who, rather
then she would be deprived of that aged Object of her grounded love, could
choose with all her heart to surcease to live. But live she must, and enjoy her
love, or her faithful Mistress must fail in her design. Which the better to
prepare Doriclea now possessed of what she affected most, becomes stronger in her
fancy, in regard her conceit was not now to work for her self; for that
love-task was done, but for her perplexed Maid who desired nothing more then to
enjoy what her Mistress had done. And protraction is a forture to affection.
Her aim is to expedite her Maids desire: left too much thought of love should
weaken the effects of love. The Plot then must be thus carried; and thrice
happy M^llida, if not miscarried: for if it prosper, Mardanes must enjoy
Mellida and Mellida those embraces (aged God wot) but to her more pleasing then
the copletest Lover. For never was Woman taken more with the affection of such
a feature: nor ever favored any object more, that presented less f^vour. But
Lovers are blind, or a blind God could not so easily wound them. Mount then
must our amorous Mellida to the height of her affections, and in them to an
unexpected growth of fortunes by her Mistress means, which she accommodates
thus.

Mellida, by the advice of her Mistress Doriclea, by whom she must be
directed, or all her aims are distracted, assuming her name and habit writes
to her endeared Mardanes, whom never before beauty looked upon, much less doted
on; and his reverend age, which now grew hottest in love, when he grew coldest
in blood, she thus encounters.

Mellidas Letter to Mardanes.
SIr, Lines cannot blush; so ^s, modesty admits ^ freedom to our Pen, which
would be taxed immodesty, being delivered by the tongue. I appeal to your
self, (for your privatest thoughts cannot be less then conscious of my love)
if I have not preferred you in the choice of affection before any other:
closing with your desires in all things that might not touch mine honor. But
it is the Evening crow^es the Day confirm then what you have professed; those
vows wherein I stand engaged, shall not be neglected. Should I tell you as
much as I write to you, I could not choose but blush; I love you; and if you
lose no time, may live with you. But Parents I have, and their command must be
obeyed; nor do I find them so well affected toward our loves, what soever
they formerly professed. Sir, I must freely tell you, lose no opportunity if
you hold me an Object worthy of your fancy. To prevent then prying eyes
(affections dangerous spies) let me acquaint you (nor is it to be conceipted
immodesty but strength of fancy that thus directs me) how in a private disguise
to prevent danger and my Parents displeasure (whose constant aim is to bestow
me upon an other) I shall meet you when and where you please in a lawful
N^ptiall way, to accomplish both our desires, and divert those approaching
fears which surprise me, till you may with all freedom enjoy me, by
accompting me your own: which interest I shall preserve with an unstained fame.
Nor do I hold any place both for safet^ and convenience more proper then that
Elm grove adjoining to Solinus Cell. If you approve of this Plot, or desire to
enjoy Doriclea's love, or to prevent a Corrivall in your love, or to crown
both our desires in our happy fruition of the effects of love, bring one along
with you, who may consu^^mate that Rite, which remains in vi^late till death
dissolve it.

yours or not her own, Doriclea.


When Mellida had writ this Letter to her affectionate Lover, by the direction
of her Mistress; whose pleasure it was that her own marriage the day before
should be privately solemnized, that it might not be discovered to Mardanes;
she addressed her self in this manner to her Mistress.

Alas Mistress! But should Mardanes now hear ^it her of your marriage, or
take my Mask off to kiss me before he h'as married me; what would become of
me? And you know, lip-labor cannot want, where true love h'as once warmed the
heart.

Doubt not Wench, said Dor^clea; for my marriage, it was so privately carried,
as excepting our own Family none knows of it: which privacy was only intended
for thy preferment. But if thou have no power over thy self, but thou must
unmask before the watchword be given, I cannot remedy that.

Nay, Mi^^esse, replied Mellida, I would do any thing so I might enjoy him; but
I fear much I cannot hold when I see him, but I must have an hearty desire to
take a taste of him.

Thy virgin-modesty, answered her Mistress, may dispense with that; so thy
indiscreet fancy bring thee not to a discovery. Solinus I have prepared to
second thee; whose approved zeal h'as infinitely engaged me to him. Only then,
let me advise thee, be wise in this carriage of thy love: lef^ thy own folly
bring thee to a loss in the pursuit of him whom thou do love. I am
persuaded, the Plot will take, if it be not spoiled by thy own mistake.

Thus encouraged Doriclea her perplexed Mellida; directing her in every passage
what to do: and advertising her withal, that if she observed but two
particulars, she could not possibly err in this Project: Silence, and
concealing of her countenance. And this Mellida promises to observe: and that
she will not kiss him till she h'as married him: nor unmask, till the Mask be
done; meaning, till the marriage be finished: unless, Mistress, said she, too
much love make me forget, and then I am sure my fame, fancy and fortunes, shall
fare the worse for it.

Thus is a way prepared for Mellida's happiness, as she accounts it: nor is
she ^lower in her care to have this Letter delivered, then she is in her desire
to have her affectionate wishes crowned. A Messenger then, and such an one
whose fidelity promises secrecy, is provided: while every hour seems a year
till she hear such an answer, as may breathe upon her hopes; by affording her
that content which she cannot enjoy in a single state.

Forestall our History we must not; the issue of this Plot shall disclose it
self in this our ensuing and closing discourse: which, as Comic conclusions
suit best with love, where virtue draws the line, makes it the least of our
meaning to set in a Cloud, but to clear all preceding storms with a
cheerful calm.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Plot holds; Mardanes rejoices infinitely at his unexpected happiness;
thanks his Spurcina for her well-spell'd practice; and infeoffes his unknown
B^ide (though much against his will) in his riches.
ZEalous was S^linus of the success of this Device. Neither was he less
serious in effecting, then Doriclea was in contriving, nor Mellida, whom it
concerned most, in expecting. Suppose now Mardanes to have received this
Love-letter: which his four eyes are not content with once reading, nor
revising, but examines every love-line. Every accent must be crowned with a
blessing: every period with a graceful acceptance. In^initely rejoices he at
his unexpected happiness, that he should come to enjoy such a Mistress, whom
both youth and fortunes suited for their Bride, but fell short of their hope.
Many thanks he gives his Spurcina for her wellspell'd practice; and commends
his own pate for attempting such an enterprise.

He holds it not fitting to spin out any needless time for effecting his
Doriclea's desires. He finds too much passion in her lines, to counterfeit
with the disposition of her heart. But there is nothing that makes delay seem
more hateful to him, nor fuller of danger; then that some may become
competitors in his love; and by her Parents choice, leave him in the lurch.
This makes him stir his stumps, and to answer her Letter with such speedy
cheerfulness, as Mellida can expect no less then all success to her
desires, and to her long-languishing hopes assured happiness. Neither was
there any thing which wrought more ple^singly upon his deluded thoughts, then
that witty device (as he conceived it) of suting herself in a disguise to
prevent her Parents aims: which confirmed the love she professed, and ingagd him
to requite her love in that which he esteemed best. And that was his substance;
wherein, like a freehearted Bridegroom, he resolves so amply to infe^ffe her;
as her large Dower might appear a manifest argument of the love he bore her.
But indeed this bounty of his proceeded rather from S^linus advice then his own
disposition: who cunningly told him, that the only way to win her Parents
acceptance after the private consummation of their marriage, was to invest her
in all his estate before their marriage. Which would not only be a means to
reconcile them, but highly to enlarge their bounty toward him. Nothing could
be moved, whereto Mardanes h'as not assented. Neither is it easy to believe
how he begins to burnish his crazy carcass afresh. His crisping and frizling
Irons must be used; his bald head with a ru^ling Periwig furnished; a Pomander
to sweeten his earthy savor prepared; an Orange stuck with Cloves to restore
that breath which was wholly mortified. And to publish to the world, that he
reteines still some color of love, he displayes his light fancy in the
lightest colors of loves livery. But so improperly suited, as his antic habit
proclaims him an unqualified Gallant. Infinitely stands he devoted to his
Glass; and yet me thinks he should not love it for presenting him a face so
near him, which might rather affright him then like him, if he were not too
much besotted on it, for his sake that owes it. For so strongly had those
amorous lines wrought on his conceit, as he verily thought there was something
in him which deserved more love, then either his age could promise, or the
decays of nature perform. Suppose him them with as much speed as his
Snailelike pace may afford him, addressing his course toward the place where
his Doriclea is to meet him, to consummate those Rites which incomparably
transport him. And meet him she will, but not as a Bride, but a Maid to his
Bride: for they have changed their habits, to make the Plot pass for current:
that the Mistress in this mysterious disguise might pass for her Maid, the
Maid for her Mistress. For howsoever, Doriclea was sometimes resolved to
recommend the whole carriage of this Plot to Solinus, who had expressed many
faithful offices betwixt her self and her dearest Philocles; yet being
jealous how Mellida would demean her self in the presence of her Mardanes,
she desired to become an Agent in the project; which no question was better
managed by her presence, then it had been without her assistance.

Love-aged Mardanes omits no time, nor neglects no mean, but provides a Man to
accomplish that Rite which so equally complyes with both their desires. Who, as
they entered the Elme-grove neighboring to Solinus Cell; they might see two
Gentlewomen masked, with one ushering them of grave and reverend aspect. Whom,
upon their approach Mardanes saluted; but no conference was admitted, lest the
Plot might be discovered* Howsoever, great desire had poore-^namour'd Mellida
to bestow a more familiar curtsie on her ancient Bridegroom, but he must not
as yet be admitted that honor, for her Mask without discovery could entertain
no liplabour.

To this private Solemnity they go, wherein Solinus supplied the place of a
Father to Mellida; who was with such observance attended by Doriclea, as no
Maid could be more officious. The Rite thus solemnized, and Mardanes seized of
what (as he conceived) he most affected, and Mellida of what she before all the
World preferred; as the Bridegroom and Bride were lovingly going hand in hand
together. Mardanes might perceive this Inscription newly indorsed on the rind
of an aged Elm, as they were to go forth at the West end of the Grove.

Love is a witty thing, and can devise
A thousand tricks to blind a thousand eyes.
He loves and weds, but weds not where he loves;
She loves and weds, and weds whom she approves.
Many before this time have often assaid
The Maid forth' Mistress, M^^ for the Maid.
If you would know the issue of their love,
Inquire of Cupids Mask in Properly, styled, Pla^ti^^^ Elysian Grove, or
Erycina's Pa phian La^^^.
Venus Grove.
A Match well made, she poor, and he is rich,
But wed't, she is rich, he poor, -- gramercy Witch.
This was engraven the very morning before by Solinus; the perusal whereof did
not a little trouble Mardanes. But no sooner was his Mellida unmasked, then he
needed no Oedipus to expound this Riddle. Then but too late, he finds himself
deluded: but never too late, said Doriclea, to be contented: vert^e must be
made of a necessity; and a poor virtuous Maid may well deserve your fancy. Not
altogether so poor, replied Solinus; for if she be poor, what will become of
Mardanes: who h'as infeoffed her in all his estate, and invested her in all the
means he h'as in the world? Nay, said Mellida, he h'as endowed me with the
personal estate of himself, which I prefer before all the world. And would
you have more, answered Doriclea? Trust me, Mardanes, you shall find more true
love in the Maid, then ever you could have found in her Mistress. The one
could give you an hand, but no heart: whereas the other gives you both hand and
heart. The one was engaged; the other free, and to your love devoted. The one
might live with you, but never love you; the other can both love you, and live
with you. Never then in my opinion did any Witch a better part, then in
bestowing an old fortune on a young heart. A spirit that can dispose it, and
not scatter it: as your care was to provide and gather it. The Bridegroom
stood as mute as a Fish all this time: till at last the Brazen-head spoke,
saying; What must be, must be. But he vowed i^ ever it were his fortune again
to match, he would never buy a Pig in a poak, nor wed a Wench in a Mask. But
those that were there, thought he might save that labor, for by course of
Nature he had married his executor.

After they had accompanied them home; broke the Bride-cake, and brought the
unweldy Bridegroom to his bed; wishing the Bride good rest (being all she
could possibly expect) and advising her to take a good life of that she had, to
keep an hank of that she held, and to supply the want of youth with the wealth
of age; they departed thence; while Doriclea with many thanks commended
Solinus to his Cell; near which her dearest Philocles with his constant
Euphilus purposely retired to bring her home: who upon relation of these
unexpected news to her Parents and Family, rejoiced highly.

Within some few Months, after an heavy leave and hearty blessing, these two
married Couples returned into their Country; where they were received with
great joy by the Gentry, who admired much the relation of their amity: and
whose constancy to this day, reteines testimonies of their living memory.

To close then our History, whose groundcolour is truth, and consequently
deserves to be entertained with more trust: as virtue plays her Master-prize
in every noble enterprise; so by her Princely presence and timely attendance,
these lived together lovingly, loved neighbourly, and rejoiced mutually: which
happy Period is wished to all faithful Lovers by the Compiler of this History.

(...) FINIS.
Courteous Reader, let it be an argument of thy Candor, to do the Author so much
favor, to correct these Errors escaped in some Copies.

Page 128 line 8. for firce, read fierce. p. 139 1. 5. for faith, r. fate. ib.
1. 6. for fate, r. faith. p. ib. 1* 28. for extasied, r. extased.


