The Poor man's Ievvel, that is to say, a Treatise of the Pestilence. Unto the
which is annexed a declaration of the virtues of the herbs Carduus Benedictus,
and Angelica: which are very medicinable, both against the Plague, and also
against many other diseases.

Gathered out of the Books of diverse learned Physicians.

Imprinted at London for George Bishop. ANNO. 1578.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Thomas Ramsey, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, Thomas Brasbrige wishes continual and godly prosperity.
RIght Honorable, as you being the Head, and governor of the City, are
careful, and paineful, for the preservation of the health, and wealth thereof: so
if every member, and inhabitant be ready to do that he may, and ought to do:
^our care, and pain, may take the bet^^r effect. For the head deuiseth, and
provides for all the body: but the hands, ^eete, mouth, stomach, and other
parts serve it, as God has ordained: by which means it continues in lively
estate, so long as God has appointed. So I being one of the least members of
the City, have taken pains to pen a short treatise of the Pestilence:
wherewith it is oftentimes annoyed: being persuaded, that if it be generallye
received, it may do much good, for the preservation of the Citizens, and
other inhabitauntes, from the danger of this disease. Therefore, I have
thought good to present it to your Honor: not doubting, but as your office
moves you to be careful, and you are careful according to your office: so
you will have care to publish this little Book, so far forth, as you shall
understand by your own judgment, and by the advice of other, both wise, and
learned, that it may profit the City: unto the which, and unto the whole
Realm, I wish continual health, and godly quietness: and unto your Honor,
perpetual and true felicity.

To the Reader.
FOr as much as the famous City of London, (where I am an inhabitant,) is
eftsoons infected with the dangerous disease, called the Pestilence, to the
hindraunce as well of them that are clear, as also of them that have the
sickness in their houses: I (understanding that the herbs Carduus
Benedictus, and Angelica, are preservatives, and medicines for this, and many
other diseases,) have thought good to gather out of the writings of learned
Phisicians, a treatise of the Pestilence, annexing thereunto the virtues of the
said herbs, to the use and commodity of Londoners, and al men elsewhere,
that shall have need of the^. The use of the herb, and the like treatise has
been set forth before time (I grant) both (...) Latin and English: but in
diverse books, ^^^arately the one from the other: The one in ^^arbals,
containing besides, the properties of many other herbs: the other most
commonly in books containing medicines for a great number of diseases: and
therefore more costly, than that every man could buy them. But I have joined
the virtues of these herbs with the treatise of the Pestilence, without the
addition of any further matter: and have set the^ forth more perfectly than
ever they were before in any one book, and that in a few leaves of Paper, not
heavy to be carried, nor long to be read, nor dear to be bought. For besides
the properties of many herbs, and medicines for a great number of diseases,
even in this treatise of the Pestilence, I leave out many preservatives, and
medicines too costly for them that are of small ability: having respect to the
poor: who as they can not have the counsel of the learned Physician, at al
times, when they need: so are they not able to take those things which commonly
are by him, in words, or writing prescribed. Therefore (gentle Reader,)
whether thou be rich or poor, take this my labor in good part, and use it to
thy co^meditie, with thanksgiving to God, as the Author of all things that
are healthful, both to the body, and to the soul.

T. B.

A Treatise of the Pestilence.
The first Chapter shows the first cause of the disease.
Entreating of the disease called the Plague or Pestilence, I mind not to be
over long, or curious, as they that write exquisitely and perfectly of the
matter: only I will set down a few things, necessary, and sufficient for the
commodity, and profit of them, which in this cause shall have need of help.

First therefore I will show the causes of the disease: and secondly,
preservatives whereby a man may be kept from the sickness: thirdly, the
tokens, whereby he that is diseased may gather, and understand, whether he be
infected with the plague or no: fourthly, and last of al, I will set down
some remedies and medicines to cure the diseases. Some Physicians recite four
principal causes of the Pestilence. The first pertayneth to Divinity, the
second to Astronomy, the third and fourth to Physic. As touching that which
pertaynes to divinity, our sin and wickedness, (the principal cause of al
our misery and calamity,) is one cause of this disease. As may apeare by the
words of Moses unto the Israelites: who among many other curses, and
punishments for sin, Deuteronomy. 28. 15.
recites the Pestilence as one, saying: If thou will not obey the voice of
the Lord the God, to keep, and to do all his commandments and his
ordinances, which I command thee this day: then all these curses shall come
upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in
the field, etc. The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee, until he
have consumed thee, from the land which thou go to possess. 2. Sam. 24. 15.
Moreover, we read that seventy thousand of the Israelites died of this
disease, 2. Chro. ^1. 14.
for the sin of David their King. I think no man will deny, but yt hereby it
is evident that sin is a cause of the Pestilence even among us. For
whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning: and the
punishment of the Israelites, 1. Cor. 10. 6.
is an example to us, that we should avoid sin, lest their plagues fall upon
us. For their God is our God, and he hates sin in us, as he did in them, and
there fore punishes it in us, as he did in them. Therefore I say sin is a
principal cause of the Pestilence: whereby God punishes not so much those,
whom he takes thereby out of this life: as those that remain alive. For they
that live, feel the smarte of the plague, when as the other, many of them,
dye Gods servants, and for this transitory life, enjoy that, which never shall
end. If our own experience do not teach us this, we may perceive it by the
foresaid punishment of King David, to whom it had not been so grievous to have
dyed himself, as to leese his subjects, in the multitude whereof, he through
a worldly wisdom trusted more than in the almightye power of God. Therefore
God diminished the number of them by the Pestilence: to teach him, and all
other Princes, not to put their trust in ye multitude of men, (because it is
his own work to preserve the state of Realms, and to give victory in
battle:) and also to teach us, and all men, that sin is a cause of the
plague, as well as of other calamities yt happen unto men. Although this cause be
supernatural, (as some term it,) and not properly pertaining to Physic:
yet those Physicians are not to be misliked, which in reciting ye causes of
this sickness, note this in the first place, as the root of the residue,
upon the which the other do depend, and consequently do follow: the which
being expelled, the other shall not be perceived to our hurt, but shall
vanishe even as the smoke, when the fire is taken away. Therefore these
Physicians are like unto good and faithful Chirurgians, which seek the
bottom of the wound, and heal it thoroughly. But they that prescribe
preservatives only against the third and fourth cause of the plague, are like
unto unskillful Chirurgians that heal the wound without, and leave
corruption in the flesh, which shortly after breaks out to further
inconvenience. For they that are preserved from the Pestilence, or are healed
of it, may be sure, if the corruption of sin remain within them, that a
greater plague will follow. For God sends this, and diverse other calamities,
for the punishment of sin: as our savior signifies, saying to the man that
he had healed: Behold, John. 5. ^4.
thou art made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee.
Howbeit, I grant that we may learn by the word of God, that he se^deth
sickness, trouble, and misery often times to good men, not for sin only,
but for diverse other causes: yet this, that I have said, remains most true,
that Sin is one, and the principal cause of the Pestilence.

The second Chapter shows the second cause of the Pestilence.
THe second cause is given by Astronomers, and is called an evil
constellation: which they know by the placing of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
in the firmament, or circles of Heaven, and by their conjunctions, oppositions,
and other aspectes of the one to the other. Of this cause I do not think it
needful here to speak, especially in such manner as the Astronomers do, who
by their Ethnicall phrases, and kinds of speech in their Alminackes and
Prognostications, do seem to favor or foster the Idolatry of the Heathen: who
worshipped those celestial creatures as Gods. For they speak of them, either
as of Gods, or (at the least) as of living Princes, endued with reason, and
being in great power, and authority. Moreover, whereas they write their
Prognostications to the use of the unlearned, I know not to what purpose they
set down the motions of the planets, with their terms of Art, only known to
themselves. If the Art be profitable for Physic, let them keep it to
themselves, and use it in their practices: if it be profitable for husbandry,
let them write that only which is according to the capacity of husbandmen:
Which being done, I think husbandmen shall have little use of their writings.

For although husbandry did (perhaps) first proceed of the knowledge of
Astronomy, as diverse other trades necessary for the life of man, have their
beginning of Geometry, and natural Philosophy, yet I think husbandmen, and men
of other faculties, which are altogether ignorant in these Arts, are more
skillful and wise, through their daily practice, in the use thereof, than they
themselves that are professors of the Arts. Thus much by the way, by occasion
of the second cause of the Pestilence.

The third Chapter shows the third cause of the Pestilence.
THe third cause, (which more properly belongs to Physic, (is the
corruption of the air: which being corrupted, is apt to infect man's body.
For every man that lives, draws the breath which we have, of the air round
about us. If it be stinking, venomous, and corrupt, the body of man yt is near
to it, is in danger of corruption, whereof often times is ingendered the
Pestilence. The air is corrupt, either generally in diverse Cities, or
Countries: or particularly, in some one place.

Generally (as Astronomers write) by an evil constellation, or by ye filthy
matter of a Comete, caused by ye constellation: Particularly, in a few houses,
or streets, through the stinche of channels, of filthy dung, of carrion, of
standing pudles, and stinking waters, of seeges, or stinking priuies: of
sheding of man's blood, and of dead bodies, not deeply buried, (which
happens among Soldiers:) of common pissing places, and such like. Finally a
great company dwelling or lying in a small room, (especially if those rooms be
not very clenly kept, and perfumed,) do inge^der a corrupt air, apt to infect
those that are in it: which infected persons and their infectious clothes, may
infect a whole City, and the City may infect the country that resorteth unto
it, or unto the which the inhabitants thereof do resort. For a venomous air
is like unto fire, which burns that is nighe unto it: if the matter be apt
to take fire. Whereby it comes to pass sometimes, that as a little spark
consumes a whole Town: so one house or street, infecteth the whole City and
Country round about it: the persons I mean of the City and Country, that
come within the compass of the infectious air: if their bodies be apt to be
infected. I speak of the ordinary vvorking of God, which I would alvvaies
have so to be understood, that it is nothing prejudicial to his miraculous
operation.
I say a venomous air infecteth not all, but those only, whose bodies are apt
to be infected. For if the air were of power to infect all that come within
the compass of it, then in a general corruption of ye air, none should
escape infection, which comes not to pass. For, as fire burns, but not
Iron and stone, as it does straw, cole, and wood: so a corrupt air has
power to infect, but those bodies only, that are apt to receive the venomous
operation thereof. Therefore, unless unto this third cause of the Pestilence,
the fourth be added, it is of no force.

The fourth Chapter shows the fourth cause of the Pestilence.
THE fourth cause is the aptness of man's body, through evil humors to receive
ye effect of a venomous air, putrefying and corrupting the body: whereof the
disease is ingendered. The body is made apt to be infected by the abuse of
things not natural, (as Physicians term them,) that is to say, by taking of
meat and drink out of measure, specially by feeding of many dishes at one
meal, or by toomuch lack of good nourishing meat, by too much sleep, or
watching, by too much labor or ease: Finally, by too much anger, grief of
mind, and fear of the disease. As all these things are dangerous: so the
last is sufficient of it self to infect the body, and consequently to bring
death, as I have heard it declared by diverse examples.

Hitherto, I have showed of what things chiefly the Plague does proceed, to
the end, that every man may the better escape it, from the which there is no
better preservative, than to avoid the causes.

For, as it is an old saying, so every man may easily perceive it to be
true: Sublata causa, t^llitur effectus, when the cause is removed, the effect
follows not. If the cause of war be taken away, we shall have peace: so
if we avoid the cause of sickness, we shall have health. If fire be not
laid to the woodde, it cannot burn: so, if there be nothing that brings or
causes the Plague, we cannot be infected. Therefore it serves our turn very
much, to know the causes thereof.

For it is a very true saying, Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, he is
happy that can understand the causes of things. By understanding the causes
of good things, we may the more easilye obtain that which is profitable for
us: and by understanding the causes of evil things, we may the more easily
avoid that which is hurtefull unto us.

Therefore I have set down the causes of the Plague. Now, it follows, that
I write of the preservatives, whereby a man may be kept from this disease.

The fifth Chapter, wherein is mentioned a preservative against the first cause
of the Pestilence.
IN this part we must have an eye to the causes. For except the preservatives
be of force, and also contrary, or (as I may say) enemies to the causes: they
cannot prevail against them. For preservatives are to the causes of diseases,
as watchmen are to thieves. If the watchmen be strong enough, and also have a
mind to resist the thieves, they will keep the house from robbing: but if
they lack of strength, or if they consent unto the robbers, and let the^ have
their purpose: they rather do harm than good to him yt appointed them to
watch. So the preservatives must be such, as are contrary to the causes of
diseases, and able to resist them, or else they can not keep a man from
sickness. The first cause of the plague is Sin. Therefore it is requisite if
possibly it might be, that we did in all points abstain from it. But forasmuch
as the corruption of our flesh is such, that we sin often times, and there
is no man living, that without Pharisaicall, Papisticall, and Fantastical
arrogancy can say, he is void of wickedness: it remains, that with all
speed, before the ripeness of our sin stir up Gods wrath against us to
plague us: it remains (I say) that we purge, and cleanse our selves from all
sin and wickedness. Sins are either Public or Private. Public
offenses, or (to speak more properly,) offenses that are committed by a
multitude openly, so that they are manifest to the eyes of al men, must be
purged by Public authority: and Private, or secret offenses, every private
man must seek to purge of hymselfe^ Although I know, that of the two,
public offenses are more dangerous, as the which are cause of war, famine,
and pestilence, of captivity, of the spoil of men's goods, of destruction of
the people, and of the subversion of kingdoms. Yet, forasmuch as it
pertains not to my purpose, in this treatise, to speak of these offenses, I
let them pass. For as in many things perteining to Physic, I refer the
richer sort to the counsel of the learned Physicians: so in this matter, I
refer them that are in authority, to the sermons, and writings of the learned
divines. But as it does little good to cut off the tops of weeds in a
garden, and not to dig up the root, because most commonly they will come up
thicker than they did before: so it is almost a labor in vain, to show
means how to purge the wickedness of private me^, unless public offenses be
first cured. For as from the root comes nourishment to herbs both good and
badde, whereby they grow and flourishe: so by public offenses, the
wickedness of private men is increased, and maintained, or (at the least) so
hid and covered, that it cannot be perceived. These offenses, which I call
public, do annoye the whole body, not without some grief of the principal
members of the common weal: which being uncured, I persuade my self, that the
operation of my poor medicines, prescribed unto the inferior parts, will be
very small. Therefore, I wish all them that are in authority, to ask
counsel of God, who speaks unto us in his word. If they be not students of
Divinity, and therefore mistrust their own judgment, let them resort to
Sermons, and to the writings of the learned Divines. Let the^ ask of them
whether these daily customs of running to plays, and enterludes, and to
bearebaitings, as well upon the Sabbath day, ordained for the service of God,
as upon other days, appointed for me^ to work: whether daily haunting of
Tauerns, and Alehouses, both early in the morning, and in the after noone,
whereof proceeds drunkenness, the cause of much mischeef: whether common
dicing, and other idle and hurtful pastimes: whither resorting to harlots
company: do displease God, and provoke him to plague us, or no?

Let them ask of them, whether that plays upon the Sundays be godly
exercises, fit for the sanctification of the Saboth day or no: unto the
which, light persons for the most part resort: where (through light
communication of one with another,) occasion is ministered of further
inconvenience: which is not so secret, nor so small, but that honest me^ do
both perceive it, and speak of it. Finally, let the Magistrates ask of the
godly Preachers, whether they that resort daily to Bearebaitings, are not
as well worthy to be whipped out of a Common weal, as those vagarant persons,
which will not work, and yet seek to live upon other men's labors. For if
search were made, it would be found, that no small number of them that haunte
the Bear gardens, are not of any great wealth, and yet they spend their
money, and leese their time, which should rather be bestowed in laboring
for the maintenance of themselves, and their family. But (as I said)
referring them that are in authority, to the counsel of the learned Divines,
for the redress of these and such like matters, I let them pass, and will
speak of private wickedness.

The sixte Chapter shows briefly, how private wickedness may be purged.
HAd I not said, that I mind not to be over long or curious, some would look
here, that I should set down all kind of private or secret offenses. For in
Physic, they that are learned in the Art, do first show the disease, what it
is, and after the preservatives, and medicines for the same. The like order in
other Arts is commendable. But if I follow it, I shall make a large volume
contrary to my promise. Therefore, as in other places, I omit many things:
so in this, I will refer the godly Reader to the writings of the Evangelists,
Prophets, and Apostles, and to the sermons of learned men, and will only set
down that which is written in Ecclesiasticus, Eccles. 38. 9.
in the which book Jesus the son of Sirach has these words: My son,
fail not in thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee
whole: Leave off from sin, and order thine hands aright, and cleanse thy
heart from all wickedness.

Here the wise man teaches us two things, which are medicines in time of
the Pestilence and preservatives before it comes, that is to say, Prayer,
and Repentance. Repentance, (which chiefly consists in forsaking of
wickedness and amendment of life,) must go before: them our Prayer that
follows, shall be acceptable unto GOD.

For his eyes are upon the righteous, Psalm. 34. ^5*
and his ears are open unto their prayers: 1. Pet. 3. 12.
but sinners he will not hear. Psalm. 66. 18.
Although all men are sinners, Esai. 55. 7.
yet when we repent, GOD puts away our sin, and we are accounted as
righteous in his sight. In this case, if we pray unto him, he will grant us
those things that are convenient for us. What are the parts of Repentance,
how we ought to pray, and other circumstances belonging to these things, the
ignorant reader has to learn, as is aforesaid.

This may be sufficient in this short treatise, for the preservatives against
the first cause of the Pestilence.

The seventh Chapter shows the preservatives against the second cause of the
Pestilence.
THe second is linked to the first, and last causes, as the effect of the one,
and cause of the other. For the evil constellation causes an infectious air,
and an aptness of man's body to receive the effect thereof, which
constellation is not so much evil of it self, as per Accidens, because we
are sinners. But if the Astronomers dare say, that the Stars, or the motion
of them, (created of GOD from the beginning,) which makes the constellation,
is evil of it self, (the truth thereof I refer to the Divines to dyscusse:)
yet I dare say, that the operation thereof, could have no force to the hurt
of man, if we were his faithful servants, and did continuallye walk in his
commandments. For unto the children of GOD it is said: Fear not the signs
of Heaven. Iere. 10. 1.
So little cause have they to fear the signs of Heaven, that for their sakes
GOD alters the course of the stars, Iosu. 10. 1^.
which he himself created. Ecclesi. 46. 4.
For the commodity of the Israelites, 2. King. 20. 11.
he stayed the course of the Sun, Esaias 38. 8.
so that one day was as long as two. The wonderful miracle, vvroughte for a
sign of health unto Hezechias, was noted at the same time (as may be thought)
of the Astronomers at Babylon, a thousand miles from Jerusalem, (...) dvvelled,
and therefore the King of Babylon (...).
For Ezechias sake he brought the Sun ten degrees back. In that text where
this is written, if a degree be taken as Astronomers take it, and as I do take
it, for the thirtith part of a sign in the firmament, it may be thought, that
that month was ten days longer than other months are. If it were so, it is
no more wonderful tha^ other miracles, which God has wrought for his children.

For where as the Egyptians were plagued with ten grievous plagues, 2. Chro.
32. 31.
the Israelites, Exodus 7. 8. 9. 10. 12. and. 14.
Gods chosen people, which dwelled hard by them, were not touched therewith.
And for their sakes he made the bitter waters sweet, Exodus 15. 16. and 17.
and gave them drink out of a rock, and food from heaven. Joshua. 3. 16.
For their sakes, he made the waters of the river Jordan go back: yea, and the
waters of the great sea. He made the sea dry ground, Exodus 14. 21.
so that his people went safely through the midst thereof. For their sakes he
sent hailestones from heaven, Joshua 10. 1^.
and slew their enymies. For the three young men's sakes, that would not bow
down to the Image that the idolatrous king had commanded to be worshipped,
God turned the heat of the fire from them, upon their enemies, that put them
into the hot burning oven. Dan. 3. 25.
For Daniels sake, who would not worship the idol Bell, nor the Dragon: God
stopped seven Lions mouths, into whose den he was put: which Lio^s, though
they were kept without meal seven days, yet they never opened their mouth
against Daniel: in the mean time, God provided sustenaunce for him. These and
many other like wonderful works of Almighty God, are written for our
learning, that we worshipping him aright, might have confidence in him without
fear, what so ever the signs of the heavens do threaten against us.

For if God, for the commoditye of his children, after the course of the
stars, and of the waters: if for their commodity, he quench the heat of the
fire, and stay the rage of the fierce and hungry Lions, if he wonderfullye
preserve them from plagues, and slaye their enemies: we may be sure, if we
forsake our wickedness, and keep his laws, the operation of the stars
shall have no force to hurt us. Therefore it follows, that the same
preservatives, which serve against the first cause of the Pestilence, that is
to say Repentance, and Prayer, are very good, and auailable against an evil
constellation: the which being well used, the other that are to be taken
against the third, and fourth causes, will take the better effect.

This that I have said, the Astronomers will not deny. And if they give any
other preservative against the second cause, than this which I have set
down, I think it superfluous and vain: as I do all the publishing of their
practices Astronomical, over and above that, which it teaches us, to discern
one time of the year from another, and to direct men from place to place, from
sea to sea, from land to land, and from country to country. Some reason of my
opinion I have already given: unto the which I add, that in diverse points,
it draws men's minds from depending upon Gods providence, and moves them to
direct their actions by the motions of the Stars. Therefore I do not think
their Art necessary, or profitable in a Christian common weal, further than
is aforesaid. I think rather, that the burning of their books would be as
acceptable a sacrifice to GOD, Acts. 19. 1^.
as that of the Ephesians: whose books of curious Arts consumed with fire,
were valued at fiftye thousand pieces of silver. For their Art is unlawful,
and forbidden by GOD his law, in these words following. If a man, or woman,
have a spirit of divination, Leuit. 20. 27.
or southsaying in them, they shall dye the death, they shall stone them to
death, their blood shall be upon them.

Let none of them be found among you, (...). 18. 20.
that makes his son, or his daughter go through the fire, or that uses
witchcrafte, or is a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of fowls, or
a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counsels with spirits, or a southsayer or
yt asks counsel at the dead.

If they say that no clause, in these sentences, makes against their Art, (I
mean divination, or judicial Astronomy,) I doubt not, but that the Hebrew
Grammarians will easily prove the contrary, by y^ signification of the Hebrew
words, out of the which language, these laws of God are translated. If this
question did pertain to my purpose, I would stand longer upon it: but I let
it pass, and will return to my preservatives.

The eighth Chapter shows the preservatives against the third cause of the
Pestilence.
THe third cause was said to be the corruption of the air. The preservative
is, to avoid, as much as may be, those things aforesaid, that cause
corruption. In the which, good heed must be taken of clothes, and also of
dogs, and cattes, that haunt infected places. Sir Thomas Eliot, in his castle
of health, says, It has been seen, that infected stuff lying in a coser
fast shut for the space of two years, and then being opened, has infected
those that stood nigh it, who soon after died. And he that wills to kill all the dogs, (unless they be tied up,) in time of infection, gives not the worst
counsel. Not many years since, I knew a Glouer in Oxforde, who with his
family, to the number of ten or eleven persons, died of the Plague: which was
said to be brought into the house by a dog skin that his wife bought, when
the disease was in the City. It is good therefore, when it is in any house,
well to air in the Sun, or at the fire, the clothes that the infected
persons do wear, that they lie in, or that are near unto them. For the fire
is a good purger of evil air: it is of force to draw the venom thereof unto
it, and to consume it. So that if the fire be between a man, and the infected
person, or place, it takes away the force of the evil air.

Therefore the counsel of Physicians is, to make a fire at all times,
especially in the morning, and evening, in the houses, and also without in the
streets, where the disease reigns. It is written that ye famous Physician
Hippocrates, was a mean to preserve the city, and country of Athens, from
the danger of the Pestilence, by making great fires in the streets, and all
about the town by night: at which time (because of the absence of the
Sun,) the air was most contagious: whereby the inhabitants were delivered
from certain death, which they were persuaded should have come among them. I
say not as some ignorantly do* nor as the Atheniens (which knew not GOD)
thought: that Hippocrates preserved the City: but that he was a mean to
preserve it, by ye ordinance of God: who as many times miraculously, so for
the most part, works by ordinary means: who has given to herbs, and other
his creatures, virtue to expel diseases: and also has given unto men
knowledge and understanding thereof: which he uses as his instruments,
wherewith he works, when, and upon whom, it pleases him.

This I write by the way, that when the virtues of herbs, and other Gods
creatures are mentioned, we depend chiefly upon his providence, and always
with the eyes of our faith look upon him, as the chief worker of al good
things, without whom nothing can take effect to our commodity. With this
mind we may be bold to seek to the Physician, and to use such things as
God has created for our health. Contrariwise, if a man refuse them in time of
necessity, when the Physician is ready to minister them after this sort: I
take him to be a tempter of God, or as one accessarie to his own death. After
this sort I counsel al men against the third cause of the pestilence, to use
the fire, unto the which it is good to add perfumes of Juniper, Intense, and
such like: and as the time of the year serves, green boughs, sweet flowers,
and herbs, are to be set and strewed in the houses, and streets: as well
where the disease reigns not, as in places infected.

Finally, it is good to hold in the mouth and to bite of the Orange peele, or
of the root of the herb called Angelica. Here note by the way, that where I
say, or signify that persons, or places infected must be avoided: I counsel
not any man whose vocation requires, or the necessity of the diseased, or
charity binds to be present with the infected: I counsel them not (I say)
to absent themselves from them: but rather to prefer the commandment of God
before their own safegarde, using such things as GOD has ordained for the
preservation of man's health. For in so doing their life shall be nothing the
shorter.

The ninth Chapter speaks of the preservatives against the fourth cause of
the Plague.
I Said ye fourth cause of this disease is, the aptness of man's body to
receive the effect of a corrupt air: for preservation whereof, those things
aforesaid must be avoided, which engender evil humors, or otherwise make the
body unable to expel evil air.

The first of these, is the taking of meat, and drink out of measure, and
too much lack of it. Of the former the rich are in danger: by the latter the
poor are pinched. But the rich can find means by purgations to expel the
superfluity of evil humors: which in time of necessity is very requisite.
Howbeit it is a common saying, that many purgations, and other such
euacuations, do weaken the body, diminish the natural moisture that
prolongeth life, and therefore hasten death.

For avoiding of the which inconvenience, I would show them a better remedy,
if they could learn it: and that is this: That they diminishe some part of
their excess, and give it to their honest neighbors that can not work: and
also to them that labor, whose charge is such, that they are not able to
maintayn their family.

This is more healthful for themselves, better for a Common weal, and more
acceptable to GOD. Further of this matter I need not to write: For the meaner
sort, that labor truly in that trade, which God has appointed them, have
not much to fear the corruption of their bodies: who must eat, and drink:
sleep, and watch: labor, and rest, as they may: and take such medicines as
they are able. I know that against this cause, and the former, the learned
Physicians prescribe many preservatives, curious, and costly: as choice of
meats, and drinks, perfumes, savors, things to be eaten, and drunk: things
to wash the teethe, hands, face, and head: letting of blood, purgations by
pouders, pills, and electuaries, and such like. They that are able, and
wylling to take these things, (if they have not a Physician at hand,) may
understand them by the books of these learned me^, that have already written
of this matter: namely, sir Thomas Eliot, D. Fair, and diverse other.

Therefore commending unto the reader, for this purpose, only the herb
Carduus Benedictus (the virtues whereof are hereafter set down,) I make an
end of this part of my treatise.

The tenth Chapter shows the tokens, whereby a sick man may understand,
whether he be infected with the Plague, or no.
IN ye next part is to be declared, what are ye tokens, which show that a man
is infected with the Plague. First, for the most part, there appears about
the ear or neck, or under the arm holes, or about ye flank of the infected
person, an Aposthume, or swelling, with a Fever, or Ague: or in some other part
of the body, a green, black, or evil colored sore. This (I say) appears
for the most part, but not always. Therefore, for the more certainty, the other
tokens following must be considered. An other token is, a great pricking and
shooting in the body, especially in those foresaid places, the neck,
armeholes, and flanks. The third is an outrageous heat within the body, as
if a man were in the fire: and yet oftentimes ye outward parts are so cold,
that it makes a man to shake, as if he were in a Fever. This inward heat is
joined with much heaviness of ye head: dryness of the mouth, and extreme
thirst. Whereupon, in some follows a marvelous desire to leepe, so that they
can not be kept waking: othersome can not sleep, but are out of quiet, and
rave as though they were fallen into a Phrensy, or are like them that dote.
Other signs are, hardness to draw the breathe, or much labor to take
wind: which in some is so straight, that they can scarce speak. Also the
breath stinking: great pain of the head: faintness, sluggishnesse, weakness
of the lims: the body very heavy, and dull: the sweat stinking: the pulsies
beating thick, small, and deep: anguishe, and pensiveness of mind: psain in
ye mouth, of ye stomach: no apetite to meat: often vomitting, the vomit being
bitter and of diverse colors: bitterness, and blackness, or yellowness, and
dryness of the tongue: the urine much like unto beasts stale, troubled,
thick, and stinking, or at the first like clean water, then blackishe, and
at the last troubled, and for the most part, without any residence: changing
of sight, so that there comes sometimes to the patientes eyes, as it were a
yellow color, and sometimes all that be beholds he thinks to be green:
pain of the mouth or an vnaturall taste, bitter, sower, or stinking. These are
the principal signs of infection: and yet not certain tokens of the Plague.
For it may be sometimes in a man without any of them: and also some of these
tokens are in many, that are not infected with this disease. Here it is not
impertinent to note, that where ye Plague reigns, there are scarsly any other
diseases besides, or if there be, they will shortly after be turned into it.
This is the opinion of learned Physicians, and seems to agree with reason.
For if evil humors, make a man apt to receive infection: it is no marvel that
they which are diseased (because their sickness proceeds of corruption in
the body,) be infected with the Pestilence, if they come within the compass
of the venomous air. Therefore D. Fair in his treatise of the Pestilence,
says for a certainty: What child so ever is vexed with the worms in time
of the Plague, is infected with it. For it is a matter (says he) so disposed
to the Pestilence, as Brimstone is to be kindled of the fire. This may suffice:
as touching the signs and tokens of the disease.

The eleauenth Chapter speaks of the cure of the Pestilence, and shows the
virtues of Carduus Benedictus.
LIke as for preservatives, so for the cure of this disease, mani things are
prescribed of Physicians: as choice of meats, perfumes, letting of blood,
cupping, vomiting, electuaries, pills, potions, pouders and plasters: al
which, (as over costly) I omit: which, they that are disposed, may understand
in other men's writings. I mind only to set down the virtues of two herbs,
vz. Carduus Benedictus, and Angelica: which being known, as they may help
against many infirmities, so they are much commended, both as preservatives,
and medicines against this disease. Howbeit, it seems they were known but of
late years. For Doctor Turner writes of them, among those whereof there is no
mention made of Dioscorides, Galene, Pliny, and other old Authors. Also that
which he writes expressly of Carduus Benedictus, does signify the same.
Although (says he) diverse of the later writers, have gone about to make
Carduus Benedictus, a kind of Atractilis: yet for all that, the description is
found not perfectly to agree unto it. It is written that it was set out of
India, Of this name there were five Emperors, the first of them began his
reign within these*430. years that was above. ^100. years after the
creation of the world.
unto the Emperor Frederick, as a precious medicine against many diseases,
and griefs. It is called in English most commonly, Cardo Benedictus: and in
Italian, Herba Turcha. Thus he writes of the Herb, and after shows the
virtues thereof out of the later writers.

The virtues of Carduus Benedictus, that is to say in English, The blessed
Thistle: which for the operation and great efficacy, that GOD has given unto
it, may well be so called: the properties whereof are diligently gathered out of
D. Turners Herball, and other vvriters, and partly proved by the Gatherer.
First it helps the head and the parts thereof.
THe herb eaten, or the Powder or juice of the herb drunk keeps a man
from the head ach, and migram, and also dryueth it away, when it is gotten.
Being taken in meat or drink, it is good against disinesse, and the swimming
giddiness of the head: it comfort the brain, sharpeneth the wit,
strengthens memory, it is a singular remedy against deafness: for it
amendeth thick hearing. It provoke sleep. The juice of it laid unto the
eyes, quickens the sight: Also the water in the which the powder, or herb
dried is steeped, has the same effect, if the eyes be washed therewith. The
herb eaten, is good for the same purpose. The water or juice dropped into the
eyes, cures the reddenesse, bloudshotten, and itching of them.

And some write, that it does strengthen the teeth, they being washed and
rubbed with a cloth dipped in the water or juice thereof. The powder stauncheth
blood, that flows out of the nose, being applied to the place.

Secondly, it helps the stomach.
THe brothe of the herb, otherwise called the decoction, drunk in wine, is
good for an evil stomach it helps a weak stomach, and causes an appetite
to meat. Also the wine wherein it has bin boiled, does cleanse, and mundifie
the infected stomach. The powder thereof eaten with Honey, or drunk in wine,
does ripe, and digest cold phlegm, purges, and brings up that which is in
the breast, scouring the same of gross humors, and causes to fetch breath
more easily. The herb chewed in the mouth, heals the stinche of the breath.

Thirdly, it helps the heart.
THe powder being taken before a man be infected, preserves him from ye
Pestilence. And a dram of it, or a Walnutte shell full, taken immediately after
a man feels himself infected, expels the venom of the pestilent
infection from the heart: so that if a man sweat afterward, he shall be
delivered incontinent. The same effect has the herb, boiled in wine, or in the
urine of a healthful man child, and drunk. I mean the decoction, or licour,
from the which the herb is strained, after that it has bin boiled therein.

The leaves, powder, juice, or water of the herb drunk, and the patient well
covered with clothes, and sweting three hours, expels all poison taken in
at the mouth, and other corruption, that does hurt and annoy the heart.

Finally, it helps the Liver, Lungs, and other parts of the body.
THe herb boiled in wine, and dru^k hot about a quarter of an hour before
the fit, and the patient afterward well covered in the bed, drives away al
agues. The powder and water of the herb drunk with wine, has the same effect.
The juice drunk with wine, is good against short wind, and the diseases of
the Lungs. Also it is good against ye ach of ye body: it strengthens the
members of ye whole body. The herb boiled in ye urine of a helthful manchild,
and drunk, does help against the Dropsy: breaks all Aposthumes: maistereth
the falling sickness. The powder eaten or drunk, helps against the
stitches in the side. It is also good for them, that begin to have the
Consumption, called the Ptisicke. The herb eaten, does strengthen the
trembling and palsy members. The powder ministered in a Clister, helps against
the Colic, Colicke.
and other diseases of ye guts. The water drunk, has the same effect. The
juice drunk with wine, or the herb boiled in wine, and drunk hot, breaks
the stone, and drives out gravel: being sodden in water, and the patient
sitting over it, so that the hot vapoure may come unto the diseased place, it
helps against the same infirmity. After the same manner being used, it is
good against the green sickness. Also it heals the griping pains of the
belly: it opens the stopping of the members, pearceth and causes urine. The
leaves boiled in wine, and drunk as is aforesaid, provoke sweat: consume the
evil blood, and engender the good. Also the wine or water, in the which the
herb is boiled, being drunk, consumes the evil humors, and preserves the
good. It is good for one that is bruised with a fall, or otherwise. The leaves,
juice, broth, powder, and water of the herb, is very good to heal the canker,
and old rotten festered sores. The leaves bruised, or punnd, and laid to, are
good against burnings, hot swellings, carbuncles, and sores that be hard to be
cured, especia^ly for them of the pestilence: and also they are good to heal
the bitings of venomous worms, and serpents, or creeping beasts. Finally, the
down, coming of the flowers thereof, when the seed is ripe, does heal cuts
and new wounds, without pain.

Thus much of Carduus Benedictus gathered out of the Herbals of diverse learned
men, which although it may be sufficient, yet I have thought good here to
set down that, which two painful and skillful Physicians, Matthiolus, and
Fuchsius, have written hereof in Latin: whose words, as (perhaps) they may
bring some credit to that which is already written: so in them something
more may be learned, or at the lest something is uttered for the better
understanding of that aforesaid. Their words in English are as follows.

The properties of Carduus Benedictus, out of Matthiolus.
CArduus Benedictus, is a plant of great name and fame, specially against the
Pestilence, and also against deadly poisons: as well taken inwardly, as laid
outwardly to the stingings, and bitings of venomous beasts. They are healed
with this herb, that are sick of a quartane, or other Agues that come with a
cold: and that by the drinking of the decoction, or stilled water, or a dram
of the powder: in like manner being dro^k, it helps infa^ts that are troubled
with the falling sickness. The decoction taken in Wine, does mitigate the
pain of the guts, and reins, and other griefs of the belly. It provoke
sweat. It kills the worms, and helps against other diseases of the womb.
The herb it self, as well green, as dried, both drunk and laid outwardly to
the grief, does heal ye grievous, and swelling soars called Alcers: (that is,
such as breed in the flesh, without any outward cause, as a stripe with a
weapon, or biting of a beast) and covers the flesh with skin. Therefore, it
is mingled with ye drink made of Guacum, wine, and water, for the^ that have
ye French pocks. Thus much Mathiolus.

The properties of Carduus Benedictus, out of Fuchsius.
CArduus Benedictus takes away ye stoppings of the inward bowels: it
provoke urine: breaks the stone: and helps them that are seung of
venomous beasts. They say also, that they are not infected, that take it in
their meat, or drink, before they come into the evil air: and many do
persuade themselves, that it much helps them that are already infected.
Moreover, all men agree upon this: that it is a remedy against the bitings of
Serpe^ts and Scorpions. Finally, the later writers say, that it cures very
great pains of the head, takes away giddiness, recouereth the memory,
being taken in meat, or drink: also yt it heals festering soars, especially
of the Pappes, and Teats, if the powder thereof be laid upon it. Thus much
Fuchsius.

By this we may understand, with how great virtue, God has endued, and (as I
may say) has blessed this herb. It helps the body within and without. It
helps almost all the principal members of the body, as the brain, the heart,
the stomach, the liver, lungs, and kidneys, I may say it is a preservative
against al diseases: for it provoke sweat, whereby the body is purged of much
corruption, which does breed diseases. Also it expels all venom and
infection. It consumes evil blood, and all naughty humors, whereof all
diseases are engendered. Therefore giving God thanks for his goodness, which
has given us this herb, and all other things for our commodity, let us use
it as need shall require.

The twelfth Chapter shows, how Carduus Benedictus may be taken.
HEre is to be noted, that we may use this herb, and enjoy the virtues thereof
four manner ways. First in the green leaf: secondly in the powder: thirdly,
in the juice: and fourthly, in the distilled water. Unto these may be added the
licour, in the which the herb is boiled. For the most part, the virtue that
is in Sin, is in them all: so that in diverse diseases, for the which the
herb is medicinable, for lack of the one, a man may use the other. The green
leaf may be taken with bread and butter, as we use to take Sage and Parcely in
a morning to breakefast. And if it seem too bitter in the taste, it may be
taken with honey in stead of butter. It may be also taken in potage boiled
among other herbs. Finally, being shred small, it may be very well drunk with
Ale, Beer, or Wine: specially posset ale, or burnt wine. It is given sometimes
in Beer with some Aqua Composita put to it, and that without any harm, when
the stomach of the patient is weak, and he not trobled with any hot disease.
The juice of it is either outwardely applied to the body, (as is also the
leaf, powder, and water sometimes:) or else it is received by the mouth into
the body.

Being received into the body, it may be taken in Potage, even as the green
leaf: or with Wine* which if it be burned and drunk hot, it is the better.
If you list, you may boil it with Wine, and Honey, or Sugar to make it sweet,
and then drink it warm.

The powder may be taken with honey upon a knives point, or with bread and Honey
if you list, or else it may be drunk with Ale, Beer, or Wine, The distilled
water may be drunk by it self alone, or else with white Wine before meat, or
with Sack after meat, specially if the stomach be weak and cold.

The licour or brothe in the which the herb is boiled, may be made thus.
Take a quart of running water, sees it and skim it, the^ put into it a good
handful of the herb, and let it boil until the better part of the licour
be consumed: then drink it with wine, or if you list with Honey, or Sugare,
to make it the more pleasant in the taste. Or else make a potion on this wise:
Take a good handful of the leaves, with an handful of raisons of the Sun,
washed and stoned, and some sugar Candy, and Licorise slyced small, boil them
all together in a quarte of water, ale, or wine: if it be too bitter it may be
made sweet, as is before said.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that the powder and water of the herb is most
to be regarded, and specially the water: for they may be long preserved, so
that a man may have them always in a readiness to use, as need shall require,
when as he cannot have ye juice, nor the grene leaf. And the water (which only
is void of bitterness) may be drunk by it self alone: for the stomach and
taste will bear it, and like of it as well as of Rosewater. Notwithstanding, if
the seed be sown as soon as it is ripe, a man may have the herb both
winter and so^mer, from the time that it begins to grow, until the seed
wax ripe again. Therefore I council all them that have Gardens, to nourish
it, that they may have it always for their own use, and the use of their
neighbors that lack it.

The thirteenth Chapter speaks of the time, and quantity, to be observed in
taking of Carduus Benedictus.
HEre (perhaps) some man will ask a question of ye time, and quantity: which
things are to be considered in taking of medicines. As touching the time, if it
be taken for a preservative, it is good to take it in the morning, or in the
evening before a man go to bed, because that is a convenient time to sweat, for
him, yt feels not himself greatly diseased. But if a man take it to expel
any disease, it is good to take it whensoever he feels any grief in his
body, and immediately to go to bed and sweat. Howbeit it is not necessary
upon every grief to sweat, after the taking of the medicine.

As touching the quan^^e, a man need not be so careful in taking this herb,
as in taking those medicines, that do purge vehemently, by eg^^^^on, (as some
term it,) or by vomit. For in taking them, if great discretion be not used,
in considering the time, the quantity, and the state of a ma^s body, they may
cause present death: or otherwise they may much trouble a man. But in
ministering this herb, it is not so: in taking whereof a man may use his own
discretion, and the judgment of his stomach.

This I counsel all men that mind to use it, yt when they or any of theirs,
are diseased, they defer not the time, but take it presently, as soon as it
may be gotten: and that they do not think it sufficient to take it once: but
that they take it three or four times at the least.

The fourteenth Chapter shows the properties of Angelica.
NOw I have written that I think sufficient of Carduus Benedictus, because
(perhaps) enough of it cannot be gotten for them that have need: I will add
unto it an other herb of much like virtue, called Angelica, that if the one be
lacking* the other may be taken. As touching the name, the latest writers, in
my judgment most to be credited in this matter, find no other name for it,
neither in English nor in Latin. Howbeit, I know that some, much to be
commended for their learning, and also for the publishing of the same, to ye
benefit of their country, have given it other names: but I think by error.
If we English it as the Latin word sounds, we may call it, Herb Angel: or,
The Angelical or Angelike Herb. Upon what occasion this excellent name was
first given unto it, I know not: unless it were for the excellent virtues
thereof, or for that God made it known to man, by the ministry of an Angel.
I suppose the former cause rather to be true. Howbeit, as I am not able to
prove the other: so I think no man can give any good reason to the contrary.
For this we know, that GOD has made his Angels ministering spirits, to serve
us, for the safegarde of our souls, and also of our bodies. But upon what
occasion so ever the name was given, it is excellent, and so are the
properties: which be these that follow.

The Virtues of Angelica, out of D. Turners Herball.
ANgelica is hot, and dry, at the least in the third degree. All the latter
writers agree upon this, and experience proves the same: that it is good
against poison, pestilent aires, and the Pestilence it self. The Practicioners
of Germany write thus of it: If any man be suddenly taken, either with any
Pestilence, or with any sudden pestilente Ague, or with too much sodayn
sweatting: let him drink of the powder of the root, half a dram, mingled
with a dram of Triacle, in three or four sponefulles of the water of Angelica,
distilled out of the roots, and after go to bed, and cover himself well, and
fast (at the least) three hours after: which if he do, he shall begin to
sweat, and by the help of GOD, he shall be delivered from his disease. For
lackeof Triacle, a man may take a whole dram of the root of Angelica in
powder, with so much of the distilled water as is aforesaid, and it will have
the same effect. The root of Angelica well steeped in Vinegre, and smelled upon
in time of the Pestilence: and the same Vinegar, being sometime drunk fasting,
saves a ma^s body from ye Pestilence. But in my judgment, it is better to
take an Orange, or Lemmon, cut off the top, pick out the meat, prick it
fall of small holes, put into it a piece of a Sponge, Wool, Cotton, or fine
linen Cloth, dipped in the foresaid Vinegar, and diverse times smell unto it.

For the better keeping in of the sponge or cotton, etc. you may fasten the
top unto it again, with a thread, as they do a cappe unto a pair of knives.
With this you may be bolder to venture where the Pestilence is, than if you had
a great sort of other medicines.

The water distilled out of the roots of Angelica, or the powder of the same,
is good against gnawing and pain of the belly, that comes with cold, if
the body be not bound withal. And it is good against all inward diseases:
as the Pleurisy, in the beginning, before the heat of the inflammation be come
into the body. For it disolueth and scatters abroad such humors, as uses
to give matter to the Pleurisy. Moreover, it is good for the diseases of the
Lunges, if they come of a cold cause: and for the Stranguria^ of a cold cause,
or of a stopping. It is good for a woman that is in travel with child. It is
good also to drive wind away that is in the body, and to ease the pain that
comes of the same. The root may be sodden in water, or in wine, as the
nature of him that is sick does require. The juice of the root, put into an
hollow tooth, takes away the ache, and so likewise does the distilled water
put in at the ear.

Moreover, the juice, and the water also of Angelica, quicken the eye sight,
and break the little filmes that go over the eyes: whereof darkness does rise.
Of the roots of Angelica, and Pitche, may be made a good Emplaster, against
the bytings of mad beasts. The water, the juice, or the powder of the root,
sprinkled upon the diseased place, is a very good remedy against old, and
deep sores. For they do scour, and cleanse them, and cover the bones with
flesh. The water of the same, in a cold cause, is good to be laid on places
diseased with the Gout, and Sciatica. For it stancheth the pain, and melts
away the tough humors that are gathered together. The seed is of like virtue
with ye root. The wild Angelica, that grows here, in the low woods, and by
the water sides, is not of such virtue, as the other is: Howbeit, the Surgions
use to sees ye root of it in Wine, to heal green wounds. These Properties,
I have gathered out of the Practicioners of the Germans: I have not as yet
proved them all my self, but diverse of them I have proved, and have found
them to be true. Al these are D. Turners words, saving that instead of a
costly hollow ball of Silver, Tin, or Juniper wood, I have set down the
peele of an Orange, or Le^mon: the meat whereof is also commended by
Physicians, to be both a preservative, and a medicine, against poison, and the
infection of the Pestilence.

The virtues of Angelica out of an other learned man.
THe late writers say, yt the roots of Angelica are contrary to al poison,
the Pestilence, and all naughty corruption, or evil, or infected air. If any
body be infected with ye Pestilence or Plague, or else is poisoned they give
him straight way to drink a dram of the powder of this root, with Wine, in
the winter: and in Summer, with the distilled water of Carduus Benedictus: then
they bring him to bed, and cover him, until he have swette well. The same
root being taken fasting in the morning, or but only holden in the mouth,
does keep, and preserve the body, from the infection of the Pestilence, and
from all evil air, and poison. They say also, that the leaves of Angelica,
yownd with the leaves of Rue, and Honey, are very good to be laid unto the
bitinges of mad Dogs, Serpents, and Vipers: if (...) him to bed, and
cover him, until he have swett well. The same root being taken fasting in the
morning, or but only holden in the mouth, does keep, and preserve the
body, from the infection of the Pestilence, and from all evil air, and
poison. They say also, that the leave of Angelica, pound with the leaves of
Rue, and Honey, are very good to be laid unto the bitinges of mad Dogs,
Serpents, and Vipers: if incontinent after the hurt, the Wine be dronk,
wherein the root, or leaves of Angelica have boiled.

The Conclusion of the Book.
THus much I have thought good to write of the Plague, and of these herbs
Carduus Benedictus, and Angelica: which (as some men use to speak,) is called
a great secret: either because it is not known to many men, or else because
they would have it kept close, and known but to a few. But I do not think
meet, that any thing should be secret, which may be profitable for man. For
GOD has not made any thing for the use of a few, but for the commodity of
all me^ And we yt are the children of God, oug^^ to frame our selves so, that
we may b^ like affectioned unto our father, who (...) beneficial to all men:
who has mad^ his Sun to shine, and his rain to rain upon the wicked, as
well as upon the good, that is to say who feeds all me^ both good and bad.
For by heat and mo^sture, which proceed from the Sunn^ and the rain, all
things grow upon the earth, whereby man's life is maintained. Hereof I
conclude, that for as much as Almighty God is good unto all men, we ought to
be like minded, and not to keep any thing secret, nor to hide any thing from
man that may profit him. Thus I make an end, willing all men rightly to use
the good creatures of God, and to give him hearty thanks for all his
benefits.

FINIS.

