A BRIEF CENSVRE UPON THE PVRITANE PAMPHLET: * ENTITVLED, (HVMBLE MOTYVES, for
association to maintain Religion established.) REPROOVING IT OF SO MAny
Untruths, as there be leaves in the same.

PRINTED M.DI.III.

A BRIEF CENSVRE UPON THE PVRITANE PAMPHLET: ENTITVled, (Humble Motyues for
Association to maintain Religion established.)
REPROOVING IT OF SO MANY Untruths, as there be leaves in the same.
THE I. VNTRVTH.
THAT my first entrance of account, may give to all equal and indifferent
Readers, some proportion to make conjecture, how large and great a number of
wicked and malicious Untruths, are contained in so little and short a
treatise: As I will begin my reckoning at the Title, and beginning it self
of this Association: So for every word which it conteyneth, being only six
(besides the particles, and adiections of our language) I will assign a
several falsehood. And the first six Untruths, for the first six words. For
although the common decree of Philosophers teaches us, that Verety and
falsity, truth and falschoode, consist not in particular dictions, and first
apprehension, but in Composition or Division, and in Judgment: Yet because that
first Title is so copious, that it may easily be resolved into six several
Compositions, Propositions, and Judgments, which it vertually conceyneth: that
is, that they be Motyues; that the Motyues be Humble: that they be for
Association: that the association is to maintain Religion: that the purpose of
the Pamphletor is Religion: that their Religion is establshed: All which
assertions as they be plainly intended in that glorious Position, and six in
number, I challenge them to be so many slanderous and impious Untruths and
forgeries.

And concerning the great humility either of Puritanes in general, or of
this Associator in particular, affirmed in the first word (Humble) I appeal
for sentence to the Judicials of al trials; Popes, Councels, general,
provincial, confirmed, not confirmed, all holy Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church of God, all Arguments divine and humane, natural, and miraculous, which
their proud and arrogant spirit in the basest Puritan has condemned: I crave
censure of all Emperors, Kings, Princes, their laws, decrees, and Parlaments,
which every of them as repugnant to their holy Ghost, have censured and
rejected: whether this is humility the foundation of piety, because he
pleads it in this first place: or pride and arrogancy the mother of all
Irreligion, rebellion to God and man, and other monstrous offenses which they
have brought into the world, by that most ambitious, presumptuous, and
blasphemous doctrine: that every Puritan is directed, and infallibly assisted
of the spirit, and may control at their pleasure, all Popes, Princes,
Councels, Parlaments, and Consistories of al times and places. Which has
caused the Puritanes of England, so often by their Admonitions, Challenges,
Pamphlets, Inuectiues, Iabels, and railing slanders, to reprehend Queen,
Council, Parliament, Clergy, and whatsoever is of estimation in this kingdom.
And is the motyue which at this present moves this humble Associator, to
direct them all, and presume, that his only devises are worthy to sway the
Scepter.

THE II. VNTRVTH, CONCERning the second word: Motyues.
MOtyues are so termed a mouendo, of moving: and motyues of the mind take
their denominatio^, because they move and persuade the understanding, and will
of man to yield consent unto, and assect such things as they convince, the one
to allow, and the other to embrace: for as in natural and corporal motion,
from whence this term is derived, the leuity and gravity of bodies are the
cause which move them, the first to ascend, and the second to a lower Center.
So in the motions of the reasonable powers of man's soul, that reason and
argument which conquereth humane understanding, to give consent to that
sentence which it conuinceth, and that approved bonity and goodness which
wins the will to affect the good which is proposed, are justly named, the
motyues which move those reasonable faculties. And as in ordinary and natural
affairs, ordinary and natural reasons are sufficient, and allowed for
motyues: So in supernatural and divine things exceeding the natural wit and
capacity of humane Judgment, supernatural and miraculous Arguments are
produced. For which cause Catholics the known patrons and desendors of
christianity against all, both external, and internal adversaries, produce
not only the authorities of so many and muincible testimonies of holy
Scriptures traditions from Christ, and his Apostles, decrees of Popes,
sentences of so many general, and generally approved Councels, and assemblies
of the best learned Doctors and Professors of the world, together with the
absurdities of all other Professions: But to confirm divine business with the
infallible reasons of God, and to move men to embrace that, to which by
natural reason they can neither ascend or assent; They produce so many and
manifest miraculous operations, works, and wonders; so many prophetical
predictions, and fore-tellinges of future contingent events, to establish those
mysteries wrought of God to that purpose; which no created power of it selse to
any end, or by the power and assistance God can bring to effect to ratify any
error or superstitious falsehoode.

Now let us examine the Motyues of this Moouer by these proportions, and try
whether they be worthy to be the first mooueable or no. If we consider what
it is, which he labors to remove, it is that Catholic and universal
Religion of Christ, which has moved the whole world to approve it by such
irresistible motyues as have converted it. They which should be moved to this,
and to be drawn only by his motion, are our prudent and gracious Princess,
her wise and Honorable Council, the rest of the Nobility, the Protestant
Clergy, and whatsoever is reputed great, and of the highest judgment in our
Nation. He which would move them, is endued with that Puritan spirit, which
is in continual moving, and never finds his place of rest, and who for his
dissolute and deformed motion, shrowdeth himself under the title of an erring
Planet, not daring to diselose his name. He cites not one example or authority
for his purpose. Those which he alleasdgeth for Motyues, be none at all; as her
Majesty her self, Council, Nobles, Burgesses, Bishops, and the whole
consent of Commons, which are to be moved by his Instince, had given sentence
in open Parliament immediately before. And the means which he prescribes,
either in the same, or more forcible manner, had been practiced many years
together, as will be evident hereafter, and no man but such a spiritual
fellow can beignorant: And yet they could not prevail to that motion.
Therefore no Motyues.

THE III. VNTRVTH, ABOUT THE third word, (for Association.)
THE name Association is deduced from Socius, a fellow or Companion, and being
a noune of Action and doing, must needs fignifie to make fellows, and
companions. In which, and al such combinations there must of necessity be as
well a kind of equality (otherwise no fellowship but a subordination) as also
similitude, likeness, and agreement, as is evident in all coniunctious. For if
two or more differing things be joined and united together, this agreeing
matter must of necessitye be such, that the things to be reconciled do
consent therein. Those which be of one kindred agree in blood; The
domesticalles of one familye in cohabitation. Those which be of the same
Religion (which is the Associators case) to have the same Sacrisice,
Priesthood, Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies belonging unto
Reverence. If we consider the quallitie which is required to Association, I
trust it will not be an humble Motive, for such people to be fellows with
Princes, and their own Sovereign: Some wright that the Earls of England be
termed Comites, because by courtesy of our Kings they have both been so
named, and in some sort so used; But that Title was never given to inferior
Nobles. Then it may not be yielded to such unable spirits: except (which is
the mark they shoot at, and which priuatlie they believe) all things must be
in community, and no Superious Spiritual or Temporal may be allowed. How the
second cause of union between the protestants of England and the Puritanes
thereof in Religion, can be devised, differing in 32. points as their
admonition witnesses, I cannot conceive. For this Puritan Motor makes no
submision that they will refor me to the Parliament doctrine. Then either there
can be no Association or else the Queen and Parliament must revoke their laws
and only maintain Puritanisme, which is the second prick of their level as
appears by his own words, of which I will speak more heareafter

THE IIII. VNTRVTH. IN THE fourth word to maintain.
THE word To maintain as it suppo seth the being of the thing to be
maintained, so it must yield sufficient causes of preservation and
maintenance to the same. Towchinge the first Philosophers do call Duration a
continuance of being because at least in prioritie of nature it supposes the
existence and being of that, whereof it is a duration or continuance. In the
second Respect that which maintains an other, must be more Noble and
Potent, then that which is maintained and stronger then those assailing enemies
which strive to overthrow it. The Master maintayneth his servant, the
Sovereign his subject, and in natural causes, the more general and powerable
does maintain and preserve the weaker. The Sun among the Planets is called an
universal cause, in regard ir preserves and gives maintenance to these
inferior things. And all creatures are maintained by GOD, without whose
maintenance and assistance, all things would be annihilate. In the first
sense, Puritanisme and Association with the Professors thereof, cannot give
duration to Religion. For that which this Pamphletor labors to establish,
was neither by any kind of Priority, or Simultity, which I can find now is
authorized in England; but of this I will make challenge in the word
Establish. In the other meaning to speak of maintenance, I think all
Protestants are very far from giving credit, that Puritanes seek to
maintain their Religion. And that they are destroyers and not maintayners
thereof, Parliam. 5. Parlia. 23. Eli. Synod. Land 1562 l. art.
has bin often concluded in the highest Court of Parliament, the book of
Articles it self, by the whole Protestants Clergy of England, with a double
Subscription. And touching any motyue that may move this high conceit of their
proceedinges, that divinity which I have learned teaches me this for most
found and certain doctrine, that as there is nothing so undoubtedly true, as
the articles of true Religion, which is taught and revealed of God: which as he
is infinitely wise and good, so he can neither be deceived in himself, or give
cause of error unto others, so that which maintayneth this truth and
certaintye, must needs be most true and infallible, (every thing being
maintained by such means by which it consists.) Then the lying spirit of
Puritanes by which every basest fellow is to prescribe Religion to the
vninersall world, and no doctrine can be maintained without that man's
allowance, cannot be a maintemance but destruction to true Reverence: as to
give a short example in a brief difcourse, Epip. Haer. Aug. Haer. Bern.
later. Catal. Haer. Vlenb. l. 22. Cause. Rain. Call. turais.
there have been by moral judgment, 700. sects of Heretics, which have
pleaded this kind of maintenance. Therefore it is odds 699. to one, that
Puritanes will destroy and not maintain Religion.

THE V. VNTRVTH, IN THE fifth word: (Religion.)
REligion is that due worship, which man owes and is to render to God his
Creator, and chief omnipotent Benefactor; for so many favors wherewith he
has enriched him. And which man is to receive hereafter by his insinite and
irrecompensible bounty. This worship, as it is the Reverence of God, in whose
unsearchable will and pleasure it is, by what homage and offices he will be
honored; so the institution thereof, must needs proceed from him, and
Revelation of it to man. In which regard, it is an impossibility that any
Article or Question of duty by that incrrable power so ordained, and proposed,
should either be untrue, variable, vnconstanr, or uncertain, as this (so by
themselves called) Religion of Puritanes, which so daily alters, Aug. Her.
Epiph. Her. Bern. Later. Catal. Her. Casp. vlen. l. 22. cause. etc.
as the wanering spirit of every Professor thereof, flows and ebeth up and
down. And 700. to one as is recited, by actual experience it is untrue, so
many several and opposed sects by that soundation grounding so many diverse and
contrary professions in divine reuereuce. Of which by necessary consequence al
but one must needs be false, and by no probability that can be true.

Secondly seeing this holy worship is that obligation and bond whereby (as
the name it self, Religion, teaches us) man is bound and religed unto God,
for so many gistes and graces wherewith he is adorned, and advanced above
other creatures: the office and exe cution of this reverence must be such that
it religeth and bind all faculties and powers of man to persorm that duty.
Then if we compare puritan profession which catholic worshipp it carries no
semblance of Religion. for all articles of that holy Reverence be affirm a tiue
and teaching one point of devotion or other, as the affirmation of so many
sacred mysteries of priesthood, Sacrisice, Inherent grace, seven Sacraments,
with their supernatural effects, prayer, Invocation of Saints, prayer for the
departed, and other means to keep man still bound and religed unto GOD. And
if by frailty or otherwise he chance to break those bands of Religation,
Penance, Contrition, grief and afflictin of mind and body, to relige and
bind him again. If we resemble this Puritan doctrine to the protestancie of
England, it likewise is a Negation of all Religion, denying such affirmative
particles as they had left. Admonit: Parl. 1.2. I. W. against the Admonit.
For now the Parliament must have no sentence, the Communion book is
fooleries, and damnable, all the Courts, and Consistories of Protestants, are
become dens of thieves and serpents. The names of Archbishops, Bishops,
Arch-deanes, Deanes, and such, be Dyabolicall. No sign of the Cross, or
memory of man's Redemption may be used: Assoc page 39.
and whatsoever religeth a man to God, must not be remembered under their curse,
for superstition. If we put these people into balance with the idolatrous
Gentiles, Turks, Jews, and Brachmans, it is evident by all writers, that
although those Infidels do err in true Religion, yet they maintain forged
Priesthoods, Sacrifices, and other tokens of Reverence, to keep in sear of a
divine Majesty: all which things be wanting in this Puritan, having no one
positive or affirmative opinion, concerning worship. And so for Religion and
binding of men to God, have brought in a plain privation of those duties,
irreligion, and a freedom to all liberty and undutifulness, both to God and
man.

THE VI. VNTRVTH, IN THE sixth word: (established.)
IT is evident by the whole discourse of this Religious Associator, (and so he
rearmeth himself in diverse places) that he is a Puritan, and labors to
settle that same profession as he bewrays in plain terms. Page 19
And yet who knows not, but Puritanes be condemned, at the least (as before)
in 32. questions, by that Religion which is settled in England, Admonit Purit.
Com. B Parl. 5. et 13. Elizab.
as their own Admonition, the Communion book, and Parlaments themselves are
witness against them. Therefore this Innouator seeks not to associate to
maintain any Religion settled, but to settle his own unsettled sect.

THE VII. VNTRVTH.
THE seventh foul and flattering Untruth, is two leaves long; as though
Puritanes were the most loyal, loving, and obedient subjects, which her
Majesty has: and in respect of them, neither Council, Nobility, Bishops, or
any other, were dutifully careful of her preservation. But Sr, because you
pretend you self so dutiful a Subject to our Soueraigue, and regardfull of
reverence to the English Protestant Clergy, and that Religion which they
profess, you will give me license to utter in a few words, the true
allegiance and love, which your reformed Seignorie and eldership bears unto
them: For except this affection be known to be excellent in your Society, you
will not be worthy to be admitted to such exempted favor with our Queen and
her Bishops to whom you write. Then I will condemn you by your own
sentences, to be undutiful to her Majesty our Queeene, most malicious to her
Clergy, and devoted Adversaries to their Religion; for whose maintenance you
counterfeite desire of Assoctations. And to exemplify, what foreign Religion
is so gracious in your eyes, as that of Geneua, Admonit. parl. in fin. Repl.
Admon. Parl. tract. 20.
and other Churches there abouts, which you call (for that reason) resormed?
your Admonition to the Parliament approoueth the Presbitery of Scotland, and the
French Puritanes so far, that you propose them for example of imitation to
England: your own writings I hope you will not deny: And if you forsake
Calvin, and Beza, your Fathers and dearest friends, you are discredited for
ever. Then to begin with them first, which I named last, let the Reader judge,
whether our Sovereign, her Archbishops, Bishops, with the rest of the
Parliament Ministry, and their Religion so contrary unto Puritanes, live in
security, and be honored by this people. Concerning Princes which be not of
Caluins purity, he uses these words. Calvin. in Da. c. 6. v. 22.25. etc.
They spoil themselves of all authority, yea they are unworthy to be
accounted in the number of men, and therefore we must rather spit upon their
heads, then obey them. And touching the English Communion book, which is the
rule of Parliament Religion, he calls it fooleries. Stat. 1. Eliz. Surn. of
hol. disc. Beza epist. ded. nou. test. an. 1564. et epist. ad Episcop. Ebor.
Beza even in his Epistle to her Majesty of England, defends Rebellion
against Princes of a different Religion, and honors such as be slain in
such quarrels, with the glory of Martyrs. And in his Epistle to a Protestant
Bishop of England, condemns the exercise of their Religion. The reformed
Churches of France hold the same sentence, both concerning King, and worship
in their 39. Article. Congreg. artic. 39. Articul. Puri. Scon
Two of the chiefest Articles of the Scottish Puritanes be these. 1. Bishops,
and Archbishops, have no authority, their very names and titles, be
Antichristian and Diabolical: 2. It is heresy for any Prince, to call
himself head of the Church. But he may be excommunicate and deposed of his
ministers. And to come to English Puritanes, and the Consistory of your
Eldership and reformed Scignorie, the chiefest Patron thereof T. C. is known
to be an ancient and mortal enemy to the present Arch-bishoppe of Canterbury,
and is far from allowing the Titles, names, dignities, and authority of him,
or any Bishop, Deane, high Commissionor, or other by her Majesty's proceedings,
that as the same Arch-bishoppe has gathered to my hands, T. C. in repl. to
the ans. of the Admonit. I. whitgift prefat. to the ans. to the Reply of T. C.
T. C. in Repl. in fin Confess. c. 18. T. C. repl. page 5. T. C. page 144.
he will not allow him the dignity of a Doctor, but Ironice and scoffingly
(after your manner) calls him M. Doctor 370. times at the least, in one little
book. And tells us that the equality of Ministers, is consirmed by the
sentence of the Puritanes of Heluctia, Tygurine, Berne, Geneua, Polmia,
Hungary, and Scotland, with others. And although you to slatter the Protestant
Archbishops, and Bishops of England, would bring your disagreement from the^
toceremonies, yet he desendeth, that the doctrine of the English Protestants is
such, that Puritanes are bound to deny it, with loss of as many lives, as they
have hairs on their heads. And for reverence and duty to our Sovereign,
denounces by his Evangelical preeminence, against all Protestant Princes,
which will not be Puritanes, and embrace their Presbitery, that (to use his own
words) They must submit their Scepters, and throw down their Crowns before
the Church (of their Eldership) and lick the dust of their feet.

The highest cathedrated sentence of your Admonition, written in all your names
rayleth at the Protestants, affirming your contentions to be but Ceremonies.
But I will allege the words of that holy work, both for your confusion in
this, and all other your wicked practices in this Association: These they be.
Lordy Lords, Archbishops, Bishops, Prefat. Admon. Parl. Admonit. tra. 2.3.
etc:
Suffraganes, Deanes, Doctors, Archdeacons, Chauncellors, and the rest of that
proud generation, whose Kingdom must down: Titles, livings, and offices of
Metrapolitane, Archbishop, Lords grace, Lordshippe, Suffrragane, Deane,
Archdeacon, were denised by Antichrist, and are plainly in Christ's word
forbidden, and are utterly with speed to be removed. Prefat. Admonit. supp.
But in a few words to say what we mean: either must we have a right
ministerte of God, and a right government of his Church, according to the
Scriptures set up (both which we lack) or else there can be no right
Religion, nor yet for contempt thereof, can Gods plagues be from us any while
deserred. We in England, are so far from having a Church rightly reformed,
according to the prescript of Gods word, that as yet we are not come to the
outward face of the same. Admonit. tract 10. Tract, 11.
In the book of Common prayer, a great number of things contrary to the word
of God are contained. Except they yield, not only Gods instice shall be powered
forth, but also Gods Church in this Realm, shall never be builded. The way
therefore to avoid these inconveniences, and to reform these deformities is
this: to remove Aduousons, Patronages, Impropriations, and Bishops authority.
You must pluck down without hope of restitution, the Court of Faculties,
remove Homilies, Articles, Con. Lon. anno 1562. Parl 5 Eli. Book of articles
etc. Tract. 17. admonit.
(this is the Book where the sum of English Protestant doctrine is allowed)
Iniunctio^s (the Queens spiritual laws) a prescript order of scruice (the
Communion book) take away the Lordship, the loytering, the pomp, the
idleness, and livings of Bishops, etc. In steed of Chauncellors,
Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, Proctors, Doctors, Admonit. tract. 18.
Sumners, Churchwardens, and such like; you have to place in every
congregation, a lawful and godly Seignorie. The Lord Bishops, their
Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Chauncellors, Officials, Proctors, Doctors, Sumners,
Tract. 18. sup.
and such ravening Rablers take upon them, which is most horrible, the rule of
Gods Church. The Archbishops Court, is the filthy Quauemire and poisoned Plashe
of all the abbominations, that do infect the whole Realm. Neither is the
Controversy between them and us, as they would bear the world in hand, as
for a Cap, a Typpet, Addit. Admonit. Admonit. Parl. Tract. 20.
or a Surplesse, but for greater matters, concerning a true Ministry, and
Regiment of the Church, according to the word. To these three jointly, that
is, the Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons, is the whole Regiment of the Church to
be committed. Hitherto be the words of that holy Puritan sentence. And that
it may be manifest, what their loyalty and love is to our Sovereign, her
Bishops, and their proceedings both in temporal and Religious affairs; making
no exception at all, Tract. 23
either of Queen, council, Bishop, or whatsoever (except poor ignorant
souls) they bestow their holy blessing upon all, which will not allow of
their Admonition, and holy Eldershippe, in these terms following: God
confound them, that his peace may be upon Israel, and his saumg health upon
this Nation. Now let the Reader judge whether these men seek Associations to
preserve her Majesty, her State, and Religion or no, or whether they intend so
great love and duty to the Protestant Bishops, as is glosed in this Pamphlet,
or that no kind of Subject is so careful as they, to preserve the honor and
quiet of our Kingdom.

Let us now see whether this be true or no. Philosophers and Divines teach,
that to love is velle alicui bonum, to wish good to the beloved, then by how
much more good is wished, by so much the love is greater: and less, when less
good is desired, and where no good but evil is wished, Pa. 1 lin. 4.
it is hatred. This Pamphletor himself acknowledges in the fourth line of his
work, that 3. things in duty are to be exhibited by the Subjects to the
Magistrates, that is, Honor, Obedience, and Defense. Then who has performed
these duties to our Sovereign? none but Putitaine call honor is temporal or
spiritual, the first is most dutifully yielded of all, both Protestants and
Catholics; of spiritual honor the Catholics make distinction and are
disliked chiefly for that opinion. But this Puritan friend absolutely denies
the second, and speaks doubtfully of the first. As for spiritual honor, the
case is evident in all their assertions. And towching the terrene honor of a
Princess, Goodm. li. demonstr. Regim. muher.
was not Goodman in the time of Q. Mary a Geneuean Puritan, and yet he termed
the temporal regency of a woman Monstrosum Regimen, A Monstrous Regiment. And
this was the doctrine of his consorts, and practices of their Disciples. Stowe
hist. in Q. Mary Groft. etc.
For who were they which labored so much to depose not only that Catholic
Queen but our present Sovereign. No man will say that they were Catholics,
therefore I say and prove that they were Geneuean Puritanes (our English
Parliament Protestancie then not being established or known, but diverse years
after in these days.) Jacob Rex Scot. in li. Regin. ad fill.
Are not the Ministers of Scotland, Puritanes? then ask the King himself (if
the book of Regiment published in his name did come from him) how full of
honor, obedience, and defense this people is in that country, he complains
of them above all others in desect of these duties. Petr. frar. or. cont.
sectar Staphil. apolog. fix to. 2. Mon. test. tr. ordin. Burg in remonst. sup.
edict. Reg Gal. pare. 2. Defens. Reg. and Relig.
Were not Calvin, Beza, Spiphanius Othomanus, the Swizerland and French
Hugonites Puritaines? yes, and be so accounted in England. And yet what
Councels and Consistories did they keep to depose Kings and Princes? what base
and tyranicall Usurpers did they erect? what lawful Magistrate in France was
not deputed by them to death. Who have more turbulently behaved them selves in
these times then this deceitful and lying Sect. What Libels, Admonitions,
threatenings and chalendges has this people made against Queen, and all kind
of magistrates, especially the Protestant Bishops and ministry, with whom
they would now in words be associated? Demand an hundred sooleries of Martin
Marprelate, this Writer and his companions. This is the honor and obedience,
they use, and defense which I fear they would exercise, if it came to trial.
Let them examine Catholics by their own Rule of rendering duty, of honor,
obedience, and defense: They were Catholics which first crowned her with
honor, they were Catholics which obeyed her, when they were powerable to be
disobedient. Then by all presumption Catholics will ever defend her. And I
trust with our prudent Princess and Council, the malicious inventions and
falsehoods of Puritans to advance them selves, nor the lewd slander of any
Apostata, to excuse his impietye will be admitted, against the consciences of
so many Religious Priests and Jesuits, renouned in all parts of the christian
world, protesting (even with daily dangers, and death it self) their
Innocence in these affairs.

THE VIII. VNTRVTH.
THIS Pamphletor affirms that the estate of our Sovereign is dangerouslye
impeached with the Peril of her Person, by the endeavor of Papists, to bring
in the Superiority and Supremacy of a Foreign Prelat etc. I marvel where
this man learned his consequences. Is the Superiority and Supremacy of Pope,
or any foreign Prelate, only exercised in spiritual and ecclesiastical
causes, dangerous to the Temporal estate of any Civil Ruler, or Magistrate?
or perilous to their Person? Be not those Regiments diverse and distinct, even
in the judgment of Puritanes themselves? then the one is not perilous to the
other. How many hundreds of years, were they thus divided among the Israelites
without confusion. or peril one to another? That Nation came to most
calamities, Li. 1. Match Li. 2. Match. Iosephlib. antiq. and bell. Genebr.
Cronol. Bellon Tox to. 1.2. bill. turrie. Petr. Mass. lib 1.2.3. hist. indie:
when these Regiments were united together, about the time of the Machabees,
and after: In the Turkishe Regiment the Caliphes Rule in Religious causes, and
yet without peril to the Imperial State. Among the Indian Pagans the
Brachmans overrule their Princes in like cases, yet without prejudice to their
Persons, or Temporal dignities. Among the ancient Gentiles, the Fle^mens and
Archfle^mens had that charge: and yet no Temporal Regency endangered. And now
in Italy, Spame, France, Polonia, the Empire, and so many Catholic
Countries, the Roman Jurisdiction rules in spiritual affairs: And yet what
State of these countries? What Person of those Princes is by that in peril? And
in England when that Superiority reigned in it so many hundred years, and in
the days of almost 200. Fox tom. 1. Mon in Catal. Reg. Stowe hist.
Kings of this Nation, which of their estates or persons was endangered by
that Regiment? then it is not the doctrine of Catholics in this point, any
plot or practice by the^ which palyeth at hazard with the persons of Princes,
or draws kingdoms to ruin: But it is the presumptuous, and factious
opinions of Puritanes, whose private spirit in every mean and unlearned man,
does not only condemn the sentence of Queen and Parliament, and her
Superiority, by that title in spiritual business, but may by their Profession,
and does by open Pamphlets, and Inuectiues, control all Princes, and
Magistrates, both in Ecclefiasticall and Temporal causes: and dispose of
Kingdoms, cuntreis, and Cities, at their high will and pleasure as they did at
Geneua, Collin, in France, and other places as I have recited before.

THE IX. VNTRVTH.
But if we will believe this Puritan, her Maresties Person shall still remain
in peril, except his coufaile be admitted for her delivery: by which she shall
be enfranchised from such dangers. His presernatine and Antidote (to use his
phrase) follows in these words. It would be enacted, that all Gentlemen,
Magistrates, and Possessioners within this Realm, shall take the oath of
Assmiation, for the defense and perpetuation, of Religion now publickely
professed within this Realm. And the oath of Supremacy be mimstred with like
addition, to all men generally within this Realine, from the age of sixteen
years vpwardes, twice every year, by the Mayors, and Couernours of Cities,
Towns, and Corporations, and by Stewards and other Officers in Manors and
Lordshippes in their Cuntreis, and their Leetes, and Law-daies. And if they
refuse to enter into such league or oath. that eucry such person, shall be
holden and reputed as suspected, and shall be thereby disabled to bear any
office, or authority in Common wealth, and shall also be bound to his good
behavior, sequestered from all his aronour and weapons, and (if he be
possessed of lands within this Realm) shall yearly pay unto your Maieflie, the
fourth part thereof. etc. This is the sentence of this Solon: In which, how
many untruths and fooleries there be, it is not an easy account. But because
I deal in liberality with this Doctor, I will put the^ together in one. First
then I conclude by this high Authority, that Puritanes be most wicked, lying,
and dangerous members in this Kingdom, and most worthy by their own
judgment, to incur these penalties, which they practice against Catholics.
For if this invention were put in execution, Catholics should become so
impious (as Puritanes be) to make no account of oaths. This stratagemme could
take no effect, but the Queen would be more endangered both in regard of the
perils pretended more unknown, and the offenders could not be distinguished,
friends could not be decyphered from enemies. But by this man's confession,
all Puritanes be manifest adversaries to her Majesty in this matter; for they
both deny the Religion now publicly professed in the Realm, as also her
Majesty's Supremacy in most uncharitable terms. Then when Puritanes (as this
man assures) will take these oaths, both concerning the Religion established
in England, and her supreme Ecclesiastical power, which they so much condemn,
they be condemned to be the most impious, irreligious, and disloyal people,
utterly unworthy any office, credit, or confidence in common wealth: but by
their own law to be bound to these disablements, penalties, and payments,
which they invent for Catholics, whose fidelities, words, and oaths, may be
admitted for security of the greatest peril, as these men acknowledge by this
Invention.

THE X. VNTRVTH.
BUT to manifest farther the folly and falschood of this dream and device. If
any could be so mad to imagine that so wise a Princess, Council, Nobility,
Protestant Clergy, and Commons (for he desires that his law may be presently
enacted) would immediately after the dissolution of a Parliament, wherein these
toys were rejected, summon the whole kingdom again to please such people.
Yet his intent against Catholics would not be obtained. I will not examine the
particulers of his fooleries therein, but experience shall plead against him,
for either the same or more grievous have been enacted, and are daily executed
against us; and yet he makes these complaints of perilles by increase of
Catholics within this kingdom. For first concerning his oaths of the
Reltgion now established, and her Majesty's Supremacy, are they not tendered to
all Magistrates at their admittance? The first Parliament it self only
excepteth the Nobles of this Realm, Parl. 1. Eliz and 5. Eliz.
to whom this man likewise seems to allow that exemption. And How often have
such oaths and interrogatories been ministered to the Catholics of this
Nation, Gentlemen, and other Possessioners, and not Possessioners, whom this
lawe-maker includes not? Stat. 1. Eliz. c. 1.
the Satute of Supremacy gives the same authority for ministering the oath of
that Superiority in as ample manner as he prescribes; only he advises it to
be taken twice in the year, which limitation imployeth no other use or end,
but to make men dissolute in swearing, and forswearing as these Puritanes be;
for who will hope for truth in him, which is accustomed to forswear, which by
all laws be rejected for witnesses. And this great Politician himself, calls
al Parliament persons (which applauded not their devises) Papists: and yet most
of them had taken the oaths which he prescribes. But harken unto his
penalties. The denyers of these oaths, shall only be disabled to bear office,
bound to the good behavior, sequestered from their armor and weapous, Page
23. Stat. 1. and 5. Eliz.
and pay yearly, the fourth part of their lands to the Queen. How ridiculous
is this man? Is it not Premumre to deny that oath by law already enacted? how
many Catholics knows this man to be in office in our Nation? are not
Catholics bound both to the good behavior, and deprived of their Armor and
weapons? And concerning the last punishment, to pay the fourth part of their
lands; they only possess a third part, and her Majesty, or rather wicked
persecutors enjoy the rest and no rent at all is answered unto her, by such
Tenants for those lands. Therefore this Puritan abused her, and his prophecy
is false.

THE XI. VNTRVTH.
FOR Reverence to her Majesty, I pass over the holy blessings, which he
bestows upon the Roman See, sacred Priests, grana Benedicta, Agnus Dei, and
hallowed things from thence. And because this man is so methodicall in his
divisions, for he which teaches so wise a Princess, and Council, both in
divine, civil, and martial affairs, must needs be an Absolute; Then I will
give him due in all his excellencies. These be the words of his first
division. The power and strength of any people or multitude, is to be
augmented by one of these four ways. 1. By addition, or number. 2. By supply
of Necessaries. 3. By advantage of place. 4. By order of government.

Sr, as I am no computing writer, so I have bestowed little labor in them
which handle such employments: And I think your self to be as wise as the
Orotor of Greece, which so peremptorily entreated such things before Hannibal
that greatest Captain in the world. But I think if you had well committed to
memory, the wars and battles of Abraham, Gedeon, Sampson, Iosue, David, and
others recorded in Seriptures, wherein you and yours be so inspired: or with
ordinarily qualited Gentlemen of England, taken but a superficial Muster of
the wars of Alexander with Darius. Of the Christians, against the Moors in
Spain. The Spaniards against the Infidels in the Indies. Or Henry the fifte
and other English Kings in France. Or been a little acquainted with Plato and
Aristotle which you cite in the beginning of the first page of your Motyues,
you would have been moved to add other members to your division, gyuing it
as an instruction to so great a Princess. But Soldiers shall give you this
Reprehension. And I will in this point only call to your remembrance, that you
displayed your Banner to far, for a Soldier of small experience, and which
never kept Centinell before, may easelie discover, that according to your
skill, you labor to possess your part of all those means, by which you
think the power and strength of any people, or multitude, (I use your own
terms) is to be augmented. Your first fortification is by addition or number:
of this you would easily be owners, if you might teach Queen and Council,
and have such stratagems in use, which none but your holy fraternity does
allow. Your second embatailement is raised by supplic of Necessaries, of which
you would also be Masters, if all Armor and weapons were brought into your
Armouries. Of the third, which is advantage of place, you would have advantage
enough, if none but of your allowance lowance might be admitted to place of
Magistracy, or be placed in any office or place of defense. As for the fourth
and last order of gouerument, Page 41. insr.
you triumph al ready, that most men of action and resolution be for you, as
also that in diverse respects for number you are ten to one. And say in plain
terms, Page 41.
that it is not good in policy, to provoke the Puritanes in the declyning of
her Majesty's age and reign.

THE XII. VNTRVTH.
THE next division, he prefers to no meaner personage, the^ our gracious
Sovereign her self, in these teames. Let me present unto your Majesty, Page
11.
the whole number of your Subjects, divided into 4. bands.

1. Protestants of Religion. 2. Protestants of State. 3. Papists of State. 4.
Papists of Religion.
What Logic follows after this division, is not to be sound in Aristotle,
but so many Untruths be manisestlie sound in it, that I might make up more
then my account in this place; but I may not wholly neglect so many and learned
lessons in the rest of this Association. But concerning this hacking and
cutting the Subjects of England into those 4. quarters, I must needs put this
Isocrates in mind, that he has abused King Nicocles in this point. For
Religion (especially with those which attribute so much to says) is
principally subjected in the understanding, then according to Plato, and
Aristotle his own Authors, it takes specisication from such things, as be
taught and believed in Religion: and diversities of Religions must be named and
divided, according to the diversity and multiplicity of things believed: for
as faculties are distinguished by their acts, so these are divided and singled
by their objects, and not by the ends to which they be referred, or for which
they be practiced; for this is the operation of the will, and not any action
of understanding. Then according to that which is prooned before, if there be
almost 300. kinds of Protestants in other cuntreis, it is marvel if only two
had traficke into England. Conuoc Lon. 1562. Parl. 5. Eliz. et 13. EliZ. Stow
hist. Sinod. Land. Artic. 1.2.3.4.5.7.26.
And to put him out of doubt the approved book of Articles, and two
Parlaments, and our Protestant histories do tell him, that in England and among
English Protestants, there be Vigilantians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Arrians,
Eunomians, Grecians, Henricians, Iouinians, Donatists, Wicklefists,
Berengarians, Anabaptists, Iulians, Aerians, Manichees, Brownists, Barrowists,
damned Crew, and I know not how many Crues of most wiched Heresies, and
himself remembers some more. Page 40.
Therefore his by-membred division of necessity, is lame by many lims. And if
such a Tutor of Princes might have a saculty by himself, to renounce all other
arts, as his spirit condemns all other Religions: yet he shall find many
more ends then two of these which be professors of Reverence in this Nation.
And every man which professes not Religion for the love of God, is not of such
dexterity of wit, as this Puritan, and his Associates be, to make it a cloak
to practice in State affairs. Page 23.
Thirdlye, this princely pedagoge teaches, that her Marestie her self, her
Council, Lords, Bishops, Knights, and Burgesses of Parliament, be Papists, then
the second member of his chief division (Protestants of State) is taken away,
and he has given himself the contradiction.

THE XIII VNTRVTH.
TO show his cunning in conuersio^s, Page 11. 12.
he teaches that Protestants of Religion (which be Puritanes) be first by
order of generation, as his words import, and Papists of Religion last, whose
contrary is evident to all the world. Yet let us allow greater measure to this
untruth. Next from Protestants of Religion, proceed Protestants of state. From
these Papists of estate be rngendered. Lastly from these is the descent of
Papists of Religion. And within sieve lines after both forgetting himself, and
unmindful of the doctrine of his Masters, Plato, and Aristotle, and all reason
which deny a regradation in causes, he acknowledges that Papists of Religion,
be Parents to all the rest: The fourth, father to the third, this, to the
second, the second, of the first. Which in his former assertion gave existence
to al. This is the ridle of Oedipus. Matter me genuit, eadem mox gignitur ex me.
But his only intent being to increase the power of his people, of which he
considered before, seeks by all means, true, or contrary, to make
Puritanisme the first and last: Alpha and Omega of all. As Philosophers teach,
that which is first by order of intention, is last by execution. And in this
sense his sentence is true, for they wholly intend the settling of their
Puritan sect, which is their first and chiefest intention: But the settling,
and execution thereof, by necessity must be last: For both Protestants and
Catholics must be taken out of theyt way, before sufficient scope and place
be made for the Regiment of their spiritte, which as it ouer-turneth all
things except it may rule the whole world, as the natural propension thereof
enclineth, will ever be unruly, still seeking Innouations.

THE XIIII. VNTRVTH,
AFter he has ended his Divisions, in such learned manner as I have declared;
he gives censure of the propertyes of the parts divided. His definitive
sentence is this. The first (Puritanes) are constant and faithful unto your
Highness. The second, (Protestants) wauerenge: The third, Page 23.
(Papists) of estate: (For such he charge the Lords, Bishops, and others,
of the last Parliament) perilous. The fourth, (Papists of Religion) Pernicious.
Than the which nothing can be more corrupt. I think this man should mean,
that Papists of Religion, be pernicious in respect of a temporal Regiment, for
which he so much in words contendeth: Otherwise a false Religion (If we should
grant our most holy Catholic Reverence to be such) being used of those
professors, only for cause of Religion, (as his distinction is) cannot be
offensive or perilous to any Civil Regiment against which it teaches no
repugnant thing. Secondlye, he desineth the inconvenience of these Papists of
Religion, that (to use his words) they be in Darkness, False-hoode, Error, and
Superstition. Then seeing this member (of his division, Page 11. 12. 13.
by his own grant) has no reference to business of estate, they cannot be
ofensiue or pernicious, to that which they have no relation. But if he could
disburthen themselves (which will be an heavy load to do,) if he will
charge any of this guiltienes, the second and third Protestants of estate, and
Papists of estate, which often he confounds, because he allotteth them to
State affairs, must enter into combat against him: Which they will easilye
perform, being such by his own acknowledgment, as be neareste to her
Majesty's Person, Page 23.
by Office, by Parliament, by Council. And those which have not intermedling in
such matters, by the voice of so great an enemy, may not be condemned as
pernicious Adversaries. That mouth which denounces them innocent in the first,
cannot be admitted for Accuser in the second. Where no cause is precedent or
concommitant, no effect can be or follow, except an effect can be caused
without a cause. Thirdly, we are enfranchised by an other sentence of this
Censurer, for as he highly commends Protestants of Religion, or Puritanes, as
constant and saithfull to our Queen, Page 11.
so he confesses that these be engendered of Protestants of estate, these of
Papists of estate, which be offspring to Papists of Religion. Then if there is
any constancy or faithfulness in the first, (Puritanes) as it must be doubled
in the second Protestants of estate, tripled in the third, so it must by that
rule of proportion, be sometimes as constant and faithful, in Papists of
Religion: and by no means (if this man's gradation be true) can be less in
them, then in the other which proceed from them. My reason is (which this man
may read in his Authors Plato and Aristotle.) there be two kind of causes,
the one univocal, the other equivocal: the first although it is not that
which is now in question, yet it must needs contain so much virtue as the
effect which it produces: otherwise some virtue in that which is caused should
be effected without cause, which is a deceasance in nature. Of this sort be
all inferior natural agents as men, beasts, fowls, fishes, etc. which
produce the like in their kind. The second (of which condition this
Pamphletors descent and progeny is to be esteemed) is called Equivocal which
ever contains more virtue and ability, then that which is effected; in which
sense the Sun, Heavens, and God himself, are termed such equivocal and
universal or general causes; because their power so much excels the
faculties of their particular effects: and are able to bring forth many and not
only one, or few operations. Fourthly, by an other free charter of this
Gentleman, Papists of Religion are freed from al suspect to be pernicious, or
any ways dangerous in this business: because they want all those helps by
which he affirms Power and strength of any people is to be augmented. Page
10.
1. addition or number. 2. supply of Necessaries. 3. advantage of place. 4.
order of government. All which, be wanting in that people, as is before
demonstrated, and Puritanes be possessed of them all. And touching his
addition, and number, which he names for the chiefest supply, himself
acknowledges, that in the beginning of her Majesty's reign, Page 40.
when we were many and mighty, we were so far from contriuing against her,
that we honored her with her greatest dignity and Diadem it self. Then there
can be no danger hereafter. For seeing our doctrine is one, there is no such
peril of diversity in dealings in that case. And to avoid us from all
jealousy, for suture and present times, he makes this threatening calculation,
Page 41.
how in diverse respects, Puritanes are ten times more, and mightier then
Protestants. How far this sort exceeds all kinds of Papists, there is no
doubt. And yet it pleases this man to acknowledge this sentence. Page 15.
It is not vnprobahle, that of the Papists in this Land, the fourth part are
not Papists of Religion. Then it cannot be truly said, that such people be
pernicious, or perilous in this Common wealth: which besides all their
positions agreeable to an honorable and civil Regiment, their orderly,
dutiful, and quiet conditions in Saxonye, Denmark, some cantons of
Switzerland, Greece, Hungary, Turkic, Persia, and other places where they live
under Prin ces, enemies to their Religion, will be an eternal evidence. When
contrariewise these Puritanes and Protestants of Religion, So constant and
faithful to her Majesty, (if this man's word be Gospel:) Mart Mar Prel.
not only be their private seditious Libels without end in England, but
factious Admonitions by their general acclamation to our Prince, and
Parliament, by publicly defended posiitions, that the laws of Princes do not
bind in conscience, Andrew. Will. Sinop. c. laws. Calu. inst. Fox. to 2.
sup. obed. Tind. art. 18. Claud. de Sanct. lib. 5. accad egl.
that eucrie man is Lord of other men's goods, the children of faith, (which be
only Puritanes in their opinion) are under no law, all humane laws must be
taken away, the nature of the Gospel is to raise wars, among Christians, there
is no Magistrate, no Superior: and whose practice in action has ever been
answerable to this doctrine, manifest by all monuments of their proceedings,
or rather to be reproved for such pernicious and perilous people.

THE XV. VNTRVTH,
BUT to show how high a pitch of impiety he can mount, to make a malicious
stoop upon men in misery, he utters this most foul and untrue sentence. The
Papists of Religion at this present, Page 25.
stand furnished 1. with credit and authority, 2. wealth and ability, 3 weapons
and furniture: So that they may draw followers by the one, wage them by the
other, and arm them by the third. Whould any man think, that so holy, wise,
and well affected friend, as this man would see me to her Majesty, durst
present so monstrous and palpable an untruth, to the view of of so prudent a
Priucesse, but that I have alleged his own words. For the first of credit
and authority, I think it a difficult thing, for this Puritan to find one
Cathohcke in England, which has any authority at all. Let him name any
Presedent of Wales, or the North, Warden of Ports, Governor of Islands,
Captain of Castle, Lieuetenant of Tower, Lieuetenant, Deputy-Lieuetenant,
Sheriff. Justice of peace, or poor Constable, or Tythingman, which is a
Papist of Religion. I think it will be a dissicult thing for him, to sinde in
our whole kingdom ten of the meanest authority which I have named. Of the
chiefest no man can be singled sorth. What the wealth and ability of them can
be, except God does miraculouslie bless them (then let not Puritanes repine at
his benediction) who can imagine, if he see the due payments of 260. pounds
yearly paid to her Maicsties Checker by the chiefest, and by other the two
parts of their Revenues most truly answered, their goods seaxed; and
besides these, so many extraordinary oppressions by Puritanes in authority. As
for weapons, and surniture, to arm so many as would sight against so many
thousands of Puritanes of action, Page 41.
and resolution, of London and good Towner, most Lords, Gentlemen, and
Captains, which be for them, is a thing so ridiculouslie untrue, that none or
sewe Catholics be possessed of any at all. Does he not remember when they
were dispoyled of them. And to this day are scarcely (where such Muster Masters
live) admitted to have use of their own to serve her Majesty. And at the time
of the coming of the Earl of Essex out of Ireland, when somewhat more was in
hand then Catholics imagined, were they not generally in the West cuntries so
dispoiled by puritan Justices of their ordinary Arms, and weapons, that they
were in danger to be spoiled of the basest Robbers for want of sufficient
defense against them. but if these three things be those that be so perilous
in people apt for Innouations, let him look into Puritanes, and how many
thoufands he may find furnished with those complements. Page 41.
His own sentence (London and good Towns, most Lords, Gentlemen, and
Captames of action and resolution) will be sufficient censure against him.

THE XVI. VNTRVTH.
AT the last, this Associator comes to issue, and somewhat vnmasketh
himself, to give testimony to his spirit, to dispose of the Crown, make his
Queen a Pupil, expel Catholics, root out Protestants, wholly to advance
his Puritan Gospel, and to bring the Scepter and Regality of this Kingdom,
Page 18.
to the sacred disposition of their spirit. His words are these. The mightiest
in succession (as your Majesty knows) are they (speaking in the plural
number) whose alliance, kindred, and confederacies, are for the most part with
Papists: Who is ignorant this to be a notorious Untruth, except he will
advance any Title from Spain, and then his plural number will except against
him: otherwise if al those which be next in succession, must be esteemed as
Papists, and worthy of disinheritance from all Title of a Kingdom, by the
supreme sentence of their spirit, because they be not Puritanes, either a
Puritan whether he has any Title or no must reign. Or (which is more
probably to be coniectured) where these desires should be effected of depriving
true Titlers from their inheritance, and Puritanisme shall have superiority,
England shall have no King, Queen, or Regent at all. And if her Majesty should
attend to such treacherous, and tyrannical suggestions as this spirit
enspireth, and their purpose of planting their impiety be performed, she were
like to be rewarded, with the same payment of their common doctrine which I
cited before, that the children of faith are under no law. That there is no
Magistrate, no Superior among Christians. All humane laws must be taken
away. Eueryman is Lord of other men's goods, and the like must be put in
practice. The presbitery which they would have planted in Scotland to the
deposing of their King. King of Scots in his Book of Reg. to Henry his Son.
Suru. of holy disciple.
The practice of Geneua and such places, for a few Ministers and yearly
elected Artizans to govern, and the Flemmish fashion must be erected. And none
but Puritanes and their vile devises have allowance, which this seditious
libeller does plainly insinuate in the next page following: Page 19.
where he gives this for a law to our gracious Queen, to use both Puritanes
and Protestants, for the planting of his platform of Resormation; and that
being effected her Majesty must (to use his own words) by scuere discipline
mightily increase the first (Puritanes) daily to deminish the second and third
(Protestants and Papists) and to propulse the relapses of either. So that the
affections of these fellows (as themselves give sentence) tend to the
overthrow of Protestant, as well as Papist, And the number of the one, equally
as of the other must be diminished and propulsed. So that whatsoever they are,
Queen, Council, Nobility, Laws, Parliament, Authority, or any proceeding, not
resined by the spirit of Puritanes, must be thus diminished and overthrown.
This (as I said besore) was their first intention, and now is their final
end.

THE XVII. VNTRVTH.
ANd that these Pretendors of persection in Religion (as this Associator
calls Puritanes) might pretend a perfect and absolute neglect and reiectment
of al order, Page 24.
Magistracy, and Regiment, in this Kingdom: After they had so much distasted
their sugared mouths, with the unpleasing sauors of the State and Government,
as they complained both in their so much dishked Bill of Reformation, and this
Author consesseth in his Associotion. They first apealed to Parliament, and
taking the repulse in that highest authoritiue Consistorye, besiedge our
Soueraygne with such glosles, as have been recited of her danger by Papists,
and their only tender care of her happiness and prseruation. Hopeing perhaps
she would for their extraordinarye love, reward them with those extraordinarye
graces of her absolute power, which by usual means she had omitted, Now in
this part of their Association, rather then they will be left desolate of all
helps, they will not only appeal from Parliament and Prince, to the Protestant
Bishops, (a parcel thereof) but unite themselves with them in all love and
fraternitye, whom in so many Rimes, Libelles, and Inuectues, they have
disgraced so many years together. And salute them in their first entrance
with Tytles of the most Reverend Archbishops, and right Reverend Logd Bishops,
to whom in all former proceedings, they have ever and absolutely denied all
Reverence, Page 23.
Lordeshippe, and the common name of either Archbishop, or the other. And now
plainly acknowledge them to have power to perform that which Queen and
Parleament had denied. Page 24.
And yet they still reserve a last appeal to the higheste court of all,
which is their spiritte, to threaten ouer-matchinge multitudes, Page 41.
and strength, both for number, and power; if their griefs be not redressed.
First, they complain that their Bill against Catholics was not admitted in
Parliament. The cause whereos, they would establishe, with a most unstable
falsehoode, by the Papists packing (to use their words) to make Burgesses for
this Parleament. Page 23.
How true a tale it is? or can by possible conjecture be: Who but such trusty
Prophets can divine? who be they which be in Parliament? of what estates,
places, callings? who, and what authority does assemble them? is not every
Parliament called by our Queens authority? is she a Papist? are the Council
Papists? are the Lords Papists? Page 41.
in an other place he says they most are for them. Are the Sheriffs of
Shires, the Justices, and others, which make the choice of Knights Papists? no
Papist is admitted to those offices. Are not London, and the Towns whence the
Burgesses be, as this man says, Puritanes? are the Protestant Bishops and
Clergy, Papists? and yet these be they, of whom that Parliament consisted, and
in whom, of all others, Papists have the least interest. Therefore if that
liberty of speech, and Alehouse phrase of Packing, were as lawefull for me, as
packing, playing, jesting, and wicked earnest dealings be usual with these
men, even toward Peers and Princes; we could neither pack, shuffle, or cut,
in that Parliament. Neither was there any motive to incite us to such exercises;
for first, there was no Bill to be preferred for our good. And none but
Puritanes (of whose counsel we are not) did think that such measure would
be then offered against us. But most likely it is, that this people, which had
so long, as this Pamphlet seems, to insinuate by the phrase (long since
penned) both determined that unnatural Bill, Page 23.
this Association, and all mischief they could imagine, to afflicted
Catholics. And if banding to gither for that intent, soliciting Queen,
Nobles, Clergy, and Burgesses, and shuffling themselves into the meanest Romes,
rather then their voices should be wanting may be termed Packing: the packing
was in them, and not in us. As also the number of their Gospel, noted to be
far greater in that, then any former Parliament will witness.

THE XVIII. VNTRVTH,
BUT this man is not ashamed to term all that resisted their Bill, to be
Papists. These be his words. I call them Papists, Page 23.
which were so carnest against that Bill. For who but Papists, would pronounce
that Penalty to be extreme, etc. But their Popish and dangerous end, does
manifest them to be Papists. Hitherto be his own words. Which how untrue they
be, that those Lords, Bishops, Knights, and Burgesses which rejected that
Bill (which were the whole Parliament, and all England represented in that mayor
part let others censure. Only I humbly wish such Papists, which be all sorts
and estates of people in England, Sovereign, and Subjects, which be not
Puritanes, and pretendors of their perfection in Religion, to beware of these
men's spirit. For although they be not Papists, yet seeing it pleases their
spirit to condemn them by the names of Papists, Popish, and dangerous: they
are not unlike to taste of the same cup with Papists, if ever these Associators
may have their will. And although those things which I now allege, be diverse
and distinct untruths to this I have cited, yet because in reckoning so small
a number of this man's forgeries, I must ouer-passe many of moment; and these
following make for this purpose, that all Protestants, either of the Lay or
Clergy condition, Magistrates of what calling soever, which be not at the beck
of Puritanes, to advance their pleasures, are in the case of Papistry, and
equally hated as Catholic Recusants themselves: this Religious pretendor of
perfection, acknowledges it to be their sentence, when he breaks out in
these speeches. The Pope can dispense with Papists their being Ministers in
our Churches, Page 30.
provided, they maintain some one point of Popery or other. With their being
Magistrates in our Common wealth, provided, they under hand, hinder proceedings
against Papists. Which two sentences, the first most false, and the second not
needing dispensation, being a lawful act, yet they prove, how Puritanes
esteem all, both Archbishops, Bishops, and others of the Protestant Clergy,
as also all Magistrates (no degree excepted) which in any respect oppose
themselves to the headlong actions of this people, to be Papists and so to be
punished by their spirit, if ever it be in their power to perform it.

THE XIX. VNTRVTH.
Will any man believe him to tell a truth, when to gloss their wiched
practizes, he both denies the Earl of Essex to be a Puritan: Page 28.
and affirms that he was led by Papists to that disobedient tumult. And yet
he blusheth not to say that Doleman in his Epistle, does cunninglye in sinuate
and advise to make him away. When there is not any one word in that Epistle
to that purpose; or to arm him to any disobedience, except the spirit of
Puritaues does judge: If any affirms a Nobleman is in credit with Prince and
popular with the people, (as all men knew he was; and is that which Doleman
there speaks) is a warrante to make such a tumulte as he did. Neither can the
Earl be said to be led or accompanied with Papists, except he will now give
that name a more ample extension then he did before, and make it also
comprehensiue of their own hole brethren, and pretendors of perfection in
Religion, as is before described. And whether himself was such, or a Papist.
Examine the lamentable and repininge words, actions, gestures, and beehauiors
of all Puritanes at the time of his desolate end: Demand the Pulpits of
Puritanes, which so much deplored him. And let any Puritan if he can,
exemplify one man, either a Leader, or led in that wickedness, which by any
probability had ever counsel of I esuite, or Priest to that enterprise. But
that these, and all Catholics, both condemned the fact, and rejoiced at her
Majesty's delivery. Which soon after, and ever since, many of them,
especially in the Western countries, have dearly bought at the hands of
Puritanes in authority And upon the very day, and at the very hour (as was
supposed) of his death (namely and generallly in Summerset Shire, where a
Prince of these pretendors of perfection reigns, and of whose pure breath
this Pamphlet sauoureth) al houses of Catho lickes were forcibly entered, with
great numbers conducted by Puritan leaders, and without any commission showed,
rifled, ransacked, and spoiled, without restitution of such injuries. And the
Catholic, and other possessors of those howses, both basely used, and
threatened at home, and in contumelious terms and usage committed to prison.

THE XX. VNTRVTH.
NOW this holy pretending Gospeller, is come to disgorge his poison, against
the Reverend, and Sacred Priests of our Nation: and principally, of the most
learned, and holy Society of Jesus. Whom he does not only charge, with
disloyal practices against the State of this Kingdom, but (which is most
impudent) inuenteth shameless suppositio^s, as though such things had bin both
proved against them by some Priests of England, and themselves had voutsased
the accepta^ce of those accusations, Pa. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37.
by their silence of not making answer to such crimes. And going forward in
this blushlesse business, labors to persuade the Reader, that the Jesuits
and some Priests (such as have appealed) conuented and agreed together, to
counterfeit a contention between the^, to this purpose, that the Jesuits
being but few in number, and not able by that disparity, to advance the cause
of Papists, as those Priests which be not of their society, a far greater
multitude will willingly undergo the ignominy of all misdeamenors objected:
and set the Priests at freedom, for the intent recited. And that the Pope
himself has dispensed in these conspiracies. Which horrible sins be such,
and so odious in Catholic Reverence, to suffer and dispense in a voluntary
infamy, not only in particular persons, daily bequeathed to death for their
Religion, but of so renowned a fraternity, that no man except refined and
purified with that spirit, with which no fraud, falsehood, forswearing, or
treachery can be sin, will possibly imagine. But to call this perfect man
back again to so many imperfect untruths, which he has uttered in this
discourse, I doubt not but since the writing of his Pamphler, he perceaueth
defacto, that those which accused that company of Jesuits, by Quodlibets, and
I know not what, were not such Priests, and friends to Jesuits, as he
excepteth against them: But if I may dilate the word Puritan, half so far
as he extends Papist, it will appear even to his dim sight, that almost
Quilibet was agent in Quodlibet. And that all Appellants utterly disclaymed
from those books. Touching your untruth, that the Jesuits yielded to those
crimes and accusers, you have also seen how foulie you were deceived. And for
reverence to her Majesty, and honorable Council, I must spare you too much in
these points.

And Sr, Pretendor of Persection, in this place you were deceived in rash
sentence, that there was no difference between the Jesuits and some Priests.
And it is neither sin, nor shame to confess it, being but matter de facto, not
any question of Religion, and such as besides your daily chops and changes,
controversies, and contentions in highest mysteries, and matters of Reverence:
the Courts of law, where perfect brethren daily impleade one an other, will
give record, that at this present, there be many hundreds, and in these times,
have been thousands of greater dissension, then that only one in so many
years, when no Superior or Consistory, for the Priests of our Nation, was to
determine any contention. Your wisdom has definitiuely set down in your
Association, that the only reason why Jesuits, and Priests, be so dangerous
people in this Nation, is, because they hope for future aduauncements by
alterations: And therefore practice enen the death it self of our Sovereign.
Sr, to plead experience (the Master of fools) her Majesty is the eldest
English Princess, L^ew hist. Graft hist.
since the Normans entered; she has reigned 44. years complete. And yet such
wise men as you have daily used these acclamatio^s against us. But the event
has proved how perilous we are, never any prince reigned half so long where
your Gospel is admitted. Secondly your self may easily understand that in the
order of the Jesuits there is a rule, indispensable by any of their society,
not to meddle in matters of estate. Thirdly, Sil. v. Irre: Fum. v. irr. Nau. v.
irr. sum. Caiet. Panormit. tollet. v iregular. etc.
the Canons of Catholic Religion repute it so great an unworthiness, for
any Priest to be guilty of the death of the meanest Subiccte, that all such
be ipso facto Irregular, and disabled to execute that sacred function. Then
what will it be esteemed, to be guilty of Princes blood? And Sr, to dispute of
such ambitious ends, as you would prognosticate they have determined: So
universal a man as you desire to be reputed, cannot be unskillful, how this so
much offensive Society has made it self so far incapable of honors and
aduauncements, that the whole Christian world reports for a nouelty when any
Cardinal or Bishop, is created from that company: although for all kinds of
such deseruings, all Nations will witness, how worthy they are of greatest
dignities. And if you will travail, at the least with your understanding,
into Italy, Spain, Germany, Polonia, Bohemia, the Indies, and other nations
where they live, you shall easily make experiment, and (except you leave your
will behind wholly possessed with malice) acknowledge, that those Jesuits
which be now in England, when they lived in such foreign Nations, both were
sreed from these perils which they pass in their own country, and yet
enjoyed as much as England Catholics would, or can allow them. The estate of
their country, and fellow brethren left behind in such condition, will tell
you, what exchange from better to worse, the Jesuits at home have made. Those
Kingdoms now Catholic, give with security and reputation, so much, as with
so many dangers and reproaches, any future time can yield them hope, which is
nothing, but S. Paul's victus and vestitus, with which they are, and must be
content. Then who can censure them to be so great favorites to sorreigners
aduancements, and careless of their own securities for no greater gain?
Concerning other renerende Priests of this Kingdom, as you thunder not
against them with so great fury, so I trust of many late defenses, some will
come to your hands, and as they be innocent, so be an armor to save them
harmless, and for that reason I may, and for other regardes I must be silent.
And you may rest secure, that the Monks of S. Bencdicts order, are not yet
multiplied to posses your Abbeys: Ten or such like number of them, are not
likely in haste, to challenge and enjoy, so many hundreds of Monasteries with
their revenues, as were their dowry in England. And so small an handful of
other Priests, are not likely to make present entry to so many thousands of
Bishoprics, Deaneries, and Ecclesiasticali livings, as the Protestant Clergy
is settled in. Many or most of us, have willingly disinherited our selves, and
embraced wantes; we which have been voluntaries in poverty so long, cannot by
probability, be so suddenly changed to desire riches, with so great
encombers. If England were Catholic to morrow, no Pretendor of perfection
ever heard, that in any age, such a generallity of Dualities, or Pluralities
was grannted, which could endowe so litte a number, with so many thousand
spiritual maintenances. Then Sr, if you could be but so equally affected to
them, which were so many hundred years together, true Titlers, and owners,
both of Religion, and religious possessions in this Nation, to let them now, in
some poor disgraced and penitential manner profess the first, with such
devotion as they affect: they should easily join to leave the second, to them
which more desire, and less deserve it. And I trust no Puritan should
complain of peril to Prince, injury to himself, or damage to other subject.
Such serving of God (which is all we seek) is not so dangerous eiher to
Religion established, or the temporal state of our most beloved country, that
any banding in Associations be needful against it. Being neither more or so
much as the Pope himself allows to the Jews in all his Terrytories, even in
the City of Rome, where he is Resiant. And which the protestant Prines of
Germany, the Turkish Emperor, Persian, and other absolute Monarchs (which
cannot be condemned regardlesse of their temporal Regiments) allow unto
Jesuits, Priests, and others both religious, and Catholics of the Lay
condition: in which so small a kindness, any man of reason, would rather
presume upon your favor, then fear your disfriendshippe. And the rather
because (Sr give me leave) in this very Pamphlet, so inuectiue against so
little courtesy, your self do seem to free us of all unworthiness. For if you
remember, there be but two bars which you put against it, (Jealousy to concur
with foreign forces) (And Popes Supremacy with reconciliation) and your self
have broken both, and seem to set us at liberty from such suspects. Of the
former, thus you do discharge us, when you take away all hope of aduancements,
by such conspirings, (upon which you ground your wicked and untrue conceits)
your acquittance in this case is set down in these words. Page 27.
The Admirant of Arragon, spared the Papists no more, then the other in the
Borders of Germany. And the Duke of Medina said, that if he had prevailed
against England with his invincible Armado, he would have spared Papists, no
more then Protestants, but make way for his Master. Concerning the second, our
Supercedias from you, Page 35.
may be this sentence. Priests are executed (indeed)for affirming the Popes
Supremacy, and reconciling to the Church of Rome, which are parts of their
Priestly function. Then Sr, if Supremacy in the Pope of Rome, and to
receconcile to that Church, be parts of Priestly function, which is wholly
spiritual and distinct from a civil state, and temporal affairs: by no law
or learning, that which appertains to that function, and is part thereof,
can be prejudicial or dangerous to the second. And your simple distinction
following, which you say was made before the late Earl of Huntington, (you are
well acquainted with that family, watch-wordes, ward-words and their
appendices) that Priests are not executed for these parts, as they are
religious, but as they be dangerous to the State, in civil consideration: is
both ridiculous for my reason before, and derogareth to the laws of England:
because you cannot doubt but those articles were maintained, known, and honured
even in this kingdom, by almost 200. Kings and their laws, many hundreds of
years together, until these days: and at this present, are so reverenced in
the most flourishing Kingdoms of the world. And if contention be between
Religions, and civil laws (except God be inferior to man) it is no question
who must have dominion. Temporal things be subordinat to spiritual.
Religion is the highest rule. But to give you all contentment; Page 6. 7.
if you only must be wise, and your plots approved; Then to satissie you in
your own devises of security, which be by oath, and pecuniary punishments:
Concerning the last, I have made you a reckoning before, how the Catholics
of England which defend their Religion, answer yearly, and truly far greater
sums to her Majesty's use for that cause, then, you demand: If they come not
to her purse, you know they be not such Recusants which be Receauers and
hinder it. And for other Subjects, how no gain at all, but general discontent
would grow, by tender of such oaths, your own opinion so often repeated of
Parliament and disguised Papists, overthrows your first position, and would
prove the practice to be ridiculous. Touching an oath for the security of our
most honored Queen, and the temporal estate of this kingdom, a man of such
reading as you affect to be reputed, does know, that a spiritual oath was
never used in any Nation, to secure a civil Regiment: Neither by any wit, can
you now make it a politic invention for that purpose. Where the ends be
diverse, the means must needs be different. But seeing it pleases you thus
far to give confidence to the consciences of Catholics (which is more then
we dare assume for you) Then if you remember what is written, Page 6. 7.
both in domestical, and foreign histories commended, and commanded in laws
of Princes, to such sntents. Temporal Regiments are, and ever were secured,
both in this, and other Nations, by oaths of temporal, and civil duty, and
obedience. To this, our ancient Statutes, and the particular oaths of private
offices, as of general, and common allegiance be testimony, Then Sr, to secure
our Prince, and try our assections, if you move our gracious Sovereign to
receive all Catholihkes into her protection, which will take such oath, which
is so much as we ever gave to former Prince, or our laws require, or her
Majesty (will as I hope) needs to demand, let all which refuse so loving,
and gracious dealings, be as in all former ages, forth of her favor and
defense. And whereas your new engine is, that oaths, should be chiefly
ministered to Gentlemen, Magistrates, and Possessionors, Page 6.
by which particular you know how many be exempted, yet to take all danger of
your perilous Priests, and Jesuits away, procure, that upon their acceptance
of this, and rheir allegiance sworn, they may be discharged from your
Inuectiues, slanders, and other hazardes. And because you change opinions so
often, if any new eonceite of scruple, shall make you newly perplexed, that
they will not deal sincerely: Let them be put to secure this, with a second
vvarrant, of known, and sufficient sureties. And I do not doubt, but both
Jesuits, and Priests, will as willingly accept, and truly perform that oath,
and with as great contentment to all, find as ample, and able pledges, as
Puritanes can do, either for their duties to Sovereign, or debts to Subjects:
which we trust, the innocence of our behavior, and creditte in that cause,
with such as will be taken for greater matters, shall procure; if the danger and
disgrace, to give assurance for such persons, and in such a case, be taken
away. And to put a perpetual bar between you, and all future fear of our
foreign Seminaries, and dealings for other Princes, if a man of your
direction could, and would procure unto us, so much grace with our most
gracious Queen, to tolerate in this Kingdom, but a fevve Schools, for the
education of Students, and to allow but the least number of Catholic
Bishops, to sacre the Priests of our Nation, I am out of doubt, you shall see,
that we will most willingly resign all pensions, stipends, and allowances,
from strange Princes, although out of so many hundreds of religious houses, and
thousands of spiritual livings, our ancient patrimony, your benevolence gives
us nothing at all. And if you have confidence in your cause, that your Religion
is true, let our Colleges be in your Universities, whose ancient constitutions
we will observe, and trial will sooner be made, whether Puritanes or Papists
defend the better worcester ship: And if you dare not deal in that (as I am
secured you will not, which we will grant to you in Catholic Schools, but you
never durst grant the one, or accept the other) allotte our aboade, to meaner
and obscurer places. By this means, and such oaths as you may tender, and
security offered, all our traficke, and suspecte of concourse with Spain,
Spanish, or any enemy will be taken away. And to put you in some hope of
indee^pnity by such proceedings, look into Saxony, and other countries where
this is used, and you shall perceive a long continued unity for many years
past, no suspicion at this present, or danger for times to come. O Sr, do you
think any English Catholic can beso unnatural or foolish (if he has but
common wit, which I hope you will allow to our labors, learning, and
travails) to desire to live under a foreign Regiment, if he may live at
home, though in dishonor our daily returning into England to your tortures,
from security abroad, is testimony unto our sincerity. I take the whole court
of heaven to witness, I am, and ever was. far from wishing, and I think,
there is neither Jesuit, nor Priest in England which desires it: It was an
old saying, and prayer of my father when I was a child, that we might speak
English still, and shall ever be the opinion of his son. And if your
Puritan factions be not greater hazard against it, then any practice of
Papist, I trust we shall enjoy it. I have bin more bold to acquaint you with
these things: first, because a great number of our English Priests, and
Jesuits, have undertaken those holy functions, by occasion of your Puritan
most unholy dealings and persecutions against them, even to their exilement
into those Nations. Secondly, (because I love to answer you with your own
Arguments) in respect you grant it a thing unjust, Page 35.
that Priests should be put to death, or persecuted, for affirming the Popes
Supremacy, and reco^ciling to the Church of Rome, which are parts of their
Priestly function: for if this security (which is all you demand) were given,
they could not be dangerous to the State, in civil consideration, though we
appeal to your judgment. Thirdly, because (if we should grant all your
untruths, and slanders against Priests, and Jesuits, to be the highest
verity) yet in your whole Pamphlet, you never charge any one Priest, or Jesuit
in particular, which is in England, to be guilty of any such conspiracy, Page
33. Proclam. 5. Nouemb. 1562.
except (perhaps) Doctor Bagshawe (whom with many others the late
Proclamation of her Majesty her self excuses) but you load the shoulders of
such as conuersed in other Nations, Page 33. Page 27. 30. 33.
as the late Cardinal Allen, D. Bristowe, D. Sanders, Father Parsons, and
Father Walpoole, to be the Agents in such business, neither can I, or any man of
equal sentence, perceive how a private Priest in England, lining under such
watchful cies, can carry the least suspicion to conspire with externe Princes.
Or what private Priest, durst broach such an enterprise to any Jesuit, Priest,
or Catholic in this Kingdom? or who would harken unto him, if he wereso
desperate to attempt it? And if you can, name that Jesuit, or Priest, the
Archpriest, Provincial of the Jesuits, or any Priest of their obedience,
which have dealt in such conspiracies: why are you silent only in that, and so
prodigal in all other kinds of accusall. Good Sir, utter your own name, and
that Jesuit or Priest in England, whom you have most confidence to accuse,
set down the fact and offense, against this present state in civil
consideration, and I doubt not, but he will acquit himself to your confusion and
shame. Therefore if this law could be enacted by yoru intercession, our
gracious Queen, Council, and whole State, might sleep in security by your
own sentence, except the ruffling winds of your Puritan spirit should awake
thee^. And if you should be yet perplexed, that so small a number of Jesuits,
and Priests, living in so disgraced conditions, by their learning, and example
of regular life, would win people from your great multitude of ten Puritanes
to one Protestant, and from your pleasant and libertine Religion, to so
Austere, and penitential profession, with so many dishonours, as Catholic
worship should be in such terms. Then Sir you may be secured, by all rules of
Religion and reason, that Puritanisme is false, and Catholic Reverence most
holy. And if the whole state of England it self, her Majesty our successor,
should be moved by so many forcible, and undeniable true Motyues as this
worship has, yet such common wealth men as you need not to doubt, but
England then would be as mighty, and able to defend it self, against Spain
and all foreigners, as England Puritanes would be. Reckon all hundreds of
years since the conquest, examine the state of those days, before the revolt
of Henry the eight, and see whether I am deceived or no. Your sect has
offended many, but not defended or exalted any kingdom.

THE XXI. VNTRVTH.
BUT howsoever obedient and dutiful Catholics are, this man proceeds in
his usual vain, and like astone descending, by how much nearer center, so
much more violent. And begins his Heralds office of defiance, even to the
State it self, of which he has bin hitherto so kindly careful. And because
he loves authority and pleads for it, of such as be placed therein, and have
credit with her Majesty (he means some of her privy Council) he affirms
not only that they have incurred Praemunire, Page 38.
by favoring, comforting, counselling, or abetting an appeal to Rome,
contrary to the Statute of 24. H. 8. c. 22. whereby he calls their liberties,
lands, and goods into question. But because he will cast at all, even their
lives themselves, charge them not only with Priests and Jesuits, but to
have received ahsolutio^, indulgence, or dispensatio^ by such means. Which,
what an untruth it is, I need not vrter; and how venomous against such
personages, I remit to others censure. And concerning the Protestant Bishops,
now at last he rewards with the offalles of the whore of Babylon. Page 40.


THE XXII. AND LAST Vutruth.
AND as the nature of the spirit of these pretendors is to rule, and to
govern, to be at defiance with all, peace with none; so now he denounces
wars, mustereth his men, calls his Lords together, surueyeth his Cities, and
Towns, Page 40. 41:
numbreth his Gentlemen, Captains, men affaction and resolution, and arrayeth
his whole Army in such order and multitudes, ten to one, that if dissembling,
and untruths may not be admitted, yet his confidence is, that he may prevail
by arms. And tells in plain terms, that it is not good to provoke the
Puritanes. And why? forsooth because to use his words. London and good Towns,
Lords, Gentlemen, and Captains, (that be of the Religion) incline that way,
and be men of action, and resolution. And concerning his Chaplains, thus he
boasts: Setting by nonrefidents and dumb dogs, ye shall sinde ten
Puritanes, for one formalist. What the meaning of these men is, requires no
difficulty to decypher. And yet if his words were true, I doubt notbut he
would dispute in an other manner (which their spirit teaches) and battle
with weapons and not with words, as they have threatened in other Pamphlets, and
their holy brethren performed in other place. But for this time, I will put it
in the number of his untruths. For if so many in authority and credit with her
Maresty, and the Mayor part of Parlamet, Clergy, and others are this man's
Papists, then it cannot be true, that most Lords, Gentlemen, and Captains, and
men of action and resolution, London, and towns out of which those Papist
Burgesses were chosen, be for them. And although the affirmation or denial of
them, which speak so untruly, is not to be regarded; yet if we will either
consider their Religion in it self, what it teaches, community of things,
wars, rebellions, spoils, and usurpation of others labors, few will be
found (for I do not speak but some may be deceived) which have either wit,
wealth, honor, credit, authority or estimation, but would be willing to
maintain them, which in this destructine Religion, they cannot perform. Or if
we will be measured by experience, we shall consider, that in these London and
good towns (whereof they glory) only the meanest and most needy, which hope
by exhanges and innouations to be exalted, and among their clergy, such as want
wealth, and benifices (which they cannot get) envying at others substance, have
embraced this Religion. And if they could be adua^ced, and change their
debased estate, Petr. frar. or. cont sectar. nou. test. tr ord. Burg in
remonstrat. sup. edict. Reg. Gal. delens. Reg. and Rel.
would be no more scrupulous to change their pretended perfection, then their
brothers a Tailor and Cobbler at Franckford, which were under no law before,
when they had gotten head constituted Laws, Courts, and Rulers, as their
spirit taught them. And as Calvin, Beza, Othoman, and others, both in
Switzerland, and France, could neither endure riches, or regiment, but kept
councels to depose Princes and Rulers: yet when themselves prevailed, could
both approve of riches, and keep others in subjection to their devises.

Thus we se, by these sew things wherein I have exemplisied in so short a
Pamphlet, how falsely and corruptly he has dealt, if the rest of his untruths
should be measured with like examine: Which for many causes, and not to be
offensive, I have omitted. And therefore, when voluntarily I pass over so many
sorgeries, let no man think, that I have allowed for truth, such things as I
have not here consuted. And concerning the humility, Motyues, loyalty, and
love of this Associator to our gracious Princess, and those Protestant Bishops
whom he takes in hand to teach, I hope no man will be so moveable to be
carried with the motions of him, which not only without any motive at al,
would move so great a Queen and Kingdom, to go about utterly to remove a
Religion, which had reigned vnre moved, in her most holy and renowned
Ancestors and this Nation so many hundreds of years; and moved by so certain
and infallible motives as I have recited, the whole Christian world to honor
and defend it: but such as every man of judgment (and such as will not be moved
with every blaste of such unconstant and contemptible men) may suppose they
were, by which so many proud Pagan Emperors and Princes of the earth, so many
wise and learned Philosophers, Magicians, and potent enemies were conquered, to
profess so poor and penitential life, in regard of those honors and
pleasures they had enjoyed. Neither is this the end and scope of that
Associator as I have described: But to move our Sovereign, first to
establishe that Religion which she has allowed, only until such time, as he
hops the former may be overthrown: And then, both that. and the professors
thereof, must be diminished and taken away, as his own words have
witnessed. And that uncertain, unconstant, false, and seditious profession
which never has end, but ever is in debate, contention, disobedience,
rebellion, and dissentions wickedness must be erected. When the Vicar of
Greenewitch, or Deane of Winsor, or Parson of any place, where the Queen or
King shall keep their Court, may depose them as their spirit pleases. Which
under Puritan correction, to use this man's phrase is far more dangerous to the
State in civil consideration: Page 35:
then to maintain supremacy in the Sea of Rome. And yet I make a doubt, if
your Presbitery may be planted, and the pretended persection in Religion
admitted, whether any Queen, King, or Prince, may be allowed with that
submission. For such Regents are incompatible of those brethren, upon whom no
law may be imposed. Then Nobles, and Council, are to cease where both
community of things must be, and so many Regalities and Regencies are, as
there be Parishes in this Nation, thousands of supremacies, more then can give
maintenance to any unity or Subordination. As for Protestant Bishops and al
such as depend upon ecclesiastical dignities, Page 24.
you have alreade enacted in this Pamphlet, as distinct and opposite to
Puritanes, viz. such as pretend perfection in Religion. How the depending
authorities of inferior Magistrates can have place, where the superior to
which they are subordinate, is taken away, it passes my invention. Or how the
private wealth wives, or any proper of Subjects, can be their peculiers, where
every beggarly, and lascivious wanton, must have his will, as his spiritte
leads, I find not in that profession. And yet your own writings witness,
this vvoulde be platform of holy Assotiation.

FINIS.

