Titulum ne horresce novantis,
Non rapit Imperium vis tua, sed recipit.
Ausonius de Seuero.


THE HISTORY OF That wise and Fortunate Prince, HENRY of that Name the
Seventh, King of England. With that famed Battle, fought between the said
King Henry and Richard the third named Crookbacke, upon Redmoore near
Bosworth. In a Poem by Charles Aleyn.

Vnus mihi pro populo, and populus pro uno. London Printed by Tho. Cotes, for
William Cook, and are to be sold at his shop, near Furnivalls-Inne gate in
Holburne. 1638.

Perlegi historicum hoc Poema, dignumque judico quod Typis mandetur.

Tho. Wykes. R. P. Episc. Land. Chapel. domest.

To his Ingenious friend Mr. Charles Aleyn, on this his learned Poem.
-- Sum Superbiam,
Quaesitam meritis --

Think not that these my weaker lines can raise
Or to thy name or to thy work a praise.
Yet give me leave to write, and let these be
The Testimonialls of my love to thee.
They Are no true Leigemen, whosoever disclaim
Tribute of Praise unto thy Henry's name.
Who now by thee instated lives, more high
Than in the joys of former Royalty;
And from thy hand receives a better Crown
Than was his Kingdoms Transitory one.
^y thee he conquers Death and Time, thy words
^^eld him his honor, more than could his swords,
And gain a Nobler victory than he
Obtained over usurping Tyranny.
Great Henry, whom wise heaven did ordain,
^o bless this Realm with thy most happy reign.
No more, dull Chronicle thy worth shall hold
Or sullen prose thy Noble acts infold.
Behold! the shrine wherein thy reverend story
Shall ever be preserved, and thy glory,
Fresh to all Ages; then it is just we give
Praise to his name, 'has made thine truly live.
Ed. Sherburne.

To my dear Friend Mr. Charles Aleyn.
WHen Fame had said, thy Poem should come out*
Without a Dedication; some did doubt
If fame in that had told a truth, but J,
Who knew her false, boldly gave fame the lie,
For I was certain that this book by thee,
Was Dedicated to Eternity.
Thy true lover, Ed. Prideaux.

THE HISTORY OF HENRY THE SEVENTH.
A Caesar, or that Maximilian,
Who was our Henry's learned Contemporary,
And his own Annalist, and Historian
Could only pen our Henry's commentary.
For only light it self, it self can show,
And none but Kings can write, what Kings can do.
Yet if those heights, which with aspiring look
Do overtop the rest, are easilier found,
And with more certain observation took
By those who stand upon the lower ground.
Then Henry's fame shall not disparrag'd be,
Although his Altitude be took by me.
Richard whose gummes his Birthday armed saw,
(Presage of cruelty) will needs make true
That dreaded sign; for he against the Law,
After confinement Gray, and Rivers slew.
For he the Devils Axiom did know,
If you depresse you must confound your foe.
Rivers and Gray must sacrificed be,
The sad oblation to Hastings power:
But to appease divine Astrea, He
Is offered next: a Scaffold at the Tower
His Altar was; curses his Obits were,
And for the Priest an Executioner.
But here is a story scarce has Parallel;
For at the time those two destruction met,
At the same Day and hour Hastings fell:
As in a Clock you see a 'larum set,
So was his Ruin set: Heavens vengefull power,
Wheeled Hastings fate, and struck him at an hour
'Twas Policy Hastings should suffer next,
For he had done his work, when they were slain:
Richard this doctrine borrowed from a Text
In Machiavell, who did this knowledge gain
From Caesar Borgia, Whom you do employ
In mischief, when it is done, you must destroy.
^hen Richard did the Prince, and York oppress,
For in the method of Confusion,
The other were humble premises unless
The Prince and York be the conclusion.
It seems he would by their pure Crimson shed,
Turn Yorkes white Rose to the Lancastrian Red.
Such Tears which from scorcht Phaetons sisters fell,
And in their fall did into Amber turn,
Would with their Ashes be proportioned well,
Rich ashes, worthy of so rich an urne.
For such sweet Corpses, and such limbs as theirs,
No Tomb is fit but one congealed of tears.
Twin-brethren in their death's; What had they done?
O, Richard sees a fault that they were in;
It is not Actual, but a Mortal one,
They Princes were, 'twas their Original sin.
Why should so sweet a Pair of Princes lack,
Their Innocents Day in the English Almanac.
Now here stand still, and gaze: their Father did
Richard instruct, Henry the sixth to Kill:
Their Father taught him by the blood he shed,
The Art, how he his childrens blood should spill.
Who value others blood at a low rate,
Make their own cheaper to be higgled at.
The sword of vengeance, which a single twine
Held over Richards head must now drop down
With ruin at the point; the Eye divine
Has spied a Hand, that must lop off his Crown.
Henry like Meleager must come over,
And combat with this Caledonian Bore.
Fourth Edwards Queen, and Henry's mother plot
The Union of her daughter and her son;
Both must be set as Flowers in Hymen's Knot,
And the two Roses be conjoined in one.
In Henry's Royal Crown there is not a stone,
Gives it such luster, as this Union.
Fate did this Union to Henry owe;
In whom there was a union more rare:
The Heaven's do not such a Conjunction show,
When the two highest Planets married are.
Scarce had the world seen such a union yet,
Where Wisdom, Valor, and where Fortune met.
But though the Queen, and Lady had contrived
Their Cabinet of councels close as his,
Who vowed to burn his shirt, if it conceived
But his least plot: Yet all unlocked is
By some false Key Kings have long hands and ears,
And then hear best, when they have greatest fears.
Buckingham flies for this; and monie's bid
For's Head; cursed Banister the bargain made,
And made his Lord his Ware; and basely did
Sell him for money, which he never was paid.
Ungrateful servant, thou to him did owe
All that thou could, and all thou could not do.
Puissant Gold! Redearth at first made man,
Now it makes Villain; this refined clod
Can what nor love, nor time, nor valor can,
Jove could do more in Gold, than in a God.
Destruction surer comes, and rattles louder,
Out of a Mine of Gold, than one of powder.
But Banister has his merit; this offense
And treacherous Act his progeny betrayed
To Heaven's revenge. But why must Innocence
Suffer for him? stay there: the Ancients made
Divine Revenge to be the child of Night
Shut to the Earths, but open to heavens sight.
The immediate hand of Heaven did scourge this sin;
One son wa^ drowned, one son with lamenesse took:
White Leprous scales rough-cast his daughters skin
His Eldest son was with a madness struck,
And so unfit to be an heir that he,
Had not his portion o^ humanity.
But here I wonder Richard did not pay
Such Traitors: how can Richard justly look
For more such agents, others to betray?
Fabius this council of his father took.
For if, said he their payments be deny'de,
You teach them how to leave, not choose your side.
Now Henry is aboard; now under sail,
Both shipped, and manned from Brettaigne; but the Sea
Vexed with a scolding sto^^e, and thwarting gale,
Proroges his executing Heavens decree.
'Though tossed, none were afraid; for all did know*
They carried Henry and his fortune too.
Or Eole with his spear did strike his Cave,
(The Goal of winds) and give them liberty,
The Watery god in his own court to brave:
Or Henry's friends, by some fair Augury,
Foresaw his danger, if he landed then,
And sent their sighs to blow him back again.
The Morning showed him all the shores beset
With walking steel; Henry his Ship-boate sent,
To know if they in Henry's cause were met:
Ambiguously they send him their intent.
They said he should to Buckingham be led,
And so he should for Buckingham was dead.
But Henry's wise distrust did bid him stay
(They were not Lizzards in the grass did lie
But Evets:) a belief had made the way
To his repentance, not recovery.
Trust makes us our own Traitors: nor could He
Be saved by faith, but infidelity.
Henry thus cros'd by Sea, and yet thus blessed
To escape a wrack at Land, and wrack at Sea,
Makes sail to Brettaigne his assured rest;
Where English meeting, swear him fealty,
And pawning to him both their selves and state*
Will take their own in following Henry's fate.
At this on Richards thoughts worse storms did fall,
Than Henry had at Sea, or ever rose
Charmed by a Lapland witch, which made him call
A Council, and declare them Englands foes,
Who were her friends: Thus if the Lion do
Say Ears be Horns, they must be deemed so.
Then offers richly to have Henry slain,
But Henry's lands must be the murderers fee;
A cunning Chapman, he would Henry gain
At the best rate: what is Henry's own, must be
Henry's own Price; as if you would him pay
The Lions skin, that would the Lion slay.
What will you give me is the common cry
In Treasons Mart: by Rule of Relatives
There will be some to sell, if some to buy:
Landose was chapman and the sale contrives.
In this design he will the Engine prove,
But silver weights must make the Engine move.
But Mortons piercing eye descried the Plot
Through the thick night of closeness, and did bring
Light to the danger Henry dreamed not;
Wise Counselors shine nearest to the King,
Upon this lower Orb, as in the sky
Sol constantly is nearest Mercury.
Saved by this light, Henry to France did make,
Hid in his man's apparel changed for his:
Famed Barclay made his Poliarchus take
A vizzard, in his high-writ Arginis.
Nay, gods they say have done it, to escape
Less trusting to their deity, than shape.
Richard informed that the Earl was fled
From Brettaigne his best hold, nor could expect
Succors from France; will not allow his head
The notion of a foe, but let neglect
Lull him in danger; like a Seal that sleeps,
When an enfranchised tempest scares the deepes.
And to be the Extract of security
His Fleet's discharged, Welsh to the Coasts assigned;
To shut all Landing from the Enemy;
But Henry is their Country man, and friend.
They will not close to Henry: when he shone,
They were the flowers that opened to this sun.
This fatal slackenesse Richards party made
Apt for impression, supple to receive
The Characters of a victorious blade,
Which Henry must imprint: the Heaven's do leave
Some parts for him to act. Who would be great
He must court fame not in perfume, but sweat.
But now this news arrives; Richard would wed
Elizabeth, by whom Henry must claim:
Fear at this news amongst Henry's soldiers spread,
Without his settled soul had spoyld their aim.
But he, wise Marksman bids them quickly on,
Least hands should tremble, or the mark be gone.
To escape the tempest threatened by these clouds,
Henry from Hartflew sets sail to sea;
The winds tuned by Heaven sung in the shrowds
Presaging that he should victorious be.
You would have thought, he came so fairly in,
He had the winds charmed in a Dolphins skin.
Blessed Milford Hav'n whose semicircling Bays
With amorous embraces hugged his Fleet:
From thence was given the signal that did raise
Our hopes deprest under a Tyrans feet.
And happy Milford shall triumph in this,
Henry was Englands Haven, Milford was his.
Sir Rice ap Thomas with his British power
First mixed his influence with Henry's stars;
Which Act enstil'd him, Wales her Governor;
This Honor crowned his merit in these wars:
Thus Hercules in Heaven is fixed down
Next to the stars called Ariadnes Crown.
Then Talbot joining with two thousand strong,
The volume is enlarged: their forces grow
With new additions, as they march along.
As bellowing Volga issuing from Franow,
Whilst in his stream he new supplies does take,
Pays seventy Inlets to the Caspian Lake.
Richard is mad Henry meets no control;
Choleric heat shakes his distempered nerves,
Blood lies his Veins, and fury oades his soul.
Choler, they say, as arms for valor serves:
But weapons seldom have been fashioned thus,
We rule our other weapons, this rules us.
(...) thickened blood about his Heart did sees,
(...) Heart which in revenging heat did send
(...) spirits out, his spirits which did breath
Fire in his eyes, his eyes which did portend
Ruin like Comets, or like Beacons flame,
To tell that Henry, and their danger came.
But Henry in a dump marching behind
(Having more thoughts in's Company than men)
Was lost in the night, nor could his Army find,
But in the morning came to it again
To bring it Day; for without Henry's light,
Although the Sun had shind, it had been Night.
Yet when the sun was set, it was not Night
In Richards Conscience: that light never goes out:
Or Devils limn'd by his fancy did affright,
And seemed to tear, and hale Richard about.
Or else they real were, and came to see,
What diffrence 'twixt his Tent, and Hell might be.
Morpheus, that does Phantasticke Idols feign,
Never with dreams the Atlantic People frights;
Because they feed not upon what is slain,
Such diet had made Richard calmer nights.
But Richard had been fleshed, and blooded deep,
And spite of Poppie blood will break a sleep.
The marks of fear were in his looks impressed,
Which though in wisdom he would have defaced;
Yet in those looks the Index of his Breast
Some figures of distraction were so placed,
That a deciphrer might without a Key,
Read the distracted Characters in's Eye.
Now he is by Bosworth pitched, whence he sent over
A charge to Stanly to advance his power,
And join with him, or by Christ's Passion swore
His son, his Hostage should be slain that hour.
He answered, he had more: 'Twas highly done,
To prove his faith by offering of his Son.
Strange he should Stanly a Commader make;
His match with Henry's Mother did him bind
To Henry: hence weak Policy might take
The Crisis of his fall: to be so blind,
Was deaths unerring Symptom: when we dye
Death with her lead does first arrest our eye.
Then Richard like a man, that first would taste,
And then Carowse in Blood, puts Stanlies son
In The Headsmans hand; his Council stayed the haste
Of the Execution till the field was won.
Where Richard falling, Stanly freedom got,
And Richards bane, was Stanlies Antidote.
^hus Julian vowed to offer Christians blood
^f he his Persicke victory did gain,
^ut Heaven his vow, and victory withstood,
^or Iulian's self was in the Battle slain.
The Christians escaped then, young Stanly now,
Julian, and Richard had like fate like vow.
Now in the Glass of Time, that Sand by course
^egan to run, which should begin the Time
Of Richards fall, who sat upon a horse
All white, whiter than he that sat on him.
It seemed an Emblem offered to the sense
Of guilt, triumphing over Innocence.
Then drawing out his men, he did commend
The forward to Old Norfolk to be led,
Which in a shapelesse length he did extend,
That seeming greater it might strike more dread.
But strongest bodies wier-drawne in length,
What they do get in terror, lose in strength.
^n his Battalia stood his tried forces,
Who being used to danger did not use
^o fear her looks: on either side his Horses
Stood out for wings; this strength himself did choose.
Which upon Henry had victorious been;
But naked virtue can beat armed sin:
Then like those Generals, whose Examples are
Precepts for leaders, for the times to come:
In an Oration of more power in war
Than the wild Rhetoric of Fife and Drum,
He to his men his cause and mind did break,
And thus did speak, or thus was made to speak.
Chiefetaines and friends; they were your hands tha^ mad^
This Garland for me, and your Swords that set it
Upon this head; then let it never be said,
That others hands and swords should ever get it.
Be jealous of this right; that only you,
Who first did crown it, can uncrowne this Brow.
This Throne, since I sat in it, has been the Throne
As well of Justice, as of Royalty;
My rule has been Tyrannical to none,
Directed by the line of Equity.
My Morning red against all Astronomy,
Turned to a day full of serenity.
It Is true that through a Sea of Blood I did
Arrive at this wished Port; much blood was spilt
To waft me hither; yet the Tears I shed,
I trust did expiate my purple gilt.
Then guard me, and if tears did me atone,
What need my Veins do what my eyes have done*
^ut up your hearts to fear, but keep your eyes
(...) to danger. This before you set
(...) alike hard to Keep, as win a Prize,
^d no less virtue to maintain, than get.
See in this diadem this truth enrold,
That which my sweat did get, my blood must hold.
^^t if your squeamish appetites have been
^^ted with my mild government, and long
^^r Richmonds second service, bring him in
^^d taste his certain sharpness: for among
All that from Exile did a Kingdom gain,
Not one that did not like a Tyranne reign.
^^are not his ragged Regiments, which are
(...) fumes, and exhalations drawn out
(...) his false heat; and He himselfe's the Star,
(...) leads these straggling Meteors about;
Which like those hayrie blazings in the sky,
Shine always against the Sun of Majesty.
(...) forfeiteth his reason that expects
^^om such a rascal herd of men as they
(...) any thing but ruinous effects;
^^ur lives, as well as livings are their prey.
Like robberies men on foot, and women do,
Their safety is to Rob, and Murder too.
Their mercy must not be your Hope, but Scorn:
It is their fate to take, and yours to give:
You cannot be legitimately borne,
If it shall be their favor, that you live.
The Engagement is more Glorious to owe
Your lives unto your selves than to your foe.
The wounds they give are General, each blow
Strikes through your children, and your wives, but yet
It hits but you: they do not only throw
At you, nor you alone at hazard set.
Here Is greater game, England is staked at this,
And as your virtue such her fortune is.
There Richard stayed, there would some soldiers stay,
And to the Action the same Period set,
That he did to his speech: for what can they
Hope from so poor an Enemy to get.
And he is unwise that to a Market goes,
Where there is nothing to be sold but blows.
Booty does more the common soldier move,
Than a discourse of prowess, or high thought
Of Magnanimity, or the inbred love
Of natural virtue: and the English fought
On less advantage for the Spanish plate,
Than e're they did for the poor Irish State.
Richards imbattail'd, what shall Richmond do,
Who never saw army, never armor wore
A novice, and mued up in Brettaigne too.
'Twas a rare spectacle unseene before
To play his Masterprize upon the stage
At the first day of his apprentisage.
One therefore did to the Lord Stanly go,
To beg his aid in ordering the fight.
Stanly said Richmonds self that work should do,
Which seized Richmonds mind with such affright,
And cross distraction, that he needed then,
One to arrange his thoughts, more than his men.
But he did both, and to himself did owe
The ordering of them both. Extremity
Is a shrewd Mistress: the most Arts we know
Derive their being from necessity.
She tutour'd Henry, and her Power divine,
Out-did Experience, and old discipline.
The fore-ward (which his numbers did allow
To be but single) in the forefront has
Men that were well experienced in the Bow,
Trusted to Oxfords fortune, and his Faith.
The arrows looked like Rays diffused about,
And Oxford was the Sun, that glanced them out.
Salvage and generous Talbot did appear
Out at the wings; whose pinions were all hard,
Conferred with themselves: and yet they were
Flagges, and sicke-feathers, if with them compared.
These were the Principals, that did them carry,
And set them, where a Kingdom was the quarry.
Then the maine Battle Richmond did begin
To fashion out; for he, like Nature, meant
To make his best Productions last; and in
The Body of the Army Richmond went,
A Head thus in a body set, did show
Like a strange Prodigy, portending woe.
Then Richmond spok (for though some think no more
Speeches can soldiers make, than a Tune Heard
Can a Musician) Caesar would deplore
When the Enemies approach his speech debarred.
Needs must that want be great that could constrain
A man so great as Caesar to complain.
And thus he spoke. If punishment, and sin
Are borne at once, then cannot Richard dream,
But that in Heaven his has for vengeance been:
For murders have lowed voices, and the Steame,
Which fumes from blood, does tear the clouds in sunder
Such exhalations can breed naught but thunder.
Think that you hear his slaughterd Brother cry,
And beg your alms of vengeance on his brother:
Think that you see his Nephews smothered lie
In Bed, exchanging one sleep for another.
And now heel wed his Niece, as if he would
Be more alli'de by sin, than by his Blood.
On Crooke-backe as a Malefactor look,
Abstracted from the Title of a King:
But view your selves as Instruments, are took
By Heavens corrective hand vengeance to bring.
Be Bold: there can be no resistance made,
When Justice strikes with a Soldiers blade.
This is the Point of time: you must strike home;
Judgment holds execution by the hilt:
His sins are ripe, and to their growth are come;
His blood is now prepared to wash his gilt.
Vengeance does surely, 'though but slowly tread,
And strikes with Iron, 'though it walks with lead.
Dare, what they think you dare not: for that thought
Makes the act easy, 'cause they think not so:
The ends at which we level, will be brought
Under command, if we but dare to do
The hardness of an act as often springs
From our Imagination, as the things.
If you fear death, you shall decline that fear
By change of Object: pitch your thoughts upon
Those Garlands, which victorious you shall wear:
Graspe conquest in your apprehension.
No other qualities can be expressed,
When the Instruments of sense are prepossest.
You manage death by facing it; blows shun
Those that present themselves to meet a wound:
Death's a Coy Mistress, court her she is not won,
Of those which sought her, she was rarely found.
Who shows his back to danger soonest dies,
The shadow of death from her pursuer flies.
Though his assaults be feirce, the charges hot
Partaking of that wildfire, which does glow
In Richards bosom; yet conceit them not
Certain presages of an overthrow.
Sharp maladies, and hardest to endure,
Have not in Physic their predictions sure.
Fear not his numbers: Victories consist
In minds, not multitudes: most of their part
Favor our cause, and coldly will resist:
Fea^e not the hand, assured of the heart.
Be wisely bold, and like a Center stand,
And fly with Brutus, not with foot, but hand,
Flight may be their security, and though
They vanquish not, they know there is a mean
Between a Trophee, and a Grave: but you
Are in a certain desperateness between
Conquest and death: you must not doubt to dye
Though Fortune doubts to give the Victory.
That word pronounced last, impression made:
(So the last sounds result most forcibly.)
Lost in the mazes of their ears it played,
Till they were ravished into valiancie.
For valor was infused at this Oration,
As at a Fiat, or some new Creation.
Then, or to give an omen of the event,
Or make their courage to their General known;
Shouts breathing forwardness to Heaven were sent.
If winged Victory through the Air had flowne,
They had so rent the Air with that vast found,
That before Battle she had dropped to ground.
Assurance now having armed all their hearts
With proof against fear, not danger; they prepare
To arm themselves compleately at all parts,
Offensive, and defensive: one might swear
They did such motions to their Armor give,
That Iron breathed, and that steel did live.
Albert, whose speaking statue with a stroke
Of Aquin fell: A work of Art (cried out)
Of thirty years is broke: but here were broke
Works, which even Nature was as long about
Blows to their Principles resolve again,
Natural statues, artificial men.
The Archers strip their sleeves, who must define
The Controversy here debated on:
The sun of Richmonds hopes was in the sign
Of Sagittarius, and there chiefly shon.
The feathers of their shafts sung as they went
Being newly set to the one-string'd Instrument.
Next these, men of exalted valor come,
Whom their Commanders fires did sublime;
Who scorning the encouragement of Drum,
Their Pulses beat a March: but discipline
Bad them expect the Trumpet, whose shrill breath,
Some spirits raised to Glory, some to death.
Between both Armies a great Marish lay,
(A loving bar to hateful Union)
Which Richmond on his right side kept to stay
And break their charges: from his back the Sun
Faced the foe, so that you might surmise,
That Heaven, and Earth brought Richmond their supplies.
But Richard seeing how his plot did lie,
Breaks through the Marsh: the Archers then begin
To let their shafts, like winged Serpents fly,
With their heads forward, and their stings therein;
Nor stung they like the selfe-disarming drone,
They had more stings, when their first stings were gone
As when the thorny Porcupine's pursued
(Whose self is her own quiver, and her bow;
And shafts, and strings) the damage is renewed
Of her lost quils, which by succession grow.
And such their quivers were, as if the had been,
Made of the Hide of an armed Porcupine.
Here Caesar's was good council. Strike the face,
For in this field brothers with brothers fought,
Sires with their sons; and so when wounds erase
The looks, and tear the marks of kindred out:
They having lost the knowledge of each other,
Nor duty stays the son, nor love the brother*
While the Archers from their liberal quivers do
Distribute Death, the men at arms rush thither;
Nor staying 'till they are asked, match with the foe,
Whom hatred does more firmly wed together
Than others love: divorced not till they dye,
This Knot is to be cut, not to unty.
There Active Oxford did like lightning fly
Deliverd from the Prison of a cloud:
Men with his sword, as Planet-stroke did dye,
His spritfull bear did blast them; and he showed
Valor so much to spare above one Glory
Might fetch a coward out of Purgatory.
There one such wondrous executions did,
That with those Arguments you might have proved
That Miracles were yet continued:
Some of them thought that Mars himself had moved
Down from his sphere: thus wondering who't should be
At last one cried a Talbot, and 'twas He.
By Talbots side, Salvage a name of war,
(Whose valor impd one of the wings) flies out.
The Actions of his Arm derived are
From strength in the Abstract: do not call them stout,
Mighty, Magnanimous, fatal; for as yet
Rhetoric has not found a fit Epithet.
There Pembroke holding out a Head epsy,
Perseus holds out Medusas in this fashion:
Had he then been translated to the sky,
He had blazed out in such a Constellation:
That our Astronomors had h^rdly seen,
Which had bin Perseus, which had Pembroke been.
And Richards men as well as these can fight,
But most of them for fear fought valiantly.
You would have thought this Paradox were right;
That fear breeds courage* for his flaming eye
Did fright them into valor, and none dared
Act there a cowards part, he was so scared.
Norfolk (a glorious star) that ruled that Day,
Like something, more than man did men pursue:
Without the aid of fire he de make away
Through the Alps: nay prove Philosophy untrue
Which thinks there cannot a third nature lie
Between an Angel, and Humanity.
With Shield and sword, Ferrars did next appear,
(The Emblem both of safety and of death;)
Marcellus, and stayed Fabius who were
The sword, and shield of Rome, in him did breath*
Mars would have thought, had Mars his actions seen
Himself the trans-sumpt, this the pattern been.
There lay an Archer whom that arrow slew
Which he shot last: for fallen another took
That arrow, and applied it to his Yew,
Which with a resalute the owner struck
And did so suddenly return again,
That he was only by reflection slain.
Here see a Breast cut open with a wound
Wider than death, He, who man's shape did blame,
Cause in his Breast there was no window put
To have his heart discerned through that frame;
Would have confessed, had he been in those parts,
Such windows needelesse to discover hearts.
There see an Arm sunder men by the sides:
One instrument by a Compendious way
Makes two divorces, and at once divides
Their Bodies from themselves, and souls: you may
But that incorporeity controules
Fear there had been dissection of souls.
There (as if Birthrights had been questioned) stood
The womb at war with it self, and brethren fought:
There Kinsmen fought, and streaming forth their blood
Into one channel found their Kindred out,
And proved without the aid of Heraldry,
How near they were by consanguinity.
Sword upon sword, a shield upon a shield
A source of blood below, and one appear
Above: yet was there not in all that field
A solecisme, in Armory, nor there
Did it abate, but make the Honor fuller
Metal upon metal, color upon color.
^hilosophers who have so anxious been
^nquiring where the soul does chief reside
Within the heart or Brain: if they had seen
^ow weapons were by all the soldiers plied.
The question then had been no longer scand;
They had defined the seat had been the hand.
But see how Richard fumes, as if he could
Turn men to incense with his fiery eyes
The Evil spirit of his fury would
Be expiated by such Sacrifice.
Like to those gods the heathen did adore,
With hecatombes of men, and humane gore.
If when the souls from bodies are divorced
They transmigrate, and others do endue
By an assumption: Richards would be forced
To wander, and be desperate of a new;
Pythagoras had been posed and never could find
A Body, suitable to such a mind.
Into the fanges of danger he did go,
(Armed with the Doctrine of fatalitie
As strongly as all Turkey:) every foe
Did feel him, for he proved ubiquitie,
And bodies unconfined: he like a soul
Was both in every part, and in the whole.
As if he had drunke^ Opium that day
With madded fits he furied on the foe;
In a magnanimous scorn, that fame should say,
That Richard would outlive his overthrow.
Or that he did the rule Authenticke hold:
That Generals should not dye, till they were old.
This Eagle caught no flies: stooped at men like
Brandon, and mighty Cheney; nor would bate
At a slight quarrie, much more scorned to strike,
It seemed his actions did prognosticate
The sweating sickness, which ensued e're long,
Which scorning weak ones, only seized the strong*
But Chenies foil Cheney could not appall;
He rose with Deaths inscription in his face,
Most terrible of terribles; his fall
Enfir'd his spirits, chafed with the disgrace.
Thus from the Earth Antheus did recoyle,
With powers reenforc'd from every foil.
But Brandon fell till Doomes-day, and there lies
His colors might his winding-sheete become;
A Phoenix from the Phoenix did arise;
Brandon, that demigod, that Charles, in whom
The Essense of fortitude so plainly shind,
Had you said Brandon, it had been defind.
This Breviarie of consuming ire
And Commonplace, of what is called stout,
Grew by their opposition, and his fire
Got heat by those, which strove to put it out.
Force not opposed would languish; so would he,
Mountains that burn do border on the Sea.
He like a Bore (his bearing was the Bore)
(A cognizance which with his mind agrees)
Broke up the ranks to Richmonds self, and tore
Men up like trees; men that are like to trees
Inverst; but Richmond he extirped not.
Non tibi spiro was this Roses Mott.
There an untutour'd fortitude did try
Experimental valor, personal strength;
That is, soft Richmond Richard did defy,
And warded the Bores tuskes at his swords length.
You could not have a cleaner valor seen,
Though Magnanimity had incarnate been.
And his impression in his soldiers hearts
Made them his medals: he like Chymicke fire
Put souls of Gold into their Earthy parts;
And by his mountures taught them to aspire.
Actions of Kings are precepts; what they do
Seem to be precedents, and warrants too.
Exempli gratias teach not but compel;
There Is no such Canon, as Authority;
They do their doctrine tacitly refell,
Who with their Acts do not exemplify.
Men practice what they see by Leaders done,
Not Caesar's, Ito but his Veni won.
Now Conquest with her wings fand every side
With equal hope, and struck with equal fear:
Like scales with constant motion they slide,
Now that is upward, and now this is there.
And Henry's faith with fears, yet hopes was mixed,
Like to those stars which tremble, yet are fixed.
The Ancients gave a sphere to victory,
On which her feet stand giddie, and uneven;
But hence just causes draw alacrity,
Her hands are holden by the hand of Heaven.
Here Is Henry's fear, she on a sphere does stand,
Here Is Henry's hope; Jove holds her by the hand.
As thus the question doubtfully did stand,
And unconcluded: Stanly did come on
With sword, and a decision in his hand:
Thus under the Equator, when the Sun
With hottest flames tosteth the peoples skin,
The constant Breeze brings a cool rescue in.
^he case at worst Stanly determines it,
^he soldiers cries this martial court adjourne;
and temper danger in her highest fit.
Were Daphne woman still, she'de sooner turn
A Laurel to crown him, than to escape
The lustful charges of Apollos rape.
Yet Richard with such rage himself commits
With the whole host, that he may make the story
Questioned though writ by Truth: but these strong fits,
Were lightnings before death; for this worlds glory
Is figured in the Moon, they both wax dull,
And suffer their Eclipses in their full.
And now I see him sink: his eyes did make
A shot like falling stars: flash out and done:
Groaning he did a stately farewell take,
And in his night of death set like the sun.
For Richard in his west seemed greater, than
When Richard shined in his Meridian.
^hree years he acted ill, these two hours well,
And with unmated resolution strove:
He fought as bravely, as he justly fell.
As did the Capitol to Manlius prove,
So Bosworth did to him, the monument
Both of his Glory, and his punishment.
Here leave his dust incorporate with mould;
He was a King, that challenges respect;
Pass by his Tomb in silence, as of old
They did their Heroes Temples, and erect
An Altar to Oblivion, while I
Another build to Henry's Memory.
This fortune sweld not Henry to a brave,
Mercy stepped in, and brought a Prohibition;
Those are best tempered fortitudes, which have
Some grains of Pity in their composition.
Valor's the Iron virtue; yet abates
Naught of her self with silk upon her plates.
The wreath of Conquest in a Generous mind
Is an inducement to a moderation;
In all exalted spirits you shall find
Something of humbleness for mitigation
And Old Rome, built as Marius thought best
The Fane of Honor lower than the rest.
He conquered, yet lay prostrate in the field;
(His sacred Camp did like a Temple look;)
Where Henry first di^ stand, now Henry kneeld,
And changed his sword into a Prayer Book.
And solemnly did a Te Deum say,
Heaven's a kind Creditour, whom thanks can pay.
Care and his Crown, met at his Head together;
He is no sooner King, but he must be
An Oedipus, and solve this riddle; whether
He Will claim by Wife, or Birth, or Victory.
But for this Triple Knot, Henry had stored
A Tripple wedge, and broke this threefold Cord.
If by his Wife, he in effect had said
The line of York was better than his own;
Or why should man, who is the woman's Head,
To a woman's hand do Homage for a Crown?
And Henry thought it an unkingly thing,
To have his Crown indebted to his Ring.
Nor would he claim by Conquest, or give part
Unto the sword: for that would but affright
The Realm to forced obedience, and start
Men into giddy subjects; for it might
Make their faith stagger, and obedience reele,
If Henry's Scepter had been made of Steel.
At last his love to himself made the case plain
That Titles Royal in his blood did flow;
And every Vein was a Basilick vein;
This made him absolute: Henry did know
That Princes were most independent, when
Their Crowns do hold of Nature, not of men.
Having thus defined, which suddenly was done
(For's consultation, and his choice did go
Together) in a Progress he set on
For London, in a Coach unseene, and so
Appearing not, some God appeared to be,
Whom men adore, and yet no shape do see.
Then Orisons, and Hymns at Paul's were sung,
And (as before) Te Deum sung again,
His Banners in the Church for offerings hung.
When Henry prayed in the Army, the Camp then
Appeared a Church: when he his Banners reared,
Within the Church, the Church a Camp appeared.
Suspicion now whispered these aires about
That Henry was not real: every head
That could nor clear, yet could create this doubt,
That Henry never would with England wed,
And join with York. How can a s^eete enfold,
Two houses, which a Kingdom could not hold.
This doubt had ground; for he had given some Hope
To match with Brettaigne: But his case required
Some reservation, and an other scope,
Than he pretended, or than they desired.
In Common Tracts great actions must not go
Here that is the Kings high way, which fewest know.
To hush this talk he promised faithfully
To match at home: and make this noise appear
A Fable, gotten in adultery,
Between a scandalous Tongue, and itching Ear.
Bad them trust Henry, not the Buzze of Fame,
Which like some Hound, opens where is no game.
His Coronation then he hastened,
Which, (that the title might be all his own)
before the marriage was accomplished,
^east she might seem a sharer in the Crown.
For though in other loves it is strange yet he
Knew that his love might here his Riv all be.
and for his Glory, and his safety too,
^e did erect the Guard; Henry conjorn'd
things different in themselves; what none could do,
^he two discordant Roses he combined.
And which have rarely been allie'd by fate,
He did unite security, and state.
^hen called a Parliament, so to proclaim
that Justice was the Rule he'de govern by;
and that a Crown alone was not his aim.
^hus Hercules constelled in the sky
Though with one hand he at the Crown does reach.
He does the other to the Balance stretch.
There with a General Pardon he allaies
The fears of the Adverse Party: he did find
That fear lodged in a subjects breast can raise
A dangerous Passion: as we see combind
The Order of Causes in the Chain of Fate
So it is in Passions; if we fear, we hate.
Statutes against Riots were enacted then
By penalties to crush sedition
In The shell: for a confused Mass of men
Is as the Chaos whence Rebellion
Is first created; and all Riots are
The seeds, and Elements of Civil war.
The Parliament dissolved, he begun
To make his summer Progress; with his shine
To clear the Northern air, and like the sun
To Cancer did approach, the Tropicke sign.
And warming there the Yorke-addicted Hearts
He made the Summer Solstice in those parts.
Stafford, and Lovell now, who had not dared
To leave their Sanctuaries, had he been near:
Rise in the South, like some new stars, nor feared
(The King thus distant) boldly to appear.
Like Venus shine at noone, if she does run
Her greatest Elongation from the sun.
Lord Lovell with his powrs advancing forth
Marched toward York; the King to let them know,
He was in's Zodiac still, though so far North,
Did suddenly against the Rebels go.
In civil discords a delay may be
More dangerous than a temeritie.
But by his Heralds first he pardons sent,
(So Tamberlane sent his white flagge before.)
Henry by lenitives, not corsives meant
Those ulcerated members to restore.
No soldier but a Herald; nor a blow
But (strange) a Pardon overthrew the foe.
The best of Trophies: chiefly when the war
Is between King, and subject; those are best
Complexion'd conquests, which least sanguine are,
And those most modest which do blush the least.
Camillus once was by Romes Senate thought
Worthy to Triumph, though he had not fought.
And greatest Trophee too: they laid their hearts
At Henry's feet to be triumphed over
And yielded their minds captive, which imparts
The bravest glory to the Conqueror,
For it is more hard to reconcile than kill;
For you may force ones power but not his will.
After this Northern blast was overblowne,
The King is made the Father of a Son:
Arturus called; after whose birth did frown
State-tempests in the land; new storms begun
To shake his throne; thus tempests beat the skies
Soon as that star, which bears his name does rise.
A new King is in making, who pretended
Fourth Edwards blood, and that his line was not
Broke off, nor yet his lawful issue ended;
And when a King a Prince of Wales had got
A Priest steps in* and undertakes to get
A Duke of York, or a Plantagenet.
A Bakers son the Priest intends to mold
Into a Prince: a matter that would suit,
Well wrought with any feature; how they could
Transchange the Bakers bread; I Will not dispute.
This act is almost of as high a state,
The Bakers son he will Transubstantiate.
First he resolved his scenicke Prince should play
The Duke of York: but when he heard the King
Purposed to make Plantagenet away,
He changed his Theme, and his Mercuriall thing
Must act young Warwick: when this Prince is slain
Enter his Ghost, new conjured up again.
The Boy was capable all forms t'admit,
Like the Materia prima, and might be
By some Philosopher mistook for it,
In him, as in some Pictures, you might see
A different face: on this side he was took
For York, on that he did like Warwick look.
Yet if you mark the Consequents, you may
Conceive, that the Queen Dowager was she,
That did this Picture draw, the Project lay,
For Henry mu'd her up at Bermondsey,
Just at that time; who else had nothing done
Worth turning of a Queen into a Nun.
Beside, the Priest did never the Coppie see,
He was to write by, nor the ^a^e survay
He was to pourtraict: like young Painters, he
Did on this Piece but the dead colors lay:
Her Pencell 'twas, so did it to the life,
That the extract with the pattern was at strife.
Yet though the Piece was lim'd most curiously,
He knew his object must not stand too near
The examination of a judging eye
His Picture farthest, fairest would appear.
This show must be far off, or in the night
His Puppit-play was best by Candlelight.
The Priest to Ireland for this reason goes.
(Their humors there did with the place agree.)
Who did inhabit by the Alpin snowes,
Their valor like their snow dissolved would be,
As Florus has of old observed, and here
The Bogges, and men equally ticklish were.
Some of the great ones first came fairly on
TO adore this Idol, but the People do
Run headlong in a wild devotion.
As in a Jack the greater Wheels do go
With soft and sober turnings; but the less
Are hurried with a whirling giddiness.
At Dublin Castle he was entertained
With honor due unto a King; brought thence
He Is in the Church proclaimed, where he feignd
The Genuine bravery of a natural Prince.
That of Sebastian sorteth with this Else
He was the true one, or the Devil himself.
When in the fable Mercury is said
To baffle Sofia, that he knew not whether
He was himself, or not: he never played
More neately, for if these two met together,
It might be feared, that this Mimicke Youth,
Would have Out-York'd him that was York in truth.
The Country where they laid the Scene, did more
Trouble our Henry, than the part they played:
For if the King in Person should sail over
England would rise, though Ireland should be laid;
Like the Barbarians Emblem of the hide,
Tread upon one, you raise the other side.
Lost in this doubt, the King resolves to try
His usual Art of war, and to stand sure
At the old guard, he conquered Rebels by.
He threw a Pardon out: 'twas Henry's lure
That Rebels stooped at; and his fairest way
To win: for Henry's Olive was his Bay.
^hen that the Imposture might be plainly seen,
(...) Public true Plantagenet was shown:
(...) the disparity, that was between
The Truth and Counterfeit was eas^y known.
They judged without a Perspective, and glass
That this a star, that but a Meteor was.
Lincoln knew well this fallacy, yet he
Pretending Ignorance, to Ireland sayld.
This Earl by Richard was designed to be
The next successor, if right Heirs had failed.
And he resolved when e're the field was won,
This King should Play no more, his part was done.
This flash was but a Star imaginary,
But the reflex of a Plantagenet:
That of it self would vanish and miscarry;
And this by Henry or eclipsed, or set.
And Lincoln thought, when they should disappeare
To be translated to the English sphere.
Burgundias Duchess next (whose envious eye
Star'd upon Henry to effascinate
His greatness) did with so much malice rise,
That Nature seemed this Lady to create,
To try a new experiment, and see
How much might go to th'making of a She.
They called this Duchess, Henry's Juno who,
(As if her fingers spun the threads of fate
For the two Rival families) did do
Or undo any thing; and meditate
To raise the Yorkists Henry to destroy:
York was her Greece, and Lancaster her Troy.
The reputation of the Duchess lent
Face to the Action, and her forces Heart;
Two thousand Almaines to their aid were sent
Under the charge of old experienced Swart.
Such are best leaders, for old chiefes are such,
Whom death even makes a conscience to touch.
Thus bravely backed, they called a Council, whether
The war, and action should be seated there:
For that of force would draw our Henry thither,
And stir up dangerous alteration here;
Be not the Lion, or the Eagle by
And every beast will rore, every bird fly.
But nor that Country bred, nor could be bought
Enough, to keep so great an army there;
Even hunger would have made their bellies thought
Their throats were cut, before a sword came near.
And make them such thin starvelings, that they might
Be fitter for a visit, than a fight.
This made the Peoples general votes incline
For England: they in civil discords strike
The business home; nor dare the chiefes decline
Their wishes, for they lead their leaders: like
The Dragon in the fable: where the head
Was in the rereward, and the tail did lead.
It was good Policy to make the war
Invasive; for invaders seem to come
With bravest Hearts; and the Irish thought they were
So freinded here, that they might beat's at home.
And Scipio spoke an Oracle, when he
Said Africa must in Africa conquered be.
Soon did the Rebels under the command
Of Lincoln, Swart, of Lovell, and Kildare
In Lancashire, without impeachment land,
No Fleet to intercept them being there.
Strange, since attempts by Sea are best withstood,
In cittadels of Oak, and walls of wood.
The Art of war has rarely thought it fit
To let our enemy land: (determind so
In fatal eighty eight;) or to admit
Upon our shore th impression of a foe.
It Is ominous, and has been often known,
They stamp the ground they tread on for their own.
But Henry gave them landing: so he did
To Perkin after, else the King had shown
Perhaps injustice, should he them forbid
To enter peaceably upon their own.
Poor things, he let them come into his train,
Then Piniond them from flying back again.
Landed, their march points toward York; a place
Once fit for their designs; for 'twas the Bed
Where the White Roses grew, and whence the race
Of all the true Plantagenets was spread.
That Corner for his shrine this Image chose,
And there a Bramble would supplant a Rose.
But (had not shame made silence) Lovell might
Have told, the nature of the place was changd,
It Was there where he himself refused to fight,
And ran away when all his men were ranged.
And Henry had been there, whose Physic had
Cheerd up the wholesome blood, and purged the bad.
The King makes on, to let them see there lay
A better King in the Pack. Of foes at home
Let me but see them, he was wont to say,
As if with him to see, and overcome
Were terms convertible; but see, and dye,
Like Basiliskes, kings having a Killing eye.
And sure the Princes presence has been thought
Most efficatious, that the action might
Sort to an issue; and some nations brought
Their Infant Kings in Cradles to the fight.
My Prince shall make me as much reverence feel
Shaking his Rattle, as his rod of steel.
I know 'twas Henry's principle, for he
Both out of valor and distrust would go
Himself in Person'gainst the Enemy.
The Turkish bounds were first extended so
As some observe: for their first Sultans took,
Some charge in every battle that was struck.
Besides, their presence brings more clearly in
Claim to the Glory of the victory,
Of which some Princes have so jealous bin,
That Constantine this Act did ratify:
To us the Honor of the Conquest yield,
A hundred miles though distant from the field.
Lincoln makes to the King; although no aid
(As he had promised to himself) appeard;
And though he saw his confidence betrayed
He wisely did dissemble what he feared.
And lightning hopes were in his brows expressed,
Though loud despair did thunder in his breast.
It Was done like a Commander: he must call
Assurance to his most deplored occasion:
A Captains passion's Epidemicall,
And soldiers put it on by imitation.
A soldier will his Captains colors wear,
Be they the Red of Joy, or Pale of Fear.
Lincoln encamped upon a hill: (so high
His hopes were once) but Henry in the plain
(So was his Case) Lincoln resolved to try
His fortune presently, marched down again,
And from the hill descending to the vale,
Himself was his own Emblem of his fall.
^hen it was advised, whether they should protract
^r suddenly upon the Rebels fall:
^ut Henry willing that great chief to act
^ho by deferring nothing conquered all.
Calls for the fight: and Politickes have cast
In all defections Generals must make have.
^ut how they fought is told so nakedly,
^s if the writers of those times had laid
^ blanke in that part of the History,
^o let the moderns guess what should be said
For Chronicles do it so lamely tell,
As if twere said, they came, they fought, they fell.
They say the Vangard, where the King did lead
Did only to the fight assistance bring:
^s if the King in charity would spread
^ome Princely luster on this pretty thing,
Who would have been a king; though he were none
Here was his Glory, he had fought with one.
And Lovell feeling that the fight grew hot,
Thought of a cooler, and would swim the Trent;
But long before the other side he got
Was swallowed by the angry Element.
It seems the stream out of a loyal sense
Would nor support a Traitor to his Prince.
But valiant Swarts for term of life did take
Possession of the ground where he did stand.
And Lincoln too, whom though his Hopes did make
The sole Commander once of the whole land.
Measure him now, and he will no more contest,
Give him six foot, let who will take the rest.
There was the mock-king, younker Simnell took,
Whose word was Regno, when he did appear
On the highest cog of Fortunes wheel: but struck
To sine Regno now, the lowest there.
Thus Honors Pyramid it self extends
Into a Point, then in a nothing ends.
But Henry's scorn, or pity would not go
So far as to his life: rather thought fit
To keep him in his Kitchen for a show.
Where he should turn a Scepter to a spit.
And there the king whose right they did so boast
Must be content to fit, and rule the roast.
Nor would Augustus have that Puppit slain
That Alexander who was bragged to be,
King Herod's son, but in a brave disdain
Enslaved him in his Galleys: so that he
Who gloried at the Helm of State before,
Sat then degraded tugging at an Oar.
After the field was won, Henry did fall
To weed the roots, whence following wars might spronght
As 'twere to cancel the Original
Whence future discords might be copied out.
Had he left off, when the Enemy did fly,
He had but wooed, not wedded Victory.
He cut off all the adherents, that did stand
For the late Rebels, and each spark bereave
Of hope to reenflame; it was a brand
Stamped upon Caesar's actions, not to leave
A war half done. From an unvanquish'd foe,
And yet provoked, the greatest dangers grow.
Now Henry looked abroad, and having here
Dispelled the sullen mists, began to throw
His luster, and his Influence elsewhere.
Like to a natural Agent, which does show
Its virtue in the Center first, and thence
Dilate it self to the circumference.
And it was time; for now King Charles of France,
Aiming at Brittaigne in's ambitious mind,
Quarrels the Duke for succouring Orleans
Who had fled to him. It Is not hard to find
Pretenses, when inferiors should be vexed,
Give me but Power, I Will find out a pretext.
The French Ambassadors to Henry sue,
Or to stand Neuter, or their Master aid
Against Britains Duke; but Henry knew
Should he do either, Britain were betrayed.
And in this Duchy were the French invested
We should by sea at pleasure be infested.
But this Dilemma was well near above
All Henry's Logic: Henry was so tied
Both to this King, and Duke, that he must prove
Ingrate to one, ayding of either side
He has a Wolf by the Ears, and does not know,
Whether 'ts best to hold, or let him go.
He would not stand a Neuter (like the Bat
When Beasts, and fowls in the feigned Battle fought,
And therefore cursed to fly in darkness;) that
Had Henry's virtue into question brought,
For not asserting Justice, which must be
Fair on one side upon necessity.
At last concludes for Britain; for he should
At once be Charles his friend, and his own foe,
Should he aid France; and no injunctions hold,
Man to such offices as man undo.
The strictest Moralist will set me free,
Where my own gratitude would ruin me.
Henry indeed by a Particular tie
Had been much bound to France; but he was more
Bound to preserve his subjects liberty,
Which had been hazzarded were Britain lost.
The greater Bond thus making void the less,
Who can implead him of ingratefulnesse?
Then was the Action moved in Parliament
To feel the People; who of their innate
Envy to France did promise to resent
The case of Britain their confederate.
Were Britain swallowed first, they stood perplexed,
'Twere a preparative to take England next.
And that the succors might be more complete
By joining Gold to Steel; they give the King
A subsidy. Henry did seldom treat
Of any war, but did some treasure bring.
The coursest Ore he wisely could refine,
And dig his Gold out of wars Iron Mine.
That time without commission from the King,
The hot Lord Woodvile in the Brittons aid
Levied four hundred men: a desperate thing
And Introduction to have a state betrayed.
To Private men this Privilege afford,
You arm the Subject against his natural Lord.
But as if fortune had resolved to tell
The world, his act was rash; he lost his blood,
And though his Cause was just, yet justly fell
In the Action: for to make a quarrel good
It Is requisite the Combatant should show
Both a just Cause and Deputation too.
Soon as the news of this defeat did land,
So soon the English succors set to sea
But that soon was too late; when towers do stand,
With bending brows, men will immediately
Set buttresses; he that would save a state
In its decline, must not procrastinate.
This stay made Henry censured, and the blot
Was marked of all, set in so high a fane
As Henry's worth. Small Stars obscured would not
Be marked by Kepler, or the Noble Dane;
But be the Sun Eclipsed, the Eclipse will be
Took to a Digit by some Alestr^e.
That which deceived him was, he set his rest
That Charles meant fair; but he drew closely on
His war in the Treaty, and that Rule professed
That the Eleventh Lewis lectur'd to his son
To learn but so much Latin, as might tell,
And tutour him how to dissemble well.
Besides his trust in Maximilians strength,
Who was to marry with Brittanias heir,
Imposed upon him: for that King at length
Showed himself nothing, when he lost so fair
A Hope as She: for he cold Suitour did
Duchess, and Duchy too by Proxy wed.
This Confidence her followers betrays,
Mounts us to foil us; like the Eagle just,
When she will break, she will the Tortoise raise.
Henry had saved this Duchy by distrust,
That argument of weakness; seldom heard,
The weakest thing should be the strongest guard.
The subsidy was now to be collected;
But he must be beholden to his sword
For's money: which the Northern men protected
As Gryphons do the Ingots which they hoord:
Or like the Mines which as Olaus writes,
Have for their Guardians Subterranean sprites.
For the Commissioners, no sooner came
To Yorkshire, but they raised a mutiny
In stead of money: for King Richards name
Being there still in recent memory
Rose like a spirit at some conjuration,
And the great word in the Circle, was Taxation.
For they, as once the Androsians did pretend
Want; whom when Athens did enjoyne to pay*
A Tax, and for the levying it did send
The Goddess Violence: We have said they
A Goddess too, as powerful as she
A Goddess, which we call Necessity.
This roused Henry in just rage to see
The authority of Parliament cast down.
To countermand what there the Estates decree,
Does make a blow directly at the Crown.
And should he suffer that, he should commit
Implicit treason' against himself, and it.
And should he wink at the Antecedent there,
He would be forced this Consequent to see;
The rest by dangerous Logic: would infer,
If Yorke-shire will not pay it, why should we.
And by strange Grammar never taught in School,
From on Example make a General rule.
Then to Northumberland his Mandates go,
With strict injunctions nothing to remit:
But he the business does carry so,
That by the People thought the cause of it,
He Is slain in the Act: sure Henry was at cost,
Before a Penny got a Noble lost.
Being thus in Blood, the malcontents agree
To go against King Henry; and conclude
Chamber and Egremond their chiefes should be.
And thus the many-headed Multitude,
Although it boasted Heads enough before,
To be more Monster will have two Heads more.
Fame with one of her Pinions soon had writ
This news to Court: Surrie as soon was sent
To hush this Tumult, and annihill it;
Who like a Tempest scouring as he went,
Some of those Clouds, scared at his presence flew,
But like the wind called Cecias, others drew.
For the Principalls were took, and led
To York, where they did by just vengeance fall;
Chamber in gallant manner suffered,
For he was hanged in State above them all.
Thus Chamber even in ruin did aspire,
For they erected him one story higher.
But Egremond seeing the cause miscarry,
And all his followers like a mist dispeld,
Fled into Burgundy, that Sanctuary
Of Traitors: who like vapors hence expeld
To Her, as to the middle Region flew,
The Place whence Henry's greatest Tempests grew.
Then Henry called a Parliament again,
(For subsidies he did remunerate
With Laws;) and such were framed in his Reign,
As with the old Heroes shall him celebrate
Lycurgus would be prow'd, if hither sent,
To be but Clerk of Henry's Parliament.
For 'twas a Principle amongst the Prime
Of their Law givers to have the law aspire
To the Condition of the present time
And seldom had their mounture planted higher.
But in all Henry's statutes, Henry's eye,
Looked through the present at futurity.
In England then as in Polonia now
Were but two sort of People: the whole land,
Or in too base servility did bow,
Or in too high a stateliness command
To have no mean a vacuum does imply
Abhorred in states, as in Philosophy.
The reason was enclosures; farms were then
Turned to demesnes; therefore the land as yet
No Yeomen had, but clownes or Gentlemen:
The abuse reformed did that third sort beget.
So proving, what our Logic does deny,
The best division is Trichotomie.
By this mysterious way our Soldiery
Had its foundation laid; in any states
To live too poorly, or too gallantly,
Vnapts the spirits, and emasculates.
For through a softness, and habitual fear,
One cannot suffer, the other cannot dare.
Which makes a moral Monster in the state,
A fortitude defective in one part:
For action joined with passion integrate
The All of valor; and a Soldiers heart
Must have them so, that yet they hardly know,
Which is the chief, to suffer or to do.
But then this sort of men, as a third creature,
Bred up in fullness, and some taking pains:
Amphibion* like partaking of each nature,
Made able foot: so having equal grains
Of power to do, and suffer, valor went
By this new mixture to a temperament.
This time were Maximilians subjects grown
To Rebels; and the news to Henry flies;
Who like a King did make the case his own,
For he stood Vmpire in all injuries.
As if Astrea, when she did abhor
The Earth had made him her Executour.
And to such perfect Rebels, that they took
Their Sovereign Prisoner, after faith was made,
And loyalty was vowed: when he did look
For all things rather than to be betrayed.
Dangers most dangerous, when we do not mind it
Not to look for it, is the way to find it.
And in this Act a Smith stirred most about,
(Baseness first tramples on a humbled Crest.)
The Emblem proves that the ignoble rout
Scoffs most at greatness clouded, and deprest.
The Pygmies mocked Alcides, when he slept,
And none but Hares by the dead Lion leapt.
A Smith was busiest with the Emperor;
The Cornish Rebels did a Smith obey:
A Bardeaux Smith first struck the governor,
Who came a civil discord to allay.
And the Ephesian Silver-smiths did make
An uprore for their great Dianas sake.
Tumults seem incident to Smiths by fat^
Whose very Trade does as an Emblem show
Both the Incendiaries of a State,
And bellows too, which the sedition blow,
The Hammers with their harsh tumultuous jarre,
Make in their brains a kind of Civil war.
How did that Time cross its first course, when fate
Would Kings subject to their own subjects doom?
The English rebel: These their King Captivate,
The Scots Kill theirs; as if the days were come
The Cynick spoke of, that when he was dead,
Nature inverst should stand upon her head.
Then into France the King some forces sent,
In show to keep the English Pale unwonne;
But in his secret, and his chief intent
To succor Maximilian: thus the Sun
In his apparent course posts to the West,
But by his hidden tract creepes to the East.
Now before Dixmue were the French set down,
And raised thus by the English: a French spy
Promised in lieu of Pardon from the Town
To bring them safe upon the Enemy.
So whilst the Town, by the English then releev'd,
Reprev'd a Rogue, a Rogue the Town reprev'd.
This Emissary brought them all unseene
Close to the Camp: which careless never thought
That the English Forces could so near have been,
Who for a hundred lives the Conquest bought:
This Engine first against the Town did lie,
But a Rope turned it on the Enemy.
Lord Cords madded to be thus disgraced
Beleagred Newport, and so far prevailed;
That the French Banner on a Fort was placed,
But soon removed, so powerfully assailed.
Such storms came whistling from the English bow
Their Lilies planted there, not long could grow.
For some few Archers newly had put in
At Newport Hav'n; who by success did show
So much of strength that Cords thought they had bin
More than indeed they were: for looking through
The Event, as through a Multiplying Glass
He judgd their number greater than it was.
Conceit the weakest things can fortify;
And in a turn, the strong debilitate.
This few, thought more, did thousands terrify;
For our Imagination may create
Real effects: though here no cause to yield
His own Opinion beat him from the field.
This Lord wished madly, that he might be fired
Seven years in hell, so he might Callis take:
But when his seven years lease had been expired,
I doubt this wish he would his second make,
To lie there seven years longer to have been
Secured by faith never to come there again.
Having for Maximilian thus prevailed
He pres'd him to the Marriage with the Heir
Of Britain; for although his arms had failed,
He thought the loss of Britain to repair
This way: and judged, that though his Arms did miss
A Ladies Arms more Powerful than his.
And Maximilian did so far proceed,
He married her by Proxy* who did lie
^'th' spowsall sheets with one leg; but indeed
That Court devise had no validity.
'Twas a lame match; what could the Proxy do
With his one leg, where is master should have two?
King Charles resolved that this trick was vain,
(Nor caring though his friends turned Enemies)
Mockd at the Ceremony; and to gain
The Lady planted golden Batteries.
Not so to win a woman is hard hap,
When Jove rained Gold, Danae held her lap.
And that which wins in a Ladies eye:
King Charles was lusty, Maximilian old,
Content to lie with her by Deputy:
Who would not choose this heat before that cold?
The Lady yeeldes: nor will I think it strange
That two such things should make a woman change.
Nor could she well deny, if Charles entreat,
For if she should in Opposition lie,
Then out of France wars did her Country threat,
Therefore to yield was her best Policy.
Turn Mars to Venus, and not fight but wed,
And so conclude the quarrel in a bed.
But here is the Knot: King Charles himself is bound
To Maximilians daughter by contract,
And she to Maximilian; but he found
A trick to solve both riddles with one Act.
And by the dextrous cunning which he tried,
One knot he loosed, and another tied.
Want of consent did both contracts bereave
Of validnesse; the Duchess was his Ward,
And could not match her self without his leave*
The other by her minority was bard.
Charles having thus broke this, made a new band,
And set his own for Maximilians hand.
But that his drift may lie obscured, he sends
Ambassadors to enterteine our King
In vain belief, and to atcheive his ends,
Whilst Henry mocked imagined no such thing.
Charles by dissembling first this Duchy gat,
Therefore to keep it, there is no Art but that.
In bodies natural the same things do
Keep them, which made them; and Philosophy
Says Elements are Aliments. It Is so
In Bodies Civil, for in Policy
It Is a ruled Case, That as a State is gained,
By the same Arts that state must be mainteind.
They (to divert his thoughts) do pray our King
Would let their Master his own Ward dispose,
Thus they the match would to conclusion bring,
And the first note scarce heard, be in the close.
And by strange Method make our Henry see;
A Bridegroom, e're he should a Suitour be.
They tell him that their Master did intend
A war against the Turk, and to advance
His Flower de Lis against their Moon, and send
Against the Turkish bow the Gallicke Lance.
True, he was Plannet-strooke, but that was done,
By Brittaignes Venus, not the Turkish Moon.
But now his misted Counsels did appear:
The marriage did break out for all to see it;
Which plainly sundred the two Kings who were
Like to lines Parallel which will not meet,
'Though drawn to an infinity: for they
Who differ in their Ends part in their way.
This double Injury; to lose his own
And daughters match, made Maximilian break
To boundless rage, with which sweld up, and blown
The less he could perform, the more did speak.
It Is hollownesse, and emptiness of ground,
Which makes an Echo multiply the sound.
His passion something cold, Reason stepped in
To show his weakness, and advise him look
For aids abroad, nor his revenge begin
Vnsided: Henry with his wrongs is struck,
Like needles of the same magneticke touch,
If you moove one, the other moves as much.
But knowing that Conjunction of Heads
Is a good part of speech, Henry unites
His Councels with his own: though a Prince leads
The Action in chief, he in the Plural writes
Mandamus, volumus, to let men know,
He does in Business with his Council go.
Then war was noys'd in Parliament, which named,
(As if some exorcisme had been conceived
To call up spirits) they were all inflamed
To wipe of the disgrace which they received
For Brittaignes loss, and to repair their shame,
He slighteth virtue, that will slight his fame.
Their memories present them with the sight
Of the French Trophies by their Gransires won*
Here the fifth Henry; there the Edwards fight
In The field of their Imagination.
Before the Sons when such fair Coppies stand,
They must write bravely, or a bastard hand.
That Parliament (which much conduced to war)
He did a Stature against Mort-paies make,
Least Captains should defraud their men, who are
Cold Gamesters; when no money is at stake.
They Will bear no Arms, but when the Field is fuller,
And bravelier charged with Metal, than with Color.
And so 'twas here: they such a Tax did grant,
That not a Soldier justly could repine;
It Is fearful, when they do their wages want,
Or food: for hunger keeps no discipline.
Who would the Body of an Army make,
Must the beginning at the Belly make.
Then men were raised, and ammunition brought,
Monie's indeed the sinew of all war;
But sinews of the Arms and Arms are thought
By Machiavell to be preferred far,
Thus Solon deemed, when he that Monarch told,
The better Iron would have all the Gold.
For leaders of these men he did assign
Bedford and Oxford; so they used to be.
His choice had in it something of Divine,
Fixed with a kind of fatal Constancy:
None from his Grace but Stanly fell away,
He was the only State Apostata.
He would not their Election decline,
Their fortunes did for their election call.
Felicity is an egregious sign,
And proper Mark to choose a General.
Let judgment, valor, in the Van appear,
It Is naught, if Fortune bring not up the Rear.
But Henry's Agents now to Henry sent
That Maximilian could no succor be:
Henry so covered this advertisment,
That none perceived he saw what he did see.
Like to the Opticke virtue in the eyes,
Unseen it self, yet all things else discries.
His weakness did Originally rise,
From's Flemmings, who indocile to obey
Did contumeliously their Prince despise,
Which made him once in jesting earnest say,
That other Kings were Kings of men, but He
Was King of Kings, who would no subjects be.
So true was that which Machiavell once spoke*
On Maximilian who so ever despends,
Shall from his freindship no more succor take
Than the Campanians brought unto their friends,
Who being small in strength, and great in Fame,
Unto their aids brought nothing but a name.
Then Henry shipped his men, meaning to be
Alone in the Action, and the Honor too.
He had so soon passed the obedient sea,
As if it had professed, what our Laws do,
'Twas under his dominion, and his own
As of the Ligeance of the English crown.
Then marched to Bulloine, and already took't
In their capacious thoughts; with threatening eye
They looked upon it, as Gonsalvo looked
On Naples, when he vowed rather to dye
With one foot forward in a noble heat,
Than live an age with half a footes retreat.
But sudainely cool Aires of Peace did breath;
Lord Cords did negotiate that Peace:
Whose Spirit once breathed only war, and death,
Treates now, that all hostility may cease.
The Fabled Clown would wonder to behold
One, like his Satyr, blowing hot, and cold.
And here was Henry's wisdom, not to hear
Peaces soft tunes, before the Drums had struck
A lowed defiance; when his forces there
Might force his own Condition to be took.
That Is the brave Peace, whose Articles are made
Under a shield, and written with a blade.
This Peace pleased Henry, which the Frenchmen bought
With more, than the English gave unto the war.
But yet the People, seeing he did naught
With all the Money, were enraged so far,
That to a dangerous Proverb they presumed,
Himself he feathered, and his people plumd.
But our young gallants had most need of blackes,
Who to be bravely furnished, paund their lands
In hope of these French wars; and on their backs,
Brought so much English ground to Callis sands,
That they left none. A strange Armoriall shield,
That they should bear their Arms without a field.
He therefore meant to make the peace be thought
His Councels act; and suffered them to take
Rich presents, as with which the Peace was bought,
Under their shapes Henry this Peace did make.
Examine Jove, and look upon his scapes,
The Poets make them done in other shapes.
The course he used might prejudicial prove,
By winning of his Councels hearts to France;
For Mutianus thus pretending love
To Antonine, did all his friends advance:
But Mutian by this Practice did so please,
Antonine lost all his dependances.
Yet Henry had fair Glosses for this Peace,
Which did his Honor with his subjects save.
TO exhaust no blood, and to imburse the increase
Of yearly Tributs, satisfaction gave.
None bled but the French treasure, and the King,
Opened that vein for Physic every spring.
The End of this French war was to rewinne
Brittaigne, which was past all Eviction gone;
And Maximilians aides which should have been
Means to acquire this End, came never on.
No Agent does his purpose more extend,
Which is defective both in means and end.
But this was his best Argument; he heard
That Burgundy was making of a King
Out of a Duke of York, and justly feared
The storms which followed. For this twice-born thing
Like to the twice-borne Bacchus at his Birth,
Amazed with Thunder the affrighted Earth.
The linkes of causes set in Homers chain
Not closer joined, nor more continued are,
Than the affairs of Kings; no Interreigne
Is in their State, nor Vacuum in their Care.
The sweating sickness in his Days so great,
Was a Presage, that he should Reign in sweat.
He (having not respir'd, since he last did
Strive with a King in Substance) falls at Odds
With a Phantasme; an Idol King will bid
Henry defiance. Kings are Earthly Gods,
And this proved Henry one, that he should see,
So many Idols tempt his Deity.
Burgundies Duchess knew imposture could
(As the best Ingen) torture Henry most:
Therefore sh' had Spials for such Boys as should
Make Dukes of York: at last on one they crossed,
So apt to take a form, that if there were
A Rellicke of the Chaos, it was there.
And this that Perkin was, that Errant Knight,
Henry's Landloper, Ape of Majesty;
Son of a Jew, who was a Convertite,
Oweing to England his nativitie.
And out of zeal the Duchess now will do
Her best, to make the Son a convert too.
But this was pretty: our fourth Edward did
Christen the Boy, and hence suspicion feignes
Some of that wanton Princes blood was hid
(To make him something York) in Perkins veins.
And this might well the Boys ambition touch,
Godfather had a syllable too much.
This is that metal must trans-changed be
By leaving its first nature: others doubt
If Gold can be produced by Alchymie:
But I Will presume this metal had come out.
(If Henry's stars did not the work restreine)
As fair a piece as any Sovereign.
Let Paracelsus glory that he can
Make Artificial men; she will do more;
And by a resurrection bring a man
To' a Natural life, which he had lost before.
Who in so near a likeness did survive,
As that he posed the clearest Perspective.
Soon as her Art this Bullion had refind,
She stamped him with the face of majesty;
And soon as she had this Rose Noble coined
She sent him from her, least the mystery
Might be discovered, and suspicion should
Think he were cast in a Burgundian mold.
Hot from her shop to Portugal he goes
To wait a fit Conjuncture, which must be
When France, and England are declared foes;
Soon as they had this opportunity,
This Piece was vented on the Irish shore,
Where one as false was current once before.
From thence King Charles sent for him into France,
Where he a guard, and Princely service had;
So great an invitation might enhance
His price: For greatness, and great men do add
Opinion, and the most adulterate stone,
Will be thought true, if worn by such an one.
But when this little Cockatrice did hear
That France with England an accord did strike:
This Ghost of York durst walk no longer there,
But fled it as a Circle. Peace was like
An Incantation, and the very smell
Of a Peace-offring did this spright expel.
Then like a Body which returns into
Its Principles, he to the Duchess went;
And constant to himself did nothing do,
Wherein he did not bravely represent
A Prince, and though by Nature he were none,
Custom that second Nature made him one.
The Duchess made it strange in company,
Where she would sift hm, and with questions prove;
At length received him like some Prodigy:
She seemed to imitate the Birds of Jove,
Which at the Sun their doubtful aerie view,
Nor till they think it false, will think it true.
This news our Commons swallowed greedily,
Whose custom it is to loath the present state,
Affecting change; which is the quality
That from their mother they do propagate.
And as the Spaniards say, there cannot go
A needles point between their J, and No.
He lively set the Peoples Humors forth
Who drew a silly Ass, and drew him clad
In furniture of an unvalued worth,
Who, though these rich habilliments he had
Lothing his Golden saddle, cast his eye
Upon an other base one, that lay by.
Ill Humors then secretly gathered head
Whence to break forth. Thus does the Earth dispense
Her hidden waters, till they find a bed
Where their collected streams may lodge, and thence
With struggling murmurs they a Passage tear,
And make a bubbling insurrection there.
The Lord Fitzwater, Thwaites, and Mountfort were
The chief: and Stanly, who at Bosworth fought
As Henry's Guardian Angel, will be here
His Malus genius now; as if he thought
To tell the world, that as he could create
A King, so he could one annihilate.
Henry to make the world this juggling see,
Proved that the tender Princes had been slain,
And did evince infallibly, that he
Could not be York, unless they would maintain
His resurrection, and believe his Tomb
Had given him up before the Day of Doom.
When Perkins lineage, and himself were made
Naked as truth: Henry this course did hold
To trip him up; he with his trains essayd
His followers, and dependants. They that would
Blow up a Castle, will begin the Mine
Some distance from the place, which they design.
If he can make but Perkins friends retreat,
He will by consequence Perkin oppress;
To' anticipate the ways which make one great
Is the compendious way to make one less.
When Causes stop, effects do make a Pause,
And perish in the ruin of their cause.
First Clifford from this Ignis fatuus flies,
Which showed but light to show men how to err;
And as the meteor is observed to rise
From places, where we do our dead interre;
So the dead Duke gave matter to this flame,
And from his grave this Ignis fatuus came.
Their Towering Edifice began to shake,
So soon as Clifford, their great prop was gone;
So Arches threaten ruin, if you take
Out of the Fabric but a single stone;
And Henry now did all their secrets spy,
For Clifford was both Cabinet, and Key.
Now having thus made their materials like
Sand without lime; Henry the Archduke prays
^o chase him out of Flanders, so to strike
^he very ground where he his frame did raise*
Some ground to stand on, was the only thing,
The Ingener asked the Sicilian King.
The Ambassadors which from our Henry went,
The foulness of the crime before him set;
That with more Zeal he might the fact resent;
A King but in his coin to counterfeit
Is treason, but to counterfeit a King
In's Person, is a more nefarious thing.
They tell his Birth (like that the Tartars say
Now of their Cinchis, whom a widow bore
Without the aid of man, some hidden way)
Such was his Birth: but when all else give over
Children, this Duchess then such striplings brings,
As at their Birth give Battle unto Kings.
Therefore they do request him, that he would
Abandon Perkin, and discard the Knave
Out of the Pack: since no Impostours should
Or can in right any Protection have.
Under what Title can he be supplied,
Who is not York, and Perkin has denied?
The Answer they received was cold, and short;
That the Archduke would not the Pretender aid:
Which did not Answer Henry's hopes, nor sort
With his desires: for by the Rule, which said,
(If not against him with him) Henry spied,
That he was secretly of Perkins side.
Therefore in point of Honor, he commands
No entertrafficke be with Flanders made:
Henry knew well, that they would quit their hands
Of one that should so damnifie their trade.
And did presume Flanders would bid adieu
To this false coin, before she would lose the true.
Advertised then, that the disease did lie
Both in the Realm, and from the Realm did come.
The Plaster to the sore he did apply,
By cutting of Conspiratours at home.
These sharp proceedings will annull their plots;
For swords are fittest for such Gordian Knots.
Take them away, you reunite the State.
As when a Sweating Hind with weighty stroke,
And blustering Hem, (which does the sprits dilate,
And force with more contention) cleaves an Oak,
And tears the Knotty trunk with labored blows;
Remove the wedge, the gaping rent will close.
Mountfort, and Ratliffe, first with Purple flood
The scaffold died. The Gentiles to appease
Their Idols offered up their Childrens blood
An expiating sacrifice: but these
Were to a more devout observance grown,
Who to this Idol offered up their own.
Next Stanly comes his last accounts to yield,
Which cannot be made up without his head,
His purer blood streamed forth at Bosworth field,
But the corrupt was on a scaffold shed.
Blood-letting never such a wonder had,
That the good blood should come before the bad.
How often do men advanced prove treacherous?
How soon the Graces of their Prince forget?
Thus Seian, Plautian, and Perennius.
So true is that the Florentine has writ;
Great benefits, as well as injuries
Have been the motives to conspiracies.
Knowing that nothing but a crown can add
The last perfection to their power and state,
They reach at that: and here more means are had,
Whereby they may their plot facilitate.
Their Princes love, and freedom of access
Make their strength more, and their suspicion less.
Henry was closed at Bosworth, and the foe
Had hemmed him in his toiles: Stanly forbad
Deaths, and the foes surprise, and saved him so;
This Stanly did, yet this hard fortune had.
Was there no way to gratify but this,
To take his life from him, who gave him his?
Nay, thinking this his service too to low
For his so high intentions, he did bring
The Crown, and set it upon Henry's brow,
And at once saved a man, and made a King.
Was it not stange, he that did set a crown
Upon his Masters head, should loose his own?
Some Authors make his Case abstruse to know,
As if by Henry riddled up in doubt:
And though Kings Hearts cannot be searched into,
They do pretend to pick his secrets out;
And by a wondrous kind of theft to get
The Jewels, and not open the Cabinet.
I dare nor say, he could ungrateful be;
As in Divinity it is better far
To think there is no God, than think that he
Can be unjust, so I had rather swear,
That he in nature never was at all,
Than think he could be so unnatural.
And though by some Lewis the Eleventh be thought
Our Henry's pattern: I will not divine,
That Henry always like his Sampler wrought,
Or that he ruled this Action by that line,
Which Lewis once drew out: when he professed,
Whom he was bound to, he affected least.
Nor will I think the sense of Stanlies power
So waked his fears, that he his death decreed,
Only because he feared, if to that hour
His Power into Act did not proceed.
He gave that power: and must not Stanly live,
For having that, which Henry's self did give?
Or why should Henry have the smallest touch
Of that? Great benefits which cannot be
Repayd displease; For Stanlies were not such.
Or why should any man conceive, that he
Was one of their disciples, who dare write?
We hate him, whom we think, we not requite.
For Henry equaled him, nor thought it hard
To poyze his merit, and requital make;
For Bosworths spoils were Stanlies: a reward
Worthy a King to give, and him to take.
Stanly had all the Riches that were there,
And Henry nothing but a Crown, and Care.
Then made him Chamberlain, and did commit
His life into his hands. Who can repine
At an advancement, so sublime, as it?
For is it not an Attribute Divine?
The lives of Kings are in his hands; then what
Could Stanly challenge more, since he had that?
For Stanlies over-merit which some find,
I see it not. Man is bound to save a man
By Natures laws; and laws of Nations bind
Our Countryman to rescue: then who can
Think he does over-merit, who shall do
But that which two great Laws to bind him to?
Rather than over-merit, Stanlie had
Over-ambition* (That peculiar sin,
And solemn vice of greatness:) If you add
The highest honor, which they sweat to win
They stand upon it, and aspire to more,
And that is a step, which was the top before.
He lookd on Henry's savor through a Glass,
Which made the object less: but on his own
Through such a Perspective, as made it pass
In magnitude; by which himself was blown
So great, that out of haughtiness of spirit,
He lookd not on his duty, but his merit.
Then he a quarrel pickd; for he did make
A suite for Wales; which suit he knew would end
In a distaste: whence Stanlie meant to take
Occasion to forsake his King, and friend,
Those Dutch who purposed to revoult, did crave
Of Flaccus, what they knew they should not have*
It Is true he rescued Henry: but to raise
The greatness of the rescue by the sense
And greatness of the danger; Stanlie stays
'Till safety it self could hardly bring him thence.
We should (for Princes are such tender things)
Not only save, but not, endanger Kings.
As when Severus with our Britains fought,
Was beaten from his Horse, and did begin
To make a flight his safety, Let us brought
A tardy, but a certain rescue in.
He saved his Lord, yet suffered for that act,
And grave Herodian has approved the fact.
But the concurrence of these causes were
Without the influx of a stronger cause,
Too weak to take the life of such a peer;
Not yet or deeds, or words had broke the laws.
Say Henry thought his thoughts had, must he dye,
Only for's own, and Henry's fantasy?
But now I hear him speak (and words they say
Are femalls of sedition) If I thought
That this young man were York, and not a play
Or a disguise, I never would be brought
TO encounter him. He might as well have said
That York in his affection overswayd.
It Was this roused Henry's fear; for the least wind,
That should from Stanlies lips most calmely blow,
Could raise a Tempest in the Peoples mind;
If he preach thus, they will Apostates grow,
And take his doctrine up without a proof,
For Stanlies, Ipse Dixit, was enough.
But other arguments proved his intent;
His words were strongly seconded with deeds;
He promised ayds, and in the Interim sent
Treasure to Perkin to support his needs.
What wealth on Stanly, Henry did bestow
Stanly will spend in Henry's overthrow.
'Twas proved, and Stanly did the proofs allow;
But vainly trusting in his merits, thought
Confession would avail; but he was now
Fallen from his faith, and works could merit naught.
Henry in his Divinity denied
That Stanly should by works be justified.
Yet hasted not his death, as those who do
Alter the forms of Justice, and advise
That punishment should before judgment go,
Like lightning which before the Thunder flies;
And in such Cases this proceeding like,
Strike him at once, whom once ye mean to strike.
In such diseases they begin the Cure
With Execution; as he did aver,
That we should rather make the Traitor sure,
Than of the manner of the death confer:
For should you trust a Lion in a Toil,
He might both break it, and his Hunter spoil.
But this suspicion could not Henry move
To change the course of Law: yet when his eye
Was fixd upon his danger, and the love
Due to himself; Stanlie is judged to dye.
Their safeties had no counterpoise at all:
Like scales this cannot rise, unless that fall.
Thus he was brought to Act his fatal hour
Upon a scaffold: to let greatness know
The twofold danger of too great a Power,
To him that has it, and the giver too.
Let greatness held by Nimium fear her fate,
For it is a Tenure of the shortest date.
Greatness triumphing on the towering height
Of Honor; if it once be turned at all,
Finds motion in it self: the very weight
Great Bodies have accelerates their fall.
There is no Medium in their declination
Between the height, and the precipitation.
Pow'r's a strange thing, which even additions make
Weak, and disposd to fall: few can digest
The swelling cheer of fortune: if you take
But one dish more, you prejudice the rest:
Some fortunes, that have flowed gently before,
Run over, if you add one Honor more.
Nilus, which issues from the Zembrian Lakes,
His channel without inundation fills:
But when the accession of those snowes he takes.
Which are dissolved upon the Cynthian hills;
Then with licentious rage he breaks the reins,
And turns the Plains to Banks, his banks to plains.
Lord Stanlies fall a general silence brought
Upon the Subject: not a man durst speak,
But closely did imprison every thought
Even to a suffocation which might break
Out with more horror: for by giving vent,
The Peccant humors are exhaust, and spent.
But since they dare not speak, the Pillars now,
And Pasquills will by a more dangerous way
Traduce his name, and defamations throw,
Which wound him worse: which made Severus say,
That he less feared a hundred Lances, then
The impetuous charges of a single Pen.
But from within such Humors being took
By a bloodletting, (which is held a part
Of the worlds Physic:) he began to look
Outward to Ireland, and his thoughts convert
Thither, for Henry by experience found,
That venomous things might breed in Irish ground.
TO Egest such venim, as did festring lie,
Poynings went over with an armed power;
With him the active Prior of Lanthony,
(Who was so often employed) went Chancellor.
To try if Irelands health might be restord,
Or by Bellonas, or Astreas sword.
But there was neither of these swords so long,
Could reach the Irish in their flying course:
So runs the Tygresse, which has lost her young
Borne from her den on some Numidian horse.
And they eluded Poynings, not by fight,
But as the Parthians did old Rome, by flight.
Swift foot, (which Homer did so often impose
Upon his Knight) the Irish much concerns;
And yet Revenge would reach them, though she goes
On wool, if Nature did not guard the Kernes.
Their bogges are inaccessible, and would
Give a repulse to Jove, though turned to Gold.
Sometime (said he in Xenophon,) we try
To Master things; the greatest fight of all:
It Is hard to combat with an Enemy,
Whose Arms are took from natures arcenall.
Man rarely from that fight a conquest brings*
Which is with Place, and not with men, but things.
Thus Swethland fortified by Natures care
Upon that side, which lies opposite
To Russia, does not the Invasions fear
And vain attempts of the cold Muscovite.
For prudent nature set a fringed hem
Of Finland Marsh between the Sweds, and them.
Let not the Irish glory, that their might
Robbed us the Honor of a victory;
The Nature of the soil, and Countries site
Scorns an assault, and mockes an Enemy.
That Poynings then so meanly came away,
The bogs must set up Trophies, and not they.
That great Castruccio, who soared so high,
And was so low in his Original;
Who twice o'rthrew the Arms of Thuscany,
Once at Fucecchio, once at Serravall.
Machiavell who so famed him, was thus free,
To say the places beat them, and not he.
But the production of an act so great,
As Irelands peace, did its perfection lack:
Until Eliza did the Work complete,
That Virgo of our English Zodiac.
Her maiden fingers tuned the Irish Harp,
And made that note a mean, which was a sharp.
Yet Poynings there performed one work of fame,
That all the English laws in Ireland should
Have force: which Constitution bears the name
Of P^ynings law. It seems that Poynings would
The Irish Rebels to obedience draw,
Not by the Law of Arms, but Arms of Law.
Now Perkin calls me, who looks boldly out,
Hearing that Henry is a progress gone:
'Twas Henry's absence that made Perkin stout,
And counseled him to put a boldness on.
When Henry like the sun, was progrest North,
This Mercury, and wandering star peeped forth.
This counterfeit, and Artificial Rose,
(Like to the true ones, which in Winter go
Back to their Causes and themselves disclose
In Summer) did himself in Summer show:
But all the Winter with the Duchess kept,
Where like a Rose he in his Causes slept.
But from this sleep, when he was well awake,
And had on England an attempt designed:
Debtours, and Malcontents his part did take,
And Bankrouts flocked by swarms: which is a kind
Of Reasonable Insect, that is made
Of the corrupted matter of some Trade.
No man of mark was in the Army seen,
Except men marked for some Villainies:
Felons, and Thieves, whose fortune it has been
To lay the frames of puissant Monarchies.
A man, as Henry Great, might fear their force;
For Rome and Turkey did begin from worse.
Fierce Spartacus the Fencer, once defied
Rome at her full, with Gaole-birds lately flowne
Out of their Cage: so bravely that he tried
Great Pompei's fortune to be overthrown.
The fight is doubtful with that foe to try,
Who brings despair armed with necessity.
That none of name, and family were there,
Henry's preventing wisdom did effect:
They by the hand, and Sword of Justice were
Cut off, whose Fortunes Perkin might protect:
His vital spirits floated in their blood,
And all his hopes were drowned in that flood.
They land in Kent but there no people rise,
Because no braver men with Perkin came:
A mean Aspect strikes not the vulgar eyes
But show a great though an inglorious name,
You cannot then their wild devotion hold,
They will adore a Calfe, if made of Gold.
Nor did the Gentry second his design,
But mustring up the People that were there;
They Marshalled them in warlike discipline
Without confusion; which made Perkin fear,
For Tumult was his Hope; they did not look
Like men of Perkins Church that Orders took.
Himself lands not, when he their Order saw,
(Which was a Badge, and Livery of a foe)
Their fair array did so the stripling awe,
He durst not venture from his ships to go*
And it was thought, that had he come a shore,
The Youth had never made Sea voyage more.
The Kentish seeing that no more would land,
Nor touch the fatal ground, the Battle struck,
And slew them, fore they could their ships command:
Some sevenscore of the Heard, were Prisoners took.
A just mischance to them, for 'twas no more,
Than they had been, or should have been before.
Henry for terror put them all to death:
Here he was strangely rigorous: hut He
At the more great Rebellion of Black Heath,
Was strangely mild: so that a man may see:
Caesar's, and Cato's nature met in one,
Spare all like Caesar, or like Cato none.
When just revenge, has a right level made,
Home to the head she may the arrow bring;
And when provoked Justice draws her blade,
unto the fire she will the scabber'd fling.
Justice and sin should keep an equal race,
If sins do gallop, justice must not pace.
And thus the courses kept by Rome of old,
Were full of terror, or without it quite:
Camillus said, the way to Latium hold,
Was Punishment, or love: And Henry might
From Alexander some such notion have,
Or to save all, or none at all to save.
Once by the Samnites when the Host of Rome,
Was straight en compas'd: one did thus advise;
Or slay them all, or send them fairly home.
Shun the third way: so place your courtesies
That Rome endeard may be your friend, or so
Confound her, that she cannot be your foe.
This blaze extinct, Perkin to Flanders sailed,
To fetch more fuel: thence to Ireland came,
That fumes, and vapors, from those bogs exhaled
Might the expired Meteor reinflame.
But the late thunder made by Poyrings there
Had purged the air, and made the Region clear.
Ireland did nothing to his succors bring
But blustering prayers, and uneffectuall vows.
Therefore they think on Scotland, whose young king
They did presume the quarrel would espouse;
Glad that with England he some cause espied,
With strength, and color for his cause beside.
To Scotland come, they welcome him at Court
(For Charles of France had prepossest the King,
And by his letters had prepared him for it)
And to the Presence Chamber Perkin bring,
Where King and Nobles sat in state that day.
To be spectatours of a Puppet-play.
Admitted to have audience he presumed
To play the man he knew not; he did look
Stately enough, and Spiritlike assumed
The Body of another: for he took
York from himself, and having made a rape
Upon his Part, thus acted in his shape.
Sir, shall you please to lend a gracious ear
To a sad story, and a Princely eye
To a sad spectacle; then know that here
Both of those objects represented lie;
And such that judgment will not censure right
Whether the tale be sadder; or the sight.
Englands fourth Edward as your highness knows
Two Orphans left to Crook-backe Richards care:
A man as far estranged from faith, as those
With whom these Maxims Orthodoxall are
Ravish Astrea, and pull justice down
If on the ruins you may scale a crown.
Soon he employed his ministers of death
To kill them both, but take no blood at all:
But curiously to suffocate their breath
To make a violent death seem natural.
It Is a bold Cowardice, when man shall dare,
To act the sin, and the suspicion fear.
They posting to the Tower (which was the fold
Of these soft Lambs in a Wolves Custody)
Sacrificed one but they their Master told
They had in both observed his Majesty,
He trusts them: for from nature it is received
An object much desired, is soon believed.
Hard though they were, and villanes to all worth,
They had some softness for they pittyed one.
As in the Crystal, which the freezing North
Does of an Ice convert into a stone,
Some little water uncongeal'd we find,
Not hardened by the rigor of the wind.
And they in truth slew not the Eldest son:
For pitying Heaven, knowing that such a work
Is then done best of all, when it is not done,
Moved the Assassinates to spare poor York.
The Holy Water issuing from his eyes
Was Yorkes expiatory Sacrifice.
Now (Royal Sir) behold that York in me;
Poor wandrer, like that bird without a Gall,
Which was the Espiall of the Arc; for we
Could find no ground to rest our feet at all:
But our returns should be of different kind,
She found an Arc, I should an Altar find.
First I was close imprisond in the Tower
Then sent into the world, which is to me
But as the greater Jail: for to this How'r
I never did enjoy a liberty,
So that you may this my strange freedom call
A world of room, and yet no room at all.
For but this piece of ground, whereon I stand
Lent by your Princely favor, I have none:
And yet by birth the Monarch of a land;
A land by Tyranns now usurped upon.
Thus he whose hand should hold a Globe, can meet
No room in all the Globe to set his feet.
Long have I gone (as these tird limbs can tell)
Like restless Heaven about the Earth; 'till I
Were certain of his Death: at last He fell
At Bosworth field* For Tyrans seldom die
Of a dry Death; it waits at their gate
Dressed in the color of their Robes of State.
But what 'though Richard did at Bosworth dye
The Persons are but changd, and not the Case:
For now one Henry Tydder does supply,
The vacant Seat, and prides it in his place.
This Tyranne did of his corruption breed,
His grave was Henry's womb, his blood his seed.
Henry for surenesse does my sister wed;
It was his fortune to ascend a throne
By the assistance of a Ladies bed,
Whose brother should have lost his life by one.
I had strange fate to Beds: for once my own
Should have my life, now hers will have my crown.
Thinking to make the Truth, by scorning weak
He sports at me, and sets himself aworke
To give me names: indeed he dares not speak
Now think my own without affright: for York
Is Henry's tetragrammaton, and he dares
No more pronounce it than the Jews dare theirs.
He by the imposing of the forged Style
Of Perkin, would upon the Realm impose
I am a counterfeit: yet he the while
Knows I am York, but covers what he knows.
Thus to the world two Counterfeits are brought,
Henry is one indeed, J but in thought.
For were I an Impostor, or a mere
Imaginary Idol, why should He
Me in his thoughts, as the true York revere,
And so commit civil Idolatry?
The World knows his devotion, and He
Can sacrifice no more to York, than Me.
For when in France his Arms were in the field.
To question the French Aribute, and the Blade
Drawn to decide, so soon as France did yield
TO abandon me, so soon the Peace was made.
Here he confessed my Birth, and did advance
My natural Right; I made the Peace with France.
The English with Flemmings trade, the Flemmings come
And trade with them; but when the Archduke did make
Some love to me he called his merchants home,
And interdicted traffic for my sake.
Then, can I be a nothing, who have made
A Kingdoms Peace, and marred a Kingdoms trade?
And were I not that York, why should my Aun^
Of Burgundy both recognize my Cause,
And second my designs? who will not grant,
That she contesting against natures laws
Should wrong her Niece a Queen, if she should get
A Kingdom from her for a counterfeit.
But to use farther demonstrations now
Were in the Cause and to your judgment vain:
Truth, and your self were prejudiced, for you
See clearly and the Truth it self is plain:
But like to Truth of Old it is in a Pit,
And must lie there, unless you succor it.
Now in your brow ( Great Sir) me thinks I spy
Characterizd both pity, and belief
Of my sad state: which with my self does fly
Unto your power, and justice for relief.
These are the two, which can my Hopes complete,
One makes you Good, and both may make me great.
All Actions do their consummations owe
To Can, and Will: these Principles alone
Are all-sufficient, and do grow in you,
One in your Power, and in your Justice one.
You are my Gaurdian Angel, these your wings,
Whose quills may write me in the list of King^.
The Greatest honor will be thine, for I
Shall be but as thy Creature; a poor thing
Temperd by thee; and is it not more High,
And Glorious to make, than be a King?
And know ( Brave Prince) this shall thy honor be
Kings have been made, Tyrans unmade by thee.
Thus Perkin boldly spoke: and did not spare,
To promise Mountains to his Majesty:
Which are no more in nature than those are,
Called Hyperborean in some History.
And with such l^fe did personate his part,
That Nature never was so braved by Art.
King James to Perkins declaration said,
Who e're he were, he never should repent
That he had him his sanctuary made.
His winning looks made all, that saw relent:
For he did play True York with such a grace,
'Twas hard to know the Metal from the face.
Diamonds and Sapphires are ascribed to Jove
In which if any feature be impressed,
The owner as Magician^ would prove,
Shall with the favor of great men be blessed:
Then Perkins face was in some Saphyre cut,
Or in a Diamond his Image put.
And to assure him, that he was as much
In his opinion, as himself professed,
Young Gordon, that same beautiful Non-such,
(And by the Kings consent) his Nuptials blessed.
Me thinks he looked, when both of them were m^^
Like a false stone, and yet most richly set.
He then ammassed a sufficient power,
And after the most hostile manner entered in
Northumberland: and Perkin Yorkes false flower
Was wagging in the field, and did begin
By a Proclamation a true King to play,
Which like a Herald thus prepared his way.
It said that York fourth Edwards second son*
(That Lion so long Couchant) now was rowz'd.
Whose case from Heaven had so much pity won,
That Scotland now his quarrel had espous^d.
Which with the English got but small applause,
Who for his Company did hate the cause.
It promised that this war was but to free
Himself from danger, them from Tyranny;
His Princely care (forsooth) was such that he
Would not the state or subject damnifie.
Which made King James to smile: for doing so
Was but to be a Steward to his foe.
It praised Richard that unnatural Prince;
Who though he enterd in by usurpation:
Yet both his equity, and laws convince,
That he was noble in administration.
Nor was this such a wonder, for one can
Be a good King, and yet a wicked man.
It told of Stanlies, and of Mountforts fall
Murderd by Henry most inhumanely.
Thus virtue like himself, he did miscall,
And what was Justice nicknamd cruelty:
But had not Stanly sufferd, Henry must;
And to himself be cruel, and unjust.
It cried how Henry did with taxes get
His coffers filld, and the poor Realm abusd.
But had the people but the foxes wit,
'Twas a poor plea for him: the Fox refusd
To have the Flies removd, which sucked him first,
He knew that fresh ones would torment him worst.
It promisd impositions should cease
And th'hated names of Tax, and subsidy:
It breathed naught but Dialects of Peace,
And silken notes of Ease, and liberty.
It might persuade the people, that they saw
Too much of Gospel to have any law.
It profferd worlds to him should take the King.
And give to Perkin Royal Honors. He
Did imitate the Devil in this thing:
All this I Will give, if thou will worship me.
The Devils and Perkins liberality
Was but to draw men to Jdolatry.
But these fair words could not the people take;
There was not one that did assistance bring:
Nor would his Proclamation perfect make
By the addition of God save the King;
They had not studied Pedegrees, to learn,
What Yorks, or Edwards sons might them concern.
King James despairing of access of aid,
Turned his intended War inth a Road:
And then with speed returned: for had he staid,
Our Army would have easd them of their Load
Of spoil and booty: soon as that should come
They'de have their Handsfull, yet go Empty home.
Before that Henry would the wrong repay
Made by this depredation: Henry made
A reparation of the trades decay,
And with the Flemmings did renew the trade:
That with his Treasure a Decorum kept,
Twinlike they smild together, twinlike wept*
This mutual entertrafficke seems a thing
Purpros'd by Nature. Isles (which in the sea
Are set like stones within a Crystal Ring)
Nature has not so far removed, but we
May from some part, some other land descry,
To mind us of this Sociable tie.
Trading confirmed; he calls a Parliament,
And shows that war with Scotland must be made:
Though he concealed his inference, they sent
His Logic was, as if he should have said
If war then Coin: when he his medium drew
From war, they easily his Conclusion knew.
With sixescore thousand pounds the subjects prove
They took his meaning right. In one we read,
His wars were a strange Ore, Iron above
And Gold below: 'twas a strange Ore indeed;
For Natralists observe, that in the ground
Where Iron is, there is no rich metal found.
The Kings Collectours at S. Michaels Mount
Met with a Cruel rub: for while they strive
To bring the stubborn Cornish to account,
Those People (buried in their Mines alive)
Mistaking it for Doomesday, did begin
To Rise out of their Sepulchers of Tin.
These Pioners (as if they owed their Birth
To the Earth matrix) crept out of the Ground:
And like the Giants the old sons of Earth
Against the gods do an Alarm sound.
To undermine had been their trade of late,
And so it is still; but not the ground but state.
Want made them murmur: for the People, who
To get their Bread, do wrestle with their fate:
Or those who in superfluous riot flow
Soonest rebel: Convulsions in a state
Like those, which natural Bodies do oppress,
Rise from repletion, or from emptiness.
While this rough Sea of People roules, and raves
With giddy Ebbes and Tides: some ^winds began
(Like those dismis'd from the Eolian Caves)
TO exasperate this troubled Ocean.
This Rabble quickly with Commanders sped;
Ill Humors thus soon gather to a Head.
A prating Lawyer (one of those which Clowd
That Honored Science) did their conduct take:
He talked all Law, and the tumultuous crowd
Thought it had all been Gospel, which he spoke.
At length these fools that Common Error saw*
A Lawyer on their side, but not the Law.
A Blackesmith next did in this tumult sweat,
To have this monster brought to light, which they
Bred in their Noddles; when Jove's Brain was great
With Pallas; Vulcan did the midwife play.
The People thus did think a Vulcan fit,
To be the Midwife of their Bare-whelpe wit.
They say this Action was but to defend
The Poor: and Chastise some about the King.
Justice, and Mercy blanch what they intend
With fair pretexts. Who on the Stage do bring
Rebellion, must to Countenance the Fact,
Have virtues clothes wherein the vice must act.
When these two Chiefes as far as Wells had gone,
They met Lord Audly, and transfer to him
Their Place, and Power by Resignation;
As I have seen two little Bubbles swim
Upon the Crystal pavement of a Lake,
Then meet a third, and one great Bubble make.
Turbulent spirits with the buzzing wind,
And aires of People are puffed up, and blown.
Popular Audly quickly was inclinde
To be their Head, although he lose his own.
The discontents of Nobles often sleep,
Till People wake them with the noise they keep.
Proud of the Gallant change, they now obey
A Lord, and under a new conduct go:
And Audly was as vainly proud as they,
To be their Leader, yet he was not so.
In a just war, he had their Leader bin,
Here but their fellow, equalliz'd by sin.
He undiscreetely led them into Kent
Which Henry by those two great props of states
Had lately fixed, Reward and Punishment.
There they might see their own in others fates.
Rebels on Jibbets hanged, like Crows to scare
Such foul from flocking, and allighting there.
But Kent was never conquered (said their story.)
The worse for them. She, who refused that Kings
Should touch her, will she yield her maiden Glory
To the Embraces of such worthless things?
As if a Virgin, which denied a Crown,
Would prostitute her Honor to a Clown.
That Kent no succors to their aid did bring,
Possessed them more with choler, than affright.
They threaten* to give Battle to the King,
And pillage trembling London in his sight;
Being thus confirmed they to Black Neath did go,
A name of dread and Character of woe.
The Rebels proud not to be met, expound
That to be Henry's fear, which was his plot:
And what they did suppose his doubt, was found
To be his resolution; he seemed not
To note them, lest the noise the game should spoil,
And Keep the Beast from coming to the Toil.
To have them far from home, Henry thought best,
From their own ground they perish with more ease;
Which Poets have mysteriously expressed
In their Anteus; and their Hercules;
Whose fight was equal till Alcides found
This Stratagem, To take him from the ground.
He knew how soon such violence was wont
To languish, and a diminution take:
Not to be feared, but in the first affront.
For Nature never did a compound make
Of such a mixture, as a headles rabble,
At once so weak, and yet so formidable.
Like to the Block, Jove cast into the Lake,
To be the King of Frogs: which the fall
Rending the waters, such a noise did make
At the first dash it terrified them all.
The first affright passed over; not a Frog,
But did insult; and leap upon the Log.
He saw their Snowball did not grow, but loose
^n rouling: daily waving in its might,
And in such Cases the best Leaders choose
The Fabian wisdom, and defer to fight.
Here the design is hastened by delay,
And then goes forward, when it seems to stay.
The Rebels perched near London on a Hill,
As if to stoop more strongly on the prey,
Henry no more protracts the time, but will
Instruct them in their ruin, that this stay
Was but to choose his time, and make them know
That his intendments were advised, not slow.
London to see a foe so near her door
Was strangely moved. Those who do most possess
Are most affray'd: desire of having more:
Was ever matched with fear of having less.
The Palenesse of the metal, which they own,
In the same tincture on themselves is shown.
The King perceiving where the Cause did lie
Of their fears shaking fit, and agueish swoune:
Himself for Physic did himself apply
Near to the side of the astonished Town.
Their Hearts left fainting, when they felt him there,
He was a Sovereign Cure against their fear.
Henry divides his forces into three
(The number of Perfection;) Old Rome held
This discipline, and order, nor did she
Fight without three Battalias in the field.
Like the three sister destinies they go,
To spin the fate, and ruin of the foe.
The Army whereon both Londons Hope did lie,
And this days Honor, and its Danger too.
Henry assigned to trusty Dawbenie,
His Chamberlain, who will the City do
The Office he did the King: Henry does deigne,
To make his own the Cities Chamberlain.
These did the Foe affront: but he ordained
Oxford, and Essex should beyond them go,
TO enclose the Game* that, as that King maintein'd,
That Hunting like a kind of war did show,
And image representing it: so here
This war a kind of hunting did appear.
Henry with force invincible did go
Assured to imparke this rascal Heard;
Else had this course been dangerous; for a foe
If stopped, gives greatest reason to be feared.
You may from Music the resemblance take,
Where every stop the note more sharp does make.
Despair of safety sharper spurs does wear,
Than hope of victory; there is not a man
Who hopes no good, that any Ill will fear.
He that contemns his own being, can
Be Master of another man's, and he
That scorns himself, may triumph over thee.
London was now assured of the Day,
Affying in the Fortune of these Three.
For man's condition's such to think, that they
Who often have conquered cannot conquered be.
Jove loves a Laurel, and his Thunder spares it
Nor it alone, but even the Head that wears it.
Our eyes, and Hopes are on men's Fortunes bent:
When Caesar did the mariner importune
To set to sea, He used this Argument,
Thou carri'st Caesar, and with him his fortune.
Not Caesar's virtue, but his fortune must
Warrant a saylour in so great a gust.
But least the Citizens should stand in doubt,
(For they are Creatures, that will hardly trust)
Of this security, King Henry brought
His army to S. Georges fields, which must,
If they have need of better bondsmon yet
Their Arms, and Marks to the assurance set.
The King gave out he would not fight that day:
That he the Rebels in suspense might hold
And unobservd their strength might disarray.
Like to the Norwey air, whose thrilling cold
With such a stealth does through the body run,
Men feel not their undoing 'till undon.
And yet he fought that day, that Day was His:
As Tuesday once in the affection swaid
Of Royal James, and his grave reason this,
As the same Day the treasons were bewraid:
So, both the Plots from the same Author came,
And the Author of his safety was the same.
Dawbney at the declining of the Day,
(Which was their fortunes declination too.)
At Detford bridge disordered their array
And taught what reason, against rage could do.
He beat them from that standing to a Ferrie;
And made the^ change the bridge for Charons whirry
There he did wind his valor to the extreme,
( Men belie virtue to a mean:) and 'though
Imcompatible qualities they seem,
He did a Generals part, and soldiers show
A soldiers Grammar will not be complete,
'Till Captain^s Rules, and their Examples meet.
But fighting hotly, (which I will not call
An inconsideratnesse, but forward zeal)
Dawbney captivd into their hands did fall,
But was redeemd before they well could feel
They had him there: no sooner took, but mist,
As if they had graspd lightning in their fist.
Then Oxford like his own Artillery
Shot himself through them: had this worthy played
Such strains of valor in Romes Infancy
Which canonisd great worths; she had not staid
For's Death, as her strict orders did provide,
He had been deified before he di'de.
Essex by Active proofs evinced so well
A constant spirit: that had he been there
When the whole breed of Giants did rebel
Against the gods, and made the gods for fear
Assume new shapes, that they might lie unknown;
Essex had scorned any but his own.
The Rebels now fears Antimaske begin
Their sinews first like trembling Lutestrings shook:
But when the spirits were retreated in
They stood insensate statues, strange to look
Upon so many Images, when fear
Was the only Statuary that was there.
In Horror some deploring their mistake,
Wishd themselves underground, and digging Tin:
Not all the Terriers under Heaven would make
These Foxes stir, if they were Eathed agin.
They had turned Sadduces, and would gainesay
A Resurrection with more zeal than they.
The Leaders first did yield: it seems their men
Would out of manners give their betters place,
And let their Captains render first; but then
Like to good Soldiers think it no disgrace
To yield: nay if their Captains run away,
They hold it breach of discipline to stay.
Henry was once incensed: but while he
Was thinking of Revenge, they of Despair:
Mild Clemency, Jove's eldest Child, for she
Made Peace in the first Chaos, cuts the air;
And for a while forsook her spangled Throne,
Which Jove has seated in the temperate Zone.
Over their steel with silver wings she played
'Till she had fastened her enquiring eyes
On Henry: and his fierce intendment staid
Which meant to make them but one Sacrifice.
And thus she spoke, having first fand his brow
With the Emblem of her self an Olive Bough.
Son of my Hopes, to spare these men incline,
And in these men thy self: for every blow,
Thy sword shall make, is by reflection thine,
They are thy limbs, thou suffer in their woe.
That which I ask is but a slender boon,
Show mercy to thy self, and I have done.
Dead members should be lanc'd unto the quick
I grant: and these are cut, as much as need;
But the whole Body of the state is sick.
Suppose; must therefore all the members bleed?
In natural Bodies open but one vein,
You bring them to their temp'rature again.
Not Heart alone makes a Chief fit for wars,
He must have Bowels too. Antiquity
Gave not the Thunderbolt to Iron Mars
To Leaden Saturn, nor Quick Mercury.
Nor any other of the Seven above,
But to the Kindly influence of Jove.
Jove thy Example breaks the insulting foes
Pitties the Broken: the Aspiring Pine,
And daring Cedar feel his flaming blows;
But not the Reeds which modestly decline.
Shall not a King pity the yielding foe
Which even the King of Kings vouchsafes to do.
The Princely Lions their full anger try,
When with a stubborn combatant they meet*
But in a Noble bravery pass by
The^ couching Prey which prostrates at their feet.
And shall a King tread on the humbled foe,
Which even the King of Beasts disdaines to do?
That Oil powered on thy head (whose suppling touch
Mercy denotes) teaches Commiseration;
Curtane the sword, does intimate as much,
Carried before thee at thy Coronation.
Which has the Point rebated, to imply
Your Justice wedded to your Clemency.
God, who has said that you are gods, does save
By numbers: so may Henry now, and can
Be like to God. Man's straightened Arm may have
Power of extent enough to save a man:
But to preserve whole multitudes alive
But Gods, and Kings have their prerogative.
Here your two Roses do their Colors show,
Both in their spreading bravery arrayed.
There the whole field distained with blood, as though
The Red of Lancaster were there displayed.
And they who yet survive are Pale with fear
As if the White of York were planted there.
Those who are slain can be esteemed no less
Than an oblation, who ventured theirs
To save the Blood of these: these who express
Repentance in an Offering of tears.
Heavens have not such a Sacrifice withstood,
Which thus consisted both of tears and blood.
When Kent was in commotion, I know,
Corr'sives did cure the ulcers of the state;
But should you use that course of Physic now,
You might the Patients more exasperate.
So the same simples, as the experienced find,
Gathered at several times do purge or bind.
If to be great not good were your intent
I have chalked out your way: 'twere a false aim.
If by the ruins of the slain you meant,
To raise the Pile, and Structure of your Fame.
They which survive will the best Trophies be,
And living statues of this victory.
Her speech and Henry's choler end together,
Who took this second for his first intent,
That none should dye but those which lead them thither
And Heavens in this were Henry's Precedent,
Which to those sinners easy Pardons grant,
Who sin not out of wantonness, but want.
The fine, and noble way to Kill a foe,
Is not to kill him: you with kindness may
So change him, that he shall cease to be so,
And then he is slain. Sigismund used to say
His Pardons put his foes to death; for when
He mortified their hate, he killed them then.
Audley, who led them once, is led from thence,
Having those Arms by his brave Grandsires worn
(Because his Arms were turned against his Prince)
Turned, and reversed: and his Coat armor torn*
Then he salutes a Scaffold, where one blow
Struck off the Rebels head, and Audlies too.
The Choleric Smith and Lawyer, who did so
Divide the members of the troubled state,
In their own members, were divided too.
The Smith insulted in his noble fate;
And on the Hurdle he did seem to Glory,
That after times should read him in a story.
When one had set (in a Satyricke vein)
The famous whores of Spain upon a list:
One of that tribe took it in high disdain,
And vowed revenge because her name was mist.
What wild attempts will vain Ambition fly,
To be Eternized, though for infamy?
Amidst these stirs from Ferdinand of Spain,
Came an Ambassador: whom Henry won
To treat a peace with Scotland, but to feign
It Was from his Master, not by Henry done.
Gospells of Peace were here his sweetest airs,
But he would no Epistles use, nor prayers.
Then reverend Fox was in Commission joined
With him, who would the Scottish King persuade,
That Perkin might to Henry be consigned,
Which with the King but small impression made.
For so he should his former faith deny,
Which would be thought Civil Apostacy.
And yet King James, did privately recant:
For calling him, he did advise him choose
Some fitter seat: yet still did Perkin vaunt,
And nothing of his haughty spirit loose.
But from the Court undauntedly depart,
Left of his hopes, and friends, but not his heart:
But his fair Gordon would not leave him there
But to himself, and to his fortunes cleave:
Her Kindred she forsook, and did adhere
TO a stranger. Thus a Loadstone will not leave
The Kisses of the Irons loved embrace,
Although a thousand Loadstones were in place.
Stand up thou wonder of thy Sex, and Times,
If I at first had invocated thee,
To be the assistant Goddess of these Rimes;
This they had borrowed from thy constancy.
That all would in a constant Tenor flow,
And had one verse been good, all had been so.
Once more the Cornish murmur, and begin
Lewdly to construe Henry's Clemency.
It Was the whole Kingdoms Case that they were in,
And therefore pardoned by necessity.
That Henry did so many Cornish spare,
They thank not Henry's love, but Henry's fear.
The Florentine delivered this Position:
When people think their Princes courtesy
Is not derived from his disposition,
But from constraint, or some State secrecy.
The Grace is valued at a slender rate,
And more endangers than secures a State.
When desperate villains ill success have had,
(Who rather had be guilty of the fact
Atcheived, than attempted) they will add
A higher, and a more nefarious act.
As when a stone-bow shootes too high, we will,
To set the Bow, set the Bead higher still.
They soon to Ireland did for Perkin send,
Who with his Council canvassing the Case,
Their fond imaginations apprehend,
That was the Time, and Cornwall was the Place.
Dispute not, if his Councillors were able
Who from their shop-bords clim'd a Counseltable.
In the first place a Scriv'ner (Be it known
To all men) Perkins quarrel undertook;
A Mercer then, late from a shop-bord flowne,
Where he had been condemned by his Book.
To these a Taylour joined, as if he meant
To mend his own with the whole Kingdoms Rent.
With sixscore men he did in Cornwall Land,
Then did to Bodmin go the Black-smiths town,
Where without Proclamation, or command
His Kingship did encounter many a clown.
The Black-smiths Cinders, which were kept in store,
Might make a worse combustion than before.
But Perkin now a higher flight will sore:
He thinks a Diadem fit for his brow.
He that was Richard Duke of York before,
Calls himself Richard King of England now.
Thus Perkin did his former sign pull down,
And for the Rose, set up the Rose and Crown.
He like a dying Taper would expire,
Which at the End, as if the End it knew,
Musters together the surviving fire,
As if it would its languish'd flames renew.
Then blazeth forth a Gallant flash of light,
Then is extinct, and lost in its own night.
These Rebels in their madness had some wit,
And Policy, which had a smacke of Brain:
They do advise him some good Town to get,
Where, as in Garrison they might remain,
Or if in Battle they in field were beat,
To have some refuge, whether to retreat.
Besides in gain a power attractive rests
To call men to it: should they once but taste
The pillage of a City, troops of guests
Would without bidding, to the banquet haste.
All stoop at gain: and if the Lure shall fail,
A Pidgeon with a Haggard will prevail.
Fair Excester fit Rendez-vous is thought;
But vainly, for nor battring pieces were,
Nor other Ingens to the City brought;
And before they starved them, Henry would be there,
To cool their stomachs, that they should not serve
To stay so long till Excester should sterve.
For want of Cannon they did wildly cry,
And make the fields with barbarous shouts resound,
As if those hideous roarings should supply
The Instruments of war. It Is not the sound
Of voices, but of instruments must make
A City dance, and her foundation shake.
Both for a needful, and a brave defense
The Excestrians wisely did themselves prepare,
To keep such hungry Customers from thence,
Men like to prove bad chapmen for their ware.
Who taking all, might make a riddle just
Faying for none, none given, and none on trust.
And as their danger did collect their strength
Into it self: so did their spirits dilate,
In Hope that Henry would arrive at length
Whose look that fiction would annihilate.
With him a King, what will false Richard do
Who but an Earl a true one did over throw?
What gave them courage, made the foe aghast:
(The hope of Henry;) for when he comes in
Perkin must off; and therefore must make have,
Not quickly win, or not at all to win
Did Perkin with an equal danger strike:
Slow victory, and ruin was alike.
Defective in the instruments of fire
He made the fire his Instrument: and set
Fire to a gate: the Citizens conspire
To do the like: so flames with flames were met.
Cross to that moldie tenet, which denies
Cures can be taken but from Contraries.
Henry came thither, soon as he did hear
That King of Rakehels roreing in the West.
( 'Twas Perkins west indeed for he set there.)
Toward whose end, all were in Arms addressed.
Let Greatness feigned, or true decline in state,
It Is the worlds garb to accelerate her fate.
The Cornish soon did yield, (whom Henry took
To mercy on submission:) for their Head,
And Leader Perkin had them all forsook,
And wisely to a Sanctuary fled.
Where he was safe, as if the place had bin
A shrine for vice, and privilege for sin.
Crimes as if Sacred to some God, were kept,
And Patronizd with the Religious care
Of Sanctuary: had a villane crept
Within those walls, he was protected there.
But while their Power such Parracids releeves,
The House of Prayer is made a Den of Thieves.
Henry too tender of the Privilege
Of Sanctuary, would not draw him thence,
Although advisd by's Council, who allege
No place could guard his person, or offense;
And Canonists deny, this Grace to those
Who are their Princes, and their Countries foes.
Cities of Refuge anciently were meant
For such Offenders, whom they guilty knew
Of the thing done, but guiltless of the intent;
They helpd not others: and Benajah slew
The valiant Ioab by the Kings command,
Even when he touchd the Altar with his hand.
Henry to those enclind, who did advise
To win him thence; that he might solve the doubt,
And sound the depth of his conspiracies.
Promise of life enticed the Iuggler out:
Who like a Hokus-Pokus soon was won
To show the King how all his tricks were done,
Perkin to London did attend the King:
Contempt, and wonder Perkin did attend:
Who, as his life had been no other thing
But juggling, like a Iuglers trick does end.
Which is of all admired, when unknown,
But every Boy will slight it, when it is shown.
As for dear Katherine in his love enthrald,
She had more pity, than himself had scorn*
And truly was the dainty white-Rose called,
The Title falsely by her husband worn.
So fair, that had you Beauties Picture took,
It must like her, or not like Beauty look.
What a deep wound did the Arm of fortune give
Upon a flesh, so delicate as this,
And soft as Peace, and slumber? did she live
With him that writ the metamorphasis;
She with a numming cold had turned stone-dead,
And Gordon, had for Niobe been read.
Calamity in Homer bare foot goes,
Therefore encountering hard and stubborn men
She makes a less impression of her woes,
For she is barefoot, and treads lightly then.
But if with soft, and gentle souls she meet,
She dares more boldly trample with her feet.
Has Pomp a being it is so transitory?
She Is nothing now, that was even now a Queen*
There is no Present tense in this worlds Glory,
Even when it is, it may be said to have been.
This Cressant's waned, and this Katharins wheel,
Resembling fortunes did her turnings feel.
But where her Perkin had deficient been
Henry supplied: Perkin but gave to her
The titles of a Duchess, and a Queen
But Henry gave the means; and did confer
Such an allowance that no more was due
Unto those titles, if they had been true.
Now the Celestial powers did ordain
A good effect from a bad accident,
A Fray at Norham where some Scotts were slain
Brought on the match beyond the Frayes intent.
'Twas a brave match but a strange kind of wooing,
Where both the parties sought their own undoing.
From ouglie Discord did fair union come,
(So dainty Beauties have their being drew
From the dark horror of a Negroes womb:)
Antiquity never such a reason knew
To ratify her Axiom, that strife
Gave all things Being, and all beings life.
These Nations Concord, thus derived from strife
From stormy wrath, and boistrous injury;
Is in that Goddess typified to life,
Who is the Queen of love and unity,
This Venus her Original must have,
From a rough billow, and a rugged wave.
The ways of ^eav'n are Pathlesse: there is no light
To trace, or p^^ck them: all those Counsels lie
Under the Privy-Seale of depth, and night
That boundless Arm will work by contrary.
And when that Oculist his skill will try
Eve'n Clay shall be Colyrium for an eye.
King James incensed that no orders are
Took by the wardens: by his passion driven
Dispachd a Herald to denounce a war,
If present satisfaction were not given.
Henry was all for peace: for with the Scott
The wars were barren, and he loved them not.
Therefore Grave Durham, who was most engaged;
(They were his men that did this quarrel make)
Writes to the King of Scotland thus enragd;
But no smooth lines this angry Mars can take.
Letters from Venus would have faild in this,
Sent by a Dove, and sealed with a Kiss.
Not thus prevailing, he in Person went,
(But Henry first his business approves.)
And was his letters fuller supplement:
For viva vox, not the dead letter moves.
When he Preachd Peace, King James to peace did bow
And's Gospels, not Epistles did allow.
The King saw farther than the Bishop could,
He told him, that his Match with England might
This Knot of Peace inviolable hold;
A Princes thoughts sore above humane flight.
There Is not a King, but is in this like Saul,
For by the head, he is higher than them all.
'Twas an ind^biate Oracle he spoke:
Divining, that this matrimonial tie,
The great Conjunction of both Realms would make,
And that a Peace, as fixd as destiny;
A greater truth nor Priest, nor Sibyll gave
From Delphian Tripod, or Prophetic Cave.
That age the marriage saw, and we in it
The great effect, a peace inviolate:
And since the d^slocated realms are knit,
It will the juncture more consolidate.
Thus in a bone cure but the fracture right,
Those parts of all most solidly unite.
About this time our world began to think
Of a New world: 'twas an Italian Head,
^here this imagination first did sinck,
that other Lands might be discovered.
As Blithe Democritus of old had done
In his assertion of more worlds than one.
Even when the world had left to Hope for more,
And like the Three-Night Giant set a mark,
And non plus ultra, not to be passed over:
Columbus like the Dove sent from the Arc
With wing-like Sails by unknown waters past,
Till he found footing for himself at last.
The furious Youth of Macedon was sad
That one poor world should bound his victories:
But had Columbus lived then, he had
So plagued the Gallant with discoveries,
That he had forced him to confess, that store
Did worse torment him now than want before.
The Prophecy of Seneca did make
Small way to this discou'rie: it expressed
Rather a flash of Poetry; and spoke
Of Islands in the North, not in the West.
It said, that Thule should no longer be
The boundure of the Roman Monarchy,
This Probability more than the rest
Moved Him: for since but half of the degrees
Of longitude were known toward the West,
He could not think, the other half was Seas,
And that the Sun did naught for half his race
But gild the waves, and there behold his face.
For this discovery he did obtain
The use of three small Barks from Ferdinand;
And sailing forty Days upon the Maine,
From the Canaries West discovered land.
Then the ships seemed to dance, and sails unfurled
Swelled not with wind, but pride for the New-world.
With poisoned breath the Spanish pride would blast
This glorious act. For Envy does invade
Works breathing to Eternity, and cast
Upon the fairest piece the greatest shade.
By petty stars her black infection skippes:
They Are Suns, and Moons that suffer her Eclipse.
Nor he alone; but even that Age shall want
The glory of it: since no Spaniard did
Find it, a Roman shall: and hence they vant
Some of Augustus coin was there found hid.
The Historian, and mintmaster did conjoyne
To coin this story, and to forge this coin.
For can it be that in Augustus time,
When Peace, and learning strove with equal Glory,
And Arts were in their flourish, and their prime,
This thing should not be registered in story?
To leave so brave an action unwrit,
Argues both want of gratitude and wit.
Rather the Knight famed in the Welsh records
Shall have my Vote: for in those Parts there were
At their discov'rie found some British words,
Good monuments that they had once been there.
Henry may seem entitled to the ground,
As by his Countreyman, and subject found.
But the Acquist was for Castile marked down
By destiny: which with the Golden East,
Did at the first compose the Catholic crown,
And now has gilt it with the Golden West.
And now the stars in his Dominions have
Their rise, and set, their Cradle, and their Grave.
Yet Henry had a tender of these lands,
Which he embraced not; for it did not come
In a fit time to one, whose head, and hands
Had their just ta^ke of business at Home:
Perkin that Little World, did lately try,
The strength of Henry's best discovery.
And tries it yet: for Perkin has contrived
His freedom; but is quickly had in chase
To keep him from the sea; yet he arrived
At the Holy Island of a Privilege place,
And did unto the house of Bethlem fly,
In Bethlem then an Antichrist did lie.
The Promise of his life, (which was the bait
That drew him out before) drew him out now:
Some about Henry, would have hanged him strait,
But Henry's disposition could not bow,
To hate a worm; for spirits highly borne,
Did never join their anger to their scorn.
All that his stomach suffered him to say,
Was, take the Knave, and put him in the stocks;
His he^les were justly punished, for they
Helped his flight most: where having heard their mock^
And made a Spectacle, they did him carry,
Unto the Tower, a fitter Sanctuary.
Lodged there, his Keepers he attempts to win;
Who scorning his contemned state to Eye:
He plots to work the Earl of Warwick in
To share the fate of his conspiracy.
It is hells Art an innocent to make
Partake in Sin, in suffering to partake.
Weary of life Warwick the Plot embraced,
And ventured death to fly the fear of it.
Thus did the Tunnie, by a Dolphin chased,
Into a boat, with greater danger get.
He could no longer Deaths expectance bear,
For death is less than deaths continual fear.
The Hidden Powers of Heaven! they make, and bend
Those Councels, that a mischief should divert,
Fit to advance it; when the fates intend
To ruin us, our judgments they pervert,
And add this greater plague, to make us thought
The cause, which on our selves the mischief brought.
Soon Warwick turned, soon turned the Keepers too,
He was the spring whence they their motions took;
His Fortunes did, what Perkins could not do,
For Perkin had no bait upon his hook:
Nero had nets of Gold: had Perkin one,
Perkin had caught them, though he fished alone.
These fellows, the Leisetenants men conspire
To Kill their Lord, and them their freedom give,
Rewar'd but hoped for did these villains hire
To sell his life, by whom themselves did live.
Money and Men a mutual falsehood show*
Men make false money, money makes men so.
But though their Project was in darkness sealed,
Yet he, who made the Light from darkness come,
Said but his Fiat Lux, and 'twas revealed;
And it is maintein'd impossible by some,
That any plot can undiscovered lie,
With more than four in the Conspiracy.
Perkin who twice before had life obteind
By Henry's Pardon, nor could justly hope
The Mercy of another, was arraigned
To have his thread of life end in a Rope.
You may the Ladder a true Emblem call
Of his false honors; which he clim'd, to fall.
Thus he his fortunes giddiness did feel,
For had not fortune turned, man would doubt
She were the Lady Regent, who did wheel
The Actions of Mortality about.
And some unsetteld Head would draw from thence
An argument to question Providence.
At Tower hill next the Earl of Warwick fell,
(With false Plantagenet a true one dies)
The reason for it in state I need not tell,
That object's not proportioned with my eyes
To look upon: and he that argues least
In the affairs of Kings concludes best.
If that were true, which some of old professed,
That vicious Souls fled hence themselves did roll,
And wind into the Body of some beast
Which they resembled here: then Perkins soul,
That could so imitate, and take a shape,
Is playing somewhere in a Iugglers Ape.
But if the Nobler Souls, as they maintein'd,
Were fixed in the Body of some star
Where, in a constant motion they reigned;
Then Edwards murdered sons, and Warwickes are,
In those called Delta of Triangle fashion,
And there lend virtue to that Constellation.
Such Envy fell on Henry for the fact,
That though he ever was observed to stand
And dare it to the encounter, yet this act
He was content to lay on Ferdinand;
Tired with its weight, like Atlas, he was feign,
To put it on the Hercules of Spain.
Letters were shown from thence, wherein was read
This doubt: his daughters heirs might miss the crown
If Warwick lived: 'twas that took Warwickes head.
For which the Lady afterward made known
Her fear, that Heaven would not the marriage bliss
Because 'twas made in blood, and she meant this.
This year a Jubilee at Rome did take
Some English purses: but the Pope pretends
A Holy war in Palestine, to make
The People free by such religious ends.
Sacred pretext's he knew the purse would draine,
Thus in an ill sense, Godliness is gain.
But now our Doctors Chaires will not allow
Wars for religion: for the Conscience
Is immateriall, and disdeignes to bow
Unto the bent of Corp'rall violence.
It Is built too strong, and high: none can invade it;
Nor lead it Captive, but the hand that made it.
And force is vain, for it advances higher
The Cause it would oppress. The Martyrs blood
Made such conceptions in the pregnant fire,
It brought forth Converts in a numerous brood.
And the ten persecutions did as much,
As ten Commandments to make them such.
Pity from Love; love does from pity spring,
And such a mutual combination hold;
That when the sad spectatours in a Ring,
With wonder, and Compassion do behold
Those fixed spirits, which no torment awes:
They pity first, and then they love the Cause.
That was a merry Turk who when a war
Was by the Pope denounced, this answer made;
We Turks, as you Italians say you are,
Are sprung from Troy, then let us Greece invade,
And joined in one the Trojan wars renew
With those who Hector our brave Gransire slew.
He said that Arms were an improper way
To spread a faith: (nor does the Signeur take
The assistance of compulsion at this day,
Which does more Hypocrites, than Converts make:)
So scoffd at our Religion, and our Laws,
That built a war on so absurd a Cause.
But 'though Religion will not make a war
Legitimate against this Infidel:
Yet there be motives which sufficient are
To rouse us against this race of Ismael:
Or else the truth of Prophecy might fall;
All hands against his, his hands against them all.
The enslaved Christians tired with whippes, and fears
Command us to compassionate their groans:
The chained slaves, whose pitying Oars drop tears
Solicit freedom with such ruthful Tones,
That heard, there would more Voluntaries come
Unto that Call than a Commanders Drum.
How many sacred Oratories burnd
By the mad zeal of the Mahumetan?
How many Temples to Moskettos turned
Profaned by their impious Alcoran?
It is the Devils policy that where
God has his Church, his Chapel should he there.
God did his Law first in Arabia write;
And there (this Ape of God) the Devil meant
By Mahomet his Scripture to endite.
With the same Country he was then content,
But now grown saucie, the same walls must be
Seezd by this Rival of the Deity.
The world is summond to this glorious strife
By all those Kings out of their Kingdoms thrown:
And by the action to give Justice life,
Which lies in this, Give every one his own.
And spoil this gaudy ^ay, who thus presumes,
Trimd in the Pride of his usurped plumes.
And since these Scythians in an impious vaunt
Vntemple God, and Majesty unthrone;
The singularity of the Act will want
Both precedent, and imitation
To discompose this Barbarous Power, which beats
Both God, and Man from their Imperial Seats.
Nor is the Impresse so difficult as then;
Their Conquests have enlarged them to our doors:
We may more easily now transport our men,
Than when they went to the far Eastern shores.
They have encroachd so near, that we may choose
Surely to conquer, or as surely loose.
The Ianizaries bull warks of that state,
Are broke with idleness, and cowd with vice;
As if they purposd to anticipate
The loose delights of their dreamed Paradise.
They were the winds which sweld that sea so high,
Now they breath faintly, and those waves will lie.
And seems not Turkey to approach her Fate,
Having so many years no progress made?
(A certain note of ruin:) when a State
Comes to its Tropic, then it is retrograde.
When Bodies cease to grow, it is the presage
Of a decline to their decrepit Age.
Called to these wars Henry good will did show,
To pay his money, that himself might stay:
Yet (please the Pope) he would in person go,
If Christian Princes first their discords lay:
For Henry knew, they had the causes been,
Why Christian Arms no good success had seen.
While our first Richard, that same Lyon-heart,
His banners did in Syria advance,
And with his Conquests made the Sultan start:
King Phillip seizd on Normandy; and France
Forced him to lay that glorious action down,
And quit the worlds affairs, to save his own.
But when another Phillip had espousd
The quarrel, and such preparations made,
That the East trembled: our third Edward rowsd,
And claiming France, the expedition staid.
Thus Emulation foiles us; and while we
Conquer our selves, the Turks triumphers be.
But at this time no Holy war went on,
The pence for other use were kept in store:
For when the Fair, and Jubilee were done,
The rattle of the war was heard no more.
When the Deneirs were paid, they understand,
They were for Rome, and for no Holy Land?
Our Arthurs nuptial with Spaines Katharine
Succeedes this year of Jubilee at Rome:
Which we deluded with our Hopes divine
Would be a year of Iubile at home.
Vain man to Hopes, vain as himself, will trust,
And Dust will build its confidence on dust.
Things with slow strides to their perfection grow,
Then they take wings, and to their period have:
A seav'n years treaty made this marriage slow,
Whose joy with Arthur did not seven months last.
To the conjunction of the Moon and Sun
A month's requird, but in an hou'r it is done.
And heaven it seemd, the Marriage would retard:
The winds displeasd her landing did oppose:
Or Sea-borne Venus her arrival bard,
Who with a frown wrinckling the waves arose
And stopd the Bark, vexed that her youthful Nun
Should taste of sweets, which should so soon be don.
Married at Paul's with state celebrious,
The Tryumphs of the marriage did succeed:
He was Arcturus, she was Hesperus,
And King Alphonsus did their fortunes read,
No story tells what his predictions were;
But if for good: he, or the stars did err:
For these two Princes in November met,
And the April following divorced are
By the command of Death: Arcturus set,
And had his even before his evening-star,
His Hesperus; who the new sphere did prove
Of Henry's arms, where she did longer move.
For compensation of this year, the increase
Of Triumphs do attend the ensuing year:
With Britain, it is the Epoch of peace,
Her peace begins her computation there.
Write all that year in Red, for it is all
But as one Holy Day, and Feastivall.
Margeret, eldest daughter of the King
King James to wife did by a Proxy take:
Which told by Fame, the Bells contend to ring
A peale as loud as Fames: and Bon-fires make
So great a light that if heavens light were don,
They might have made a Day without a Sun.
Then into Scotland did this new Queen go
Whom a brave troop of Lords, and Ladies bring
I^ ^^llant order, and Majestic show
To Ed^nborrough to her spouse the King.
And there with all magnificence of state,
This glorious Marriage they did consummate.
A thousand little Cupids with their wings
Did blow their fires, and heighten their delights;
And every Grace a flowrie present brings.
Then Hymen, president of marriage Rites,
Beckned for silence with his Torch of Pine
Used at Nuptials, and did thus divine;
My Torch turns clear, and with the pointed flame
Not dim, nor winking does white hours foretell,
And if my skill be true, I see the same
Portended in the stars, by which I spell
Future events and fortunes, that are set
Down in those lights, Heavens mystic Alphabet.
In them ( Fair Bridegroom, fairer Bride) I read
This Marriage shall two hostile Realms atone,
Which must be married too: yours does preceede
As Introduction to that greater one.
That marriage, as the substance, Heaven points at,
Yours is the figure, and the Type of that.
Your Marriage is their contract, and inferres
The espousals of those Kingdoms: in your hands
The Genij of two nations hold out theirs,
Which shall hereafter consummate those bands.
But the Solemnities are kept by fate
For your posterity to celebrate.
It is a work of Time: there cannot be
The springtime in your Age, and Harvest too,
Your Age the seed, the next the blade shall see,
A third the Ear. Thus China Grandsires do
Bury their Porcellan dishes in the ground,
Whose profits but to their sons heirs redound.
Both Realms a while with their own blood shall flow,
( Alli'de in blood before alli'de:) but the End
Shall be a firmer love: for a brave foe,
If reconciled, m^kes the bravest friend.
All things from strife Originally rose,
And discords must this harmony compose.
Thus the Elements did in the Chaos fight
When jarring seeds did in her Matrix lie.
When cold with hot, when heavy with the light,
Did combat with intestine mutiny.
Till on the Abyss a Spirit did display,
His brooding wings, and arbitrate the fray.
Mars bathed in blood shall on the borders ride,
With terror in the Van, death in the Reere.
And in this quarrel fatal to decide
These realms, with mutual cuts their breasts shall tear
As if they meant through those large wounds to see
Each others hearts, before they would married be.
^et shall this Union no debtour be
To victory, nor be a Conqu'rours prize:
The Author shall descend from you, and He,
that must unite this Pair, from you shall rise.
And that Rich Pearl, which does the Union hight,
Shall be derived from this Margarite.
Your offspring, a Pacificke Prince shall knit
This sacred bond, this true-love Knot shall tie.
Biest are Peacemakers shall be justly writ
His Glorious Motto: in whose Monarchy
Drums shall be silenced, and alarums cease,
As at the Birth of the great Prince of Peace.
If the impressions of licentious rage,
And marks of ancient enmity remain;
They shall be canceled, and effaced that age
By the mild peace of his auspicious reign.
Nature no more her prickles shall disclose
In Scottish thistle, or in English Rose.
Thus Hymen spoke; this Heavens accomplished have,
And with the Sea, as with a Ring, have Knit
This Royal pair. Let Venice cease to brave,
That she contracts the Sea, and marries it.
Let her stand dumb at this more glorious thing,
What there is married, here is but the Ring.
Never could the Sea, which does about them flow,
With her embrace put them in mind of love.
For her encircling arms did nothing do,
But make a stage whereon their Arms to prove*
And two feirce realms the Gladiatours were
To combat in this Amphitheater.
It Is thought the Policy of France did break
The intended marriage of this froward pair*
For if for us alone France were too weak,
The united Scots would force her to despair.
Since the English Aspect was alone so feared;
At their Conjunction how had they been scared?
Therefore when the English did to France sail over
The Scots obliged by the French courtesies,
Made their incursions at the Posterne door,
And stopped the Current of our victories.
Which did the Proverb make. He that would wi^
The Day of France with Scotland must begin.
When 'twixt sixth Edward, and the Scottish Queen,
The match was almost to conclusion brought:
It Was broke by France, whose gifts did intervene.
Then was the field at Mussell Borrough fought;
Where Mars did quit the wrongs by Venus done,
And though the Night was lost, the Day was won.
At last Great James this Union contrived,
Whose Royal blood by lineall descent
Was from the Monarchs of both Realms derived,
He joined this Isle, and in the Parliament,
Called it his Wife: the Angels Peace did sing,
When he espoused her with Astreas Ring.
Here is a threefold Cord, a threefold Knot;
The Saxons Heptarchie was first combind.
Then Wales was added, then the valiant Scot,
This twist by Mortals cannot be untwin'd.
And as the lips of Sacred truth have spoke,
A threefold Cord cannot be easily broke.
My Sovereign now; Heir of his fathers Peace,
And great Confirmer of it, does defend
Her Rights, which do increase with his increase;
Triumphs of Peace Trophies of war transcend
In Glory, and an Olive branch will raise
A name as high, as a whole Grove of Bays.
Being now at Peace, Henry did wealth pursue;
For soon as Iron was laid down, he had
Some thought on Gold: we but four Ages knew
Gold, Silver, Iron, Brass, till he did add
This fifth, a compound different from either,
His Age was Gold, and Iron mixed together.
And as the lower Orbs are wheeled about
Rapt by the motion of the Orb above:
So were Inferior agents soon found out,
Which moved, and turned, when he began to move.
For it is observed, that Princes sooner get
Men for their humor, than their honor fit.
Empson and Dudly, men of wide desires,
Which could not be or satisfied, or shamed.
The Creatures were, whose avaritious fires,
Like Hells, could not or be extinct, or tamed.
Had they drunk Tagus, and Pactolus quaft
Their Golden streams had been too small a draught.
Nay if they owners had, and heirs become
Of all the treasures, which interred lie,
Where nature teemes the burden of her womb
Conceived with Sulphur mixed with Mercury.
Even nature had grown barren, and her stuff
Been all consumed, yet they not said, Enough.
The wisest King in sacred leaves has writ
The Horse-leach has two daughters, which do cry,
Give, give, nor have enough: if she thought fit.
This longing Pair should not unmarryed dye,
Here is a Pair, which may their longing save,
So they two husbands, she two sons may have.
Let dark Antiquity cease to avouch
Her Midas, whom the angry Gods decreed
Should with his fingers admirable Touch
Turn all to Gold: for these men did indeed
What he did but in fiction, and were able
To make that Story which was once but Fable.
These out of subtle malice, and not error
Did wrest the penal statutes to their bent:
And make that Rigor, which was meant but Terror.
Pretense of law did color their intent,
And their oppression gild, as if they would
Employ the scales of Justice to weigh Gold.
The sweet of Riches did pervert the Law
To Gall, and wormwood, which their greedy mind
Did with Gold-wires to its own vastness draw,
And pass the lines, which Justice had defined.
Nay man will venture to an Indian Mine,
Though in the passage he twice cuts the Line.
This was the noted Blemish of his Time,
And most disfigured it: though else a Man
Built to be Great by goodness: the same Crime
Story has cast upon Vespasian.
A Prince framed all of Clemency, and one
Too high for Censure, but for that alone.
Yet one Historian for the Emperor pleades;
Says, he was forced by the necessity
Of Public stock, and the Exchequers needs,
But Henry found as lean a Treasury.
Thus Victor with Vespasian did dispense,
One is the fault, then one be the defense.
I am not of their Party, who contend,
He used these Arts to Keep his subjects low,
And by the weight of Poverty to bend
Their minds to Concord, and to Union bow.
Want is too sordid, and too base will prove
To bear so trim a Pair as Peace, and Love.
What though the Scribe of Florence does maintain,
To keep men quiet, is to keep them scant.
Clouds of Examples, and all Henry's Reign
Refell him; whose Rebellions sprung from want.
Want's a strange Herald: for some men had bore
No Arms at all, unless they had been poor.
To men exhaust, and worn with Pen^ry,
New things are pleasing, and the Old ingrate,
And innovation is their Remedy.
Rebellions are the Monsters of a state,
And nature shows, that they proceed no less
From the defect of matter, than the excess.
They who to Fortunes lowest form are thrown,
To ruin, and confusion do aspire;
As if another wound could salve their own,
And when their own Estates are set on fire,
Then Catilines resolve is judged most fit,
With fire not water to extinguish it.
He rather did observe the Exigents
The want of Treasure, brought some Princes to,
And taught himself by those experiments
The danger to be unprovided so.
He Is a Good husband who so buies his wit,
That others, not himself, do pay for it.
The Case of neighbor Kings did him instruct
The inconvenience, not to have at hand
The three maine things, which do a war conduct
As when one did Trivulcio demand,
What things in war a Prince most powerful made,
He answered three, and three times Money said.
And may not Henry's Buildings speak him clear,
And not so poor, that he did riches prize,
His Royal Chapel this record shall bear,
That he to Gold did not Idolatrize.
For if he did, succession might object
He spent his God, his Chapel to erect.
But grant it was his fault: who will deny
That Henry was a man? if you will say,
That Henry had not his infirmity,
Maintain this Paradox: He was not Clay.
Man is Gods Coin, yet he was never made
Of any Ore so pure, but was allaide.
A constant cleerenesse is above the law
Of Mortal, nor within that Region stands.
As those elaborate pieces, which do draw
Breath from exact Van-Dyks unerring hands
Are deeply shadowed, and a duskie Sable
Does Clow'd the borders of the Curious Table.
Now least that Henry should be too intent
With an affection totally inclined
On wealth; the times a danger did present,
To waine his thoughts, and avocate his mind.
Sent Heaven no trouble man no Watch would Keep,
Without this Thorn the Nightingall would sleep.
For at this time, Suffolkes wild Earl did take
His second sally forth: Henry forgave
His first, but that did small impression make;
Who in such haughty souls thinks to engrave
A favor, writes it in the Horn of Dear,
Where it is cast, and mued in a year.
He fled before, for having rashly slain
A Private man, was forced to plead his Case
In Public, which in him begat disdain,
And purpose of revenge for the disgrace.
Indignity like lightning steals in,
'Twill run a soul quite through, and miss the skin.
His debts contracted by his bravery,
Shown at Prince Arthurs wedding, made him place
His thoughts this second time on Errantry,
Want made him feared more than his disgrace.
As it is observed, that Catiline never meant
His Countries ruin, till his means were spent.
Yet nor his Want, nor his Indignity,
So much moved Henry: 'twas another thing,
That waked his fear, and roused his Jealousy,
The House he came of, terrefied the King.
This Comet shot from York his threatening Ray,
Which was the Region, where his danger lay.
To sound his purposes, Henry did fly
To his Probatum est, and tried Art:
He sent a Spiall in discovery;
Curson must wind, and screw into his Heart,
And act the part of a Decoy, to get
The foul which flocked with Suffolk to his net.
Curson had here too hard a Task to save
His faith, and yet win Suffolk to believe;
He had no way, but what Lysander gave,
Children with confects, men with Oaths deceive:
Or else the Spanish Axiom to try,
He that would find a truth, must tell a lie.
Then if the Earl (as who can think he would)
Would not his Counsels with a stranger trust,
Till he with vows, and execrations should
Renounce his former master: then I must
Think Curson masked under Religious oaths,
Was but a Devil in an Angels Clothes.
And since he was cursed solemnly at home,
As one of Henry's foes, it may be said,
That then the Maid the Mistress did become,
And Policy Religion overswayd.
It Was like the Error which Polemo found,
When one said heaven, but pointed to the ground.
Though Curson played his Part, Henry did find
A storm do more: it is a^ ill wind does blow
To no man Profit; that impetuous wind
Which did Paul's Golden Eagle overthrow.
It did this Courtesy for Henry do,
Besides that Eagle, strike this Haggard too.
The Imperial Eagle too, the Emperors son,
Philip of Castile being then at Sea,
In hopes to take the Kings of Arragon,
Was by this wind driven hither; thus while he
To take another unawares divis'd,
(See the mistake) was by a storm surpised.
Henry upon the news dispatched away
Arundell, with an Honorable train,
To bring him unto Windsor, where he lay:
Henrie's request at Callice could not gain,
To have him in a Town: but now a storm
Effects, what Henry's calm could not perform.
After Caresses, and some Complement,
Henry from him his subject did demand,
And that this Earl that hare-braind malcontent,
Might be no more protected in his Land,
For since (said Henry) you are saved in Ours,
It is not Justice I should wrack on Yours.
He promised he would banish him; but what
Could that help Henry? for unless assured
The Earl should plague him no where else, by that
Henry had but his pain removed not cured.
And like a Running Gout with him be vexed,
Which leaves one Part, but to invade the next.
So 'twas concluded that this Errant Knight.
Should be returned home: but not to dye
On Henry's honor: as Physicians write
Some Cures are taken from the Contrary,
So it proved here, and Henry's ease must come,
Not from his banishment, but fetching home.
Now Suffolk's sent for: now he is arrived,
Now come to London, and as soon as come,
Imprisoned, as before it was contrived;
For Henry meant to Keep the Axiom,
Which he before to Philip had professed,
The fittest place for Hornets is the nest.
No sooner did the Tower the Earl receive.
But (as his stay had for that purpose been)
King Philip with all freedom took his leave
But not till Suffolk had lost his: that Scene
Concludes their Pastime, and the Jollity
Ends with the Prologue of his Tragedy.
Indeed his life was pardoned, but it cost
Suffolk his life, under seventh Henry's son;
So David slew not Ioab, yet he lost
His life, by his successor Solomon:
Death Cancells Deeds: that does their honors save,
And Suffolkes bond was laid in Henry's Grave.
Now was the Realm healthy, and strong; no Foe
Abroad; within no qualities at all
Disposing to Corruption could undo:
Nor need the Kingdoms Genius fear to fall,
But by the immediate hand which governes fate,
Like to an Angel in's confirmed state.
Thus white with honors he to nature paid
The Common debt of man, in whose last breath,
Lies the last payment: in our Law it is said,
The King dies not, then speak not of his death
Whose life I would to the last Ages draw,
If twere a Rule in verse, as well as Law.
Now if those Sages have opined right
That all this All by Discord should be broke,
A Concord once did make it: Henry might
Cement the Ruins, who has been so spoke
For Union, that a thing called Henry's fame,
Would like some Spirit reunite the frame.
FINIS.

