THE SHEPHERDS TALES.

Too true poor shepherds do this Proverb find,
No sooner out of sight then out of mind.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1621.

TO MY WORTHY AND AFFECTIONATE KINSMAN RICHARD HVTTON Esquire, Son and Heir
to the much honored and sincere dispenser of judgment, Sir RICHARD HVTTON
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Judges of the Common Pleas:
The fruition of his selectedst wishes.
TO sit secure and in a safe repose,
To view the cross occurrences of those
Who are on Sea; or in a silent shade,
To eye the state of such as are decayed;
Or near some silver Rill or Beechy Grove,
To read how Starre-crost lovers lost their love,
Is best of humane blessings, and this best
Is in your worthy self (Dear Cuz) expressed,
Who by your fathers virtues and your own
Are truly loved, whereseuer you are known:
In State secure, rich in a faithful make,
And rich in all that may secure your State.
Now in these days of yours, these Halcion days,
Where you enjoy all joy, peruse these lays,
That you who lived to love, live where you love,
May read what you nere felt, nor ere did prove;
Poor Swainlins crossed where they affected most,
And crossed in that which made them ever crossed.
Receive this Poem, Sir, for as I live,
Had I ought better, I would better give.
RICH: BRAYHVVAIT.

THE SHEPHERDS TALES.
THE FIRST PART.
The Argument.
TEchnis complains,
And labors to display
Th'uniust distaste
Of Amarillida.
The second Argument.
HEre relates this forlorn Swain
How he wooed, but wooed in vain,
Her whose beauty did surpass
Shape of any Country Less,
Made more to delight the bed,
Than to see her Lambkins fed;
Yet poor Shepherd see his fate,
Love she vowed, is changed to hate:
For being jealous of his love,
She her fancy does remove,
Planting it upon a Groom,
Who by Cupids blindest doom
Is preferred unto those joys,
Which were nere ordained for Boys:
On whose face nere yet appeared
Downie show of manly beard.
Having thus drunk sorrows cup,
First, he shows his bringing up,
What those Arts were he professed,
Which in homely style expressed,
He descends unto the Swain
Whom he sought by love to gain;
But prevented of his aim,
Her he shows, but hides her shame.
THE SHEPHERDS TALES.
The shepherds. Technis. Dymnus. Dorycles. Corydon. Sapphus. Linus. THE FIRST
EGLOGVE.
Technis tale. WHy now I see these Plains some good afford,
When Shpherds will be masters of their word.

Dory. Yes; Technis yes, we see it now and then
That they will keep touch as well as greater men,
Who can protest and take a solemn vow
To do far more then they intend to do.

Dym. Stay Dorycles, me thinks thou go too far
Lets talk of Shepherds, as we Shepherds are:
For why should we these Great men's errors note,
But learn unto our Cloth to cut our coat.

Sapp. Dymnus, it is true; we came not to display
Great men's abuses, but to pass away
The time in Tales, wherein we may relate
By one and one our blessed or wretched state.

Cor. Indeed friend Dymnus therefore came we hither,
To show our Fortune and distress together.

Lin. Proceed then Technis, you are the eldest Swain
That now feeds Flocks upon this fruitful Plain:
So as your age, whatseuer we allege,
Does well deserve that proper privilege.

Tech. As to begin;

Lin. So Technis do I mean.

Tech. Thanks Shepherds heartily, that you will daine
A hapless Swain such grace; which to requite,
I Will mix my doleful Story with delight,
That while ye weep for grief, I may allay
Your discontent, and wipe your tears away.

Dory. On Technis on, and we will attention lend,
And wish thy love may have a happy end.

Dym. Which shown, each shall reply, and make expressed
When all is done, whose fate's the heauiest.

Tech. Attend then Shepherds, now I do begin,
Showing you first where I had nurturing,
Which to unfold the better, I will choose
No other words then homespun Heardsmen use.
First then, because some Shepherds may suppose
By mere conjecture, I am one of those
Who had my breeding on this flowrie Plain,
I must confess that they are much mista'ne,
For if I would, I could strange stories tell
Of Platoes and of Aristotle's Well,
From whence I drained such drops of divine wit,
As all our Swains could hardly diue to it:

Dor. Indeed I Have heard much of thee in thy youth.

Tech. Yes Dorycles, I say no more than truth.
A Prentiship did I in Athens live,
Not without hope but I might after give
Content and comfort where I should remain,
And little thought I then to be a Swain:
For I may say to you, I then did seem
One of no small or popular esteem,
But of consort with such, whose height of place
Advanced me, because I had their grace:
Though now, since I my Lambkins began to feed,
Clad in my russet coat and country weed,
Those broad-spred Cedars scarce afford a nest
Upon their shadie Boughs, where I may rest.

Sapp. It seems, they are great men Technis.

Tech. So they are,
And for inferior groundlins, little care.
But may they flourish; thus much I am sure,
Though Shrubs be not so high, they are more secure.

Lin. High states indeed are subject to decline.

Tech. Yes Linus yes, in this corrupted time
We may observe by due experience
That where a Person has preeminence,
He so transported grows, as he will check
Jove in his Throne, till Pride has broke his neck,
Whereas so virtuous were precedent times,
As they were free not only from the crimes
To which this age's exposed, but did live
As men which scorned Ambition.

Dymn. Now I diue
Into thy meaning Technis; thou do grieve
That those who once endeer'd thee, now should leave
Thy fellowship.

Tech. Nay Dymnus I protest
I never credited what they professed;
For should I grieve to see a surly Lout,
Who for observance casts his eye about;
In nothing meriting, save only He
Is rich in acres, to disvalue me?

Dory. No Technis no, thou art of a higher spirit
Than these inferior Gnats, whose only merit
Consists in what they have, not what they are.

Tech. No Dorycles, for these I little care,
Nor ever did: though some there be that feed
On such men's breath.

Dymn. Good Technis now proceed.

Tech. Having thus long continued, as I said,
And by my long continuance Graduate made,
I took more true delight in being there,
Than ever since in Court or Country air.

Sapph. Indeed minds freedom best contenteth men.

Tech. And such a freedom I enjoyed then,
As in those Beechie shades of Hesperie,
I planted then my sole felicity.
So as howsere some of our rural Swains
Prerogative above all others claims,
That they have naught, want naught, nor care for ought,
Because their mind unfurnished is of naught
That may accomplish man: I could aver,
(Howsere I doubt these in opinion err)
That in my breast was treasured more bless,
Then ever sensual man could yet possess.
For my delights were princely, and not vain,
Where height of knowledge was my only aim,
Whose happy purchase might enrich me more,
Then all this trash which worldly men adore.
So as if Pan were not the same he is,
He'de wish himself but to enjoy my bliss,
Whose choice content afford me so great power,
As I might vye with greatest Emperor.

Coryd. It seems thy state was happy;

Tech. So it was,
And did my present state so far surpass,
As the high top'd Cedar cannot bear more show
Above the lowest Mushrom that does grow,
Or more exceed in glory, than that time
Outstripp'd this present happiness of mine.
For tell me Shepherds, what is esteemed amongst men
The greatest joy, which I enjoyed not then!
For is there comfort in retired life?
I did possess a life exempt from strife,
Free from litigious clamor, or report
Sprung from commencement of a tedious Court.
Is contemplation sweet, or conference,
Or ripe conceits? why there is an influence,
Drawn from Minerua's brain, where every wit
Transcends conceit, and seems to ravish it.
Is it delightful Shepherds to repose,
And all-alone to read of others woes?
Why there in Tragic Stories might we spend
Whole hours in choice discourses to a friend.
And reason of Occurrents to and fro,
And why this thing or that did happen so.
Might it content man, to allay the load
Of a distemperd mind to walk abroad,
That he might moderate the thought of care
By choice acquaintance, or by change of air?
What noble consorts might you quickly find
To share in sorrow with a troubled mind?
What cheerful Groves, what silent murmuring springs,
Delicious walks, and ayrie warblings,
Fresh flowrie Pastures, Gardens which might please
The senses more then did the Hesperides,
Green shadie Arbours, curled streams which flow,
On whose pure Margins shadie Beeches grow,
Myrtle-perfumed Plains, on whose rer'd tops
The merry Thrush and Blackbird nimbly hops
And carols sings, so as the passers by
Would deem the Birds infused with poesy?

Sapp. Sure Technis this was earthly Paradise.

Tech. Sapphus it was; for what can Swain devise
To tender all delight to eye or ear,
Taste, Smell, or Touch which was not frequent there?
Besides;

Lin. What could be more, pray Technis say?

Tech. We had more joys to pass the time away.

Dory. What might they be good Technis?

Tech. Alas I know
They Are such as Shepherds cannot reach unto.

Dym. Yet let us hear them.

Tech. So I mean you shall,
And they were such as we internal call.

Cor. Infernal, Technis, what is meant by that?

Tech. Infernal, no; thou speakst thou know not what:
I mean internal gifts which far surmount
All these external bounties in account:
For by these blessings we shall ever find
Rich Treasures stored in a knowing mind,
Whose glorious inside is a thousand fold
More precious than her Case though clothed in gold
And all Habilliments: for by this light
Of Understanding, we discern what is right
From crooked error, and are truly said
To understand by this, why we were made.

Sapp. Why, we nere thought of this.

Lin. Nay, I may swear
I have lived on this Down, this twenty year,
And that was my least care.

Corid. Linus, I vow
To feed our Sheep, was all that we need do
I ever thought.

Dory. So Coridon did I.

Dymn. The cause of this, good Technis, now descrie.

Tech. Heardsmen I will; with purpose to relate,
Lest my Discourse should be too intricate,
In brief, (for length makes Memory to fail)
The substance of your wishes in a Tale.
Within that pitchie and Cymmerian clyme,
Certain Inhabitants dwelt on a time,
Who long had in those shadie Mountains won,
Yet never saw a glimpse of Sun or Moon.
Yet see what custom is, though they were pent
From fight of Sun or Moon they were content,
Sporting themselves in vaults and arched caves,
Not so like dwelling Houses, as like graves.
Nor were these men seen ere so far to roame
At any time as half a mile from home;
For if they had, as the History does say,
They had been sure right soon to lose their way:
For dark and mistie were those drerie caves
Where they reposed, so that the wretchedst slaves
Could not exposed be to more restraint,
Than these poor snakes in th'ragged Mountains pent;
And thus they lived.

Lin. But never loved.

Tech. To tell
Their loves I will not: but it thus befell,
That a great Prince, who to increase his fame
Had conquered many Countries, thither came.

Sapp. For what good Technis?

Tech. Only to survey it.

Corid. Why sure he had some Torch-light to display it,
For the Coast you say was dark.

Tech. And so it was;
But yet attend me how it came to pass:
By means he used, having this coast suruei'd,
With all perswasiue reasons he assaid,
Partly by fair means to induce them to it,
Sometimes by threats, when he was forced unto it,
That they would leave that forlorn place, and give
Way to persuasion, and resolve to live
Near some more cheerful Border, which in time
They gave consent to, and forsook their Clime.
But see the strength of Habit, when they came
To see the light they hid themselves for shame,
Their eyes grew dazzled, and they did not know,
Where to retire or to what place to go:
Yet was the Region pleasant, full of groves,
Where the airy Quiristers express their loves
One to another and with Melody
Cheered and refreshed Siluanus Emperie.
The warbling Goldfinch on the dangling spray,
Sent out harmonious Music every day;
The pretty speckled Violet on the Bank
With Pinke and Rose-bud placed in their rank;
Where chafed Violets did so fresh appear,
As they foretold the Springtime now drew near;
Whose borders were with various colors died,
And Prim-rose banks with odours beautified;
Where Cornell trees were planted in great store,
Whose checkerd berries beautified the shore.
Besides, such gorgeous buildings as no eye
Could take a view of fuller Majesty;
Whose curious pillars made of Porphyrite
Smooth to the touch, and specious to the sight,
Sent from their hollow Cell a crispling breath,
Arched above and vaulted underneath.
Yet could not all these choice varieties
(Which might have given content to choicer eyes)
Satisfy these Cimmerians, for their aim
Was to return unto their Caves again,
And so they did: for when the Prince perceived
How hard it was from error to be reau'd,
Where ignorance discerns not what is good,
Because it is not rightly understood;
He sent them home again, where they remained
From comfort of Society restrained.

Dym. Apply this Tale, my Technis;

Tech. Hear me then.
You may be well compared unto these men,
Who ignorant of knowledge, do esteem
More of your Flocks, how they may fruitful seem,
Then of that part, whereby you may be sed
From savage beasts to be distinguished.

Dory. Technis you are too bitter;

Tech. Not a whit,
Shepherds should tell a Shepherd what is fit:
Though I confess that Heardsmen merit praise,
When they take care upon the Flocks they graze.
Yet to recount those Swains of elder time,
How some were rapt with Sciences divine,
Others adorned with Art of Poesy,
Others to reason of Astrology;
Swains of this time might think it a very shame,
To be so bold as to retain the name
Of jolly Heardsmen, when they want the worth
Of those brave Swains which former times brought forth.

Corid. Why, what could they?

Tech. Endorse their Names in trees,
And write such amorous Poems as might please
Their dearest loves.

Dym. Why Technis what was this,
Can we not please our loves more with a kiss?

Dory. Yes Dymnus, thou know that;

Dym. Perchance I do,
For Dymnus knows no other way to woo.
But pray thee Technis let us say no more,
But hie thee now to where thou left before.

Tech. I Am easily entreated; draw then near,
And as I lend a tongue, lend you an ear.
Having long lived in Minerua's Grove,
My life became an Emblem of pure love.

Dym. Of Love my Technis, pray thee say to whom!

Tech. As thou mean Dymnus, I did fancy none:
No; my affection soared higher far,
Than on such toys as now affected are:
I deated not on Beauty, nor did take
My aim at fair, but did observance make,
How humane things be shared by divine power,
Where fickle faith scarce constant rests one hour;
How highest states were subiect'st to decline;
How naught on Earth but subject unto Time;
How vice though clad in purple was but vice;
How virtue clad in rags was still in price;
How Commonweals in peace should make for war;
How Honor crowns such as deserving are.

Dory. And yet we see such as deserved most,
What ere the cause be, are the oftest crossed.

Tech. I Will not deny it (Swain) and yet attend,
For all their cross occurrents, but their end,
And thou shall see the fawning Sycophant
Die indisgrace, and leave his Heir in want:
While th'honest and deserving Statesman gives
Life to his Name and in his dying lives.
This I observed and many things beside,
Whilst I in famous Athens did abide;
But 'lasse whilst I secure from thought of care,
With choicest consorts did delight me there,
Free from the tongue of rumor or of strife,
I was to take me to another life.

Lin. To what good Technis?

Tech. To have Harpies claws;
To take my fee and then neglect the cause.

Sapp. A Lawier Technis!

Tech. So my father said,
Who as he had commanded, I obeyed.
But judge now Shepherds, could I choose to grieve,
When I must leave, what I was forced to leave,
Those sweet delightful Arts, with which my youth
Was first informed, and now attained such growth,
As I did reap more happy comfort thence
In one short hour than many Twelue-months since?

Corid. This was a hard command.

Tech. Yet was it fit
I should respect his love imposed it.
For never had Father shown unto his son
More tender love than he to me had done:
So as his will was still to me a law,
Which I observed more for love than awe,
For in that child few seeds of grace appear,
Whom love does less induce than thought of fear.
Having now taken my leave of all the Muses,
I made me fit as other Students uses,
To waine my mind, and to withdraw my sight
From all such studies gave me once delight:
And to inure me better to discern
Such rudiments as I desired to learn,
I went to John a Styles, and John an Oaks,
And many other Law-baptized folks,
Whereby I set the practice of the Law
At as light count as turning of a straw,
For straight I found how John a Styles did state it,
But I was over Style ere I came at it;
For having thought (so easy was the way)
That one might be a Lawyer the first day:
I after found the further that I went,
The further was I from my Element:
Yet forasmuch as I esteemed it vain,
To purchase law still from another brain,
I strove to get some law at any rate,
At least so much as might concern my state.

Lin. I am more sorry for it.

Tech. Linus why?

Lin. Because I fear me thou will have an eye
More to thy private profit, than devise
How to atone such quarrels as arise.

Dym. Technis is none of those.

Tech. No, credit me,
Though I Am resolved many such there be
Who can dispense with fees on either part,
Which I have ever scorned with my heart;
For this shall be my practice, to assay
Without a fee to do you the good I may.

Corid. Technis enough.

Tech. Having thus long applide
The stream of Law, my aged father did,
Whose virtues to relate I shall not need,
For you all knew him;

Doric. So we did indeed:
A Patron of all Justice, do him right.

Sap. Nor was there Art wherein he had no fight.

Dym. Yet was he humble;

Lin. And in that more blessed.

Corid. He lives though seeming dead;

Tech. So let him rest.
Having lost him whose life supported me,
You may imagine Shepherds, what might be
My hard succeeding fate: down must I go
To know if this report were true or no.
Which I did find too true, for he was dead,
And had enioyn'd me Guardians in his stead
To sway my vntraind youth.

Dym. And what were they?

Tech. Such men as I had reason to obey:
For their advice was ever for my good,
If my green years so much had understood:
But I puffed up with thought of my demaines,
Gave way to Folly, and did slack my raines
Of long restraint;

Dory. Alas Technis, then I see
What in the end was like to fall on thee.

Tech. O Dorycles if thou had known my state,
Thou would have pitied it!

Corid. Nay rather hate
Thy youthful riot.

Tech. Thou speaks well vnto't,
For the Black Ox had nere trod on my foot:
I had my former studies in despite,
And in the vainest consorts took delight.
Which much incensed such as affection bare
To my esteem: but little did I care
For the instruction of my grave Protectors
Who never left me, but like wise directors
Consulted how to rectify my state,
And some advised this, and others that,
For never any could more faithful be
In sincere trust, than they were unto me.
At last, one to compose and end the strife,
Thought it the fitt'st that I should take a wife.

Corid. Yea, now it works.

Lin. Stay till he come vnto't;

Sap. And then I know he will go roundly to it.

Tech. Nay jest not on me, but awhile forbear,
And you the issue of my love shall hear.
Having at last concluded, as I said,
With joint consent I should be married,
One amongst the rest did freely undertake
This priuaete motion to my self to make;
Which I gave ear to: wishing too that he
Would me inform where this my Wife should be,

Dym. As it was fit.

Cor. Who was it thou should ha?

Tech. He tell thee Boy, 'twas Amarillida.

Cor. Lycas fair daughter!

Tech. Yes, the very same.

Dory. She was a wench indeed of worthy fame;

Tech. As ere fed Lambkins on this flowrie Down*
Whom many sought and sude to make their own,
But she affected so a virgin life,
As she did scorn to be Amyntas wife.

Dym. Is 't possible?

Tech. Yes Dymnus I do know
Some tokens of affection twixt them two,
Which if thou heard, right soon would thou confess,
More vnfaind love no Heardsman could express:
But to omit the rest, I mean to show
The time and tide when I began to woo.
Upon that (...) Valen^ day; (...) which (...) are (...) to ^^fe their ^tes,
with ^om ^y re^e and (...) take in ^tuall ^es.
Day (sad day and heavy fate)
When every Bird is said to choose her mate,
Did I repair unto that fairest fair,
That ever loved, or lived, or breathed on air.
And her I wooed, but she was so demure,
So modest bashful, and so maiden pure,
As at the first, nor at the second time
She would no ear to sound of love incline.

Cor. But this (I Am sure) would be no means to draw
Thy loves assault from Amarillida.

Tech. No Coridon, for then I should not seem
Worthy so rare a Nymph as she had been.
But I did find that female foes would yield,
Though their relentlesse breasts at first were steeld*
Continual drops will pierce the hardest stone.

Sap. Did Technis find her such a stony one?

Tech. Sappho I did: yet though she often had vowed
A vestall life, and had my suit withstood,
I found her of a better mind next day,
For she had thrown her vestall weed away.

Lin. Thrice happy Shepherd!

Tech. Linus, say not so;
If it be happiness to end in woe,
Thou might enstyle me happy;

Dory. Was not she
Fully resolved now to marry thee?

Tech. Yes Dorycles: but when she had consented,
Hear by what strange mischance I was prevented*
Upon a time a Summering there was,
Where every lively Lad took in his Less
To dance his Measure, and amongst the rest
I took me one as frolike as the best.

Dym. What was she man?

Tech. A Matron full of zeal,
But pardon me, I must her name conceal.

Lin. It was Alburna I durst pawn my life.

Tech. I must confess it was the Parsons wife,
A lusty Trolops I may say to you,
And one could foot it give the wench her due.

Lin. Yea marry Sir, there was a Less indeed
Knew how she should about a Maypole tread.

Tech. And I may say, if Linus had been there,
He would have said, we euenly matched were:
For I may say at that day there was none
At any active game could put me down.
And for a dance;

Sap. As light as any fether,
For thou did win the Leg three years together.

Tech. And many said that it great pity was
That such a Parson had not such a Less:
So as indeed all did conclude and say,
That we deserved the Prick and prize that day.
But having now our May-games wholly played,
Danced till we weary were, and Piper paid:
Each took his wench he danced with on the Down,
Meaning to give her curt'sie of the Town.

Sim. What curt'sie Technis?

Tech. As our Shepherds use,
Which they in modesty cannot refuse:
And this we did, and thus we parted then,
Men from their women, women from their men.

Dory. But did nere afterwith Alburna meet?

Tech. Yes, on a time I met her in the street,
Who after kind salutes invited me
Unto her house, which in civility
I could not well deny;

Dym. True Technis true.

Tech. And she received me, give the wench her due,
With such a free and graceful entertain,
As did exceed the expectance of a Swain.

Dory. She had some reason for 't;

Tech. None I may swear,
Save that she ioyed much to see me there.

Dory. Yet did;

Tech. Did eat, did drink, and merry make,
For no delight save these did Technis take.
For I may say to you if so I had,
My luck to Horseflesh had not been so bad,
As by some years experience I have found;
So as of your suspicion there is no ground:
But if I had, no fate could be more hard
Than that which I sustained afterward.

Corid. Relate it Technis.

Tech. To my grief I will,
Having done this without least thought of ill,
This (as report does new additions draw)
Came to the ear of Amarillida:
Who jealous of my love (as women are)
Thought that Alburna had no little share
In my affection, which I may protest
Was nere as much as meant, much less expressed.

Sap. Alas good Shepherd.

Tech. So as from that day
I found her fancy falling still away,
For to what place soever I did come,
She feigned excuse to leave me and the room.

Lin. Yet she nere fixed her love on any one.

Tech. Yes Linus, else what cause had I to moan?
Some few months after did she take a Mate,
I must confess of infinite estate;
Yet in my mind (nor do I speake't in spite)
He Is one can give a woman small delight,
For he is a very Erwig.

Lin. What is he?

Tech. Petreius son;

Lin. The map of misery.

Tech. Yet thou would wonder how this dunghill worn
When he encounters me, redarts a scorn
On my contemned love:

Dym. All this does show,
That he resolves to triumph in thy woe,
But how stands she affected?

Tech. Alas for grief,
She is so far from yielding me relief,
As she in public meetings has assaid
To glory in the tricks which she has played.

Dory. O matchless insolence!

Tech. Yet shall my blasse
In wanting her, be charactred in this;
"Having lost all that ere thy labor gained,
"Be sure to keep thy precious name unstained.

Corid. A good resolve.

Tech. Yet must I never leave
While I do live, but I must live to grieve:
For I persuade me, there was never Swain
Was recompensed with more unjust disdain,

Dym. Indeed thou well might grieve.

Dory. Yet shall't appear,
I have more cause, if you my Tale will hear:
For nere was story mixed with more ruth,
Or gronnded on more Arguments of truth.

Corid. Let Us have it Dorycles;

Dory. With all my heart,
And plainly too; grief hates all words of (...).

The Argument.
DOrycles loves Bellina;
Who esteems
As well of him,
But proves not same she seems.
The second Argument.
DOrycles a youthful Swain,
Seeks Bellina's love to gain:
Who, so even does fancy strike,
Tenders Dorycles the like.
Yet observe how women be
Subject to inconstancy!
She in absence of her love,
Her affection does remove,
Planting it upon a Swad,
That no wit nor breeding had,
Whom she honors; but in time
Dorycles seems to divine,
Since her lone is stained with sin,
She Will ere long dishonor him;
For who once has broke her vow,
Will infringe't to others too.
In the end he does express
His disdainful Shepherdess:
Who, when she had injured
Him and his, and cancelled
That same sacred secret oath,
Firmly tendered by them both;
She a Willow-garland sends
For to make her Swain amends,
Which he wears, and vows till death
He will wear that forlorn wreath.
With protests of less delight
In her Love, than in her Spite.
THE SECOND EGLOGVE.
Dorycles tale. COme Shepherds come, and hear the wofulst Swain
That ever lived, or loved on western plain:
Whose heavy fate all others does surpass
That ere you heard;

Dym. Say Heardsman what it was.

Dory. I must and will, though Dymnus I confess,
I Am very loath my folly to express,
Whose madding passion though it merit blame,
I will display't.

Tech. To It then: away with shame.

Dory. I loved a bonny Less as ere loved man,
For she a middle had that you might span,
A moving eye, a nimble mincing foot,
And mannerly she was, for she could lout:
And her I loved, and me she held as dear.

Corid. But Dorycles where lived she?

Dory. Very near:
Know thou not Polychrestus?

Corid. Who, the Swain
That with his sheep does cover all our Plain?

Dory. It seems thou know him Coridon;

Corid. I do:
And seven years since I knew his Daughter too.

Dory. Who, fair Bellina?

Corid. Yes, the very same.

Dory. And her I loved, nor need I think 't a shame.
For what might move affection or imply
Content of love to any Shepherds eye,
Which she enjoyed not? For if choice discourse
(As what more moving than the tongue) had force
To infuse love, there was no Heardsman near her
Who was not ravished if he chanced to hear her;
And for a beauty mixed with white and red.

Corid. I know 't was rare, good Dorycles proceed.

Dory. When I was young, as yet I am not old,
I doted more than now a hundred fold:
For there was not a May Game that could show it
All here about, but I repaird unto it,
Yet knew not what love meant, but was content
To spend the time in harmless merriment.
But at the last, I played so long with fire,
I cing'd my wings with heat of loves desire.
And to display my folly how it was
Without digression, thus it came to pass.
Down by you Vale a Myrtle grove there is,
(Oh that I nere had seen it, I may wish)
Where Pan the Shepherds God to whom we pray,
Solemnized had his wonted holiday:
Whereto resorted many noble Swains,
Who flourish yet upon our neighbor Plains;
Among which Bellina with a youthful sort
Of amorous Nimphs, came to surney our sport.
Which I observing (see the fault of youth)
Transported with vainglory, thought in truth
She came a purpose for a sight of me,
Which I with smiles requited lovingly:
But howsoere, I know Bellina ey'de
My person more than all the Swains beside.
When night was come, unwelcome unto some,
And each was now to hasten toward home,
I'mongst the rest of Laddes, did homeward pass,
And all this time I knew not what Love was.
To supper went I and fell to my fare,
As if of love I had but little care,
And after supper went to fire to chat
Of sundry old-wiues tales, as this and that;
Yet all this while love had no power of me,
Nor no command that ever I could see.
Having thus spent in tales an hour or two,
Each to his rest (as he thought best) did go,
But now when I should take me to my rest,
That troubled me which I did think of least.

Tech. Trouble thee Swain!

Dory. Yes Technis; and the more,
Because I never felt such pangs before.
This way and that way did I toss and turn,
And freeze and fry, and shake for cold and burn,
So as I wished a hundred times, that day
Would now approach my passion to allay.
Yet still, (so weak was my distempered brain)
I thought Bellina put me to that pain,
Yet knew no cause why she should use me so,
Yet thought to ask her if it were she or no:
So as next day, I purposed to repair
To see if she could yield a cure to care.
But she (poor wench) was split on fancies shelfe,
All full of care, yet could not cure her self;
So as in brief we either did impart,
The secret passions of a wounded heart,
Shot by loves shaft, for so't appeared to be,
Which found, we vowed a present remedy;
Yet to our friends both she and I did feane,
As if we never had acquainted been.

Dym. A pretty slight;

Dory. Though many times and often,
Played we at Barlybreake in Clytus croft.
And thus our loves continued one half year
Without suspicion, till one neighboring near,
An equal friend unto us both, did make
A motion of our Marriage.

Tech. Did it take?

Dory. Yes Technis yes, so as first day I went,
My friends, to show that they were well content,
Wished that all good success might usher me.

Lin. One should have thrown an old shoo after thee,

Dory. Nay Linus that was done: and now to hie
Unto my Tale, on went my dog and I,
Poor loaue-eard Curre.

Sapp. Why Dorycles, had none
To second thee?

Dory. Too many (Swain) by one:
For trowst thou Lad, when I my suit should make
Unto her friends, my dog he let a escape.

Sapp. Ill nurtured stitchell.

Dory. Now ye may suppose
Bellina took the Pepper in the nose,
That to her friends when I should break my mind,
The carrian Cur should at that time break wind.
So as for half an hour I there did show
Like to a senseless Picture made of dough:
Nor was my dog lesse' shamed, but runs away
With tail betwixt his legs with speed he may.
At last my spirits I did call together,
Showing her friends the cause why I came thither,
Who did accept my motion; for that day
I was esteemed a proper Swain I say,
And one well left.

Cor. We know it Dorycles,
Both for thy wealth and person thou might please.

Lin. For good mug-sheepe and cattle, I Will be sworn
None could come near thee both for hair and horn.

Dory. Ye ouer-value me, but sure I am
I had sufficient for an honest man:
Having thus free access to her I loved,
Who my affection long before had proved
Though she seemd nice, as women often use,
When what they love they seemingly refuse.
Not to insist ought longer on the matter,
They deemd me worthy, if they did not flatter,
Of her I su'd; So as without more stay,
Appointed was this solemn Nuptial day.

Sapp. Happy appointment,

Dory. Sapphus say not so,
It rather was the subject of my woe,
For having heard reported for a truth
She formerly had loved a dapper youth,
With whom she purposed even in friends despite,
To make a private escape one winter night;
I for a while thought to surcease my suit,
Till I heard further of this jealous bruit.

Tech. Why did thou so? Bellina had consented
To love that youth, before you were acquainted.

Dory. Technis it is true; But seem there were auer'd,
Though I Am resolved they in opinion erred,
That these two were affide one to the other.

Sapp. What hindered then the match?

Dory. Bellinas mother:
Who tender of the advancement of her child,
And well perceiving Crispus to be wild,
(For so the youth was named) did withdraw
Bellina from him by imperious awe:
Which done, and he prevented of her daughter,
His Country left, he never sought her after.

Tech. I knew that Crispus.

Dory. Then you knew a Lad
Of seeming presence, but he little had,
And that was cause he grew i^ disesteeme.

Sap. Alas that want of means should make us mean.

Dory. So did it fare with him; for (...) his praise
(Though with his tongue he wronged me many ways,
But tongues inured to tales are nere believed)
He had from Nature choicest gifts received,
Which might have moved love in a worthy creature,
If that his life had been unto his feature.
But promising outsides like the Panthers skin,
Though fair without, are often times foul within;
But heavens, I hope, to mercy will receive him,
His wrongs to me are buried; so I leave him.

Corid. But admit Shepherd they had been affide,
She might revolt, it cannot be denide.

Dory. I grant she might; and I confess there be
Some that have done't are greater far than we:
But goodness is the mark, not height of state
That meaner men by right should imitate.
I might produce store of examples here,
But lest I should be tedious, I forbear,
What tragic Scenes from breach of faith are bred,
How it has caused much guiltless blood be shed.
This caused me for a time to hold my hand,
To see how all this business would stand,
And that I might my fancy better waine
From her I loved, to Troynouant I came.
Where I imploi'd my self no little time
About occasions for a friend of mine:
For I did think to be from place removed,
Would make me soon forget the wench I loved.

Sap. I rather think it would thy love renew;

Dory. Sapphus it did; and far more rigor show:
"For true it is, when lovers go to woo,
"Each mile's as long as ten, each hour as two.
"Whence each true lover by experience prones
"Man is not where he lives, but where he loves.
For what delight, as all delights were there,
Could my enthralled mind refresh or cheer,
Wanting my Love, whose only sight could show
More true content than all the world could do?
Yet stayed I still, expecting I should hear,
How in my absence, she herself did bear,
And whether those same rumors which I heard,
Were true or false, as I found afterward.

Lin. How went they Dorycles?

Dor. Howso'ere they went
I found Bellina merely innocent;
Whence I inferred, that many times we wrong them,
By causeless laying false aspersions on them:
For I perceived she had been wooed by many,
But never yet affianc'd unto any.

Coryd. Thrice happy Dorycles!

Dor. Happy indeed,
Till worse events did afterwaards succeed.

Coryd. What fate?

Dor. Far worse than ere on Shepherd leight.

Tech. Express it Heardsman;

Dor. So I purpose straight.
Having thus heard all rumors to be vain,
I straight resolved to return back again
Into my Country: where I found my wench
The same I left her when I came from thence;
So as in brief, so happy was my state,
I meant my marriage rites to consummate.
Which that they might be done more solemnly,
All our young Shepherds in a company,
Addressed themselves to grace that day; beside
The choicest Damsels to attend the Bride,
For to prevent occasion of delay,
Set down on both sides was the Marriage day.

Tech. Me thinks this cannot choose but happen well;

Dory. Stay Technis hear, what afterward befell^
The Even before that I should married be,
One came in all haste and acquainted me
How Cacus that uncivil lossell, would
Carry the best Ram that I had to fold,
Wherewith incensed withouten further stay,
Going to the sold I met him in the way:
Who of my Ram not only me denide,
But used me in disgraceful sort beside,
Which I distasting, without more ado
Reached my vnnurtur'd Cacus such a blow,
As he in heat of passion aymd his Crook
Just at my head to wound me with the stroke:
Which I rewarded, so as by our men
Without more hurt we both were parted then.
But scarce had Phoebus lodged in the West,
Till He, whose fury would not let him rest,
Sent me a challenge stuffed with disgrace,
Length of his Weapon, Second, and the Place.

Dym. Then we must have a field fought.

Dory. Without stay;
I met him though it was my marriage day,
Though not on equal terms.

Tech. More fit't had bin
T'encounter'd with Bellina than with him.

Sapp. I would have thought so Technis;

Lin. So would he,
If he had been resolved as he should be.

Dor. Shephcards it is true; but now it is too late,
For to exclaim against relentlesse fate,
Whose adverse hand prouented that delight,
Which lovers reap in a blessed nuptial night.

Cor. Thou migh^st with ^reait have deferred it, Swain;

Dor. I know it, Corydon: but 'twas my aim
To right my reputation, which did stand
Engaged, unless I met him out a hand,
Which I performed, and with my Second too,
To bear me witness what I meant to do.

Dym. And he performed the like;

Dor. He vowed he would,
And so indeed by Law of arms he should,
But I perceived his recreant spirit such,
To sight on equal terms he thought too much:
Near to Soranus cave there stands a grove,
Which Poets feign was consecrate to Love,
Though then it seemed to be transformed by fate,
From the grove of Love, unto the grave of Hate;
There we did meet: where he out of distrust,
Fearing the cause he fought for was not just,
To second his injurious act, did bring
A rout of desperate rogues along with him,
Who lurking, kept together till we met,
And so upon advantage me beset,
As fight or fall, there was no remedy,
Such was the height of Cacus villainy.

Tech. Who ever heard a more perfidious trick?

Dor. It Is true; yet though my Second had been sick,
And much enfeebled in his former strength,
We held them play, till haplesly at length,
Through violence of fury, from himfell
His lucklesse weapen.

Dym. Oh I hear thee tell
A heavy Seen!

Dor. Yes Dymnus had thou seen
How our shed blood purpled the flowrie green,
What crimson streamlins flowed from either of us,
Thou would have pitied, though thounere did love us:
For having fought so long as we had breath,
Breathless we lay as Images of death,
Bereft of sense or Motion.

Sap. Alas for woe,
Any true Heardsman should be used so.

Cor. What boundless sorrows were ye plunged in!

Dor. It Is true; and worser far had used bin,
Had not Dametas that well natured Swain,
Repaired that instant to our forlorn Plain;
Who seeing us, and in what state we were,
In due compassion could not well forbear
From shedding tears, so soon as he had found
Our red-bath'd Corpse fast glewed to the ground.
Often did he rear our Bodies, but in vain,
For breathless they fell to the Earth again;
Often did he rub our temples to restore
That vital heat, which was suppressed before:
But without hope of life, though life was there,
As Men of Earth, did we on Earth appear.
At last assisted by a Swain or two,
(See what the Providence of Heaven can do)
We were conveyed to a Graunge hard by,
Whereto were Surgeons sent immediately,
Whose learned skill dram'd from experience,
Brought us in time to have a little sense
Of our endangered state.

Dym. But pray thee tell
Whose hand expressed most art?

Dor. Grave Astrophel,
Whose known experiments of Art have shown
More noble ours of late on this our Down,
Than all our Mountebankes could ever do,
For all these precious drugs they value so.

Sap. Indeed I know He has much honor won
For his admired Cures; good Shepherd on.

Dor. Having long languish'd betwixt life and death,
Removed from thought of love for want of breath,
As men we lived expos' to dangers Sconce.

Lin. Would not Bellina see thee?

Dor. Nere but once.
For having heard there was no way but one,
And that in all men's judgments I was gone,
She straight resolves to find a cure for care,
That if I lived she might have one to spare.

Tech. Why, made she choice of any but thy self?

Dor. Yes Technis yes, and of a dwarfish else,
Whom she preferred, (though he could little please)
Before her first love, hapless Doricles.

Tech. Inconstant Swainlin.

Dor. Having heard of this,
You may conceive how grief augmented is:
I straight deprived of hope, began to rave,
And would not take what my Physician gave,
But scorning all preseriptions valued death
Above alanguishing distasteful breath;
Till by persuasion and recourse of time
Those braine-sicke passions and effects of mine
Depressed were: so as upon a day,
The burden of my sorrows to allay,
And to express the nature of my wrong,
I set my hand to pen, and made a Song.

Dym. Good Dorycles let us hear what it may be,
It cannot but be good if it come from thee.

Dor. Shepherds you shall; and if you think it fit,
I loved her once, shall be the Tune of it.

Tech. No Tune more proper; to it lovely Swain.

Dor. Attend then Shepherds to my doleful strain.

THe fairest fair that ever breathed air,
Feeding her Lambkins on this Plain;
To whom though many did repair,
I was esteemed her dearest Swain.
To me she vowed, which vow she broke,
That she would fancy me or none.
But since she has her Swain forsook,
I Will take me to a truer one.
Had she been firm, as she was fair,
Or but performed what she had vowed,
I might have sung a fig for care,
And safely swum in fancies flood;
But o the stain of womanhood!
Who breaks with one, keeps touch with none;
Wherefore in hate to such a brood,
I Will take me to a truer one.
Was It not enough to break her vow,
And quit my love with such disdain,
But scornfully deride me too,
With scoffs to gratify my pain?
But since my labors are in vain,
I Will spend no more my time in moan,
But will my former love disclaim,
And take me to a truer one.
Who ever lived and showed more love,
Or less expressed what she did show?
Who seeming firm so false could prove,
Or vow so much, and slight her vow?
But since I do her nature know,
I am right glad that she is gone;
For if I shoot in Cupids bow,
I Will take me to a truer one.
More faith less fair nere spoke with tongue,
Or could protest less what she thought;
Nere Shepherd suffered greater wrong,
Or for less profit ever wrought;
But since my hopes are turned to naught,
May never Heardsman make his moan
To one whose mold's in weakness wrought,
But take him to a truer one.
Cor. May all poor Swains be henceforth warned by thee;
But did thou never since Bellina see?

Dor. Yes, and her lovely spouse Archetus too,
Who seeing me (quoth he) There does he go,
Who on a time, as I informed am,
Would lose his Less before he lost his Ram;
Which I retorted, saying, I thought best,
My butting Ram should be his worships crest,
Whose broad-spread front lets did presage what fate
Would in short time attend his forked pate.

Sap. Thou hit him home my Dorycles; but say,
What said she to thee?

Dor. Bit lip, and away;
Though the next morn, my sorrow to renew,
She sent a Willow wreath fast bound with Rue,
Which I accepted, but that I might show
I neuerrue her breach of promise now,
The Rue that tide my Wreath I threw aside,
And with Hearts ease my Willow garland tide.

Lin. A good exchange.

Dor. Now Shepherds you haeue heard
My faithful love, and her unjust reward;
Did ever Swain enjoy the light of Sun,
That bare such injuries as I have done?

Tech. Indeed thy wounds were great;

Dym. Yet mine as wide.

Dor. I mist my Love, and lost my blood beside.

Dym. Suspend thy judgment, and thine ear incline
Unto my Tale, and thou will yield to mine.

Coryd Let Us have it Dymnus;

Dym. Heardsman so thou shall,
Yet if I weep, impute it to the fault
Of my surcharged heart, which still appears
The best at case, when eyes are full'st of (...)

The Argument.
DYmnus Palmira
Woes to be his Wife,
But she had vowed
To live a single life.
The second Argument.
DYmnus with long looking dim,
Loves the wench that lotheth him;
Price nor prayer may not persuade
To infringe the vow she made;
Having meant to live and die
Vesta's virgin votarie.
Yet at last she seems to yield
To her loue-sick Swain the field,
So that he will undertake
Three years silence for her sake:
Which hard Penance he receaues,
And performs the task she craves.
But while he restraines his tongue,
She pretends the time's too long:
Wherefore she does entertain
In her breast another Swain.
Dymnus having heard of this,
H^es to the place where the marriage is,
Purposing to make a breach
By dumb signs, though want of speech:
But alas they all command him
Silence, cause none understand him.
Thus he suffers double wrong,
Loss of wench, and loss of tongue,
For till three y^^res were expired,
He nere spoke what he desired,
All which time consumed in dolor,
He (...) lays her in her color;
And concluding, wishes no man
Lose his tongue to game a woman:
And to cheer his pensive heart,
With a Song they end this part.
THE THIRD EGLOGVE.
Dymnus tale. Upon a time while I did liu^ on Te^se,
I made love to a wench my friends to please,
But (as my fate was still) it would not be,
For woo I knew not how, no more than she:
Yet I can well remember this she said,
For ought she knew, she meant to die a Maid,
A Vestall Virgin, or a Votaresse,
A cloistered Nun, or holy Prioresse;
To which I answered, if 't were her desire
To be a Nun, I meant to turn a Friar,
So might it chance that we again should meet,
Where the Nun and Friar might play at Barly-breake.

Cor. Where lived the Love?

Dym. Near the bottom of the hill.
Between Pancarpus temple and the mill,
There lived my f^^re Palmira, who I say,
Amongst all our wenches bore the Palm away:
And her I loved and liked, and su'd and sought,
But all my love and labor turned to naught;
For she haa vowed. which vow should nere be broke,
She Would die a Maid, but meant not as she spoke.

Dor. No Dymnus, no, the nicest sure I am,
Would live a Maid if 't were not for a man;
B^^ there is none of them can brook so well,
To be a Beareward and lead Apes in Hell.

Dym. True Dorycles, for in process of time,
I found her maiden humor to decline:
For she did grant the boon which I did ask,
Upon condition of a greater task.

Lin. What heavy censure might this task afford?

Dym. That for three years I should not speak a word.

Cor. Alas poere Swain, this task which she prepared,
In all my time the like was never heard.

Dor. But this same silent task had harder bin,
If she had proved what she enjoined him:
For none can do a woman greater wrong,
Than bar her from a privilege of tong^e.

Sap. A woman's tongue's a clapper in the wind,
Which once a foot, can never be confinde;
But to thy task, good Dymnus.

Dym. To proceed,
What she enioyn'd I did perform indeed:
For I appeared as one deprived of speech,
Yet nere my friends unto my aims could reach;
But much lamented that a Swain so young,
And promising, should lose his Use of tongue.

Tech. I wonder how thou could express thy mind?

Dym. Only by dumb signs, so as I did find
Within short time, a great facility
In that hard task which she imposed me.

Lin. Hardest adventures often the easiest seem,
Only for love of such inioined them.

Dym. And such were mine; when others talked with ease
Of this and that, I ever held my peace;
Others sung Carols of their fairest fair,
But I in silent measures had a share;
Others discoursed of pleasures of the time,
And I approved them with a secret sign.
Others could court, as Shepherds use to do,
Which I could do as well, but durst not s^ow:
For all my aims and purposes did tend
To gain my Love, and for no other end.

Cor. Did not performance of this task obtain
That prize of love which thou desired to gain?

Dym. No Corydon; for though I did obey,
She thought three years too long a time to stay,
So as her dumb knight she did straight disclaim,
And took her self unto another Swain.

Sap. Disloyal wench.

Dym. Yet alas what remedy;
A marriage is intended solemnlie:
Which that it might more privately be carried,
In a retired Cell they must be married.

Tech V^happy Swain!

Dym. So did I th^^ appear:
For when the marriage came unto my ear,
I straight repaired to the Cell right speedily,
Where these sadrites solemnized were to be.
Strait was the Gate kept by a Porter grim,
Who guards the door that none should enter in:
But I, as time required, resolved to venture,
Did boldly knock, and knocking freely enter;
Where entering in, each casts his eye about,
Some full of fear, as others were of doubt,
What my approach should mean; but to be brief,
(Short tales seem long that do renew our grief)
The Priest pronouncing, justly as I came,
Who gives her to be married to this man?
I rushed into the crowd, their hands to break,
And gladly would have spoke but durst not speak:
At which attempt, some strange constructions had,
And verily imagined I was mad;
Others suspecting what I did intend,
Thought that ray aims were to no other end,
Than to prevent the Marriage for that time,
And afterward persuade her to be mine.
Nor were their judgments erring, for I thought
By my device to have this Project wrought
Only by dumb signs: sometimes would I show
With eyes heau'd up to Heaven her breach of vow;
Sometimes in violent manner would I seem
As if through love I had distracted been,
Pulling my dear Palmira from his hand,
Who to receive her for his Spouse did stand.
Sometimes, as Men in sorrows plunged deep
And could not utter them, IN began to weep,
And wash the Temple with a brinie flood,
Yet ^ll this while I was not understood:
For in despite of all that I could do,
I was restrained, and she was married too.

Cor. What discontent might equal this of thine?

Dym. Yet though I bore it sharply for the time,
I afterward, and have done ever since,
Borne this disgrace with greater patience.

Lin. Yet Dymnus thou wast dumb till three years end!

Dym. Yes Linus, and as truly did intend
What she enjoined me, as I desired
To marry her, when those three years expired:
Which come and past, I then expressed my grief,
Finding apt words to tender me relief;
"For woes do labor of too great a birth,
"That want the help of words to set them forth.

Tech. But did thou nere display her hateful shame?

Dym. In general I did, but not by name,
Nor ever will: my purpose is to live
And laugh at love, and no occasion give
Of just offense to her or any one,
Or silently consume my time in moan,
Frequenting shadie Lawnes in discontent,
Or to the Air my fruitless clamors vent.
Though I resolve, if ere I make my choice,
In better sort and measure to rejoice
Than I have done;

Dor. Or else I Am sure thy share
Though it decrease in joy, will grow in care.

Dym. I know it will: Now as my wrong was great,
And greater far than I could well repeat,
This shall be my Conclusion; There is no Man
Wise that will lose his tongue for any Woman:
For sure I am that they will be more prone
(Such is their guize) to triumph over one
When they have drawn him headlong to their train,
Than such as on more firmer grounds remain.
"Fly Women, they will follow (still say I)
"But if ye follow women, they will fly.

Tech. Rightly opinion'd Dymnus; but to allay
Thy grounded grief, and to conclude the day,
Let Us have a Song;

Dor. Technis with all my heart.

Dym. Though I Have small mind to sing, I Will bear a part.

Cor. And you too Sapphus;

Sap. Yes, and Linus too;

Lin. Yes, I my Art amongst the rest will show.

Dor. To it then freely: safely sing may we,
Who have been slaves to Love, but now are free.

Tech. TEll me Love what thou can do?

Dor. Triumph ore a simple Swain;

Dym. Binding him to such a vow;

Cor. As to make his grief thy gain.

Sap. Do thy worst thou can do now;

Lin. Thou have shot at us in vain.

All. For we are free, though we did once complain.

Dor. Free we are as is the air;

Tech. Or the siluer-murm'ring spring.

Dym. Free from thought or reach of care;

Cor. Which do hapless Lovers wring.

Sap. Now we may with joy repair;

Lin. To our gladsome Plains and sing;

All. And laugh at Love, and called an idle thing.

Dym. Sport we may and feed our Sheep,

Dor. And our Lamkins on this Down;

Tech. Eat and drink, and soundly sleep,

Cor. Since these storms are over blown;

Sap. Whilst afflicted wretches weep,

Lin. That by love are overthrown:

All. For now welaugh at follies we have known.

Cor. Here we rest upon these rocks;

Dym. Round with shadie Iuy wreathed;

Dor. Ioying in our woolly flocks;

Tech. On these Mountains freely breathed;

Sap. Where though clad in russet frocks,

Lin. Here we sport where we are heath'd:

All. O^r only care to see our Pastures freath'd.

Sap. Thus we may retire in peace;

Cor. And though low, yet more secure,

Dym. Then those Men which higher prease;

Dor. Shrubs than Cedars are more sure:

Tech. And they live at far more ease,

Lin. Finding for each care a cure.

All. Their love as dear and liker to endure.

Lin. For wherein consists earths bliss,

Sap. But in having what is fit?

Cor. Which though greater men do miss;

Dym. Homely Swains often light of it.

Dor. For who is he that living is,

Tech. That in higher place does sit,

All. Whose sly Ambition would not higher git.

Tech. Let us then contented be,

Dor. In the portion we enjoy;

Cor. And while we do others see,

Sap. Tossed with gusts of all annoy;

Dym. Let us say this feel not we:

Lin. Be our wenches kind or coy,

All. We count their frowns and favors but a toy.

Dor. Let Us now retire, it draws to Evening time,
Next Tale my Corydon, it must be thine.

Tech. Which may be done next day we hither come,
Mean time, let us fold our flocks and hyevs home.

A Pastoral Palinod.
THese Swains like dying Swans have sung their last,
And joy in thinking of those woes are past;
For woes once past, like pleasing pastimes seem,
And joy us more than if they had not been.
Such Lays become these Launes, such Plaints these Plains,
" Great men may higher have, no heuier strains;
For Swains their Swainlins love, and woo them too,
And do as much as brauer outsides do.
But Heardsmen are retired from their shade
Of Myrtle sprayes and sprigs of Osyer made,
With purpose to reuisit you to morrow,
Where other three shall give new life to sorrow:
Mean time repose, lest when the Swain ^ppeares,
You fall asleep when you should flow with tears.
FINIS.

