A PLAIN AND PITHY EXPOSITION OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. By
that learned and judicious Divine Mr WILLIAM BRADSHAW, sometime Fellow of
SIDNEY COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE. Published since his Deceasse BY THOMAS GATAKER B.
of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for William Bladen, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND TRVLY RELIGIOUS Mrs Katharine Redich of Newhall in
Darbyshire, increase of all graces spiritual, with assurance of life eternal.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, Having prepared and fitted for the Press, some part of the
labors of that worthy servant of GOD, that spent much of his time with you, and
under your roof both drew in and let out his last breath; the doubt was easily
decided, to whom they should be addressed. None seemed to lay more due and
rightful claim to them then your self. The maine means of his maintenance
were from your Family while he lived: and the principal stay of his, under
God, has bin from You and Yours since his deceasse. Neither may any more
justly challenge the benefit of the light, then those that have ministered oil
to the lamp. The Author, I doubt not, had he lived to publish them himself,
would so have disposed of them. And which way could I, his deputy, more fitly
direct them, then whither he himself did in all likelihood intend them? Much
benefit by them, I assure my self, may redound to all sorts. But your self
may more specially reap fruit by them more then ordinary; in that you were
formerly a partaker of that by word of mouth then delivered, which is now here
by help of pen and Press further represented to your eye, and so reduced to
your mind and remembrance again. The most that shall light on them, they will
salute but as strangers at first sight; with whom yet their worth once known
and duly weighed, will soon gain them favor and good acceptance. To your
self and some few more they shall repair as ancien ^cquaintance, renewing
that familia^^e, which they have formerly had with ^ou. But the better you are
acquainted with them already, the less need is there that I should commend
them unto you. A strangers commendation is superfluous between those that are
inwardly acquainted already. Let these few lines rather serve to acknowledge
mine own engagement unto You and Yours, (which I unfeignedly acknowledge, and
wish I were any way able really to testify) for that love and kindness that you
have from time to time shown, and do yet show to the Author of this work:
wherein I may well say of you (and I speak it without flattery) as Naomi of
Boaz, that you cease not to do good both to the living and the dead. Ruth 2.20.
The Lord increase daily the number of those, that do feelingly and effectually
commiserate the forlorn estate that the poor children of his Prophets, after
their Parents deceasse, are ordinarily exposed unto; and abundantly recompense
whatsoever kindness you have shown or shall show, in that kind, into the bosom
of You and Yours. That which h^ ^lso doubtless will not fail to do, who as is
not unrighteous to forget the pains and lo^^ labor of those that minister unto
his Saints; Hebr. 6.10.
so much less will he forget or be slack to reward the labor and charge, that
is bestowed upon those that are (through his blessing) a means to make Saints.
To his mercy and bounty I heartily recommend you, (...) Dan. 12.3.
and so rest

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, Tho: Gataker.

To the Christian Reader.
YOur Fathers (says Zach. 1.5, 6.
GOD by the Prophet Zachary to the Jewish people;) where are they? and the
Prophets, do they live for ever? But did not my words, which I gave my servants
the Prophets in charge, take hold of your Fathers, and they returned? etc.
Thereby intimating, that the word of God may have his effect and efficacy even
after the deceasse of those that sometime delivered it. As the Apostle says,
that though the Ministers of Gods word be laid in irons, (as himself also then
was,) yet (...). 2. Tim. 2.9.
the word of God is not bound with them: so though the Ministers of it may be
taken away by death, yet the word of God does not dye with them, but may
remain still (for the force and efficacy of it, or for the fruit and benefit
of it) to those that partaked of it with them while they lived: they may Suo
sibi suce^ v^uont, ros si n^ cadit. Plaut. Capt. scen. 1.
like shellfish drawn out of the Sea, feed on that moisture on dry land,
which they gathered and took in, while they were yet in the water. This, as it
is true of all, that have bin able and painful in their places; so more
specially of those, that by writing afford unto public view and general use,
the fruits of their learned and religious labors. Others benefit those only,
that are within reach of their voice; these those also, that are without the
report of their speech, that abide many miles and leagues of them, that are by
land and sea also severed and disioyned from them. They profit those that live
with them; these those also that live after them. As Sira. 46.20.
Siracks Son says of Samuel, (that which H. Northa^pt of Prophecies.
Chytraeus, Sir^gel. in Sirac. and alij.
some also so expound, to salve that Authors credit) they prophecy after their
deceasse; and, as Hebr. 11.4.
the Apostle says of ABEL, being dead they yet speak. As 2. King. 13.21.
the relics of Elisha (his corpse, I mean, though not superstitiously
reserved,) raised him again to life, that was occasionally tumbled into his
Tomb: so may their remainders help to revive, and put spiritual life into
many, that shall light on them, after that themselves have left this natural
life, even while their corpse lie laid up in their graves. 2. Chr. 21.12.
There came a writing, says the Holy Ghost, from the Prophet Elias to King
Ioram, who yet had 2 King. 2.11.
departed this world in the days of Iehosaphat, before ever that Ioram came to
the Crown. And 2. Pet. 1 15.
the Apostle Peter, by his writings, made account, that the faithful might
reap benefit, even after himself was dead and gone. This considered, I deem
them not unworthy due commendation, that preserve from perishing, and publish
for the use of posterity, the works and writings of those, that either in
Divinity, or other useful learning, have taken pains to some good purpose.
As on the other side, I hold them injurious, both to the present age, and to
future times, that envy or deny such things the public, and either feather
their own private nests only with them, or let them lie idle, by them, for
worms and mothes to make meat of. Having therefore committed to me, to pervse,
and review, some part of the writings of that godly, learned, and judicious
Divine (now with the Lord) Mr W. Bradshaw, and finding them to be, not unlike
their Author, full fraught with true piety, sound judgment, and good
schollership; his observations natural, not coact or far-fetched; his
invention rare and not ordinary; his phrase, though not swelling, yet
emphaticall, full of spirit and life; his discourse not extrauagant, but
keeping close to the point, and tending mainly to the improuement of piety and
godliness: in regard whereof, they seemed neither unworthy to see further light,
nor unable well to endure the light; I was not unwilling (notwithstanding mine
own occasions and distractions otherwise) out of my love to the deceassed, and
desire of advancing the common good, to take some pains about the transcribing
and perfecting some of them, and so fitting them for the Press, And, among the
rest, perceiving these his Meditations on that Second to the Thessalonians, to
be both pithy and compendious, handling an entire parcel of Scripture, that in
our language few have formerly dealt with; as also that himself had begun to
write them out more fairly and largely, then ordinary, as intending some such
thing, I thought good to break the ice with them: And so beginning at the
entrance into the Second Chapter, where he had left transcribing, out of other
his own notes containing a continued Commentary to the end of the Epistle
(some defects only supplied) have I made up the whole work. Which if it shall
find such good acceptance, as my desire is it should, and as the work it
self (I doubt not) will deserve, I may receive thereby encouragement to take
further pains, about the finishing and fitting for public view, some other of
his labors, that as yet remain with me, for the good of Gods Church, and the
benefit of his poor Wife, and four fatherles Orphans. Had he himself, while
he lived, put the last hand to the two latter Chapters, as he had done to the
first, the whole work had bin more consummate and exact then now it is. Yet as
it is, though not altogether so artificially compact and put together, and so
wanting some of its grace that way, it is for the maine matter of it, in all
likelihood, no other then it would have bin, had he procceded to perfect it, as
may appear by comparing his second transcript with his first draught, in that
that he had finished. That blessed Spirit accompany the publishing of it, by
whose immediate inspiration the Epistle it self was at first endited, and by
whose gracious assistance, these Meditations on it were formerly conceived and
delivered; and through his blessing it may prove beneficial and comfortable to
not a few in the reading of it, as in hearing it has bin the like to many
already. To Him commending it and thee, I rest,

Thine in Christ, T. G.

AN EXPOSITION of the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians. THE FIRST CHAPTER.
VERSE. 1. Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus,
THE principal scope of this Epistle is, The first part of the Epistle.
to confirm and strengthen this Church in the sincerity of that Faith and
Religion wherein it was first planted, and therein to arm it against all
trials and temptations arising either from wicked Persecutors, or corrupt and
antichristian Seducers.

The parts of the Epistle are many, knit together in that frame and method by
the Inditer thereof, that was most common in those times and places, amongst
not only divine, but humane writers in their Letters and Epistles.

The first part is a Superscription, wherein is expressed: 1. The Authors of
the Epistle. 2. The Persons to whom the Epistle is sent.


The principal Author was Paul, by whose spirit alone (stirred up and directed
by Gods Spirit) it was indicted. Silvanus and Timothy consented thereunto,
whose names Paul uses together with his own, for the further establishing and
confirming of that truth which here he writes of: and to testify that they
were of the same judgment and affection with him.

In these three Persons, especially in the first, is declared the divine
authority of this Epistle; For these being (though so much be not in this text
specified) the one an Apostle, the other Evangelists, their authority in the
dispensation of the Gospel, whether by mouth or pen, was more then humane,
they having (especially Paul) a Spirit that led them into all Truth, and
therefore an Epistle written from them, and under their names unto any Church,
was to be received from them, as if it had bin sent from heaven written with
Christ's own hand, and subscribed by all the Saints and Angels in heaven.

It must be acknowledged, that though they had concealed their names, (as the
Author to the Hebrews does,) that yet the very matter thereof, would have
owned that Spirit by which it was indicted. Yet the prefixing of their names
does so much the more particularly confirm the authority thereof, and add
weight and moment unto the same.

We see then first of all; That the very names of Paul and Silvanus etc, (of
themselves but weak and frail men) add authority and credit to the word of
God. That which without their names would have bin acknowledged to be of divine
authority, is for their names sake of the greater authority; the Spirit of
God gives authority to them, they give authority and weight to it* This is
true also of all true Christians, and not of these Worthies only, according to
the degree and measure of Grace communicated unto them. The Gospel (so far
forth as they sincerely profess it) does not only honor their names, Tit.
1.10.
but their names also honor it. Miserable professors are they, who after such
a manner profess the Gospel, that neither they are a credit to it, nor it a
credit to them; much more they, (and how many are they!) whose names are a
reproach and discredit to it, and it to them, in the eyes of all that fear the
Lord.

2. In that Paul for the further credit and authority of that truth, which
here by the Spirit of God he is moved to write, uses also the names of
Timothy and Silvanus, which in Gifts, Office, and Authority were inferior
unto him, it may teach us thus much: That the consent of Christians amongst
themselves, especially of the Ministers of the Gospel, adds much authority
to the truth which they profess: yea the consent of inferiors, in gifts,
graces, and callings, adds authority to that which Superiors do hold and
profess. Though Silvanus and Timothies authority be lesser then Paul's, yet
concurring with Paul's, it makes his the greater in the Church of God. The more
authority then that a man does desire to have in Gods Church, the more must he
labor after the consent of his brethren: yea of them that in gifts, and
authority are his inferiors. Vain are the conceits of them, that look to
amplify their Authority in Gods Church by their Singularity: God may indeed
reveal that truth to one, which he conceales from another, neither is any such
truth to be smothered or betrayed for want of this consent: yet this knowledge
of his, in this or that divine truth, so long as it is singular, is and will be
amongst the people of God, of so much the less authority. The authority of
Paul then flourishes most, when Silvanus and Timothy join in consent with
him; neither are they led by Paul's Spirit, that contemn and make no reckoning
of the consent of their brethren, though inferiors unto them: Were thy
authority amongst Christians as great as Paul's; yet it is the less, if thou
have not the consent of Timothy and Silvanus, to show for that which thou
hold, teach, and professest.

-- Unto the Church of the Thessalonians --
The Persons unto whom this Epistle was written and sent were Thessalonians: i.
certain people dwelling in or about that famous City of Thessalonica in
Macedonia, built by Philip the Father of Alexander the Great, and so named in
memory of a great vic^^^ie gotten over Thessalia, a Country of Greece,
bordering upon Macedonia.

This Epistle is not written to the whole City, or Country there, but to the
Church: i. To so many of them, whether Citizens or others, as were joined
together in a holy society, and communion in the worship and service of
Christ, according to his will revealed in the Gospel; for such were the
Churches which the Apostles planted, and wrote their Epistles unto. The
special fruit then of this and such like Epistles, is to be reaped principally
by them that are members of the Church, and that live in the communion thereof.
Those which direct letters to whole Cities, Countries or States, use therein
(if they be wise) to treat of such matters as principally concern the whole
Body they write unto: Howsoever therefore Heretics, Schismatics, Persons
excommunicated, and Infidels, may reap some fruit and profit by the due reading
and meditating upon this Epistle, yet it being by the Spirit of God inspired
and breathed for the use of a whole Church, the principal fruit thereof, is to
be reaped by them that are members of the Church, and in the Communion of the
Church; Neither d^d either this, or any other of the Apostles write any of
their Epistles and Letters, to Countries, Cities, or Persons, before they were
converted, thereby to draw them to the Faith, and the Communion of the Church.
But first they won them by preaching, and then they writ unto them to stablish
and confirm them in the Faith. Though therefore that which they writ, be for
substance the same Gospel, with that which they preached: yet by this it may
appear, that the principal fruit of the Gospel written, is to be reaped and
gathered by them, which have been called to live in the Communion, and under
the spiritual government of the Church, by the Gospel preached.

-- which is in God our Father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ.
He describes the Church he writes unto by this Argument, That it is in God our
Father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherein the Apostle declares the near
union and conjunction between God and every true Church, if they be in deed
and truth that which they profess to be, They are in the nearest and
straitest band knit unto God himself, yea ingraffed into him: it is not
possible for one Person to be so knit unto another, as the Church and members
thereof are knit unto God; They are here said to be in God, and in Christ, and
other where God and Christ are said to be in them; So that they are in God, and
God is in them, which notes the nearest, and most inseparable, and blessed
Union that may be.

The Apostle amplifies this Union, by describing that God, and that Christ, in
which this Church was, to be his and their Father, his and their Lord and
Jesus; So that God the Father is a Father, and God the Son is a Lord and
Savior, (for so Jesus signifies) unto all those that are in this Union:
otherwise there were no comfort, but horror in the same. God therefore being
their Father, and Christ their Savior and Lord, those that are thus ingraffed
into them, may presume to receive from this Father, being Almighty, any good
thing that they shall need, and to be secured and freed from any evil that
may hurt them. It is a nature ingraffed into Fathers, by this heavenly Father,
to do their children all the good they can: and such Lords and Masters, as
have been content with a great price, even with their own servitude, yea
death, to redeem their servants from their cruel enemies, will not suffer
them to have hurt, if it lie in them to inhibit it. The Churches of God
therefore, having God to be their Father, and Christ the Son of God to be their
Lord, their Jesus and Savior, and being in the nearest bond, even by the
Spirit of God knit unto God and Christ, they may build upon it, that this
Christ their Savior, in whom they are, will save them from whatsoever may hurt
them: That this God their Father, will show the true and most natural
disposition of a Father toward them, in providing for them whatsoever shall be
for their good. And this shall we have a lively feeling of, if in our holy
communion and society with the Church, we shall behave our selves toward God,
as dutiful children, and unto Christ Jesus, as faithful servants: Till then
we shall never know, what it is to be in God our Father, and in our Lord
Jesus Christ.

This Use we may make of this Doctrine.

1. If we desire to feel the comfort and blessing of being in God our Father,
and in our Lord Jesus Christ, let us become, not in outward profession only
and in show, but in deed and truth, true members of the Church, delighting in
the communion and fellowship of the Saints; for this prerogative is here
attributed unto such. Never think that thou art in God and in Christ, so long
as thou art out of the Church and Communion of the Saints, so long at least, as
thou art not in will and affection joined unto the same.

2. Let us fear that we are not true members of any Church of Christ, until
we have some feeling of this, that we are in God, and so in him, that he is
unto us a Father, and a Savior. And let us never rest and be at quiet, until
we have a sweet and comfortable sense indeed, that he is indeed our Father,
and our Savior, by some infallible fruits and signs thereof; for how can it
be, but that they that are in God, as in their Father, and in Christ, as in
their Savior, but they shall, if they stir up that grace which is in them,
feel in some degree the virtue of a Father, and of a Savior, transfused into
their Souls.

3. Let every Church esteem this union, as a matter of the greatest honor and
prerogative that may be, if it had nothing else to set forth it self withal,
yet let us esteem this to be fullness of honor unto it, the fruit that
springs from this Union, the graces that are communicated in this Conjunction,
should abundantly content, and satisfy every true Church of Jesus Christ,
though she had nothing else in the world to boast of.

And thus much of the first part of the Epistle.

VERSE. 2. Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
THE second part follows, which is a Salutation, wherein he testifies the
desire that he has of their spiritual good and welfare. These Salutations are
common both in humane and divine writers in the beginning of their letters,
thereby the more to gain the affection of them they write unto, unto that they
write of; Most use them for ceremony, and to be in the fashion; and many that
most feelingly use them, do therein only testify a naked desire and
affection to the parties they salute. But when they proceed from a sanctified
heart, moved and stirred thereto by the Spirit of God, they are then powerful
and effectual instruments, of procuring and effecting that grace and blessing,
which therein they wish and desire to others. For when the Holy Spirit of God
moves a man, to wish well unto his brother, it is a sign, that by the means
thereof, it intends to work that good in him: for those wishes and desires
that are stirred by Gods Spirit, are not in vain, but shall be in some measure
accomplished and fulfilled. The salutations therefore that proceed from a
sanctified heart, whether uttered by mouth or pen, are so many real blessings
to the persons they are bestowed upon. There is never a hearty good morrow or
good even that they bestow upon thee, but thou farest the better for it.

The particular good that he wishes then in this Salutation, is the same that
he wishes, not only in effect, but in a manner word for word, to all the
Churches and Persons, that he writes unto, (that to the Hebrews excepted,
which he does not profess to be his).

By Grace from God etc, he means the free favor, and love of God toward
them in Jesus Christ manifested unto them, by the testimony of Gods Spirit. By
Peace from God etc, the quiet and comfort of their Souls and Consciences,
arising from the apprehension of the grace aforesaid, whereby they might
discern, that God was reconciled unto them in Jesus Christ, and at peace with
them, and they freed from the fear of all their spiritual enemies. This then
is the effect of this Salutation, an unfeigned and hearty desire, that the less
grace and favor and peace they found amongst men, since they had given their
names to Jesus Christ, the more they might find with God in Jesus Christ. That
they might have sure evidence, even from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ,
that they are in favor and grace with God, and that he is reconciled unto
them, and at peace with them.

We may learn hence,

1. What is the greatest good, that one Christian can wish or do for another:
even to desire and endeavor to bring one another into grace and favor with
God. The Apostle could not in any of his Epistles devise a greater good to wish
unto them he writes unto. If a man might have never so many wishes, either for
himself or others granted unto him; to wish this, is to wish more then all the
world besides. If thou could by wishing get thy neighbor the highest grace
and favor with all the Princes and Monarchs in the world: If thou could
procure sufficient bonds of peace, between him and all the Powers and
Potentates upon Earth, yea and all the Devils in Hell, so that none of them,
either would or could hurt him, but would do him all the good they could: yet
this were nothing in comparison of this Grace and Peace. If by wishing, or
prayer, or endeavor thou could procure this to thy neighbor, thou do
more for him, then if thou did procure him the Monarchy of the whole world.
For alas, what would it profit a man, if all the men in the world, and all the
Devils in Hell, yea and Angels in Heaven were combined to do him all the good
they could, if the Almighty God be against him, and at war with him? On the
contrary side, what need a man care, though he were in disgrace with all the
world, and though all the Powers of Earth and Hell were up in arms against
him, so long as he is in grace and favor with God, and in league with him. Let
us that are Christians be content (if otherwise we cannot get it,) to forfeit
and forgo, for this, all other Grace and Peace whatsoever: and let us be
ashamed to lose the least pledge and interest thereof, for the purchase of the
highest and greatest grace and peace amongst men.

2. In that Paul to win their affection the more, does above all things wish in
this manner, this grace and peace unto them, it shows that themselves did
above all things wish and desire the same: For when men, to gain the affection
of others, do wish any good unto them, they make choice of that good, which
they conceive is most desired and affected of them, and which they are in
labor and pursuit after. Therefore a Christian Soul wishes and desires
nothing more, then Grace and Peace from God: If thou should wish him grace
and favor with the greatest Prince in the world, thou should not so much
win his heart, as in wishing and desiring this Grace and Peace from God. The
more then that men have received the signs and tokens of this Grace, and
Peace, the more they desire and affect the same. These Christians were in God
the Father, and in Jesus Christ, and therefore had already received Grace and
Peace from them in some degree: so that the more they have, the more they
desire: neither do any so much feel the want thereof, as they that have most
tasted of it. The more the Lord in this life manifests his grace unto them, the
more they see their own gracelesnes; the more they see their own gracelesnes,
the more they are afflicted and humbled in their Souls, and the more still in
that regard they desire grace and peace with God. What should we think then of
those, which despise the means of this grace and peace, and which most of all
despise those, who by their office do not only wish, but endeavor to procure
this grace and peace unto them, and the more they endeavor it, the more they
hate them: the next way to loose their heart, and stir up their hatred, is to
wish them grace and peace from God; they think they superabound therewith
already: Surely such are manifest despisers thereof, and are in great danger
never to taste thereof.

3. That grace and peace which is the life and comfort of a Christian Soul, is
not only in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, but from them; and that is
said to come from them, when it is not hidden in them, but shows it self in
manifest signs and tokens from them. The Soul and Conscience of an humbled
sinner, will not in this matter trust unto the conceits and opinion of others,
though all the men in the world would secure him of this, that God is
reconciled unto him, and at peace with him: yet he will not trust to that,
except he have some infallible evidence from God himself, except he by the
mouth of his Spirit, speak peace unto their Souls, they will still fear,
that they are out of grace and favor with God: Any fancy or conceit is
sufficient to persuade wicked men, that they are in grace and at peace with
God: yea those ordinarily are most conceited of it, that are furthest from it.
But the Apostles wish here, is the wish of every true Christian, that they may
have it from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ, as it were under their hand
and seal. But when may a Christian be said, to receive grace and peace from
God etc? When the Spirit of God in the due use of Gods holy ordinances, does
seal and confirm the same to the soul and conscience of an humbled sinner,
that groneth under the burden of his sins. Then does the Grace and Peace of
God, come unto thee from God, when the Spirit of God testifies unto thy spirit,
in the word, in the Sacraments, in the Church, in the Ministry etc, that thou
art in grace and favor with him.

VERSE. 3. We ought to thank God always for you brethren, as it is meet --
THe third part of this Epistle (beginning here and reaching to the end of the
Chapter) is spent in Consolation: wherein the Apostle labors to hearten and
encourage them against the troubles and persecutions which they suffered for
their profession, thereby the more to strengthen and confirm them in the faith
of Jesus Christ. This method is usually observed in all letters, when men write
to them that are in any trouble or affliction, after they have saluted them,
and before they write of other matters unto them, to comfort them. By the way,
before we come to particulars, we may observe one special reason, why he
wishes unto this Church, Grace and Peace from God the Father, and from Jesus
Christ; because for God the Father and for Jesus Christ's sake, they had lost
all grace and favor and peace with men: so that the more disgrace, and the
less peace, that Christians have with men, for the profession of Jesus Christ,
the more grace and peace they may expect from God. For that which upon this
ground the Spirit of God does wish unto a man, it will effect: The more then
that men for Gods cause do disgrace us, and war with us, the more God shows
his grace and favor unto us.

The first means he uses to comfort them by, is by praising and commending
them for those graces, which in these their trouhles and persecutions they did
manifest to be in them. verse. 3, 4. wherein in his own name, and in the name
of Timothy and Silvanus, he first unfeignedly acknowledges, that for their
sakes, they were bound to give thanks unto God as long as they live. What a
glory was this unto this Church, that these three Worthies should profess and
acknowledge thus much unto them?

Our lessons hence are these.

1. That if we behave our selves in the house and Church of God as we ought to
do, we shall bind all Christians, yea the Prophets and Apostles, and all the
Saints of heaven unto us. They shall be indebted unto God for us, and shall
esteem themselves bound for ever to praise and magnify his name for us. And
let us never think we have demeaned our selves as we ought to do in Gods
Church, until we have given just cause to all the godly that knows us,
especially to our Pastors and Ministers, to praise and bless God for us, and
to esteem themselves eternally indebted unto God for our sakes. But alas, most
of us do so behave our selves in Gods Church, that we give our Ministers, and
all religious people, cause rather to mourn before the Lord, and to complain
unto him of us.

2. Let us from Paul's example, of how great note and worth so ever we be in
Gods Church, learn to esteem Gods graces in others, as blessings upon our
selves, and to have such interest in the fruit of them, as to think our selves
bound and indebted unto God, in all thankfulness for them, as if we our selves
had a title to and an interest in them. There was not the poorest Christian in
Thessalonica, but Paul himself did think himself the better for that Grace
that was in him. We are all members of one mystical body; the grace of one
member is the honor of another; and it is a sign that that man does not
esteem his brother a fellow-member of the same body with him, that counts his
brothers Graces, disgraces unto him, as though his own graces were eclipsed
and lost their luster through the brightness of another. We know that the
comeliness of the hand or foot, does not eclipse, but rather add beauty to
the beauty of the face. If therefore we judge our brethren members of the same
mystical body of Christ with us, we cannot but esteem their graces a grace
unto us, and that our selves (how bright soever) do shine so much the more by
the beams of their graces; and therefore we are bound in a bond of debt unto
God for them, as Paul here acknowledges. But we are most of us so far from
this, that we hardly think our selves bound to give God thanks, for those
gifts and graces that are in our selves, we so seldom, so coldly, so slightly
and negligently perform this duty. And as for the graces of others, we are
(the Lord be merciful unto us for the same) of this disposition, rather to
murmr, grudge and repine against God for them, as though the more he bestowed
his graces upon them, the more he did wrong and disgrace us.

Because that your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of every one of you
one toward another abounds.
This is the reason why Paul, Silvanus etc, acknowledge themselves bound to be
thankful unto God, as is aforesaid; wherein is expressed the special matter
and argument of their praise: Their exceeding growth and increase in faith and
love, whereby he means all religious duties to God and man, required either in
the Law or Gospel. They showed every day more and more zeal to Gods glory, in
making more and more conscience of the Ordinances of God; they showed greater
and greater delight in the word, the Sacraments, the Sabbath, the Ministry,
Prayer; they daily more and more grew in knowledge, and manifested more and
more the signs and tokens of Repentance; and over and besides this, they were
every day more and more kind, loving and free-hearted one to another, one
striving to go before another, not in the duties of Piety and Religion only,
but also in loving kindness, humility, liberality, fidelity, courtesy,
justice etc: from such fruits as these does the Apostle gather, the increase
and growth of their Faith and Love. For as Faith and Love are seen unto men
only, by the works that proceed therefrom; so the growth and increase of them,
is seen by the growth and increase of works. Never tell me that any grows in
Faith and Love, but he that grows and increases in the aforesaid duties
toward God and his Neighbor.

The words whereby the Apostle notes this growth, signify to ouer-increase
and super-abound; not that their Faith and Love did swell and flow over those
banks which God in the Law and Gospel prescribed unto them; for that neither
was possible, nor praiseworthy, (as we shall have more occasion to speak
afterward): but his meaning was, that it exceeded the expectation of man, and
they went further then man could require at their hands, though they came short
of that which God requires.



1. That the praise and glory of a Church or Christian, does not lie only in
this, in being always the same, but in growing and proceeding from grace to
grace. Those sciences are not commendable that grow not in the stock wherein
they are graffed, but stand at a stay. The Graces of God are not dead, but
living plants; if they take root in thy heart, they will grow and increase; if
thy faith and love do not grow and increase in thee, they are dead, they never
took any root in thee: though for a time thou may have some respect in Gods
Church for the same, yet the end will be shame and dishonor, and thou
discovered to be an hypocrite, when thy Faith and Love appear to be more and
more withered, as it will, if it do not more and more grow and flourish. I
would to God (beloved) we had our portion in this praise; I would to God, your
Minister could thank the Lord for you in this respect: but the Lord knows,
and all our Consciences tell us, we are far from this praise. It were well in
comparison with us, if we did retain our first Faith and Love; but it is to be
feared, that with the Ephesians we have lost that, so far are we from growing
from faith to faith, and from love to love with these Thessalonians.

2. This is the singular praise of this and all other Churches, that their Love
one toward another grows with their Faith; the more faith in God, the more
love toward our Neighbor. Show me the growth of thy faith by the growth of
thy love. It is as possible for a fire to increase without the increase of
heat, as for faith to increase without the increase of love. The faith and
profession of those men therefore is but Pharesaisme and hypocrisy, which
manifests it self in the disdain and contempt of their brethren. There are
therefore no greater enemies in the world, to love and unity amongst brethren,
then those that are enemies to the growth of Faith and Religion, and all the
powerful and effectual means thereof. For such as a man's Faith and Religion
is, such is his Love, for quantity, for quality; no true faith, no true love;
an unsound faith, an unsound love; a ceremonial faith, a ceremonial love; a
sincere faith, a sincere love; much faith, much love; an hypocritical faith, a
dissembling love.

3. In faith and love we should not think it enough, to stint and moderate
them according to that measure and rule only that man may expect and exact at
our hands; but we must strive to exceed that, and according to the pattern of
this Church labor therein to go beyond the expectation and imagination of men.
But where are such Churches and Christians now to be found? It were well for us
in comparison of that we are, that we were but answerable to the expectations
of men; or that we were proceeded but so far in faith and love, as man might
justly require and exact at our hands; but the Lord knows we are far wanting
even of that.



To give God the praise and thanks, not only for Faith and Love, but also for
the growth and increase of them, whether in our selves or others. Its he that
deserves the thanks for it more then any else. Though God tie us to be
thankful to men, when we reap the fruits of their faith and love, yet in
comparison, its no thanks to them; it is Gods work in them. Otherwise the most
religious and loving men that ever were, if God should leave them to their own
natures, would quickly show themselves monsters of impiety and malice, and the
Wolves and Bears of the Forest would as soon merit thanks at our hands as
they: in such cases therefore to be thankful to men for the fruits that we
reap of their faith and love, and to forget God, is to make them the authors
of their own grace, and so to give that honor to them, which is due to God,
an Idolatry too usual in these times. And yet we are not to whisper this
thanks in Gods ear only, but we are to profess and acknowledge it, as much
as conveniently we may, even to them that it concerns, to the end we might the
more hearten and encourage them therein. And this no doubt is one cause, why so
many faint and languish in faith and love (especially in time of persecution)
for that there is so little encouragement of this kind amongst Christians: we
pass by the Graces of our brethren, as though they were not worthy to be
regarded, or any notice to be taken of them. And if it be our duty to
^cknowledge our thankfulness to God for the Graces of our brethren, the
immediate fruits whereof do not so directly concern us, as others, (for Paul
speaks not of their love to him, but one toward another,) how much more is it
our duty, to do it, when we our selves in our own persons, shall immediately
reap the fruits of our brothers faith and love, when his love shall directly
and manifestly in a special manner grow and increase toward us.

VERSE. 4. So that we our selves glory of you in the Churches of God, --
HE amplifies their former praise, That such was the growth and increase of
their Faith and Love, that he moreover boasted and gloried of them in the
Churches of God. How could this but wonderfully encourage them, to be constant
to the end, to consider that their praises, were not only talked of, but
gloried in, and that in no base and profane Conventicles, but in the holy
Churches, and Assemblies of God: not by any ordinary or common Persons in Gods
Church, but by Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy themselves, the great and most
famous trumpets of Jesus Christ. Who would make the boastings of such Persons
in vain? Who would not by all possible means uphold and maintain such an
honor? Who would not in the midst of any troubles and miseries whatsoever,
rejoice and glory in such a fame sounded upon such silver Trumpets, in such
famous Assemblies?

Let us then (Beloved) learn, to emulate the glory of this Church; let us
strive after such a profession of Faith, and practice of Love, that the
worthiest in the Churches of Christ, may be provoked to boast and glory of us,
in all the Assemblies of the faithful: let us esteem this the greatest honor
that may be, that Paul should glory in us, and the Churches of God should ring
of our praises; we need not then care though all the men in the Earth, and all
the Devils in Hell, do bark and baule against us: far be it from us, to forgo
any part of this honor, to stop the mouths of any hell hounds whatsoever,
much more for the purchasing of honor in their mouths, to give any cause,
that the Churches of God, should speak or hear dishonourably of us. And
though there be now no Paul's in Gods Church, to give us such encouragements;
yet let not this euer-the-lesse discourage us, to tread in the steps of this
Church: for if we be like them, God can and will, by some means or other, make
our names as glorious in the Churches of God, as if Paul himself were living,
and went from Church to Church, to glory and rejoice in us. But alas (beloved)
when we shall compare our selves with this Church, can we think that Paul, if
he were alive, would boast of us, in all the Churches where he should come?
Would he not rather, considering the coldness of some of us, and the contempt of
Religion in other some, in the midst of many means, speak of us in the
Churches of God, with shame and sorrow of heart? Do not most of us so behave
our selves in Gods Church, that we rather deserve to be boasted and gloried of
in Alehouses and Tauernes, and in profane Stages and Theaters, then in the
holy Churches of God? Do we not most of us so live, as if we affected, that
Minstrills, Stage Players, Ale-house-knights, and the rest of the rascalitie
should glory and boast of us, rather then the Apostles, Evangelists, and
Ministers of Jesus Christ? rather then Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy?

Let us in the second place learn of Paul, how to comfort and encourage those
Churches and Christians whom we see to grow and increase in Grace: let us not
only acknowledge and profess our selves bound, to thank God for them
always, but let us honor their names in all holy meetings and assemblies,
that they may see they are respected and honored for their Faith, and other
graces of God: and be we in never so high place in Gods Church, let us account
the faith and love of others, our own crown and glory; let us boast of it,
and glory in it, in all the holy meetings and assemblies of Gods Saints, and
strive that the eyes of all Gods Churches, may be fixed upon them, and their
tongues speak of their praises. This is a powerful and most effectual means
to strengthen and confirm them, in the graces of God against all temptations
and discouragements whatsoever. The neglect of this duty has bin no doubt, a
special means, that so many in time of trial, have shrunk and fallen from
the Faith. It is indeed a weakness in Christians, to stand in need of such
encouragements; they ought to be so grounded in that Faith which they do
profess, that though all the world should disgrace, and dishonor them for it:
yea though they which have taught and instructed them therein, should
discourage them from it, yet they ought constantly, to cleave unto the same.
But seeing that the humane frailty of Christians, needs such props as these,
especially in time of persecution, we shall be guilty of one another fall, if
we do not by such means labor to support one another. But far are such from
this Apostles Spirit, who are so far from boasting, and glorying, either in
those Churches or Persons that grow and increase in the graces of God, that of
all other they most despite, and disgrace them, in all the assemblies and
meetings where they open their mouths.

-- Because of your patience and faith in all your persecutions and
tribulations which you suffer.
This is the special matter of Paul's glorying and rejoicing. The faith and
patience which they manifested in all their persecutions and tribulations: By
which it appears, that this Church was at this time very much afflicted and
persecuted, and that the scope of the Apostles praise, in this and the former
verse, is to comfort them in the same, and thereby to strengthen them, that
they may persevere, (as I have said before,) in the grace received. He
testifies therefore, that he does not only esteem himself bound, to be
always thankful unto God for them, in regard of their exceeding growth and
increase in faith and love, but also that in the same regard, he glories and
boasts of them, in the Churches of God, especially for this, that in the
midst of so many persecutions and troubles that they sustained, they showed so
much patience and faith.

Faith then and Patience in persecution and tribulation, is the greatest glory
of a Christian. They that in the midst of many injuries and wrongs, disgraces,
loss of goods, liberty, hazard of life, etc, for Christ's sake, can still
notwithstanding by faith apprehend Gods goodness and love toward them,
conceiving never the less hope in God, bearing never the less affection, but
rather the more to that Faith and Religion for which they suffer, never showing
the least repentance for their profession, how much soever they suffer for the
same, neither murmuring nor repining against God therefore, nor breaking forth
through impatience, into any breach of duty toward God or man. They which
have grown to such an height of Grace, shall be honorable in the Churches of
God in a high degree, for their profession. But dishonorable is that
profession, and not worthy to be named with any respect or honor in Gods
Churches, that in peace and prosperity makes some show and flourish, but when
persecution comes shrinks in the wetting.

The Apostle joins Patience and Faith together, neither can they be sundred
in time of persecution, but the one shows it self in the other: where there
is impatiencie in suffering, there appears no faith but infidelity: Faith
makes Patience, Patience manifests Faith. Never say thou beleeuest in Christ,
if thou can not show thy belief in patient suffering for Christ: at least
never look that thou should be praised, and gloried of in the Churches of
God for thy Faith, until it shine and show forth it self in thy Patience. The
glory of a Christians faith, does not consist so much in beating down and
resisting the enemies of Christ, as in a meek and willing suffering of wrong
and evil. If thou suffer never so much for Christ's sake and the Gospel,
though thou should give thy body to be burned for the same, yet if thou do
it not patiently but perforce, thou may be pitied, but never look to be
praised for it in the Churches of God. Those sufferings only are celebrated
there, wherein a man may lively behold the very face and living countenance of
Faith in Patience.

VERSE. 5. Which is a token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.
HItherto of the first part of their consolation, wherein the Apostle takes
notice of their persecutions and troubles, praising them for the Graces of God
manifested therein.

The second part follows, taken from the happy issue and consequent, which
these patient sufferings of theirs did portend. These sufferings (says he) of
yours are an infallible sign or demonstration of the great day of Judgment,
wherein, the more patiently you have suffered for the kingdom of God, the more
you shall be reputed and declared worthy of that kingdom for which you have
suffered. What an unspeakable consolation would the due consideration of this be
unto all that shall suffer for righteousness sake: that the more they suffer,
the more they may assure themselves of a day of public hearing before the
Lord, who will thoroughly debate all those injuries and wrongs, that have bin
offered unto them, and that not in a corner, but in the face of the world, that
this judgment wherein this cause of theirs shall be heard, shall be a
righteous judgment, not corrupted by bribes, and ouer-swaid by partial
affection, but proceeding according to the equity of the cause, without
respect to the quality of Persons; that in this judgment shall be called into
question, especially their sufferings for the kingdom of God, and that which
they have endured for righteousness sake, and in obedience to the Gospel; that
in this judgment the more it shall appear, that with Patience and Faith, they
have suffered for the kingdom of God, the more they shall be accounted and
reputed worthy thereof in Jesus Christ, insomuch as they shall with that praise
and glory, before the face of their enemies, be put into the eternal
possession thereof, Luc. 21.36.
as if they had merited and deserved the same by their sufferings, though the
greatest sufferings that ever any Christian has or can endure, are in deed and
truth in themselves no ways worthy that glory which shall be bestowed upon
them. Romans 8.18. and it being given, is an inheritance. Matthew. 24.3.4. and
therefore not of desert. What an unspeakable comfort must this needs be in the
midst of all persecutions whatsoever, when every particular wrong and injury,
which here a man shall endure for the kingdom of God, are so many infallible
signs and demonstrations of this judgment; so that the more they suffer and
endure at the hands of men, and the more the Consistories and Judgment Seats
are shut against them, the more cause they have to be certain and assured of
this judgment, and the more to rejoice in it. It would be great consolation
unto a Christian heart, and a means of much patience and constancy in
suffering, if he might be assured, that his cause should come to indifferent
hearing, but before men: yet there is far more cause of comfort in the certain
assurance of this judgment; and so much the more certain assurance there is
of this, by how much the more uncertainty, doubt and despair there is of the
other.

But this is no matter of Consolation to them that suffer (though with never
such patience and confidence) for the fancies and inventions of their own
brains, or the superstitious inventions and traditions of men, which
appertain to the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist. They which will reap this
consolation in their sufferings, must look to this, that they suffer for the
kingdom of God, i. for their obedience and subjection unto the laws of Christ
their Head and King, manifested in his word unto their souls and consciences.

VERSE. 6. For it is just with God to render in like manner affliction to those
which afflict you:

7. And to you which are afflicted, rest with us --


FOr the further confirmation of them in the aforesaid comfort, he here
renders a reason, why this Patience and Faith of theirs must needs be a
manifest sign of the just judgment of God aforesaid; because (says he) it
stands with the justice of God to afflict them, that afflict his servants, and
to give rest unto them which are afflicted for his sake, and therefore the more
that any do suffer for the kingdom of God, and the more that the wicked
prevail over them, the more certain and infallible sign it is of that great
day. So that in this reason he comprehends two grounds of the former
assertion.

The first is this: That it stands with the equity and justice of God, to
afflict and punish them, which molest and trouble his children for righteousness
sake. God has stamped in man, who is his own Image, the print of this justice.
Can a Prince endure, that his Servant should be abused for doing his will and
commandment? Will he not take himself bound in equity, so far as his
authority and laws will stretch, to call them into question that shall abuse
him? If he should carelessly suffer the same, would it not be judged an unjust
thing? Has not the righteous God that care of his Servants, that an earthly
man has? Is it possible that he that has written this point of justice in the
breast of man, should neglect it in his own Person, and suffer his own
Servants, for obeying his will, to be persecuted and wronged, and that before
his own face, and put it up? Yet we see that for the most part in this life he
does so. None more free from judgment and vengeance then they that persecute
Gods Servants, none live more merrily, none dye with more ease. Why then we must
of necessity conclude, that therefore there must come a day of doom wherein
they must answer it. God must needs be a just Judge, and therefore the fewer
judgments overtake the enemies of the Gospel in this life, and the more they
triumph over Gods Servants, the more we must learn to comfort our selves, in
being so much the more assured and persuaded of this day of judgment. If there
were no other cause to be heard but this, it stands with Gods justice to hear
the same. It would affect and comfort Gods children in their affliction, to
behold some present judgment of God or man, upon them which persecute them;
and it much dismayeth them, when they see no hope of help either from God or
man in this life. But this ought to strengthen and comfort them so much the
more: for this is so much the greater evidence and demonstration, that in this
great day of judgment, the Lord will render affliction to those which trouble
his Servants. This then is the best revenge, that Christians can execute upon
their persecutors, even with faith and patience to suffer persecution and
affliction at their hands: for the more they suffer, the more they bind the
Lord in his justice, in this day to judge and revenge their cause: so that if
Christians by dint of sword could subdue all their enemies, they have not
therein such just matter of comfort, as in their patient and faithful
sufferings. The less we revenge, the more has God in justice, bound himself
to be avenged of them: and it is great folly to think, that we can do our
enemies more hurt, then God can and will, if we leave the revenge unto him,
unto whom indeed it appertains.

The second ground of the former Assertion is this, that as it stands with the
justice of God to punish them that afflict and persecute his servants; So it
stands no less with his justice, to give unto his servants which are troubled
and molested, rest and quiet, of which, the less hope and assurance there is
in this life, the more cause there is, to assure themselves of it in another
life, and therefore to expect that day wherein, they shall be put into a full
and eternal possession thereof. It is no such comfort to the soul of an
afflicted Christistian, to be persuaded that God will render unto the wicked
enemies, affliction for affliction, more comfort it would be unto them, to see
some signs and tokens of their repentance and forgiveness. But this is the
strength and life of Christian consolation, that the more sorrow and trouble,
that they sustain for Christ's sake and his kingdom, the more pledges and
demonstrations they have therein of their own eternal rest and happiness;
for howbeit our sufferings (as is formerly declared) are far from meriting
any such matter, yet it is just with God, to give them rest and quiet, which
have been content patiently to suffer for his sake; no man shall suffer in
vain for Christ, but the more he suffers (if he suffer for the kingdom of
Christ) the more security and assurance he has of eternal rest in heaven,
which all those want, which want that grace; never look thou to enter into
this rest, except thou can with patience and faith endure trouble and
disquiet for the kingdom of heaven.

He shows what manner of rest this shall be, by way of comparison, in these
words with us.i. It shall be such a rest and quiet, as is prepared for us that
are Apostles and Evangelists, and such, as together with us you shall
certainly enjoy; This must needs increase their consolation exceedingly:
there are no true Christians, but are persuaded the Apostles and Evangelists
shall in this great day be in most happy condition: neither can they desire to
be in better estate; would thou then be sure to rest with Paul, Siluanus,
Timothy and the rest of the Apostles and Evangelists: thou must learn with
patience and in Faith, to suffer persecution and tribulation, when the Lord
shall call thee thereunto, for that Faith and Religion which thou have learned
of them? for the Lord has not prepared a higher heaven for them, and a lower
for us, but we shall rest together with them in the same heaven, if together
with them we shall suffer in this life, for that kingdom which they in the
Gospel have called us unto.

-- When the Lord Jesus shall be manifest from heaven, with his mighty Angels.

8. In flaming fire --


That the consideration of the day of doom (the manifest signs whereof they
were to behold in their patient enduring of persecution) might the more comfort
them, and strengthen them in their troubles. The Apostle concludes this second
part of their consolation, with a digression into a description of that day of
judgment, every part whereof contains great matter of comfort to all the
afflicted and persecuted servants of God, and no less matter of fear and
horror to all their enemies, if they had grace to apprehend the same.

The first part of the description declares who shall be the Judge: even our
Lord Jesus himself in his own Person, even he who loved his Servants so
dearly, that he gave his life for them, yea did undergo his Fathers wrath for
them, which was for the time a Hell of Hells unto him: and therefore the more
gracious, and loving and merciful, he has showed himself unto them, the more
merciless and cruel, will he in this judgment show himself unto their
adversaries. Whom could the afflicted Servants of Christ more desire to sit in
judgment, then their own dear Savior, for whose sake they have suffered so
many indignities? Whom can the enemies of the Gospel more fear, then him whom
in his Servants they have most dishonored and despighted? No doubt but in this
day, they would rather choose any, to be their Judge then Christ: yea, they
would hope for more favor and mercy from the Devils themselves, then from him.
Let us then (if ever the Lord shall exercise us in the same manner) comfort our
selves in this, That Christ himself will in his own Person, in this day, come
to judge the cause betwixt us and our enemies. It were great matter of
consolation, if we were assured but of this, That Christ would raise up some
just man upon earth to do it; or send a Saint, or an Angel from heaven for
that purpose; but this must needs be an exceeding comfort, That Christ in his
own Person will come to sit in judgment upon our adversaries, and will not
put the matter over to Vnder-Commissioners. Let us then take heed, lest in our
sufferings for Christ's sake, we break not out through impatiencie or distrust,
into any sin against Christ: for this is the greatest advantage that we can
give to our adversaries, and a sign that we do not so much suffer, (how just
soever the cause be) for Christ's sake, as for our own fancy: for how can that
man say, that he suffers for Christ's sake, when in his suffering for his sake,
he will not for his sake forbear such and such sins which Christ forbids?
Can he in his sufferings comfort himself in the consideration of this
judgment, when in and by occasion of those sufferings he rebels against the
Judge?

The second part of the description of the latter day follows, wherein is set
forth the glorious manner of Christ's coming to judgment, consisting of three
parts.

First, he shall manifest himself from heaven: i. shall appear to the eyes
and senses not only of the godly, but the wicked, and they with these eyes of
theirs shall behold him coming from the highest heavens, in that majesty and
glory, wherein he now sits at the right hand of his Father, and not in that
base and contemptible estate, wherein he first showed himself, when he took
our nature upon him. So that Christ will sit visibly in judgment in this day,
and that in all the sensible glory that may be: he shall then show himself in
all his majesty to every mortal eye: then shall the godly behold and see,
that their trust and confidence in him, in the midst of all their greatest
afflictions, was not in vain: they shall then have cause to triumph and glory,
that they have (though through many reproaches and contempts) served so
honorable and glorious a Lord. How then shall the wicked enemies of Christ hang
down their heads, that have scorned and disdained his Servants, as if they had
served some base and contemptible Master? Verily so vile and base is the
service of Christ in the eyes of some, (yea and of some that would be reputed
Christians) that it were less disgrace for a man (in their eyes) to serve a
hangman, then to serve Jesus Christ. Judge you how such will look, and what
they will think, when they shall behold Christ coming from heaven, and
revealing himself in all his majesty and glory, and that to sit in judgment
upon them? Let this then be our comfort in all our tribulations, that howsoever
Christ now have the heavens drawn as a curtain, or veil between our eyes
and him, which is the cause that makes the enemies of his Gospel, so bold and
saucy with his Servants, yet that the more he hides himself now from the eyes
of persecutors and wicked men, the more gloriously he will manifest and reveal
himself unto them in this day, to the greater glory of his humbled Servants,
and the greater shame and confusion of all their enemies.

The second degree of his glory, consists in the train that shall accompany
and assist him in this judgment; All the mighty and powerful Angels of
Heaven: These shall be present as so many Sargeants, Bailiffs, Officers at
Arms, Sheriffs and Executioners in this great Assise. If therefore it be so
terrible to guilty prisoners, to behold an earthly Judge in his scarlet robes,
attended upon with the Justices, Sheriff, and other Officers of Peace, how
fearful and terrible will the sight of this Judge be, manifesting himself
from heaven with such a mighty host and glorious army of Angels? If the
appearance but of one Angel, and that in peace, has bin so terrible, even
unto Gods own children, as appears Luc. 2.10. and 1.30. Judge. 13.6. how
terrible shall the appearance of all the Angels in Heaven be unto the wicked in
this day, when they shall come with Christ from heaven to be executioners of
his eternal vengeance upon them? For their Office at this time, is set down
in the Parable of the tares. Mat. 13.41. It is not then possible for them to
avoid the presence of this Judge, but they must needs appear before him,
where there are such Officers, as these, to apprehend and attache them: though
they should run into the clefts and hollowes of the rocks, or could cause the
mountains and hills to cover them, these Angels could pull them out: though
they had wings like to an Eagle to fly away from this judgment, these winged
Cherubims would ouer-flie them: though all the wicked should conspire and band
themselves, as it were one man to resist the proceedings of this Judge, there
is not the weakest of this heavenly army, but will be found strong enough to
bind them hands and feet in chains and fetters of iron: and therefore the
Apostle calls them, powerful Angels; how truly see 2. King. 19.35. Act. 12.23.
What an encouragement then would the consideration of this be unto any that are
under persecution for the kingdom of God, if they had grace but to believe
this? If poor men suffering wrongs at the hands of great men that live amongst
them, could be assured of this, that the King himself takes notice of those
wrongs that are offered unto them, and will without fail upon such a day come
in his own Person, with all the Court and Council, Judges and Officers of
State, to call the matter into question, and to sit in judgment upon the same,
would they not think themselves happy, yea and the more wrongs they have
sustained, the more happy, in regard that the more they have endured, the
better they are sure it will be for them, and the worse for their enemies? What
infidelity then is this, that we should have so sure and certain a word of
Christ's own coming, and of his coming accompanied with all the glorious and
powerful train of heavenly Angels, to sit in judgment upon them which shall
persecute us, and to give rest eternal unto us, even in regard of our
troubles, and yet we should murmr, repine, fret, grieve, yea and basely often
deny and forsake the cause of Christ, rather then suffer for it? Is it
possible (beloved) that any Christian that is persuaded of this truth, and
thinks of it seriously, should be daunted or disquieted, or put out of any of
Gods ways, for the persecution of wicked men, be they never so mighty, and
never such politic adversaries, and be they able to set never so great a
gloss upon their proceedings? It is to be feared (beloved) that many from time
to time, which seem to be most forward in the profession of the Gospel, that
think this glorious coming of Christ with his mighty Angels, to the end and
purpose here expressed, to be no better then some old wives fable: otherwise it
were not possible, that every fear of trouble and molestation should make so
many start aside like a broken bow, from the profession or practice of that
truth which formerly they have given testimony unto, but it would rather make
them so much the more resolute and confident in the same, by how much the more
trouble they shall see to pursue the same, or any part thereof.

The third degree of his glorious coming is in the manner thereof, which shall
be most fearful and terrible, even in flaming fire, which shows the
extremity of his wrath, against them which he shall come to sit in judgment
against; they are not in jest that fling firebrarnds: terrible even to Gods
own people was his giving of the Law in thunder and lightning; but a thousand
thousand times more terrible will his coming in this fire be, unto the wicked
transgressors of that Law. To have bin in Sodom and Gomorrah, when fire and
brimstone fell down from heaven upon them, Genesis 19, could not be so terrible
as this must be unto those wicked men, that shall stand upon the earth in that
day, and behold this coming of his, who would then if they might be put unto
it, choose rather to leap into burning Aetna, then stand in this presence. Let
the consideration of this make us to run, even through fire and water, rather
then displease this Judge. Let us, the more fiery trialls and persecutions that
we shall endure for this Judges sake, the more rejoice in the expectation of
this his coming, and be armed against the terror of it. Let no flame kindled
by the wrath of any man, make us do any thing that may provoke this irefull
Judge.

-- Rendering vengeance unto them, that do not know God, and which obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The third part of the description of the latter day of doom follows,
wherein is set down the end of Christ's glorious coming in manner and form
aforesaid, to judgment: which is twofold.

1. To render vengeance, or to be revenged upon some. 2. To be in a special
manner glorified upon other some.
The first act then and end of Christ's coming in flaming fire, is to be
revenged upon some sort of Persons.i. in that manner to proceed in judgment
against them, that those men use to do which are possessed with a furious and
revenging Spirit, even with all rigor and extremity, to seek their mischief
and utter ruin. For it is the nature of revenging minds, to seek only the
hurt and evil of those which have provoked them: and the greater and more
powerful they are, the more fearful will the vengeance be which they shall
inflict. The wrath of a King (says Solomon) is as messengers of death, Pro.
16.14. and 19.12.
and like the roaring of a Lion; what then is the wrath of the King of Kings,
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Verily if a man were naked in the wilderness,
and all the Lions, Lyonesses, and their whelps roaring about him ready to tear
him in thousands of pieces, it were not so fearful, nor so much euillnes to
be expected, as when this lion shall roar upon him, and come in such a fierce
and furious manner to be avenged of him; and the more terrible the auenger
shows himself to be, the greater vengeance is feared, and the less hope of
mercy. If we see one come gnashing his teeth at one, and with a furious rage
running at him with a naked sword, we presume that the vengeance that this man
intends to execute, is no less then death, and that the blood of the party
can only quench the flame of his wrath; what then will quench the wrath of this
Person, who comes in flaming fire from heaven, with all the powerful armies of
glorious Angels, to be avenged of all his enemies. If the least offender had
10000 hearts, it were not the blood of them all could quench the fire of this
auengers rage against him: If it were possible for him then to weep a Sea of
tears, yet there would be no hope thereby to mitigate the wrath of this
auenger, or to move him to relent, when he shall come in such a manner as this,
to render vengeance: then shall the chamber door be shut, and it will be too
late for the foolish Virgins to cry, Lord, Lord, open to us. Mat. 25.11, 12.

Hence then we are to note.

That howsoever in this life the Lord shows himself a miracle of patience,
suffering infinite and innumerable indignities and dishonors to be offered, both
to himself and his servants, and howsoever the wicked enemies of his Church
and Gospel, do no more fear his threats in the word, then the arrow that a
scarcrow threatens to shoot, yet when this day shall come, they shall find it
verified in him, That patience wounded, becomes fury: Seneca.
so that the more he has endured and suffered at their hands in this life, the
more wrath and fury shall break forth against them in this day. This then is
the day of the Lords wrath and vengeance, and this is it that Gods children are
to expect, and to rest in hope of. They are not to hope and expect, that God
will in this world be avenged of their enemies, seem they never so desperate*
and incurable: but thus ought every good Christian to stand affected toward
their persecutors and wickedst enemies, to desire their repentance in this
life, and to rest satisfied with that vengeance, that this Judge will be sure
(if they repent not) in that day to render unto them. And surely they do not
believe the truth of this Gospel as they ought to do, that are their own
auengers, and will not wait this day of the Lord; for if they did not either
think, that Christ will not at all revenge their wrongs, or that he will not
do it so thoroughly and effectually, as their enemies deserve, or that themselves
were more wise and able to avenge their cause then Christ, they would not be so
hasty and headie as they are, in revenging their own wrongs. But such must
know, that the less patience and faith they have showed in those persecutions
and wrongs, which have bin offered unto them, and the more they have broken
forth into revenge of their own quarrels, the more they have cut off from
themselves the comfort of this doctrine: for in so doing, they have done so
much as lies in them, to prevent the Lords vengeance upon their enemies, and to
pull it upon their own heads in this day, insomuch as they have more cause to
fear, that the Lord will come in flaming fire to be avenged of them, rather
then their enemies, seeing they in revenging themselves upon their enemies
contrary to Gods will, have themselves as much provoked God, as their enemies
have in wronging them; so that thou can not do thine enemy a greater
pleasure, then to avenge thy self upon him: for though thou may in this day
see the Lord avenged of him, for the wrongs he has done thee, yet what comfort
will that be to thee, when thou have cause to fear, that thine enemy also
shall see the Lord avenged upon thee, for revenging thy self upon him. If
Christians in their hot, and unchristian blood, would but meditate of this, it
could not but be a strong bridle and curb unto many violent and outrageous
distempers, that they use to break forth into, in the wrongs and injuries,
that are offered unto them, wherein commonly (through the just judgment of God)
they often discover the very same corruption and wickedness, which they revenge
in their enemy, to be in a greater measure in themselves, and in the same
kind in a higher degree, do sin both against God and their enemy. Is any
thing more common, then for men and women, yea Christians, yea special
professors of the Gospel, in revenging the pride, the malice, the disdain,
the contumelious speeches, furious acts and deeds of others, to discover
greater pride, malice, disdain, contumely and fury in their own words and
deeds? What? Can such comfort themselves, in the consideration of this coming
of Christ to render vengeance, to them that have wronged them, when themselves
by this occasion have showed themselves, as deep offenders against God and
their enemy in the same sin? Such only then can reap comfort to themselves,
in Christ's coming to render vengeance, unto whom that praise is due, which the
Apostle here gives to these Thessalonians. i. Such as manifest patience and
faith in all their persecutions and afflictions. And if those can have no
comfort herein, which shall through impatiencie and infidelity revenge evident
wrongs and injuries; what comfort can they have, that revenge themselves upon
their neighbors for imaginary and conceited wrongs, for doing no more then
they may do, yea many times for doing that which they ought to do, and which
they should have answered to God if they had not done.

This vengeance is set forth and declared more specially.

1. By the Subject. 2. By the Matter. 3. By the Place.
The Subject of this vengeance are the Persons upon whom the Lord will execute
the same in that day; and they are such as know not God, or such as obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Concerning the first: God is in himself of an
infinite and incomprehensible majesty, and therefore cannot perfectly be
known of Men or Angels. See to this end 1 King. 8.27. Job 11.7. Exodus 33.20.
Ioh. 1.18. and 5.37. and 6.46. yet he has in some degree manifested and made
known himself in his works, wherein men if they were not more brutish then
horse or mule, might clearly behold and see, That God is an infinite majesty,
almighty, all-sufficient, the Creator and supreme Governor of the whole world,
him, in and through whom they live and breath and have their being, the author
and fountain of all goodness, most worthy of all honor, obedience, and love:
That he is a God that loves Religion, truth, honesty, humility, justice,
mercy, charity, loyalty, chastity, sobriety, and such like other virtues in
men, and will bless men for the same: That he hates and detesteth in men, all
profanesse, falsehood, dishonestie, pride, injustice, cruelty, oppression,
disloyalty, uncleanness, drunkenesse, and such like vices, and will curse all
them that are given unto them: And that he has provided Heaven, a place of
everlasting happiness, for those that shall do his will; and Hell, a place of
everlasting torment, for them which shall offend him. To omit many other
matters concerning God, which are clearly revealed in his works, even to the
senses of men that have the use of reason, and do not wilfully shut their eyes
against the light: what savage and brute creatures are all those, that in the
midst of these means, have no knowledge of God at all? That this God should be
as a stranger unto them, yea as one that they had never heard of; that they
should have no sense or apprehension of his Majesty, Power, and goodness,
when all their senses are daily and hourly filled with the same; that they
should live and delight in those sins, which the very light of their
Consciences tell them are displeasing to God, and yet be no more afraid of God
therefore, then of a painted Bear or Lion. Were not that a strange child,
that being brought up from a tender one in the house of his Parents, being fed
and clothed by them, and ever receiving from them all the kindnesses that
Parents can yield unto a Child, and yet this Child should not so much as know
them, or look upon them, but demean himself unto them, as unto mere
strangers, such as he had never seen nor heard of, passing by them without so
much, as looking toward them, respecting the servants and dogs in the house
more then them, delighting most in that which he knows will vex and anger
them, hating their presence, and no more affected with any good received from
them, then with a straw or rush; what a monster of children would every one
judge this to be? Were thou the Father or Mother of such a Child, what would
thou do? Verily, such children are most of us unto our God. We live in this
world, which is the house of our God, yea in his Church, which is his
Presence Chamber, no earthly Father can possibly show more kindness to his
Child, then our heavenly Father does unto us, nor can so much by his kindness
manifest himself to be a Father as God does unto us, and unto all mankind: and
yet for all this, we live as though we knew him not, we never look after him
nor regard him, we are no more delighted with his presence, affected with his
kindness, nor more studious to please him, no more fearful to displease him,
then if he were no body, or worse then the worst of all creatures, as if he
were one that we never received, nor expected the least good at his hands, or
one that we would not be any ways beholden unto though we might; the more he
offers us means to know his Majesty, Power, Goodness, the more we shut our
eyes against them, pleasing and delighting our selves in our ignorance, as a
matter of great advantage unto us. This is the condition and estate of the
greater part of the world, if you look into their lives and conuersations,
they are as it were without God in the world, as men that had not the least
sense or apprehension of a God, Ephesians. 2.12.
or had never heard of him, or that all that they had heard of him were but
fables. Is it any marvel then, if the Lord having showed himself so kind and
loving a Father unto all mankind, shall be severely avenged of such, as in the
midst of so many means will not know him? Oh let the consideration of this
move every one of us, to bewail our ignorance, and to seek after the
knowledge of God above all things. For if we will not know him in his goodness
in this life, we shall feel him in his wrath in another life. Ignorance of God
in this day of Doom will be no plea for us; for it shall be one of the
Articles of condemnation against us, that we know not God.

The second sort of Persons, that Christ will come in flaming fire to be
avenged of, are such as obey not his Gospel. i. such as will not accept of
those conditions of Salvation that are offered in the Gospel. In the Gospel
everlasting Salvation is offered to all sinners, that will believe in Christ,
forsake their sins, and yield obedience to the Ordinances of Jesus Christ,
set down in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles; when therefore, God
shall out of his word, convince our consciences that we are sinners, and have
offended his Majesty by our sins, and when God shall offer to be reconciled
unto us, to pardon and forgive our sins, to save our souls from Hell, yea to
bestow everlasting happiness in Heaven upon us, if so be we will forsake our
sins, acknowledge Christ Jesus, for our Lord and Redeemer, and be subject to
his discipline; when God shall send to this end, his Ministers, Messengers, and
Ambassadors, to offer unto us these conditions, yea to entreat and beseech the
acceptance of this Grace, and yet we will not accept of them, we will not have
Christ Jesus to reign and rule over us, we will not (whatsoever follow upon
it) forsake such and such sins, but whether God will save, or not save us, we
are resolved upon our own courses, and if we may not be saved without any such
conditions, we will not be beholding to God for our Salvation, but will put it
to the adventure, either to have it upon what conditions we our selves please,
or go without it: this is to disobey the Gospel, and to trample the blood of
the new Testament under our feet: this is directly to sin against Christ Jesus;
and therefore such of us can expect no other Doom from Christ at that day, but
fearful vengeance. For upon whom should he avenge himself, if not upon them,
which cannot content themselves to have sinned against God, and so to have
provoked him, but despise the means of his grace and favor when they are
offered, purposing still to continue in their sins, whatsoever come of it.
This is the fearful sin of many that live in the Church of God, and profess
themselves Christians, yea and that look to be saved by the blood of Christ,
who notwithstanding live and delight (and so purpose to do) in such sins, as
they know are forbidden in the Gospel: they can be content, yea they look for
that Salvation by Christ, which is promised in the Gospel, and that the
Covenant on Christ's part should be performed unto them, but they are resolved
not to keep any Covenant on their own part. And those for the most part that
most disobey the Gospel, and that show most contempt to the Ministry and
dispensation thereof, and are the greatest enemies that may be to the
principal Ordinance thereof, do most presume of that Salvation which therein
is offered. But let us know that it is not a naked profession of the Gospel, or
a bare belief that can pacify the wrath of this Judge in that day, but it
must be such a profession and belief, as manifests it self in obedience
unto the Gospel. If it were possible for a man (as it is not) truly to
profess, and unfeignedly believe the Gospel, without obeying of it, yet that
shall not save him, he must obey it also. The Gospel contains not matter of
knowledge and Faith only, but of practice also: and therefore so many as
desire to be free from the vengeance and fury of this Judge, had need in that
regard to be acquainted with the Gospel and all the Ordinances thereof: (for
how can they obey that which they know not?) and they had need with all
diligence and care to be conversant in the reading and hearing of the writings
of the Evangelists and Apostles, of Moses and the Prophets, for they are they,
which testify of this Gospel, and in them is fully and most clearly
declared, what manner of obedience is to be performed thereunto: Also the word
here translated, to obey, originally signifies, to hearken unto, which is when
we set our selves diligently to hear a matter, that in our own estimation,
much concerns us to know, either for the procuring of some special good unto
us, or the avoiding of some feared evil, and so it is translated by the best
Interpreters, and that neither unfitly, nor disagreeing in substance from our
own translation. For they can never be said to obey the Gospel, that do not
hearken unto the same, especially when God by his public Ministers, as it
were his Ambassadors and Heralds, proclaims the same in their Assemblies; and
they which have the grace to hearken after the same as they ought to do, cannot
but do their best endeavor, to obey the same. Fearful then must their estate
needs be in this day, that are so far from, either obeying or harkening unto
the Gospel, that of all other Persons, they most hate and despise them which
are Messengers of the same, as though their feet, yea and their tongues were
accursed, that bring them any tidings thereof.

This Gospel is here called the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is not
(beloved) our own Gospel which we preach unto you, and call you unto the
obedience thereof: but it is the Gospel of our Lord and our Savior, and that
which we must submit and subject our selves unto, if we look for Salvation
from him. When the Gospel requires any thing at your hands, which shall any
ways cross your corrupt desires, you are presently offended, and incensed
against us, that are the poor Ministers thereof, as if it were our own
Gospel, and the law of our own will which we propound unto you. But know you
this, whosoever you are, that it is Christ Jesus our Savior, that in our
Persons you are offended withal, and against whom you rebel, in despising
that Gospel we teach unto you: know you also that in your obedience and
subjection to that Gospel, which we preach unto you, you are not subject and
obedient unto us, but (except you be reprobates) unto your own Lord and
Savior, who requires only this obedience at your hands, tying the
everlasting salvation of your Souls, and the merits of his passion thereunto.

To conclude this point then: Seeing that Christ will come in flaming fire, to
be avenged of them that shall not obey his Gospel, let the terror of that fire
make us run through water and fire, rather then disobey the same. And though
the Devil and Antichrist, and all his accursed imps and limbs, should come in
flaming fire against us for obeying this Gospel, yet let us assure our selves,
that it will be more easy for us a thousand times, to fry in their flames,
then to burn in this. The fires that they kindle, do soon go out; and in the
greatest heat and sense of them, men have received that comfort, that they have
sung for joy: but this fire shall never be quenched, and he that feels but the
least degree of the heat thereof, is not capable of the least comfort, but in
it there shall be ever howling and crying, and gnashing of teeth. And therefore
great folly it is, to leap out of the one fire into the other; far greater then
if a man, to avoid a shower of rain, should plunge himself into a
whirlepoole; or for fear of being scalded in a vessel of lukewarm water,
should leap into a furnace of boiling lead.

VERSE. 9. Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition --
HItherto of the Persons, upon whom Christ will be avenged in this great day.
The matter of his vengeance follows, which is everlasting destruction or
perdition, that is, the utter ruin and confusion of the Parties. This is the
extremest revenge, when one seeks after the utter perdition and overthrow of
them whom he hates. Many have endured much evil at the hands of auengers, and
yet in time have recovered themselves again, and held up their heads: but he
that falls into the hands of this auenger, shall never be able to hold up his
head again: for he breathes after the utter ruin and overthrow of the
creature, and he is able to effect the same, and therefore will bring it to
pass. And yet if this perdition and destruction were temporary, if in the
same, a man might perish, as the beast does, it were the less: but this is an
everlasting perdition, wherein a man shall be for ever and ever in destroying,
and never be destroyed; for ever and ever dying, and never dead; for ever and
ever burning, and never burned. What a horrible condition is this? How would
this (if we had grace to believe it) be as a goade in our sides, to force us to
seek after the knowledge of God, and to yield all possible obedience to the
Gospel? The fear of hanging, burning etc, (though they be pains that last
but a moment in comparison) is powerful to restrain many a lewd and wicked
nature, from murder, theft, treason, witchcraft etc: but alas, if it were
possible for a man, to be hanged or burned a thousand times one after another,
all these deaths would be nothing to this destruction. Do thou then believe
the truth of this which the Apostle here affirms? If thou do not, thou art no
Christian, but a very Infidel: if thou do believe it, how comes it to pass
that thou seek no more after the knowledge of God? yea that thou hate to
know God, and affectest to be ignorant of him? How comes it to pass that
thou live in disobedience of the Gospel, and resoluest so to do? Though
thou covet thy neighbors Ox and his sheep, yet thou will not steal them;
though thou malice and hate thy neighbor to the death, yet thou will not
murder him, because thou perswadest thy self that thou shall be hanged for
it, if thou do so; and though there may be some possibility of concealing the
matter, or of flying from the Judge, yet thou will not put it to the adventure.
Thou say thou beleeuest, that Christ at the latter day will come in flaming
fire, to punish with everlasting perdition, those which know not God, and which
obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and yet thou art ignorant of God, and
despisest the Gospel, which plainly manifests, that thou esteemest of this
which the Apostle here affirms, as an old wives fable, whatsoever thou
pretendest to the contrary, and therefore that thou art but a masked Infidel.
But they that will not believe this doctrine, shall one day, to their eternal
horror, feel the truth of it. Let so many of us, as fear the Lord, and
tremble at his word, often meditate of this: If a man should be condemned to
lie for a thousand years together upon a soft fether-bed, and during all that
time should hear nothing, but the sweetest music that may be, yet he would
choose rather to dye a dogs death, then to endure the wearisomnesse thereof:
how shall a man then bear this Judgment, to lie in the burning lake of Gods
wrath, in unspeakable torment, not for a thousand years, but for ever and
ever? If an hour in torment seem a year, how long will this hour seem,
that shall never have end? But when a man has endured it, as many thousands of
years, as there be stars in the heaven, or drops of water in the Sea, yet he
shall be no more near his end, then he was at the very first moment of his
torment. Those, that are but common and indifferent wise men amongst us, use to
dislike and condemn the courses of those men's lives, (how jolly and pleasant
soever they be in the same) whereby they hazard and ruinate their estates, and
follow desperate and break-neck courses, by means whereof, their liberties and
lives are endangered: oh that any Christians then should be so brutish and
without understanding, as to approve either in themselves or others, those
ways and courses, that directly lead a man, body and soul to this eternal
ruin.

-- from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power.
The third Argument, whereby he amplifieth the revenge aforesaid, is from the
place wherein they which know not God, nor obey the Gospel, shall suffer
eternal destruction, which is here described by the privation of Gods
presence, and of the glory of his power. The meaning whereof is thus much. That
they shall for ever and ever be tormented in such a place, where they shall be
ever removed from the gracious presence of God, and shall never behold that
glorious power of his, which he manifests in the eternal glorifying and
blessing of his Saints in heaven: such shall be the detestation and hatred that
the Lord shall bear toward them, that he will not endure them to abide in his
presence, but will shut them up in eternal darkness, where the light of his
gracious countenance, and his saving power (which is the glory of his power)
shall never shine unto them; so that the Lord will never look after them,
never come unto them, never so much as cast his eye toward them, nor the place
where they are: nor show the least part of his glorious power in that place, to
the mitigating of their torment, but will leave them altogether to the power of
the Devil, and to the comfortless presence of damned Spirits, where they
shall see nothing, but horror and confusion, nor hear any thing, but howling
and crying and gnashing of teeth, without the least hope of any comfort from
God, out of whose presence, they are for ever and ever excluded and thrust out.
What a fearful vengeance is this, that Christ in that day will execute upon
the wicked persons above described? How should the consideration of this,
restrain all good Christians from revenging their own quarrels upon the
enemies of the Gospel, though they had never so much power to do the same? For
can a Christian heart desire a greater vengeance then this, upon any how wicked
soever, and what wrongs soever they had done them? If God should give up our
enemies into our own hands to do with them what we would, would we if we
could, be more avenged of them, then Christ will be for our sake? Certainly it
is not possible for the most malicious curser and banner that ever was, to
desire a greater vengeance then this. How wonderful malicious then are all
such, as profess that they believe thus much, and yet think it not enough,
unless they also may add something more unto this vengeance? It is a world to
see how Christians upon every trifling occasion, are ready to fly at the faces
of them which trespass against them, and against the express will of God, to
revenge their own causes, as though either they did not believe, that Christ
would execute any such vengeance upon them, or that if he would, yet that it
were not vengeance enough for any trespass committed against their persons.
Whenever therefore any enemies of the Gospel, shall offer wrong unto us in
words or deeds, let us leave the revenge to this Judge, who will either in this
life make them repent it, (yea more repent it then we could make them, though
we had power to hang them for it) or else he will make them eternally to rue it
in the world to come which is a greater vengeance, then the most spiteful and
malicious stomach that ever was (if he knew or believed what it was) could
wish unto him, he hates to the death. If a man for some petty trifling wrong
done unto any of us, should by the Magistrate be cast into prison for our sake,
there to be reserved till the general Assizes, then to be hanged without any
hope of pardon, except he yielded full satisfaction unto us, as much every way
as we would require, would not this punishment content us? Would we not (if we
had any good nature in us) be grieved that he should for our cause suffer so
much? Were we not monstrously malicious, if notwithstanding all this, we should
desire to be farther avenged of him, by reuiling and beating him in the prison,
by misvsing him in his wife, children, goods, and good name, all that we can?
There is not (beloved) any man, that does offer us the least wrong, but Christ
our Lord, does thereupon bind him by stronger bonds, then if he were in
fetters or stocks, to be forth coming at the great day of Doom, and then
purposes to be revenged on him, in the extremest manner, even with eternal
destruction, from the presence of his face, except he truly and unfeignedly
repent. And is not this enough to content us? Are our hearts so full of rancor
and spite, that notwithstanding that we know and believe thus much, yet we
cannot be quiet in our minds, except we our selves also fly upon him that
has wronged us, euilly entreating him in words and deeds? Should it not rather
pity us, to consider, that for our sake, and for that he has done to us, he
should be in danger, to be eternally damned in Hell? Let this malice be far
from all Christian hearts, and that it may be far from ours, let us often
meditate upon this first end of Christ's coming to judgment.

VERSE. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
wonderful in all them that believe --
IN these words are contained the second end of Christ's coming to judgment,
which is the glorifying of his Saints. The violence of his rage and fury
against the wicked, does not make him forget his grace and love to the godly,
but the more he shall in that day manifest his wrath and fury against the one,
the more shall his wonderful grace and love break forth toward the other.

To be glorified in his Saints, and to be made wonderful in them that believe,
is in such a manner to glorify them, that all the world shall wonder and be
astonished at that unspeakable glory, wherewith he will glorify them, and in
their glory, glorify himself But what! Will not Christ also be glorified and
made wonderful in the damnation of the wicked? Yes, out of all question, the
Lord shall reap wonderful glory in the vengeance that he shall execute upon
them. The wrath of Christ shall be a wonderful wrath, the torments and
judgments inflicted upon them shall be wonderful; men will then wonder, and
be astonished with wondering, that that God, who in this life has showed
himself so patient and gentle unto sinners, should be so exceedingly wroth
with them: the wicked themselves will wonder at his fury, and happily at their
own graceless folly, in despising the means of their own Salvation: the
godly shall wonder at the most glorious justice of God, and magnify him for
the same: yea the confusion of the wicked in this day, shall be one part of
that glory whereby the Lord will be made wonderful in his own Saints. For,
for their sake, and the wrongs that they have offered unto them, shall their
judgment be the heavier; but there will be incomparable more cause of
glorifying God, and of wondering at the glory of his Majesty in the Salvation
of believers: for alas, the wicked in that day, shall have but their deserts:
but this is the wonder of wonders, that the Lord should bestow such infinite
and exceeding glory, upon those that believe, without the least merit on their
part: yea when on their own part, they have deserved the same vengeance, that
is inflicted upon the reprobate. What a glory must this needs be unto Christ?
How shall it fill the mouths of all the Saints and Angels in heaven with the
praises of this God? How shall the Saints seeing their own glory, and the
glory one of another, wonder at their own glory, wonder at the glory one of
another, and wonder at the incomprehensible love of God toward them therein?
How shall the Potentates and great Princes of the earth, that have despised and
trampled under their feet in this world, the poor servants of Christ, now
wonder at their glory? How shall all the Devils and damned reprobates, to their
greater torment, wonder and be amassed thereat? Oh how wonderful shall the Lord
be in this day, to all the world, in that glory, which then he will bestow upon
his despised and contemned Servants.

Howsoever then the Lord in this world, does glorify himself by many means,
howsoever he is glorious and wonderful, not only in the creation of the
world, but also in the general and particular government thereof: yet in this
day, he will exceed in glorifying himself, in and by that special glory,
that he will then bestow upon his servants. All his glory shall be their glory,
and he will be made glorious and wonderful, by the reflectio^ of that wonderful
glory which in that day he will bestow upon them.

But what Persons are they that Christ will be glorified and made wonderful
in? Saints and believers: Saints and believers are all one; A man cannot be a
Saint, that is not a true believer: and he does not truly believe, who does
not so believe, as that upon the same he become a Saint. A Saint then is he,
who even in this life forsakes his sins, and endeavors to serve and please
God, according to his own will revealed in the Gospel; To believe, is in that
effectual manner, to know and give credit unto the doctrine of the Gospel,
and the promises thereof, as that we are willing to yield all obedience therein
required, to God for Christ's sake; To believe, is it that makes a Saint; To be
a Saint, Act. 15.9. Iam. 2.^4.18.
manifests that a man believes; That belief is no belief that makes not a
Saint; That Saint is a Devil that does not believe. Will any of us then
(beloved) be assured, whether in that great day, we shall be amongst the number
of them that Christ will be glorified in: we must examine our selves, whether
we be Saints and believers, whether we be believing Saints, and holy believers;
do we give no credit to the Gospel? Do we wilfully disobey the same? Do we
delight in profaneness, and such like sins, contrary to the doctrine of the
Gospel? Cannot the voice of Christ in the Gospel, either by threatenings or
promises, restrain us from unholy and vn-saintlike courses, from our
prophanations of the Sabbath, our blaspheming, drunkenness, scurrilitie,
maliciousness? etc. Are we scorners and deriders of them that refrain from
our over profane courses? Do we despise and hate and persecute, as much as
lies in us, the most effectual means whereby men become Saints and
believers? If we be such, (as it is to be feared that some of us are little
better then such) the Devils and damned wretches in hell, have as much cause as
we, to hope that Christ will be glorified and made wonderful in them; Neither
can we (so long as we remain such) expect that the Lord in this day, should
any otherwise be glorified, and made wonderful in us, then in the Devil, and
all reprobate persons.

This doctrine being believed, will be a means of much comfort to the
afflicted and persecuted Saints of God; It is a matter of great humiliation
unto them in such times of persecution, to consider how the name of God is
dishonored and profaned by the Enemies of the Gospel, and how they insult
and triumph over Christ, and his holy ordinances; It grieves their souls and
humbles them often, unto the very dust, that Christ will no more show himself
in his own causes. Also, the consideration of their own weaknesses and
infirmities, which in such times they cannot hide, (whereby they are often a
reproach and dishonor to Jesus Christ, and a means of triumph and glory to the
enemies of Christ) does much dismay them; but the more Christ suffers himself
to be reproched, and dishonored in his Saints in this life, and the more the
wicked do glory and triumph over their baseness and infirmities, the more will
he to the wonderment of all the world glorify them, and glorify himself in
them; that which he withholds in this life, he will pay with infinite usury
and advantage in this day, if we can patiently wait until then. And thus much
of the description of the day of Doom, into which the Apostle for the further
consolation of this persecuted Church did digress.

-- Because our testimony was believed of you in that day.
Here the Apostle returns again to that point, which a little he digressed
from: for having in the beginning of the seventh verse, affirmed thus much in
effect; That it was righteous with God, that they which were molested and
troubled by wicked men for the Gospels sake in this life, should rest with the
Evangelists and Apostles in the life to come; he here renders a reason
thereof; Because our testimony was believed of you in that day. By their
testimony, he means the doctrine of the Gospel which they preached, the
substance where of, is contained in their writings. This is it they testified
of, and the testimony they give thereof, ought to be the ground and foundation
of every Christians belief. There is no other doctrine of Salvation, that a
Christian ought to believe, but what the Apostles and Evangelists give
testimony of; That which has not their tongue, or hand, or seal at it, does
not appertain to the Christian Faith: yea, if our belief of the principal
parts of the Gospel, be grounded only upon custom, hearsay, or tradition
from our Ancestors, and not upon their testimony, it is but a fancy and no
sound belief, no, though we should give our bodies to the fire, to be burned
for the same.

Would we then be sure (whatsoever betide us in this life) to rest after this
life, for ever and ever with the Apostles, and be partakers with them in that
glorious estate, that we persuade our selves they are in? Let us beleeeue their
testimony, and so far forth as we believe the same, one may be assured to
rest with them, and the more disquietnesse and restlesnesse, we endure in this
life for believing them, the more we may secure our selves after this life to
rest with them: little hope can they have to enter into this rest, whose
greatest hope, lies in the belief of that the Apostles never gave any
testimony unto. The superstitious ignorant Papist looks to rest with the
Apostles, for going on Pilgrimage, for his worshipping of Saints and Angels,
for his praying unto our Lady, for his whipping of himself, for his praying
for the dead, for forbearing to eat flesh upon Fridayes and Saturdayes, and
such like will worship; whose testimony do they believe herein? Not the
Evangelists and Apostles; They no where give any testimony unto any such
matters, C^l. 2.20.21.22.23.16. Mat. 15.9.
but rather testify against them; The like may be said of others, who though
in words they profess, that they believe the doctrine of the Apostles, yet in
their deeds they give the lie thereunto, so living, as if that which the
Apostles have preached or written, were but so many fables; To go no further,
we have heard the Apostle testify in this very place, That in the latter day,
Christ will come in flaming fire to render vengeance unto them that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ; would we not, if we did believe
this testimony, strive by all means to attain unto the knowledge of God, and
to yield all due obedience to the Gospel? Would we please our selves (as we
do) in ignorance of God, and purposely continue in disobedience and rebellion
against the Gospel, if we did believe this testimony? It is not possible;
Well, we must know, that we must never look to enter into rest, with the
Apostles, so long as in this manner we shall refuse to believe their
testimony. And thus much of the second part of the Apostles Consolation.

VERSE. 11. Wherefore we also pray always for you --
THe third part of the Apostles consolation follows, wherein; First, he
certifieth this Church, that He, and Siluanus, and Timothy do always pray
for them; i. do daily in their ordinary and extraordinary prayers remember
their afflicted state unto the Lord, and become humble and incessant suitors
and suppliants unto Christ Jesus for them. And was not this (think we) matter
of great comfort unto them, that such Worthies as these, so deep in grace and
favor with God, should so take their afflictions to heart, that they should
become daily, and continual petitioners unto God for them, never giving the
Lord any rest, until he should hear them and grant their requests? If poor
oppressed subjects, that should endure daily wrongs and molestations from great
men, should be assuredly certified of this, that some special Favorites about
the King, did take notice of the wrongs, and injuries that were offered unto
them, and did daily solicit the King to relieve them, would it not be a great
matter of comfort unto them? would they not conceive hope, that at length they
should have some remedy against their oppressors? Much more might these poor
persecuted Saints in this Church comfort and hearten themselves in the midst of
all their misery, to consider that they had such continually to supplicate for
them, who could prevail as much with God, as if Noah, Daniel, and Job should
have stood up, and have entreated the Lord in their behalf, especially seeing
they could not be ignorant, Iam. 5.16.
but that the prayers of men so faithful, must needs prevail exceedingly with
God.

First in that Paul (to the end that he might comfort them) certifieth them
that he prays for them; it shows that himself was persuaded, that they
were the better for his prayers, and that he assured himself, that they so
esteemed themselves to be. Though therefore it should be far from Christians,
to be proud and conceited of their prayers, yet we cannot pray either for our
selves or others with that earnestness and feruencie of spirit that we ought,
except we esteem our prayers certain and sure instruments of blessings unto
others. And this should be the solace and joy of every poor Christian soul,
that thirsts after the good and welfare of his neighbor, that though we be
not able to do them that we love and wish well unto, any other good, yet we may
pray for them, and in praying for them, we shall do them good worthy thanks.
Let us further learn, not only to esteem well of our own prayers for
others, but of the prayers of others for our selves: let us make no question
but that we fare the better for the weakest prayers, that proceed from a
faithful and good heart; let their hands be dear and precious unto us, that
are lifted up unto God for us. We dearly affect (if we have any good nature in
us) those which in our necessities will speak a good word for us to our
Superiors upon Earth: how dear then should they be unto us, that in our
misery speak unto God in our behalf?

Secondly, let no man think himself too good to pray and that continually for
the poor distressed Saints of God. Were thou as good as Paul or Peter, as
great as Solomon or David, it will become thee to beg at the Throne of Gods
grace for thy poor brethren; yea the better thou art, and the worthier in the
eyes of God and man, the better will this duty become thee, and the more
fitting it will be for thee to perform the same. For the more that a man is in
grace and favor with God, the more he ought to be humbled with the sense of
his brothers wants, and should the more use that interest which he has with
God for their relief. And as no man ought to think himself too good to pray
for his brethren, though he were as good as Paul himself; so ought none, how
holy soever, think themselves too good to be prayed for. What a worthy Church
was this? How did Paul magnify it? yet, it stood in need of continual
prayers, and Paul for their comfort tells them, that he does pray continually
for them, whereby he declares, that they desired the same; yea, Christians the
better they are, the more they see their own wants, and the need of the
prayers of others. How often does Paul himself beg the prayers of the poor
Saints for himself? See for this end Romans 15.30, 31. and the third Chap of
this Epistle and the third verse; of which matter I shall have more fit
occasion to entreat upon that place.

Thirdly, all Christians (after the example of Paul in this place) should in
all their prayers be in a special manner mindful of those Christians, that
are under the cross, whether by persecution, or any other tribulations, as
this Church was at this instant. Oh beloved, we should ever carry them in our
bowels and hearts, and never come into Gods presence, but we should have them
in our mouths, and commend their estate unto God. For no persons are in so
great danger as they, none feel the want of our prayers so much as they, none
reap so much fruit and comfort by our prayers, as they. Little know we (beloved)
how much good we may do them by our prayers. Though we cannot by our prayers
pull down visible and sensible vengeance, upon the heads of their persecutors,
though we cannot by means of them, open the prison gates, and shake off their
fetters, or turn the hearts of their enemies and them that molest them, yet
some blessing or other we may be assured to procure unto them. For either the
Lord, by this means will in his good time remove the cross, or mitigate it,
or give comfort in it, or strength and patience to bear it, or not suffer them
to fall so grievously under it, or bestow some better grace upon them, then
that which the cross depriueth them of; we may presume, that some way or
other, they shall fare the better for our prayers, and that they shall never
return unto us in vain. And therefore, if there be any bowels of mercy and
compassion in us, toward them that are in distress, it should move us ever to
remember them unto God, never to go to God in prayer, but to carry a mind with
us deeply possessed with their miseries, that the Lord may see it, and even in
pity and compassion toward us, may show some pity to them, as it is his
nature so to do.

Fourthly, it is the duty of Christians, not only to observe a constant and
perpetual course in prayer daily, but in those prayers, not to remember our
selves only, but our brethren also; and in those prayers which we make, we
must not look to receive the grace, either upon our first asking, or for once
asking; no, though our prayers, were never so faithful and fervent, and though
we were never so great in Gods favor: but we must wait the Lords leisure, and
crave again and again; yea continually, for that grace which we desire,
either for our selves or others, and never cease praying until we have
obtained it, or that the Lord has evidently declared, that it is not his will
to grant it unto us: and though for many weeks and months, and years
together, we have bin suitors unto the Lord, and given all attendance at the
gate of his mercy; though we have daily renewed our suite, and continually put
the Lord in remembrance thereof; though we have others also (were they Prophets
and Apostles) daily for many years together suing for us, and yet we have
received no answer from God, yet so long as God does not flatly deny our
request, and does not forbid us to make the same, let us not think much to
wait the Lords leisure, but let us still in hope daily renew our suits unto
him, for in so doing, we shall be sure in the end to be no loosers, by waiting
the good pleasure of God.

-- That our Lord would make you worthy this Calling.
Secondly, for the further comfort of this Church, he sets down the
special matter and contents of his prayers, containing 3 petitions.

The first petition, (according to the true meaning thereof) is this, That as
the Lord had vouchsafed them this honorable Calling to be Christians, and had
given them grace, even to suffer for Christ, and therein given them a pledge of
their eternal glory with Christ: so it would please the Lord to direct them,
and in that mannar to be present with them, especially in these times of trial
and persecution, that they may approve and show themselves before God and men,
to be worthy Christians, and that they may not in word or deed, through
frailty and infirmity, do any thing that may blemish and stain their
profession, or that may be unbeseeming or unworthy the name of Christians. He
does not then so much entreat the Lord, to free them from trouble and
persecution, and to deliver them from their enemies, as that they may acquit
and behave themselves worthily and valiantly, as it becomes the soldiers of
Jesus Christ. A prayer very necessary for such times and persons. Our
experience will serve to teach us, how many Christians in time of peace and
prosperity, have made a worthy and glorious profession, which in time of
persecution and troubles have discovered much unworthiness; yea many for a
good time, have in the midst of many trials showed themselves worthy
Confessors, who yet in the end have fallen grievously, and have therein
exceedingly blemished their profession. It is not therefore sufficient for men
to be Christians, but they must endeavor to be worthy of that Calling, that is,
to be worthy Christians.

The worthiness of a Christian consists in these points.

1. When he does not satisfy himself with a verbal profession of
Christianity (as most Christians use to do) but is a Christian in practice,
Iam. 1.26. and 2.14.18.
and when he strives that his practice does rather exceed his profession, then
come short of the same, and that in the eyes of the very enemies and
persecutors of the Gospel.

2. When a man prizeth this Calling above all other Callings, honors and
dignities whatsoever, making no reckoning or account of them, when they any
ways cross or disgrace this, but with Paul counting all things loss for this
gain, more respecting his duty to Christ, then to Father, Mother, Wife, or
Children. This is to be a worthy Christian, especially when he can manifest
this affection in the midst of persecution.

3. When men strive after perfection in Christianity, and are not content to
be half Christians, like Agrippa, Act: 26* 29.
contenting themselves with a mediocritie and indifferency in Religion, but
every day striving to grow and increase in this Calling, and so much the more
to strive to grow and increase, by how much the more the enemies of the Gospel
shall go about to diminish and decrease the power of godliness in them, when
in despite of all Gods enemies, they labor every day to be better Christians
then other, never thinking that they are come to a perfection in Christianity.

4. When Christians labor after all things, that may grace and honor their
Calling, and above all things avoid those things which may blemish and stain
the same, when men so live, that their Religion does not only credit them, but
they credit it.

5. To esteem it their glory and honor, to suffer for it, and to rejoice
therein, as the Apostles did, and in that regard, the more they are molested
and persecuted for it, the more to cleave unto it, to grow and increase in it,
to shine by it, and by and in all the graces that accompany it, Act. 7.
as Steven did.

6. The more worthy they have showed themselves, the more to give the glory
unto God, and to acknowledge themselves the more indebted unto him, for their
very worthiness; for it is that, makes men worthy this Calling, as appears by
this prayer, and the more worthy he makes us, the more in our selves we should
be humbled, that of our selves we should be so unworthy.

For these and such like properties does the Apostle pray in this petition,
which Grace, whosoever in time of persecution shall obtain from God, he shall
thereby more vex, disquiet, plague, torment, and confound the enemies of the
Gospel which persecute him, then by any bodily revenge whatsoever. If the Lord
should deliver our wicked enemies into our hands to do with them what we list,
if we should make them our villains and slaves, and put them to the basest
services and uses that might be, though it might be a means the more to humble
them, yet nothing in this life can so much torment and torture them, as when
the Christians that are under their hands, do in the manner aforesaid, worthily
behave themselves, and as becomes them that are called to be Servants of
Jesus Christ. And on the contrary side, if Christians should set themselves to
do the enemies of God the greatest pleasure they can, and to minister unto them
matter of greatest triumph and glory unto them, and that which may most flesh
them in their wickedness, and hearten them in all their lewd and wicked courses;
they cannot effect it by any means so soon, as by showing themselves, whilst
they are under their hands, unworthy Christians: for this is the top and height
of all their desires, to make the Servants of Christ as vile and unworthy
beasts as themselves. That we may therefore obtain this Grace at Gods hands,
for our selves and others, we must pray for it, yea continually pray for it, as
the Apostle does, especially in time of persecution.

-- And that he may fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness.
The two other petitions following, concern the means whereby the Lord makes
them, and all other Christians worthy of that Calling.

This then is the second petition, that God would fulfill or accomplish in them
the good pleasure of his goodness. 1. That to the end they might show themselves
worthy to be called Christians, he prays, That the Lord would never forsake
them nor leave them, especially in these times of trial, but as hitherto in
his infinite goodness, he had showed himself a loving God unto them, so he
would continue to manifest more and more his love and good pleasure toward
them, not giving over the work of his saving grace in them, until he had
fully accomplished the same, and that they had attained (through the midst of
all temptations and discouragements) unto the fruit and perfection of their
Hope and Faith.

But what need Paul pray, and that incessantly, that the good pleasure of Gods
goodness may be fulfilled? Is there any question, but that God being infinite
and omnipotent, will fulfill the good pleasure of his goodness? What man is
there, but he will be sure to have his will, if he be not hindered? But we may
as well ask, what need we have to pray for any thing as well as this, for we
know before hand, that there is no good that we can obtain from God by prayer,
but it is the good pleasure of his goodness, and that before all eternity, that
we should obtain it, and it is not our prayers, that begets this good
pleasure in him, but his own mere free will and disposition. This then is the
divine ordinance of God, that men should pray, and that daily, that the good
pleasure of his goodness may be fulfilled in them, and by this means has the
Lord ordained to convey unto us all those graces which flow from his goodness.
So that though we were never so certain, that it is the will and good pleasure
of God, to bestow this or that grace upon us, yet we are to know this withal,
that it is his will also, that we should, by our earnest prayers, draw the same
from him.

From this petition we may observe.

1. That all the strength and stay of a Christian (in time of persecution and
trial especially) depends upon the good will and pleasure of God: if he do not
from it receive grace and strength of perseverance, he is gone; he can never be
able to stand and hold up his head in the day of trouble.

2. That this good pleasure of God, arises not from any goodness in us; but the
fountain from which it streameth, is, his own mere goodness, and therefore
it is here called, the good pleasure of his goodness. Thence only it is, that
he either decrees, purposes or wills any good unto us: yea this good
pleasure of his goodness, is the cause of all that goodness and worthiness
whatsoever is in us. God does not manifest to a Christian, his good will and
pleasure toward him all at once, but by certain degrees: neither are the
first beginnings of that grace, which flow from the good will and favor of
God, sufficient to support a Christian in persecution, but the Lord must add
grace unto grace, and strength unto strength, until he have fulfilled all the
good pleasure of his goodness. And therefore in such times, we had need so to
behave our selves toward the Lord, that he may multiply, increase, and bring
to perfection, the work of his good pleasure and goodness in us. We had need
then to beg and crave it at Gods hand, and rest upon it as our only hope,
which if we can do, no doubt but that the more, the enemies of God shall
accomplish the lewd pleasures of their wickedness upon us, the more we shall
feel God, fulfilling the work of his good pleasure in us, which will more
strengthen and encourage us, to be constant in the Faith of Jesus Christ, and
to suffer for it, then if we should receive special encouragement, and
applauses from all the Saints in heaven and earth.

-- And the work of faith in power.
The third petition is, that God would fulfill in them the work of faith with
power, which is another special means, whereby they may become worthy of the
Calling aforesaid: yea, and whereby the Lord does accomplish in them, the good
pleasure of his goodness.

There is no doubt or question, but by Faith here he means, justifying or
saving Faith, that very kind of Faith, which formerly he said did superabound
in them, and was exceedingly increased.

Learn we briefly from hence.

1. That there are degrees of Faith, and that not the beginnings, but every
degree of Faith is the work of God, yea one of the most powerful works of
God. So that it is no more in the power of man to believe, or in believing to
increase his own Faith, then it is to climb up to heaven. Faith and every
degree thereof, is wrought only by the finger of God; and our natures are so
incapable of it, that God is feign by a divine and almighty power, to imprint
every part and degree thereof in us.

2. Though we had made never so great proceedings in Faith, yet we can never in
this life be said to come to that perfection in Faith, but that we shall have
need to make this prayer unto the Lord, to fulfill in us the work of Faith:
yea, the more our Faith is grown and increased in us, the more we shall desire
still the perfection thereof. This Church (as we heard) is commended by the
Apostle, for that their Faith was exceedingly increased, and yet the Apostle
prays continually for them, that the work of Faith may be fulfilled in them.
So that though we had never so much Faith, yet we shall need more and desire
more; and it is a fearful sign, that those have no Faith in them, which think
they have so much, as they need no more, despising all those means, whereby
their Faith may be increased.

3. Faith is the most necessary good, that Christians in time of persecution,
stand in need of. By our prayers to free them from persecution, or to inchaunt
their bodies, that they could feel no pain nor hurt, either by sword or fire
from their wicked persecutors, were not to obtain so great a grace for them,
as the accomplishment of their faith. For faith does supply whatsoever is
needful to give a Christian strength and comfort in persecution. By it not
only the fiery darts of Satan are quenched, but the swords and spears and
darts of all the wicked Tyrants in the world are so blunted and dulled, that
though they pierce, yet they cannot hurt, the party that is armed therewith. It
is an inchaunted shield, that can bear of the most mortal blow: for the more
we shall suffer for Christ's sake and the Gospel, the more by faith we shall be
secured and assured, of a blessed reward that shall infinitely surpass in
worth and weight, any thing, which either we shall, or can possibly suffer in
our flesh by the hands of wicked men. Faith, will make us to see, that it is an
advantage and gain unto us, to lose for Christ's sake, and that the greater
things that we shall forgo and part with, the greater benefit it shall be for
us; and that the more we shall suffer for him (though to the death) the more we
shall be glorified with him. Read the 11 to the Hebrews, and consider the
power and virtue of Faith, how through it, Christians have endured mockings,
scourgings, bonds, imprisonment, stoning, the rack, and would not be
delivered, that they might receive a better resurrection. Heb. 11.35, 36, 37.

VERSE. 12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and
ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
THese words contain the maine ground and reason by which he moves the Lord
to grant the former petitions, and by which he persuaded himself, and
conceived hope that the Lord would grant the same unto them. For by this
means, Christ Jesus should receive glory and honor by them, in the very face
of his enemies; and they again, through the free favor and love of God,
should be glorified in him.

Whence we may learn,

1. That this holy intent and desire here specified, is a special means to
move the Lord by prayer to grant the former requests: and that the Graces in
the former petitions, are the means, whereby the name of Christ is glorified
in us, and we in him; and that being destitute of the former graces, specially
in time of trial, Christ's name shall be dishonored by us, and we shall pull
shame and dishonor upon our selves.

2. The first and maine scope of a Christian, is to glorify the name of
Christ, and not to look to be glorified in Christ, but in and through his own
glorifying of Christ; yea we are to desire the glory of Christ, when it seems
to fight against our own glorification in him, as Moses did, Exodus 32.35; and
Paul, when he desired in the affection he did bear to the glory of Christ, to
be Anathema for the people of the Jews. We may, and we ought to desire to be
glorified in Christ, but we must first desire and endeavor, that Christ may be
glorified in us, and receive honor in our serving and worshipping of him.

3. Though God be never so glorified in us, and though our glory in him is a
consequent of our glorifying of him, yet our glory (as appears here) comes not
of any merit of ours, but of the mere grace and favor of God, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ. So that when we have brought all the glory we can to the name of
Christ, if God in Christ were not gracious and merciful unto us, we should not
for all that be glorified in CHRIST.

And thus much of the third part of this Epistle.
THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. We beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by our assembling unto him,

2. That ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled, neither by
spirit, nor word, nor by letter as from us, as though the day of the Lord were
at hand.

3. Let no man deceive you by any means. --


THE fourth part of this Epistle follows, which is a brotherly Admonition:
wherein we are to consider, 1. The Form, 2. The Matter.


In the Form, the Apostle expresses, with what heart and affection he
admonishes them: and therein, is a worthy president unto all Christians, what
loving hearts and feeling affections, they ought to bring with them in
admonishing one of another.

And first he styles them (as in the sense and feeling of that spirit, by
which he writ, he esteemed them) Brethren; wherein, he declares not only a
special love and affection to the cause, but also to the persons of them he
admonishes. For the persons of brethren (where there is any nature or grace
amongst them) are dear one unto another, in regard of that natural bond,
whereby they are mutually knit one to another. So that in this very name of
Brother, which he gives them, there shines a great love and affection, in the
Apostle toward the persons of all in this Church.

And from this love, does this Admonition flow: And from the like Love and
Affection ought all Christian admonition to flow. Would thou effectually
admonish an other? thou can never do it, until thou show thy self a
brother unto him. Thou must let him see, that thine admonition streameth a
brotherly affection; and that, that is the very ground and cause thereof: so
that if thou did not esteem and love him as a brother, thou would not
admonish him. On the contrary side, those admonitions that flow from gall and
choler, or from malice and hatred of the person admonished, are no Christian
admonitions; neither can we expect any blessing on them; but rather, that the
parties admonished should be the worse for them. It is brotherly Admonition,
that Christ will bless. Neither is it possible for us, to admonish them
brotherly, whom we do no not esteem and affect as brethren.

2. In this Admonition he lovingly entreats and beseeches them, to take
heed unto themselves. As he calls them Brethren; so he behaueth himself
toward them as a Brother, in the whole tenor of his Admonition. For in meek,
sweet, and brotherly manner he prays and beseeches them to beware and to
take heed; and does not in an imperious, and controlling manner require the
same, though he were their superior: wherein he shows a tender and
compassionate heart, esteeming their danger to err, as it were his own hurt,
and their freedom from error as his own good. For, when men of their own
mere motion do become suitors and suppliants unto others, though it be for
others; yet they declare therein, that they themselves have an interest in that
good, which they sue for.

The Apostle carries not himself, as we often use to do in our admonitions
and warnings of others: he bids them not, in an insulting manner, look to
themselves, and take heed of such and such matters, say they have a fair
warning, thank themselves, if they do otherwise then they ought to do, and
look not to be pitied of them: but he beseeches and entreats them; and
therein professes, that it should do him much good, if they would take
warning, and that it would be no small grief and sorrow of heart to him, if
they did not. This spirit, should all Christians bring unto the admonishing of
their Brethren: especially the Ministers of Christ. And this is one reason, why
there is so little fruit often, in our admonitions, because we show so little love
and compassion in them. Our admonitions for the most part are but purgations
and euacuations of our spleen and malice; and not any manifestation of our
love and compassion to the parties admonished, as though their well-doing were
an advantage unto us, and their ill-doing a damage unto us.

Now further the Apostle does not nakedly beseech them; but he adjoyneth
thereunto, a double adiuration or obtestation, wherein he declares, with what
zeal and ardor of spirit he beseeches them. The Apostle then in this his
Admonition heateth his Love with zeal, and moderateth his zeal with Love: he
mingleth and tempereth them both together: In the one, he shows his desire of
their good; in the other, his fear of their evil.

And therein, he teaches us what affections we should bring with us, to the
admonishing of our brethren, a zealous Love, and a loving Zeal. Love without
zeal is but folly: Zeal without Love is but fury and madness. But how do most
of us swerve in our passions, when we come to admonish our brethren? Sometime
in our admonitions, we show neither love nor zeal; but admonish them in that
manner, as though we cared not whither they hearkened to us or no. Sometime, we
show love but no zeal; sometime hot zeal, but no love, if that may be called
zeal that is without love. But let us never take upon us this office, until
we can temper these affections together.

Besides, in this feruencie of his Spirit he shows, that they were in great
danger to be seduced: and that it was a dangerous matter for them to be seduced
and led away with that error which he admonishes them of. And in them, he
shows the condition of all true Churches and Christians, especially in the
time of persecution and trial; that they are then in great danger, through the
powerful and malicious work of Satan, to run into error: and it is then
most dangerous for them to err, as by means whereof, they give special
advantage to Satan and to the enemies of the Gospel.

He adiureth them by the coming of Christ, and by their assembling unto him:
as if he should say; you heard before, what I said concerning Christ's second
coming, and the wonderful glory of all the faithful, that shall be in that
day assembled unto him: As therefore, you will look and expect to be amongst
the number of those, and to have your portion in that great glory, and as you
tender the salvation of your souls, look to your selves, and take heed of
that dangerous error, that here I admonish you of.

Whence we observe:

1. That Christians must learn to place their special hope and comfort in the
expectation of Christ's coming: otherwise this adiuration should have little
force in it.

2. That all Christians, Ministers especially, must be most careful, to warn
and admonish their Christian brethren, of such errors, as may hazard or
endanger any ways, their hope and expectation in that day.

3. That Christians, even the best, and those which have given greatest
testimony and proof of their faith, shall be in danger, if they look not to
themselves, to be seduced and drawn into most pestilent and pernicious errors,
such as may take away all hope of, and comfort in the coming of Christ.

4. That the serious meditation and consideration of Christ's coming, and the
hope of our assembling unto him, is a special means to uphold and support all
good Christians against such errors. It is a special bond to bind us unto the
truth.

The matter of the Admonition follows, which is this: That whereas some
secret enemies of the Gospel, and of their salvation, went about, under diverse
pretenses to persuade them, that the second coming of Christ should be in
their days; they would not in any case, be disquieted and troubled in their
minds, or suffer themselves to be deceived by any such falsehood, what colors
soever they should bring for the same.

Wherein, the Apostle offreth to our consideration,

1. The error it self, wherewith seducers went about to corrupt their minds.

2. The pretenses, which they either did, or might use for the coloring of
their error.

3. Their intent in persuading, together with the effect and consequent, that
would follow upon the entertaining thereof.

4. The duty of Christians in this case.

1. The error is this, that Christ would come to judgment out of hand even in
their days. An evident untruth, as the experience of many ages since has
discovered. It ought to be an Article of our Faith, to believe that Christ
shall certainly come again to judge the world. But it is a pernicious error,
to determine of this or that particular time, of his coming, any further then
we have clear evidence out of the word. In matters of Faith we ought not to be
wise, above that which is written.

And observe we, how busy Satan has bin from the beginning, to fill men's
minds with errors in religion. He that durst be so bold, to corrupt the
doctrine of Faith in the Apostles time, will be much more bold now: And
therefore we had need to look, upon what grounds we build our Faith.

2. The pretenses, that either they did or might allege, are these, Private
Revelation, Apostolical Tradition, Writings of the Apostle, wrested and
misinterpreted. These were the means, whereby even in the Apostles time, the
Mystery of Iniquity went about to corrupt, infect, and poison the Church with
errors and heresies. And these they are, by which they labor to seduce to this
day.

3. The intent of these seducers, in persuading hereunto, is not manifestly
expressed: And surely, it may seem at the first, to be a godly error, and that
they could mean no hurt, but good, that taught it; and that it could produce
nothing, but religious thoughts and deeds, in the receivers thereof, causing
them the more carefully to prepare themselves, that they might the more boldly
hold up their heads in that day. And surely, those Christians live a most holy
life, that so live to day, as if they looked that Christ should come unto
judgment to morrow. And therefore it might seem, that the Devil should
rather be a looser then a sauer, much less a gainer, by this error^

But the Apostles earnestnes does plainly show, that the Devil and those
instruments, which he used in persuading to this error, had a pestilent intent
and purpose therein; and that it came from the mischievous Spirit of
Antichrist, who was now working in a mystery his own greatness. For though
for a time, the persuasion hereof, might stir up some to look to their ways,
and bridle their natures from many sins; yet when at length they should
perceive that they feared in vain, and that their religious fears were upon a
wrong ground, it would make them afterward break forth into so much the more
profaneness, yea and be a means to make them at length to believe, that there
shall be no such day at all: and so would it prove a means also to open the
mouths of profane mockers, as it did indeed in those times 2. Pet. 3.4. and so
by that means, to weaken the credit and authority of the Scriptures, wherein,
for this error, there might seem (they being not rightly understood) some
ground.

Let us therefore, beloved, take heed of any error in Religion, though it have
never such a show. For many times those errors, in the event prove most
pestilent, that carry most show of piety. Note we withal, how Antichrist in
the very egg has endeavored by all ways to weaken the authority of the
Scriptures.

4. The duty that the Apostle in this case requires of them is twofold.

First, that they be not distracted in mind, shaken as it were beside their
wits, and troubled.

Wherein the Apostle intimates,

1. That it is Satan's slight and policy often by false and strange doctrines, to
distract and astonish the minds of men, to disturb and drive them (in a
manner) out of their wits: by that means not only to make them incapable of
such holy and sound instruction, as might stay them in the truth, but to make
them fit instruments for him further to work upon, to possess them with fond
illusions and delusions at his pleasure. That which we may observe in the
doctrine and practice of the Familists, Anabaptists, and other like Enthusiasts
of our times; as also in the courses of some of some of those in the Romish
Church, who under pretense of affecting a seuerer and austerer course of life
then ordinary, have so weakened their brains, and confounded their
imaginations, that they have afterward fallen into a number of strange
fantastical conceits, which partly Satan, taking his opportunity, has
suggested unto them, and partly their own distemper has of it self forged
and fraught their heads with.

The second thing he here intimates, is this, that men are usually very prone
to be distracted and perplexed with such strange and unsound doctrines, and
with such groundles conceits. And surely, such indeed is our natural
corruption, (some remainders whereof abide in the best,) that the truth of God,
evidently taught out of the word, often affects us but faintly, when such
frivolous conceits, though having no truth in them, or ground of them, so
strongly possess us, that with many false fears, they affright and amase us;
and make us in a manner, beside our selves.

This corruption should we take notice of, and strive and contend to the
contrary; that howsoever we labor, to keep our hearts tender and pliable, for
Gods Spirit and word to work upon, yet we strengthen our minds against such
frivolous and false fears and terrors, as Satan by his instruments, and their
strange fancies shall assay to possess us with.

The second duty that the Apostle requires of them, is to take heed, that no
man by any means deceive them. Wherein, the Apostle forewarneth them, that by
no manner of man or means, they suffer themselves to be deluded on this wise.
That neither the persons, of those that publish such points, though they seem
to be never so holy and religious in their life, or to be never so sound in
their doctrine and teaching otherwise; nor the means they shall pretend, for
the ground of such their doctrine, be it revelation, or tradition, or
authority of other learned, or counterfeit writings, or the like, prevail so
far with them, as to cause them to give credit to any erroneous doctrine,
contrary to that, that the Apostle had before delivered unto them, and did now
further inform them of.

Whence we learn, as in hearing to respect and regard, not so much who it is
that speaks, as what it is that is delivered; so withal, to be careful to
examine whatsoever doctrine shall be delivered of any, upon any grounds or
terms whatsoever, with the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles in the holy
Scriptures recorded; and take heed how we admit any, whatsoever the bringer of
it be, or whatsoever plausible pretenses shall be alleged for it, that we
shall find upon due examination, to dissent and swerue, from the written word,
or not to have sure footing and foundation from thence.

-- For that day shall not come, except there come an Apostasy first. --
The Apostle, having in the two former verses admonished the Church, to beware
of a dangerous error that some went about to corrupt their minds withal,
concerning the coming of our Savior Christ, as if it were instant. For the
further strengthening of them against the same error, be takes occasion, by way
of prophecy, to foretell of great matters that must come to pass, before that
day; which could not, within the compass of one or of sundry ages following be
fulfilled.

The matter of this prophecy is concerning Antichrist, the most pestilent and
cruel enemy of the Church of Christ: a matter of great use and consequence,
to all the faithful people of God.

The parts of it are three: For, 1. He foretells an Apostasy. 2. He
foresheweth an Effect thereof. 3. He lays down the means and the cause
thereof.


And this he does to the end, that all Gods people that have understanding, may
take heed both of the one, and of the other.

For the first, he affirms that before that, that day shall come, there must
be an Apostasy. An Apostasy generally signifies, a reuolting or falling away
from him, whom we are bound and have undertaken to serve, and a betaking of our
selves to the service of his enemy: As when Soldiers in the field, forsake
their own Captain or Emperor, unto whom they have sworn allegiance, and
perfidiously and traitorously join themselves to the adverse party. And such
a kind of Apostasy is it, that the Apostle here means.

Now that we may make the more use of this point, let us in order consider: 1.
From whom this Apostasy is made. 2. Unto whom it is made. 3. By whom. 4. By
how many. 5. Where. 6. Wherein it consists. 7. When it begins. 8. When it
shall end.


The discussing of these points is needful, in regard of that wicked
opposition, that is made unto the truth contained in this Scripture, by the
enemies of the Grace of God, who are wounded to the quick by the same, and
labor, by all wicked fraud possible to cover it from us.

For the first, it is plain that this Apostasy is a reuolting or falling from
Jesus Christ. He is the Emperor from whom the departure here mentioned shall be
made. This, our Adversaries themselves dare not deny: yet feign they would
shift it of; and therefore their great Champion says, Bellarm. de Pont. Romans
l. 3. c. 2.
that it may be understood to be a departing from the Roman Empire. For the
confirmation whereof, he brings the names of three Latin Fathers. But it
cannot be so understood. Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius.


For 1. this sense contradicts that, which Bellarmine himself makes the
best sense of these words. For if by Apostasy in this place, be meant (as he
says) Antichrist himself, who should be such a notable Apostata, that he may
well be called Apostasy it self, then it cannot by any means be meant of an
Apostasy from the Roman Empire. Since it is out of all question, that the
Apostasy of the great Antichrist must needs be from Christ.

2. That must needs be an Apostasy from Christ, wherein Antichrist works,
and by which he grows to his height.

3. This Apostasy is afterward in the 7. verse called the Mystery of
Iniquity: which must needs be opposite to the Mystery of Godliness, of the
Gospel: and so, by consequent it must needs be a departure from Christ.
Neither can it be showed, that the Scripture any where takes this word in any
other sense, where it uses it indefinitely.

4. The use that the Apostle makes of this in the 15. verse, manifests the
same. Therefore, says he, brethren, stand fast, and keep the instructions you
have bin taught. What? Does he herein move them to stand fast to the Roman
Emperor and Empire? No: but Jesus Christ, of whom he had spoken before. This
standing fast, is opposite to falling away: which therefore the Apostle
expresses elsewhere, by a word that signifies to fall. Hebr. 6 6. (...).
Look therefore, what the Apostle wills them to stand fast to, was this
departure to be made from.

This point then is clear, that Christ is the person fron whom this Apostasy
shall be made.

And yet suppose it were from the Emperor, what good gets the Jesuit, or
his Master, or his Church by that? Surely none at all. For they are all of them
Apostataes from the Empire of Rome: they have thrust the Emperor from Rome;
they have taken his authority from him; and the loialtie and homage that they
owe to him, do they give to a proud usurping Prelate; who out of this Apostasy
is risen up, and so by the same consequent is revealed to be Antichrist.

2. The Person, unto whom in this Apostasy they fly, must needs be some
special adversary of Christ. And that must needs be Antichrist, who is the
head and ringleader in this Apostasy, though masked and covered for a time.
For he is the party, that in this Apostasy shall be discovered: and he is
afterward described to be the Adversary; to whom, but to Christ and all true
Christians? Now reuolters ever fly to the adverse party. I know none that
denies this, or makes any question of it. And this confirms the former
point. For to fall to Antichrist, is to fall from Christ.

3. This Apostasy is to be made by Christians: that is, such as have given
their names to Christ, and have bin baptized into his Name. This is plain. For
none can revolt or fall from Christ, but he that is the professed servant and
follower of Christ.

4. This Apostasy is to be a general or universal departure of the whole
Christian world, tho not of every particular Christian in the world.

This is manifest;

1. By the indefinite speech of the Apostle. For if he had meant otherwise, then
of a general defection, he would some way or other have limited his speech.
Luke 18.8.
2. Our Savior speaking of the latter times, says, When the Son of Man
comes, shall he find Faith upon earth? 3. Many of our Adversaries, if not
all, do grant it, Rhem. on 1 Thessalonians. 2. Domin. a Soto in Sent. l. 4. did. 46.
q. 1. art. 1. Catharin. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that under Antichrist there shall be a general revolt: but from whom? from
the Pope and Roman Church. So that Antichrist should rather in that regard be
called Antipope then Antichrist. Yet let us take it at their hands. 4. The
event has showed it. Diverse of the Fathers have complained of it. One says of
the whole Church in his time, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 14. hom. 36.
that it had the Caskets and Cabinets wherein the Jewels and Treasures of the
Church were, but had lost the Jewels and Treasures of the Church were, but had
lost the Jewels and Treasures themselves: and compares her to a woman fallen
from her prosperity, that had nothing to show, but some bare tokens and signs
only: that it was no more Bethel but Beth-aven; that it was no better then a
Tavern or tipling-house. (...). ad Ci^rum in (...).
Another afterward complaining of his times, Oh, says he, these are the
unhappy times, wherein men will not endure wholesome doctrine. And again he
says, that there were made in the Church inward and incurable wounds. Papists
themselves have complained of it; not of this or that particular Church, but of
the whole Church in general. Says one, in a speech made in the Council of
Trent, Cornelius Ditontinu^.
I would, they had not with one consent fallen from religion to superstition,
from faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, from God to the
belly-God. A Pope himself could say of his times, We are all of us of that
belief that our Princes are: if they would worship Idols, we would worship
them also; because Charity is cold, and all faith is perished.

5 The place of this Apostasy is evident. It is the Christian world, the
Church Militant.

This appears;

1. By all the former points. For none, but those, which are members of the
Church of Christ, can properly be said to make an Apostasy from Christ. Since
those were never with Christ, that were not of his Church.

2. Antichrist, the chief author, under the Devil, of this Apostasy, is said
to sit in the Temple of God; that is, as we shall show afterward, in the Church
of Christ. That is his shop where he works: as for Infidels, Jews, and
Turks, he is not so busy amongst them.

3. Paul tells the Elders of Ephesus, that after his departure, there should
enter in, Act. 20.28, 29, 30*
ravening wolves amongst them, not sparing the flock; and therefore exhorts
them to watch and take heed to that particular Church, whereof the Lord had
made them ouer-seers: adding withal, that even of their own selves also men
should arise, speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them.

The other three points, to wit, wherein this Apostasy consists, when it
begins, and how long it shall last, will appear in the explication of the
verses following.

-- and that Man of sin be discovered, even the Son of perdition.

Verse. 4. Which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is
called God: so that he sits as God in the Temple of God, showing himself as
God.


HItherto of the Apostasy: the Effect thereof follows; which is the
revelation and discovery of a strange Monster, that shall arise out of the
same, and grow greater and greater by the increase thereof.

What manner of person he shall be, he shows by the description of him;
wherein he gives to understand, how necessary it will be for the Church of
God to be able to know and discern him.

The first Argument, whereby he describes him, is his Lewdnes, that he is a
Man of sin. Whereby we are to understand, not only that Antichrist shall be
a sinful man, or some great and notorious sinner only; but by man of sin,
we are to understand one, that has the art and mystery of sinning, whereby
he does not only in his own person sin, but makes it a trade and an
occupation to draw others unto sin. He is such a sinner, as the Pharisees
were, that would compass sea and land to make a Proselyte, and make him
twofold more the child of the Devil then themselves. Math. 23.15.
And therefore also is the profession and practice of mntichrist called
afterward, a mystery of iniquity. So that all his wit, strength, and
authority shall be herein employed, to abandon and overthrow righteousness, and
to advance sin and rebellion, superstition and idolatry, against God and his
Son Christ.

Therefore also (in some measure) all his subjects are a company of such as
have learned this Art. And it will be good for all that look to be saved by
Jesus Christ, to know this Man, and to take heed of him, and to have as little
dealing with him as may be. For all his dealing with men, is to draw them to
sin against God; yea to be artificial sinners; to make it a trade to draw
others to sin; and be such sinners, as the more they shall sin, the less they
shall seem to sin, or shall deem themselves so to do. There is none
therefore that fears God, that should desire to have any league or communion
with him, or with any of his professed servants and followers. For as he is a
Man of sin, so they shall get no good by him, unless they serve him in
sin. And if we be to sever our selves from all inordinate persons; how much
more then from this Man of sin, and all his adherents? 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.


The second Argument, whereby the Apostle describes him, is his Cruelty: and
so the second title he gives him, is the Son of perdition: which is the same
Title that is given Judas the Traitor by our Savior. Wherein appears, Ioh.
17.12.
that Antichrist shall in nature and quality, be an other Judas, and as it
were Judas his successor. And indeed there cannot (as we shall hear afterward)
be a greater resemblance between two, then between them.

In this Title, there is an Hebraisme; whereby is meant 1. Passiuely, one
destinated and ordained to destruction; as, filius gehennae, Math. 23.15. the
son of Hell; one that shall have his portion in hell fire: filij irae,
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and Sons of the promise, such as shall partake
in Gods promises. Romans 9.8. 2. Actiuely, one ordained to be a destroyer of
others: as the son of wisdom, for a wise man. Math. 11.19. so the son of
perdition, for a destroyer. To which purpose also is Antichrist called Abaddon
and Apollyon. 1. a destroyer. So that as Judas, Apoc. 9.11.
before he came to his end, was the death of Christ, so shall Antichrist be the
ruin and destruction of the mystical body of Christ, for which he died. And
as Christ is a Savior, and that a mighty one: so shall he be a destroyer, and
that a mighty and powerful one. So that whosoever follows him, shall be sure
to come to eternal ruin and confusion with him.

This should be a motive, to persuade us to take heed of him. We had better
fall into the hands of any thieves and robbers, then of Antichrist. He is
destinated, not only to damn his own soul, but all those also that submit
unto him, if the Lord do not in good time deliver them: and those he most
destroys, that he most makes of.

The third Argument, whereby he describes him, is his Pride. He is said to be
one that opposes himself, and lifts himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped. Such shall be the intolerable arrogancy of this Man of
sin, that he will not endure, that any power or potentate, in heaven or
earth, should be above him. So that he is an irreconcilable Adversary, to all
those, that prefer the worship of God before his worship, and that will not
adore his ordinances, before and above Gods, or any left unto man by God. For
he cannot, by any other means, lift up himself above God, and be an
Adversary unto him, but by lifting up of his own laws above Gods, and
trampling Gods under his feet, that his own may be observed; not enduring any
law, that shall cross the law of his own wicked will. So that he shall not
think it enough, to be reputed higher, then all the Princes and Potentates
upon earth, except he may be worshipped also, even above God himself.

Now, to the end, that he may the more oppose himself against God; the Apostle
adds,

1. That the principal place of his residencie, where he will erect his Throne
and Consistory, shall be in the Temple of God; that is, in the Church of
Christ, where God dwells most, and rules and governs most, there will
Antichrist be most busy. For that is meant by the Temple of God, as appears 1.
Cor. 1.2. with 3.16. where speaking to all wheresoever, that call upon the name
of God; Know ye not, says he, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you? See also 1. Pet. 2.5. So that the place of
Antichrists tyrannous dominion, shall be the Christian world, amongst the
people of God, where the Name of God is called upon, in the Catholic and
universal Church upon Earth.

So that we must not look for this man of Sin, in Turkey, Barbary, etc, but
amongst such as have received the Gospel of Christ.

2. He adds, That he shall carry himself in the Temple of God, not as a
Servant, Subject, or Minister of God, but as God: that is, look what God uses
to do, that will he do. He will be head of the whole Church, the supreme and
uncontrollable Governor: he will prescribe Laws and Canons to the whole
Christian world; prescribe a word of his own, Sacraments of his own, a Church
ministry of his own: he will take upon him to bind men's Consciences to his
will, as to the will of the eternal God; to bless whom he likes, and to
curse whom he lists. etc.

What an arrogant person is this? How have the people of God need to take heed
of such a monster? What blocks and sots are they, that cannot discover him, and
know him? Let us therefore, beloved, that live in Gods Church, take heed to our
selves; look to our religion and worship, and all the parts thereof; that we
do not serve Antichrist rather than Christ, and that we mingle not both
together. It will be hard, to live in Gods Church in his times, and to keep
wholly free from him, who if he cannot wholly draw men from Christ, will be
attempting yet to do it in part.

Verse. 5. Remember ye not, that while I was yet with you, I told you of these
things?
FOr the further confirming of them in this truth, before he proceed any
further in the description of that Man of sin, which shall be revealed, not
without a secret reproof of their forgetfulness, he calls to their mind some
other points, which, together with these, he had taught them by word of mouth
concerning Antichrist.

Whence breifely we may observe;

1. How profitable the remembrance of any divine truth may be, especially at
some times, if men could then remember it. If this people had but remembered
thus much, as they ought to have done, they had not bin in danger of being
poisoned, with the error before mentioned, but they had a present preservative
and counter-poyson against it.

2. Note we, how forgetful the best children of God may be of those divine
doctrines, which most concern them, and which one would think, they could not
have forgotten if they would.

3. Mark what advantage Satan makes of our forgetfulness. Did he see that care
in us, to remember the word that ought to be, he would not be so bold to broach
and spread his errors as he is: So that though there be much teaching, yet there
is so little remembrance of that, that is taught, that Satan and his instruments
may broach any errors, and yet we never able through our mere forgetfulness, to
oppose the divine truth of God against them.

4. All Christians, especially Ministers, may learn hence, to be careful to
call to the memories of their hearers, what they have formerly taught,
especially when particular occasion serves to make use thereof, as when the
forgetfulness thereof, may prove prejudicial and dangerous unto them.

Verse. 6. And now ye know, what withholds; that he might be revealed in his
due time.

7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he that
withholds shall let, till he be taken out of the way.

8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed; whom the Lord shall consume
with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his
coming.


TO come to the particular points then, that over and besides he puts them
in mind of.

The first is this, that he had acquainted them with a special let and
impediment that hindered the present revealing of this Man of sin.

What this should be, the Apostle here concealeth: So that it seems, he told
it them then as a secret, fit for the Christians in those times to know, but
not so fit to be published. Only it seems by that which follows, that it
was some kind of person that hindered. And the most general received opinion
is, that it was the Emperor of Rome. This have the ancientest Fathers held: and
this do most, both Protestants and Papists too grant. And the event does agree
thereunto. Yea, it seems that by their tyranny and persecution they hindered
the same. For so long as the Church was under persecution, and the sword of the
Magistrate was drawn against it, this proud Man of Sin lurking in the
Church, and beginning to advance himself, yet could not rise to his greatness.
And this may be the reason, why the Spirit of God concealeth the impediment,
lest this might the more encourage the Civil Magistrates, and Potentates to
persecute the Church. And indeed the very suspicion of this, that Christians
would be the overthrow of that Empire, was one cause of many bloody
persecutions.

2. He admonishes them, that the foresaid Apostasy was even then in working,
which here he describes to be a mystery of iniquity, that is, an Art of
sinning, by secret, cunning and artificial conueyances: whereby he means
that then the foundations and grounds, and principles of the Antichristian
religion were secretly laying: So that the Apostasy of Antichrist or the
Antichristian Religion was not to rise on a sudden, but as an edifice is long
before in squaring and working, and at length is reared and joined: so the
Religion of Antichrist, (which is therefore an ancient religion, at least the
maine grounds whereupon it is built) should be a long time preparing and
privily contriuing, before it should come to be openly and eminently, erected
in his due proportion and full perfection.

3. He tells them, that that which hinders the manifestation of the Man of
Sin, shall hinder, until it be removed; and that as soon as it is removed,
shall that wicked one be discouerd: Which shows that Antichrist revealed, and
this let and impediment could not stand together, but the one must be removed,
before the other can show himself in his colors.

Here then, the Apostle gives them a watchword, concerning the time, when the
Church of God was to expect the manifestation of Antichrist: to wit, when this
let was removed, and not before then. So that the Man of Sin shall be
discovered, and then must be discovered, when he is at his greatest height.

Note by the way, the Title given this Man of Sin here; he is called (...),
the lawless person. So that Antichrist is such a one as will be lawless,
subject and liable to no law, but will ouer-top and overrule all laws at his
pleasure.

4. He puts them in mind of the end of Antichrist, after he is revealed,
and that is twofold:

1. He shall be consumed by the breath of the Lords mouth. As Antichrist shall
in a special manner set himself against Christ: so will Christ set himself
in a special manner against him, and then most, when he is greatest. Neither
will Christ at once utterly confound him; but first he will by little and little
consume him: So that as at the first he grew by little and little to his
greatness, so he shall by little and little be consumed.

The means whereby he will consume Antichrist, is, by the Spirit of his mouth,
that is, by the word of God, and the preaching of the Gospel. See Psalm. 33.6.
and Esai. 11.4. It is not sword and spear, that shall so much prevail against
Antichrist, as the Ministry of the word. Antichrists glory shall more and
more vanish, the more that it prevails.

This point may give us great light in the discovery of Antichrist and his
kingdom, and of the open and secret friends thereof.

2. He and his kingdom shall be utterly abolished at the second coming of
Christ, and not before. So that though he be the vilest and most detestable
monster that ever was; yet he shall not either by the word or sword, be utterly
destroide until the latter day. So that till the day of doom he shall sit in
the Temple of God, seducing the Saints of God, and drawing men from the Gospel
of Christ to his idolatry, even until the end of the world: and then shall he
and all his limbs, by whose means his kingdom has here bin advanced, be
cast into that burning Lake. Apoc. 20.10.

So that Antichrist now is, and has his kingdom upon the Earth, and shall
have, though every day more and more ruinated, until the day of doom.

These are the points, which he calls to their memories, which formerly he
had taught them, and is feign to teach them over again, and to apply them, as
a special counter-poyson against that false error, that before was mentioned,
concerning the neerenes of Christ's second coming.

Verse. 9. Whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders.

10. And in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness, among them that perish.


THe Apostle here returns again to the description of Antichrist, from which
he had digressed; showing the means, whereby this Man of sin should raise
himself to his height, and having so done should uphold, from time to time this
his apostaticall kingdom.

The means are General or Special.

The general, that he will come with the efficacy of Satan: that is, Satan,
especially when he is mounted up into his chair of estate, will work mightily
and powerfully in and by him: so that he shall have all the help and
furtherance, that Satan can afford him, for the advancement of his kingdom,
even as if he and all his Champions were inspired with the devil, and had
Beelzebub as a familiar with them, to aduize and execute what they would. No
Iuglers or Coniurers, no Witches and Wisards, not the Soothsayers of Egypt,
shall come with that efficacy of Satan that he shall, and therefore it must
needs be wonderful powerful. As the Spirit of God is effectual in the
ministers of Christ. Col. 1.29. 1 Cor. 14.25. So shall the spirit of Satan be
as effectual, to these ends and purposes in the ministers, and instruments of
Antichrist.

More particularly he shows 1. wherein this efficacy of Satan shall consist,
and

2. Upon whom it shall take hold.

For the former: The efficacy of Satan in him shall show it self, in
procuring him all the power and authority that may be, and in confirming the
same, with lying wonders and miracles, and by all the wicked and impious
frauds and collusions that may be devised.

Which shows, that Antichrist shall be such a one as shall not deceive of
ignorance, but of set purpose; and shall propound to himself by all devices
that may be, to draw men from the truth, against knowledge and conscience. It
shall be his glory and joy to seduce men, and to withdraw them from the true
faith of Christ, to the end that he may thereby, the more establish his own
kingdom, and greatness upon earth.

2. The persons whom Satan by Antichrist shall seduce, are such as shall
perish, as are reprobates. Iud. 4. Apoc. 13.8. and 9.4. These are the true
members of Antichrists kingdom, in whom he shall work most effectually. So
that the more wicked a man is, and the more hated of God, the more subject
shall he be to be deceived by Antichrist: and the more that we see men deluded
and deceived by him, the more are we to fear their eternal perdition.

Object: What? Shall Antichrist then deceive none but those that shall perish?

Sol: Yes: even Gods own people shall be in Babylon, which is Antichrists
kingdom. Come out of her, my people. Apoc. 18.4. But they shall be most
effectually deluded that shall perish. They shall of all other, by the just
judgment of God, be most abused by him. So that the vital members of
Antichrist, and the peculiar limbs of his kingdom, shall be a damned crew of
reprobates, persons ordained to perdition.

-- because they received the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
Here is the reason, why those that shall perish shall thus be deceived:
because they showed no love, nor liking, nor would give any intertainment to
the truth; but despised the means of their own salvation.

Truth here, is the Gospel, so called

1. In regard of the certainty and infallibility of it: in comparison
whereof, all other doctrines and religions are error, and all other humane
truths, vanity and deceit. The Gospel will never deceive us: whatsoever it
promises, shall certainly come to pass; whatsoever it affirms, shall never
be proved false.

2. In regard of the use of it: it is the rule of all saving truth. Whatsoever
is not ruled and squared thereby, in matter of Salvation and Religion is error.

3. In regard of the effect and efficacy of it: for, 1. It is powerful to
discover and beat down all error and heresy, and untruth whatsoever. 2. It
is a great and powerful instrument of God, to work truth and synceritie in
the heart. And where this truth is not, there is nothing but hypocrisy and
falsehood.


This Gospel then, is Truth it self, and yet is nothing ordinarily, accounted
more false: witness the very lives of Christians and such as profess it.

To entertain the love of this Truth, is to entertain it with love: as 1. To
hunger and thirst after it; 2. To seek and search after the knowledge of it, 3.
To give credit unto it; 4. To love and affect all the means, whereby it is
attained; 5. To bestow cost upon it; 6. To rejoice in it, and all those that
love it; 7. To cleave and stick close to it; 8. To defend and maintain it; 9.
To grow and increase in it; 10. To expect and look for all happiness, and
salvation in and through it.


When men therefore, 1. Desire it not. 2. Never seek after it. 3. Give no
credit to it. 4. Care not for the means. 5. Think all cost too much they are
at with it. 6. Take no pleasure in it. 7. Fly from it and forsake it. 8.
Oppose themselves against it. 9. Stand at a stay in it. 10. Look not for
salvation by it; they are said not to entertain it.


Where note by the way,

1. That it is not enough to receive the truth, and give some kind of
entertainment to it, but we must give it loving entertainment, if we look to
have good of it, if we desire to be eternally saved by it.

2. That not to entertain the love of the Gospel, and not to accept of the
conditions of salvation therein offered, is a fearful sign of one that shall
perish.

More principally we are here to note,

1. What is the cause, why the Lord will suffer Antichrist so far to prevail
over the Christian world; to wit, for their unkind usage and contempt of the
Gospel. All despisers therefore of the Gospel, that entertain not the love
of it, are in danger to be deceived by Antichrist, and lie open to his sleights
and subtleties.

2. That the best counterpoyson against Antichrists seducements, is, to
entertain the truth, as was aforesaid. The love unto the truth, shall be more
able to preserve us, and arm us against all the efficacy of his power, though
he have the help of all the Devils in Hell, then if a man had the greatest
learning and knowledge that ever any man had.

Verse. 11. And therefore shall God send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies,

12. That they might all be damned, that believed not the truth, but delighted
in unrighteousness.


IN these words, is declared the ground and equity of the former judgment:
wherein consider we two points:

1. The judgment of God upon such as entertain not the love of the truth. 2.
The cause thereof.

The judgment is this; God shall send them strong delusions, or the efficacy
of coosenage, as it may be translated: that is, God will give them over to
Satan and Antichrist, and will give them liberty to deceive and cozen their
souls: so that there were never any so cozened, and deluded, and abused as
they shall be.

He further amplifieth this judgment, by the effect and the end of it.

The effect; they shall believe lies: they shall in that manner be cozened,
that they shall receive and entertain, as the eternal truth of God, most
gross and notorious lies and figments, absurd and most palpable untruths and
fables; and so believe them, as no evidence or demonstration of truth, shall be
able to draw them from the same.

The end, why the Lord does this; that they might be damned, being by that
means, drawn with the Devil and Antichrist into everlasting perdition.

The cause of this fearful Judgment is twofold:

1. Because they believed not the truth. i. would give no credit to the word of
God and the promises thereof, but esteemed them as so many toys and fables,
worthy no belief or credit.

2. Because they took pleasure in unrighteousness: i. took such delight and
felicity in those sins, which by nature they were given unto, that rather
then they would forsake and forgo them, they chose rather to trample all the
hope that the Gospel gave them, under their feet: So affected and well-pleased
were they with their natural corruptions, that nothing could bring them out of
conceit with them.

Whence we may learn;

1. That Antichrist shall deceive and delude none, further then God gives
special commission. God has a special guidance, and government, and
direction in the seducements of Antichrist. God deludes not, but yet sends
delusions: and if he send them not, they cannot come. He leaves the seducer,
and the seduced together, ordering both of them to the glory of his justice.

2. That the Kingdom of Antichrist consists of a company, of cozened and
deluded people. Therefore the more that men hate to be deceived and coozened;
the more let them take heed of that sin that lays them open thereunto.

3. It is a fearful sign that God intends to damn those, whom he
suffers to be so powerfully deluded by Antichrist. For whom he means to
damn, he is wont to give up to a reprobate sense; that, which they are like
soon to come to, that are so powerfully deluded.

And thus of the prophecy of Antichrist, and of the Apostasy, that by his
means was to be effected before the latter day: the branches whereof, together
with some particular uses, we have laid open before. Now follows the maine
Use; which is this, to take heed of this Apostasy, and of that Man of Sin,
which in the same shall be revealed.

Now this that we may the better do, we must learn, so far as this Prophecy
will help us to find out, 1. Where this Apostasy is; 2. Where we may find
this Man of Sin.


First, for the finding out of this Apostasy, we must consider, what
properties and notes to discover the same, are laid down in this prophecy;
and then see whether they agree to any state or condition of people, that
either has bin or yet is in the world. For there need be no question but,
unto what state or condition of people so ever these rules shall agree, that
there this Apostasy is.

1. This Apostasy must be a revolt of Christians from Christ, that is, a
departing from the foundation of that Faith, Religion, and divine worship,
which was planted by the Apostles in the primitive Church: this is out of
question; and appears, as before was showed, by the title given it, verse. 7.
the Mystery of iniquity, opposed to the Mystery of the Gospel; and the use
made of it, ver. 15. Therefore, brethren, stand fast, etc.

2. This Apostasy is Catholic and Universal, ouer-spreading the whole face
of the Christian world. This is evident by the indefinite speech of the
Apostle, verse. 1. by the Confession of all men, even our Adversaries
themselves, and by the event.

3. This Apostasy is a Mystery of Iniquity, wherein men do not professedly
fall from Christ; but under the profession of Christ, and in his name, do fight
against him in an hidden and artificial manner. verse. 7.

4. This Apostasy shall be one body, and have a Catholic head, who shall in
that manner rule over the members thereof, as Christ does over his Church.
verse. 4.

5. This Apostasy was not to be such, on the sudden, but to begin by little
and little, and so (by degrees) to increase, and afterward again to decrease by
degrees. verse. 7, 8.

6. This Apostasy began in the Apostles time: for then it is said, that the
Mystery of iniquity began to work. verse. 7.

7. It shall prevail against those, that love not the truth and sincerity of
the Gospel, but give liberty and indulgence unto themselves 'to live in some
sin. verse. 10.

8. It shall be effected and vpheld with the efficacy of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders. verse 9.

9. It shall be consumed by the Spirit of Gods mouth. i. by the word of God.
verse. 8.

All these points are clear enough out of this prophecy; and if they were
not, yet might we well conclude, that where all these may be verified of any
Apostasy now in being, that it is either the same with it, or as bad as it.
But there is no cause to doubt of any of them: and therefore we are to make no
question, but that, these points being true, this Apostasy must needs now be
in the world, and that it must needs greatly concern all Christians, to be
warned thereof: As also, that for the finding thereof, we are not to seek the
secret nookes and corners, woods and wildernesses, for it is to spread over the
whole Christian world.

That this Apostasy then, such as the Apostle here prophesied of, is to be
found in the present Church of Rome, is most evident and notorious.

For 1. that this Romish Church has made an Apostasy from the Faith and
Religion planted by the Apostles, and that for this 1000. years, so that she
is no more like to that Church, that the Apostles planted at Rome, then Hell is
to Heaven, may appear by these Reasons: 1. From the difference of the Church.
2. From the difference of the Church government. 3. From the difference of the
Doctrine. 4. From the difference of the worship.


1. The present Church of Rome holds her self to be a Catholic Church,
universally spread over the face of the whole world, unto which all true
Christians, and Churches do appertain as members: so that they are held no
true Churches or members of Christ, or Christians, that are not professed
members of the Church of Rome, in what parts so ever of the world they abide.

But the Church of Rome, which the Apostles planted, was a particular Church
only, comprehending under it only those Christians, which dwelt in and about
Rome, and not in any other places. For Paul directing his Epistle to that
Church, describes it thus, The Saints at Rome; and concludes his Epistle, with
Salutations unto such persons, as inhabited in or about Rome, yea and it was
sent from Corinth unto this Church: which could not be, if this Church were
every where, and had not bin a particular Church.

Again, this Apostle writing to other Churches, gives them as great, glorious,
and respectfull titles and privileges, as he does unto this Church. Neither
does he any where, in any colorable manner, subject them to this; but writes
unto them as entire, and distinct, and free Churches of themselves; never
exhorting or moving unto subjection or obedience to this Church. And if it had
bin such a Church, of which all Christians are members, he would (out of
question) have described it, writing unto it, as James and Peter do, writing to
the dispersed Jews; To the 12. Tribes scattred abroad; To the strangers that
dwell through Pontus, Asia, etc. So, To the Church of Rome, and all the members
thereof, even to all the Christians throughout the world. So that this Church
of Rome, can no more be said, to be such a kind of Church, as the Apostles
planted, then the whole world can be said to be the City of Couentrie, or
Lichfield, or London. And for any color of ought in Gods word, these or any of
them, yea this Parish of Stapen-hill, might make as good claim to be the
Catholic Church, as the Church of Rome may.

2. The head-Officers and Governors of the old Church of Rome, were the same,
for name and office, that were appointed in other Churches. For had they bin
Officers of an other kind, the Apostles would undoubtedly have given notice of
it.

But the Head-Officers of this Church, are such, as whose names and peculiar
Offices were never heard of in the Apostolical Churches or times. The
Apostles, in their Epistles, do often mention the Church-Gouernors in their
times: and yet not a syllable concerning any Pope, Cardinals, Abbots, Moncks,
Friars, Jesuits etc. nor any such kind of Officers. Take these Offices and
Officers out of the present Romish Church, and you raze the very foundation of
their Church: and yet that Church of Rome, which the Apostle wrote unto, was
perfect and complete without them.

3. The maine and fundamental doctrine of this Church, whereby it differs from
those reformed Churches, that have made separation from it, cannot be justified
by the doctrine of the old Church of Rome, and of other Churches in those
times, comprehended in the Canonical Epistles of the Apostles: as,
Justification by works, Transubstantiation, Man's Free Will, Ability to keep
the whole Law, Merit of works, Satisfaction for Sin etc. It shall not be
needful upon this occasion, to enter into proof of particulars. This in
general, may serve for a proof of all; Her enmity to the Scriptures,
diminishing the authority of them, as much as she may, preferring her own
authority above them; her tying the Scriptures, to what translation she
pleases, to what sense she lists; and her keeping them locked from the
people, shows that her fundamental doctrines are not agreeable to the
Scriptures, and by consequent differing from the Doctrine of the old Church of
Rome.

4. Her principal Worship and Service, so far forth as it differs from our
Churches, is as different as may be from that worship and service, which is
prescribed by the Apostles to the old Church of Rome, and other Churches. Her
Masses, her Dirges, her Trentalls, her Prayers for the dead, her Pilgrimages,
Processions, Adoration of Images, Angels, and Saints departed, her Vows of
Virginity and Poverty, her Service in a strange tongue etc. In these does her
principal worship of God consist. And yet not one of these has any color or
shadow from the doctrine and worship prescribed in the Epistle to the Romans,
or in any other Book of Scriptures.

2. That this Apostasy of the Church of Rome, is a Catholic Apostasy, needs
no proof; seeing themselves glory and boast of the Catholicknes of their
Religion, especially before Luther, and how generally and universally their
Worship and Faith aforesaid, have bin received and professed; neither has
there bin, since the Apostles, any profession so general and universal, as
the Papacy, when it was at his height. In this they glory; But except they
could justify the truth of their Faith and Religion, this their glory is their
shame. For by this means they rather argue, that they are not of the true
Religion, but of this Apostasy, because there was to be an universal
departure from the true Faith, in which case not the true Church, but the
Apostaticall must be universal.

3. The Church of Rome has a Catholic Head, who in that manner rules over
the members thereof, as Christ does over his Church. For the Pope claims to be
the Uniuersall Head of the Church, making Laws according to his own pleasure,
even to bind the Consciences of all them that are under him, of no less
authority then the Laws of God.

4. The Religion of Popery came not in, all at one time, but by degrees,
beginning in the Apostles times, and increasing more and more after the decease
of the Apostles, as the sincerity of the true Religion decreased. It is
evidently to be seen in History, when and by what means the gross and maine
points of the Popish Religion came in.

5. It prevails, against whom most? Surely, such as evidently show, that they
bear no love to the word, but are despisers of it, and the ministry thereof.
Such in our experience are they, that use to be seduced; men that are glad to
have any color to be of any Religion, save that which is the true, and which
crosses their corruptions.

6. The whole world knows with what efficacy and power of Satan it has bin
vpheld: how busy Satan was, how often he appeared in Goblins, Fayries, walking
Spirts etc. for the strengthening and supporting of it.

7. It cannot endure the brightness of Gods word, but melts before it as Snow
before the Sun.

Hitherto we have showed, that the Religion of the Church of Rome is that
Antichristian Apostasy, that here is prophesied of; because all the notes and
marks thereof, do most lively agree thereunto, more then to any Religion and
Profession in the world besides.

In the next place we are to show that the Bishop of Rome is the Head of that
Apostasy, and that great Antichrist here prophesied of. Which appears,
partly by that which has bin said before concerning the Apostasy of that
Church; and shall more fully appear by those Notes, whereby in this Prophecy
he is described.

The first is this. The Antichrist is a Man of Sin. i. not only a notorious
sinner in his own person, but as Satan is; a notable instrument of Satan, to
draw men from the obedience of Christ, to sin and rebellion against God.

This agrees to all the Bishops of that Sea, in a manner, since they became
Uniuersall Bishops. It is almost incredible, what monstrous villains most of
them have bin; and that by the report of their own Historians. You shall not
read of any Sect or Order of men whatsoever, amongst whom, so many and such
monsters have bin found, as amongst them; Murderers, Poysoners of their
Predecessors, Simoniacks, Negromancers, Sodomites, Adulterers, Atheists,
Church-robbers, etc. Yea such lewd persons ordinarily their Popes have bin,
that the time was in those parts, where the Pope most abode, that, when they
would note a man for a notorious, extraordinary Villain or Knave, they would
say, He is a Knave or Villain enough to be Pope. Non est opus instare.

Again, they are not only such Men of sin in their own persons; but the
grand Patrons of sin in others, and fruitful parents of lewdness. So that
it is as it were their trade to devise, how they may either by laws force men
to sin, or protect such as are wicked.

He is the great Patron of Ignorance, using all the power and authority he
has, to keep the people from the knowledge of God, so that they might not know
the right way to serve him.

He forbids Marriage to all his Clergy, which are innumerable, the hundredth
part whereof are idle bellies, not forced to any pains, but living like
Epicures and Swine put up to feeding: By means whereof, innumerable
Adulteries, Fornications, Rapes, Sodomitries, Murders of Infants, and other
abominable acts are committed.

He vpholdeth and maintains Stews, as it were Colleges and Societies of
whores, whereunto men may freely without punishment repair: And counts it
better for some sort of persons, to keep a whore, or to defile an other man's
wife, then to have a wife of their own.

He counts some sins small and venial, not deserving Hell fire; and no
sin so gross, but that for money he can pardon it: and he can dispense with
Incest, divorce at his pleasure, discharg men of their oaths, and absolve
subjects from their Oath of Allegiance etc. By means whereof, he has bin the
procurer and author of infinite treasons, rebellions, assassinates, poysonings,
bloodshed of many thousands, murder of Princes and Potentates, and other the
like villainies in all parts of Christendom.

The second Note follows. He is the Child of perdition. Wherein is signified
that the Man of sin shall be such an other as Judas was. And surely Judas may
well be an Emblem, to represent the nature, disposition, and condition of the
Popes of Rome, for the most part. Judas was a covetous wretch, and grudged that
any thing should go beside his bag: so is the Pope. Judas sought all means to
betray Christ; so does the Pope in his members. Judas, though Christ convinced
his Conscience of the vileness of the fact, and denounced such a woe against him,
as might justly have terrified him, yet for all that held on his wicked
purpose: so does the Pope. Judas in words and ceremonial complement most
honored Christ, when he betrayed him: so does the Pope. Judas came to an evil
end; so have the most, if not all, of them. Judas was the instrument of Christ's
death, and of his own perdition: so is the Pope. None live more like men,
ordained to destruction then they.

3. The Antichrist here spoken of is one that opposes himself against, and
lifts himself up above all that is called God. The Scriptures give this
Title not to God himself only; but to Angels also Psalm 8.5. Hebr. 2.6. and to
Magistrates, I have said, Ye are Gods, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 82.6. This
property notably in both these respects agrees to the Pope.

Concerning the first, nothing can be more evident, whether you respect the
Bishop of Romes claim, or his practice.

He claims to be in all Christian Dominions throughout the world, yea and of
the whole world to be the Supreme Head and Governor: That Emperors and Kings
are but his Vassals and Subjects; that he has authority to place them in
their Thrones, and to cast them out again; to absolve their Subjects from that
loyalty and allegiance, that they owe and have sworn to them; that he is as
the Sun, and the Emperor but as the Moon, borrowing all light from him; that
he is as Gold, and the Emperor as Lead; that Emperors and Kings are but as
Sawes, and he as the Sawyer to move them at his pleasure; that the Emperor is
but his Sword Bearer, and his Creature; and the Imperial Majesty as much
under the Popes, as the Creature under God.

Concerning practice: has he not deposed Kings and Emperors? has he not made
them kiss his toe, hold his stirrup, wait barefoot at his Pallace-gate,
crowned Kings with his feet, made them carry him on their shoulders etc?

Again, he aduanceth himself above Angels and Devils. For he claims to be
Lord of all in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell. One Pope in his Bull for the
Iubilee, Clement 6.
commands the Angels in Heaven, to take such souls out of Purgatory, as dye
by the way, and carry them instantly to Heaven.

And for his lifting up of himself above God himself, it is as plain as any
other matter. It is nothing with him to be another God on Earth. The Scriptures
that are proper to God or Christ, as Esai. 60.12. and 28.16. Psalm. 24.1. and
8.6. Ioh. 10.16. and 15.5. and 3.19. Apoc. 5.5. they apply unto him; and he
like the proud Man of Sin admits of them.

Yea, this is all too little: He is above God, and that by his own claim. He
can bind where God loses, and lose where he binds. He can dispense with
the Laws of God, with both the Old and the New Testament. His word is of more
authority then Gods word is. And to sin against his Laws is (after a sort)
to sin against the Holy Ghost.

Lastly, this Man of Sin is (...), not a wicked only, but a lawles person;
one that shakes off all yoke, like a son of Belial, that lives like an
Outlaw, that refuses to be ruled by any law, either divine or humane. But who,
more lawles then he that no law can hold either of God or man? That will give
laws to all, but take none of any? that not only claims power to break
laws as he lists himself, but can at his pleasure dispense so, not with
man's law alone, but with Gods to, that he can make Treasons, Murders, and
Massacres, and the horriblest sins, that Gods law condemns, acts pious and
meritorious, whereby men shall deserve heaven?

Yea, who so lawless as he, that not only refuses himself to be ruled by
any law, but exemteth all his shauelings, his principal members, from all
subjection to laws and civil jurisdiction, though the ordinance of God, that
they may live as they list, in all loosenes and lewdnes, without check or
control?

And thus we have showed, both who is the Head of the Apostasy, foretold by
the Apostle in this place, and where, both he and it are to be found.

Verse. 13. But we ought always to give thanks to God for you, Brethren,
beloved of the Lord. -
HItherto of the Prophecy concerning the Universal and Catholic Apostasy
of Christians, from the true Faith and sincere worship of Jesus Christ, as it
was planted by the Apostles; and of that Man of Sin, that next and
immediately under the Devil, was to be supreme Head and Author thereof. A
burdensome Prophecy to all that feared God, and such a one as could not but
make their hearts heavy, and possess their souls with much fear and
trembling And therefore, the Apostle, before he passes unto any other matter,
comfort this Church he writes unto, and therein labors to remove that
fear and sorrow, which this Prophecy might cast them into.

In the Consolation, 1. He propounds the maine argument and matter of their
Comfort. 2. He makes special Use thereof.


The matter or argument is set down, 1. Generally, 2. More specially.


The Effect of the general Proposition is expressed in the Title he gives unto
them, O ye beloved of the Lord: as if he had said, O my Brethren, though the
condition of the Christian world shall be fearful, in regard of the power and
tyranny of that Man of Sin: yet you need not to be dismayed thereat. For
the Lord loves you most dearly and tenderly; and therefore will preserve and
keep you from that fearful Apostasy.

Whence we note;

1. That the more that any Christian man or Church is beloved of the Lord, the
more afraid they are of this Apostasy, and of that Man of Sin: and the more
they are humbled and grieved to consider the same, and the more they shall
fear it, and desire to be armed and strengthened against it, being conscious of
their own weakness, to withstand so great assaults and temptations, as also the
more they shall mourn and groan under the tyranny and burden of it, or of
any part or parcel of it; the more present will the Spirit of God be, to yield
comfort and consolation, and spiritual might, and strength unto them, as here,
he is unto this Church.

And further, the more feelingly that a man shall be persuaded of the love of
God toward him; the less cause he shall have to be dismayed and faint-hearted
in regard of this Apostasy. Art thou one beloved of the Lord? Had thou a
lively sense thereof in thy soul? Verily, though by Prophecy it should be
revealed unto thee, that all thy friends and acquaintance, the whole Town and
Realm where thou live, the whole Kingdom, wherein thou art a Subject,
should revolt from Christ to Antichrist; yea though thine own eyes should
behold it; though thou should see all the faithful Pastors and Ministers of
Christ, and amongst them those that have bin the powerful instruments of God
to bring thee to the sense and love of God, to fall away from Jesus Christ, and
to receive the mark and character of the Beast: yet in the midst of so
fearful and so lamentable a spectacle, thou shall find comfort and strength
enough to support thee, though thou stand alone against all the tempests and
storms, that Satan and his Vicar-generall can raise against thee.

Would we therefore secure our selves against such tempests and brunts? Let us
labor to be beloved of the Lord, and to get unto our selves all the signs and
tokens thereof that we can. For there is none safe from Antichrist, but those,
whom God hides in his own bowels. And if once we feel our selves there, what
need we care? They must pull out the Lords own bowels, that pull us out thence.

The Apostle amplifieth this love of God toward them, by the effect thereof:
as if he had said, My Brethren, you are so beloved of the Lord, that I,
Syluanus and Timothy, think we can never sufficiently give God thanks for you
in that regard. Wonderful great, must that love of God needs be toward this
Church, that binds the Apostle and these Evangelists in so great a bond of
thankfulness unto God for them.

1. The Apostle did not (though he might) say, You ought, but, We ought:
whereby he shows; that Gods love toward this Church, did bind these worthy
Ministers in an everlasting bond unto God. So that the more love and grace God
shows unto a people, the more bound unto God are the Pastors and Ministers of
that people. Does God manifest by any signs, that our people are beloved of
him? As though therein we were beloved of the Lord, we are bound to be
thankful unto God: yea, not Pastors and Ministers only, but every brother is
bound in a bond unto God for the love and grace that God shows unto a
brother. For Paul speaks this as a Brother, and not as a spiritual Father
and Minister. Else he would not have called them brethren, but children rather;
if Gods love toward this Church had wrought this effect in them, as they were
Ministers only. It is the duty then of every Christian, to be so affected
with the grace, love, and favor that God shows unto any man, as if himself
therein were specially bound unto God; and he had therein himself, received a
special grace and favor from God. Let us learn to esteem our Brothers
holiness, his redemption, his joy, his glory, his eternal happiness, and all
other signs and tokens, of Gods love in Christ toward him, as so many parts
and parcels of, and additions unto our own. Far be from us that malignant
spirit of Cain, us especially that are Ministers, the more to hate, and to
despise, and to disdain and murmur and grudge and repine at, and persecute our
brethren, the more signs and tokens of Gods love and grace we see in them.

Further, would any of us know how to bind our true Christian neighbors and
brethren in the strongest bonds unto us? Let us use all the means, that we may
show our selves beloved of God. This is sufficient to bind them for ever to be
thankful unto God for us. We cannot better deserve one of an other, then by
striving one to go before an other in grace and favor with God.

2. This band of thanksgiving, though it be for them, yet it is not to them.
Its no thank to any Christian, that he is beloved of God: but all the thank
is due to God himself. The cause that we are beloved of God is not in our
selves, but in God only; and therefore is all the thank due to him.

3. It is an everlasting thanks, that is due to God: it is a debt that can
never be paid, either in this life, or in the life to come; but that which must
ever be paying, even in heaven, and more in heaven then on earth, because
there, it shall appear indeed how beloved we are. It shall there be so many
heavens unto us, to behold the heavens one of an other. So that to be admitted
as spectators of that glory and joy that is in others, will be unspeakable joy
and glory to us, tho we had no other cause of either. Such comfort unspeakable
shall we have, in the joy and glory, and happiness one of an other, streaming
from the love of God, that I shall never cease magnifying God for thee, nor
thou for me. Such mutual beams and rays of glory, will reflect from one upon
an other, that we shall not be able to tell, whether we have more cause to
thank God for our selves, or for one an other; the joy shall be so
unspeakable, that the one shall reap by the other.

4. Note here a special means, sanctified of God, to support our brethren,
against the assaults of Antichrist. Let them see that we take notice of the
graces of God that are in them; and that we are so affected with them, that we
unfeignedly acknowledge our selves bound to be thankful unto God for them.
Little know thou, what power there is in this means, to support a weak
brother, when he shall see, that the eyes of Gods servants are fixed upon him,
that they esteem his standing as a blessing of God upon them. The general
neglect of this duty, has no doubt bin the occasion, that Antichrist has
prevailed against many a one, that have fallen from the sincerity of religion;
because professors make so little one of an other, the Minister of his people,
and people of their Minister, and one of an other.

-- that God has from the beginning chosen you unto salvation, through the
sanctification of the Spirit and faith in the truth.
Here follows the special matter or Argument of their Comfort; to wit, the
certainty of their Salvation, wherein specially consists Gods love toward
them; and from whence does arise, that everlasting bond of thanksgiving
aforesaid. As if he should say, This prophecy, concerning the dangerous times
to come under Antichrist, need not dismay you. For your salvation lies upon a
solid and firm foundation, against which all the gates of Hell shall never be
able to prevail. So that though Antichrist should come with the greatest
efficacy of Satan, and with all the strength of Hell against you, yet he
should not be able to prevail against you to your condemnation and destruction.

Let us consider then, what that firm and solid foundation is, in regard
whereof he comfort them thus. It is expressed in certain degrees of Gods
special love toward them, enwrapped together in these words.

The first degree is this, that God himself had chosen and elected them unto
salvation, i. had voluntarily and freely, of his own mere love and good
pleasure, singled and severed them out of the number of them, which shall be
condemned, and had written their names in the Book of Life, amongst the number
of them that were to be saved; and therefore they should not need to fear the
power of Antichrist.

Quest. How knew Paul this?

Ans. Either by the evidence and demonstration of that very Spirit, which
stirred him up to write this Epistle; or by some evident effects that he saw
thereof in them. But I incline more to the former, or rather hold both.

Hence we learn;

1. That though the world be never so overwhelmed with Antichristian confusion;
though by his tyranny and poisoned enchantments, he never so much prevail
over the Christian world; though by his power, he should mingle heaven and
earth together, and all the powers of hell were in his power; yet the Elect of
the Lord shall notwithstanding be preserved. The Lord will have such an eye
upon them, that he shall never do any mortal hurt unto them. But in the
midst of all his fury, they shall be safe, and hold on their way to heaven,
though they be often foiled and overthrown in the way.

2. The certainty and assurance of our election, is a mighty and powerful
preservative against Antichrists Apostasy. It is that, that makes the Apostle
urge the certainty thereof upon this occasion. And this is no doubt, the maine
cause that makes Antichrist, and all his wicked limbs, such enemies thereunto.
There is none that comes once to be persuaded of this, that he can have any
hope to seduce. And men's carelesnes herein, to make their election sure, is a
great cause, that many become such Apostataes. Let us therefore labor by all
means to come to the assurance thereof: and then though Antichrist should
bring with him Bishoprics, Arch-bishopricks, Cardinalships, Popedomes with
him, to allure us from Christ, and prisons, racks, gibbets, and fires to
terrify and affright us, yet shall he never be able to withdraw us from him.

The second degree is, that God had done this from the beginning. This may be
taken either for, from all eternity, or for, from the fall of Adam. In the one
sense, it is taken for the decree it self of Election, which is eternal: in
the other, for the first act in the execution thereof, out of the corrupt mass
of all mankind in Adam. It is needles to contend, whether sense is truer, or
more fitteth this place: seeing either sufficiently argues the unremovable
love of God toward them; and the one cannot be understood without the other.

Now the consideration of this also serves notably to strengthen this Church
against the fear of Apostasy. For this election of God was not sudden, or
since their profession of the Faith; but it was a matter decreed of God from
all eternity, and began to be executed while they were in the loins of Adam,
before they had any personal being. So that the love that God bears to his
elect and chosen ones, is not a sudden and a rash love, like fire in straw and
dry thorns, that makes upon the sudden a great crackling, and blazeth, but is
as soon almost out as in: But it is an ancient love, an old affection, yea a
love and affection as old as himself: As soon as ever he was, and he ever
has bin, he loved them. And therefore there is no cause to fear, that he will
suffer Satan or Antichrist so far to prevail against them, that are so
aunciently beloved of him: Seeing there can be no cause in them, or us now, to
make the Lord to cease to love us, but what has bin present before the Lord,
when he began to set his love on us, and would as well have moved him then to
refuse us, as now to reject us.

Note withal, by the way,

1. That this may serve as a special sign of one elect from eternity, that
Antichrist is not able to prevail against him, to withdraw him from the
sincerity of his Christian profession.

2. That so long as Antichrist prevails against any, so long little hope
thereof can be had.

The third degree follows, which consists in the means, that God has
ordained for the attaining of that salvation, which from the beginning he has
elected them unto.

The Means are Inward. Outward.


The first inward means of Salvation, is Sanctification; which is the purity
of the soul, from such filth and pollution, as it is capable of; or a
conformity of our wills, unto Gods revealed will, whereby the image of God is
renewed again in us. He is an holy and sanctified man, that is afraid to do any
thing, that God would not have him to do, yea that he does but suspect that God
will not approve, and whose whole study is how, in all things he may please
God.

Whence we may learn;

1. That these two, Sanctification and Salvation, are not severed in Gods
Election; but go together. Those, whom God in his Election has decreed to
save, he has also decreed to sanctify; and his Election is not grounded upon
our holiness, but our holiness upon his election. So that this Sanctification
is the very first act, and entrance into our Salvation. So long as we are in
sin and unsanctified; so long are we in the gates of Hell, yea in Hell,
though in Heaven. But when once we begin to be sanctified, then are we within
heauen-gate, we have one foot, as it were, over the threshold, yea though we
were locally amongst the damned, and amidst all the Devils in Hell. In regard
whereof, one once said well, in my mind, though a Papist, that he had rather
be in hell without sin, then with sin even in heaven.

Now, this Sanctification is described by the Author thereof, the Spirit of
God. By the power of that Spirit, whereby they were elected to salvation, they
are also sanctified. And this Sanctification is a work of God, as well as
Election, and not an act of humane power or will. Otherwise, there were small
comfort in this, if we were elected to salvation, through such a
sanctification, as were of man's own will only. For what hope could we then
have, to stand forth against all the temptations and assaults of Satan and
Antichrist? This sanctification therefore is of Gods own Spirit. He is the
first mouer in the same. Which argues, that there is in this sanctification, a
divine efficacy and power indeed, such, as against which, all the gates of
Hell are not able to prevail. For it is not a dead or senseles quality of the
soul, but a quality that has a Spirit in it, that turns and moves about,
all the motions that are in a man's soul. And where Gods own Spirit turns the
wheel one way, it passes the strength of all the Spirits in Hell, to turn it
an other way. So that whosoever feels these motions in him (for they are not
dead and senseles motions) may thereby assure himself, that he is one of Gods
elect; and one, that though Antichrist should mingle heaven and earth together,
yet shall he not be able to prevail against him to his ruin and confusion.

Note withal, that it being the sanctification of the Spirit, man cannot merit
thereby For what can man merit with God, by that which he has from the Spirit
of God, and for which therefore he stands bound and endebted unto God?

The second inward means, is, Faith in the Truth. Whether this be first or
second in nature, I will not stand here to discuss: according to the diverse
acceptions or degrees of sanctification, it may be in nature before or after;
but in time they are together. There can be no true sanctification of the
heart, till faith be in the heart; nor can there be faith in the heart, before
there be sanctification there.

Now this is then, when the sanctifying Spirit of God does in that manner
reveal unto the elect child of God, so much of Gods will, as is needful for
him to know and practice for his own salvation, that he assenteth unto it and
embraces it. This Faith and Sanctification go hand in hand together. The
motions of a sanctified spirit, go no further then the light of this truth,
and this eye of faith does direct. And what need they fear to be seduced or
drawn out of the way, that have such a Spirit to move them, such an eye and
light, and rule to direct them?

Verse. 14. Whereunto he has called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of
our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe outward means, whereby the inward means were wrought, was the Ministry
of the Apostles and Evangelists, which he calls their Gospel. Whereby he
declares, that whatsoever they ministered to the people, it was the Gospel:
and therefore that we, that are Ministers, should tread in their steps, and
minister that only to Gods people, that we may avow to be Gospel.

By this Ministry, being nothing else but the Ministry of the Gospel, were
they called (says the Apostle) to sanctification and faith in the truth. The
Gospel then, yea our Gospel.i. the Ministry of the Gospel practiced and
instituted by the Apostles, is Gods own consecrated instrument, whereby the
Spirit works sanctification and faith. Thus does the Lord honor his
Ministry: So that they which are the despisers thereof, never had any true
faith or sanctification; and therefore are a prey to Antichrist. And surely who
are they, that he prevails against in our Kingdom? Are they not manifest
despisers of this ordinance? For as for those that are called by the same unto
sanctification and faith, they cannot but honor it as the blessed instrument of
their conversion and eternal salvation.

He shows further, wherein the end of this their Ministry consisted, in
calling of them to the obtaining of the glory of Christ. i. of that everlasting
glory and happiness by Christ, which Christ our Head himself in Heaven now
enjoys.

So that this is a notable means to debase the glory of Antichrist, to fix our
eyes on the glory that Christ has purchased for us, and is entered into heaven
to take seisen and possession of, in our behalf. And surely one maine cause,
why a many are so carried away with the glittering shows of Antichrists
pompous estate, is because they have not their minds set, nor the eyes of
their souls fixed, on that wonderful, and unutterable and inconceiuable
glory, that for all Christ's faithful followers is prepared in heaven. All the
glory of Antichrist, would be vile in their eyes, if they so did.

Verse. 15. Therefore, Brethren, stand fast; and keep the instructions, which
you have bin taught, either by word, or by our Epistle.
THe Use and Application follows. As if he had said; Seeing you have so great
matter of comfort, Brethren, stand fast, etc.

Wherein we are to consider these 3. things.

1. The duty that he exhorts them unto. 2. The ground of the duty. 3. The
means of performing of the duty.
The duty is, that they stand fast. It is a metaphor borrowed from Soldiers,
who in brunt of battle gather their strength together, that they may not be
overthrown. So he would have them to do, to gather together all the strength
they can, that they may stand against the brunt and storm of Antichrist.

Whence we may learn,

1. The beloved and elect of God shall be powerfully and strongly assaulted by
the Man of sin, and in great danger to fall into the Apostasy aforesaid, if
they look not unto themselves.

2. That they must therefore gather all their force and strength together, to
stand strongly to the defense of the true faith and religion, that no tempests
and storms may remove them from it.

2. The ground of this duty is implied in the word, Therefore: i. Seeing that
the Lord has elected you etc, therefore stand fast.

The doctrine then of the certainty of our salvation, and of our election, is
not a doctrine of security; but it has this nature, in whomsoever it is
found, to stir up men so much the more to stand to the truth. So that the more
that a man is assured of his salvation, the more he will strive to keep the
faith. So that if he should see his name written in the book of life, yet
would not this make him wax secure, but so much the more careful to please
God, and so much the more resolute against the enemies of God. If a man should
know that his body were in that case, that he could not be slain in battle,
howsoever he might be wounded, maimed and hurt, would that make him to yield
himself to his enemies, or to suffer them to wound and hurt him? Would it not
rather make him fight so much the more courageously.

3. The means follow of performing this duty, whereby they and all other may
stand fast.

The first is, that they hold fast, or lay a sure hand, (as the word
signifies) upon the Apostles Traditions. These Traditions are all such
Ordinances of religion and divine worship, as were taught and established by
the Apostles and Evangelists, whether by word or by Epistle. For unto them,
whom the Apostles with their own mouths preached, their words were of equal
authority with their writings. But with us, to whom they never spoke, their
writings only are authentical, and not their words, because we know not what
they spoke more then they writ.

1. The duti^ then is this, to lay hold with both hands on the doctrine of the
Apostles, and not to suffer any part or parcel thereof to be wrung forth of
our hands.

2. This shows the means, whereby Antichrist has so much prevailed; for that
men have not held fast the Apostles traditions, but the Churches of Christ have
suffered now one Ordinance, and then an other, to be wrung out of their hands.

Verse. 16. Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our God, even the Father,
which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope
through grace;

17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every word and good work.


THe second means of standing fast is in the hand of God: and it is twofold.

1. Consolation of the heart. Except the Lord from heaven send a comfortable
and cheerful heart, that it be not daunted and terrified, one shall hardly
hold fast. Whereas so long as the Lord comfort the heart, so long we shall
uphold and maintain the faith.

2. God must also establish us, and confirm us in every word and good work,
that we may so carry our selves in word and deed, that we give no advantage to
the adversary. For if Antichrist can trip us in either, he will give us a
dangerous blow.

The Apostle therefore concludes this matter, with a prayer to Jesus Christ,
and to God the Father, stirring him thereunto, by mention of that free favor
of his toward them, whereby in Christ he has loved them, and give them
everlasting consolation, by putting them in good hope of eternal salvation
through grace. Thereby teaching us, that the maine ground of our assurance of
future and further mercies from God, arises from the consideration of his
former favor and love toward us. And that therefore we must labor to get
assurance of the one, if we desire to have our faith confirmed and strengthened
in the hopeful expectation of the other.

And thus much of the fourth part of this Epistle.
THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Furthermore, Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may
have free passage and be glorified, as it is with you.
THE fifth part of this Epistle follows, which is a petition; wherein the
Apostle becomes an earnest suter unto the Church that he writes unto. And
what does he sue for? For their prayers. He entreats them that they would
pray for him, and for Syluanus and Timothy his fellow laborers. And to the end
that he might obtain his desire, he calls upon them by the name of Brethren,
as he has done twice or thrice in this Epistle already. Wherein we must not
think, that the Apostle, according to the common usage of this age, does it
only for courtly complement; (a thing far from the disposition of that Spirit,
by which he writ this Epistle) but he does unfeignedly desire this office at
their hands, as a principal fruit of their brotherly love and affection
toward him, and as a matter whereby he expects a special blessing from God.

Whence we may learn these lessons:

1. That it is the duty of Christian brethren, mutually to pray one for an
other unto God their Father. Paul he prays for the Thessalonians: and he
prays them to pray for him. The brethren in Christ do mutually merit one an
others prayers, when they pray one for an other. Do I pray unto God for thee?
I have therein deserved that thou should pray for me. The wages of an hired
labourer are no more due to him, then thy prayers are due unto me. And thou
shall answer at Gods tribunal upon an action of debt and default of payment,
if thou answer not the same. Though I should not pray for thee, yet art thou
bound to pray for me: the Lord has laid this law upon us, to pray even for
them that persecute us, and to bless them that curse us: How much more are we
then to pray for them that pray for us, and to bless them that bless us?

And as this is a mutual duty and debt that one Christian owes to an other:
so ought all Christians to make that reckoning of this debt, as that they
should (upon all occasions) demand and require it, and not remit or forgive it.
We can demand our temporal debts, and will think much to remit a penny in the
payment of a great sum. But for this spiritual debt, we can be content to
let it go and never demand it. Or if we do at any time demand it: it is but
for ceremony and fashion: we care not whither men pay it or no. This shows
(beloved) that we make no reckoning or account of an others prayers. For if we
did, we would oftener demand them then we do: And the rather, because the debt
is of that nature, that the more we urge the payment thereof, the more we
favor the person indebted: and the more we neglect to urge the same, the more
wrong we do unto him. For there is no prayer that he makes for us, but he
obtaines thereby as great a blessing for himself as for us.

2. If we desire that others should pray effectually unto God for us; let them
see that we esteem them as brethren; and let us so demean our selves toward
them, as they may esteem of us as brethren. For howsoever the prayers of the
faithful may do good to them that as yet are not brethren in Christ: yet is
there a more lively feeling of the efficacy and power of prayer, and of the
sweet influences of Gods graces obtained by them, when professed brethren pray
one for an other. And only by their prayers can we look to get good that are
our brethren. For otherwise their prayers are an abomination to God, and their
blessings in themselves but so many curses.

3. The prayers of the faithful are the common goods of the Church. And there
are none so high and great in favor with God, but they stand in need of the
prayers of others, even of their inferiors. Behold here Paul; a great Apostle
of Jesus Christ, that had bin rapt up into the third heaven, and there heard
things unutterable; he that had the Spirit of Prophecy, and the gift of
working miracles, and who was in a singular manner illuminate in the mystery
of the Gospel, and inspired to be a penman of holy Scripture, desires the
prayers of this poor Church. Would that Spirit, by which he writ this Epistle,
have suffered him so to have done, but that through the same Spirit, he had a
lively sense of his own need, and a confidence that he should be the better
blessed by means of them, and that God would for their sakes show the more
favor unto him? There are none therefore so low and mean in Gods Church, but
the highest may be beholden to them for their prayers. Paul here desires the
Thessalonians to speak to and entreat God for him and his fellows.

This should teach us to stir up this gift in our selves, and highly to esteem
the prayers even of the meanest of Gods servants. For if the Spirit of God
taught Paul to make that reckoning of them, much more ought we, even the
Ministers, who as we are many degrees inferior to Paul, so do we by so many
degrees more need the help of the prayers of the meanest of Gods people; even
we, I say, that are Ministers do need the prayers of our people; and the people
need to pray for their Minister: yea the meanest of them must learn to be
Orators unto God for him, if they look to reap fruit by his labors. And this
no doubt is one maine cause, that the Lord does no more bless our labors unto
you, because you never pray for us; nay, because many of you cannot pray for us.

The Apostle does not only in general require this Churches prayers; but he
gives them special directions concerning the matter of those prayers, which he
would have them to make for him.

Wherein in general, and by the way he teaches, that if Ministers will look
to reap fruit from the prayers of their Churches, they must teach and direct
them how to pray, and inform them in the special matter of their prayers. We
must not only call upon men to pray, but we must teach them how to pray, Luke
11 1.
as both CHRIST and JOHN taught their Disciples. It is very fitting and
necessary, that Christians should have directions for prayer, yea and for the
further help of their weakness, set forms of prayer also, though they are not
to be tied only unto them, and stinted and streitned so as they may not use
any other prayers; but according to the practice of our Churches, that
prescribe and use set forms indeed, but are not so limited or tied to them,
but that they may and do use other conceived forms also, as occasion is
offered, contrary to the calumniation of our separating Brownists.

The special matter, he directs them to pray for, is 1. a propagation of the
Gospel. 2. the means thereof.
And 1. That it may have a free and speedy passage in all places: 2. That it
may be glorified else where also, as it was among them.


The word here translated free passage, and that not unfitly, signifies a
running as it were upon wheels. So that he would have them to pray that the
Gospel of Christ might have a swift course, and might most speedily, by the
means of him, and the rest of the Apostles and Evangelists, be carried
throughout the world, as it were upon the wheels of chariots drawn with
winged horses.

Object. Why? this concerns the Lord himself and his own glory, to let his
own word have a free passage. Will he send Ambassadors into the world, and not
give them safe conduct, when he has supreme authority and power to do what he
will? But must men beg and entreat the Lord, that his own word may have
passage, which so much concerns himself?

For answer hereunto we are to know, that the propagation of the Gospel,
concerns our good as well as Gods glory. And it is for our sins, that he does
not make a way for the passage thereof: and therefore he looks that we should
stir him up to give passage to it by our prayers.

Whence we may observe;

1. That the faithful Ministers of God, desire and endeavor nothing more, then
that the Gospel may spread it self, and may have prosperous success in all
places. So that they do not think they have done their duty, when they
prea^h, when and where a door is opened unto them but they desire, and use
means, that the Gospel may be preached, where a door is shut against it: yea
they count it the greater advantage unto them, the more the Gospel is
propagated. And those (out of question) are the Ministers of Antichrist, and
not of Christ, who labor so much as lies in them, to put fetters and shackels
upon the Gospel, that it may not so freely have his course, and that stop the
passages and ways thereof. And far are they also from Paul's spirit, that will
not preach at all, no not in those places, where not only they have a free
passage and liberty, but where they are bound unto it by the laws of God and
man, and by their own faithful promise. It is a sign that such men make no
reckoning, of the Lords word or the propagation of it. But this is the height
of the desire of all faithful Ministers and people in this life, that the
Gospel may have liberty and spread it self, and have every where a free
passage without opposition.

2. We learn, that the prayer of Gods Churches and people, is an effectual
means, for the procuring of the liberty of the Gospel. We see how many lets
and impediments the Gospel has: how hardly, without the loss of some lim, or
the wrenching of some member, it can pass any way; the passages are made so
streit; there are so many ditches cast up in the way, so many secret pits
dug, etc. This the Lord does to stir up his people to prayer. And no doubt,
the want of prayer, is one maine cause, that the Gospel has no freer passage.

Neither must men post off this duty to the Ministers thereof only, but every
Christian, how mean so ever, must perform it. Paul no doubt prayed himself
for this. But he entreats these Christians also to pray. And happily the Lord
may hear the prayers of a simple plain Christian, when he neglects the
prayers of them of greater note; yea he may yield the rather to the prayers of
Paul for the prayers sake of these poor Thessalonians.

3. Be the means never so worthy and excellent, yet without Gods special
assistance, the Gospel shall find impediments enough. Paul himself, a man of
admirable endowments, whose excellency, one would have thought, might have
broken through all impediments, was not able to do it, but was feign himself
to pray, and to set others also a work to pray, that the Gospel which he did
carry, which had so many graces attending upon it, might find free passage. If
therefore all the Ministers of the Gospel, had each of them as many Graces and
Muses attending upon their ministry, as Paul himself had; yet they must not
look that the Gospel which they bring, should find in all places, and amongst
all persons, present intertainment: nay happily, the greater gifts, the greater
opposition. If Paul himself, accompanied with Siluanus and Timothy, should
carry the Gospel from village to village, nay if CHRIST himself, in his humane
nature, should preach in our streets, and work never so many miracles for the
confirmation of the Gospel; yet except God join his hand unto this work, it
will find no passage. How does our Savior mourn over Jerusalem? What
fearful woes does he denounce against Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum,
where he had often preached, for denying passage unto the Gospel? Ministers
therefore are not to be discouraged, when either the course of their Ministry
is interrupted, or the Gospel which they preach is not admitted. It was Paul's
case; it was Christ's own: and theirs it would be, if they were in thy place.
They that will not hear thee, would not hear Paul, or Peter, or Christ, if
they should stand in thy room.

The Apostle would not only have them pray, that the Gospel might have a free
passage, that is, that it might speedily without any let, run and spread it
self speedily in all places; but secondly, that it may be glorified, and in
that manner glorified, as it was amongst the Thessalonians. He would not only
have them to pray, that himself and other the Apostles might have liberty to
preach the Gospel in all places; but also that it might find glorious
entertainment in all places, as it found already in many famous and renoumed
Cities, especially this of Thessalonica. It is not enough then, that the
Gospel has sounded in our ears, that we have heard wisdom in our streets
and gates lifting up her voice, but we must glorify and honor it, and that
according to the pattern of this Church.

Let us then breifely consider, wherein the glorification of the Gospel
consists: and therein follow the pattern of this Church, so far as Paul
himself gives testimony of them in both these Epistles.

To glorify the Gospel therefore, as these Thessalonians did, is

1. To hearken unto it, to receive, and to believe it not as the word of man,
but as it is indeed, the word of God: so did this Church. 1. Thessal. 2.13. and
1.5.

2. To be moved and persuaded thereby, to forsake our sins of what nature
soever, even our Gods, our idolatry. This Church left their Idols to serve the
living God. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.

Verse. 2. And that we may be delivered from unreasonable, and wicked men. --
THE second part of his direction follows, which is deprecation. Wherein he
requires them to pray against a special evil, that they were in danger of,
by means whereof, the free passage of the Gospel was in danger to be greatly
hindered, and the glory thereof much defaced. The deprecation is this, that they
may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men.

The word translated unreasonable, is understood of such as we call gross,
shameless, impudent, peruers, and peevish men, such as care not how gross, vile
and absurd they show themselves, so they may compass their own wicked wills.

The word translated wicked, by deriuation, signifies, such as put good men to
labor and trouble, and thereby use all means to vex and disquiet them: which
is indeed a special property of a wicked man, and that principally, which we
call wickedness. From such persons, as these, Paul desires to be delivered, and
to this end, desires the prayers of this Church.

Whence let us note these points following:

1. That those which principally oppose the Gospel of Jesus Christ, hindering
the free passage thereof, are shameless, vile and absurd men, such as care not
what men think or speak of them, so they may bring about their lewd desires;
men whose industry and labor is spent, in bringing labor and molestation and
vexation upon them, that will not run forth with themselves into the same riot.
And the Gospel, the more it shows it self, the more will it discover the
shamelesnes and grossenes and wickedness of them that are the enemies thereof.
So that they, which (before the publishing thereof) have had the name of
modest, wise, discreet men, shall (the more they oppose against the same) show
themselves the more absurd and wicked. No modest, no good man can be an enemy
to the Gospel, but such only as nourish in them some gross wickedness, which
the Gospel discovers; in regard whereof, they hate the Gospel, and all good
means of the knowledge thereof. And out of this hatred of the Gospel, and
desire still to hide their sinnse, the more they seek to hide them, the more
they discover them.

2. There was never any time of the Gospel so happy, as to be free from such
lets and impediments, even in the primitive times thereof, when it was most
purely and powerfully preached, and shined in the fulness of glory without the
stains and blemishes of man's inventions; yet were there impudent, shameless and
gross men, that opposed against it, and hindered oftentimes the free passage
thereof. And therefore never let us look to see those happy days, wherein the
Gospel shall have no let, but shall have a free course.

And further, be the persons that carry the Gospel never so worthy, of never so
eminent gifts, speaking with never such evidence and demonstration of truth;
yet all this will not suffice to get the Gospel a free passage: But were all
the Ministers of Christ of as worthy gifts as Peter and Paul; yet should they
find faces that durst and would resist them, and despise the Gospel brought
by them. Yea the worthier gifts that a Minister has, and the more Graces he
comes attended withal, the more opposition shall he find.

We should not therefore be dismayed, when we meet with gross and wicked men,
having the Apostles, yea Christ himself for our companions therein. But let us
learn by our own prayers, and by the help of others to seek to be freed from
them: And let us assure our selves, that there is great force in our prayers to
that end, both for own and others deliverances. And when we see wicked and
perverse men prevail against the Gospel, let us fear that we are defective
in this duty; and let it stir us up the more unto the same. These are the
weapons, wherewith we are to fight for this liberty. Thus are the flock to
fight for their Pastor. And these are such weapons, as cannot be taken from the
servants of Christ. And they are such, wherewith they so wound the aduers
party, as they cannot save themselves.

-- For all men have not faith.
In these words he preuenteth a secret doubt, that might arise in their minds,
upon the deprecation aforesaid. For they might marvel with themselves, what
should be the reason, that any should be so peevish and wicked, as to molest
them, for bringing so acceptable a message as this; especially they having such
gifts and abiliments, to make good the same unto the heart and conscience of
any reasonable man He therefore tells them, that Faith belongs not unto all.
i. all have not grace given them of God, to believe and embrace the Gospel:
and therefore that such will be sure to oppose themselves against the doctrine
of it, and with might and maine hinder the free course thereof. For which cause
he would have them in this regard to pray for him and his fellow laborers.

Whence we learn;

1. That there are some sort of men, to whom Faith does not appertain, and by
consequent, Salvation, whereof Faith is the evidence. The Holy Ghosts phrase is
more then our translation sounds; for Faith may appertain to them that have
it not: but it may more fully be translated, Faith belongs not to all; but it
is a gift that God in mercy will bestow upon some persons only, even upon
those alone, that he has resolutely purposed to bestow heaven upon, and upon
no other. Hence is it called the faith of the Elect. Tit 1.1.
And in the Acts it is said, Act. 13.^8.
that so many as were ordained to life everlasting, believed.

1. The Use hereof, may be to stir us up to strive to know whether we be
amongst the number of them, unto whom Faith appertains. For till then we
cannot know, whither we be of the number of them that shall be saved.

2. Hence it appears, that it is not in the power of any outward means
whatsoever, to beget faith in them, unto whom it belongs not. If Paul himself
should preach the Gospel never so sincerely and powerfully; if he should
confirm it with never such miracles; yet were not this enough to beget faith
in them. It is the Lords own immediate work to bow and frame the heart unto
the word. Otherwise the more powerfully it is preached, and by the more
miracles it is confirmed, the more peevish and wicked, men show themselves
against it. Else it could not be, but all men, that the Apostles preached unto,
should have faith, if the outward means alone were sufficient.

Which shows the vain conceits of them, which think they may easily
believe, when they list themselves. Whereas except the Lord give the gift, they
should not believe, though lying on their deathbeds, they should have Peter
and Paul preaching to them. And what hope can men have, that God will bestow
that gift upon them at their death, which when he offers them, they despise in
their life.

3. It is a fearful sign of a man that Faith belongs not unto, when he
shows himself a wicked and unreasonable man toward them that preach the
Gospel: when men set themselves to hinder the free passage thereof, and hate
and persecute the Ministers of it. This is argued here by the Apostles
reasoning.

And on the contrary side, it is a comfortable sign of one that faith belongs
unto, if he love and entertain the Gospel, and advance the free passage of
it. For there is no reprobate, but to his power he hates and persecutes it.
Many wicked men and infidels are quiet indeed, but the reason is, because they
want power and authority, or God by some secret work restrains their rage.

4. Hence we learn the true cause, why men are so unreasonable and wicked
against the Gospel, that no godly man can safely and securely preach it among
them: it is infidelity. And a godly man had as good live among Tigers and
Bears as such.

And again, that Faith makes men gentle and quiet: so that no man can hope
here to live happily and quietly, but in the society of them, with whom he must
live for ever. And therefore let us desire to join our selves in society to
such, with whom we shall find content in this life, and converse eternally
with, in the life to come.

As also, let it not discourage us, that so few do believe, seeing that Faith
belongs not to all.

Verse. 3. But God is faithful, who will stablish you, and keep you from that
evil one.
HEre follows a second preoccupation, wherein, lest that understanding what
opposition the Ministry of the Apostles was to have, whereupon their faith
was grounded, they should fear by this means to fall from the faith; he
therefore comfort and strengthens them from the assurance of divine
assistance; as if he had said; Let it not trouble you, that our Ministry,
shall in this manner be opposed, neither fear you shipwreck of your faith: For
had the Gospel, which you profess and believe, never so many enemies; and
were you that believe and profess it never so weak, yet the Lord will support
and defend you himself.

Whence we may note;

1. In general:

1. That it is the property of true believers, and of all them that have
received the saving grace of God, to feel their own weakness, and the
feeblenes of Gods graces in themselves, and in the sense thereof to fear
exceedingly the loss of Gods graces in themselves. The covetous man cannot so
much fear the loss of his goods, as he or she that is truly called, does
fear the loss of grace. Which shows, that Faith, Hope, Repentance, and all
other saving graces attending upon them, are so lovely, and bring such sweetness
and content with them, that he that once has them, would never by his
good will part with them: and therefore pray they, Lead us not into temptation.

This then is a great sign of grace, to be afraid to loose it, and in that
regard to be jealous over a man's own corruptions, and to fear them; and not
to satisfy himself in the graces received, but to desire to have them
multiplied and increased. And on the other side, a fearful token it is, of
one utterly destitute of grace, not to fear the loss of grace; Phil^p. 2.11.
we must work out our salvation with fear and trembling. See 2. Pet. 1.5, 10.

2. It is the duty of Christians, especially Gods Ministers, to use all good
means to hearten and encourage the Saints of God, who fear their own weakness,
that they may not be overwhelmed with fear; but that they may go on in the
course of a Christian life with hope and confidence amids all terrors and
fears.

More particularly; he does not say, that they are strong and sufficiently
armed of themselves; but that they shall be established and defended by the
Lord: Neither does he put them in hope, to be defended from all whatsoever
evil; but that they shall be defended from that evil one, So 1. (...). ^.13.
meaning the Devil: And for their further security herein, he tells them,
that the Lord is faithful, he has promised it, and therefore will perform it.

Whence we learn:

1. That the strength of Gods children to persevere in grace, is not in
themselves, and in the strength and power of their own heart and soul, but in
the hand of God: and therefore Christians must not encourage themselves or
other, in the confidence of their own strength and power, but of the strength
and power of God in Jesus Christ. For let God never so little forsake his
child, and leave him to himself; and there is no sin so foul that he may not
fall into: And therefore, let us always fear in regard of our selves, and
hope and trust only in respect of God.

2. Consider here a double work of God, 1. To establish a Christian, 2. To
defend him.


There are some buildings, in regard of the weakness of them, and the mixture of
bad and rotten matter, so infirm, that of themselves (unless they be
supported and propped) they cannot stand, though they be not assaulted with
winds and storms, or though men do not set their force against them to fire
or batter them. And secondly, others, though never so strong, yet in time of
war they may be ruined, if they be not by some other power defended and
protected. In like manner here, partly in regard of our own weakness and
mixture of corruptions, and that in some more then in others, as also partly in
regard of the furious assaults of the aduers party, which the best of
themselves were never able to with-stand, we have need of double aid and
assistance from above, partly to support us in regard of the one, and partly to
protect us in regard of the other.

3. The party that Christians are most to fear, is that evil one, the Devil.
They need not care for all the power of wicked men, they can but hurt the body;
but he mischieues the soul. And so long are we free from the Devil, as we can
keep our souls from sin. Neither can Christians any longer be free from him,
then God himself shall with his own power support them, and fight for them.
Otherwise such is our corruption and weakness, that all the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, would not be able to keep us from the power of Satan.

4. All sincere Christians may assure themselves, that God will so stablish and
defend them against that evil one, that he shall never be able to prevail
against them, utterly to ruin them, or Gods grace in them. God has promised
to prtect them, and has pawned his faith on it, which is as sure and as
unchangeable as himself.

Verse. 4. And we are persuaded of you through the Lord, that you both do, and
will do the things that we command you.
HItherto of the Apostles first petition or exhortation: a second follows;
wherein, under a godly confidence in them, he closely exhorts and entreats
them to do the things that he had given them in charge: as if he had said, I
earnestly beseech you, that you would do those things, which from the Lord I
have given you in charge, even as now also you do. Which petition of his has
some dependence upon the former consolation: For upon that condition might they
hope that God would stablish them and defend them from that evil one, if they
were careful to do those things that the Apostles enjoined them.

Now what was it, that the Apostle and his fellow laborers, Syluanus and
Timothy enjoined them, but to obey the Gospel, which contains precepts of
Faith and Repentance from dead works?

1. Therefore it is the duty of Christian men, if they will be sure of Gods
protection and assistance against Satan, to do those things, and to do them
constantly, that are taught them by the Apostles and Evangelists in the
Gospel; yea that are taught them by their own Ministers out of Gods word.
God, as he is faithful in himself, so he stablisheth those that be such. No
other can hope for protection from him; but are exposed unarmed to the power of
Satan. To do the things enjoined by the Apostles of Christ, is the only means
whereby we may bless our selves from the power of the Devil; other courses are
but mockeries, of the Devils own devising.

2. It is the office of Ministers, to hope the best of the piety and
perseverance of their people, where they discern any good thing in them. That
which also, it is fit for them to make known to their flock. For by this
means will the souls of the godly be the more encouraged to go on in that
good course that they are entered into. And on the other side, the peoples faith
often grows faint, when they perceive that their Pastors hope waxes faint of
them.

3. The confidence which they use, and ought to have of the perseverance in
well-doing of others, though never so godly, has not its ground in themselves,
but in God. For it is of God, not of our selves, and our own mere will, that
we do that, that is acceptable unto God. The Apostle therefore trusts in the
Lord of them, he trusts not in them themselves. Those then, that the Lord
has decreed to stablish and defend from Satan, those does he enable (by the
power of his grace, and the instinct of his Spirit) to persevere in such good
works, as by his Ministers they are enjoined.

4. Out of this certain faith and assurance that God will thus stablish and
defend them, the godly ought not to grow retchles, but to be the more diligent
and careful to yield obedience to the Ministry of the Gospel.

Verse. 5. And the Lord guide your hearts to the love of God, and the waiting
for of Christ.
NOw that through Gods help they may constantly persevere in the practice and
performance of those things, that by the Apostles were enjoined them; the
Apostle wishes unto them the principal means, whereby they may persevere in
Evangelical obedience to the Ministry; to wit, that their hearts may be
directed by God to the love of God, and the patient expectation of Christ.

By the LORD here seems to be understood the Holy Ghost; as by GOD, God the
Father. And so have we the three persons here distinctly set down.

The word (...), signifies by a right line to direct one to somewhat. Now the
Lord is said to direct the heart, when he turns it to some thing, causing it
to affect it and delight in it, which before it was estranged from, and
abhorred.

(...).
The patient expectation of Christ, is such an expectation of him, as whereby
expecting all benefit by him, we are encouraged patiently to endure any thing
for him.

Hence we gather:

1. That these two things are principally necessary unto godly perseverance,
such as was spoken of before, the love of God, and the patient expectation of
Christ. For the love of some good thing past or present, and the expectation of
some future good, are wont to make us more cheerful in the doing of our
duties. Unless therefore a man's heart be inflamed with the love of God, whom
in the Gospel he yields obedience unto; as also unless he be possessed with
an earnest expectation of Christ, and a longing for him, that so he may work
with much patience in hope of reward; our Evangelical obedience will soon wax
faint. But a heart inspired with these graces, will stir up the whole man to do
every thing commanded in the Gospel with all constancy. And contrariwise,
where this constancy of obedience is not, it is a sign that this love of God,
and this expectation of Christ is wholly wanting in the hearts of such.

2. That even the hearts of the faithful are in their own nature estranged
from the love of God and the expectation of Christ; insomuch that they would
wholly swerue and wander from either, were they carried by their own proper
motion, which would rather carry them to an hatred of God, and a despair of
Christ.

3. The heart is directed, disposed and moved by God alone, who directs it as
by a straight line to the love of himself, and to the expectation of Christ,
i. of eternal salvation in and by Christ. Would a Pastor therefore have his
people persevere in well-doing according to the precepts of the Gospel? Let
him by earnest prayer entreat of God, that he will be pleased to direct their
hearts to the love of himself, and the expectation of his Christ.

Verse. 6. We charge you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. --
HEre begins the sixth part of this Epistle; which contains a Christian
reprehension, laid down in form of a denunciation.

And it is General. verse. 6.-11. Special. verse. 11.-16.


In the general denunciation come to be considered, 1. The manner. 2. The
matter.


In the manner he shows, 1. With what affection, 2. With what authority he
uses this denunciation.


1. His affection appears in the title of brethren, which he often repeateth in
this short Epistle; thereby teaching how necessary it is for the edification
of others, that our brotherly love toward them do often appear to them. Neither
can we hope that either our exhortations or admonitions, much less our
reprehensions should prevail ought with others, unless they be heated with
brotherly love, and appear evidently to stream from a heart fraught with it.
Evil therefore perform they these offices, whose admonitions and reprehensions
are dipped in gall and vinegar. And yet alas such are the reproves of most
Christians, nothing for the most part but purgations of their own rancor and
choler.

2. His authority follows; He charge them in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that is, by that authority which he had from Christ. He gives no
charge in his own name, but in the name of Christ, his and their Sovereign
Lord. Wherein we are taught, that our denunciations and reprehensions, if they
be truly Christian ones, must be grounded upon the authority of Christ: And
Ministers ought to take heed, that they presume not to reprove ought, but what
they have in charge from Christ to reprove. It beseems not a Minister, to
come in the name of any other. And it is an heinous sin, for a man to come in
the name of Christ with a counterfeit charge; and in his name to deliver a
reproof hatched in his own brain.

Furthermore, how dreadful are those denunciations, that are truly done in
this Name? and what a contempt of Christ himself is it to set light by them?
Those that charge ought in the Kings name, by virtue of their authority from
him, though but mean men otherwise, are not wont to be contemned, unless it
be of desperate ruffians and roisters: what desperate wretches are they then
that dare despise and set light by them that enjoyne ought in the name of
Christ? And yet alas, how many every where are there, that no more regard such
denunciations done in his name, then the hissing of a Goose?

-- That you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
inordinately, and not after the instruction, which he received of us.
The matter of his denunciation follows: which is this, that they withdraw
themselves from disordered persons. Wherein is contained a close reprehension.

By brother, he understands a Christian in external profession, and a member
of the visible Church.

To walk, is to live, and to hold on a continued course of life. A
metaphorical speech very usual in Scripture, and therefore needing no further
explication.

(...), inordinately. (...), or persons inordinate, are such as observe not
that order, that by the rule of reason, and right of law is prescribed them:
and it seems to be taken from soldiers, that keep not their order, by their
Captain assigned them, that break their rank, and so breed a confusion in
the whole Band. Here it is applied unto such as are of dissolute behavior, and
will not endure to be kept within compass of their duty and office.

To withdraw themselves from them, is to abstain from society and familiarity
with them; not to converse familiarly with, but to carry themselves strangely
toward them.

The meaning of the words then is this, that they should hereafter forbear and
cease to have familiar conversation or acquaintance with all such, though
professing the same religion that they did, which live loosely, and not
according to those rules and courses, that in the Gospel are prescribed.

Whence we learn:

1. That it is the duty of all Christians to live orderly, and not as they
list themselves. They must in their life and conversation, and in the whole
course and tenor of it, observe a due and decent order, and shun all disorder,
as contrary to true Christianity.

2. That there were even in the times of the Apostles, amongst those that of
their own accord, without any external constraint of the Magistrate, gave their
names up unto Christ, some that walked disorderly, and would not endure to be
kept within the lists and limits of their duty. How much more then may the like
be expected in these times, wherein, the most profess Christ more for fear of
man's law, then of their own free accord? It is never therefore to be hoped,
that any Churches, be they never so well constituted, will be free from all
scandals and offenses* In this Church, as well constituted as ever any, yet
were there some professors, who by their bad behavior, stained and blemished
the Gospel professed by them.

3. That the company and familiarity of such is, as the plague it self, to be
shunned. For this vehement manner of denunciation evidently shows, not only
that Christian men are hardly withdrawn from the society of such; See 1. Cor.
5.6, 11.
but that it is exceeding dangerous to cleave to them, and to be inward with
them. Now how far forth this separation ought to reach, we will show when we
come to the 15. verse.

In these words, and not according to the doctrine delivered by us, the Apostle
expounds himself what he meant by walking inordinately, to wit, not to carry
ones self according to that instruction that the Apostle had given. The
Apostles then are as guides unto us; and their writings, since the decease of
them, the rule and square of our course and life; from which to walk aside,
that is, in a continued and ordinary course to swerue, is to walk
inordinately.

They are not therefore to be accounted to walk inordinately, that yield not
to our pleasures and our traditions, but that neglect those instructions and
institutions, which they have received from the Apostles, as delivered by them,
and ours so far as we can prove them to agree with those.

Verse. 7. For ye your selves know, how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved
not our selves inordinately among you.
HEre follow two Reasons of the former reprehension.

The effect of the former is this: To live disorderly is far from the example
of my self, and my fellow laborers, Syluanus, and Timothy, when we were
among you. They are not therefore to be embraced by you, but to be forsaken of
you, that take a contrary course.


The Antecedent of the Argument is in the 7. verse: the consequent is to be
repeated out of the 6. verse

From the Antecedent we learn, that the higher place Christians have in the
Church, the less it beseems them to live disorderly: yea rather the more
regard ought they to have to their life and conversation in the Church of God,
and the more be subject unto law and order. For how odious a thing is it, both
in the sight of God and man, that he, whose office it is to keep others in
order, should live beside law and out of order himself? With what indignation
speaks this our Apostle of such Romans 2 21? It is not sufficient therefore,
for Ministers and Teachers, that by word of mouth they teach; but by examples
also, they ought to go before their people: yea so ought their lives to be
composed and addressed, that each one of their actions should be as a lesson of
instruction, and resemble that which they teach.

Such therefore let us all study and strive to be, Teachers especially, that
the actions of our lives may be precepts, and doctrines, and documents of piety
to those, whom (by virtue of our vocation) we are to live among. Let us
endeavor by our godly conversation to gain that authority, that by our
actions men may argue this to be evil, because we eschew it, that to be good,
because we do it.

Hence are those Teachers justly reproved, that think it enough that they
teach the truth, though they follow it not themselves. And these much more,
that neither teach by word nor life: But those most of all, that both by word
and life pervert, and incite others to impiety and disorder. And how many such
there are, too too woeful experience daily shows.

Out of the Consequent of this reason we learn, that Christian men ought in
special manner to beware, lest they seem to approve or favor the courses and
customs of such, whose lives not the doctrine only, but the practice of the
Apostles and Evangelists does condemn. Paul's care of keeping good order,
sufficiently condemned the disorderly carriage of these Thessalonians. The rest
therefore offended in favoring them, whom Paul's contrary practice taxed and
controlled. Do we live then among men, whose life and conversation is repugnant
to the life and conversation of the holy Apostles? Let us take heed, lest by
our familiarity and society with such, we seem to set light by the examples
of the Saints, and by our practice commit that, that may seem closely to
approve, what their practice has disapproued and condemned. A fault among
Christians too frequent, who are wont commonly to delight and make themselves
merry, with such vicious courses and cariages of lewd and bad men, to wit,
obscenitie, scurrilitie, lying, drunkenness etc, as are most repugnant both to
the doctrine and the lives of the Saints. This ought to be a reason sufficient
unto us, to dissuade us from so doing. The holy Apostles in their exemplary
course of life, eschewed all obscenity, scurrility, swilling and drinking etc.
and therefore we will withdraw our selves from those that affect such courses,
we will not take delight in them, or make our selves merry with them, give the
least sign or show of liking unto them; howsoever we must of necessity bear
and endure them, unless we would go out of the world.

In those words, For you know, etc, is a proof of the Consequence of the
former reason.

You ought to follow us; and in your Consciences you know that you should.
Therefore when we keep far from all such disorder, you ought not to approve it
by your companying and familiarly conuersing with such as live disorderly.
Out of the Antecedent whereof we learn:

1. That all Christian men ought to frame their lives after the pattern of
their Pastors and Teachers, in those things, that are agreeable to godliness and
good manners. Neither may we take liberty unto our selves, in those things,
that are repugnant to the courses of our good Minister. Ye ought, says the
Apostle, to imitate us, to wit, in our course of life and Christian
conversation. Many think that a sober, spiritual and christian life, is
required of the Ministers of the Church only, and that a loose, idle,
covetous, ambitious, hypocritical life is odious and abominable in them, but
is lawful and seemly enough in themselves. But look what euill-becommeth a
Minister, euill-becommeth thee too, if thou be a Christian; since thou
ought to frame thy life after the pattern of theirs, else were the Apostles
rule and argument here lame and unsound. In blessed manner therefore do they
order their lives and courses, who in their life and courses resemble the godly
Ministers of Christ; insomuch that they differ not from a Minister, but in his
function and office of teaching only.

2. That Christian men are bound to live according to that they know: and it is
a shame for them in ought (at any time) to swerue from it, which yet this
worthy Church in some things did, and the best Christians always have done.
Let us therefore diligently strive to walk according to that we know. Do we
know that we ought to imitate the Apostles? What a shame is it then, for any
Christian, to be in his life and behavior contrary to them? The like may be
said of other vicious courses. You know you should not imitate ungodly men and
infidels in surfeting and drunkenness etc: you know that fraud, and deceit, and
lying and dissembling etc, are hateful and odious in Gods eyes: how unworthy a
thing then is it for you, that profess your selves Christians, against Gods
will, and in despite of him, as it were, to follow such things?

Out of the Consequent we learn, that not to withdraw our selves from those
that live inordinately, is to live inordinately. Else the Apostles reason
should not hang well together. For the Apostle calls to imitate himself;
whom, but those that do not, as is fit they should, with draw themselves from
those that lived inordinately? And what should they imitate in him, but this,
not to live or walk inordinately? They live therefore inordinately, that live
familiarly and converse ordinarily with such as live inordinately.

Verse. 8. Neither took we bread of any man for naught --
HEre is a confirmation of the former Antecedent. For hereby the Apostle
proves, that he and his fellow-Ministers lived not inordinately, because they
took bread of no man for naught: that is, they were so careful to live
according to rule and order, that they took no bread to eat of any man, but
what they paid for. In this point of living orderly, the Apostle instanceth,
because some members of this Church sinned in the contrary, as hereafter we
shall see.

But what is this? may some say. Is this disorderly living, for a man to eat
freely of an other man's bread? Is it lawful for a Christian man to eat
nothing, but what he pays for? Is not this to take wholly away all
hospitality, liberality, kindness, courtesy, humanity, alms, Christian
society and fellowship?

But we are not so to understand these words, as if always and every where it
were utterly unlawful for a man to eat or drink of free cost. Loue-feasts,
and alms, and hospitality etc, are commended and commanded in Scripture, and
that by Paul himself too. But to what end, if a Christian might not lawfully,
at some times, make use of them? What would be more harsh and distasteful to a
free and bountiful disposition, then to make offer to pay for that meat or
drink, that he has (in friendly manner) invited us unto, or not to eat of
that we are invited unto? How distasteful would it have bin to Lydia, when she
so earnestly entreated Paul to take his repast with her, if he had refused, or
had offered money for his meat? Yea Paul himself confesses, 2. Cor. 11.7, 8,
9. that he spoiled other Churches, taking consideration of them, to spare the
Corinthians, and to do service unto them. And he defends his practice, and
the like in others at large, 1. Cor. 9.4, 6, 13, 14. Phil. 4.15. Gal. 6.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. 1. Tim. 5.17. Heb. 13.7.17. But CHRIST'S own example is beyond all
exception, who, at other men's tables, often eat bread of free cost, in that very
sense, that the Apostle speaks in this place: yea and received from some
women too, that ministered to him, of their substance. Luke 8.2, 3.

It is not therefore simply, but in regard of circumstances only, unlawful of
free cost to eat an other man's bread. And Paul (in regard of some
circumstances) would not eat of free cost, that is, refused to receive
consideration, wages and allowance, and does thence argue, that he lived not
disorderly among them, that, wherein he propounds himself to be imitated of
them.

It is not always therefore agreeable to Christian order and carriage, for men,
to eat other men's bread and meat of free cost, though they be freely and
willingly thereunto invited. There is no doubt, but that many in this Church,
would right willingly and gladly have spared, as we say, out of their own
bellies, for Paul to have eaten: and yet would not Paul take ought of free
cost. Yea though it were an unworthy and an discourteous behavior in some
cases, to offer money for the meat and drink that we take of others, yet
ought we to take it with a purpose and desire at least of gratifying them
again, and of deserving it, and by how much the less we may satisfy them for
it in the like kind, by so much the more in some spiritual manner be careful
to recompense their gift again. But far are they from Paul's disposition in
this case, that daily devour of free cost, and for naught, other men's bread,
without any purpose or desire to deserve it: they much more, who though they
receive it of free cost, and without any kind of desert, yet receive it
grudgingly and unthankfully with an evil will.

And surely, this may be a great glory, either to a Minister, or to any
Christian, if he can say, that he has not eaten any man's bread for naught. And
it ought to be a cross to a godly mind, to be driven by necessity, to take
stipend or allowance freely and without desert of any man. In regard whereof,
an ingenuous disposition will choose rather to rest content with slender fare
gotten by his own labor and desert, then to live liberally and plentifully at
other men's cost.

-- But we wrought with labor, and travel night and day. --
HE proves hereby, that they took not bread of any man for naught, because
they wrought with labor and travel night and day: that is, they earned their
living by some manuary and mechanical work, as, by tent-making, or the like.

But here, it may not without good cause be demanded, if the Apostle had taken
allowance for his pains and labor, in preaching the Gospel, whither he had
taken it for naught or no.

I answer; No, in no wise. The Apostle Paul himself both affirms and
confirms the contrary in the places before alleged. But he adds this over
and above that which before he had said: As if he should say; we not only
preached the Gospel diligently to you, which was enough to merit meat and
drink of you, but besides that with our own hands we earned our living, and
that with toil and travel.

Where first observe we the condition of these holy Apostles, how poor and
bare, and needy they were, and destitute even of the necessaries of this life.
Act. 3.
Gold and silver I have none, says Peter to the lame criple. He had not so
much, it seems at that time, as might serve to give for an alms to a beggar.
And yet begged he not neither, no not so much as in show: for then would not
the criple have asked alms of John and him, or hoped of ought from them.
Though therefore they were not amongst the beadroll of beggars, yet they hardly
kept out of it. At some time they had not so much as a penny to bestow upon
the poor. Yea, sometime for poverty and want were they compelled to put their
hands to servile works, and thereby to maintain themselves, and supply their
own wants. Whom would it not strangely affect, and work no small commiseration
in, to see such great and so famous Doctors and Teachers of the Church, toiling
and moiling, digging and deluing, following the plough, or the cart, or it may
be, sowing of garments, and that with much pain and travel, night and day,
not for couetise and base desire of gain, but constrained to do it for mere
want and necessity. The condition of the poorest parson or vicar among us is
hardly so hard, as theirs was, that were justly esteemed principal Apostles.

Which may teach us, to be content with our estate, and not to murmr against
God, though we be never so worthy, and have been never so liberally brought
up, yet if he shall see good to bring us to that poverty and penury, that we
shall be compelled to work night and day for our living. And let us learn to
thank God, if it be better then so with us. But far be it from the Ministers
of God, when they may live well and maintain their charge, without such labor
and travail, yea when they have sufficient to keep themselves and their
families not in mean and bare manner, but in liberal and plentiful sort, to
be yet ambitiously minded, and aiming at greater matters, chopping and changing
of Churches, a great benefice for a greater, and adding benefice to benefice,
and affecting and aspiring to temporal honors and high places, as if they were
worthier then Peter and Paul, and their gifts greater matters then theirs.

2. That it is not a thing unlawful for the Minister of the word, not contrary
to his calling, in case of necessity, to labor hard, even night and day, in
worldly employments. They ought indeed, so much as in them lies, to forbear,
and not to entangle themselves in worldly affairs, but give attendance to
reading, as Paul else where advises. But yet, if they be oppressed with want,
1. Tim. 4.
it becomes them to labor as well as others, and it is part of the entaxie or
good order that they are tied unto.

3. We see what other Christians then in want and necessity, much more ought
to do, that desire to live religiously, rather labor night and day if they
can, for their living, then to eat other men's bread of free cost. They must
not beg, or require to be fed freely by others, but labor night and day rather
with pain and travail, as wood cleauers or the like. That which seems to
condemn to hell, the life and course of begging friars, whose manner is not to
labor, but to beg other men's bread.

4. The Apostle did not only for his living so labor, but that he might live
to preach the Gosspell. So 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. Let not therefore poverty compel us
to leave our ministry: but when otherwise we cannot conveniently and honestly
maintain our selves, let us even be content to work with our hands, that we
may with the Apostle preach the more. Labor then about earthly things, is not
a sufficient reason to excuse and free us from the work and exercise of our
ministry, but we must so labor that we may preach. And albeit it were easier
for the Apostle endowed with such gifts as he was, to preach profitably to the
people after such distractions as these; yet every Minister, that is in any
measure fit for this function, ought so to be instructed in the mystery of the
Gospel, that even on the sudden, and as the present occasion shall require,
when necessity shall require it, he may be able in wholesome manner, to speak
unto his people. Divines ought not to be worse furnished then Physicians or
Lawyers, that are able to speak somewhat on a point of their Art propounded,
if need be, upon the sudden.

-- because we would not be chargeable to any of you.
He renders here a reason, why he labored so much in that manner, not for
filthy lucre sake, and love of worldly wealth, to increase his substance; or
out of a pride, because he would not be beholden or engaged to them for ought,
but that he might not be burdensome to them.

Wherein 1. he does intimate the poverty of this Church, that had not
sufficient (without some burden and charge) to maintain Paul. For what? did he
use to exceed so in apparel, and retinue, and costly fare, that the
maintayning of him should require some large expense? Surely he would never
then have taken such pains, or could he with his pains have compassed so much
as might suffice for such expense. Small procurations, no doubt, would have
sufficed Paul. How poor then was this Church, that being blessed with such
worthy Teachers, had not wherewith to maintain them, without being pinched by
it? The dignity and excellency of a Church therefore is not to be measured by
worldly wealth and riches, by the outward state of her Ministers, by a silken,
a rich, and a glorious Clergy, but by the piety of it, and the means of
salvation, and Christ's institutions, the freenes and plenty of them in it.

2. The Apostle not obscurely implies here, that this Church ought to have
supplied the wants of Paul, and the rest of his fellow laborers there, and to
have afforded them competent means of maintenance: else would he have said,
that you might not by reason of your poverty complain of a greiuance. There
is no doubt therefore, but that they likewise ought to have wrought night and
day for Paul and the rest of them, that they might have thereby bin maintained.
And surely, it is fit rather that the people should work for their Minister,
then the Minister for the people. The Christian people therefore ought even to
burden themselves for their Minister, rather then ought that is necessary
should be wanting unto him. That whereunto Christians are more bound now a
days, by how much the less Ministers are now able to do ought without
study, and by how much the more danger there is now of their being corrupted,
if they shall further then is fit, enwrap and entangle themselves in worldly
affairs.

3. It is the Ministers part to be burdensome to himself rather then to his
people. He ought to consider rather his peoples ability then his own worth:
and ought to have a care, that the Gospel may bring with it as little greiuance
as may be. All is not to be accepted, that of some may be offered: that is not
to be exacted, that can hardly be afforded. It is not the part of a Christian,
to take always of one that is both willing and able, yea and ought to give,
much less to exact, where it is not to be had without much grieuance. It is
odious in any Christian, much more in a Minister, if otherwise for necessity
and without scandal he may, to eat other men's bread of free cost, though it
were offered him; (for all men ought to bear the same mind that Paul did) much
more ought they to abstain from extreme and rigid exactions, though of their
dues. The Shepherd is rather to feed, then to feed upon his sheep, and to
fleece them but not to flay them.

Verse. 9. Not that we had not authority. --
HE preuenteth here a scandal, that might hence arise. For lest some should
hence gather, that the Minister were bound to take no allowance from his
Church, but to work for his living with his own hands; he says, that it was
lawful for him to have taken of them; and that herein he had departed from his
own right, because he would not be burdensome to them.

Whence we learn:

1. That a Minister may lawfully require a just allowance from his people, and
that even then when without some burden to the Church, it can not be made good.
The Apostle so departs with his own right, as yet he does not thereby impeach
the right of others, or approve the sacrilege of such, as think they may
lawfully pinch, as they say, on the Parsons side, and withold or withdraw
what they can by force or stealth from them, as if nothing at all were for
their Ministry due unto them; or as if their maintenance were nothing but
mere alms and benevolence, or gratuities only. Let sacrilegious Patrons
consider this.

2. It is the part of all Christian men, Ministers especially, not always to
exact, what in strict rigor is their due, but some time freely to depart from
their right; yea even rather to work night and day, then to exact that in some
case, which both Gods law and man's also does give them a right unto. But how
much more ought Christian men to abstain from all unjust and unlawful
exactions, and such as are contrary to all right and reason?

-- But that we might make our selves an ensample unto you to follow us.
He renders a reason here, why though he might, yet he did not take, to make
himself an example for them to follow. 1. It was no singular fact therefore
that concerned an Apostle or an Evangelist only; but such as concerns every
Christian that lives in the Church; who in this very point ought to follow the
Apostles fact as a pattern, in departing from his own right, rather then
ouer-burdening his brethren, and not in necessary precepts only. Many think
that it is the duty of Ministers to depart in part from their right, and not
to contend for the utmost that is due to them, nor to maintain suites with
such as withold their right from them, but to endure any hard measure and
wrong rather then by courses of law to seek to recover their right: when in
the mean while, they think it lawful and fit enough for themselves to exact
their own with all extremity, even whatsoever the highest strain of legal
rigor shall wring out to them, from any; and they think that they have given a
sufficient reason of what they do, if they can but say, that they did it by
law, and exacted but their own, no more then was due to them. Yea it were to
be wished that many went no further then so, even of those, that are yet
readiest to condemn the Ministers of the word, if they come any thing near so
far as to demand their due, and that where it may well enough be had. More
certain it is, that Ministers ought to take heed, that they deal not over
strictly in such cases, as the Apostle here speaks, and so to carry themselves
herein, that they may be an example to others: but so that all men are bound to
tread in their steps, and follow them in this point as well as in others.

2. It is the duty of Ministers, to get that respect and honor, if it may be,
in the eyes of their flock, that they may be incited thereby to follow their
examples, and count it an honor to them so to do. And look what virtues they
most of all require in their people, they ought themselves to put on, and so to
put them on, that they may shine in the peoples eyes with them. The like may be
said of the eschewing of vices. Would we have our people to be just, pious,
courteous, liberal, peaceable, etc? Let us be our selves examples unto them of
such virtues. Would we not have them to be profane, malicious, covetous, unjust
etc? Let us eschew such vices our selves, and be examples also therein unto
them.

Verse. 10. For even when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there
were any that would not work, he should not eat.
HItherto of the first Argument of his reprehension taken from the contrary
example of the Apostle himself: Now follows an other reason, to wit, that
this their indulgence was directly contrary to the Apostles doctrine. For on
this wise he argues: We when we were with you, warned you, that if there were
any that would not work, he should not eat.

Therefore ye ought to withdraw your selves from such as in that point walk
inordinately.



Here is a manifest sentence set down by the Apostle, that idle persons are
not to be borne with, nor to be fed and maintained among Christians: but if
they have strength and ability of body to labor, labor they must. Where the
Apostle yet speaks not of impotent persons, or of such as are willing to
work, if they were able, but of such as will not though they be able; such as
albeit for strength, and actiuenes, and years, they might profitably apply
themselves unto honest labor, yet choose rather to live an idle wandering life,
without any Christian calling at all. It is no Christian charity therefore to
bestow our bread upon idle and lazy persons, that will not lay hand to any
work. The Apostle was full of Charity and mercy, when as rather then he would
burden this Church, he chose to labor with his own hands himself: And yet
amiddest this his charity he both taught and enjoined, this pious cruelty, as
some might account it, that they should not eat, that would not work, so
far forth as they were able. For so should we judge of such persons as refuse
to live by their honest labors, as of those that are well worthy to perish. So
that we are no more bound to feed such, then to feed Wolves, or Foxes, or Mice
and Rats. And those that bestow their alms upon such, can expect no fruit
thereof at Gods hands again, but wrath and judgment rather; because they
bestow evil and dispose amiss, those things that God has committed to their
trust.

Let us therefore take heed how we condemn those as void of charity that
refuse to give bread to idle and sturdy beggars: for it is to condemn the
doctrine of the Apostle himself in this place. And again let us take heed,
least under pretense hereof we deny them alms, who by their work, are not
able to supply their own wants.

Verse. 11. For we have heard, that there are some that walk inordinately with
you, and work not at all.
HEre follows a special reprehension, or a reason rather of the former
general reproof: wherein he reprehendeth them more particularly, for that
they suffered some to live idle among them, not working at all. He means some
professors of religion, that under color thereof, led an idle, and a lazy
life, living on the sweat of other men's brows, and abusing the alms and
charity of the Church, to maintain them in their idleness. A sore plague to
the Church; and such an one as it has never been free from. For there are and
ever have been some, who after they have taken upon them the profession of the
Gospel, and perceive that they are for the same in some reckoning with the
godly, do thereupon begin to conceive so highly of themselves, as if it were
too base a thing, and not befitting their profession, to labor any more for
their living, and as if the Church in regard of their profession, stood bound
to maintain them. Hence it comes to pass, that many that are in the
condition of servants, grow slack oftentimes in their duty toward their
masters, as if there ought not so much to be expected at their hands as of
others: whereby it comes to pass, that many, to the scandal of the Gospel,
have found care, diligence, industry, and painfulness in the doing of their
business, and in the discharge of their duty, in such servants, as make little
show of religion, then in the most of them that are professors. Who especially,
if they have lighted upon religious masters, are wont to presume upon much
idleness and indulgence under them. But such professors are not to be endured
in the Church; but are as inordinate livers, to be admonished and reproved;
that we may make it known to those that are enemies to religion, and willing
to take any occasion hereby to reproach and twit it withal, that our Religion
approves not, but utterly condemns them, and all such as they are.

Hence therefore servants, and such as have not wherewith to live in good
fashion, making profession of religion, must be admonished, that they take
great heed, how they presume and promise to themselves, as if it were lawful
for them, to leave their callings, and live on other men's labors. Nay rather,
the more that they profess Christian religion, the more are they bound to
earne their living by their labor: And the more they labor, that they may not
be burdensome to others, the better God accepts of them. Insomuch, that the
baser and meaner work thou art employed in, for the getting of thy living, and
the maintenance of thy life, the greater favor shall thou find with God. For
it is not with Christ's servants in this world, as it is with the servants of
Noble men. They are not exempted from labor and servitude. It is not a thing
unbeseeming the best Christian that is, to serve even a Swineherd. Yea he is
tied to that calling, if therein or thereunto he be called. Nor does his
calling to the Christian faith, withdraw or exempt him from the vilest office,
that in this life may be, so it be honest and lawful, be it never so base.

-- but are busy bodies.
The Apostle in these words describes the very wonted nature and disposition
of such: the elegancie of his phrase can hardly be in any other language
expressed: and he seems to speak contradictories. For how can those that do
nothing be said to be busybodies? Yet certainly such is the manner and
disposition of these men: the less they do that they should, the more busy
are they about those things that belong not unto them; they are wholly employed
about other men's affairs, and about such things as little or nothing at all
concern them. Very seldom is the one vice severed from the other. For are
these idle professors idle, think ye? Nothing less. But the less they
labor with their hands, the more they work with their tongues: they are
talking of other men's faults, taxing other men's manners, prating continually of
the public state of the Church and Commonweal, as if the maine burden of
both of them lay upon their shoulders. But would we have our profession of
religion approved by the Apostles rule in this place? Let us learn (...), not
(...), to work, but not to be busy bodies; which yet is the fault of most
Christians, and of those many times, that are forwardest in profession.
Howbeit, let us not together with this vice, wherewith profession is often
tainted and foiled, cast profession away it self, but learn rather to adorn
it with such pious and apostolical virtues, as may well sort with it, and be a
grace and honor unto it.

The Apostle says, that he had heard this, whither by common fame, or by
private relation, its uncertain: either might deserve credit.

1. It is not against Christian Charity, sometime to reprove upon bare report
only, so the fame or report be worthy credit, as often it is.

2. It is the part of a faithful Pastor, not to teach his flock their duty
only, but to see what fruit his teaching has with them; and for that purpose
to make inquiry, whether he be present or absent, into the lives of them; and
if he find that they do contrary to his teaching, to admonish and to reprove
them. Whereas, (the more is the grief) for the most part, we content our
selves with teaching, not regarding whither that be done or no that is taught.

Verse. 12. Those therefore that are such, we charge and entreat by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread.
AFter reprehension he endeavors a reformation of them; wherein he puts
them in mind of their duties.

And in the first place those that walked inordinately: and afterward the rest
of them.

The duty of the former, which he puts them in mind of, is, that they
work quietly, and that so working, they eat their own bread.

Learn we hence then;

1. That it is the duty of all Christians, to work with their own hands, so
far as their ability of body will permit, rather then to be burdensome to
others. Christian religion allows no man to live idle in the Church; but
urges all to labor what they may. And this labor about the necessaries of
this life, when it arises not from a covetous mind, but is done of conscience,
that we may not be burdensome to others, it is a service most acceptable unto
God. And on the contrary, the very worship and service of God it self is
distasteful unto him, and not accepted of him, when men thereby take occasion
to cease from their honest labors, and are content to live on other men's
labors, that they may have the more leisure for religious offices. Though the
Church would allow a man means, that he might wholly tend divine service, yet
might not an ordinary Christian accept of the condition, but he ought rather
to labor.

2 Christian men must not work only, but they must work quietly, i. with a
quiet mind, not murmuring against God or the Church, as if they were neglected
more then were meet, when they have not things necessary ministered unto them;
but quietly resting on the good will of God, and therefore working willingly, as
knowing well that it is Gods will that they should so do, that he has imposed
it upon them, and regards them in their labors, as doing his business, and
hoping therefore for a blessing from him.

3. That is our bread, that is earned by our work. And we eat not our own but
other men's bread, if we come not by it by our own labor when we can, albeit
it be freely given us by others. It is not enough therefore for us to say, that
our bread or ought else that here we live by, is our own, because it is yielded
us by others; but that alone is ours rightfully, that by our own labor we have
earned.

4. Our bread should be the sweeter to us, the more it is our own: and the
more it is other men's, the bitterer should it be. Unworthy then are they to be
termed Christians, that find the more relish in things, the more they are an
others; and that count stolen waters most sweet.

That they do this, he charge and earnestly entreats them by the Lord Jesus
Christ: wherein not only he shows his ardent desire of having this abuse
reformed, and the difficulty of reforming it; but he implies withal, that
the reformation thereof will be exceedingly well-pleasing to Christ; and on the
other side, that this offense was highly offensive and displeasing unto him. As
also he teaches the form and manner, how inordinate livers are in the first
place to be corrected by the Pastors of the Church.

Verse. 13. And you, brethren, be not weary of well-doing.
HEre follows an admonition of the duty of those, that did not live in such
inordinate manner. And it is twofold.

First, that they would not grow weary of well-doing, but that as they had
begun, so they would go on in a virtuous course of life, and not show
themselves cowards, and faint hearted, by falling back from it, after the
manner of those whom he had spoken of before.

Whence we may learn:

1. That it is not enough for one for sometime to have done well, but he must
do well always, and never wax weary of it, or grow slack in it.

2. That those that do well are in danger of waxing weary and slack, if they
be not hartned and encouraged to perseverance; especially where evil examples
are.

3. That they have need of courage and confidence, that would persevere in
well doing: and that it is a note of a base and a cowardly mind to give it
over.

4. That the inordinate courses and lives of professors, and in particular this
corruption of living idly, upon the labors of others, and making the
profession of the faith a pretense for the same, is a shrewd means many times
to cool both the charity, and Christian courage of many. That which our
Savior himself foretold would be. Math. 24.12. And it was that, as it is
likely, that made some in this Church to be so affected.

Verse. 14. If any man obey not our sayings, by this Epistle note him, and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
THe second office is concerning those that walk inordinately: and it is
threefold:

1. If they be refractory, and refuse to obey the Apostles admonition in this
Epistle, that they note him; that is, to make a sign as it were of him, for
the use of a sign is to give notice of something; or to set as it were a mark
upon him, (...).
that he may be as a marked man.

He would have them then so to mark, and regard, and take special notice of
such, and of their courses, that they may perceive, that they are noted by them
for the same, and that the eyes of men are set upon them as on a mark or a
sign. A means worth the observing for the correcting of such as live
inordinately. For when they see that the eyes of the godly are set on them, and
that they are so noted, it cannot but be of great force, if there be any spark
of grace in them, to make them change their life, and take some better course.
And the neglect hereof is wont maruailously to confirm men in their inordinate
courses, when the godly pass by them, and seem not to regard what they do,
but so carry themselves, as if they observed no such thing in them.

2. He would have them to have no commerce with them; he would not have them to
keep any company with such; that is, not to converse so with them, that by the
least gesture they seem to approve of their courses. For he does not exclude
all commerce in general, as utterly unlawful, with such; but such only,
whereby either in deed, or in show they may in some sort partake with them
therein For example sake; he has no commerce with a drunkard, and an haunter
of Tauernes, that refuses to go with him to the tavern, and to make himself
merry with his swilling and bibbing: and the like may be said of commerce with
players and iesters. It is a grievous sin therefore and warily to be
eschewed, that we have no fellowship with such as refuse to obey the
admonitions of the Prophets and Apostles: For it concerns us as much herein
to obey the Apostle, as it did this Church.

Now the end of the former observation and separation is that such may be
ashamed. These means has God ordained to shame such Christians as live not
according to the rule of the Apostles writings; and to that end are they
faithfully to be used. And though they may make some graceless men,
hypocrites, and Atheists more impudent and shameless; yet are they of
maruailous great efficacy, to shame such, and by shaming them to bring them
into the right way again, that have any grace at all left in them. And it is a
sign of a man wholly graceless, that perceiving himself so to be noted by
the godly, is not ashamed of it, and much more, that grows thereupon more
shameless.

Verse. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy; but admonish him as a brother.
3. HE would have them to admonish such disordred ones, yet not accounting them
as enemies, but regarding them as brethren.

Wherein observe we:

1. That the noting before spoken of, must not be a bare, sullen, and silent
eying of them, or a scornful and hateful pointing at them; but it must be
joined with loving and friendly admonition, as occasion and opportunity shall
be offered. They must perform that office by word of mouth unto such, that the
Apostle himself did by writing before, verse. 12. as he also enioyneth the same
expressly els-where. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

2. That though the Apostle willed them to withdraw themselves from such, yet
his meaning therein was not, that they should have no dealings at all with them,
nor perform no kind offices at all unto them; but they should forbear only
all such familiarity with such, whereby themselves might be endangered, or
such offenders encouraged in their rechles and disordred courses, or have the
least show of approbation or liking afforded them. Otherwise that good offices
are to be performed unto such also, and that for the performance of such
offices we may repair to them and deal with them; (which the more need they
have of them, the more frequent also they ought to be; as sick or sickly
persons require ordinarily more attendance, then those that be in good health:)
it is apparent, in that the Apostle enioyneth to admonish those now, whom he
willed them yet to withdraw from before.

3. That admonition, and that frequent and instant, ought to go before ejection
and casting out of the Congregation, according also to this our Apostle his
rule and ordinance els-where. Tit. 3.10. yea according to that direction, that
our Savior himself has given Christians for their carriage in private wrongs
done them by their brethren. Math. 18.15, 16, 17. All means are wont to be
used for the curing and preserving of limbs and members diseased, ere we
proceed to the dismembring and maiming of the bodi^, by the seuering of them
from it.

4. That this admonition it must be brotherly, and so all the former offices
also. So are we to note such, as we would our friend, or our brother, whose
well-doing we sincerely desire and earnestly thirst after. So must we withdraw
from them, that our very withdrawing may unto them appear to proceed from a
brotherly affection toward them, and to tend unto their good. And so lastly
must we admonish them, that by our very admonitions of them, we may make it
known unto them, that we bear no foe-like mind unto them but retain still a
brotherly heart and mind toward them: yea and that we would not take that
course we do with th^^, but that we desire to retain and keep them st^l with
us, in the mutual bond and body of Christianity as br^thren.

Verse. 16. Now the Lord of peace, give you peace, always, by all means.
HEre follows the last part, or the Conclusion of this Epistle; with a
postscript annexed to it.

He concludes in the usual manner, not of himself alone, but of all others
that use to write Letters or Epistles, with prayer for them, or wishing well to
them. So use the Latins with their Vale, and the Greeks with their (...), to
close up most of their letters, thereby wishing well to those they write unto,
to testify their love and friendly affection toward them.

And surely the Apostle is very frequent herein; thereby teaching us, that it
is a special duty of Christians, to wish well one to an other, and to pray
one for another: As also, that it is a matter that much concerns Christian
men, and makes much for their good, that the godly Ministers and Brethren
should wish well to them, and accordingly pray for them.

The good he wishes them is twofold:

The first is Peace; and that always, and by all means.

Peace is the chiefest good of every society; as jarre and war is the
greatest evil: And it is then, when the members of any society do live
quietly, and in friendly and loving manner together, embracing mutually each
other, and communicating all things to the common good either of other, and
herein conspiring together, in affording the fruits of love, and performing all
good offices one to an other. To wish them this then, is to wish them an heaven
upon earth. For what greater happiness can there be here? As on the other
side, what can be more woeful and more hellish then the contrary evil? In
peace, man to man is a God: in jar and war, man to man is a Wolf, a Bear, a
Tygre, a Devil.

That therefore that the Apostle wishes to them, and with them to us and all
others; that ought we not only to wish to our selves, but by all means
earnestly strive and endeavor to compass. Let us therefore carefully follow
those things that belong to peace; and eschew, so much as in us lies, all
occasions and means of contention and strife; and hate as firebrarnds of hell,
all make-bates, raisers and kindlers of contention and strife.

He wishes them further all manner of peace, that is, peace and quietness in
Church and state, at home and abroad, in heaven above, and in their own
consciences here; peace civil, peace domesticke, peace spiritual; peace with
men, with the Saints, with the Angels, with God: and that continual too; that
is, sure, firm, sound, neuer-ceasing.

We ought therefore to follow peace, not with this or that man alone, or at
this or that time alone, but always, with all men, and by all means; and with
the Apostle here, wish the like as well to others as to our selves.

Now this peace he wishes unto them from God the Author of peace.

Wherein he teaches;

1. That such peace issues only from God and his good pleasure; and that he
alone is the author thereof; on him it depends; and without him there is no
hope of having it.

2. That no peace is to be regarded, but that, that God is the author of; such
especially to be refused as is contrary to his will. It is an accursed peace,
that is gotten by fighting against God; it is no peace, but a cursed
conspiracy and war against God.

3. That peace among Christians is a special work of God; and for the benefit
thereof is great praise due unto him. And by prosecuting and maintaining it, we
honor him that is the author of it.

-- The Lord be with you all.
The second good that he wishes them, is that the Lord be with them all; that
is, that he would be present with them by his Spirit, and manifest this his
presence by the sweet influences of heavenly grace.

Now out of the connection of this with the former, whereof this is the cause; we
learn; that there is no true and sound peace, but among those, with whom God
is. He by his presence in house, Church, and state works this peace. And
where this peace is, there is God himself in special manner present with that
society, and a member in some manner of it. On the other side, where this peace
is not, some evil Spirit reigns in that society, and is with that house,
church, town or state. Would we then have God to be, and abide with us, and to
bless our societies with his gracious presence, and to knit us fast together
in the bond of peace? Let us give all diligence to serve and please him: and
let us account it the greatest blessing that can be, for God to be with us; and
the greatest evil that can be, for him not to be with us.

Verse. 17. The Salutation of me Paul, with mine own hand; which is a token in
every Epistle; so I write.
HEre follows the postscript annexed to the former; wherein he gives this
Church a certain token or sign, whereby they may know, that this Epistle is
his own, and distinguish it from all forged and counterfeit ones.

Wherein 1. observe the fraud and impudency of Satan, who even in the Apostles
own times, attempted to obtrude upon the Churches of Christ, bastardly and
counterfeit writings, as Apostolical; that by this means he might corrupt the
pure doctrine of faith.

2. It concerns us much to be persuaded of the writings of the Apostles, and
to be able to distinguish them from all other writings. For albeit that other
men should write the same things that they did, yet would not their writings be
of the like use, because they could not be of the same authority that theirs
are. Would we then have our doctrine to be of weight with Gods people; let us
give them some sign, whereby it may be known, that our doctrine is
Apostolical, and not an humane device: let them see how it is deduced and
derived from their springs, and has consonance and agreement with them.

The Sign he gives them, is the writing of a kind of Salutation, that was
ordinary with him, with his own hand. For Paul often, as well he might, made use
of other men's hands in writing of his Epistles, himself only dictating to them
what they should write: And that it may be, because he had not so plain or so
fair an hand, as was fit for such purposes: or it may be also, that thereby he
might give a more evident proof, that what he delivered, proceeded from his
own spirit, and was not transcribed by him from some other.

Verse. 18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
THis is that usual Salutation of Paul, which he was wont to write with his
own hand, so often as he used the help of other for the writing of the rest.

Wherein, under the term of Grace, he comprehends, and consequently wishes
unto them, all effectual means of salvation that flow from Christ. For to
wish unto any the grace of (...) is to wish unto them all things, that may
(...) make a Christian man eternally happy. (...) then be the vpshot and the
utmost aim (...) Christian desires, to desire the grace of Christ (...) it
will bring with it heaven and eternal happin^ (...) And that in vain expect
or hope we for, unless he be our Lord, and we become his servants.

The word, Amen, signifies not only his sincere desire, that what he wishes
unto them may accordingly befall them; but his faith also and assurance that
they should certainly enjoy it. Which mind let us bear also toward all those,
whom we see to be well given and to embrace the true worship of GOD prescribed
by CHRIST.

FINIS.

