The Scholars Medley, OR, AN INTERMIXED DISCOVRSE UPON HISTORICAL AND
POETICAL RELATIONS.

A Subject of it self well meriting the approbation of the Judicious, who best
know how to confirm their knowledge, by this brief Survey, or general Table
of mixed Discourses.

And no less profitable to such as desire to better their immaturity of
knowledge by Moral Readings.

Distinguished into several heads for the direction of the Reader, to all such
Historical Mixtures, as be comprehended in this Treatise.

The like whereof for variety of Discourse, mixed with profit, and modest
delight, has not heretofore been published,

By RICHARD BRATHVVAYTE Oxon.

HOR. Quod verum atque decus turo and rogo -- and omnis in hoc Sum.

LONDON,

Printed by N. O. for George Norton, and are to be sold at his Shop near
Temple-barre 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD OF SOUTHAMPTON (LEARNINGS best Favorite)
RICH: B^ATHVVAYTE wishes perpetual increase of best meriting Honors.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
SO rarely is Pallas Shield borne by the Noble, or supported by such whose
eminence might revive her decayed hopes: as Britains Pernassus (on which,
never were more inhabitants planted, and Homer-like, more usually expulsed) is
grown despicable in her self, because protected by none but her self. Hinc
ferrea Tempora surgant: wanting their Cherishers (those Heroicke Patrons) whose
countenance in former times made the Studies of the learned more pleasant
(having their Labors by such approbation, seconded.) Yet in these times (my
Honorable Lord) we may find some Royal Seeds of pristine Nobility (wherein
we may glory) reserved, as it were, from so great ruins for the preservation
of Learning, and the continuance of all virtuous Studies; amongst which your
Noble Self, as generally reputed learned, so a professed friend to such as be
studious of learning: a charracter which ever held best correspondency with
honor, being a favorite to them who can best define honor: expressing to the
life (what proprieties best concord with so exquisite a maister-peece: It is
ob^erued that all the Roman Emperors were singular in some peculiar Art,
Science, or Mystery: And such of the Patricijans as could not derive their
native descent (with the particular relation of their Ancestors most Noble
actions) were thought unworthy to arrogate any thing to themselves by their
virtues. These Romans were trucly Noble, bearing their own Annals ever with
them, either to caution them of what was to be done, or excite them to
prosec^te what was by them commendably done: nor knew they honor better
limmed, or more exactly proportioned, then when it was beautified by the
internal ornaments of the mind. Many I know (my good Lord) whose greatness
is de* riuatiue from their Ancestors unto themselves, but much eclypsed by
their own defects: and Plants which had a Noble Grafter, use now and then to
degenerate. But so apparent is your Luster, that it borrows no light but from
your self; no eminence but from the lamp of your honor, which is ever ready
to excite the virtuous to the undertaking of labors well meriting of their
Country, and generally profitable to all estates. In Subjects of this nature
(my Honorable Lord) I cannot find any more exact then these Suru^ies of
^istories; many we have depraved: and every Iasciuious Measure now becomes an
Historian. No study in his own nature more deserving, yet more corrupted none
is there: O then if those ancient Romans (mirrours of true Resolution) kept
their Armilustra with such solemnity, feasts celebrated at the surueyes of
their weapons: We that enjoy these Halcyons days of peace and tranquillity,
have reason to reserve some time for the solemnizing this peaceble Armor of
Histories; where we may see in what bonds of duty and affection we are tied
to the Almighty, not only in having preserved us from many hostile incursions,
but in his continuing of his love toward us, we cannot well dijudicate of
comforts but in relation of discomforts: Nor is peace with so general
acceptance entertained by any, as by them who have sustained the extremities of
war. Many precedent experiments have we had, and this I Will has tasted of
misery with the greatest, and now revived in her self, should acknowledge her
miraculous preservation, as not proceeding from her own power, but derived
from the supreme influence of heaven, whose power is able to erect, support,
demolish, and lay wast as he pleases: Hinc Timor, Hinc Amor. Hence we have
argument of Fear and Love. Fear from us to God, Love from God to us: Cause
we have to fear, that subject not our understandings to the direct line and
square of reason, but in our flourishing estate (imitating that once renowned
Sparta) who was -- Nunquam minus faelix quam cum felix visa -- Abuse those
excellent gifts we have received, contemning the meanaces of heaven, and
drawing upon our selves the viols of Gods wrath, heavier diffused, because
longer delayed. We should recollect our selves, and benefit our ungrateful
minds with these considerations: that our present felicity be not buried in
the ruins of a succeeding calamity. These Histories (my Noble Lord) be the
best representments of these motives. And in perusing discourses of this nature
(next to the Sacred Word of God) we are strangely transported above humane
apprehension, seeing the admirable foundations of Commonweals planted (to
man's thinking) in the port of security, wonderfully ruinated: Grounding their
dissolution upon some precedent crying sin, which laid their honor in the
dust, and translated their Empire to some (perchance) more deserving people.
Here civil wars, the original causes of the Realms subversion: there
ambition bred by too long success: Here Emulation in virtue, the first
erectors of a flourishing Empire: there Parasites, the Scarabe of Honor, the
corrupters of Royally disposed affections, and the chief^st Enginers of wrack
and confusion, buzzing strange motions in a Princes ear, occasioning his
shame, and their own ruin. Here States happy, before they raisd themselves to
the highest type and distance of happiness. And generally observe we may in
our humane Compositions, nothing so firm as to promise to it self constancy,
so continuate as assure it self perpetuity, or under the cope of heaven, any
thing so solid as not subject to mutability. This Survey (my Lord) have I
presumed to Dedicate to your Honor, not for any meriting discourse which it
comprehends, but for the generality of the Subject: Your protection will raise
it above it self, and make me proud to have an Issue so highly Patronized: it
presents it self with fear, may it be admitted with Honor: So shall my
labors be in all duty to your favor devoted, my prayers exhibited, and my
self confirmed

Your Lordships wholly, RICH: BRATHVVAYTE.

To the understanding Reader.
SO many idle Pamphleters write to Thee now a daeies, as thy understanding (in
my judgment) seems much disparaged: I have ever resolved to have this Motto:
Catoni solus dormio: But where that Cato is, there is the difficulty. He is too
heavy for the Court, too wise for the City, and too precise for the Country.
If my book chance to find him, I know my Subject shall be entertained, and
my Petition shall be heard, for Auriculas Asini non habet -- to give my labor
but impartial censure. Understand thy self Reader and thou vnderderstands me:
if thou battle at Ordinaries thou art not for me, thou have thy wit in the
platter: For ^ never knew him wise that only delighted to

Farewell. R. B.

THE SCHOLARS MEDLEY, OR AN INTERMIXED DISCOVRSE UPON HISTORICAL AND Poetical
Relations.
IN the survey of Histories, the true Relators of things done, with a probable
collection of things to come, by precedent events: I thought good compendiously
to contract some especial caueats, as well for observance in Historical
Discourses, as for prevention of such inconveniences A threefold division.
(or exorbitances rather) as happily might occur in such Narrations. First
therefore I 1. Scope of histories.
have propounded to my self this method, (by way of inferance) to describe
the true scope at which all Histories ought to aim, and to which they should
principally be directed. Secondly, to distinguish of 2. Fruit of histories.
several uses and fruits of Histories. The end whereof being exactly set
down, a di-iudicating power may easily collect from what Subject the choicest
and selectedst fruits may be deduced. Thirdly, the profit 3. The profit
redounding to (...) Families by Histories.
which redounds to every state, either Aristocraticke, Democraticke, or
Monarchicke, by the true and understanding use of Histories. The true use and
scope of all Histories ought to tend to no other purpose, then a true narration
of what is done, or has been achieved either in foreign or domesticke
affairs, with a modest application (for present use) to caution us in things
offenfiue, and excite us to the management of im^loiments in themselves
generous, and worthy i^. So as it pleased the Orator to call History the
(...), or M^rror of man's li^e: charactring the (...) of this Universe, the
states of princes, eu^nts of wa^res, conquests of renowned Captains, even all
designs, either public or p^iuate by a succinct description, or map rather
^xpressing every part affair: and what (as a worthy Historian has obs^rued)
can be imagined more worthy admiration, then in a safe and retired port, in the
harbor of secure rest, in our ptiuate reposes to see there a Prince beleagred
with many hostile apponents, straight by miraculous means defeating them, and
by his own policy, (the supreme purpose of the Almighty) to plant himself in
tranquillity, where (as far as humane apprehension could reach) naught but
imminent ruin could be expected: there a Cittiy by wise and discreet
government wonderfully preserved: here amidft concealing or shadowing rather of
the conquerours exploits by his moderation in conquering, implies how he could
bear his fortunes, if he were conquered. We may read no state in her self so
secure, but may be shaken, exemplified well in Rome, the Gouernesse of ample
Territories, and now made subject to those which were her subjects: no Prince
of so prosperous imploymen^s, so successiue proceedings, or general forces,
but either vanquished at home or abroad: abroad by foreign powers, or at home
by his own illimited affections; instanced in that great and potent prince of
of Macedon, who (though Prince of the whole world) could not play prince of his
little world, being slaued to distempered passions. No City but sore harased,
if notrazed. Nor could that Italian Tryacala (which taking her denominate from
the Greek, comprehends all beauty) stand against the injury of Time, or
withstand the battry of all assaults; which makes me tax that Ci^ty of
arrogance (whereof Hyppo. speaks in his Book of the increase of Cities)
upon the gates whereof was this Impressa engraven, Intact^manet. To see these
states so well and lively decolored, cannot but confer no less delight
(being grounded on virtue, where all true and perfect delights be seated) then
the relation of the Trojan affairs (being made by so excellent and
experimented an Historian as Ithac^s) delighted that chaste Greek Penelope:
Theseus Travels Ariadne, or Alcides Labors Omphale. But to the use of
History. History being a minte of profit and delight, the seasoning of more
serious studies, the reporter of cases adjudged by event, the interlude of our
haps, the image of fortune, the compendiarie director of affairs, the
representer of humane success, the infallible character (by collation had with
things past, and things to come) of succeding events: should not aim at
lascivious stories, amorous subjects (unless by way of disgression to smooth a
serious discourse with a modest insertion of mirth) but to prosecute the
argument of the History without frivolous Ambages, or impertinent
circumstances. Affectation ill beseemes an Historian: For he should understand
what office he supports; not any thing draind from his own invention, but to
perform the charge of sincere relation. I approve of his oppinion that
thought, Invention to be least needful to an Historian, but disposition more
then to any. It is sufficient for an Historian to express what he has read
or seen, truly, without concealing any thing, in partial r^spect to any
person, making truth the period of his discourse. The Philosopher thought a
poor man was not to be an historian: for necessity would enforce him temporise
and observe humors: Nor a rich man, for he had his eye fixed upon his estate,
and durst not vn-rip great men's errors, lest he should loose by his labors.
But I disaprou^ his censure, and refell it with another opinion of the same
sect: Si dives de fortunis and infortunijs scribat, sie enim vtriusque fortunae
sortem aequius ferat. Si pauper de fortunis scribat, vt cum eas attigerit,
melius eas regat and teneat. The error of judgment should not be appropriated
either to want, or eminence of fortune: for so should we subject the inward to
the outward, the intellectual power to the external varnish, preferring the
eye of the body before the light of the mind. Yet to intermeddle in estates,
so much as to dis-able them (by extenuating theit powers) lessening their
revenues, or ecclipsing their pristine honor and eminence, by mentioning some
insuccessiue events they have had by war, or other occurrents, I wholly
disallow it, proceeding either from private enmity to the state, or from a
malevolent nature (unfitting for so good a professor) apt to sting all,
because an enmy to himself and all. States should not be laid too open: but
when occasion serves to describe the seats of Countries, Regions, etc. or to
touch the manners and conditions of inhabitants, how they live, and to what
trades most inclined, with whom they have commerce or the like, will not
derogate any thing from the scope of an History, or any way implye a
digression. It is thought, (and that by the Authentickst Historians) that
Caesar; by the description of U^lateranus, which he made of Britain,
declairing how the people were savage, and unapt for military discipline, the
places of defense unprovided: and then showing how fruitful the whole Island
was, replenished with all necessaries, was induced to take his expedition into
Britain, and to conquer it, though prevented by a Brutus, who to rid Rome of
tyranny, restored poor Britain to her liberty, for his journey was stayed by
death.

And (doubtless) there is nothing which inflames the mind of man more unto
valor and resolution, then the report of the acts of their Ancestors, whose
monuments remaining of record with this Impress: Non norunt h^c monumenta mori,
must needs stir up in them a desire of imitation.

Many examples I could produce herein, as the Trophies of Mil^iades inducements
of imitation to Casar: the acts of Achilles to Alexander, of Ulysses to
T^lamon, of the Greekish Heroes to Prymaleon, of Danaus to Linceus, Aegeus to
Theseus. Many times (we read) where a natural defect and want of courage was
seated, even a retrograde from the sphere of valor, there (though a barren
seed-plot to work on) by historical discourse has magnanimity shown herself
in more perfect and real colors, the^ if nature her self had implanted in that
man a Native desire to fight, so powerful is history in her self, where
Nature in her self expresses small power. This discourse therefore should not
be employed in any thing save in excitements to Glory, motives to warlike
designs; since by it valor is quickened, a desire of honor inflamed,
Countries fame dispersed, and Monuments of never dying glory erected: O then
who should so disalow the precious treasure of a refined discourse, as to mix
it with impudent and scurrilous inventions; such fictions as are not only in
themselves fabulous, but to the unstaid Reader (of which sort we have too
many) mortally dangerous. Which fables (in my opinion) fall among the
impertinent and feagured Tables called Milesiz; only aiming at the depravation
of manners, and the effeminating best resolved Spirits. The ripnesse whereof
(by such unseasoned discourses) become blasted before their time: O that the
depravednesse of these times should taint so generally approved study: making
Histories mere Panygi^icks (poems of adulation, to insinuate and wind
themselves into the affection of the great, leaving the scope of an History to
gain by their studious traffic. Office of an^ Historian.


But let us return to the office of a good Historian. He will not write but
upon singular Grounds, reasons impregnable; conferring with the best to make
his Narrations confirmed of the Best: He writes the stories of Princes truly
without concealing their errors (by way of silencing them) or comment upon an
History, annexing to it an unnecessary gloss. He will not be so engaged to
any, as that he will be restrained of his scope; or so countermanded, as that
he must of necessity illustrate vice, virtue cannot pass without her
character: A good Historian will always express the actions of good men with
an Emphasis, to solicit the Reader to the affecting the like means, whereby
he may attain the like end. This was the cause all the Noble Heroes in
ancient time did live to posterity their acts to imitate: not so much for
record of their own memorable life's, as for the propagating their Countries
eternal honor by succeding Worthies. As those establishers of good and
wholesome Laws made themselves with their Country renowned: Mynois and
Radamanth among the Cretensians; Orpheus among the Thracians, Draco and Solon
in Athens, Lycurgus in Lacedemon, Zamolx is among the Scythians: Nor be
Historians (if so the Professors merit that style) of less esteem then the
prudentest and most experienced Statists. For these direct every Senator in
polliticke affairs by producing such as excelled in administration of justice,
describing the very natures of such Laws, and the causes why such Laws were
enacted to present times.

These Ages have been, and are to this day, much (...) of Transcriptories.
indebted to Transcriptions, Inventions are often times slow, where the
application of things invented to the present State seems more facile and
easy: Hereto then should the scope of Histories tend; not only to personate
the acts of men upon the Theater of this world, but likewise to cull out such
Laws, Orders, and Precepts, as well Moral as Divine, which may benefiet their
present estate. Sysambris skin was a good caveat for succeding Judges: Justice
before went on crutches, and more were troubled with Demosthenes disease then
with Phoycions bluntness. The Historian must not sow pillowes to the elbowes
of Magistrates, nor sooth corruption with an humor of shadowing vice: He
shows what was done: and commends the one to reprehend the other. Virtue never
wants her character, nor vice her reproof: For such Hystoricall Relations as
induce to virtue and deter from vice, comprehend in them the true use of such
Subjects, being Apologeticall and Moral to reform, not Mylesian or profane
to deforme or disfigure the exact simmetree of a virtuous Idiome. No marvel if
Alexander laid the works of Homer under his head, being such as directed him
how to be a Head, how to govern Provinces, how to sway his inordinate
affections; so as Cleanthes Fable (virtues best elucidary) had her Liberal
Sciences never better portraied, then the differences twixt true fortitude, and
a foole-hardy boldness were by Homer deblazoned. Here a Hectors badge of true
valor, there an Antenor whose gravity purchased him honor: there a Diomedes
no less wise then resolved, here a Troilus stoutnesse but unadvised here
wars well managed abroad, but less successiue at home, examplefied in
Agamemnon, there a subtle scouce, no less frieghted with pollocy then
success in Sinon. All these are expressed by that Heriocke Historian.

Qui quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe quid vtile, quid non?
Before ac melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.
These acts couid not but minister sufficient matter of admiration to such
Judicious Readers, as apprehended each circumstance in the subject; making that
apt connection of all, that the body might seem more excellent, by the
proportioning of every member. Several fruits of History.
Histories in themselves are diverse, producing several fruits to the
pervsers, according to every man's affection: Which made that modern Historian
compare them to a Banquet, wherein were to be served several dishes; some to
provoke appetite, others to satiate, more delightful subjects penned for
relishing more serious studies, grauer discourses to ripen the understanding,
by applying the instructions of foreign States to our own judgments: where
we may make use of the best part of man (in his reasonable power) and that is
Election: approving of what is good, or may in it self be beneficial to the
State: and slieghtly observing discourses of indifferency, as accomplements,
ceremonies, circumstances, and the like, resembling fair frontespices which
are made rather for ornament then use. It is necessary for a good Historian to
have maturity of judgment, to apprehend what is fittest for his discourse, and
to be as little complemental as may be, lest the varnish mar the work; for
the words of an History in my opinion iumps with Mirandula: -- Vt non sint
le^ta ita nec neglecta: the one implics a kind of deiection, the other a mind
too Profit of History.
curious to profit any, desiring only to please himself. Caesar in his
Comment, shows no less discipline in the Art of History, then in the
discipline of Arms: using a style as well fitting a Soldier, as curiosity the
smoth tongue of an Orator. It is true which are observed of him: Si acta eius
penitus ignorasses, per lingua^ tame^ militem esse diceres: Having neither hi^
phrases too selected, (as to show a singularity) or too neglected to express a
c^relesnesse in his writing. The records of things done commended to posterity
should not be enrolled, as the Chaldees did their Hieroglyphics in ciphers and
intricate conclusions, but in words most significant, phrases modestly elegant,
and discourse most pertinent? Here by way of disgression let me touch the
ridiculous labors, and unfruitful travails of such who pass the Alps,
trace uncouth places, Des^rts, Promontories; for what end Heaven knows, s^ue
only to wrest ou^ a phantasticke behavior of superfluous wit, or to comme t
on othe^s travails by way of dirision: These are such as upon their return,
publish what they have seen; some more then they have seen, which I term
Commenting Trauailers: others less then they have seen (or at least the most
(...)) which I term Phantasticke Trauailers. Such as lie on their travel,
either do it for admiration, or having run upon the adverse shelues of a
deplored fort^ne, are enforced to invent strange things for the relief of
their dejected estate. Such as publish less then they have seen, (omitting
things of the greatest consequence, to satisfy our humors with trifles) do it
to gain pregnancy, or singularity rather of conceit: they talk not of the
acts of Princes, nor the sites of Regions, the temperature of such Clymates, or
any material discourse, but to show an exquisite strain of wit, purchased by
a little fruitless travel: they insert frivolous occurrents, borrowed, or (it
may be) invented by their own phantasticke brains. These miss the mark a
good Traveler should aim at: they should observe Laws in foreign places,
like a good Lycurgus to ^ranspose so glorious a freight to their own Country.
They should not (like our Fashion-inuenters, our Italionated Albionacts) so
much observe what is worn on the body, as what habit best beseemes the nature
and condition of their mind. Since flourishing Commonweals are then the
highest, when in external habilliments the lowest: for Sparta never flourished
more, then when she conformed her state to the imitation of the (...). Many
Realms have we known to be miraculouily protected, by means of experienced
men: which experience they Vsc of (...) and example.
either received by Travel or Example: yea, many Empires (and those of amplest
circumference) have been reduced from a kind of servitude within themselves,
by experiments derived from a far^e. For travel, the excellent designs of
Sertorius, Eumenes, Marius, and Antonius, may sufficiently confirm the profit
to be reaped thereby. For example: We shall read in all the Roman Annals, a
certain vehement desire in all the worthy Patritians of imitating whatsoever
Imitation in virtue.
they perceued to be worthy imitation in their predecessors, marking the
events of their intendments, and collecting the goodness of the means by the
prosperous success in the end. These were worthy monumentall honors, that
could not only imitate the vercues so transparant in others, but even
exemplify their memorable actions in themselves. We are placed in the
following Ages, but we scorn to follow the precedent times in their virtues,
though expert enough in contriuing politic designs: the fabric of our
invention can dispose or transpose it self to any shape, any impression, or
private gain or advantage: but public affairs may be Advocates for
themselves; they are a Merchandise too far estranged from our affections,
none will travel to purchase their Countr^es peace: Solon and we have few that
go mad for their country; but Tarp^a's we have too many, that are mad with
desire to betray their Country. Few Law-inacters, many Law-infringers: making
wholesome laws, like Tarandulas web, wickets for great ones to come through,
but snarles for little ones to hold.

But to return to our former argument: by the right use of H^story, we see
virtue revived when her defender is dead: and to say the truth, I may use
Thales sentence in this discourse: without History, Nihil mortem a vi^a
differ: Since the life of the dead depends upon the memory of the living: for
without some memorial of actions prosecuted, what difference betwixt the
valiant acts of Ithacus, and the shameful retiredness of Aeg^schus? betwixt
Aeneas piety, and Pigmalions cruelty? They are dead, and their poor vrne can
speak no more for them, then Pompeys Sepulcher spoke for him: Hic situs est
mag^us, here he lies that was once great: powerful in popular command,
generally succesfull, before his Pharsalian discomfite: here he lies that was
styled his Countries Patron, Romes best Centinell: yet failing in the close of
his fortunes, drooping in the vpshot of his victories: Time can erect no other
monument in his remembrance: Uixi, and Uici: only once I lived, and was once
conqueror. It is recorded, that when Alexander came to the Tomb of Achilles,
and beheld the mirror of Greece, shut up in so small a scantling of earth, (a
parcel of that whole which could hardly contain him living) he wept bitterly,
adding: Heccine sunt Trophea? Be these all the monuments, all the Trophies this
world could afford thee? Is greatness so soon extinguished, and the lamp of
Honor so soon put out? A good motive for Alexander, to caution him of his
mortality, and might make up this conclusion: Alexander thou art not (...), but
(...): not the son of Jupiter, but the son of earth.

The like we read related by Qu^ntus Curtius: that when this great Prince of
Maccdon came into Persia, an object of no less pity, then example of humanc
frail^y, represented it self unto him: to wit, the poor Sepulcher of that
victorious Cyr^s, on which he found no other Inscription then this: O man,
whosoever thou be, or from what pl^ce soever thou shall come (for I know thou will come) know, that I am Cyrus, who translated the Emp^re from the Medes to
the Persians: pray thee do not enur me for this little handful of earth that
does cover me. This Epitaph could not choose but fix an impression of remorse
and commiseration (as indeed it did) in that great Conquerours heart: seeing
whereto all his victories tended: So as Neroes affecting command and
sovereignty was well answered by Seneca: Pulchrum est regnare (said Ne^o:)
Nihil est, si nihil quaras, replied Senec^: certainly (if I be not blinded with
the love of Historical discourse) there is no means better to deter from vice,
nor more effectual inducements unto virtue, then these moral relatio^s. By
them we see the lives of Princes, and their employments ( Prima sp^cie leta) ^n
their first entrance or passage pleasant, and delightful, promising no less
then success, and in success continuance: Afterward, Tractu dura, more
difficulties attending, as if the Wheel of Fortune were removed to a place
subjected to more occurrents; yet not so dangerous, as to be attended by
ruin: nor so secure, as to promise an undoubted issue. Euentu tristia, a
strange Catastrophe of so fair beginnings: where, in the first, there was
security grounded upon more then hope: in the second, hope, though not secure:
In the third, neither hope nor security, but depriuall of both. Yet even in
these conuersions, if it please the Reader to cast his eye upon the admirable
moderation of some Princes affections, he shall see verily a Christian
resolution in a Pagan. Furius Camill^s could not be daunted, ^.
(^ough unjustly censured:) his exile neither made him d^ected, nor his
Dictatorship proud. Phocion, that honest Senator (to satisfy an unsatiate
appetite of revenge) renders up his life willingly, and when he could not dye
without paying for his death, so indifferent was life to him, as he confirmed
his resolution by this Epiphonema: Itaque nisi empta nece mo^i mihi Athenis non
licuit. What should I speak of (...) Publicola, whose moderation in the ebb
of fortune, and surplusage of miseries, made him more admired, then hated. The
equal temper of Rutilli^s, the exceeding modesty of L. Quintius, the grave and
serious respect of Fabius Maximus, the temperate deliberation of Marcellus, and
the admirable government of Tiberius Gracchus; the wi^ staidness of Metellus,
and the discreet patience of Ma^cus Bibulu^. We use to be more excited to
goodness by examples then Precepts, and such instances in Histories are not a
little perswasiue, representing to our eyes the diverse objects of Piety in
C^riolanus, of Justice in Aristides, of Prudence in Cleobul^: and to be brief
of all virtues so well practiced by Pagans, as they may well deserve an
imitation by Christians.

To proceed now to the Discourse it self; I allow of a copious phrase in
History: For contraction of sentences does oftimes contract the sense, or at
least makes the Subject less intelligible: Cornelius Tac: seemed to affect an
intricate kind of writing, yet his Argument in it self so copious might
modestly Apologize his succinctnesse; approving Tullies opinion, where he
propounds, what errors are most subject to Taxing in such Discourses - Titio
sum etiam est si nimium apparatis v^rbis compositum, aut nimium longum est:
Taxing in the one Singularity, commending in the other Breuity: Yet he seems
to oppose himself in it by plain contradiction, making relation of the same
Discourse. Non parum fructus habet in se copia dicendi, What S^ile best seru^
an History.
and commoditas orationis: But these tend rather to Rhetorical Narrations,
then Hystoricall Discriptions: Tacitus is to be preferred before the most,
(...) a dilated compendiary of many declined States, disunited Provinces:
showing the vices of the time, where it was dangerous to be V^rtuous, and (...)
Innocence tasted the sharpest censure: what g^rbe best (...) with the state of
that ^me, describing the (...) Tongue - Facundam i^micitijs, more partial then
Time-obseruers. Where Amici Curi^, were Parasiti Curi^: The Courts friends, the
Courts Popingayes; Here he shows a great Man rising, and his fall as
sudden as his erection: The immeritorious in election for greatest honors,
and the virtuous depressed, because they will not mount by sinister means.
There a Prince that showed great testimonies of his approved virtues, so long
as he was subi^ct, but raised to an unexpected height he seconded this
Conclusion: - an ill Prince spoiled a good Subject: so was Galba: Omnium
consensu capax Imperij, nisi imperasset: O what singular fruits may be gathered
out of that one History, to teach men in high estates how to moderate their
Greatness; and others of inferior rank, rather to live retired, then to
purchase eminence in place by servile means. But of Diversity of affections.
all the diverse affections of Princes, either well or ill disposed, minister no
little delight to the Judicious Reader: Here o^e so popularly affected, as he
had the trick to bind his Subjects to allegiance by a native insinuation,
such was Augustus, Antonius Pius, Septimus Seuerus; one whereof seemed rather
to affect popular satisfaction then his own, subiecting (as he himfelfe
professed) his entirest thoughts to propagate his Countries glory: Anton:
Clemency, was the chain that united and combined (in a knot inviolable) the
hearts of the Romans to him, publicly protesting: He had rather save one
Citizen, then destroy a thousand enemi^s. But Seuerus was loved (which seems
no less admirable) for that which engenders, for most part, greatest occasion
of offense, and that was Severity; Being no less exact in punishing his
friends then enemies. But to read over the life of Scilla, we shall see an
opposition in his Nature. None that ere did more good to his friends, or more
harm to his enemies: Nay, even in Brothers (derived from one Stem) discrepant
natures; Titus, the love and darling of Mankind, Domitian a professed foe to
all Mankind; the one banishing Parasites his Palace, the other a persecutor
of flies: what more delightful Subject can be imagined, then to converse (and
that without peril) of the dangerous events of war? of the diverse
dispositions of Princes, raisings and razings of Empires: Some shaken by the
vi^iousnesse of the people which inhabit them, being so long secure, till
ruin impose a periode to their security: Some by (civil and intestine
Factions) making their dearest Country the sad Spectator of their Funerals,
their entirest friends, their prof^ssed foes; and the argument of love and
amity, the ground of civil dissentions: The cause whereof (for most part)
proceeds from a continued peace, for retiredness from foreign affairs, make
us bent to prosecute Managements d^mesticke, and the ouer-flow of success
(purchased by peace) makes men more capable of injuries, even to their best
friends. This was the reason moved Athens to erect places of Martial exercises
(even in peace) That so the youths being daily invred to such exercises, might
employ their strengths in them, and not in civil Commotions. This we have by
relation of Histories, which so manageth affairs of State, as I am of that
Sages opinion who auerred: That no man could be an experienced How studious the
Romans were of Histo^ies.
Statist, that was not initiated in the reading of Histories, which he
confirms with reasons no less authenticke, calling them the aptest and
exquisitest directions that can attend man, either in public or private
affairs, at home or abroad. Diverse therefore of our famous Senators in Rome,
have employed their times in these Studies, as Salust, whose welcouch'd Style,
succinct Sentences, and pureness of W^iting, may a^rogate, if not the chiefest
place, yet to be inserted amongst the chiefest: Varr^ one of reputed esteem,
and of ample possessions, took in hand the like task, to illustrate his
Native Tongue not only, with apt and accomodate phrases, but likewise to
compile the memorable acts of the Romans, and to reduce them into an exact
order, to excite his Countrymen, by perusing the valiant attempts of their
Ancestors: Eorum gloria in^lammare ad eandem virtutis exercitationem (...): To
be in^lamed and prouok^. by t^ir (...) and glory (...), to imitate the ^n the
lik^: A^ there is nothing cer^ainely that (...) m^re (...) impr^ssion in a
resolved mind, th^n the ^port of ^ormer exploits; Hearing this man (...), and
vigilant (...), to contemn all (...), oppose himself to ^ll dangers, whereby
he ^ght (...) something ^orthy memory: Anoth^r (sustai^ing (...) labors) to
purc^ase himself but a little ^lory. This man subjected to Seawrackes, exposed
to the mercy of the (...), enuiro^ed and hemmed in by emin^nt danger^, yet
moderating his passions, arms himself against the perils of Se^, adverse
wi^ds, the menaces of ruin, with resolution ^o endure the worst of fates, ever
meditating of that motive to patience:

No^cere hoc primum (...),
Quid facere Victor debet, Uictus pati.
These observations, are receipts, or cordials against the maladies of Fortune:
A man thus resolved cannot be (...) a Prince, for he gouernes a Dominion
(...), an Empire more imperious, a Dia^hy, o^ Monarchy rather: having
disconsorting affections, ever laying Siege and Battry to the palace of the
(...). which moved Plutarch in his Morals defini^ to con^lude: That he who
mod^rated his affections (...), but he that never past the bound^ and (...) of
temp^rate motives, nor felt the deluding enforcements o^ (...) ^im, was wholly
virtuous: But the Mo^als p^oposition was better then his conclusion: (...)
mortal (since the stain of his Original Puri^) co^ld (...) subsist so
secure, or remai^e so vnmoueabl^, as never to be engage^ to perturbations, the
(...) attendants of (...).

In this first entrance to my Discourse, having spo^ something in general, of
the use and fruit of Hystory: having by an (equal diameter) determined
Division of Histories, Divine, Discu^siue, Moral, Physic, or mixed.
the proper place and center at which such Historical relations ought to tend:
I will descend to the division of Histories, which may properly branch
themselves into -- Divine, Discursiue, Moral, Physic, or Mixed.

For Divine, I will not comprehend them in my discourse, being such as depend
on their own Arches, drained from the pure Spring of Celestial Wisdom, and
therefore impossible to err either in Action or Relation: yet necessarily (now
and then) immixed with moral Histories, because their weight may better poise
in the scale of every Judicious Reader, when he sees Moral Discourse so well
fortefied, as by the pillar of Truth: Albeit I approve of Hesiods In Noct. and
Di^.
words. Fabulous Relations should not, nor ought they to be authorized by Holy
Writings: It was a Pagans observation, and worthy ours: So should our profane
Pamphleters, restrain their libidinous writings more, and either write that
which should propagate themselves a general reputation, without derogation to
the sacred Writings of the Almighty, or silence Not to mix^ Sacred with
profane. Vid. Lypsium in prescript: in lib. de constable.
their works; least they should deprave many, for a private reward, or pedling
gain: More I insist upon this, because too many have I known steeped in this
promiscuous Subject, well read in Scripture, to wrest them, otherwise Babes and
Sucklings, for they cannot reach to the depth of such Mysteries, but only
touch them to corrupt them: But their Cymerian Corrupters of Scripture.
Cloud, when it shall be dispersed, and the Rays of a reasonable
understanding to them exhibited: They will repent them (I fear it not) and
heavens grant that repentance, be not like the after-raine, out of season of
their prophaner mixtures. O let them turn their eye of consideration
(whosoever they be) to the miserable end of Lucian, Cleand: Metrodoras, whose
disastrous falls answered their blasphemous risings, contemning the sacred Writ
of Heaven, and prostituting their labors to the merited censure of confusion:
But too much of them. Times are not so easy to be wained from their habit of
error, or induced to a course of more Sanctimony: Lamps and Oilely Studies
were made fruitless at Epictetus death, his Lantern hung up, (as a Monument
of his virtues) made a deeper impression in his Scholars, then all our
Mo^iues, Precepts, or Examples can ^o in ours: that Age was more apprehensiue
of Good, thi^ of Ill.

Now to our Discursiue Histo^ies. Many discourse Discu^siue Histories.
without matter, only descanting upon idle Theames: more observed for their
idleness, then for any Subject wher^on they entreat: Such be foolish
Phantastickes that spend their Oil upon unnecessary Subjects. I have
apprehended many of this vain, but they shall be namelesse, talking of strange
Horse-races, such as their barra^ne Muse never conceived: others of Fabulous
Histories, never found out by that Arch-Artist Nature, whence they derived
their foundation; for such, I pass untouched, being such as they hardly
conceive their own writings.

Discursiue Histories, are either true or feygned: If Division of Disc^rsiue
Histories.
true, they comprehend in them a certain ground, not only forti^ied by a
reasonable production, but also by the authority of such, whose Authentiquest
labors claim to themselves, a kind of Authority without further proof: Such
we read to be the Labors of Cornel: T^c: Tit: Liu: Trogus Pompeius, and many
others, whose Subject confirm their authority: Being such as repres^nt the
diverse events of things done, by Histori^all Relation, and Ocular
presentation: For diverse of those worthy Historiographers have been interrested
even in such probable, and generally allowed discourses by personal presence,
in the management Faithful Historians.
of such affairs: as Commineus of all Histories (amongst our Modern) most
approueable, being an eye witness of what he writ. But in ample terms to
explain what the condition of an Historian is, let me in brief, yet
material words express what he means: Not such as inueigh against (...)
Historian, and the Sycophant Historian.
States, or politic Governments, for such are rather Satyrists, then
Historians; nor such as personate the entire acts of a Marti^list, by
assentatiue terms, which are such as insinuate themselves by a glossing Style
to win the affection of their Patron; less to be borne with be these, then the
other, subiecting the free use of History to a Parasite and Oily tongue:
which moved Alexander so exceedingly against Aristobulus, as that on a time,
hearing his own Acts deblazoned far above truth, he commanded his labors
should be thrown over Board: saying; He was almost induced to throw
Aristobulus after: A Caveat very nece^sary for all clawing Par^sites that make
their Pen Mer^enary, and therefore as may be inferred upon their works, dare
not unrip the vitiousnesse of times, least by vnbosoming Truth, they should
incur the offense of some person, to whom their labors are engaged, their
fortunes subjected, and their endeauours partially devoted. Plato banished all
Poets Athens: But a favorable Gloss would restaine that Ostracisme, only to
peculiar wits (petulant I mean) such as the Prince of Sparta prescribed his
well-gouerned Hiero and L^rna.
City, for presenting some obscoene verses to his Queen: But I wonder why
Plato excluded not these Historians, since their Labors were prostitute (like
the public Strumpet) for gain, making their Wr^tings to the opinion and
imitation of that Scarabee of History, who being demanded why he wrote not
truth of such a Prince; replied: Viuit, quis veralice^? His life kept him in
a^e, he durst not express his vices to the quick, lea^t he should bite too
much. Indeed I must acknowledge there should be a reverend and modest
concealing of such Personages in criminal causes, so the bounds of the History
can admit it. And sometimes a Native pusillanimity restraines us to A mod^st
caution for all Historians.
speak that which we know, because silence (as the wise Sage said) never
occasioned so great offense as speech. And, Veritas odium parit, is a Motto for
these days too probable, too well authorized; where sins go with impunity,
adorning their growth with a fair outside, to second that Tyrant of Syracusas
proposition: Et quis corriget? quis audet prodere, si crimen audiat? Sur^ such
tyraniz^ng Subjects, or Objects rather of fear, must needs be terrible to the
poor Historian: He cannot show Iulus Canius spirit, spit in the face of ^anny:
Hating by a modest Silence to Pamper vice, though reprehension cost him a gage,
he could redeem with nothing save life: Such was that Cordus (the Roman
Historian) who for speaking truth, was censured unworthily.

But if Princes or Potentates should exactly observe The commendation of a
sincere Historian.
the courses and reuolutions of times, the subsequent degrees of ruin and
deposition (vices Apologized) they would commend such an Historian (and no
less desertfully) who emploieth his Time, wastes his Oil, and macerates
himself in the scrutine of true Relations, by conferring Histories together,
and with a Judicious approbation, or electing power, extract whatsoever may
seem most probable and authenticke.

Many worthy Statists have desired, and in themselves no less deserved (though
perhaps some little spark of vainglory may seem to appear in them) to have
their memorable acts recorded: as Cicero his withstanding Catyline, Cato his
opposing Caesar, Solon his Pysistratus, and Demosthenes his Philip: their acts
recount^d, and committed to memory, induce others to the like attempts; and
like a cool Arbor to a wearied passenger, yields no less delight to
themselves, which Persius seems covertly to shadow in his first Satyr: Et
pulchrum est digito monstrari and dicier hic est. This finger is History, which
truly demonstrates the life of the person, characters his virtues, or vices;
disposing every particular member, and branch of his discourse in such an exact
method, that it res^mbles a fair beautiful building, which yet deserves more
commendations for the contriuement, then the outward and garish Garnishment.
Edes (opera sunt) quae si culte extruantur, mi^us restat, si minus sumptuose.
True, Books Historical have no better beauty (nor indeed can they) then an
apt and methodicall disposicion: other accomplements are superfluous,
resembling some of our works now and then published, with fair and beautiful
frontispices, as if some worthy conueiances (rare buildings of A^t and Nature)
were within so comely portalles. But alas! look inward, naught but rubbish,
and refuse of some old building, vnhandsomly repaired, or some frothy
invention, not worth half so much cost: These should fear (as the Philosopher
Fruitless labors.
told the Mindians) least their whole labors should fly out at their gate,
having their gate so promising, their labor so immeriting: But such as go
od*prelum tanquam ad prelium, (for so indeed they do) furnish themselves
aforehand with exactest labors to stand in defiance against the spirit of
detraction: for we cannot fortify our works against all Assa^lants: some
being addicted to carpe, because long custom has consirmed in them a desire
of reprehension.

Aelianus, in his Natural History, reports, how the vipers issue is the bane
and death of the parent: Certainly, as Libri are our Liberi, our children,
which we should be as careful and provident in bringing up, as the Father over
his child: so oftentimes they play the Vipers with us, they murder us in our
name and reputation, much disparraging their parents, being priselesse and
therefore unfit for press: nay, they do more, they oftentimes asperse an
imputation upon her that should be no less dear (if not more) unto us, then
our L^centious (...).
selves: our Country, making her floury bosom a nourisher of ^ruitlesse
labors, a scale to licentious Libel^, or Brothell rather of lascivious
measures. And how shall we make answer for so many motives to lust, so diverse
inforcements to inordinate affectons, and so temporizing subjects in humoring
great ones, and soothing vice in her Majesty. Debemur morti nos nostraque:
Where our works must abide scanning, and that by a judicious censurer, one
that can unrip the secretest of imagination, and knows the Bent of our
purposes.

Thus much I have writ briefly (by way of inference) to caution such as by
their labors ere^t a Throne for impiety to sit in: these Humor-mongers, that
can with Caesar the Dictator, Atros dies albos facere, make black white, and
mask Vice with a veil better suiting with Virtue: Now will I descend to their
opposite, and that is, the Satyricall Writer, or Historiomastix.

Some of these are very dangerous to a State, laying The Satyricall Historian.
it open too much: and though acts should be related, as they were done: yet if
the circumstances may seem any way detractiue to some person, or stat^, they
are better silenced, (if it may stand wi^h the body of the History,) then
discouer^. I have known some too precise in this vein: and one especially I
remember, who speaking of the great Sultan, could not be content to describe
his palace, managements, domesticke and public, person, and the like; but of
his piked Beard, the color of his stockings: and in the end coming near him
(said he) and indeed nearer then need was, his breath was noisome. These, and
such like imperti^ent (...) this hu^or in the seditious and fact^ous Write^s of
our time.
circumstances, are so frivolous, that they imply a defect of judgment in the
Author, to insert such idle, and immateriall ambages in a History of
consequence. But the^e are far from those Historio-mastixes of our time, some
whereof personate the wrongs of a Noble Ancestor to his lineall successor,
moving him to r^uenge: this is one of the Furies Brands: for you shall never
see one of this kind, but a tergo Nemesis, he has vengeance at his back, a
spleenefull ^on disgorged upon the best of deserts. And thus he inserts the
injuries: Such a family (well meriting of Prince and Country, and ever sound
loyal to the State) was vndeser^edly censu^ed by the (...) suggestions of
such, and such; whose suggestions are (as yet) unrevenged, but the heavens are
just. What motives more enforcing to civil commotion? Injuries A true
Aphorism.
ripped up, have oftentimes hazarded states: and there was never any People,
Nation or Government, which have not from time to time had one of these.
Thersites, as deformed in mind as body* (for so Homer characters him) was ever
kindling the ^lame of civil combustion betwixt Achilles and Agamemnon at the
siege of Troy, about the rape of Briseis, ever harping upon that string to set
them together by the ears.

Why Achilles should yru sustain so great reproach, that have engaged your
self for Agamemnon, and his brothers glory? Be all your hopeful serui^es,
your valiant exploits, your incomparable a^chieuements, so rewarded? Has
Agamemnon no place for valor? no r^gard to honor? Why then desist Achilles,
embarke your self for Greece, and le^ue this brave Champion to himself and
his fortunes, your merits (being gone) will be better esteemed: you had but one
prize, (and that prize unworthy too of your valor*) and must that prize, got
with much sweat, many difficulties, imminent dangers, multitude of occurrents,
now be taken from you? But one Briseis, one dear one, and yet Achilles must
loose her, Alas poor resolution! Why it is better to be Aegystus, a coward,
a recreant, one that retires himself from Arms, fighting close under
Clytemnestra's target. Such a Carpet-knight is better then a Martiall-knight.
Then would he presently move Agam^mnon in like sort, in no case to moderate his
desires: Why should Achilles have so fair a Paramour, and the Prince of Greece
want one?

These are poisonous and virulent heads, that suggest into the ears of
Princes, arguments of revenge, causes of distrust, motives of suspicion and
jealousy: not to profit themselves, but to satisfy the deprauednesse of
their own natures, intended to nothing but the subversion of states, the
setting at discord united Princes: En' pallor! etc. -- It was thought, that in
that glorious and Christian-like expedition of those memorable Heroes, Princes
recorded in the eternal book of fame, against the Turks, whose hostility had
lain waste those blessed and fruitful coasts, where the remnant of Israel was
once planted: that the greatest cause of the ill success of that war,
proceeded from some factious heads, setting (that unfortunate, yet never
sufficiently praised Hero) the Duke of Normandy, and the King of France, at
variance: an impious and A memorable Christian, and royal expedition.
disasterous enmity, being a maine impediment for the hindering a war, no
less glorious to Heaven then generally beneficial to all the world. Some have
imputed the cause to certain expostulations betwixt the two Princes, which
grew afterward to words of public reproach and infamy; vpbraiding each other
with diverse insolences offered by their Countries, one to another. What ere
the motive of this dissension was (how varied soever the opinions of Writers
be A mischicuous plot.
herein) the brain that contrived it was sure the forge of great impiety, and
an irrepairable detriment to the Christians, exposing them to ruin, slaughter,
and desolation.

The like we read of those two renowned Cities, Sparta and Athens: which two
flourishing Commonweales Factious Historians amongst the Ancient.
long time lived in unity, without the least motion of war: but in fine,
reading the works of a mutinous Historian: mutinous indeed; for his factions
before, had been sufficient, without further inducements by writing: such
bloody and cruel wars ensued, as the fire of those intestine combustions was
not extinguished with less then an universal effusion of blood. Many more I
could produce, even near at home, but I must not insist upon one Argument too
long, since I have entered a spacious and intricate maze, that promises
entrance enough, if I can (with Ariad^es thread) find a passage to my
precipitate adventure.

Thus much have I spoken of State-snarling Historians, that make their works
like pricks, or goads to the public state. I will now proceed with my former
division of History, and find in these two extremes ( Assentation, and
State-inuection) a mean to direct us in the perfect and exact use of
Historical Narrations: Medio tutissimus ibis; neither too depressed, An
excellent mean for an Historian to (...).
as if thy labors expressed their masters poverty: nor too erected, to intimate
thy states security. Thou art too depressed, when with lagging wings thou
stoopest to every base lure, or object of affection, making thy invention a
scale to others pleasure, writing nothing less then truth, because truth
cannot teach thee how to live. Thou art too erected, when like an eminent
Censor thou taxes the acts of Princes, with such an austere brow, as if thou
had forgot the discipline of History, and w^rt transformed to a professed
Satyrist; mixing thy I^ke with far more gall then discretion: yet transported
with imaginary motives of self-conceit; cares not who be galled, so thou (with
Ctesiphon) kick against the Moiles heels. For the latter, there is no
profession more easy, nor subject more frequent, nor argument more general:
and as Invenal says:

Di^ficile est Satyram nonscribere: nam qui^ inique, Lib. 1. Satyr^.

Tam patiens vrbis, tam ferreus vt teneat se?
For the first, I never knew any Discourse worth reading, proceed from so base
and ignoble Merchants: They sell their works by retaile; and hope of a
gainefull A Flattering Historian.
Dedicatory, makes them contemn Method, Truth, Subject and all: Irus skrippe
is open, relieve but the needy Artist, he will imitate the Bohemian Curre,
fawn on a good suite: show the project of his intendments to him, and protest
him, he will insert monumentall Characters of honor to grace thee; only
bestow thy bounty, and show not thy self unworthy of so fabulous an Attendant:
His invention is tied to his Benefactors: then dries the source of his fancy,
when they restrain the spring of their bounty. These two sorts (as not worthy
an Historical Title) have I proscribed the bounds of my discourse: if betwixt
such two dangerous shelues, I can find a retired harbor for the truly named
Historian to breath himself in, I have attained my wished expectance. The
mean betwixt these two, gives us observation of noting causes and effects, how
produced, and how ended: counsels and successes, how intended, how administered:
then he proceeds further, making resemblance betwixt nature and nature, state
and state, the government of this province and of that: then differences of
actions and event: some wisely carried, bearing themselves fair, and promising
a complete satisfaction to the undertaker: yet what opposition betwixt the end
and beginning, ruin being the period, or extreme of his hopes. Many such
opposite Conuersions, or Catastrophes rather, may we daily see in the
managements of wars: who more happy in his Countries protection, and who more
successiue in his prosecution, then Pompey the great in his first entrance to
martial exploits? Yea, (as Caesar acknowledged himself) he had conquered, if
he had Vicisses, si te vicisse, cognouisses.
known when he had conquered: yet in event, whose designs more unhappy? Not
only deprived of the bent of his hopes, proscribed (as it were) his native
Country, and enforced to beg a poor sepulcher in a foreign Country: but
even most oppressed by their cruelty, whose service, under his own Banner, had
been rewarded royally. Such discourses often move Moving Historians.
in men a commiseration, in seeing Virtue so ill guerdoned, and Vice (under a
counterfeit garb) of Innocence receive an immerited reward: And this certainly
have most Historians ever observed in their writings: so lively to express the
disasters of deserving men, that their relations might move a kind of sensible
pity and remorce in the peruser, which is best exemplified by circumstances:
for the time, place, cause, and person, with other necessary adjuncts, do (for
the most part) lay a more open and smooth Tract to the inforcement of passion.
Lucan, that heroicke Historian, brings forth Cornelia sitting upon the shore,
where her husband took his last farewell of her: where (like another Niobe) she
makes a Limbeck of her eyes, and descants her own calamity, often wishing his
return; and when deprived of his sight, yet the eye of her imagination
represents a new object of sorrow. Here, in such royal compositions, and
funeral conclusions, he describes the diversity of nature, in two contrary
subjects: a servant faithful, sitting ore the headless trunk How to move
passion, and by what circumstances.
of his unhappy mnister: a slave as ungrateful, haling his once well-esteemed
Lord and General to the fatal shore: where (without taste of remorce,
remembrance of former merits, or regard of Countries love) he depriues him of
life. Such Tragic occurrents require their Emphasis, and a kind of vn-vsuall
working passion: that the History may present to our eyes, the very acts how
they were done; making her discourse (as it is) a Theater of humane actions. I
know pitiful Lively impressions of remorce drawn from the son toward the
father.
stories have strange effects, if amply described: For warriers themselves in
the report of their own misfortunes (of all men most pitiless) have hardly
contained themselves from tears: Aeneas, wept to see the ruins of his
Country so lively depictured in Didoes Hall: But when he beheld his poor
father Anchises hanging on his own shoulders (having no other refuge in so
imminent disasters,) Suspiria mittit, he could weep no longer: for tears
mittigate grief; but with a passionate silencing of his miseries, treasured
his vn-vtterable woes in the balefull center of his heart.

Xerxes, when of a populous Army, as ever passed out of Asia, he had but so
many left as might attend him in a poor Cocke-boat, to accompany him in his
distressed expedition, the History mentions, that he wept bitterly; enstiling
himself, The rui^e of his Country, the slaughter of many resolute Soldiers.
Nay, Titus himself, the flower of all the Roman Emperors, in the sack and
subversion of that once glorious City Jerusalem, is said to weep exceedingly,
beholding so many lamentable objects of pity (dead carcasses lying in open
ditches) so as not able to contain himself, he cried out, I call Heaven to
witness, I am not the cause of this Peoples slaughter. Many such
representments we have very usual in Histories, motive for their passion, and
memorable for their end, proceeding from the just judgment of God, to caution
others by their miserable falls. There is another propriety in a History, which
should be observed: and that is a Judicious collation, Comparing of Histories
very necessary.
or comparing of Histories one with another: the defect and want hereof, is the
principal cause why so maine discordancies and mere oppositions in Histories
arise: and that not in circumstances alone, but in materall points, as original
foundations of Cities, succession of Princes miscited, the sites of Countries
(an observance more Geographical) ill-disposed, with many other errors, which
are grounded upon no other reason, then the want of conferring such Histories
together, as tend to the present subject we have in hand. Nay were it not much
think you, now to prove directly, that the very Computation of years which
they derived from their A differenc^ amongst the Pagans in their Computation of
yea^es.
ancient Calendar, and which they observed as Ceremonially and Religiously (in
their kind) as we the years from CHRIST'S Incarnation, was very defective
amongst themselves? And yet this is easily done: For their opinions about their
Olimpiads in Greece, for Vid. Aul. Gell. and Laert.
the time of their Erection are diverse: The foundation of Rome as uncertain,
since the founder himself is not as yet generally agreed of, for the diverse
relations of Numitor and Amul^is, Romulus and Remus, with their mother Rhe^, o^
Ilia, (as some will have it) make up a laborinth of themselves without further
confusion: But to inferte the strange conueyance (or Apotheosis) of Romulus:
suddenly vanished forth of their sight, and by the testimony of Julius
Proculus, transplanted to some other place of more eminence; hardly deserves
the credit o^ an Historian: Yet some there be which show more favor to this
famous founder of Rome, daigning to bestow a Monument of him, which is erected
for him in the Temple Quirinus. Indeed it were little enough to memorize so
renowned an Establisher, with a Tomb, and to consecrate the place of his
Burial; As Achilles Tomb, or Monument in Sygeum, Theseus in Athens, Ajax in
the Rhetian Shore, and Alcides Relics in Oeta: Read but over the Roman
Annals, and you shall find the discordancies of Historians in these
computations of times to be great: As especially the destruction of Troy,
confounding the several times of Troies Sacking, missing their account from
Laomedon to the succession of Priam. But I have touched the error enough, let
us now descend to the prevention of it.

Before we take in hand any Discourse we must always Transcriptions oft-times
uncertain and defective.
meditate of the means, ere we can attain the end: Which end is soonest
achieved, when we address our selves for such Subjects (as have been in our
^ime) wherein we may receive instruction, by some that have been interrested in
those affairs, of far more certainety then any Transcription. But intending
our Studies to any Foreign R^lation (whereof it may be we have some one
Record) I would not depend upon the Antiquity of the Record (for we have many
ancient Fables) but recollect my self and examine the probability, whether
such particulars are like to be are resemblance of truth or no: And herein we
imitate the Antientest and best Authorized Historians that ever wrote.

Valerius Maximus had recours^, not only to Roman Annals (which were kept
with great care) but he used to confer with such as had any Breuiats of the
Roman lives in their hands: Comparing the^ together, that he might cull and
choose out from the best Authors (as himself witnesses) such documents, as
not only propogated the glory and pristine height of his Country, but might
move succeding ages to emulate their virtues.

The like of that true Moral Historian Plutarch, whose Style so modestly
garnished, and so sententiously concluding, has (and not without cause)
purchased him the name of the Father of Histories.

Laertius a worthy Recorder of those famous Sages of Greece; describes his
Countries happiness with great modesty: Whose Sentences may beseem the
grauest Understanding to extract, and upon oc^asion to accommodate to his own
purpos^: Here he shows Spirit in a Philosophers pen, one opposing himself The
variety of discourse in Laertius.
against a Tyrant; There a Moralist, making young men fit Sociates for the
matur^st ^imes: Here a Cynicke contemning the glory of the wo^ld, though
offered him; There a merry Greek, laughing at the vanites of men wholly beso^ed
and subjected to mundane slavery. O what Christian-like maxims, what Divine
conclusions, what solid Arguments, what enforcing reasons be there included,
only to move men to the embrace of virtue? With Discourse plentiful enough in
oppositions betwixt Ethnicke and Ethnicke; out-stripping Nature (if it were
possible) in reasoning, and drawing an argument, near to Divine approbation,
and ready to confirm it, if the general blindness of the time, and their
want of further Revelation would admit of their Asser^ion.

Thus much for the former branch of my di^ision, of Histories True and
Authentic: Now I will entreat of Relations Feigned; yet such as Moralized
include an excellent meaning, drained from the uncorrupted Springs of Hellicon.

All Relations feign^d are not to be excluded: for Feigned Relations or
Poetical Histories.
many Poetical Narrations there be which comprehend in them a wonderful
sharpness of judgment, pregnancy of Invention, and a great measure of
discretion; of which sort, none more excellent then the works of Homer,
weauing many pretty conceits in Homer an Excellent and Heroicke Poet; shadowed
only at, because my Judicious friend Master Tho: Heywood, has taken in hand
(by his great industry) to make a General (though Summary) description of all
the Poets lives.
the web of his History, to make the Subject it self more pleasant: The more I
commend him to the reading of the Iudiciously Generous, because I could never
find in his Works any scurrulous Affectation, but prosecuting his Discourse
with a modest gravity, as if Nature, that had (...) him of his Corporal sight,
had done it, to make the eye of his understanding more piercing: For to read
the Majesty of his Style, the wel-coucht Fables immixt in his war betwixt the
Greeks and Trojans, may as in a storehouse imagine the treasures of all wits
to be locked up in him. Many excellent Histories have been derived from him, as
well in Prose as contracted Measures, for his pleasing variety r^lisheth more
then others, because through all his Works, he uses less digression then
others: And pity it is, that every impolish'd hand should have to do with the
Transcription of his Lab^urs: grieuing the poor Blind-man with their
blindness, For who so blind as Buzzard? And if Stesychorus was worthily
struck blind for commenting on U^nus beauty, and discommending Hellens form:
much more deserve they an exacter punishment, that dare comment on his
eternized labors, who detected Labors disparraged by Translators.
Venus lust, and portraied Hellens inconstancy. To prescribe in what tongue
Histories are to be read, I know their own garment is most na^iue. But such
have been the di^parraging labors of our English Translators, that Romes
tongue, and Gr^eces Characters, grow as vulgar and common with us, as the
Italian Garb: so as we seem beholding to others, both for speech and raiment.
I do know some works are necessary to be translated, being such as express
the politic states of Realms, which imparted to the illiterate, oftentimes
Many illiterat of the exactest judgment.
confer no little benefit to our Country. But other works there be, which
modesty would have concealed, being Records of the viriousnesse of former
times; as the obscene and sensual conuents, or prostitutions rather, of those
mirrors of impi^ty, ^he Roman Emperors, the relation whereof acquaints the
depraved too well with such impudence. But because I have entered into a
Catalogue of poetical Histories, I will proceed further into the m^morable,
and no less ingenious works of Hesyode: much I cannot write of Hystoricall
matter in Hesyode; yet what he writ of that subject, comprehended in it more
height and true proportion, then any Poet that ever writ. With what hazarding
danger does he there delineate the rare Combat between C^ix and Cy^nus? now
equally poizing their valors (as if nature had made them of that equal power)
to the end to leave the conflict uncertain. Presently (upon occasioned
advantage) he shows a better and a worse: yet so, as without the least
imputation, or disparrage to either of their spirits (making them as imparalell
as equal) but applies the event to some auspicious, genious, or divine power,
favoring one more then another. Straight, with a new passage, he proceeds to
the resolved exploits of Hercules; and Hercul^s Labors.
with an admirable facility describes his labors. He it was, that by the
assisting hand of Jupiter, of whom he descended, slew the Cleonian Lion, the
Erimanthian Boar, the Bull of Marathon, the Lernean Hydra, and the winged
Heart: He who purchased no less memorable Trophies in Hell, then on Earth;
haling the three-necked C^rberus, and rescuing Pros^rpina, (if the supreme
powers had not inhibited) from the tyrannicke hands of infernal Pluto:
Discomfiting the Centaures, vanquishing Achelous (being his corriuall in the
love of fair Deianeira, the (...), the Cremona Giants, the traitorous Nessus,
Antheus, Augeas Stables, Apples of Hesperides, Cacus, Busyris, hurling Diomedes
to his horses (to quit his own tyranny) freeing Hesyone from the Whale, sacking
Troy in revenge of the perfidious Laomedon, subduing those invincible Giants,
(...) and Albion, redeeming Orcalia, and Betricia from the captivity of Gerion:
and wearing the Amazon Baldricke, to intimate his victories in those warlicke
Provinces*

These, and the like, does Hesyode set down with that probable coherence, that
i^ the matter it self did not imply an impossibility, one would be certainly
induced to believe so concorda^t an History. Presently he descends to the
generation of the Gods, making up a Genealogy in that distinct order, as the
Pagan Gods (for so one has observed) were much indebted to him for so well
deriuing their pedigree, which without his invention (perhaps) had lain
obscure.

Lucian deserves his place, whose otherwise ill-deseruing parts, being a
professed foe to all divine adoration, purchased him an end as miserable as his
prophanations merited; being devoured by dogs: yet in this regard we have
propounded our opinion about Historical fictions, I will give him his dueplace:
one of an excellent wit, ripe understanding, and labourious withal, to find
out the ancient Manuscript^, and Records of authorized Histories: yet,
foras^uch as his ^itings are interlarded now and then with inuectiue sp^ches
against the Celestial powers, arguing too much of Natures power, too little
of the Sovereign of Nature. I would have the Generous Reader to prepare
himself in the perusal of such Discourses, as Calypso instructed Ulysses
against the Sirens Inchauntments, thus inuiting him:

Hue ades o ingens Graecorum gloria Ulysses. (...). in Iliad. (...). (...).

Siste Ratem, etc. -- Thus Englished.
Come hither Noble Ithacus,
of valiant Greeks the choice,
Take harbor here, incline thine ear
unto the Sirens voice:
For there nere was any did pass,
since we arrived here,
This liquid way, but wished to stay,
our warbling notes to hear.
Hence pregnant wits, and ripe conceits
much knowledge have conceived:
As for the acts you did at Troy,
we news long since received.
And how the Gods pursued the Greeks,
the Trojans Greeks pursue,
The Grecians hate in sacking Troy,
Heavens hate in wracking you.
Of these Inchauntments did Calypso fore-warne Ulysses with this preparation,
that he should command his Assotiates in his Ship, to bind him, when he
approached near those fatal Harmonists, and to stop their ears, least they
should be made a prey to their cr^elty. So must every one prepare himself in
such Syren-discourses The liberty of these times, persuades some too easily to
Lucian^ Arguments; and those which (in fear of divine power) dare not deny the
Omnipotency of the Immort^ll Power in word, yet their profane couuersation
implies an absolute Apostasi^ in them in their works. I wish these digrssions
were not needful: for then I might more directly proceed in my discourse,
which the deprauednesse of times will in no case suffer.

But in these feigned Histories I wholly exclude all Feigned Histo^ies approved
tending to instruction.
ribaldry, times themselves have instruction sufficient for obscene subjects,
without any further excitements: nor can I admit, that those vnprofi^able
stories of Primalion, Palmerin de Olina, The Knight of the Sun, Gerilion,
with many other fictiue Discourses should be entertained by youth: many of
these Relations have strangely transported diverse well-promising wits into
strange amazements; especially such as conceive more delight in them, then more
serious studies. Some we have heard, that in reading the strange adventures of
Orlando Furios^, and conueying the very impression of his amorous passion to
themselves, would presently imitate his distraction, run stark naked, make
louesongs in commendation of their Angelica, put themselves ^o intolerable
torments to gain the affection of their supposed mistresses. Others, in
imitation of some valiant Knights, have frequented Deserts, and inhabited
Provinces, ecchoi^g in every place their own vanities, endorsing their names
in barks of trees, wholly turned Sauag^, and intractable to personate that
knight more lively.

Such Histories I only allow of (whether in Prose, Such Histories only merit
that name, which yield profit with delight.
or Verse, for Epickes may be writ in either) as yield profit with delight; not
subiecting their discourse to observe some indiscreet humor of the time, for
application, but prevention. Many read, and (in the loosnesse of their own
lives) make application of the worst unto themselves; hoping with Herostratus,
to be memorable for villainy: These are like Spiders, that turn the sweetest
and most wholesome ^lowers to rank poison; the discredit of an History, and a
great strengthner of vice.

Others there be, that transported only with the delight and present variety
of the History, make History only (as our Gallants do their Tobacco) a
spender of time: they apply not the fruit or use of Histories. But as in some
pleasant or delightful dream, satisfied for the present time: but past, quite
razed out of memory. In stories of this nature, (such I mean as be ^eigned) I
approve of those best that res^mble Truth: the nearest according to Flaccus
opinion:

Ficta volupt^tis causa sint proxima veris. For the impossibility of the
relation oftentimes makes the subject more ridiculous: whereas the
concordancy, or apt connection of the History (though the maine plot be false)
enforces more attention.

And thus much of Poetical Histories: I will come to the second Branch of my
Division of Histories (to wit) Moral.

Moral Histories be such, as conduce to a civil and Moral (...).
moral institution of life or manners; teaching what is to be done, and what
avoided. Xenophon in his instruction of Cyrus, propounds what reasons should
especially induce a moral Historian to speak more of examplary motives to
virtue, then any thing else; Because (says he) if Cyrus had not been elected
King amongst Sheepheards, it may be, he had never reigned over the Persians:
but the very Title, which was given him by Rural Swains, enforced him to
attempt further.

Moral Histories teach men to behave themselves in all (...): If employed in
Embassages, Commerce, or any n^gotiation whatsoeu^r, it directs them how to
hazard f^irely, bear themselves discreetly, and support the burden imposed on
them stoutly. These kind of stories are the best Nurses, they weane us from a
childish effeminacy, and train us in more virile and man-like actions: so as
Education is called by the Philosopher, A second Nature, habituating us to the
kind of our breding: Morality likewise is called, the Soueraignesse of
Education, The squar^ of human Actions, the best Schoole-mistresse for
unbridled youth, that r^straines affections raging, erects our passions too
much asswaging, tempers our spirit, and (...) us to that perfect Symmetrie, Ut
expede Herculem, you may know H^rcules by his foot, the inward habit by
external appearance,

Hence was it that Alexander glorified so much of his Stagyrian Moralist:
Achilles of his Phoenix: of whom he had received so much good, as he
ingeniously acknowledged; by Phoenix he could both, Been dicere, and been agere.

To be brief, there is no exorbitancie in Nature, which by Moral Narrations
has not been reformed: Seneca was naturally coue^ous: which disposition, or
malady rather, he shrowdes covertly in that sentence of his, inserted in his
Book^, De Tranquillitate Animae. Nec aegroto, nec valeo. Yet by daily
conference with Moral Histories, and Precepts of civil institution, he could
moderate his desire of having, esteeming the treasure of his mind only worth
possessing. Qui cuncta habet, nec tamen habetur, as Salust observes.

The like we read of Stylpho, a Roman, whom (as Cicero speaks) was of all
other most libidinous, yet by reading of Moral Pr^cepts, amplified with grave
examples, became most continent. The infirmities of this time are great, and
need the hand of an expert Physician; No Medicine, nor Antidote, more
sovereign to cure these contagious Ulcers, then Moral Physic, if the
disease be green, (I mean the diseases of the mind:) We have here
Lenitiues to mittigate, if it be old, and grown to a (...), a very Gangrene,
griefs insensible, being most incurable? We have Corrasiues to eat away all
those corrupt The praise of Moral Hist.
tetters that hinder the cure. This is a ^ingular Art, and far surpassing
Galens, Aesculapius, or Hypocrates: their cures were but external, these
internal: and so much more worthy is the cure of the Mind then the Body, by
how much the one is more precious then the other. O Divine Art! O secret
mystery! The Greeks called this Discourse, The life of Man: for without it, he
would degenerate from Man, and loose the best ornaments of humane nature: The
light of Reason, The Eye of Election, (...), great indeed, in comparison of the
small esteem this world makes of it: laboring of a great burden of impiety,
an huge freight of sin, an insupportable carriage, and feeling her own
strength unfit for such a weight, yet refuses to entertain a companion that
would willingly and readily lighten her burden.

Distempered Age, that labors of minds frenzy, captiuated to unworthy
bondage: how long will thy intellectual eye be shut? How long hood-winckt? If
thou fall with open eyes, thy misery is greater, seeing thy fall yet would not
prevent it, falling with blinded eyes: No marvel, that sees thine own
infirmity, and scorns the direction of others eyes to conduct thee. Alas,
here be many intricate Mazes, unfrequented Laborinths, places of imminent
perrill, and thou art blind: no suspect of any Strata geme or Ambush does
possess thee, thou promisest thy self most security, when most beleagred with
peril.

It was no meruail^ if miserable Oedipus, run into Brakes and Bri^rs, when
his erring feet were guided by two bli^d eyes? Here be many seducements: And
as in the Pagan time, there were more Temples erected in honor to Bacchus and
Uenus, then to Iuppiter and Apollo: So for one example of Piety and Religion,
we have ten of vice and licentiousness: Here the bait o^ Ambition, hung out
and swallowed, and like enough by a Gudgion; there the painted Flagge of
Vainglory, leading a troop of vices in a Ring-dance: Here a Silken Fool
welesteemed A Caution for your silken Gallant.
-- for -- Nasci a Principibus fortuitum est -- He was borne rich: There a
ragged Sage descanting on Moral precepts, but neither guarded nor regarded.
Here Rosa mundi, the Rose of worlds vanity, set on a splay-foote, making Art a
cover for Natures deformity: There a plumpe of Feathers dangling on a Head more
light then Feathers, to make Platoes naked Platoes definition.
definition of man true -- Homo est Animal Bipes, implune: No matter for
reason: They would be loath to be endued with more then is needful for a
phantasticke head -- An ordinary portion of reason will serve an Ordina^y. O
that these poiselesse Brains would but employ their time in Moral Discourses,
what excellent matter might they find out worthy the judicious approbation of
refined Wits.

It is observed that in Athens, and in Rome also, young Gentlemen were to be
employed in preferring some Law in behalf of the people: or Patronizing such
as were poor, and destitute of succor in themselves: Patronizing such, and
protecting them in public defense of their cause, or the like.

This was the first step of preferment unto Cicero, defending Roscius against
Scilla: and that with such vehemence, as generally he was approved for his
seriousness in a poor Actors cause. And sure generous minds cannot be better
expressed then in actions of this nature, whereby they may not only secure
themselves and their entirest affections from the friuolent assaults of
irregular perturbations; but also purchase unto him, the general love and
favor of such as observe their disposition, and admire it.

By Moral reading we use to be most excited to these compassionate effects:
exampled in them whom The fruit of Moral reading.
we deservedly think of, and earnestly covet to imitate: Not taxing them
unworthily, nor commenting otherwise of their virtues, then as we receive by
Transcription from others. Former Ages (in this kind) have been more
charitable, but the apprehension of our own defects makes us suspectfull of
others. As in Rome, if the Pisoes be Frugall, they are censured Parcimonius; if
the Met^lli Religious, they are taxed Superstitious; if the Appij Popular, they
are termed Ambitious; if the Manlij Austere, they are styled Tyrannous; if the
Lelij Wise, they are Curious; the Public^le Aspiring, if Courteous. Many such
Mam^threpts we have, that censure others actions to the worst, making their
own depraved judgments, censors of others virtues. But Moral Precepts would
remedy this obliquity, and will us first be Masters of our own Affections,
ere we fish in the troubled waters of other men's errors: But this Age
confirms the Ass^rtion of a wise Roman Senator: Suam cu^usque culpam
Authors ad causam tranferunt: Or, which Seneca writes in his Epistle to his
friend Lucil: Many (says he) my frierd Lucilius commit faults in Rome, but
will in n^ case hear that they committed them: the Aedile lays blame upon the
Questor, the Questor on the Praetor, the Praetor on the Consul, the Consul on
the Censor, the Censor on the (...).

Apollogizing and defending errors, the greatest cherisher of them: For how is
it possible we should am^nd them, that will not confess we did commit them?
But acknowledgement is a precedent direct^sse to reformation, according to the
Traged: word^: Quem paenitet fecisse pene est innocens. In Moral (...).
Studies much excellent matter may be chose out of that mirror of Morals
Plutarch; not only to instruct youth, in the Rudiments and Precepts of Virtue:
As how to bear himself in all occasions, how to conceal and smother his
passions, with a wise ouermaistring of ^is affe^tions; and how to redress the
multiplicity of Injuries by taking opportunity by the fore-top. But even old men
likewise, such as have seen many changes and alterations in their times, and
were well nigh persuaded, that all the volumes of the world could not show them
more, then they in the revolution of times had seen: But seeing instructions
rare to them, and unaccustomed precepts fit for the maturest head to plod on,
they then confess that their old age has been a dotage, verefying --
Addiscendo These times, old in years, but young in hours.
se semper senescere: Reaping more profit by o^e Moral Precept, then a whole
years Experience in worldly affairs.

Many old men we have (that can discourse of the change of Princes,) whose
Gray-haires be as so many records of what they have seen: But alas, confer
with them of true Moral experience, and you shall find them as young in
hours, as old in years: Their knowledge in the Infancy, though their one
foot in the grave, ready to bid adieu to the world, when they are half
scarcely erudiated in the preuentiue sleights of this world: A simple age, when
we have no other testimony that we have lived long, save only our Gray-haires,
and yet the general ignorance pleades pardon: None so generous as those which
know the least, none of a ranked spirit, that will cast the ^ie of a judicious
applause, upon the meriting labors of any man.

It is recorded, that Licinius, Coleague in the Empire The cause why Learning
is contemned.
with Constantine the Great (being incapable of learning himself) by reason of
the slownesse or barrenness of his understanding, was wont to call learning
the very poison and public plague that infected the Realm: The Roman
Historians, have applied this vanity of his, rather to his want of judgment,
then any thing else, being not able to comprehend the benefi^e of Arts.

The like of Maximiman, who wa^ d^sirous to attain some extraordinary height
in ^loquence; which when he could not (by reason of his natural duln^sse)
attain ^.
unto, he envied and maligned others. Many hau^ we that second these, glorying
in their own^ ignorance, and making a rediculous spectacle of Learning: as a
superficial ornament to accommodate more to the threed-bare Sophister, then
the Generous (...).

I r^call to mind the a^cient presage upon all Arts, and the pr^iction
concurres well with this time: (...) for a Philos^pher, and smoke for a Coun^.
It was spoken in the declining age of the Rom^n Empire, when Vice rode in his
foot-cloath, and Virtue (like a poor Iris^ Lacky) ran at his stirrup. But
Moral learning illumines the intellectual power with a better and cleerer
foresight; showing the difference between goodness and appearance: for true
Morals love not to garnish their portraitures with shadows.

The best means to distinguish betwixt the ignorant ^.
and morally instructed, is to put them into their habilliments of nature, send
them both forth naked into the world, and their distinct characters will
appear more manifest. Alas, the Moralist cannot discourse of what the world
most affects; he sees the ambitious man rouing at v^setlded ends, meaning to
ingrosse the whole world to himself; he smiles at his illimited desires, and
wonders whereto his fond pu^poses tend: he considers the event, ^re he take in
hand the means, and hates desire of popular praise, or ostentation, lest he
should grow proud by ^orraigne obseruances: he entertaines death with a
cheerful To whom death is not terrible.
brow. Terror of death is not terrible to one prepared for her ere she come;
always taking her, as one of the necessities of nature, and in^uitable,
meditating of her, as one -- Qui finem vitae extremum inter munera ponit
naturae. These considerations ever ^ortifie a good Moral against the violence
of all assaults inward and outward; apprehending his substance, and
composition, to be such, as cannot barracadoe it self against the encounter of
nature.

Agathocles, that tyrant of Syracusa, in all his tyranny, An excellent
observation by a Tyrant.
had a good Moral statue to represent to him the Idiome of his mortality;
having the upper part of his Image made of Marble, Gold and Iuory, but the feet
of Earth, to intimate of how weak and infirm ground, he and his goodly
promising person stood. O if we should but read the choice variety of Divinely
composed sentences, comprised in those elaborate works of the ancient Moral
Historians: they would move us to no less apprehension of our own weakness,
then if some expert or curious Painter, ( Apelles-like) should portray to us
every part and lineament of this little man we carry about us. Morality (says
a good Moral) is man's Anatomy; it shows every Morality man^ Anatomi^.
part of his body, how composed, how disposed: and prescribes how this
excellent composure may be best preserved: It deals not by predominancy of
Planets, (as our ponderous burdens of Nature calculate,) but by an even
symmetry of Virtues governing the inferior Spheres, the bodies liniaments. Nor
deals it like your phantastike Musician, that bestows more charges on the
Cover of his Instrument, then the Instrument it self: but by the couers
debasement, augments the excellency of the Instrument, the divine faculties of
the soul.

But I may seem to run too far in this subject, confounding Moral History
with Philosophy: which though I might defend for Moral Philosophy, is nothing
else then a globe of Moral precepts drawn from Historical grounds; yet to
make mine own passage mo^ smooth, I will descend to the next branch of History,
entitled Physical.

Histories Physical, be especially conversant in the search of the natures of
things: approving that opinion of the Philosopher: Ea Physica sunt, quae Nature
as rerum explorare solent: whether things animate or inanimate; in living
Creatures, as in the search of Beasts, Birds, Serpents, and the like; and of
vegetiue Bodies, as Plants: In ^reatures inanimate, as in the sc^utiny of
Me^als, the distinct natures of stones, etc. Wi^h which discourses the greatest
Emperors have been delighted. Those admiral works The several kinds of
physical observations.
of Pliny, Aristotle, and Aelian, with many others, are sufficient to erudiate
the most incapable in these relations: where they do, Abdita rerum rimari.
Here describing the very intimate natures of Beasts, the rar^ and incredible
virtues of Plants, and Herbs, the virulent natures of Serpents, and the
attractiue powers These two beasts, in nature and feature different, by one
peculiar Nation ( Egypt) equally ^euerenced,
of Stones, Metals, and the like. The Crocodile, a most dang^rous beast,
(^requenting the River Nyl^s) and a professed foe to man: The Ichneumon, a little
creature, yet powerful in her self, and in her power a professed foe to the
Crocodile.

To set down the several properties of all, or of most sorts of Beasts, would
crave an ample Volumne of it self: I will only (as in my former discourse)
express the use of Natural Histories, and to what persons most accommodate.

We read of diverse most famous Princes and Monarchs to have applied their
minds to the search of these studies: Alexander (otherwise most potent in What
princes best assected these studies.
Arms, and sole commander of the world) addicted his mind to the scrutiny of
these rarieties: as may appear most manifestly by his letter (at this day
extant) to his master Aristotle, containing the strange proportions of beasts,
with their natures; which during his Indian war, he had observed: describing
the strange and unheard of qualites of the (...) Aspi^kes, Cerasts, and many
other kinds of Serpents, continualy infesting his Army; professing (as he
himself writes) he found more difficulty in discomfiting beasts, then
subduing men: for the one sort assaulted him when his Troops were well
disposed, cheerful, and full of alacrity: but the other invaded him by night.
Ita vt ne in castris quidem nimium ocij detur: Always was this puissant Prince
much given to see the natural qualities of beasts, so as no present could be
more grateful, or acceptable to him, then some strangely natured savage,
making excellent use of this Theory, appropriated to the natures of men: which
upon all occasions (with singular delight) he used to apply unto his Nobles
disposition, which attended him.

Those noble and courageous Dogs, which were sent Courageous Dogs.
him by the Kings of Albany, much contented him: They would not stir at small
beasts, disdaining them (as it were) in the ouer-flow of their courage,
contemning any encounter but with Lions, and Elephants. This magnanimity could
the valiant Emperor apply well enough to himself: He saw his own nature
delineated, or charactred (as it were) in their courage, Scorning to triumph on
the conquered, solacing him ever with this extreme, yet cheerful comfort:
Sup^rest sperare salutem.

The like desire of exploring the natural properties of beasts, possessed
S^torius: one no less provident, to shelter himself in adversity, then in all
his actions continent, amidst his prosperity; who after his regiment in Spain,
erected many places for taming of wild beasts, delighting exceedingly to see
the aptness of some joined with a certain natural flexibility, and the
backwardness of others, retaining ever a certain semblance of their first
Nature, so Natures of Beasts.
d^epely imprinted, as difficultly removed. Nay what Stratagems used he (by his
white Har^) to support and govern the whole Fabrique of his declining (...)
Ce^ua (...).
Estate: Implying that by his Hind, or Heart, he received instructions from
Diana, which the people (with such superstition) believed, that by his glory he
conquered envy, enlarging the bounds of his jurisdiction, and making his exile
the symbol of his renown, till by the bloody conspiracy of Perpenna and
Antoniu^, he was deprived both of Crown and Life.

Demetrius a worthy Soldier, and one well meriting of his Country, was much
inclined to this Study: So as at home, if at any time sequestered from his more
serious Affairs, he conceived exceeding pleasure and delight in the portraying
of those beasts he had seen: Excellent he was in the frame of any simillitude,
but more divine in his own; being of that exact form, elegant constitution,
and sweetly mixed ComplexionUt a pictoribus, sculptoribusque ei similis non
potuerit effugi: A rare Model of Nature, when (by Nature) he was imparrale^d.

Alcibyades, no less deserving, yet worse censured, was well experimented in
the Natures of Beasts, but more in Plants: having an herb, even to this day
Natures of Plants.
(amongst our Apothecaries) called after his name. Alcybiadon - or the Wild
Buglosse.

And for Metals, Minerals, or the like. None more Nature^ of Mines. Plutarch
and Suet.
accommodated to such Studies then that Sovereign of Roman hearts Augustus,
hearing his Lapidary Dioscorides with especial delight: So as in time he was
not only able to distinguish of any Stone, but to describe their Natures:
Using likewise the Art of Alchemy, more expert in their recalcinations (says
the Roman Historian) then the best Professors of that time, and consequently
I may conclude then the gro^se Quacke-saluers of our time.

You see it is no disparagement for the Generous, Expedi^nt not necessary.
or Heroicke Spirit to be Studied in these Notions: since the peerless for
Valor, and true R^solution have Dedicated themselves unto them: yet would I
not have them so besotted, or bewedded, to these Studies, as to forget more
important intendments: I confess these are rather to make a man complete,
then exactly necessary, and a superficial knowledge is sufficient for learning
of this Nature* and well do I approve of that Ornament of Learning (the best
luster to the School of Arts) where he would rather have a Gentleman
superficially seen in all, then profoundly learned in one: Too much retiring
to these Studies, accord not with gravity or State, but to discourse (by way of
reason) without Sophistical Argumenting well beseemes the most Generous minds.

It is an happy thing to keep a mean in wisdom, not to strive (i^ an
ouer-flow of understanding) to outstrip Nature, in the investigation or search
of Natural things: A little will serve us in indifferent things, and more it
relisheth of discretion, to know when we have enough; then, with an unbounded
will of affecting knowledge, superstitiously to know more then Nature has
prescribed.

This excess in desire of knowing, has been a contagion, that has infected
and poisoned the mature^t Studies: especially in things so impertinent, as when
the pitch of that they expected was attained; Their knowledge conduced no more
to the profit of the Repub: then if with Endymion they had sl^pt their time,
and passed their life over i^ a fruitless silence. It pleases the Orator to
term such a Study -- Invitilis mentis agitatio: Sailing in the troubled
stream, where a more clear and calm passage does show her self. Thus I
approve in these Natural Discourses, a superficial Discursiue Knowledge, to
exclude Ignorance, but no such affectiue height, least in so exquisite a search
of Nature, we should show our selves Naturals. We say the Generous should be
but Mediocrit^r Doctus: I need not insist upon the persuasion, we have too
many of Iuvenals painted blocks in the way of Learning, that never mean to
come nearer. So as I may (...) in^lyta no^ine truncus exhibuit.
answer, as an Athenian reasoned, what the cause should be why there was such
an ebb of good wits in Athens: because (says he) they run into the Sub-vrbs,
and dwell with Lais.

The best and ripest wits are most subject to corrupting, concording well with
the native deprauation of these times, where Medeas Rule is made an Axiom,
every one with Lin^ius seeing the best, but with blind Baiard, deprived of the
eye of their election.

Too much of them: our Treatise requires a better subject, then such stains to
their Countries fame, and pristine honor, making her complain, as Rome did in
time of old: Eone vos produxi, etc. Is this the fruit of ^one materna cura se
prouexit
my long labor, the freight of my race, and the reward of my motherly love, to
bring you up, and then (like Vipers) to sting me that has nourished you? Well
then, my blessings must be turned of necessity unto execrations: and that
breast which first nourished you with the milk of comfort, must be the very
sepulcher to interre you that buried my honor.

Thus did Rome hollow out her complaint against her ill-nurtured issue, and no
less cause Albion against her undisciplined race, that seem as if they were,
Fruges consumere Nati.

But to proceed in our discourse: Histories of this Nature, are very needful
for professors of Physic: for how should they conceive the true Art of
composition, if the simples whereof the compounds are made, and their virtues be
not perfectly known unto them? Braseualus, de examine herbarum, exemplifies
this discourse more fully, I will refer them to that place, not entertaining
that subject which is but superficially traduced to me; and I have always made
that obs^ruance (in way of axiom) to all my readings, which Siluius ^n his
book, De Simplici^. Medicament. inioyne^h himself: What Art soever a man
knows, let ^im only exercise and use it: For otherwise he shall but descry
his own Ignorance, as I have noted in some: Quos cum nes^e piguit, mentiri n^n
pig^bat. An odious scandal to a generous-minded Scholar, to write that which
he is ignorant of himself; Less ashamed to lie, then to be defective in
knowledge. But especially some we have of this sort, that lie upon their
knowledge: Some (as in Traians fabling Age) write Arts of Horsem^nship, that
never rode otherwise then Agesilaus with his children, on Cocke-horse. Others
can exactly prescribe times for planting, sowing, reaping, and the like;
playing the good Husbandman (I pray you mark him) that never read Virgils
Bucolickes: These are usurping wits, presuming on the affable censures of these
depraved times. Ignorance can Apologize herself: for what writer now a days
wears not that livery?

To our History: These natural discourses of the qualities of Beasts, Birds,
Serpents, and other Crea^ures, be likewise especially ne^dfull for Divines:
^hey may amply dilate upon the admirable wo^kes of their Creator, by the s^ruey
of his Creatures. For even all Embleme^ o^ Birds.
Birds and Beasts (if exactly considered) show the infinite power of the
Almighty; not only in creating, The contemplation of the Crea^ ministe^
admiration in us toward our Creator.
but infusing such (...) natures and dispos^tions in them. The witty
Emblematist also (...) his pretty inventions from these resemblances;
portraying the creature, and annexi^g his device to the Portray.

Nay, they are very motive persuasions to the acknowledging of our own
weakness and infirmity: spurs to thankfulness, as that excellent Emblem
where a Lark was pearched, with these verses:

Cantat Al^uda Deo lauds gratissima summo, Vid. Sambucum and Alciat.

Hinc nos ingratos grata lacescit auis.
Englished thus.

The early Lark her grateful mind displaies,
Discanting morn by morn her Makers praise:
Whence she does tax such as unthankful be,
That have more cause, yet give less thanks then she.
We have many such witty Embl^mes, well befitting the most Christian
understanding to contemplat^; drawing the inscrutable wisdom of God from the
excellency of his Creatures: the diverse forms whereof generally varying,
their different natures in few things concurring, and their continuance so
mainly discording, may minister to the greatest Atheist, no less c^e of
admiration, then c^use of execration of his irreligious and damnable opinion.

Here the Hyene (as Pliny relates) can imitate the The distinct na^ures of
beasts expressed.
voice of any man, and that so nearly, as his voice can hardly be
distinguished from the voice of him he imitateth, taking his denomination from
the Greeks, according to his natural rapine.

There the Fiber, or Beuer (by what instinct humane wisdom could never reach
to) to satisfy his covetous pursuer, bites off his own stones, being the
price (he knows) for which he is pursued.

Here see the dissembling Sphinx, able to personate any p^ssion, either of joy
or sorrow. There the wonderful Nature of the Rhynocer^s: the Lion so naturally
vali^nt, as not to be daunted; yet behold the silly Cock can make him tremble.
Then represent to your generous reading, the natural enmity betwixt the Horse
and the Bear, the Wolf and the Lion, the ^ox and the Badger; such a native
disagreeing remains among these beasts, as their hatred is implacable; ever
pursuing their enemy with an inueterate hate: for an enmity ingrafted by
nature, cannot be suppressed by less then nature.

Many conflicts were instituted in Rome (at solemnization of any festival, or
in remembrance of some memorabl^ exploite achieved) betwixt Beasts: whence the
Romans gathered great knowledge, seeing the remissness of some natures, and
the eagerness of others. Some of an vnquailed spirit, yet in strength unable
to maintain their spirit: others (like our unwieldy Epicures) sinowy and fleshy
enough, have strength at will, but defect of cour^ge so curbes them, as the
ouer-flow of ability waines in the rising; not daring to encounter with one of
less strength, but more vivacity.

When Fabius Maximus went in Embassage to Pyrrhus, Vide Lucium Flor. in 1 lib.
do Sab. Be^l. and pos^ea de bello Tarent. cap. 18*
Prince of Epyre, with whom (at that time) the Romans had war: he denounced
open hostility against him and his territories, for not performing some
conditions included in the league. Pyrrhus to terrify Fabius, commanded his
Guard to place an Elephant behind the Arras, that at their next pa^ly, Fabius
seeing so terrible a beast, might of his own accord solicit peace. But Fabius
(though one at that time unacquainted with such sights, for never were any
Elephants then seen in Rome) hearing him send out his hollow voice, replied:
The sound of a Roman Ram will be more terrible then the voice of an Epyrian
El^phant. But these grew afterward to public spectacles: so as in any
Triumph of some victorious, or puissant Captain, there were many Elephants,
Ounces, Panther^, Tigers, and other sauadge beasts slain, offering them (in
triumphant manner) to the Temple of the Goddess Victoria.

Varr^, a Roman Peer, one to whom the Roman tongue was much indebted, did
illustrate the Annals of Rome with their ceremonial triumphs; showing also Si
multo sanguine victoriam obticuissent, Gallum: si absque sanguine, Bouem Marti
i^molarent. etc.
what beasts were wont to be sacrificed to the Gods, and for what cause that
institution was observed; If the victory (says he) was purchased with the
loss of blood, they used to sacrifice to Mars, a Cock^; but if without blood,
they offered an Ox.

These natural desc^iptions of beasts are very delightful to the generous
Reader; they are very fit for illustrating any Subject; making comparison
betwixt the Natures of Beasts, Birds, or Plants, and other material subjects
of our discourse; comparing lust, incest, and such lasci^ious exorbitances to
the Lapwing, represented by Tereus, the rauisher of Phylomele: Inferring by the
Spider, arrogance, or p^ide, that durst compare with Pallas for preeminency. By
the C^rmorant, grating oppression, senseless and remorc^sse of others
miseries. Progue (i^ a Swallows habit) implying the swiftness of revenge to
murder.

In the Beasts of the Forest this may likewise be observed: the Lion (a fierce
beast) of an heroicke nature, contemning the dejected ones, nor caring to feed
on Carrion: He is of a Maiesticke disposition, and hates to be ungrateful for
the least benefits received: If the Mouse rid him of base servitude, he will
find time to requite her love one way or other. This may represent the person
of a King (for indeed he is the King of beasts) who scorns to triumph over the
subjected, but to tyrannise over the proud.

The El^phant resembles a man pressed down with honor; Resemblances in beasts.
being once down, he cannot rise: he is like some great man, who puf^ed up
with the prospero^ gales of his fortunes, can find no knees of legiance, or
submission to either Prince or State; his joints are inflexible, and the load
of his honor insupportable: once down, impossible to rise, but by some
vn-vsuall occurrent.

The Wol^, (a State-gormandizer) preyes upon the innocent, suckes the blood of
the Orphane, i^paires others means to enlarge his own: cruelty is the
habilliment he best likes, making the state a wild Forest for every Savage
to live in, but a shambles for the poor silly Lambkin to suffer in.

The Goat, your wanton and sensual Amorist, that skippes here and there, in
every brake of vani^y, till so entwined, as the sale of his repu^ation makes
him beg for a good Name: but the Eyes of General Observance are not so
dazeled, they have seen his Heart, and registered his follies.

The Bear, one that portends by his Birth, what he ^sus tanquam Orsus.
will be: an unhandsome piece of flesh; one that needs licking before he be
brought to fashion: Heeres Natures deformity, charractring by the foulness of
the body, the filthiness of his disposition: Tyrants we have had of this
resemblance, who came the wrong way into the world, but to intimate what wrongs
they would do unto the world. But now of tamer Creatures. Several pro^ resem*
bling several persons.


The Lamb cannot drink of a troubled Spring, no more can Innocence.

The Hare ever sleeps with open eyes: so does good Providence.

The Cony is fruitful and fearful: So is Nuptial Chastity.

The Emmet is in Summer ever foreseeing a Winter: Such is good Husbandry.

Shall we proceed in Birds likewise, and examine their Natures?

The Turtle for Constancy: The Cran^ for Vigilance: The Rohin expresses his
love to Man: the Nightingall to women: None more industrious then the Lark,
more laborious then the Wr^: more odious to her self, and others, then the
Cuckoo: More Heroicke then the Eagle, more Base then the Buzz^rd?

Then observe what (...) ins^incts gi^en to certain Birds, to prognosticate
the events of things.

The Crow a ^ore-teller of what weather will come to pass. The Halcion or
Seamew remarkable in prediction Vid. Aur. Vict.
of storms, and the Swallow, Crave, and many others, exact obseruers of
Seasons.

Other Birds there be that have more Humane feeling: Pliny reports that there
be certain Birds which howl excedingly at the Eclipse of the Sun; as if
naturally moved by some (by some miraculous influence or instinct from heaven)
to suffer with a Divine Body. so extremely suffering: Let us descend to Worms,
Serpents, and Creeping things, we shall see in them distinct Qualities also.

The Serpent Pareas, creeps on his Tail, and with Natures of Serpents, and
of Pagan (...).
the sharpness of his belly makes a ^urrow upon the ground where he crawleth.

Strange things be reported of the Serpent S^raphis, adored by the Egyptians
as a God: Some feeding upon See the discourse of Asia, and Affricke, entitled:
The Far^ell of Fashions. In Aulular.
raw flesh, intimating their ravenous Natures: Others on fish (as diverse
Serpents) living upon the Bank of the River Nilus: Others on Plants, and the
fruit of Trees, which Plautus expresses by the Vinefretter.

Matura Uitis folia Inuoluolus carpit. But other creep^ng Creatures there be
very beneficial to Humane Society. The Silke-worme, whose labors make our
Silken-Gallants. To that excess are we come, as our bravery must be
maintained, by the diligence of the simplest creatures, clothing our S^ll. de
contempt. Mundi. Singula solatia singulis malis obuiantia preparauit deus.
August.
selves with the very Bowels of Worms: Wonderful is their Generation.

The Add^r in her self obnoxious and hurtful, yet she casts her skin (to
express ^er good meaning to man) an excellent cure to many diseases.

The poor Worm, of her self, neither greatly harmefull nor profitable, only
(by a Synonomy b^twixt M^n and Her) she is the best Mirror of Humany Glory, an
Emblem of our Mortallity: and an importunate Guest that will come to banquet
on our bodies, though not invited: She is called Uermis (quasi inermis) she
can but turn again, that is all the defensive, or offensive weapon she has
ready.

These silly contemptible Creatures be especial The worm a Motive of
Thankfulness, and the best Charracter of humane frailty.
Motives to a good Man, of Thankfulness: the ^xample we read in that devout
Father Anselme, who walking on day in his Garden, and seeing a poor worm
crawling under his feet, presently applied this Christian-like use to himself.

O Lord, thou might have made me like this Worm, contemptible and base, to
live in the holes and cauernes of the earth; But such was thy mercy, as thou
would not, bestowing on me thine own Image, that thy similitude might be
glorified in me: A comfortable Meditation of a zealous Father, and wo^thy our
observation.

We will now discourse of the skaly fishes in their Diversities of Natures in
Fishes.
kind, that the Majesty and Power of God (by giving such diversity of Natures
to Fishes) may appear in the Depths, as before it was manifestly expressed
upon the earth, and all dry places: Here is a tyrannicke power even in the
Ocean, and an absolute government without restraint of power: Here is a
Musical concordancy likewise; a Diapason of Sea-inhabitants. The Dolphine
playing a soft strain, resembling a Iulis vide Plinium quam ^nacem piscem
appellat, etc.
mean: the Sturgeon (swimming against the Stream) sharpens her Note, more
near a Treble: the ^ulis a smoth Counter-tenor, and the rolling Porpoise the
Base.

Here is great enmity likewise for predominancy: Contention amongst ^ishes.
And that amongst the greatest, the Orcke with the Whale: The Cuttell with the
Thorne-backe; the Seahorse with the Sea-vrchine: Many rare ver^ues in little
Creatures: With what strangeness the R^mora (a fish of small bigness) holds a
Ship, when in her full Sail? How wonderfully the Torpedo delivers her-selfe,
being taken by the unhappy Fisher? Disgorging her own bowels, to stupefie the
Taker, with an uncouth amazement.

The Acipenser, or which Pliny calls, Sacer piscis, feeds on nothing but man's
flesh, implying a caveat to man: that having so many enemies even in Earth, and
not free from them in the Depths, should not spend his time in security, but
prevent the enmity of all creatures by a dilligent and vigilant care to
himself. Long could I protract this discourse, but two material parts of this
Relation with hold me from insisting longer: The first whereof first offering
themselves, be Plants and Vegetative Bodies.

The wis^st of all Kings was much conversant in The Study of Kings in Plants,
Herbs, and Fruits, etc.
these Studies, knowing every Tree, every herb, and every flower: A Cedro
Libanon vsque ad Hysopum supra parietem: An excellent commendations in a King;
not addicting his mind to other things then the purchase of Knowledge, even in
inferior things: that a generallity of knowing, might make him worthy of
governing.

Probus the Roman Emperor, who succeeded Florianus in the Empire, was much
addicted to Planting, and distinguishing the natures of Flowers, the virtues of
Plants, with proper obseruances accommodated for the knowledge of all seasons,
apt for grafting, Stilling and the like: Planting the Mountain Almus scited
near Syrmius, and the Mount Aureus in Maesia the Higher, with Vines.

The like we read of Galerius Maximinus, Surnamed Armentarius, and many others
of the Romans, whose diligence was much employed in such pleasant affairs.

Resemblances in these vegeta^iue Bodies, requires observance; To see the Vime
like a fruitful mother To wha^ especial resemblance these (...) be
accommodate.
of many fair children, sending out her ripened ^lusters, fair blossoming
Sprigges, and infinite store of pretty Slippes, imitating their Mothers
fruitfulness, and bending with her own Burden, as not able to support
herself without some stay or vp-holder: The pitiful Elm stretches her
arms out to bear her up, in pure compassion moved to help her, that in
herself and f^uitefull Issue, was so helpefull unto others.

The Vine seems sometime to weep (for tears indeed she sheds) as if in
Throws and pain of her labor: These tears distilling from the Vine cure the
Plinius.
Leprosy: So as she seems both Fruitful and Sovereign, yielding no less
comfort in her tears, then verdure in her spraies.

Many of these teare-shedding Trees there be, as Teare-shedding Trees.
the Myrrh, dropping Amber, and the Rosined Fyrrh: These by allusion may seem
to commiserate our unhappy states subjected to miriads of anxieties, by the
taste of one Tree, whose dismal fruit made us wretched.

Some Trees we have for harbor and Shadow one^y, resembling our dissembling
Professors; whose external appearance makes great show of a fruitful
inside, when nothing, save a mere naked pretense of Piety, remains in them.

Others for fruit, without any store of blossoms, and such be they as desire
rather to be good, then so accounted.

Some Trees pine away, as if surprised with an Buxus amator^ languere similima
visa est, pallor inest illi pall^t and omnis amans. Alciat.
amorous passion, exemplified in the Box: Others show by their freshness, to
whom they are consecrate, as the Myrtle.

Some loose not their color in Winter, like the patient man, who beleagred
with the worst of fortunes oppositions, never changes countenance for the
matter: but like that Uenetian Motto writ in Triumph: Nec stuctu nec statu
mouetur.

Others not subject to any hurt by Thunder, as the Bays: resemble the sincere
Conscience, not discomfited with any assault, or dismayed with any terror.

Sweet Odours, Flowers, and all other Beauties strowed upon this Arteficiall
Carpet garnish the earth, as the internal virtues inhabiting the mind do the
A resemblance of Odou^s, Flowers and other Beauties to the inward Graces and
Ornaments of the mind. Of Precious Stones. Iulium Caesarem spe Margaritarum,
Britanniam pet^se.
Soul: This discourse more concerning the Hearbist, then Historian, makes me
more brief in the handling hereof.

For Stones, and all kinds of Minerals, it is a knowledge worthy Gentlemen:
wherein I may likewise comprehend the ancient knowledge of Coins, in what
Emperors time, and their several inscriptions.

We read how Julius Caesar came into Bri^tany in hope to find Pearls; though
Caligula's traffic seemed less worthy, commanding his Soldiers to gather
Cockle-shels.

It is a very generous quality, (and sometimes he shall be put to his
judgment) to distinguish rightly and ^xactly of Saphires, Emraudes, Diamonds,
etc. This requires exact judgment, Iustres may be given to Glass, as well as
Diamond: Adulterate Gemmes, pass current with our Nouice: The Siluer-Smiths of
^phesus have instructed ^his age sufficiently, and fraud must be incorporate to
every Profession.

If these Gemmes, I talk of, were ornaments of the mind, I should desire
longer to insist upon them: but being (as these times use them) rather foments
to ensnare and entrappe, then attractiue motives, according to their Native
Properties, being ordained as resemblances of virtues: I will not dilate of
their valewes, only of their power, more pertinent to my Discourse, and better
according with my knowledge, who Aeschylus-like, have long time drawn water
out of another Cesterne, but never filled mine own Bucket.

Many excellent virtues of Stones, does Pliny in The ver^ues of Stones
described.
his Natural History set down unto us: As some have power to frustrate the
effect of poison: Others very powerful against the operations of Magic
Spells, With-craft, and the like: But as a Judicious Commentary writes of him:
Mul^a scribit, quae mehercule vera non existimanda s^nt: Yet to stand in
suspense with us (for the reverence of such a learned Author) because their
effects have not been as yet tried of us.

Many things (I confess) seem by all probability like the Amalga, to have
more Moon then Sun in them: But the experiments which we have in some, makes
us more credulous in others. The patient man like ^he Stone Gallasia; Hard as
the Diamond, cold like Ice, not to be fired. Or the Stone Amazantus, once on
fire will never go out.


The Diamond (whose Character is not to be razed) resembles the pure
Impressions of virtue we have received, and which is traduced to us by the
intellectual eye of the soul, which in no case should be razed or abolished
in us, but to be augmented with a greater increase of virtues: It resembles
also the truly Charitable man, that to do good to others, impaires his own
fortunes: For the best Motto that ever was made of the Diamond was this: Dum
formo, minuo.

The stone Mithrax (says Pliny) is of a perfect color, till opposed to the
Sun, and then it loses Strange effects in Stones.
his color: It alludeth to many of our painted Sepulchers, our She-puppets:
None more clear, or amiably-coloured then they, till the Sun glitter on them,
and their slightly laid on varmish, presently then dissolueth: Quantum mutatur
ab Illa: True Sodoms Apples, no sooner touched, then to dust and corruption
turned.

Topaz, her opposite (in Native virtue) shines most in the thickest
darkness: The very Idea of Virtue her self: The Clouds cannot interpose
themselves betwixt her, and her Native luster: The Glo-worme glisters Allusions
of certain Stones to internal graces.
not more by night, then it does in obscurity: A precious Stone fittest for
these times, and an ornament wel-beseeming the greatest Personage: For the
Cloud of Error should not be able to obscure their thoughts, ever bending
their course to the mark of honor.

To recount the virtues of all, were a superfluous task, for so should I make
a Collection merely of what has been wri^ten before, I only set down with
my self, to extract the speciallest, and to make resemblances of them with the
Native proportions of such things as are most usual objects to our outward
senses. I will briefly touch the admirable devices of Minerals, and so proceed
to my intended (...).

Mines the lower laid, the better: in them we disbowell Of Mine^als.
(as it were) Nature of her hidden Treasure^; yet the earth, like a kind and
bountiful Mother, willingly vnrips her own breast, to enrich her children,
the diverse veins, and ^ordons which we find there, like hidden or concealed
streams, having filled up their Treasure-channels (because so long time
vn^mptied) minister store of all Metals unto their Digger.

C^sar in his Commentaries, seems greatly to have delighted herein, ha^ing so
quickly found out with what sorts of Metals, these Britaine-coasts most
abounded: Some we have of these Mineralists that by the supe^fices of the
earth, can judge, what kind of Metal best agrees with that Soil; and
without pier^ing the ground (can prettily well) presage the event of their
labor: Their Studies deserve cherishing, being grounded on honest foundations,
and such as have much be^efited their Country by their industry.

The North-part in their Copp^r-workes most labourious, merit their share of
commendations; The northpart famous for Copper-work, by their labor and
industry yielding no small benefit t^ their coun^ry.
both profiting themselves, and yielding an amp^e gain to the Kings Revenues
out of their labors. The most precious Mines have been ever found out in
Regions least inhabited, and where the Inhabitants could make little or no use
of so large a bounty of Nature, as to this day among the Indians, men that
would exchange their preciousest things for trifles: like Aesops Cock,
preferring a Barley-corne before a pearl.

Yet in these labors (in themselves praiseworthy) I altogether disalow such
(of which our reading ministers too many examples) that have dug the
Sepulchers of the dead, to find some hidden treasure buried with them. A
sharp law was enacted (for this end) amongst the Egyptians, (which nation
used to interre their chiefest Jewels with the dead party) that whosoever
should violate the sacred rites of the dead, by digging up their Treasures
inchested with them, should be buried quick.

A pretty story to this purpose is recorded of Semyramis, A pretty cau^ion for
a miser.
that valiant Q^eene of Assyria, who before her death, commanded that a fair
Monument should be erected over her, upon which should be engraven this
Inscription: Whosoever shall dig up this stone, let him but look under it,
and he shall find an infinite mass of treasure. Cyrus having conquered that
people, chanced to come where that curious monument was erected; and seeing this
Inscription upon it, presently commanded the stone to be taken up, which being
done accordingly, he found no treasure, but this caution of better value then
all treasures: None but Fools and Mis^rs would dig up the bones of the dead.
A reward well fitting the miserable desire of an insatiate mind.

I might annexe to this Discourse, the excellent study of Antiquities, and
speak in part of them, But our coast is freighted with such elaborate
Antiquaries, as the digression might seem less necessary: through all the
body of this discourse (including Physical Relations) I have but shadowed the
chiefest, without intention to entreat of ^uery particular, using Ualerius
Maximus words: Quis omnis ^ui gesta modico voluminum numero comprehenderit? I
will descend to Mixed Hist^ries, which was the last branch of my division.

Mixed Histories are composed, or compounded of Mixed (...)
all those three, of which we have sufficiently entreated before. Variety of
subjects best agree with the frame of these writings: they express to the
quick, not only what was done discursiuely, but what should have been done
morally, and deriuing the event from probable causes, arising from nature, they
conclude their Mi^t Histories composed of all kinds.
discourse, making it universal. Some have styled these Miscellaneae, because
a commixture of all affairs; they playing the Moral Philosopher as well as
Historian: comprehend all which the other could any way seem to entreat of;
being the abridgement of all relations, and in themselves sufficient to produce
incredible effects: they require especial reading, ripe judgment, and an apt
disposition withal to make their members, so diversely hanging, unite in one
maine body.

I approve of Salusts opinion: Ex ijs Negotijs quae ingenio ex^rcentur, in
primis magno vsu est memoria rerum gestarum. Yet of all those Records, none in
themselves more eminent, because none more elaborate then mixed Histories: they
contract in one leaf (as it were) what a whole volumne could scarcely
comprehend. There must be a general knowledge in these discourses, These
requir^ a general knowledge, and extend furth^r then all the rest.
making a well-composed body of many scattered limbs, gathered from the
relics, or ashes of their deceased Authors. For as a good Limber will not see
any blemish in his portraiture; but (ere he hang it out) will desire to make
every part and proportion in a kind of correspondency, to move a more deep
impression in the beholder: So should there be an equal correspondency in
these kind of Histories, letting no discourse pass (if of consequence)
without a mixture of both Moral and Physical reasons; lest one little blemish
(one omission of either) should be a disparrage to the whole. Here
Antomedon-like, he should set out virtues table, making his life a globe of
precepts: There, like an excellent Naturalist, he should dilate upon the
natures of things, or probable reasons (as I said before) de^iued from Nature.
The maisterpeece (like the warp^ in the web) is Discourse: for these
Buttresses, without a maine foundation, would soon decay.

Wits compared to Soiles: some naturally fruitful, without forci^g: others,
without continual labor and ^illage, will bring forth nothing but tares (or
the Husbandmans tears) Some fit for Barley, others for Wheat, Oats, or the
like: and some most apt for Missellane. A (...) of wits.
So in wits, some naturally ripe and forward; others require a more deliberate
dispatch: the o^e more present, the other more solid. P^egnant and ripe wits
are not so good, they are like a Rasorkeene and sharp^, but his edge is soon
rebated. One compared them, and not unfitly, to soft wood, ready to receive any
impression from the Limber; but for warping, is unable to keep, and therefore
not fit for any worthy, or curious Portraiture. Such wits are these, which be
rather fit apt ^or invention, then iuditious scanning of any Author: they can
invent, better then extract; and consequently unfit for these mixed Discourses
whereof we now entreat,

Exquisite labor is the producer of these Histories; which (for the most part)
is intolerable to your sharpest wits; being rather for the present, then any
serious deliberation.

Salust in his Iugurthine War, includes a pretty commixture of Histories; as
if he had intended to Example of mixed histories.
make a president for relations of this kind, where he brings in Micipsa upon
his deathbed, speaking to his sons: Equidem ego regnum vobis trado fi^mum:
Si boni eritis, sin mali imbecillum. Wherein he so lively characters the state
of Princes, and the moral instruction of a Father dying, to his C^ildren, with
the several natures and dispositions ^f them; that it seems he purposed to
instance t^is kind of writing in so excellent a subect. Here he shows
dissimulation in a Prince, even at his end: there an unworthy plot of an
adopted son, seeking to reign by indirect means. Here Micipsa exhorts them;
with, colite talem hunc viru^, imitamini virtutem. Yet he intimates withal,
his fear of aspiring, seeing his nature so boundless. There he describes the
jealous doubts, and perplexed windings of Adherball; there the drooping spirit
of Hyempsall, and the royal disposition of Iugurth: so as by reading their
diverse natures, one might conjecture for whom the government of Numidia was
reserved.

These Histories are most fruitful, they draw both Mixed Histories ^ost
fruitful.
attention, and they comprehend in them great plenty of instruction. Attention
by their variety, instruction by their morality; including a pe^swasiue kind
of writing in the one, and a delightful proceeding, or continuance in the
other.

Some Historians in this kind, and not unfitly, lay open the causes of decays
in Cities, Empires, and Governments: as Romes fall proceeding from her Popes
pride, Babylons from her riot, the Medes from her security, the Tyrians from
their sumptuousness in apparel; the Christians (in Eastern parts) more to
their shame, and our grief, from their civil dissension among themselves.

Thus have the flourishingest Commonweals fallen to desolation, and
dissolution, their highest spires ruinate, their Temples, with their places, of
profane adoration, defaced; nothing remaining to boast of, Causes precedent
directors to the events.
save that they once were happy, once victorious. Yea Iugurth himself seems
to express the cause of Romes ruin; showing how subject they were (even the
purple Fathers, the reverent Benchers) to take bribes, and receive ointments,
which would close their mouth for speaking in the Commonweals behalf. For
when he was complained of, unto the Senate, for the murder of Hyempsall: and
the Senate having then government over Numidia in chief; which Realm (as
others) was tributary to them, commanded Iugurth to appear before them upon
such a day; fully resolved to punish his insolences. He so wrought by rewards,
as their censure was not only mittigated, but (as the Historian records) Tanta
commutatio incessit, vt ex maxima inuidia in gratiam and fauorem nobilitatis
Iugur. veniret. A strange Metamorphosis, when states were so soon changed,
which portended a sudden change of their government, falling from so great
glory, and ^minence, to eternal obscurity.

Many Histories of these natures there be, which depend Distinct proprieties in
all Historie^.
upon apt allusions, equally mixed with Discursiue, Moral, and Physical:
Discursiue to delight and trick on the appetite, by a sweet variety; seeing
the change of great states in a few leaves; being a speech merely documentall,
to better our lives, teach us what should be done, as well in private as
public. Physical, in the character of several ^atures, aptly accommodated to
the subject whereof we ent^eate. With wh^t delight do we read the diverse
inclinations of Princes? Here Inclination^ different i^ Princes.
a Catyline, doing little, and ^peaking much: there a Iugurth, doing much, and
speaking little. Here ^ Philip drunk, and in his drunkenness raging against
his foes: there an Alexander, drunk too; but in his passion raging against his
best friends. Here a Caesar, then whom, none ever (...) more good to his
followers: there a Nero* then whom, none more desertlesse to his followers.
Here a working crafty wit, stirring up trifling rewards, to contain him in
suspense; instanced in Ti^erius: there an affable mind, set out in threedbare
words, one that could never flatter; specified in Titus.

These several natures we may see, and mark what success they had: some, the
more thinking, the more not knowing what to think: yet to observe the work of
Heaven, seldom, or never have these suspitio^s heads cause to rest; but the
more they suspect, the more motives they have to suspect: for this craft is
always hateful, and procures enemies: sub^ill councels being odious unto the
world, and so dis-fauoured of God, that they are alwaye^ waited on, and
attended with most unprosperous ends. We shall see in profane Virtue ever
^ttended with a prosperous end.
stories a maine diversity, even in the simplest and shallowest
understandings, the subtillest sconses the means of their own decay; as in
Sejanus, who in the opinion of his own worth, grew in time, Ferox sceleris:
Such aspiring spirits be (for the most part) used like Sponges, wet with their
spoils and extortions, Policy her own ^ine exemplified.
with which being a long time soaked, they are ^t last crushed and condemned,
that their long gathered wealth might return to the Princes Coffers. Traian
used ^o call the Treasury, or Exchequer (by way of comparison) the Spleen,
because it increasing, brings to all the other parts a pining.

The simple (or Innocently imagining statist) comes ever to an expected end in
his hopes; as they are not great, so not subject to so great an Eclipse: yea,
the hopes of these men attain sometimes ends above expectance: Such was
H^luius Pertinax his success, who (never aiming at the Title of Emperor) was
crowned when he was from thoughts of Titulary honor most sequestered:
R^pugnansque suscipiens using a kind of withstanding ere he would entertain
so great a weight. And in all histories, if we observe the diverse occurrents
which befell men in great and eminent places, we shall see ever the honestest
purposes seconded with the happiest events; and the disproportion of the end
ever sorting with the discordance of the mind: for the intention is discussed
by him that lays the foundation, and (of all Empires in dust at his pleasure)
breathing ever upon the sincere purposes of the good, and confounding the deep
defigues (upon what pretense soever grounded) of the evil.

In Mixed Histories (as the scope whereat they ai^) is mixed part with profit,
and part with delight, to What subject best concord^ with mixed Hi^.
make the Discourse m^re complete: So should the seriousness of the subject
attract a kind of Majesty to it; for impossible it is, either with trimnesse
of words, propriety of aptly-annexed, and duly-applied sentences, or any other
elegancy whatsoever, to make a subject (of it self light and frivolous) bear
the portray of state: For words (if well applied) illustr^te, and add^ a
beauty, but not any way better the weight of the matter. Three things
necessarily required in Histories of thi^ nature.


There be three things which be especially required in Histories of this
nature, to make them perfect: first Truth, in ^incerely relating, without
having any thing (as Tacitus observes) ^austum ex van^, foisted in by our own
invention, to smooth the passage of our story.

Secondly, an explanation in discovering, not only the sequels of things, but
also the causes and reasons drawing to the conclusions.

Thirdly, judgment in distinguishing things by approving the best, and
disallowing the contrary.

For the first, stories should be true, or at least resemble Histories should
be true
truth, because by so much, they are more pleasing, by how much they resemble
truth the nearer; and so much more graceful, by how much more probable and
doubtful: we have many Histories (even of this kind) mixed, that comprehend
in them nothing less then truth: yet by their smooth carriage, and their
proper* circumstances with such aptness drained and disposed, they have been
taken for truth, and registered amongst works of more s^rious consequence.

Such were those Apologae Fabulae (whereof we have in part spoken before) which
contained in them many pitthy and grave (...), and worthy observation in the
excellentest Moral: these are fitly called by Tully, Mirrors of Man's life,
Patterns of Manners, and Images of truth. Their near resemblance of truth,
made the reader more attentive, subiecting his ear to Discourses probable,
more then to things surpassing the bounds and limits of belief, as producing
unheard of miracles (mere conceptions of the brain) phanaticke Chymeras: A
Giant immured in a rock, yet able to pierce it through, win a whole Monarchy
with his own single hands, lead a multitude of Kings captives, and return
home without a wound. Here strange Inchaunted Castles, Ladies and Knights
detained in most base servitude by an Airy Monster: there admirable victories
purchased upon incredible, odds: and to be believed, it pleases the Painter
so to deliniate their virtues.

But of these erroneous stories there be some observe no method, planting an
Arcadie in a Brittanny: Absurdities in Historians of our time.
as if by some supernatural accident there were a transplantation of Regions,
or some Earthquake in the Authors brain, whence this immane Colosse of an
irregular Discourse proceeded. Which strange representations be not unlike to
your Lanskip; where upon the sea, whatsoever we see, by land, seems in our
sail to go with us: Even so do these vain Historians make strange objects unto
us, of places impossible, transiting whole Countries to make an impolished
strain of pastoral music (one good Bell-weather would make as perfect
harmony) sound well in a Clownes ear.

To be short, my opinion positiuely is this: That Historian which can join
profit with a modest delight together in one body or frame of one united
discourse, grounding his story upon an essential truth, deserves the first and
principal place: and he who (upon a fained discourse) can proportion it to a
likeness of truth, merits the next. As for him that (like one of Duke
Humphreyes Knights) observes neither mean nor measure, but gorge their own
insatiate appetites with full messes of untruths (without probability) should
be dealt withal, as that wandering Italian Squire was used, for his monstrous
lying: Tossed in a Blanket, till his erring spirit by suffumigations, or some
such like means, were canuased out of him.

Great blemishes these be to so reputed a Profession, aiming neither at profit
nor modest delight, but imitating your Mercenary Actors, spurt out some obsoene
jest to make a profane Rogue applaud him: and sure if the strict doom, and
censure, of banishment, were to be inflicted upon any kind of learning, rather
should it be pronounced against such as these then any. The Pagans have
abhorred them and much more odious should they be in a Christian
Commonwealth, where virtue should be the scope of all our actions.

They are like some Comoedies we read now a days; The first Act whereof is
in Asia, the next in Africa, the third in Europa, the fourth in America: and
if Ptolomeus, or Marcus Paulus had found out a fi^fth part of the world, no
question but it had been represented on their universal Stage: Such as these
ought to have some distinct language, Utopian, or some other grunting tongue
eng^ossed to themselves: For they should profit more, by being less
understood. Much they speak of valor, and many imaginary Heroes are pitching
their Pauillions; But I will take my leave of them with my French Proverb:
Beaucoup de bruit, e peu de fruict: Much brute, but little fruit: Battles
more fierce (by report) then Alcahors: That was but Kings, their's Giants: and
one of those Giants as able to vanquish all those Kings, as for Milo to carry
his Bull on his shoulders.

For the second: Their should be an explanation in Explanation in discovery of
causes.
discovery of the causes, with a direct and graduall proceeding to the sequels:
As thus; in description of a solemn Just, or Tournament, it is necessary for
the Historian to show the cause why such solemnities were instituted: I do know
many things there be in Discourses, which may be as well employed as inserted;
But in Festiuals, solemn Games, events of Duellors, or public Trials: The
causes forcing should and ought to be as well deciphered, as the ends
succeeding: How should we have known of the uniting of the Sabines with the
Romans, or the occasion of their Marrying together, but by those dissembled
feasts ordained by Romulus, to bring his purpose to effect: The circumstances
of which feast (are with a certain concordancy) amongst most of the Roman
Writers agreed on; standing (though with too nice prec^senesse) I confess upon
the place, occasion, and hour of the day, with such a lively Transcription, as
if the Sabine Rape had been committed in their time.

The like we read of the destruction and utter subversion of the Gabians, in
the time of Tarquin Superbus: The general union of Historians, about the time,
place, and occasion, so concordantly iumping, as if all those proceedings (as
well in the Stratagemes by Tarquins youngest son, as the very Contents of A
concord in circumstances amongst Historians.
that Letter writ by the father to his son, for the management of this
exploite) had been set down by one pen.

The like in that Combat, or bloody Banquet rather of Thomyris her eldest
son, and the Persian Cyrus, with such native descriptions of every
circumstance, the River Araxis, the place of their passage, the reasons which
moved Thamyris to suffer their passage, and the very plot where their Tents
were pitched, their dainty viands left for the Scythian surffet, in what sort
prepared, and how insatiably desired by the Scythian army, coming rather to
feast then to fight: And then their defeat, being there vanquished, where they
were most confident of victory.

In these explanations, the Reader should not be delayed, or frustrated too
much in his hopes, by unnecessary ambages: We should not trifle out the time in
vain and impertinent repetitions, it cloies and satiates the appetite too
much: not unlike to your great feasts, reserving the choycest dainties for the
end, when the appetites of the Guests are satisfied before they come: It is a
good frugall course, and includes an Occonomicke policy, their best dishes may
be preferued for another time: He that discouers events and sequels without
their precedent causes, is as one that would draw a River dry, without knowing
whence the Spring is derived: applying the conclusions of things, as it pleased
the Ethnickes in ancient time, to reserre them to the arbitriment of Fortune;
making ever this womanish argument: The event was so, because it was so; and it
was so because fate would have it so: answering Titus opinion, Potestates fato
dari: But these which thus apply the course of all conclusions to fortune, be
as blind as Fortune: Nay, far more; for though Fortune be blind, yet she is
not invisible: But these men are not only blind in the eye of common sense,
but invisible in the composure of their own Arguments; their Conclusions being
as blind as themselves.

In making likewise our judgment of Histories, and considerately applying it
to our present interests, we must specially regard the dispositions of the
Agents, and dilligently remarke how they are affected in mind, this is the
least dece^uing ground of forming opinion: By the nature of the Agent,
coniecturall events or reasons of events may be drawn: As if an ambitious man
be employed in Embassage twixt Prince and Prince, he is to be suspected that
his Treaty will be less happy, in that his illimited Passions oftimes, rather
aggrauate then allay causes of civil discord. Men of moderate dispositions,
purchase peace with less ado, and more successful; For Princes (ballancing
their own wrongs, to their apprehension insupportable) cannot endure brauing*
but The Event gathered by foregoing causos.
will rather try the extremest of Fortune, then be unworthy of themselves, by
hearing and bearing affronts with patience.

The like we have observed in the success of war, a wise and experienced
Leader, to have accomplished great matters with a handful of men; and that
Aphorism Tanti esse exercitum q^nti imperato^m Luc. Fl^r. 2. lib.
to be very true: Better is an Army of Hearts, with a Lion to their Leader, then
an Army of Lions, having an Heart to their Leader: And contrary wise the unhappy
events of most flourishing Empires, the miserable slaughters of most puissant
Armies, by the unadvised government of their Agents, or tyranny of their
Regents, whose improuidence made much people unfortunate: To see Han^iball once
a Conqueror, because his hopes were not seated on indirect means, and by his
own traculent disposition, to become a prey to the conquered, makes ^his
Assertion good.

Many examples we have of the like, where the Nature of the Agent ill affected,
crossed not only the success of hopeful designs, but buried their Names in
oblivion, of such I speak, as have been interrested in the like adventures.
Contempt of Religion, the cause of Realms subversion.


As sometimes where the Agents have been neglectfull of Religion; depending
more upon their own proper resolutions, then the power of heaven directing all
humane a^aires to their appointed ends: As we may read in that memorable
disaster of the Romans at Can, where the Consul This even the very Heathens
have observed.
V^ro, with a populous Army of experienced Soldiers, was utterly discomfited;
and that (as the Roman Historians have observed) because of Iunoes wrath
conceived against Uarro, for erecting (in derision of Jupiters Temple) a
Mimicke-boy to keep watch, as the solemn order was.

The like of Potitius detracting from the honor of Hercules: The like revenge
inflicted on Virilius by Aesculapius: By Juno Lacinian Q. Fulv: By Proserpine
In aur^am cr^teram Delphos perferendam curasset. Valor. Max.
on Plenimius: By Jupiter, on that sacriligious Tyrant Dionysius: By Apollo on
the Pirate-prince Thymasitheus: On Alexand^r by C^res.

Sometimes by the libidinous disposition of the Governor, other sometimes by
his Avarice: now and then by his Impatience, and most of all by his
recklesnesse, have the sequels of things proved less fortunate, because the
precedent motives, or instruments directing to the end, had no better
likely-hoods in them.

We wonder not at all, to see troubled water come from an v^cleere Spring: Nor
at tares growing in the sluggards field; but we admire successiue ends, drawn
from improbable causes: Many times there be (I confess) intrinsecall motives,
which like, as that Beauty is the best which cannot be expressed by the
Painter, so arrogates it the chiefest place (that inwardly moving cause, I
mean) because, the efficient cause of causes, more sure, more infallible then
the euidentest demonstration: And I have (for my part) ever superstitiously
Such things as be above us, be not to be argued of us.
feared to bring such causes in Question: since such Arguments have ministered
no small occasion to the prophaner wits, both of Ancient and Modern times, to
boulster their insufficient opinions: As to arguethus: Here we see a
flourishing Commonweal supporting her self by no other mean^s then Justice;
reaching to as high a perfection in every degree, of as exact government, as
the blindness of the time would permit: Yet this State (so flourishing) laid
wast by a people exposed to all impieties: Here the end can hardly be collected
by the foregoing cause. Equity was in the conquered, Tirrany in the
Conqueror: Here is a maine discrepancy in the beginning, and conclusion; and
the active causes ordinarily moving seem ( Cardine Uerso) to oppose
themselves. It is true; But tell me (whosoever thou art) that Lucianlike
composest this Argument: Is he that sets up, and confounds, what Empires as
b^st pleases him, tied to means, or secondary causes? There is no Realm which
for some abuse or other, has no^ deserved to loose her glor^; and herei^ does
the Maiesticke power of heaven show abundant mercy, to some Kingdoms in
chasti^ing them before they come to the height of sin, that their eclypse of
glory, might be an increase unto them of virtue; their ^bbe of honor, an
occasion of acknowledgement of their Creator.

For even in the best Commonweals, we read, Kingdom^ (...) to
acknowledgement by the taste of ^seties.
that the experiment of some external misery or disaster, has reduced them to
more ripe consideration of themselves, and an exact search in themselves,
discussing the causes of the Gods indignation against them. Present extremities
are of that force to Humane bodi^, that the present apprehension of their woe,
seems in some sort to extenuate their pride, in^lameth Religion, ^iteth men to
undertake a labor for the benefit of their Country (with the loss of
themselves) to appease the wrath of the Gods. This was the cause why the
Romans used to have the gate of the Temple lanus open in war, but shut in
peace: For Nec^ssity (as well in these times as in Pagan times (uses to be the
mo^e of devotion.

Explanation of causes, is an elucidary or examply^g, as it were of the matter
whereon we entreat: Happy (says the Poet) is he, that has known, or does
Causes directo^ies of eu^nts.
know, the principal causes of things, as well precedent as su^uent: Events
may be known (I confess) without their causes, but so defective is that
knowledge, as the Co^ntrie Shepe-heards prediction is of weather: His obseruan
ces are causeless because Artlesse, judging of the Cloud (by usual
approbation) making experiment his ground, without recourse had to Natural
causes: To show the destruction of Troy by Alcydes, without explaning the
perfidious dealing of Laomed^n: or of Troies second subversion, without the
rape of Hellen: or of Romes translated Aristocracy, without relation made of
those civil wars, planting C^sar in his Mona^chy; or of that ample and
potent Empire of Media translated to the Persians, without the precedent causes
arising from the glory, and eternal renown of Cyrus, would make a confused
History, as if the former chaos were A disposition, yet not limited, an order
yet not coacted, a means yet not enforced: Qui enim (Si voluit) omnia si^e
medijs creare potuit, ea etiam siae medijs (Si voluit) seruare potuit.
reduced to her first indigestion: causes are the Springs of Events.

If we should read the diverse effects of glory, the sundry moving causes of
perpetual honor, amongst the Romans, we would admire them: Some having
raised themselves to an exceeding eminent pitch of greatness, and that by as
unaccustomed means, Selfeaffiance, or Confidence of their own valor,
instanced in Cne: Scipio, publicly proclaming: That nothing was more generous
then this Confidence, more infallible then Prediction, more powerful than
celerity in dispatch, or more eminent then the digni^y of the Person: The like
of Scipio Many Kingdoms much renowned, by that means, which makes them most
debased: Selfe^ceit.
Aemilian^s, Scipio N^ca, Furius Phyl^s, Luc. Crassus, M. Scaurus* and many
others, whose greatest fame was purchased by that mean, which uses to be the
greatest error i^ humane society, (...) of a man's own deseruings: Which
likewise has been ruin to many populous and most puissant Empires. Then to
divert our eye to an opposite of Conceit, and that is Modesty, or a silent
shadowing of their own demerites: Excellent and memorable examples whereof may
be produced out of Valor: M^ximus in his 4. Book, entreating of Modesty: where
he observes (by way of explanation,) the meriting parts of many, whose
resolutions shadowed, made the luster of their Country more eminent.

Likewise to describe, the strange, and unexpected, rising of some, Qui
p^steris fuere nobilitatis initium, and virtutis exemplum: Borne of nothing;
yet by some private indowments, either of i^sinuating, as the ignoble wits: or
of State-obserui^g, as those elated Natures, grieved (as it were) with the
obscurity of their birth, in seeing others less (it may be) meritorious,
ascend the Throne of highest honors, possess the eminentst places, in
contempt and despi^e of Fortune, and humblenes of b^rth, crowde in the press
of the honored, Honor the ^st when it i^ deriu^d from ^r selves.
if but sor enobling their Country by their peculiar deserts. This wa^ objected
against Cicero, which he as sufficiently answered: Satius est me meis rebus
gestis storere quam maiorum opinione ni^i. Dependence of Ancestors confer
small or no glory to us, if our succ^ding worth show not a correspondency to
our Prodecessours glory. Tullus Hostilius, Tarquinius priscus, Tulliu^ Seruius,
Perpenna, and T^rrentius (...), and that mirror of countries love, M. Portius
Cato: Their births ignoble, yet they made their Cradles Noble by their many
d^seruing parts; Characters of proper Nobility, not derived from their fathers
greatness, but from their own eminence: Nor have there wanted others who
degenerated from their A^cestors well deserved lives: Scipio Affria^, his
Countries honor, leaves a Scipio the monument of his own dishonor: Fabius
Maximus, ^ son, for worthless respect, deserving the name of Fabi^s Minimus:
Clodius Pulcher beautified with ornaments of mind, as well as body, makes his
Country no (...).
less hopeless by his birth, then renowned by himself. The like of (...) his
Nephew, one least equalling so many deserved parts of his thrice glorious
Ances^our: The one a prosessed prostitute to all licentious places, an
arch-protector of sensuality, having no other Clients, but noted S^rumpets: The
other a supporter of Equity, a resister of indirect proceedings, a mirror of
continence in his time; and one, second ^o none, save Cicero, in promptness of
speech, and a present modestly composed Eloquence.

In the description of their natures we include the causes of their ends;
virtue being (as we said before) ever seconded with event answerable to her
intent, either in the beginning, middle, or end. And certai^ly, whosoever
should but read the desolations of the mightiest Empires, or their rising,
shall see some appearance of causes proceeding from their government, occasions
of their glory, or ruin. Nor can we (without cause) admire the erection and
establishing of the Turk^sh Empire, The wonderful establishing of the Turkish
Empire.
her many dilated Provinces, extended Confines; and almost sovereign command
in the Eastern parts. Let us but consider their politic government
(subiecting all laws of Conscience, or Religion, to the furthering of their
designs; planting their seat (maugre the fury of all opponents) in those
floury and spaciou^ territories, where once the sanctified feet of the sacred
Apostles used to tread. Yet in their policies (because not proportionate to
virtue) shall they be subu^rted. They have erected themselves to an exceeding
height, (with the Giants menacing the fabric of Heaven;) but their fall will
be more miserable, by how much they be of miseries more i^capable. For that
kingdom which is not established in peace, shall be ruined by war; and where
virtue had not her predominance, there shall the illimited rage of vice take
her residence: and where she is an inhabitant, there is imminent desolatio^
menaced. To make explanation of causes in this, were needless, because the
seat of such a government is the occasion of her fall; For ruin and
extirpation have ever followed Imp^ous Governors at the heels. Yet in making
use of this especial Branch of History: Explanation of the discovery of
causes, I will limit and restrain it to an asser^aine bound. We must must not
search causes above their natures; there be Concealed reasons not to be
searched.
many hidden and concealed reasons, which to enquire after, were unlawful;
much less to wade into the secret conuentions of that facred power from whom
all visible and apparent causes borrow their light. What we may gather by
authenticke relation, or prob^ble im^gination, may without pre^udice, or error,
be produced. As for supernatural causes, the more we sound them, the more we
sound into the shallowness of our own judgments; never further from
apprehendng them, then when we seem to apprehend them. Now to the third, that
is, judgment in distinguishing things, by approving the best, and disallowing
the contrary. Dijudication of Histories.


Dijudication of Histories, or i^dgement in distinguishing the approuedst,
proceeds from a mature understanding.

In this Historical scale we must ba^ish all lasci^ious and petulant wits,
conversant about fro^thy and licentious obscenities. The works of an Historian
should be Monuments of Antiquity, true Heralds of acts; either prosperously, or
insucc^ssiuely achieved: and not forments to lust, inducements to sensuality.
Two sorts there be which eclipse an Historians glory: from the one, we reap
the harvest of shame, where characters of Myrrha, and Uenus (the wantons
votarie^) are deblazoned in their colors: yet in their descrip^ions more
pernicious to easily-inclined youth, then ever Archilochus was to the Spa^tan
dames. Poor Albion has labored too long of this impostume; such Historians
must either be exiled, or the Commonwealth must of necessity be depraved. Vice
h^th too many supporters, without the furtherance of Authors. From the other,
there redounds no other benefit, then impertinent inquisitions of
strangelysought out Antiquities; so ^recise in description, so cur^ous in
foundation and so selfe-opiniona^e of their own writings, as they oft-times
do only ( Haerere in verb^) omit^ing the substance to set out (with Phydias)
the shadow: search of a fruitless Antiquity, occasioning a contempt in the
body of the History. As in the foundation of a Cit^y, neglecting the
materiallest parts of the discourse; as upon what occasion the City was rather
erected there, then in another place, by what means it was augmented, how
con^inued, and other necessary circumstances omitted: they insist upon affairs
of l^sse consequence; finding out where the first stone was laid, when the
foundation of such a City was dug. This causes oftentimes great volumes,
with small benefit to the Reader, and indeed rather implies an
affecting-opinion in the Author, of pleasing himself, then others.

Ancient Records are necessarily inserted in Histories; but such are to be
supported by truth, including a necessary relation to the subject where of he
entreats. Otherwise, such Antiquities (as for selfe-pleasing) are produced,
express nothing. Propt^r plebaeium and invtilem quendam opinioni^ succum.
These be rather Opinionists then Historians.

These two kinds (like Ianu^ face) stand contrarywayes: the one sort (to wit
the first) are Charons best Factors, they traffic for a Ladies bon-voyage to
hell; there is not a line in all their writings, that tastes of modesty, or
relish v^rtue: If Pluto and his Angels had not one she-prophet, nor
state-moppet within all his dominions, to make his Empire noble: yet these
Broth^ll-authors (^or better I cannot name them) would by their Lime-twigges
furnish his ( Malasperanza) with a full sail. My Lady here sits and reads,
wonders at the ingenuity of the man, (a pr^gnant youth doubtless,) and will
make her pregnant too, if she have any moving faculty in her; his best
character is the schoole-maister of folly, the introduccr of sensual liberty,
extinguisher of pure love, experienced instructor to lust, harbourer of
illimited desires; and consequently harbinger to the Devil. As the Martin will
not build, but in fair houses, so this man will not live, but in the ruins of
honor: he is too conuersan^ in the Court, too familiar in the City, and
sometimes too willingly entertained in the Country. His pen, as it is
mercenary, so his labors pernicious, his state labors of penury (and he would
rais^ it) his soul of a lethargy, but seeks not to redeem it. To be brief
(for such a subject is not worthy dilating on.) As Augustus banished Naso to
Naxos, and his depraved works to the darkest corner of his study: so should
these petulant wits be expulsed every wellgouerned Commonweal, and their
prostitute labors sustain Enpolis censure.

For the other, as none yield or afford more benefit to their country, then
laborious and judicious Antiquaries: so trifling and opinionately-conceited
Historians may benefit themselves, but hardly can communicate the best of
their knowledge unto others. Opinion is a maine opponent to Judgment: the one
guided (or rather drawn) by a precipitant will, the other disposed by the
directing eye of reason. Opinion ( Lesbian-like) frame their line by their
work, and not their work by their line: but Judgment has ever (
Cleanthes-like) a table equaly mixed or furnished with ^id. ^siod. in Noct. and
Di^.
services of Arete and Pomona, virtue and pleasure: the one to profit, the
other to delight: Which equallymixed judgment should be especially conversant
in censurers of Histories; they must not do, as it is reported of Ualerius
Maximus, inhibite many things in the evening, which he would approve of in the
morning, and command that to be enacted one hour, which he would be ashamed to
confirm the next hour. A settled and wel-seasoned judgment will with
(circumspection) not so much censure a modest digression in a History, as the
use which may be made of that digression; nor tax any thing in a faithful
Historian, though he Sicut Bestiae in Eremo, ita Genti^es in mundo. Greg: in
Moral. 29. cap. 18.
shadow at the corruptions of the age with bitterness: for oily and temporising
tongues, are nourishers of these vicious and irregular times; where, as beasts
in the desert, so men live in the world: nor be censurers to tax such things
for impossibilities, because they have not heard of the like; nor such
R^lations as false, which have not occurred to their readings. For how should
we give credit to those incredible attempts of former times, where victories
were achieved with less ado, then May-games in these times. To s^e Antheus
renewing his strength, and doubling his force by falling: those magnanimous
Romans erecting their spirits most when they were nearest declining. I have
ever observed these times, as they second the first in gradation, so they stand
inferior to the first in exploits and managements of resolution. Censures
should b^ balances equally and euenly disposed; neither inclining to partial
affectation of person or state; but ready to give approbation where the verity
of discourse, and sincerity of the Author gives his pen fre^ scope to curb
error, and attribute to virtue her merited Titles. Alas, that Censurers
should be either so engagaged to the servile command of popular glory, or tied
to great men's sleeves, that the Historian^ labors must be razed, which truth
would have raised: Virtue has in her self a sovereign end, to which all
liberal Arts and Sciences (in themselves truly noble, and meriting honor)
have their aim and recourse.

This occasions learning to be neglected, and the exact scrutinie of ancient
Records (then the which nothing more beneficial) to be suppressed, or at
least, not a little darkened: when a Rhadamanth, or Critic Censurer must have
the corrections of our industrious labors, and iuditious volumes: which (to
feed his own indigested humor) must be subject to many frivolous
inte^lacings. But patience (which is C^mes sapientiae, non famula
concupiscenti^) must be the poor Historians supporter, making use of times
abuse, and applying this salve to his misery, which the Poet inferred, as cause
of Romes subversion, and calamity. Prim^ Virg. in A^nead 30.
peregrinos obsc^na pecu^ia mor^s intulit.

But let me stay a little, that I may make an end the sooner; ^re I proceed to
the true (...) of Histories, I must caution two so^ of men, which (in their
reading) pervert the use and scope of History, by a maleuolent disposition,
either bred in them by nature, or engendered by custom, a second nature: the
one foolishly precise, whose behavior (as one observes) are like a verse,
wherein every syllable is measured; or like your Spaniards aspect, who will not
smile beyond a point, for fear to vnstarch his look.

These cannot taste any thing well, that is not absolute; yet for their
judgment a Uenetian Ass may Superbire est supra regula ire.
outstrip them: He is (vnmeasurably proud) wise in hi^ own conceit, ^hath an
orb in his brain, which ever turning round, makes his iudgem^nt brain esicke.

The other, far more intolerable, because more troubled with the rising of
spleen: he detracteth from the best, and finds scruples in infallible truths;
his own judgment, as it is defective, so it en^ies aagainst others, maturer
in the height of understanding, and more exact in the ancient surueyes of
truth. But as fortitude of body deriues her essence from the imbecility of the
mind, and the ability of the mind from the d^bility of the body: So the
Authors glory is ofttimes revived, and augmented by the sting of Detraction, as
the Detractors in^amy by the Authors glory: Virtue alone is crowned, Virtue in
her self, is of all possessed. She it is alone by which man is eternized. Hae^
(...) quae faci^ (...) Deum, etc. S^neca
This is she that steeres the poor Historians Bark against all oppositions.
In this harbor therefore may I repose, leaving the depraved Reader to the
distemprature of his own humor, and betaking my self to my propounded task.

We must walk in a more modest path for judgment Deliberation n^dfull in
Histories of main consequence.
in the relation of every act that is done: we ought to use a kind of
deliberation, consulting with our own intimate understandings, and ask them
whether such an Act is worthy memory, or no: for many things we see and read,
which discretion would rather have omitted, then to writing committed; we have
occasion sometimes to unrip the tyrannicke lives of Princes, and their
illimited affections, of dissolute gouernements, and to what peculiar vices
most engaged; yet in the summary rehearsal of these vices, we do ofttimes (as
an excellent Historian has well observed) Instruere malos, teach men to be
evil, instructing them in the exercise of those impieties, with which before
they were scarce acquainted.

Thar memorable Lawgiver being demanded what punishment was to be inflicted on
him, who should chance to slay his Father, or Mother: he answered them with,
Haud equidem puto, etc. I do not think there can be any of so unnatural
disposition.

Acts silenced sometimes do better then if expressed: for the Curtain of
vices drawn, moves imitation rather than euitation: In distinguishing also of
things good and necessary from their contraries, we should not mix triuiall
discourses in our maine Relation: they much impair and disparage the weight of
an History, distracting the readers mind with impertinencies, where the
subject might of it self be better Strange novelties draw attentio^, mo^e
approbation, if probability be mixed in the Discourse.
prosecuted; nor can any thing show more indiscretion in an Author, then these
vagaries, where attention can no way be moved, the expectances of men
satisfied, or a real delight with profit apprehended. Attention (as that
eloquent Orator notes) is there the quickest, where we promise to speak of
things, great, new, vn-vsuall, or of such affairs as may conduce to the
benefit of the Commonweal, to the establishing of Religion, piety, or the
like.

Now such serious discourses (in themselves grave and ponderous) are not to be
mixed with every frivolous digression; the body of the History b^ing solid,
should not depend of weak and infi^me members: which might seem to resemble
the Roman Colosse, of an huge proportion in body, but feeble feet; so as one
day the frame of the whole was demolished by the debility of one part. Yet in
this grave and firm composition, there must be one necessary cau^at inferted:
that whencesoeuer we draine the approbation of our Di^course (as from many, and
those to our judgment of the selected Authors) we reconcile their opinions,
and make one united body of so many dispersed parts. This I thought to caution
(as well the Histories peruser, as the generallest Collectors of) because I
have observed this foul error (and that in both Ancient and Modern
relations) where diverse Opinions draw^n from diverse Authou^s should be
reconciled.
Authors were cited, and their several opinions marshalled on a row: but as in
a battle, when the wings be broken, there insueth naught but an vn^uersall
confusion; so without reconcilement in the conclusion, he leaves the Reader in
suspense, whose opinion to entertain; because not directed by the Author.

This implies a double defect; either from stupidity, A double d^fect,
Obstinate and ignorant.
not able to distinguish; or from a pertinacy, not willing to communicate his
judgment to others. The latt^r is more intolerable then the first; for the
one includes a na^iue defect, (which he would remedy if his apprehension could
better it.) The other a malicious desire of engrossing knowledge to himself;
though both unworthy of an Historical place: for Ignorance deserves small
entertainment in so iuditious an argument: and a perverse disposition much
less, concealing his knowledge from his Country, which by his subject it
seems he intended to benefit. In distinguishing likewise, we should ever
observe to cull out such perspi^uous sentences, as comprehend most, yet least
i^ affectation: for such taste ever of singularity. Hortensius was called by
Pythias (for his too much gesturing) Vid. Aul. Gel. in Noct. A^ic.
a professed Mimicke, a Dionysian: the same Ti^le may be given our curious
Relators: they bind their subject Words should be accommodate to the matter,
not the matter to the words.
to their words, esteeming no Discourse in it self worth judicious
observation, but what is replenished and full fraughted with polite sentences,
making the matter indebted to the superficial Art of the Composer.

These beseem not a History, dilated circumstances, instances too much stood
upon, an ambiguous leaving of something undetermined: They leave the
understanding in doubt what to resolve, the judgment what to think, the
thoughts what to deliberate: So as our reading conferres no other profit, save
an int^icate ^inding, or wr^athing, of many anxities up together: Giving the
mind free scope to imagine the event, being employed by the Author.

An Historian in his writings should have a kind of seeming security, for his
Style and Order of Speech: Non ^hi vanitati sestiuitas proprie cedit.
yet not so, (as to omit an exact or wittily composed jest) to relish the
Readers distaste: Such was Tacitus use, by enterlacing the seriousnes of his
tale, with some judicial, (but strangely brief,) sentences: annexing some
pleasant strain, either of me^re purpose invented, or from the occasion of his
Subject derived, to sweeten the heavier part of his discourse: which should not
be too long insisted on, for that were trifling; but shadowingly touched, ^or
that implies plenty of Subject, not flying to tr^uiall relations, to make up a
greater Volume, but for the delight of the iudiciously affected: Misce^do v^ile
dulci.

But alas, where this distinguishing of judgment of Histories requires great
labor, it os^imes ob^aines as little favor: The present age cannot admit of
such discourses, they be too serious: So that whosoever should compile a Volume
of Judicial Extractions, or approved Obseruances, should hardly have as many
Readers, as Persius coniectured for his Labors: Vel duo, v^l nemo: O ill
disposed times! when judgment goes a wool-gathering. (...) had two which he
especially respected above the rest of his Nobles, and the one of them was a
Mecenas, a Patron of learning, and a grace to the sacred influence of Poesy:
But where should we find an Atl^s for Pernassus in these days, where Noble
(yet degenerate Spirits) esteem him that will be Pandor to his Punke, above
him that will be Patron to a Poem: It seems strange that in best experienced
times, where knowledge should be hightned, the foggy vapors of ignorance
dispelled: Nay, where these times have respite from warlike Alarums, and
therefore may securely feed at Mineruaes Table, should be so delighted with
superficial shadows, contemning the perfect essence and luster of man, (to
wit) how to know himself. Here the Miser digs (and with the Dormouse) sleeps
out his time in a fruitless scraping; There the Prodigal (careless of times
expense) bastardizeth his fathers Providence, leaving no more to himself, then
that he could not take from himself, a poor Grave: Here the Ambitious man,
displaying his pie-coulored flags of vanity (in the elation of his Spirit)
contemnes the inferior rank of men, ever aiming at an higher sphere then
popular press, till his aspiring produce his falling, and the honor which he
purchased without merit, forsakes him not without shame: But which of these
will take pains to see himself represented in exemplary Histories? If the
picture of old Menedemus were hung up in the eye of the Miser (he would I doubt
it not) gaze with his four eyes on the Picture, but make little or no use on
the Pattern: The Ambitious man, if he saw the character of himself in that
vast and indetermined mind of Catyline, in that ambitiously insinuating spirit
of Sejan, I fear me he would rather make use of the means of his rising then
caution himself by his untimely declining: The Prodigal (expressing his own
Mirror, by Theotimus error) who preferred lust before his eyes, would (much I
fear it) rath^r da^ken the eye of his soul, to satisfy the eye of his body,
then moderate hi^ passions on earth, to reap the fruit of his moderation in
heaven. O that these times would so distinguish of their abuses, as being
discou^red they may be censured; for where abuses are concealed they seem
afresh to be renewed, and (with Authority) confirmed, but being openly ripped,
they may be whipped and stripped: first displayed to the eye of the world, then
summoned before the Throne of Justice.

O let Histories, as they be Records of what were done, whether good or evil;
excite us to be good, and deter us from being evil: Stories are replenished
with examples of both sorts, for they be Storehouses of precedent events, and
consequently so to be observed and digested, as the Judicious Reader may better
dispose of his euen^s. I have noted in Discourses of this kind, the observance
of that Generally Judicious Gentlman, A Threefold Discourse branched into a
threefold Observance.
and the best aduancer of depressed Learning, where he says: Some Books are
to be tasted, some to be swallowed few to be chewed and dig^sted. Such as are
to be tasted I comprehend, in S^ories of modest accomplement, superficial
flourishes, garnishing our Discourse modestly without vain ostentation or
bravery: Such are to be swallowed, as those Amorous, and fruitless labors of
braine-sicke Authors, freighted with continual hyperboles, comely in nothing
but love, Such are to be chewed and digested, as include discourse tending both
to instruction and delight, etc,

So then here we may come to our judicial point, we see and read Histories,
some only to be tasted, others swallowed, some few chewed, as beasts were in
the old Law. Histories being ruminated and chewed, yield a continual profit,
and the more meditated, the more beneficial; which seemed well approved (and
no less worthy our observance) by his institution* that wished ^uery Reader to
take these three remembrances Three obseruances worthy our
considerationinreading.
in his way to read: Libenter, Dilligenter, and Intelligenter; The first
yeeldes a present delight, because it includes a willingness; the next a
dilligent attention, implying a seriousness; the last an use of both,
enfolding Use of those three obseruances.
an vnderstandingnesse: These three attend a judicious distinguishing of
Histories, Judgment in discerning what is best, and these to apprehend the
best: These four commixed resemble twins at two burdens, all directours one
to another: for without judgment we may choose the worst as soon as best,
taking our aim only at delight, without recourse to profit, best agreeing
with the outward sense; Here is a want in the Election: without willingness,
our reading breeds a loathing; without diligence, our discourse is fruitless;
and without understanding, our minds be erring: And thus much for dijudicating
of Histories, an essential part of this book: I have but summarily set down
my opinion (grounded on the collections of others) herein, that I might
prosecute the former parts of my Division in the method of this History,
contracting much into a little Body.

The method which I propounded to my self in the beginning, was first to
describe the scope of Histories: Secondly, the use, fruit, and effect of
Histories in general: and the third ^xtracted from the second, was the
parti^ular profit which redounded either to a Family in p^iuate, or
administration of States in public The Method prosecuted.
by these Histories: For the first, being the original whence the two others
are dra^ned, I have spoken sufficient: Longer (I confess) was I enforced to
insist upon them, then my Volume (which I prescribed my self) would ^dmit: But
the many uses, subdiuisions, and grounds naturally arising from them,
enenforced me to ^rosecute the Argum^nt more fully: I entend now to handle the
second part, to wit, The fruit and use of history, the speciall'st motive
inducing reading.

The greatest and mouingst argument of persuasion Use of History.
to the undertaking of this or that, is the benefit we expect redounding from
our enterprise: I will succinctly express the severally moving effects of
profit (the worldly man's Admant) from History, Naturally and Essentially
derived: which being laid open, I hope the Miser (who as Seneca notes, is good
to none, but worst to himself) will be profitable both to himself and others:
My exordium shall be drawn from him, because I take him to be one of the
devils chiefest Factours, and more benefit should I yield my Country in
bringing in such a one, then in taking an Arch-pirate: From him descending to
every vicious professor (binding my self ever to my tackling) the fruit of
History in it self able to reclaim the deprauedst from their habituated
enormities.

The Miser, that is indebted to both back and belly, The Misers profit by
History.
so engaged to the world, as he must have his household God of the world, ever
harbored in his bosom, or made his pillow to sleep on, the key of his rust:
He that never fed Nature in all his days with competency; or durst recreate
himself, for fear least his recreation should play cheater, and cosen him of
his providence: being the moath of the virtuous, the harbor of the vicious:
carrying a conscience more infectious then rats-bane ever about him, if ever he
have grace to cast his eye into an Historical discourse (next to the Sacred
Writ) he shall find as Soueragne Antidotes for his malady, as in any place. I
will Anatomise the Misers corruptions, and like an artificial practitioner
first open his wounds, and then infuse Balm into them; which Unction if it
will not serve, I shall then apply more rough and sharp plasters.

Now Master Miser, that is, mere wretched man, thou have sufficient, and more
then is competent for Nature, yet thou art not satisfied: A very, very little
will serve thee for thy use, for thou never had the Grace to know what an
honest expense meant: Thou cautalizest thy self, amidst of plenty, (...); Thou
have a good mind to be rich, but that is impossi^le: A Miser cannot be rich.
Semper au^rus ^get; There is a greedy ^orme that is ever consuming and gnawing
on thee: Thou ^rt at liberty, yet imprisoned, and in more intolerable
servitude, then the miserablest captive upon earth; yet thy chains are of
Gold, thou art a gorgeous prisoner, Thou art subjected to more hazards then a
Merchant Ven^urer, to more rightly-oppressing, and sur-charching cares, then an
Emperor; to more hourly distractions, and terrible apparitions, then a
Murderer: Thou would sleep if thou could, but thy disturbed thoughts
deprive thee of that comfort: To be brief, A Miser his own Hangman.
as thou art in image the best, so in disposition the worst of all creatures,
being thine own Tymon, thine own hangman; that macerates thy self, and makes
thy appetite ever insa^iate.

I will lead thee into a spacious field of Histories, where thou shall see thy
immerited mind deblazoned in her colors, not a memorable instruction for
Liberality (thy absolute Opponent) but shall be produced for thy use: that
seeing the eminence of thy Adversary, thou may hate thy self, and be
r^conciled a^ last to thy foe.

The Liberall-hearted-man is as much Master to A (...) i^ two differ^t
dispositions.
himself, a^ thou art thine own Slave: he surpasses thee in use of his own,
and can direct himself by an equal proportion, limited ever to a generally
approu^d end: He hates to draw in the Sails of his Bounty, in the presence of
desert, and makes no more account of his own, then to distribute to others
wants a share of his fortunes, nor esteems he that his own, of which he has
not power, and in his power can freely give: He verefies the Verse (approving a
liberal mind: Quod nunquam dederit, non habuisse putat: He never was so far
engaged, or enthralled, to any earthy substance, as to make it chiefe-tane over
his intellectual part: he makes this his Position, and scorns it should be
controuled by any inferior subject: To give, and to delight i^ giving: And
that day The Liberal man's Aphorism.
wherein, (to the moity of his fortunes) he has not demonstrated the rare
character of his bounty, he cries out with Ti^us, Amici, perdidimus diem: This
day has been an ab^idgement of my generous intentions, a restraint to my
extended mind^; I did n^uer show my self, less to be my self, then in this
days exigent: This is he who measures virtue for his mere peace and
contentment, and not according to success; he shows not his liberality for
observance, but peculiar satisfaction, for he imagines no greater infelicity,
then to be miserable; his promises are ever relatiues with his performances: He
scorns to dissemble with the The Character of a Liberal Man.
world, he never anointed his tongue to enrich his fortunes, the perfect
Idiome and Character of his Native Properties is already depictured: I will
illustrate this Mirror of Virtues with Examplary Mirrours, Professors of this
Virtue: Read but the ancient Roman Annals you shall see many renowned for
Liberallity, and in Syrac^sa too, for her eminence and exquisite Government no
less glorious: In Rome a Fabius Examples of Liberallity.
Maximus: who willlingly forgoes his Patrimony, to preserve his Countries
reputation: Se enim P^trimonij, quam patriam fidei inopem esse malui^. Paula no
less renowned, and in this more to be observed, because a woman, whose sex
implies a parsimony, releiuing the poor distressed Romans (coupt up in the
walle^ of Cann^) making her self poor, to add power (by her bounty) to the
afflicted.

Quintus Considius (of all most memorable) an Usurer An Usurer never found his
Countries friend.
and Bountiful, a black Swan was never rarer: the Pagan Usurer (it seems)
had a conscience, which our Christian Usurer wants: for in that bloody, and
inhumane conspiracy of Catyline, second to none, our Modern Counterbuffe, our
Powder Treason, except^: he remmi^ed all his Debtors, laying his Bills and B^nds
upon o^e pile, making a Bone-fire with them: where I make no question, but the
Usurers conti^uall Customers, the Poet Archias, and his echo the Actor Roscius
had reason to swear: Quod nunquam ignem vidiss^nt clariorem: That they never
saw a cleere^, or m^re comfortable fire in all their days: It may be Considiu^
did this, because he saw the disability of his Debtors (^or those Civil
Commotions had much empou^rished all Estates) and therefore in policy, once to
exp^sse hi^ bounty, thought it fittest to forgive An Usurer bountiful against
his will.
them that, which they were not able to give. More worthy is the memory of
Quintiu^ Flaminius, who in an Isthmiam triumph, in the presence of his
Countries so, the daring Phillip of Macedon, redeemed such as were Phillips
Captives at his own charge: Worthy our observation it is, willing to answer
so public solemnity, with an vniuersall-concording harmony, making such free
spectators, that were before in servitude.

The modest Prince Hier^ of Syracusa, who in mere Examples of bounty an o^gst
the (...).
compassion of the slaughter of the Romans, at the Lake Thrasimenus, sent to
the afflicted remnant of that woeful Army, three hundred thousand Bushels of
Wheat, two hundred of Barley, and two hundred and f^urty pound weight of Gold
to releive their wants, and manifest his royal bounty. I may annex the
memorable example of Gillia of Agrigentum, who was Planted is this Cit^y (...),
on that (...) Moun^ame Agrag^s.
rich in Mines, but much more rich in mind, always rather inclined to
distribute then scrape: so as his house (and that not undeservedly) was called
Officina Munificentiae, a Warehouse of Bounty, erecting monuments for public
use, that the ^ies of the people mightbe delighted with so grateful
spectacles. Here were prepared sumptuous feasts, yielding and ministering food,
and all other necessaries for the sustaining Nature, to all wayfaring men,
bestowing dowers upon Maids, and reli^fe to the poor, ministering plenty of
comfort (out of his royal Exchequer) to such as had sustained any detriment,
or damage. To be brief, he kept open hospitality, A Memorable instance of
Hospitality.
receiving five hundred Cel^nsian Gentlemen at one time, by occasion of tempest
driven upon his coast, which he fed at his own table; and at their departure
royally adorned them with sumptuous Garments. To be short thou would not
(says our History) have taken him for any mortal, for he was too liberal,
but the very Bounties-bosome of propitious Fortune. Thou have seen these
examples of liberality, I will now unrip thy own casket, and see what worthy
pictures thou have locked up in it. I see many bags of mould, but not one
ragge of conscience: great Chests ram'd up with inexorable bars, crammed with
Avarice, Famine, and Oppression. Lucifer is thy Treasurer, and proving a
faithful servant: for he will not cheat thee for a world, lest he should
loose his part of thee in the world to come. Thou committest to him the Keys
of thy Conscience; which opens and shuts upon all occasions: He being one of
thy Family, how can thou choose but be prosperous? Yet bele^ue me, (thy end
will be poor and miserable) not one of those many Angels thou possessest, like
a good Angel, will guard, or give thee so much as the least taste of Comfort.
I come not to instruct thee, like a Divine, but to illustrate my Assertions by
Historical Examples, which I have here placed before thee, to deter thee
from their life, that thou may avoid their death.

Avarice, or (which is extended ^urther) Mysery* was best exempli^ied in
Hermon; who to decciue his own friends, and deprive them of that which he made
his god, at his death, made himself his own Excecutor: This man would be loath
to loose so precious a friend, death must not part him and his riches. No
question but his opi^ion was, he might purchase himself a tabernacle of rest
with his rust: and translated from Miserable end^ of misers.
the vale of earth, might erect himself a mansion of pure gold, for he carried
the stuff with him. I could here produce infinite other examples, which to
avoid tediousness I omit, and return to our Discourse.

History may yield no less profit to the Prodigal, who makes himself the
last of his name; who no sooner (yea oft-times sooner) then he has shut his
fathers eyes, opens his fathers Chest, and wipes away the remembrance The young
man's maze.
of his Fathers death, with the evidence and broad seal of hi^ fathers love:
he had need of some direction. There be many mazes for the young man: I have
known many exposed to all delights, and (as it were) sold under the gage of
prostitution, who by Historical observations have not only reclaimed their
former error, but grew singular mirrors of purity. No question, if Catyline,
whose mind was ever subjected O^r predecesso^s virtues motives of imit^tion
to illimited affections, had but perused the excellent relations of his noble
predec^sor, he had not been only able to extinguish that common and
universal combustion, which his aspiring s^irit raised to consume his whole
Country; but had been memorable for his own atchieu^ments: for the best of
Roman Historians (that I may use the words of the best commentor Q^m
propri^tatis seruantissimum, voc^t Gelliu^.
upon Crispius Salustus) saw thus much into his disposition, that so long as he
retired himself from those factious and (...) spirits, Cethegus, Leutuli^s,
with others of that hateful consort, none showed himhimselfe a more profitable
member to the Commonweal, or more ready to endanger himself for her (...);
employing his time in s^rious discourses; which not only moderated his
affections* but poised him to the equal balance of a virtuous discourse:
which afterward per^erted by the depraved suggestions of those Ruffi^s,
reduced those fair beginnings to nothing, and him to a miserable death, and
perpetual i^famy.

The very same effect we see in all other vices (which wo^ld be w^ll
extenuated) if vitiou* mi^des would Histories best discouerers of errors.
apply themselves to these, and the like Discourses: we should have our
d^unkards see into their own shame, deblazoned by the Epyrotes; our Epicures
by the ravenous Vit ellij, spending their fortunes in pampering their worst
household servant; our carnal Brothellists, by those impudent prostitutes in
N^roes time, who were never weary of their shame, till their public
filthiness engendered a loathing in the professors themselves: look to th^se
men's ends. Oh how long might I prosecute this argument without want of copiou^
discourse! Here producing an Helliogab^lus, generally Instances of famous
delinquents.
hated for his i^satiate lust, and least pitied in that ebb of his (...) (his
miserable death) when men use most to be pitied, being attended at his
funerals with milit^ry reproaches: Here go we to bury a Dog of distempered
lusts: there a wanton Messalina, r^warded with a death beseeming her. Here an
aspiring Sejanus, shaken with an unexpected end, and made miserable in his best
fort^nes, interred with dry eyes: For who will pity the fall of Ambition?
There an Herostratus (memorable for nothing but villainy) purchasing by his
fame, an infamous end. Here a bloody Perillus, expert in the invention of
cruel proiects, punished with the torture of his own invention: There a
fleering Parasite, who circumvents himsel^e with his own policy.

Such exemplary motives be frequent in Histories, and able in themselves (if
duly pondered) to e^force Nature from herself, and reduce man, prima^ily
addicted to this or that vice, to a consideration of his own estate, wisely
foreseeing his own danger by others misery; wisely cautioning the young man to
level his affections at an other scope, then the depraved intendments of the
time wherein he lives; making difference betwixt sense and reason: the o^e
common to Beasts with men: the other a disiunct propriety only History the
b^st tou^hstone to dijudicate ^wixt what i^ good and ill.
to man from beasts: For Reason, the directresse of our understanding, the
limiter of our affections wit^in honest bounds, the Touchstone to dijudicate
what is good, from what is ill, the intellectual Notion of the soul, should
be ever the conductor of our fancies; which is best shown, when (
Antomedon-like) we can How to be masters over ou^ selves.
delineate V^rtue in no better shadow, then the Tablet of our own hearts;
expressing our selves the best by that, which makes our selves the best, to
wit, in prosecuting V^rtue with an earnestness, that in the end we may become
masters of our selves, governors of our affections, and right Signiors over
our in-disposed fancies.

But to come more near thee in this second part of my division, we must
distinguish of the several fruits and effects of History, directed to peculiar
ends: As first, art thou a lover, and desire to complement with thy beloved?
Thou art in a dangerous way, and if thou wisely select not such Histories, as
may (like sovereigns) rather allay and moderate thy brain-sicke passion, then
kindle the fire of thy senseless reason, be-lulled with nightly apparitio^s of
thy beloved fair one, to what exorbitances shall thou be made subject? But I
know the nature of thy sickness: thou art like one who has taken poison; and
though drink be mortal to him, yet he longs out of all measure for it.
There is no subject so fitting thy humor, as amorous Sonn^ts, Historical
Relations, carolli^g out the discontents of vns^tisfied love.

Leander swimming over Hellespont, to crop a blossom alrea^y cropped. Achilles
retiring discontented for the loss of his Briseis, Agamem^on for his Chryseis:
Passions pro^ding from (...)-sick lovers, etc.
these are subjects fit for thy Loue-sicke fancy; whereas opposites to love,
(Moral Relations, instructing thee in a more equal and reasonable path) wo^ld
better cure thy disease, and bring thee to an understanding of thy self.
Absence (we say) from our Mistress, makes us most forgetful of her; and lest
we think of her when we discourse of Arguments least concerning her; whilst
reading Idle pamphlets, the very bane and canker of Youth, and Age too: for Age
is as A Louer^ ^phonesis.
subject to dotage, as Youth to fancy; putting us in mind of our former
distracting passions, crying: Nec m^ minor vrget a^or: with hard-hearted
Mistress, inconstant Dame, fickle in affection, inconstant in thy resolution,
shedding as many tears as would drown our Mistress, if she were not so
light, as she is able to bear herself above water. Alas poor lover! and
whereto so many fruitless wishes, so discomfortabl^ laments, so discordant
ecco's of redoubled sighs, Aye me unhappy? Thou know not how these
reasonlesse perturbations make thee more lothed then loved, more intranced then
fancied; and more beleagred with passions anew, then to salve those passions
wherewith thou wast tormented of old.

Read the continent life of Zenocrates, dedicated wholly to chastity; not a
Lais (though never so motive) can induce him to gage his reputation to a
harlot. Read me the noble disposition of Scipio Affrican, who scorned to make
himself a slave to his fancy, the Look upon the History of Antony and
Cleopatra.
royal mind of that potent Alexander, who would not captive ^is affection to
his Captive: the vndestained resolution of the Matron Antonia, wife to Drusus;
that chaste Tragedian Sophocles, who being demanded, whether he ever applied
his mind to sensual affections, Vid. Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 30.
replied; Dij meliora: Heaven forefend a strumpet should put on a Tragic
Buskin. These continent relations will reduce thy straggling motions to a more
settled and retired harbor.

But yet I must proceed further; Art thou ambitious, and have both wings and
will to fly? Thou art soaring with Icarus, and thy waxen wings (no question)
must be dissolved with Icarus: he gave a sea a name: but thou have a sea in
thine own brain, tho^ art floting, and ( Camelion-like) feedest upon the air^
of thy own^ fancy: Thou art now for building a second Pyr^mides in the air;
and no doubt but thou would p^rfect thy intentions, if death prevent thee not.

Thou (...) a vain fool, thou see many daily decli^ing meri^s vnd^seruing,
raised to height above themselves: not a Senator, or sage Purple Father, but
subjected to an vndese^uing censure: and what is the cause? Why, honor
procures censure; and yet thou art well, served w^ll, safely retired, not
envied, nor maligned by ^he opposites of greatn^sse; and yet thou desire
(like another Phoe^s) to shine in the eye of the Court, to show thine own
admiration by a vain flourish, commenting on thine own per^ections, which
need some exposition* ^or they cannot demonstrate themselves. Alas^e, how
strangely art thou transported above thy self! not apprehending how the means
of rising oft-times procure an unexpected fall. Consider thy own vnb^idled
desires, and seek to repr^sse them, I pray thee do; and take this observance
with thee: Neue^ look into, either Modern Histories, or An^ient, for the
proiect^, how they grounded the foundation of their plots; but aim at the end
and event of their designs, what issue they had: there thou shall see a Caesar
reign^ long, and attain the very height of his hopes; yet his continuance
^bridged, and his new-established Monarchy (in himself) qui^e ruinate (...)
fall of (...).
in a stab. Here a Sejanus (who was (...)) a great hunter after cruelty, become
the last of his aspi^ing desires, and the sponge (^s Taci^us observes) who
being squised, only en^iched his Emperors fortunes, and made himself
miserable by his own fall: for ambitious men, who leap to greatness, for the
most part, hop without heads, and too late repent their madness.

To run (...) every vice pa^ticularly, would require a (...) ampler of
themselves, then I have allot^d Third Branch. Particular profit drawn from
History to particular persons.
my (...). Proceed I must to my third branch, The particular profit^ which
redounds to every private stat^ or family, from discourses of this nature. I
know that the natural deprauation of man is such, as that he fixes his mind
upon that, which (for the most part) conferres least profit, and most delight:
this is lively exemplified even in Historical Discourses; where we shall see
men (for the most part) rather addicted to fabulous Travels, the survey of
str^nge and neuer-heard of Islands, prodigious sights, Monsters, Chymera's, and
mere imaginary fancies, then to such narrations as might minister instruction
and benefit to every particular Reader. Some we see delighted with the strange
and incredible miracles of Mandeuill: others with the victorious combats of our
Beuis of South-hampton: others, What fabulous Histories more suff^red then
approu^d
more conversant with the tragic Histories of our time (prodigies in part
merely invented.) And last of all (which in my judgment is worst of all)
others with the phantasticke writings of some supposed Knights, ( Don Quixotte
transformed into a Knight with the Golden Pestle) with many other fruitless
inventions, molded only for delight without profit. These Histories I
altogether exclude my Economy, or private family; I have culd out more
beneficial Discourses for youth ^o employ themselves withal; producing a
subject from the pure Cabin of Truth: not from the brain^ of every
Quackesaluer, that runs out his inventions by selling lies at grosse-sale.

To express our Latin Authors I need not, so much is our Country be^ited by
Translators, as the Neatheard in this Houell may discourse as well of Corneliu^
Tacitus (if he ^now his mothers tongue) as our best Latinist. In my opinion no
Argument better for instruction then that Author: and if I should dwell upon
one, I had rath^r insist upon his phrases (though seemingly perplexed) then any
other Roman Author, how perspicuous soever. Vid. in vit. Neron.


Tranquillus writes true, but he vnrips the immodesties of the time with too
long discourse upon every particular vice. Nothing (says Quintillian) can be
esteemed more perfect, then the elegancy and breuity of Salusts speech (
Presertim apud vacuas and eruditas aures) Aul. Gel. in Noct. Attic.
and I assent to his opinion; the singularity of his phrase was (which may
seem strange) without affectation: so Aulius Gellius (a very Aristarchus for
the search of Antiquities) testifies of him. Neither was ^abius afraid to
entitle him, The chief of the Roman Historians, as Thucydides the Prince of
the Grecians. Yet in these Histories there is an exactness of understanding
required; and more do their writings conduce to state-affaires, then private
and domesticke employment.

I will retire my self to such as may yield the reader no little profit by
consideration had to the judgments of God; modestly mixing moral instructions
with a sweet variety of divine discourse: a matter which may seem directly
opposite to my first intention, but is not so; for these Histories which I
mean to produce, are so grounded upon infallible truths, as in that respect
(...) (...).
they may seem to merit a morally divine Title. Josephus works I esp^cially
entertain into my Family, as best describers of the judgments of God,
expressers, to (...) in the (...) wa^re give a^ (...) b^uty to the Discours^.
(...) is said to have his Tents there first pitched wh^re our Savior was taken.
the life, of an obdurate and stiff-necked generation. Here to behold the
incomparable beauty of that glorious Temple (the type of the Celestial Temple)
founded by that wisest of men, and that peace of Princes, Solomon, defaced, and
that City which was once called, The City of the great King, demolished, and
laid level with the ground. Then to direct our eye to the wonderful judgments
of God in raising civil discords, and mutinies amongst the Jews themselves,
the greatest means of their subversion, the main predictio^s of their ruin and
utter destruction, before these wars came In Mo^tem Oliuarum castra metans,
etc.
upon them, yet their impieties not a whit lessened, their arm of sin
shortened, or remorse of conscience excited: no refuge to the Religious, but
defense to the wicked in every place of the Cit^y ministered: Then surueigh the
pollution of that Sacred Temple, where Altars were once erected, Peace Offering
sacrificed, and the prayers of the holy consecrated to God; there naught but
effussion of blood, slaughters among themselves (an occurrent remarkable)
committing no less Massacres upon themselves, in the ceasing of war, th^n
the Romans did in the heat of war: Being wholly exposed to tyrannical
Factions in the Citry; to expose themselves to Roman servitude The judgment of
God in that History most remarkable.
more easily. These examples of Gods Justice, are worthy our observation, to
admonish us of our p^culiar duties, careful how we offend, serious in the
administration of Justice: For how should we think he will spare the Wild
Vine, that has thus dealt with his own Natural Vine? When he has dealt thus
with the Green Tree, what will he do with the Dry Tree? That Vine was planted
with his own Hand, watered with the dew of his especiallest favors srom
heaven, dressed and pruned, yet behold the wild Boar has rooted it up: Et
seges est vbi Troia fuit: The truth of that History is so undoubted, as besides
his own concordance in relating, there is none that ever made question of the
truth and verity thereof, composing what he wrote, not by report of others, who
speak (for most part) as they are affect^d, but by the approbation of his own
eyes, the best outward directresses to inward knowledge. To this Noble
Historian (for he was Nobly descended) I may add those excellent Greek
Writers, worthy and memorable: as Nicephorus, Divine Histories.
Evagoras, Socrates, etc. For their Divine examples plentiful, the success of
the Christians amidst the tirannies of the cruellest Emperors wonderful: the
diverse sorts of (...) by those Tyrant^ inuen^ed, pitiful; and ^he dismal
and terrible end of those Bloud*suckers, fearful. Here thou shall see an
(...) (...) above himself, with the acclamation (...).
of his people: Not the voice of Man, but of God: And presen^ly behold ^is
pomp converted into loathsomeness, his precedent joy, to a subsequent
pensiveness, and the ^xcellency of admiration to a sudden amazedness; he
that seemed before a God, and no man, is now by God made the miserablest of
man, forlorn and dejected: Nay, if we would observe the whole current of their
Histories, we shall see in them that God ever used to recompense the offendour
with a punishment of the l^e nature: Nic^phorus reports, how Herodias daughter
having begged the head of An (...). Punis^ment alluding to the condition of the
fact.
John Baptist, chanced on a time to go over a maine River, frozen over with
Ice, where the Ice presently parting received her, and meeting again cut off
her head, a true and evident testimony of Gods judgment.

The like of that Blasphemous wretch Julian, a foul mouthed detractor from the
glory of God: who on a time mocked a Christian for talking reverently of the
Bowels of CHISTS Co^passions: but what end came of this miserable Atheist: His
bowels fell out of (...).
his belly being thrust through with a Iaueling, confessiing the power of God
with a regreate, saying: Vicisti o Galilee, etc. yet vouchsasing to bestow no
better name on him, then Galilean, a fearful end of a most profane
Blasphemer.

The like of Dioclesian that cruel Emperor (and a great persecutor of the
Christians) who, whilst he reigned seemed little or nothing to fear the Divine
Power of heaven, yet the History records, that Fear was the greatest occasion
of his death, no, that he died by a voluntarry fear, very jealous of the Air,
least it should pierce his Brain.

These examples extracted from infallible grounds, may seem the judicious
understanding of the Grauest, and fittest for Private Families, where order is
best attained by examples: We vfe most to be moved, when we see the end of such
a man, to caution us; who having led his life securely, concludes the period
V^d. Lud. vinem de educ. virgin. 1. lib.
of his days as miserably: And some have I known even of the discreetest and
most virtuous parents, who to deter their children from Drunkenness, used
(like as the Epirotes did with their children) to hang the picture An usual
means o^ reclaiming drunkards from their bestiall filthiness^.
of a Hog wallowing in a filthy pudle, with this Inscription on it:

Nunc Ebrius astet --
Neque suem sumpsisse suam formam:
Drunkard, if ^hou would see this form of thine,
Come here and see it depictured in a Swine.
The lascivious and sensual worldling, deciphered with this character: Myrha
hanging in a chain of Every vice briefly deciphered.
gold about her father Cyneras bed, with this Impressa.

Hinc amor vt tenuit suspendet. The miserable wretch that makes his gold his
God, best expressed by Menedemus, with his Spade, deluing and digging for life,
with this Mo^r:

Sic mihi diuitijas Famulique parti. Trewest deciphering os all vices,
proceeding from the exemplary (...) of delinquents, committing what they like,
and at last feeling what they like not: Oeconomicall (...), (...) private
families how to be dispos^d.
The best government in private, proceeds from Histories, and the serious
reading thereof: the virtuous Ma^ron squaring her course, by that modestest of
Roman^ Dames Lucretia, making her ( colum her thorum) her Distaffe, her best
companion in her bed, when her husband was absent: No vicious mind can deprave
her, she is fighting at home with her own passions, whilst Colatine her
husband, fights in the field against his Countries enemy: But you shall see
Lentulus and Aruns, their ^iues rioting, and reuelling, in their husbands
absence.

If our Historians, now a days, would employ their Lamps and Oil in the
delivery of profitable History, such as might rather tend to the cherishing of
the vnripned blossoms of virtue, then the nipping of them: How happy members
were they, yea: that I may use Historian^ most p^ositable to the Common^.
Salusts words, though they retired themselves from public affairs, yet;
Maius commodum ex eo ^tio, quam ex ali^rum n^gotijs Reipub: venturum: Yet such
have been the depraved humors of former times, that the best Obseruors and
Relators, have purchased little, save envy, for their Labors: No, the very
chiefest Historians have opposed themselves one against another.

Titus Liuius was so violent against poor Salust (as Enmity amongst Historians
themselves.
Seneca observes) as he objected that certain things, Transcribed by Salust
out of Thucydides, though elegantly applied, yet by him depraved and corrupted;
which Aurelius Fuscus also, notes to be done, as it were, of set purpose by
Salust, to derogate from the excellency of Thucydides Writings: A mere
detraction to such a worthy Author: But what works meriting emulation, have
not ever had envy for their attendants. I conc^iue the reason to proceed from
that of Hesiod, who infers in Professions, none to be more apt to en^y one
another, then such as be of one Trade: Figulus figulum odit: True, for where
either singularity Hesiod 1. lib.
is required, or hope of gain, there envy is ever shooting her impoisoned
Arrows: And (for the most part) ^nuy reigns there most, where our labors
deserve most: The low Mushrome is seldom touch^d by the violence of any
Tempest, but the peering Cedar is ever exposed to all vehemencies. For the
particular use of Histories, and their f^uite, I have gathered these
Obseruances, extracted from a judicious Writer: Expert he was in all
Histo^icall Rela^ions, as his apt similitudes more fully demonstrate: what they
are I have here set down, and as contractedly (as I could imagine) for the
benefit of cuery understanding Reader.

If History comprehend in it any ceertaine documents A compendious discourse of
the gene^all profit of H^story.
for the instruction of man's life, I suppose it expedient for all men; as well
to select and make use of it, as to rush violently into such most plentiful
and fruitful fields of History, where all exemplary grounds are in ample sort
propounded. For what can be more pleasant, or more profitable, then in the
Theater of man's life; so, to be made wary and wise by other men's harms (and
that without harm) as to sit in safety, and yet to be instructed in all parts
without ieopardy: choosing out examples of all kind, which thou may apply unto
thy own peculiar use, upon all occasions: And whereas History, is conversant
oftimes in the secretest counsels, importing the weightiest affairs of the
greatest Persons: we that are men do with greatest appetite covet them, as
likewise to be interressed in their events, because it is impossible (through
the shortness of man's life) otherwise to abridge the successions of times, by
the limit of our forgetful memory: or to see the prosperous fortunes,
successes, and ends of Empires, or manifestly to conceive the causes of evils,
either private or public; or in every hard and difficult assay, to have a
president before our eyes, of such things as were t^yed before us, or which
were in hazard before they were attempted by us: And that I may speak all in
one word; to judge of things present, by things past, which is the property of
a wise man, and discreetely to foresee of what is to come by all succeeding
events. But it becomes us, to come so much the better furnished, by how much
our History is with all fruits better fraught and replenished: And whereas
there is the very same difficulty in judging rightly, as well of our own, as
another life; there is none that can duly (how piercing-ei'd soever) judge of
another life, that has not measured his own: of both sides it is to be
employed, that not only a maine difficulty is here placed, but also before we
be to this History addressed, it is required necessarily, that we be not only
endued with a certain Civil Wisdom and Moderation, but also to have our
lives grounded on a settled inten^ion vnle^se we will be miserably, and that
perpetually, deluded with the vain illusions of this life.

For even as it fares in a most sumptuous and royal An apt similit^de.
Banquet, replenished with all sorts of dainties, one thing seems delightful
to one which is distasteful to another, sew things are liked of all, every one
being best pleas^d with his own, though all dishes be alike to the Glutton:
And as every one's appetite is, so is he affected; yet there is a mean (which
Nature has ordain^d) and a certain kind of nourishment, which in it self is
merely simple and uncorrupted, and best agreeing with our bodies: From which,
whosoeu^r departs so, as he crammeth himself above the bounds or
determination of Nature, will find more in conueniency then profit in it: So
in this diversity of man's life, though the^e be a thousand forms, and a
thousand purposes, and as every one is resolved in mind and judgment, so he
judges of his own and another life: yet there is one only path of virtue,
which whosoever keeps and obs^rueth wisely, he only makes use of his life
really. Others, as in a doubtful supper, when they inuit themselves to all
pleasures, can neither find out in themselves or others what might deserve
imitation, or whereto they might make recourse: But if there be any thing given
to man by Nature, which is in his power to use well or ill, it behooves him to
use great circumspection in the use thereof: But what is he I pray thee, that
will use more exact consideration in all his words and works (by the direct
line of virtue) then in the use of such meats as are set before him? And who
thinks not himself sufficiently instructed herein? In which how wonderfully
are men deceived? Supposing that Discourse to be History, which teaches the
Reader, ministering to him matter of learning (yet so) as a Banquet ministers
use and appetite to every one as he is affected.

This is the reason that we see some so delighted with the sweetness of
reading, as obeying their own pleasure, they loose the inestimable fruits
thereof. Such have no other scope in all Histories, then with which our
Generous Musitions, vs^ to pass time away, upon their Instruments, employed in
reading only, to spend their weary hours, which be presently encountered with
more wearisomenesse: For there is no Nulla volupta^ est quae non respicit
virtutem.
pleasure in it, which has no reference to Uert^e, the glitt^ring object of
glory and ambition exciteth others, and that which shows a flexibility of
mind in all other things, vainly transports them to every brave and eminent
image, forgetful how glorious and remarkable examples are produced by
Writers; not only to follow virtue, and contemn honor offered us; but if a
Competitor were admitted us to countermaund the authority of our honor, to
endure him with patience; yet, though none but fools will purpose to aspire to
such merited excellence, without the like meriting virtue: We see many men, by
the very reading of excellent things, to taste in themselves a certain kind of
excellency, arrogating much to themselves, and resembling those Tragedians, who
imitate the State of such persons they represented, after they have put off
their Habits.

There be also (but of these there be but a few) whom new, and unaccustomed
things do delight (men ^f vulgar apprehension) who hearing the State of
Emperors, for the most part, more esteem the Purple then the Man, the Picture
the^ the Work: So effectual (...) in tit^lis and imagini^s.
a force, does History exercise, and imprint in the mind of the Reader.

Now it is the scope, and draught of all Histories to excite man's sloth, and to
arm him against all dangers; and whereas the force of examples (then which
nothing can be imagined more powerful to persuade) tend especially to that
end; it comes to pass that by the security of men (who think other men's
harms little or nothing to concern them) such things (as in themselves are
memorable and worthy observation) be read and heard with a deaf and careless
^are.

To brief, there be some also (which on^ would hardly think) offend in a more
severe, and critticke kind of reading: As if things should not be writ as they
were done, but as they ought to have been done. Where^ore, partly by this
curio^ity, partly by that secu^ity (the very surfeit of confused and rash
reading) it comes to pass (as in a body pestred with corrupt humors) that a
certain (...), or ill disposion of judgment and opinion, which ought
especially to be sound and sincere in the course of our life, and a (...) or
bad temperature, converting all food into ill humors, uses to be contracted
in us: And as meat avails such as be distempered nothing, so no prosite at
all by these means is ministered to our reading.

I suppose thou s^ est how the very same reason is in reading History, and
disposing the course of thy life: but this is certainly the greatest difficulty
(to wit) the per^ersenes of our judgment, which is the speciali'st cause; that
we are not moved with examples as we ought, ^ut what way as our minds is
inclined and affected most: and this difficulty is no less then the other:
forasmuch as writers so desc^ibe things done, as they do Artificium
beneuolentiae colligendae habe^tes.
not only ^arry fauo^r, but follow their own appetites (like some Builders)
ever interposing their own peculiar judgments, (of their own accord)
praising some things, (though not praiseworthy;) and whatsoever likes them,
they imagine it worthy approbation: which (surely) if they did simply, it were
easy to consent or dissent unto them. But even as Cooks (for the most part)
do more respect their Masters Gulam s^pius quam commodum Heri spectant.
palate then his profit: Even so an Historian (I could wish the most did not
so) applies himself to the appetite of the Reader. We are oft-times therefore
deluded by these two means, our own Judgment, and the prejudice of the
Author, not laying things open and naked, as they were done.

An Historian is the best interpreter of Acts achieved; whose judgment, i^ it
chance to be corrupt, it comes to pass, as when Wine (of it self neat and
generous) takes either some want of the Caske, or is corupted by some other
distaste, which either proceeds from an imposture, or folly great and
intolerable. We may see in one only example, the judgment of the writer: The
profane Historian ascribes the ^uents of serious and weighty affairs, to the
council and industry of men; al-be-it he has sufficiently tried how fowly
those men were deceived in the events. Hence it is that men be drawn to great
^olly; that they, whose knowledge was scarce sufficient for the consideration
of things subjected before their eyes; and whose force and strength not much
(...) little Worm^s, should by one small success arrogate the government of
the whole world unto them. But a good Historian teaches thus: Things (says
he) are purposed by Man, but (...), and moderated by God; whereby he riddeth
the scrupulous reader both of folly and superstition (a mischi^fe no less^ then
the other:) and in all other pro^ good Historians (whose studies are only
consecrated to holiness) ought not to be ignorant of the Agent and Instrument
wherein they differ, and what be their several effects: the one moving, and
the other moved. But especially I admonish thee to this end; that whereas I
observe many Authors of that kind, who for their exceeding force of
innumerable examples, deserve to be read; I could wish that the No^ice-reader
discuss with himself as circumspectly and seriously as he can by proposing to
himself both the fruits which might redound, and the dangers which might
occur him in his reading: For to one that runnneth over all Histories
cursorily, or who rashly and unadvisedly spends his time without any exact
observance, of private or public duties, it comes to pass as to Country
Clownes, who in sacking of a neighbor City, take spoil of some Apothecaries
shop well furnished with all receipts; where, provoked with the sweetness of
some iunkets or spices, being the first that came to their hands, and imagining
the rest to be of the same sort, they swallow, sup up, devour, and gormandize
all before them; whereby presently some are taken with a strange disease,
others with a frenzy, most are bereft of life; none but strangely
distempered, which occasions laughter through all the Army: For as Man's life
(so History the Image of Man's life) has her commodities and discommodities:
for the Government of Man's life consists only in the use of his life.

In these Collections, as in a most clear mirror, may our young Ga^lant see
into his errors: he shall be of necessity forced to distaste himself, till he
have relinquished his midnight revels, surceased from his licentious meetings,
and reduced his disconsorting passions unto a calm and retired harbor; here
the public Magistrate shall be able to dispose of himself, and Office
deputed unto him; seeing matters worthy imitation, and precepts worthy the
Grauest and Ripest Consideration: one to Instruct, others to Correct, and all
to make per^ct this whole module of Man.

The Philosophers Axiom is: Om^e quod non ens est, malum est. And worse then
no being, (hau^ they) who measure out their lives without a due proportion
drawn from others, and applied to themselves Instruction Instruction the light
of understanding
is the light of Being, the directresse of Living, and the best
Schoole-mistresse that disciplines us dying: States public are managed by
her, Offices private admistred by her, and the wisest men have desired to
possess her. No Beauty more permanent, Gemme more eminent, or Treasure more
excellent; It beautifies it self, and no Phydias could ever portray any
picture so well as i^ portrayes it self. And what instruction better then that
which comes from History, where the true Image of our life is delineated,
Virtue in her best colors expressed, and Vice (without either shadow or
pretense) laid open and naked. Histories mirrors for all states.
The Prodigal reads, and sees himself r^presented in another person, he sees
the miserable end of others, which (unless he will fall with open eyes) must
needs caution himself: he sees haire-brain'd courses, leave both patrimony and
reputation behind them: Penelopes Woers, ever woing, never winning. The
miserable wretch, that pincheth himself to enrich his unthankful posterity,
may see the fruit of gathering perdi^ion to himself, and oft-times occasion of
ruin and speedy desolation to his surfeitting heir. Here the brave Soldier
sees his own fame; acts duly and fully expressed: not a famous exploite
(deserving memory) must be silenced, but the very name of the Agent, (^o excite
others the more) must be r^corded. Here the effeminate Milke-sop, that fights
best under his Ladies flagge, first man that will come to a lascivious Banquet,
but last that will come to a pitched field: he (I say) must show himself,
though smally to his credit: Histori^ must not (...).
yea, Alcybiades (though otherwise well deserving of his Country) must be set
out in his ignominious death, as well as his memorable life; giving up the
Ghost in the lap of his Concubine Tymandra.

Absolute Histories will not admit of the least concealment; but representing
every Act, Person, and Event, use to illustrate what is worth insisting upon,
omitting (or at least cursorily passing over) more fruitless subjects: and how
delightful may it seem to every iuditious man, when in reading of Ancient
Records, he conferres the stratagems of war then used, with the present
observance of this time: sees (and seeing) notes the sundry dispositions of
men, how noble in themselves, and how generally esteemed invincible, by a
sudden conversion laid low, beneath the stirrup of Fortune, and made a
spectacle of Fate. Then to observe states, better governed in their decline
then in their height; and far more able in power, when in the eye of the
world least powerful. The Romans, when they had attained the very height of
felicity, that all Gouernements were their Tributaries, then they began to
stoop most under their burden; and pressed with their own grandeure, seemed
to imitate the Phoenix, who weary of her self, desired to have Rome in her
decay compared (...) the (...).
her ashes renewed, but her self extinguished. What ambitious Tyrants proud of
their own strength, and secure of divine power, are laid flat in the height of
their expectancies: so as where they planted the foundation of their hopes,
there they were most defeated, to express the providence, and all-working
Majesty of God, who disposes of all governments, pulling down A Christian
consideration of the power and (...)* of God.
the tyrannical Empires, and setting wise and discreet Princes in their place;
and no motive (of profane writings) more effectual then Histories, to draw us
to a consideration of ou^ selves, and the Majesty of God, whose excellency
beautifies this universe, teaching us to admire, and (in our admiration) to
tremble and fear, having recourse to the incomprehensible judgments, and
secret counsels of the Almighty.

Every private Family may draine hence unspeakable Profit derived from
Histories to private Families.
profit, observing the diverse casualties, and mutabilities subject to every one
that is interessed especially in matters of state; preferring their own
private, and free life, before popular admiration, so entangled with continual
incertainties. Here may the poor Husbandman, at his leisure, receive tidings
from foreign Courts: here may he learn what difference there is betwixt the
Coulter and the Scepter, the Share and the Shield. Here may the Merchants Wife,
Merces domestica in coniugio longinqua in nauigio ^ita est.
pity her poor Husband, tossed with so many adverse winds, environed with so
sundry dangers, and exposed to so miserable adventures, she cannot choose but
play true at home, that has a husband so faithful abroad, who endangers
himself to make her secure: Why should any come into his hazard, that like a
Tenis-ball casts himself into every hazard. Here the wife of the valiant
Soldier may see what difficulties her distressed husband is exposed unto,
heat, cold, watching, hunger, thirst, al inconveniences, to propagate the glory
of his Country, and purchase himself a name eternally memorable. His poor
family has reason to pour out their prayers for his deliverance, and
thankfully ascribe all glory to the power of heaven for his safe return. To be
brief, what particular estate not engaged to Relations The description of a
Mariners danger.
of this nature? The Mariner sees his dangers; and seeing them, observes the
influence of the stars, and planets, the Orion and the Pleiades; yet in all
these obseruances, he gathers there is a Power above, whom the sea and winds
obey: to him therefore, as (the expertest The Soldiers discipline by Histories.
Pilote) he flies for succor, finding no harbor more secure, no repose more
safe. The Soldier sees into the Discipline of Arms; and (by History)
apprehends how a small handful of men have oft-times conquered an Army, to the
judgment of man invincible: he sees into it, and admires the wonderful power
of God, who works oft-times directly against all means, to teach us thus
much: That his power is not limited to means; but can effect (without the
least instruments) what in his sacred Synod he has ordained. Here the
Merchant sees into the riches of the whole Earth, how it pleases God to
subject all things to the service of man, to the end man might only reserve
himself for the service of God: he observes the exceeding favors of Heaven
shown upon Earth, and he collects hence, that those joys, those comforts and
exceeding treasures which he keeps for the Elect in Heaven, must needs be
great above all comparison. Si ^anta solatia in die lachrymarum, quanta
conferet in die nuptiarum? These considerations must of necessity move him to
play the good Merchant, who finding one gem of price, will sell all and b^y it.
Every private household is a little kingdom within it self, and needs
instructions (though not so consequently serious) as the greatest palace, and
royallest Empire: order must be observed in the one, as well as in the other, a
Principality in both, and a subjection to both. What fitter for the householder
to train his children, servants, and attendants in (next Divine writ) then the
All Arts may be reduced to noble atempts and condign fortunes by their own
professions.
reading of profit^ble Sto^ies, such as excite to virtue, and stir up their
minds to the undertaking of some thing worthy a resolved spirit. I know the
base minded Groom hearing the prosperous success of Lucius Quintius, who was
chosen one of the Patricij from his plow stilt, and afterward by his valor
and magnanimity, reserueth the name to this day, of Triumphalis Agricola: a
poor Husbandman sitting in his Chair of Triumph, will desire by all means
to imitate so notable a president; scorning to rip up the bosom of the earth,
when he may purchase himself more fame by the deblazing his honor upon earth.
The homespun Shepherd hearing the renowned Acts of Romul^, fed and brought
up among Sheepheards: and of Cyrus, who bare himself a Prince among
Sheepheards, will cast away sk^ippe and sheepecrooke, and behave himself a
worthy successor in their profession. The Gardener has an Emperor of his
profession to imitate, and an honest one too, as his name implies, to wit,
Probus. The Wood-man, or Forrester, a Pompilius. The Diuiner, a Zoroastres, and
the Philosopher, an Anto^ius. But many have we, that we may better imitate then
Princes: as their state was eminent, so were their natures depraved. We shall
read that many of them were as good Law-breakers, Royal Errors.
as Lawmakers; and the greatest vices appeared least, (though most approved)
in greatest men. They had ever virtuous pretenses to shadow vice: sin became
clothed in Tissue. We shall see impunity of offense to be a great supportresse
of them, presuming still on the kings mercy, and squaring their course to his
discipline: for subjects love to imitate their Prince, either in vice or
virtue: But more are there inclined to the worst the^ the best, making this
conclusion, through long and inueterate custom of sin: which Medea with that
cunning and quaint discourse seemed to compass, with this subtle preparation,
laying this grand-hold of proceeding: Fructus est scelerum tibi nullum sceleris
putare: A Position of Machiauel: Wherein every judicious Machiuels Position.
Reader may gather the admirable and inscrutable wisdom of God, frustrating
their devices, anhilating their purposes, never bringing their designs to
effect: yea, which is more worthy our observation, making there the most
fools, where they thought themselves to be most wise: For their policies
either in governing, or establishing Empires, How far short have their
purposes ever come to effects. Examples I could produce many of this nature, as
well Divine as Moral.

How safe thought Cyrus himself established in his new Translated Monarchy,
when behold his security ends as miserably, as his beginnings had a flourish of
seeming happiness: Unfortunate he was to be deprived of his hoped-for
Greatness, by a Sex so weakly effeminate: Soucing that head (which was Head
to a powerful Government) in a Tunnell of blood, with this bitter inuection:
Satia te sanguine quem diu sitij^ti, cuiusque insatiabilis semp^r fuisti. Just.
1. lib.


The like of his successor Cambyses, who hoping to plant himself in a royal
Throne by blood, miserably ended his own life by his own blood. An excellent
Ipse enim gladio sponte sua euagin^to in femore grauiter vuln^ratus, (...),
Ibid.
and notable example of a sacrilegious and bloudthirsty-Prince, who sought to
establish himself by indirect means, (to wit) by the murder of his own
natural brother Mergis. I insist longer upon examples because I have oft-times
found that sentence of Demosthenes to be most true: (...).

These examples being best motives unto piety, and Examples best motives to
piety, confirmed by the O^ator Demosth.
indeed more forcible, in that we have two occasions in exemplary precedents of
imitation; the one to caution us not to do this or that, least we fall into the
like punishment, being attended on by the like means: The other (like a sweet
lenitiue) inducing us by reasons drawn from profit, which we conceive may
redound any way by the like examples, which the Poet seems to illustrate when
he says: Exemplo alterius qui sapit ille sapit.

The greatest benefit in private, I imagine to be drawn likewise, from the
right and exact use of History: which particular good I have ranked in the
second place, and that is this: In private to behold the sundry dispositio^s of
Princes and people: Reasons whereof cannot be given, but only from the
temperature of the Region wherein they live: Which reasons drawn from
coniecturall grounds are oftimes deceived in themse^ues; as in disposing or
ordering of States to the square of wisdom.

This benefit I have gathered, and placed in the rereward: Last obseruances (I
know) take greatest impression, and none more needful then this: when we shall
have commerce with any people, then to call to mind their disposition, least we
incur a greater mischief through our ignorance. Strangely jealous are some
Nations, they have Actaeons eyes, perchance his ears: We must show our selves
modestly bashful toward such; every lascivious look is as good as a comment
for such men, taking our eye to be the directresse of our heart: Others more
prodigal of their wives reputation, seem respectlesse of their shame, or the
hostage of honor, so they may increase their estate, and raise their fortunes
out of honors ruins. Other people we know to be of a surly, proud, and
intractable nature, living more by their own will (making it their Law) then
the square of Reason. Others seemingly humble, more dangerous far then the
other; under pretenses religiously honest, masking Treacherous and Disloyal
Proiects: Never less your friend, then when seeming most so: He has a
fleering Noli obscurare faciem, qualis es talis appare. Basilius.
look, smooth face, sleeke tongue; can observe times, and for private
advantage (like a second Sinon) vnbosome himself unto you: There be no
windows in his heart, therefore believe him not; if by the transparancy of thy
eye thou could see into that rotten sepulcher of his sugred-poisoned heart,
thou would admite so fair and beautiful an outside, to have so loathsome
and hideous an inside: Better charactred thou can not have him then by
History, it is the best image of thy life, and can best set out in their own
Historical rela^ions, occasions of public experiments.
native colors such deformed Images. Thy whole life wrap^ up in experiments
either at home or abroad, cannot tea^h thee so much, as one years serious
discourse in History will teach thee in one year.

LVCID. Scriptis aspiret meis, qui fa^et voti^*
FINIS.

