ANNIVERSARIES UPON HIS PANARETE.

-- Par nulla figura dolori. LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston and are to be
sold by Robert Bostock, at the Kings Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1634.

Look not upon me, because I am black, Cant. 1. 6. To the indeered memory of
His ever loved, never too much lamented PANARETE, Mris FRANCES BRATHWAIT.
A distilling Vial of Funeral tears obsequiously offered.

MELPOMENE.
MUSE, thou have often to others griefs been known,
"Now show a real passion in thine own.
NIOBE.
I Will not invoke, as othersuse,
"The influence of any Muse;
"The Muses nine shall be no other,
"Than O^phans nine to moan their Mother.
Anniversaries upon his PANARETE.
Weep! no; I will not: yt would ease mine heart;
^he burden of my griefs shall bear a part
In sadder Strains: Still-running Rivers are
Ever the deep^st: Not a tear^ shall share
In my discomfort: They that can allay
Their griefs with tears, are Mourners for a day.
Nor will I cast my Sorrows on my back,
Nor cloth them, as our Painters use, in black;
Such clothing's mere dissembling: many wear
A sable habit, and distill a tear,
Who can dispense with grief: which I detest;
Though Pictures be by Shadows best expressed
To Native Symmetrie: we cannot so
Paint our essential Portraiture of woe.
O Niobe! that Story writ of thee
Shall borrow life and lineament from me.
I Am stupid grown, and by continuate moan
A livelesse-senselesse metamorphos'd stone.
Where shall I then retire, dejected man?
But like the Desart-hanting Pelican,
To ^ome dark Lawne, close Cell, or remo^e plac^,
Where I may takefull view of (...);
And mak^ my self the Emblem? Where delight
In melancholy walks, and Birds of night
Shall feed my pensive passion, and in time
Make my retired bosom Sorrows Shrine.
The throbbing Turtle having lost his Spouse,
Will not on an^ bloome or blossom brouse,
No^ roust on any twigge that is fresh or green^,
But like a Recluse live unknown, unseene.
The chaste-choice Bird Porphyrio, left alone,
(Reft of his Mate) converts his mirth to moan;
Famine's his food, darkesilence his repose,
Lost Love the Loome, his Life the Web of woes.
Retired he lives, not seen converse with any,
His comforts few, his discontentments many;
Dew-trickling tears, like Crystal Rills distill,
Which form a funer^ll habit to his will.
To live he loathes, for while he lives he tries
Naught good in life, till it expires and dies.
If Birds oth' Air such heavy Aires send forth,
Deepe-drain'd must mine be, or they are little worth.
Had she been, like too many of our Nation,
Exposed to riot, or engaged to fashion;
Or entered parley with an amorous Mate,
Or for a toy impaun'd her husbands state;
Or like a private Gossip, wiped her mouth,
And in a corner had a luscious tooth;
Or shown a tempest in a furrowed brow,
Or been averse what she was moved unto;
Or seaz'd by various humors; or oppressed
With spleen and passion; or reserved a Breast
To nourish jealous thoughts; observed no Laws;
Or taken exception when there was no cause;
Or heard aspersions with a longing ear,
And made them ever worser than they were.
Had she been such, by all mine hopes, I vow,
I should have mourned in clothes, as others do,
And with a sable habit clothed my skin,
But worn a cheerful Nuptial Robe within;
And joyed like those, who, when the storm is done,
Refresh themselves in seeing of the Sun.
Yea, e're th'Rosemary Sprigs and fragrant flowers
Stuck on those ashy corpse, which once were ours,
Should lose their beauty or their odor sweet,
Or Moth or worm should pierce her shrouding sheet.
I Would dride my tears, clozing her obits thus,
"Adieu! thou art fitter far for Earth than us.
None Such was mine! her virtues were too pure
To feed fond fancy with a foreign lure.
Fixed was her eye on heaven, while every sense
In doing good strove for preeminence.
In distinct hours she would divide the day,
To walk, write, work, to meditate and pray:
Her first fruits were for Heaven; her second cares
Pitched their resolves on temporal affairs:
For Mine held Time of higher estimate
Than to expose it at so vile a rate,
As to bestow't on trifles: every hour
Was her improver; not a budding flower
(Such sacred contemplation did awake her)
But stamped in her the memory of her Maker.
Yea, of such sweet compassion she was,
As not one subtle grain of sand did pass
Through the glassie Crevet, but each single grain
(So loath she was that ought should fall in vain)
Wrought in her thoughts an Emblem; which she would thus
In her devoutest privacy discuss.
"Hours, minutes, moments, ye distilling sands
"Whereon our lives dimension merely stands,
"Diviner use of you I cannot make,
"Than by your swifter current to awake
"My long-depressed thoughts, and lodge them there
"In that pure orb, where you must not appear.
"Hence then this benefit do I receive,
"As sands do summon me unto my Grave,
"It shall be my sole comfort, supreme care,
"Each minute for my passage to prepare:
"That when my vading breath shall cease in me,
"I may plant there where I desire to be.
"O Soul! would thou but eye these sands that fall,
"And how thou can not one of these recall
"With myriads of tears, thou would esteem
"Nothing more precious than to redeem
"The expense of misspent time, and strive to show
"A pattern unto others what to do:
"That every minute might a model give
"To thee and thine both how to love and live.
Thus would my PANARETE meditate,
And thus with Death would she expostulate,
To make him more familiar; which was wrought
By sleighting Death, t'enioy Him whom she sought.
But leaving these, Dear MUSE relater be
Of her descent and honored Family;
Ennobled by her spotless virtuous name,
To prove those Ancestors from which she came.
Near Darlington was my Dear Darling borne, Her Family.

Of noble house, which yet bears Honors form,
Teese-seated Sockbourne, where by long descent
Cogniers were Lords, their Countries ornament;
Which by that ancient Monument appears,
Reared in the Chancell there for many years;
Where th'Ancestor such an Exploit performed,
As he by Fame and victory adorned,
Made his Successors glorious, which I wish
(And crown my wishes Heaven!) may live in his:
Mean time I this relation will omit,
Because In his REMAINS AFTER DEATH.
elsewhere I have recorded it.
But what is a Family but style or name,
Unless preserved by a virtuous Fame? Her Fame.

And this she had, which did perfume her life,
(Like a most precious odor) Maid and Wife.
Pure were her thoughts, her Actions without stain,
Grace was her Guide, and Godliness her Gain.
She breathes not that lived freer from suspect,
Nor courted vanity with more neglect;
Pride was her scorn, Humility her Prize,
And Heaven the Object where she fixed her eyes.
Yea, there was naught on Earth she more did love,
Than Fame by real goodness to improve:
So as, even those which knew her by report,
Admired that which they heard, and famed her for it:
Tears trickling streamed from Neighbors eyes; expressed
Those silent sorrows treasured in their breast:
While with joint voice, made hoarse through grief, they cride,
"None ever lived more loved, or moaned, did.
Nor was she vain in habit or attire, Her Habit.

A modest-matron Weed was her desire;
That habit solely tendered her delight,
Which made her comely in her Makers sight.
No painting, pu^sting, poudring of the hair,
No C^russe cheek, no azur'd breast laid bare,
To take deluded eyes; fantastic toys,
Wherein corrupted fancy only joys,
Never lured her love: Her Maxim used to be,
"She wears best clothes, that wears to her degree,
Yet was she neat; atti^d in such a manner,
As she wo^e naught but properly became her:
Nor careless, neither curious would she seem,
But in her habit to retain esteem;
Whose graceful pres^nce did so well besit,
I^ gave a grace to her, and she to it. A modest Descri^tion of her Person;
taxing the use of for^'d Hyperboles.

For to describe her Person, which shall be,
As was her self, composed of modesty,
Her Beauty was her own, a native red
Got by a modest blush, her tincture, fed
By Fear and Fancy; No complexion bought
From Shop e're touched her Shape, nor ever wrought
On her affection; rather high than low
Appeared her stature, that the Age might know
Nature did owe her nothing, taking care
To make her proper, as her form was fair.
Nor can I vye in my trueteares with these
Who faigne an Idol of Hyperboles:
As to compare the tresses of her hair
To purest Lydian threads, which subtle air
Dishevels; or her smooth-ascending Front
Unto a Beacon, or some rising Mount
For prospect glorious; nor those Lamps of light
To burnished Diamonds, which beday the night
With their diffused luster; nor her teeth
To Orient pearls; nor her roseat breath
To Nectar or Ambrosian rivolets;
Nor Lips to Rubies dipped in Violets:
Nor with description upon every part
To make my grief a curious Scene of Ar^,
To give a relish to a liq'rish taste,
And so forget what dishes should be placed
At this sad funeral feast: No, Dearest, no,
My grounded griefs cannot be razed so.
Colors well laid, and such are did in grain
Are of that substance, they will admit no stain;
The more you wash, the more you lose your time,
And so it fares with these extremes of mine.
I cannot artfully show what she was,
But sure she did all mortals far surpass
In my conceit, nor needs he any art
To pensill Her, whose feature's in his Heart:
Which a more living deep impression bears
Than all our Art-expressive Characters.
This, were my breast unript, would make more ^how
Than all our Limners with their art can do^.
So as, I cannot choose but highly tax
These Mimick Mourners, who like Shrines in wax
Can mould their faces to what form you please,
And varnish over their Dear Loves Obsequies
With high poeticke raptures: whereas sense
Of grounded grief admits no Eloquence:
"He that is truly wounded and heart-sicke
"Will never converse with flowers of Rhetoric.
Let it suffice, naught could in woman be,
If good, were not in her espoused to me*
Chaste was my choice; so choice, as never was br^d
A (...) Con^ort both for board and bed.
Besides, where e're I walk, I gather thence Her Providence.

Apparent tokens of her Providence:
Although I seek her, whom I cannot find,
I find Inventions of her pregnant mind
Expressed in every Arbor: quick conceit
S^cer'd by (...) to support a state;
Without too much restraint or liberty,
Not domine^ring in a family,
Nor too remiss; nor lavish, nor too spare;
Careful, yet wise to moderate her care;
Rich in a frugall bounty, while content
Smiled on her brow, whether she spared or spent*
So as, in all domestical affairs
So sweetly mixed were her well-tempered cares,
As if she had been from her childhood bred,
And the Oeconomicks solely studied.
Nor did her cautious providence extend
Wholly to thoughts of frailty, which take end
From time and mutability; O, no!
She thought of th'place, whereto all Mortals go;
And that she might with Preparation store her,
She had her Shrouding-Sheet still laid before her,
As a Memorial; which, during breath,
Might represent to her the face of Death:
With which, that she might make her self more fit,
Thus she would familiarly converse with it.
"SHROVD, thou art all that is left me to my grave,
"To cloathe this poor Remainder which I have;
"Pray thee be my Remembrancer, and now
"Put me in mind oth' place where I must go.
"Vile veil of frailty! pray thee still be nie,
"And be my Lecture, "to prepare to die.
And that she might leave pledges of her love
On earth below, as she had done above,
Rings on her Husbands Sisters she bestows,
For a Remembrance, which expressly shows
The goodness of her Nature, being known
To tender them as dearly as her own.
She sets her house in order, and applies
Her will to Gods; and dies before she dies.
Some Countries I have red of, who did ^se, (...) of m^tallor (...) t^ Princes,
i^ some (...), upon their Election, which they will make ch^ice of ^o be their
Tomb.

When by Election they their Princes choose,
Pieces of Stone or metal to present,
Which they would choose to be their monument,
Tomb, or Triumphant Vrne; for they renoune
A royal death before a regal Crown. Us^ of that (...) ^o her appli^d: in
her convo^ t^ her bea^ficall estate.

This use or custom may be well applide,
To my now glorious Heav'n-infranchis'd Bride,
Who lodged Deaths model ever in her eyes,
And in her thoughts that sole-sufficient prize,
Which of a Mortal, an immortal makes,
And loos^h naught by those that share in stakes.
Glorious resolves! When, while we mortals are,
For heaven on earth, wee'dresse our highest care*
And so enspheere our thoughts in Him we love,
That though our Foot's below, our Faith's above,
Such do not prize Raze, jeat, nor Porphyry,
To give a Cover to Mortality.
The Thracian Marble naturally wrought
To be their Shrine is least of all their thought.
A Mansion more transcendent is their aim,
While they reflect on th'placefro^ whence they came.
Both which reflexive aims did her attend,
To crown her gracious life with glorious end.
DORCAS full of good works and alms too, DORCAS Needleworks to her applied.

The lively Emblem of my lovely Do;
Widows stood weeping, and with grief disma^d,
Showing the coats and garments DORCAS made;
All which commends may be applide, and more,
To Her, whose hand made garments for the poor.
Besides rich Needle-work^s, which ancient use
Approves to store and beautifi^ an house.
Which patterns when I see, needs must appear
Still in mine eye a Monumentall t^are.
Shall I express her Love! it might be made
Equal to what the Roman Matron said,
"Where thou art Caius, I am Caia too, He^ love ^xpressed and made (...) with
that of Caia, wif^ to Caius Tranquillus.

"Nor will I act what Caius would not do*
What s^cred-secret union was this,
Where naught was done by Her, implide not His?
And such was mine; and happy was the time,
When I might truly living style her mine.
No mount, no vale, no shady Laune nor g^ove,
But in her presence were receipts of love;
Local Idaeas, where all comforts were
Cloz'd in one abstract, while her self lodged there.
For where Wit, neatness, goodness jointly meet,
That subject needs must be perfections seat,
And such was mine; neat to delight the eye,
Good to improve her life, and pregnancy
Of sweet-chaste-choice conceits to cheer the ear,
And raise Invention to an higher Sphere.
Which puts me now in mind of various flowers
And Posies too, which at retired hou^es
Her richer Fancy used to devise
For Bracelets, rings, and other rarities;
In which, ingenious modesty would show
Emblemes of Love, and teach an Artist too
His just dimension; Such would She compose,
Crowning invention with a virtuous close.
One day, two rings with Posies I received, Her Posies.

In which were these inscriptions ingrav'd:
By THIS (th'devise, a bleeding Heart) I LIVE,
YET THIS (see her affection!) I GIVE:
On the inner brimme these words inscribed were,
THIS (heart engraven) IS NEAR, YET YOU AS DEAR.
The nexta Garter-ring, and on the knot
Was this in Capitals distinctly wrote:
THIS (and may this be sacred) WHEN I DYE
FATE (and too soon came it) MAY THIS UNTIE.
Within the wreaths, these words addressed unto me,
Sir, IF YOU LOOSE ME (aye me!) YOU UNDO ME,
Such quaint conceits allai'd more serious cares,
But suffered no neglect in her affairs:
For her stayed thoughts surpast her years, and told
The World, that it is Discretion which makes old
The bloomingst youth; which stood confirmed in ours,
Who, though but young in years, was old in hours.
And now, me-thinkes, in silent shade I hear The perplexed Sages answer; "He
was be- "thinking "himself "wherein his "Spouse ever "offended "him, to allay
"that (...) "sorrow which "had so possessed "him, but "could find "none: And "how
He "never suffici- "ently prized "the height or "weight of "her less, ^ill
"he fel^ i^.

The Answer of that Sage sound in mine ear;
Who much perplexed, and walking all-alone,
Was asked by one, what He was thinking on:
"I Am thinking, Sir, quoth he, of my dead wife,
"Wherein she ere offend't me all he life,
"That thought thereof might bid me cease to moan,
"And so allay my grief, but I find none.
"This makes my Sorrows infinitely pressed,
"And adds new store to re -- possess my breast.
"Besides, this draines fresh rivers from mine eyes,
"For that sufficiently I could not prize
"The height or weight of her unequalled loss,
"Before I felt mine unsupported cross.
These thoughts of his dear Spouse his joys exiled,
And caused this ancient Sage to play the child.
Reflect on thy sad Scene; peruse each clause;
And poize thy griefs, if they have not like cause.
Did sne ere give occasion of offense?
Or if she did, would not her penitence
Resolve it into tears? did she not share
In thy discomforts, and allay thy care
With her discreet advice? and yield increase
Unto thy Comforts, by partaking these?
Would she not joy, and in her joys overflow
When she saw smoothness smile upon thy brow,
Could ought affect thine humor, she would not make
The Object of her pleasure for thy sake?
No, heaven thou know, all these her life expressed;
Which are with tears recorded in my breast.
BUT pause a while! can thou be said to breath,
And breathless She sleep in the arms of death?
Husband and Wife are two-united-one,
How can I live then when my self is gone?
Gone to her gain, my loss; unvalued loss!
Yet should her Christian Crown allay my Cross,
Could I appease my passion, which springs
From brackish streams of humane sufferings:
While Reason with my Passion dictates thus: Reasons dictate with Passion.

"How is it, that you incense both Fate and Us
"With your incessant mourning? you will say
"She Is dead whom you so loved; it is true, but pray,
"What was she borne for? or what made of? Earth
"Her composition, whence she took her birth;
"Her feet frail ^ases, though of purest mold;
"Where the Groundworke's weak, the Building cannot hold.
"Did not that lineall Consumption ^unne
"(Whereof she did) to Mother, daughter, son,
"Before it seaz'd on her? Eldest was she,
"Yet last surpised, as one reserved for thee.
"Would but consider what to thee is sent,
"Others have felt, thou would be more content.
"Yea, but again you will say, she dyed young,
"And might by course of Nature have lived long.
"Go to the Embrodred Theater of ours
"Decked with variety of choicest flowers,
"Where you shall find some meldew'd in their prime,
"Some blasted, others pruned before their time;
"Not one amongst ten but cul^ed in their youth,
"And those are left, do perish in their grouth.
"These spring, and sprung untimely blasts do take them,
"Those grow, and grown then winter comes to shake them.
"Nor is it in these, but in all else that breath,
"Both Youth and Age are subject unto death.
"Nor should it be unto our humane form
"More strange to dye, than for us to be borne.
"Recount those Heroes that were styled divine,
"Renoun'd for famous actions in their time,
"What Is left of all their glory? a strait urne
"After such spacious conquests served their turn.
"Where Is all those specious Dames, whose very sight
"Darkened the luster of the Chrysolite;
"Whose richer beauties seemed to bestow
"Mintage on all inferior beauties too,
"And seemed exempt from frailty? those even shun them
"Dead and deformed, who, living, doated on them:
"Their beauteous Bodies earth-reduced forms,
"Their eyes dark Cranies to encloister worms.
"He then or she the happiest appears
"That dies the youngst, because he sheds least tears:
"Since Life is such a vaine-deceiving sleep,
"We dream of joys, but when we wake, we weep.
"Yea, but you will say, She was with virtues blessed,
And might improve the place which she possessed
"By her example! Do you therefore grieve
That for her Country she should Exile leave?
O do not so malign her happiness!
"This were t'adjorne fruition of her bliss
"For humane ends; Her virtues are her Crown,
"And those Examples which her life has shown
"Surviving Annals which can never dye,
"But still embalme her precious memory
"So long as Time keeps minutes: "Cease to moan;
"'It Is sin to mourn for such a Saintly one:
"Whose death's her wreath, her palm her periode,
"Her Epithalamie her dying ode*
"Cease then your fruitless wishes; they are in vain;
"Nor Prayers nor Tears can call her back again.
"But should Heavens grant this suit perferr'd by thee,
"Her loss were greater than thy gain could be.
"Her joys are infinite, thine finite are,
"And 'twixt these two there can be no compare.
"For what is this world, but a painted bliss,
"Where few or want or have what they could wish!
"Do no^ give reins then to thy furious will,
"She loved thee well, why should thou wish her ill?
These Dictates on my Senses wrought some force,
Though Sense told Reason, Nature must have course!
"Too well knows he his moan with mirth to season,
"Who in his griefs applies his Ear to Reason*
But to impressive were these prints of grief
To tender me such expedite relief:
Too deep those Characters to be defaced,
Or so by Reason or persuasion razed;
As no Remains were left to gather head,
No^ in my birth of Sorrows to succeed.
For then, even then, when Reasons self affords
Some rays of comfort, her last dying words
Renew my wounds, and add unto the store
Of those old griefs I parlyed with before.
And blame me not, that these effects were such,
Who so forgets them, He affects not much.
For if these halfe-breath'd words of dying men
To strangers precious be, who knew not them,
What will the voice of one do whom we love?
What strange impressions leave? how strongly move?
When it calls to us from the Deathbed too,
And with eyes fixed on heaven's addressed to go
From this vain vale, these ^ew but evil days,
O what a conflict doth-each accent raise!
Grief and affection struggle to enclose them,
The Heart becomes a Casket to repose them:
No Syllable is lost, naught uttered
By that weake-faltring tongue unregistred:
Knowing, that in short space, that very tongue,
Whose weake-breath'd Organs tuned their dying song,
And as yet speak, and all attention move,
By friendly accents, in their Ears that lov^,
Shall in eternal silence be ty'de up,
And from the Ear of Mortals ever shut;
So as, those dying words you heard before
With their sweet sound shall never salute you more.
And such were mine; O that the Judge of time
Would have repriv'd her to be longer mine!
But let me not offend; Heavens pardon me,
If Passion make me speak too forwardlie!
Now to her dying words let me descend,
Sweetly delivered, while her sweetest end
Was now approaching; just the very same, Her dyingwords, at his late and l^st
(...) from her, (...) her childr^n (...) Fath^rs care.

Though not so moving, as from whence they come.
"Sir, (with a dying-smile, these words she spoke,
"While her weake-beating pulse my hand did take)
"I Am going from you, and must recommend
"These little ones now to you at mine end,
"To whom you must father and mother be,
"And in their Image, Sir, remember me.
"Be it your care, next to your supreme care,
"To tender these, in whom none h'as a share
"But your dear self; by all my hopes I vow,
"Not one strai'd thought estranged their birth from you: Never did one strai'd
^ought estrange her from him.

"No^ did you e're conceit it; For we were
"By Nuptial tie fixed in one sacred spheere,
"Where Twin-like Love such graces did bestow,
"As neither liked, what the other loved not too.
"Dear your respect to me, to you was mine,
"And so were you opinion'd all our time.
"For since I h^ld the title of a wife,
"I n'ere eyed pleasing Object all my life
"But in your pr^sence, (and heavens forgive) Her vowed affection s^ constantly
fixed on him, as it never eyed Object with delight, but in his presence.

"If that delight made me desire to live,
"So constantly was my affection fixed,
"As it was never with foreign fancy mixed,
"But pure as is the Fire; Which to requi^e,
"Let these be in your thought, when least in sight;
"These younglins, tender in their mothers ^ye,
"Whom they must want, and you are to supply.
"Let them have breeding, Sir, by your dispose,
"It is a portion that they cannot Iose.
"Correct them too, yet let them understand
"That their Correction's from a Fathers hand.
" -- Now with a Mothers Blessing, Babes, adjeu,
"Your Mother takes her lasting leave of you.
"For you, Sir, as God's pleased to bestow
"Much on you, so make use of what you know;
"O do not hide your Tal^nt in the g^ound,
"But let your knowing life with fruits abound^
"Fear God for love, more than for fear of Hell;
"Heaven be our meeting -- Dearest Love farewell.
" -- So, now my race is done, mine Houre-glasse run,
"Come, my Lord Jesus, my sweet Jesus come.
WHAT a choice-curious piece of Clay was this
Which gave her form! Which form shall be in bliss,
Clothed with immortal beauty and divine,
Not subject to mortality or time,
When it shall rise again; and rise it must
From this poor shell of Earth, or Shrine of dust
Where it lies now inter^'d; to re-appeare
Fuller of luster than it shined here:
Rankt with triumphant Quires, where length of daie^
Is the sole-sov'raigne subject of their praise:
While her heav'n-mounting Soul with airy wings
Sings glorious Paeans to the King of kings.
Cloze then thy funeral Ode, sinc^ thou may hear
This sound from every mouth to every Ear;
"Her due deserts this sentence on her gives,
"She dies to life, yet in her death she lives,
She live^ in fame above the reach of death, Choicest virtues our ^hiefest
honors, our sweetest odours.

An^ from her ashes do such odour^ breath
Of her surviving virtues, as they prove
No death so sweet as th^irs who goodness love.
For though they seem unto our Senses dead,
The Branches of their living actions spread,
From whence no bloomes nor blossoms only shoot,
But to succeeding ages store of frui^.
And such was mine; once mine; now from mine eyes
Taken, to obtain a more transcendent prize
Than earth could give her: and heavens will be done!
My night is coming, but her day's begun.
In silent passion then, or as griefs be, He clozeth her funeral Ode, with an
Ecstasy or passionate silence.

When they do labor of an Ecstasy,
Retire, and when thousee'st Earth-minded men
Bemoane inferior losses, Smile at them.
And if they ask thee why thou can not grieve,
Tell them, Discretion will not give thee leave.
Vain griefs can work no such effect in thee,
Thy tears are treasured for PANARETE.
If they ask What She was, bid them here read;
If they ask Where She is, in tears write, DEAD.
FINIS.
1 Epitaph.
FOr rites of holy Church which Christians have,
Quires of blessed Angels sing her to her grave;
For hallowed candles, virtues give her light,
And form a day of a sad funeral night;
For ^els. good works, which ring so sweet a chime,
As they do sound he^ mortally-divine;
For An^hems and Memorials of the dead,
With Saintly Orisons solemnized:
For Shrines of Raze or monumentall Brass,
A living fame; her Epitaph: I WAS.
"Cease then your friendly Sorrow, 'twere a Sin
"To weep for Her; reserve your tears for Him.
2 Epitaph.
MArch dust more worth tha^ a kings ransom is; Obiit Mar^ii vijo* Anno Dom.
1633.

Which proverb may be verifide by ^his,
^his precious gage lest here to Earth in trust;
Who on the sev'nth of March resolved to (...).
Upon her only Sister. 3 Epitaph.
IN this Vine interred lies
One, who closed from mortal eyes,
^yes that Day which knows no night,
Spheared in her Makers sight;
Who to crown her Day with bliss,
Has vouchsafed to style her his.
"Life so ended, is begun,
"Far from Death, when Death h'as done.
Upon he^ dearest Fannie. 4 Epitaph.
ILost a Mother for a Grave,
And by it I two Mothers have;
Earth, and mine own dear Mother too,
In whose bare breast I slumber now:
"My corpse sleep (Mother Earth) in thee*
"While Angels sing my Lullabee.
PANARETIS (...)
TEISIS me genuit, Sponsatam W^STRIA cepit, Corpus CANDALIVM, pectus OLYMPVS
habe^.


