A STRANGE Metamorphosis of MAN, transformed into a Wilderness. Deciphered in
CHARACTERS.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by Lawrence Chapman at
his shop in Holborne. 1634.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe world is a Wilderness, Man apilgrime lost in the desert; or rather Man is
the Desert, not to be found, but in the Wilderness. A Desert who leaving the
path of Rectitude, has plunged himself into the thicket of worldly Appetites;
to seek him in the City were in vain, who leaving Jerusalem, entered into the
Desert the way of Jericho. To find him then, we must leave the City, and
seek him in the Wilderness. Where behold a strange Metamorphosis! We find
him not in his own similitude, but like Vlissis Crew, transformed into the
shape of every thing we meet with. We then take him as we find him, and
deliver you his Character in those borrowed shapes, not to put him to the
blush. But lest of a Wilderness of things, I make a Wilderness of words, and
loose my self in my own Wilderness: Or laboring in a Maze as Pasiphae in
(...)

A strange Metamorphosis of Man, transformed into a Wilderness.
1. The Lion
KIng of Beasts is a right tyrant among Beasts, Nature it seems has made him
for terror, for when he roares his Subjects tremble at his voice. Instead of
Ermins like Hercules he wears a Lions skin; which robe though he had not
on yet would he be known by his claws. He is always seen in his Parliament
robes, but carries up his own train himself. He has an Antipathy with the
Cock, especially of the Game. One reason is, because he sees him commonly with
his Crown on his head, while Princes commonly are jealous of each other. Some
say because he presumes to come into his presence booted and spurred, contrary
to the Law in Court. But I think rather because he meets with a Lions heart
in so weak a body. He is of a generous and noble disposition, offend him not,
and he is a lamb, touch him never so little, and he is a Lion right: He is
exceeding jealous of his Lioness especially of the Parde; not without good
cause, since they often meet by stealth, and he enforced full sore against his
will to father the Leopard though a Bastard, and none of his. He is so hot of
Nature that he is never without a burning fever, but is feign to recover
himself; for in his raging fits, no one of his Physicians dares approach to
feel his pulse. He dreads the fire he sees without, because he feels so
great a heat within, which even glowes again at the windows of his eyes. His
children are no crying Puppies, but whelps rather, that come at last to be
roaring boys; Yet they cannot a letter of the book, not so much as the
Christ-crosse Row. Only in the Greek Alphabet their memory serves but to
carry away the last letter ((...)) which they will tone forth with such a
throat as no crier in Westminster Hall can put you forth such a one. And no
marvel they can read no better, since they hate the vowels; the A because it
is too childish, the E too feminine, the I stands not with their majesty, for
the O they are too stout to blinch or say oh at any thing, and for the V they
hold it rusticitie. If he chance to fly out at any time or be unruly, whereas
Madmen are put into Bedlam, Rogues into Bridwell, Beggars into the Stocks,
Night-walkers into the Counter, he for his Nobility is clapped into the Tower,
where he is never like to come forth, till instead of stripping his Collar, he
be stripped of his skin.

2. The Squirill
IS that nimble Reueller of the Forest who is always set upon a merry pin.
It is the innocence of his gentle breast, that makes his heart so light, and
the body so naturally active. He keeps Holiday every day, and is never
without his pumps on, to be ready to dance. For he will dance you beyond
measure, and yet be never out of his dance. He is very desperate in his
tricks, so that if he chance to fall, he ventures his neck, life, and all. He
is no Carpet-knight that danceth on strewed tapestries, for he will dance upon
a tree without any music, But this in the Forest only, for in the City he
has another manner with him, where it is ridiculous to dance without music,
and therefore gets him a dancing school with a chime of little Bells at least.
He is a foure-footed bird that is kept in a cage, not to sing, for he has no
voice that is worth the hearing, but to dance only. One would wonder to see
him so well breathed who will hold out so long and yet not be tired, especially
considering the diet he uses being commonly nuts, so apt with us to breed
obstructions, and the tisicke. With an apple and a nut or two he will make
himself not only an handsome collation but a royal feast. It is very
strange what teeth the thief has, for he will pare you a wallnut as big as
his head, much sooner than we an apple, yea and devour the kernel and all ere
you would imagine. He has a good face, and he knows it well, and some beauty
withal, whereof he is exceeding choice and tender, while he never goes
especially in the Sun, but he carries his Vmbrella about him, which serves him
likewise for a cloak in a shower of rain. He that should mark him well,
would think him a puppet made in fashion of a Squiril, that by engines were
made so to mount up and down, and that either he had no joint at all, or all
were nothing else but joints, for he moves not his head so much as his whole
body when he moves. He is very neat, for he washes his face at every bit he
eats, and should be a Jew in that, but in other things has no Religion in him
at all. In a word, I told him to have a good nature with him, and a pretty wit,
and though he seem to have a cunning head, yet stayed enough from any
debauchments.

3. The Bramble
IS that little great Competitour of Regal dignity upon trees, who carried it
away from the rest. He is the right Agathocles raised from dust to supreme
authority, to weild the Scepter in our wilderness of Plants. The Dionisius
Tyrant of Sicilie, who rules rather with the prickie thorns of severitie, than
with the Roses and sweets of lenity. Had he the Muskes of the Eglantine to
temper his thorns, his Empire would be more tolerable. It is a tree indeed
without a trunk, a trunk without boughs, boughs fuller of pricks than
leaves, of leaves than fruits. He proclaims his shadow to be a protection to
all; but who is he would choose such a harbor to pay for his lodging with a
scracht face? To retain the majesty of a Prince he has always a Corps-de
Guard about him, armed with Holbe^ts never from his side. He is greedy and
having, because tenacious and a notable griper of all who have any thing to do
with him: And for his fees (as he calls them) he will pull the clothes from
your back by hook or crook. It is a wooden Saw full of teeth, which needs
no whetting, as being always on edge, but without handles, because not to be
handled, yet yields no dust as it goes, like other Sawes, but in lieu thereof
makes the blood to follow. He is a Schoolmaster right, who is never without a
sharp rod in his hand, and his Scholars are certain black boys that board
in his house. He is as good as a Sergeant at Mace, for if he catch a debtor by
the cloak as he goes along, he would make him believe he were arrested, and
looking back to be ready to ask at whose suite. Howsoever he is a right
Catch pole, that will go near to catch one by the pole indeed. He is no
swearer, but will rend and tear like an arrant Turk. In fine, being of the
family of the Bushes, he is raised to have a place in the Moon; for if it be
true that there is a man in the Moon with his dog, he is not without his
bush with him which is our Bramble.

4. The Stagge
IS a stately Beast to behold, you would say he were some Coriphaeus of the
Lions Court. He is tall enough of stature of himself, but affects a
portlinesse so much, that as others help themselves with Corkes and Cheppeens,
he has his Stilts upon his head, to make him seem much higher then he is.
His coat is fair and beautiful, powdered here and there with certain spots
which make a handsome show, and were it not his own, would be thought a rich
wear, and little inferior to the Martin furrs or the Ermins of Russia. He
has long and slender legs, like a Redshanke, or Irish Kern, which makes him
so tall a footman as he is. He has four of them, or else it were impossible
so great a bulk could be held up by so weak pillars. He flies like a
Parthian Archer, with his face turned backwards, not to shoot his enemies, but
to show them a fair pair of heels. Before he fights he whets his horn, as a
Mower does his Sith, but uses them rather as a Pitchforke in harvest to toss
the hounds with, like heycocks in the Meadows. He is much delighted with
Music, I may say much taken with it, for he is often caught of the Hunters by
that means; As the Horse by his teeth is known how old he is, if the mark be
not out of his mouth; so he by his horns, if he have not cast them in some
bush. The Heralds call his horns his Thiara or dress, and say he is not
fully attired till he have them absolute and complete: this I am sure of, that
when they have them not on, they are ashamed, and hide themselves, as Maids
that are unreadie. Hence it is perhaps that tyers and horns are held
Synonimas. He is very constant in his fashion, for he changes his attire but
once a year, and then never al^ers it a whit. He bears his years very well,
as one that takes no care, while all the care and pain is rather had how to
take him. When he is hunted by a Prince, he is ever after termed a Heart. In
fine, had he but valor to his strength, and not such wings at his feet, I see
not why but for his goodly head he might make a noble Standard in our
Wilderness.

5 The Golden Mine
IS the Basiliske of Metals, for the Regal Crown he wears upon his head.
Nature it seems has laid him out of sight in the bowels of the earth for fear
of killing with his looks. It is either the Sulphur it self or the boiling
froth of Hell, and eternal flames, it is the self same color, and the cause
of so many damnable actions. It is now through wantonness made potable, and for
its sake we swallow all things. And if they could, I verily think they would
have it respirable, which they do pretty well, when they can breathe and speak
of nothing else. He is the Orpheus who with his looks only, without setting
his hand to the Lyre, enchants and ravishes the most savadge of our
wilderness. He has a key that opens all locks, will prostitute Widows, and
corrupt Virgins. He will enter into all men's counsels, yea, insinuates
himself into Princes Cabinets. It is the Sun that dispels all clouds of
melancholy from the heart, and makes one, of a Saturn a Jupiter, because
joviall. He is capable but of two sins, Baseness and Levity, which in him
are held for mortal. He loves not to be cut or barbed, nor washed in his
trimming, for thereby he loses much of credit and estimation with men. He is
very charitable, for he will waste and spend himself and substance to make a
sick man well, or to comfort his heart. He has no good voice, but a kind of
hoarsenesse with him, which yet is twenty times more graceful than the best
music the silver makes. He seems to have the yellow Iaundies, it is but his
natural complexion, which in the eyes of men makes him the more amiable, nor
have ever heard him to be thrust into the Pesthouse for his look: If he look
pale now and then, it is for fear of falling in the Coyners or Clipper^ hands,
his chiefest ene^mies. He fears no^ thieves so much as Vsu^rers, while the
first giv^ him liberty, and let him go current where he will the other thrust
him up in some hole or dun^geon, where he sees no light. Though he be heavy
in himself, yet is he lighter and fitter for travel than Silver is: in fine
he is good if not abused.

6. The Hedgehog
IS a right Vrchin and a peevish Elfe, that cannot be meddled with at no hand.
He is a whole fort in himself, he the Governor, his skin the walls, his
prickles the Corpse de guard. He is very jealous and suspicious by nature, so
that he never takes his rest, till he have set the watch. He has a drawbridge
to collect himself with at his pleasure, especially when he stands upon his
guard, so as it were impossible to make any breach into him. He is a great
enemy to the winds, principally the North and South; and therefore having but
two gates to the City where he keeps his hold, he has barricadoes for them
both to shut them out. There are two sorts of them, one for land, who never put
to sea, the other seafaring men, that never come to land: who as they differ in
trade of life, so do their manners: yet both are weather wise alike, and both
crafty enough it seems to provide for themselves. For if the one have his
fort, the other his ship to trust to: and if the one keep out the wind at his
doors, the other in a storm will stick to his tackling, and take in stones
for his Ballice, or if need be, cleave to an anchor; and therefore should be
politic as they all likely are, who are so. He is all comb, though not to
kemb with, which has no teeth but to mischief with, and therefore is no
friend from the teeth outward, while every tooth is a very sting. He is but a
milksop yet, and a very suckling, who will hang on the speens of every Cow,
which therefore makes him cry so like a child. He cannot brag much of his
gentry, whose father was a Boar, his mother a Sow, himself a Pigge, and all
begot under a hedge. If there be any such place as Hoggs Norton is, where
Piggs play on the Organs, it is surely with them; who have such a squeeking cry
with their wind instruments. What his flesh is to eat, I know not, but I should
think, he that should eat him whole, were as good have a burre in his throat.
They say his flesh is as good and as tender as a Rabbet, but this I am sure,
their furre is nothing near so gentle. As the Fox has his hole, so has he
his bush, from whence there is no getting him forth, till he be fired out. He
is no great medler himself, nor loves to be meddled with, nor any that is
wise, I think, will teyze with him, who knows how touchy he is. For my part,
if I stumble not on him, I will have nothing to do with him.

7. The Pike
IS the Pirat of the Lake, that roves and preyes upon the little Fishermen of
that sea, who is so covetous and cruel, that he gives no quarter to any; when
he takes his prize, he goes not to the shore to make his market, but greedily
devoures it himself; yea, is such a Cormorant, that he will not stay the
dressing of it. He is called the Wolf of the water, but is indeed a monster of
nature; for the Wolf spares his kind, but he will devour his own nephews
ere they come to full growth. He is very gallant in apparel, and seems to
affect to go rather in silver than in gold, wherein he spares for no cost* for
his habit is all laid with silver plate down to the foot in scallop wise. He
is a right man of war, and is so slender built, and draws so little water,
as he will land at pleasure, and take his prey where he list, no shallop shall
follow where he will lead. The Pikes themselves are the taller ships, the
Pickerels, of a middle sort, and the Iacks, the Pinnaces amongst them, which
are all armed according to their burden. The The master or Pilot sits at the
prore, yet has the rudder so at command, that he can wind and turn the
vessel which way he will, in the twinkling of an eye. He sets up but little
sails, because he would not be discovered who he is, yea many times no sail
at all, but trusts to the finnes, his Oars. The youthfuller sorts of Pikes,
whom through familiarity they call Iacks, are notable Laddes indeed, and so
their strength and bigness will fish as their fathers (...). In a word, a man
would easily be mistaken in him in beholding him so handsome and gentle a
creature, and never imagine him to be half so ravenous as he is; but Fronti
nulla fides.

8. The Rock
IS the huge and vast Whale in the sea of the desert, which spouts his water by
the springs that shout from him; and in the time of tempests, by his open jaws
receives the amazed beasts as Jonas into his belly, and so shelters them till
the storm blow over. He is so unweildy and stiff in all his joints, as he
never moves but in Earthquakes, and then rocks like himself. It is the palace
of the king of beasts, where he keeps his Court, well founded, walled, and
vaulted over with a stony roof; no windows there, but the open doors or
mouth thereof, unless you will say the eyes of every creature there, are the
glass windows, which being within, do serve them well enough to see with. He
is even as old as the world, and has seen many centuries of years to pass
over his head. He could speak perhaps of the Deluge of Noah, as it had been
but yesterday, were he well put to it. This I can tell you, that being so long
under water, he still keeps his breath to the end, as well as at the first,
and came forth of the waters as fresh as ever. There is no Tortoyse could bear
so great a load, yea, if the whole world were laid on his back, he would not
shrink an inch under it, unless the foundation or center should fail. It is
well that God and nature has made him inanimate, for were he sensible as the
beasts of the Forests are, and should but walk therein, he would shoulder
every thing out of his place. He is nothing so bad as those of the sea are,
which lie lurking in wait over head and ears to work mischief, while this of
the wilderness is very courteous, and does many good offices for his
neighbors, the inhabitants round about him. He is very valiant, for if he have
any quarrels with any, he will never budge a foot from the place he is in. In
fine, though he be a Rock, he is no scandal of offense to any, but a fair
example and pattern to us of constancy and perseverance in virtue and a good
life.

9 The Goat
IS a right Worcestershire man, bred on Mauburne hills, which he takes for an
honor, and therefore stands so much upon his tiptoes. He is high fed, but is
but lean, because leaving the fat of the earth, he picks his hungry salets
from the bush tops. He is a very churl, who is never good to any til he be
dead, for then you may have his skin, a good commodity, nor ever comes to
any honor till then, when he has the privilege to kiss the best man's hand.
If he come from Spain, he is allied to the chiefest houses there, and derives
himself from that of the Corduas, and will be called by no other name. Yet
howsoever he is but a Sloven in his clothes, which hang so like rags about
him as his knees appear not. It should seem of himself he has but an ill
breath, who is likely never without his perfumes, and is not so neat as he
should be. He is very grave as appears well by his long beard, but not
trimmed after the Persian manner, with fair Mustacho's, while his hair grows
all beneath his chinne; whereof he is so proud, that if you take him by it,
they all take it for a common affront to the illustrious family of the Goats,
and will either hang down the head, or make it a quarrel. He glories of I know
not what, and despises the innocence of the sheep for his simplicity, and
wanting the garb of a complete Gallant as he takes himself to be. But the
great Shepherd as the only King Herald of Arms, has decided already which
is the better man, and put him on the left hand. While they are kids they are
innocent enough, but being elder grow debauched to all lasciviousness. They
are very amorous, and therefore their milk is cordial, for love flows from
the heart. He is a notable Physician, but deals by restoratives only, and
therein has excellent medicines many ways. He should be cursed, who has so
harsh a hair which perhaps is the cause he is never trimmed. He is quick of
hearing, but not so quick as to hear any good of himself, for they all cry
out upon him, fie, fie, how he stinks; which he neither regards, nor yet
believes; so good a conceit he has of himself. He has an excellent ear,
and loves Music beyond measure, but not out of measure, for that would argue
he had no ear. But he has no Nose to smell with, that makes his ears so
good, Quia pluribus intentus: the Fawnes and Satyrs take it for a grace to put
on his dress, who are no small ones in this wilderness. Nor has he lived so
ill a life on earth, but he has deserved to have his place there in the
heavens, as well as the rest, where I leave him.

10. The Echo
IS the Iris of the ear, as the Iris is the Echo of the eyes. She is the true
Camelion of the Air that changes into every colorable sense. The Proteus that
transformes her self to every shape of words. She is the Inamourado of the
Forest that will be taken with every ones love, and as Narcissus with his own
beauty, be enamoured with her own tongue, and take delight to hear her self
speak. Yea she is a thing or nothing, a rattling Gossip, a mere babbler, a
teller of tales. One that has no substance in her, but is a mere accident, in
that she comes suddenly upon you unlooked for. She is of a strange quality,
who takes delight to affright the ignorant and simple: will play the Hobgoblin,
the Fairie of the woods, least in sight, or wholly out of sight. Though she
be a talker, and full of her tongue, yet she has no invention with her, nor
can contrive any thing of her own, for she speaks but by hearesay, only all
she utters, and that upon trust of another, nor can tell you the Author,
unless he discover it himself. She has no memory at all, and therefore can
remember but the last words she hears, which she will do very faithfully
indeed, and not leave you out a tittle. She has no certain tone of her own,
but as she is taught, immediately before which she will exactly imitate, if her
master be present, else not, for she cannot retain her lessen long, but must
instantly recite it, or else she is no body. She will keep her key well if
she sing, and never miss it, if he that is the Rector Chori, guides the Quire,
mistake it not. And when she sings at anytime; she sings no distinct part from
her fellow, or the rest of the parts; for she has no skill at all to compose
or set a whit, or to run descant on a ground, but sings the very same the
others do. She dares not stand to any thing she says, but goes her ways
presently, and never yet durst show her face. She is a very Monster and a
Prodigy of Nature, having no body to speak of, at least as small and slender
as the Air, and yet has a mouth as wide as the valleys. She has no proper
tongue of her own, but what she borrowes. If the Lion roar, she roares
likewise; if the Heyfer low, she lowes as loud; if the Wolf but howl, she
howles for company; yea rather then stand out, she will bray with the very
Ass; but is never better in her Q indeed then when she apes the Nightingale
especially in their fughes, for then you would think them both stark mad,
while they follow one another so close at the heels, and yet can never
overtake each other. She is a right woman, that can keep no counsel, and yet
will be ready to intrude her self into every ones counsel, but as soon as
she has it, out it goes straight, life or death, all is one to her. She were
good to make a Player of the Stage, for she would take her cues excellently
well. She is no Ciceronian, nor apt for fluent styles; but a Lipsian right, and
fitter for a brief manner of speech Dialogue wise. All her Poetry is chiefly
in Saphicks or Iambicks at most, for she cannot abide the examiter or heroical
verse, because too long for her. In fine, though she be a common speaker and
teller of news (as I said) yet makes she a conscience to devise any of her
self, and therefore would hardly serve to be the Secretary of false fame, but
being once broached, let her alone to blaze it abroad through all the
Wilderness.

11. The Lake
IS Dian's Glass, or common mirror of the rest of Nimphs, wherewith they
dress themselves. It is a liquid crystal, whose Ice the crust thereof makes
the perfect Crystal, while the Sands in the bottom as the black of the
mirror, makes the foil that causes the reflection. It is more properly a
sea, than the sea it self, because indeed a true congregation of waters, so
gathered into the stony cesterne of the Rocks. He is no flatterer, but a true
tell-troth, for he will show the Stagge his braunchy horns, the Ass his
prodigious ears, and discover the Satyr to be a beast as he is by his attire.
He is very liberal of his liquids to all the Forest, for let them provide
meat elsewhere, and he will find them drink enough: exceedingly blessed of
God for this his hospitality, for though he have given drink to all our
Desert from the time of Noe, his store is never a whit the less. He is very
patient, who will suffer any reasonable burden to be laid on his back, and
bear it; willingly, if it sink not of it self, or be not perhaps stirred up
and set on by the malicious blasts of the calumnious winds: for the^ he will so
lash forth with his waves like so many kicks of the heel, that twenty to one
he unhorseth whatsoever is on his back, unless such as through a privilege
of Nature are so good horsemen as to keep the saddle and ride it out in spite
of Aeolus and him. He is not hot, but yet of that quality, that he will bear
no coa^es, especially if active and lively. As great as he is, there is no
Snake shall creep in at a lesser hole then he; and like him where he gets but
his head in once, with time enough he will draw his whole body after him. He
is free to lend what he has, as appears by the Sun who is always
borrowing of his store, which he fetches and draws with his exhalation, but
looks to be repaide again with interest. He loves to keep company with the
nobler sort, who are truly generous and better then himself, and will bear
with them, especially the more airy they be, as come from a higher family. But
for the ignobler multitude, as the earth and earthly things, he contemnes the^,
and sets them at his foot. He is so pitiful that he will communicate
himself to any that stands in need of him, and will even spend and exhaust
himself to do them good, being never more troubled then when he finds
himself so limited that he cannot go forth to help his neighbor. He is cold
of constitution, and will congeale through fear with the least frost, and then
the very boys may triumph over him, and even ride upon him at their pleasure.
He is stable and constant, and not so fleeting as the Sea which has his Ebbes
and flows, while being contented with his own estate, he lives most happy in
his solitude, remaining so private in the Wilderness, where like a true
Hermit he keeps an exact and endless silence in his cell assigned him by
nature.

12. The Coalepit
IS the Shop of Mulciber, or Vulcan's Forge, where Neptune's Trident, Jove's
Thunderbolts, and Mars his Sword and Target were first forged. If Pluto's
treasury be golden Mines in the bowels of the earth, this is his Kitchen,
seated in his cellars there, or his Coalehouse rather, where he stores his
fuel for his rosts. It is the right down stairecase that from the face of the
earth, leads into his Palaces beneath, whose stairs are no more than a
wicker basket, and a rope, not to hold, but to hang by rather. It is a chimny,
whose tunnell casts no smoke, but damps, yet able to make all the chimnies of
the world to smoke. It is the Peru of Newcastle Merchants. The Havana where
they make their randevouz for their black and sable gold. It is the Mare
mortuum, or black sea, where they dive for Pearls, a Pearlelike treasure
hidden in the scallop of coal, through its inestimable riches. It seems to be
no other mould than ordinary, a little blacker than the richer sort of our best
soil. If the wilderness be sick or distempered with some melancholy, or
choler adust; it is the opening of the vein to let out that coaly and black
stuff, true melancholy indeed: while the Anger is the lancet that pierces it,
the Buckets the sawcers which receive the corrupt blood. He is very
charitable, who has not only an ardent heat and foruour in himself, but is
ever ready to communicate the same to others, especially if they approach unto
him, and be but conversant and familiar with him: it being not possible for
one to keep him company for any time, and not enflamed, though of iron, or
harder hearted than a very stone. He is a right Salamander that lives in the
fire, but yet for want of fresh company, will even die in the fire it self,
and, as all things else, at last be brought to ashes. The truth is, he is not
a master cook, but a scullion, and therefore meddles no higher than with
making the fire only. He is fitter indeed for the Kitchen than the Parlour, for
his ill complexion he gives to others; especially Ladies, and the finer sort,
who therefore casheere him thence, and shut him out for a rude companion. He
is but of mean and base condition, and has his extraction from the earth
only, both by father and mother, whereas Seignior Charcoale is of a better
descent, and comes perhaps from the loins of stately Ash, Oak, or Beech. He
is good to approach to, but not too near, for so he will anger you, and put
you into a heat, but if you keep your distance with him, he is a very good
companion in the winter. And to tell you truth, he is a good plain fellow,
and an honest Blacksmith, and in the forge will take his liquor as well as his
master, if he take not too much.

13. The Bear
IS a clumzy fisted fellow come from Greenland, who goes in a Rugge-gown, for
the coldness of that climate, which here also he cannot leave off, out of
custom. He is a true savage, who has no more civility with him than that
place can afford him: By his gate you would take him to be a right cripple, who
goes on his hands, while his forefeet are much shorter than his hinder. He is
no witch though he border upon Lapland, and be tied to a stake, for he
burns not there, though he be hot, and put into a chafe by the Mastive dogs.
He is pestilence kind where he takes, for if he chance to catch a dog in his
arms, he so hugges him, as he will even break his back withal. He is very
licorish, which makes him love honey so much, that costs him many a scratcht
face by those peevish Elfs who have the keeping of it; but he cares not, so he
may lick his lips after it. What his tallents are otherwise, I know not, but I
am sure, he has good tallons of his own that take such hold of one* Some
call them claws, but they do him wrong, for he cannot flatter. But I should
take them for paws rather, which will make you pause ere you get out of them.
If he be a man of war, he is a tall one, for he fights high, and is nothing
snugge as the Bull is, who fights so low; but high or low, when he fights, he
will be sure to roar full loud with his cannon voice, if he be put to it.
He is very unthrum at every thing he goes about, and brings his work but rawly
forth, till with the fyling of the tongue with much ado, he brings them at
last to some perfection. He is a good Trencherman, for he will eat soundly at
an other man's cost. But if he be at his own finding, he will dine you
sometimes with Duke Humphrey, and keep his chamber like one with never a penny
in his purse. They have their Seniors with them, it should seem, who have their
Majorities and Minorities amongst them: but fall not out about precedence,
because in the heavens there is no strife at all; the truth is, he would make
at least a good Groom in the Lions Court, especially the Porter there, for his
grim look and the habit he wears.

14. The Mustard Seed
Seems to be a thing of nothing. It is even the dwarf among the rest of
seeds; and yet is a Giant if you deal with him. He is very snappish, for if
you meddle with him, he will strait take you by the nose. He is full of his
jests, which are so quick and sharp, as you will not know how to relish them,
for they bite shrewdly. He has a strange manner with him, while he will
touch you by the tongue, and tickle you in the nose, and so tyrannize upon you,
as he will make you put finger in the eye. He is alone but a common soldier,
but if they gather together, and make a muster, there is no hoe with them,
especially when they take their liquor well, for then they will assault the
stoutest man of the guard. Poor John were but a poor thing, were it not for
him, and a Ioule of Ling, a fit companion for the best man's table, will blush
to appear without his company, when they will never lin calling for him, where
is the Mustard? yea, a Surloyn of Beef, as surly as he looks, after he has
bin well soused in a brinish sea, and come safely off with a powder, and be
never so well larded within with fat on his sides, yet if he have not this case
of Pistols by his side, no man will reguard him. He is hot and fiery of nature,
which makes him mount up to the brain, as to his proper element, where he
keeps such a bustling, as he turns all the liquors thence out of the glass
windows. He is very saucy wheresoever he comes to any man's table, for he will
take upon him to season every dish, so much sometimes as he mars all, till he
take his sugar with him, for then he has no fellow. He is but little in
himself, but grows to be an Oak among the rest of herbs; upon whose boughs,
the chanting birds take pleasure to warble out their descants, and who knows
whether to the honor of this miracle of seeds. He fears not the Muster master
so much, who but lays him forth to take view of them and no more, as the
Mustard maker, who puts him into Bridewell, as it were, to pound in a Mortar.
If he be of the right stamp, and a true Tewxbury man, he is a choleric
gentleman, and will bear no coals; but will himself strike any man into a
heat that takes him into his roof; though indeed he will easily be pacified
again with a crust of bread, and so long I hold him to be no such perilous
Companion.

15. The Goose
IS the trusty Sentinel of the Roman Capitol, whom Heliogabolus hated and the
Romans honored so much. She has but a simple look with her, but has a
great deal more matter in her, then you would take her to have. Yet she has
no good way to bring up her children, for she still keeps them at home she is
so fond of them; nor ever sends them abroad to see fashions, whereby they prove
to be arrand guls, and know not how to look a man in the face. She maintains
them handsome enough in apparel, if not too richly for her calling, while they
go in Plush every day, as soon as they come out of their cradle, but of a
color as makes them to be right guls indeed. There is no deceit in them, but
are honest swizers all, as bred in Lucerna Lake. They hate the Laurel, which
is the reason they have no Poets amongst them; so as if there be any that seem
to have a smatch in that generous Science, he arrives no higher then the style
of a Ballet, wherein they have a reasonable faculty; especially at a Wake, when
they assemble themselves together at a Townegreene, for then they sing their
Ballets, and lay out such throats as the country Fiddlers cannot be heard.
They are good penmen, though no good Clarks, but yet excellent Scribes, who
copy forth all the Books that are. But for the Gander he is so cursed, and is
so full of teeth, that he even sputters again, and has no good utterance
with him, and therefore by all Scribes is thrust out for a wrangler, being good
for nothing but to sweep houses, which he will do very neatly* She is good
for bed and board, for bed while there is no Featherbed or Pillow likely
without her; and for the board, there is no Feast if she be not there. She is
able to furnish a whole table her self; if Pudding, Pottage, Roast, and baked,
make but a feast. She is very hot of nature, which makes her bathe so much, and
go barefoot, Winter and Summer. She is no Witch or Astrologer to divine by the
Stars, but yet has a shrewd guess of rainie weather being as good as an
Almanac to some that believe in her. She has a great opinion of her own
stature, especially if she be in company of the rest of her Neighbors and
fellow ghossips the Duckes and the Hens at a Harvest-feast: for then if she
enter into the Hall there, as high and wide as the door is, she will stoop for
fear of breaking her head; And is so full of tongue the while, as she takes up
the whole discourse of the Table, which makes her so much noted for it: She
has but a hoarse voice when she sings forth; because she strains it so much,
whereas if she would sing but somewhat lower, her voice perhaps would be more
grateful; but as it is, I know not a worse. She lisps not when she speaks,
but pronounces her s s very perfectly, in so much as she hisses again, the
reason may be, because her Organ-pipe is made in form of an S. In fine, I
could wish there were none that had more malice in them.

16. The Horse
IS a creature made as it were in wax. When nature first framed him, she took
a secret complacence in her work. He is even her masterpiece in irracionall
things, borrowing somewhat of all things to set him forth. For example his
slicke bay Coat, he took from the Chestnut, his Neck from the Rainbow, which
perhaps make him rain so well; his Maine belike he took from Pegasus, making
him a Hobbie to make this a complete Gennet, which Main he wears so curld,
much after the women's fashions now adays, this I am sure of, howsoever it
becomes them: It sets forth our Gennet well, his legs, he borrowed of the
Heart with his swiftness, which makes him a true courser indeed. The Stars in
his forehead he fetched from heaven, which will not be much mist, there being
so many. The little head he has, broad breast, fat buttocke, and thick tail,
are properly his own; for he knew not where to get him better. If you tell him
of the horns he wants to make him most complete, he scorns the motion, and
sets them at his heel. He is well shod especially in the upper leather, for as
for his soles, they are much at reparation, and often feign to be removed.
Nature seems to have spent an Apprentiship of years to make you such a one,
for it is full seven years ere he comes to this perfection, and be fit for
the Sadle: for then (as we) he seems to come to the years of discretion, when
he will show a kind of rational judgment with him, and if you set an expert
Rider on his back, you shall see how sensibly they will talk together as
Master and Scholar. When he shall be no sooner mounted and planted in the seat
with the reins in one hand, a switch in the other, and speaking with his
spurs in the Horses flanks, a language he well understands, but he shall
pronce, curvet, and dance the Canaries half an hour together in compass of a
bushel, and yet still as he thinks get some ground, shaking the goodly plume
on his head with a comely pride. This will our Bucephalus do in the lists. But
when he comes abroad into the fields he will play the country Gentleman as
truly as before the Knight in Turnament. If the game be up once, and the hounds
in chase, you shall see how he will prick up his ears straight, and tickle at
the sport as much as his Rider shall, and laugh so loud, that if there be many
of them, they will even drown the rural harmony of the dogs. When he
travels, of all Innes he loves best the sign of the silver bell, because
likely there he fares best, especially if he come the first, and get the
prize. He carries his ears upright, nor seldom ever lets them fall till they
be cropped off, and after that as in despite will never wear them more. His
tail is so essential to him, that if he loose it once he is no longer an
Horse, but ever styled a Curtall. To conclude, he is a blade of Vulcans
forging, made for Mars of the best metal, and the Post of Fame to carry her
tidings through the world, who if he knew his own strength would shrewdly put
for the Monarchy of our wilderness.

17. The Hawk
IS a noble Bird, and if the Eagle be royally descended, and of the blood, he
is one of the Peers of that Monarchy, that would put in for the Crown, if that
line failed. The truth is, he is a companion for a Prince, who will not stick
sometimes as a favor to take him by the hand, yea 'that hand which every one
strives to kiss, will not disdain to kiss his foot, and be his footstool.
He is such a Courtier, that a Clown will commit you a thousand absurdities in
his language, but only to speak of him, much less know how to demean
himself in his presence, and to give him his dues. He is so punctual and
precise in all things, as he has a peculiar language, as it were, to himself,
so as hardly he has a feather about him, that has not his proper
appellation. There is a world of distinct families sprung from the ancient
stock of the Hawks, while there are no yeomen amongst them, being all daintily
bred. The femals, which are the wives with them, do wear the breeches, the
Males having yielded up the right of superiority to them, as being the true
Amazons of that species. They are chaste and loyal enough to their mates, nor
will easily stain the marriage bed; but the male is fain to play the cocquain
at home to look to the house, while the goodwife her self will go to the
market to seek provision, or hunt for the purpose. They go in several habits,
some with long sleeves, they call wings, other shorter, and so are styled short
or long winged Hawes, according to their habits, but so, as constant ever in
the fashion they once take up. They have excellent Tailors when need is to mend
their clothes, who will put you pieces so cunningly in, that they shall not be
perceived. Hoods are a great fashion with them, which term they keep common
with us; but for their boots, they call them Gesses, to distinguish them from
ours. They are very forgetful, for being tied so fast by the heels, they
never think of it, but will offer to fly away an hundred times an hour. She
has so curious a pallat of her own, as she will not trust any cook to dress
her foul for her, but will plume and pick it her self with an admirable
dexterity. If she be high with too much ease, and grow pursie, she will
physic her self, and take a vomit, and thereby come as sound as a Bell. She
has a piercing and rolling eye in her head, but no wanton, being so honest:
otherwise she were like enough to have many paramours, who goes so much abroad
at her own pleasure. When she goes a hunting, she is well attended with many
that go with chains about their necks, by two and two, which they call
couples, where they do nothing but serve her, and put up her game; yea, the
best man in the company will not refuse to toil and sweat to show her sport,
and of all they take, she is first served. They are somewhat fantastical, and
as their manner is, will take a toy now and then, and go strait beyond seas
without a license, or taking leave of their friends ere they go, where when
they come, or return again, they are held as passengers and great travelers,
and happy he who can get them into his service: they never stir no way but
the bells ring. They are watched sometimes, they are so unhappy, especially when
they have not sowed all their wild Oats. If they be once reclaimed from their
debauchments, they prove notable convertyts, and very obedient to the cure.

18. The Elephant
IS a huge Colossus or Mausoleon of flesh and blood to bury quick in, a
certain thing they call life, which like an Artificial engine within, gives it
a motion, and makes it a kind of a moving Pageant in the form of an Elephant.
He is the vast Poliphemus or Gogmagog of the Wilderness, but without a Clubbe,
while his own bulk is Club enough to terrify withal. It is a hulk at land
of such a burden, that when it moves it is hard to say, whether the trees pass
by it, or it sail by the trees. He is as the Whale amongst Beasts that might
well have wafted Jonas through the Desert had it been his way to Ninive. The
Trojan Horse was not so handsome and commodious to lodge the Grecian Ambuscado,
as he had been within his flanks. It is a living house not tyled without, but
pentised rather with oake^ boords, not thatched because he has no hair on his
back. He has no manners at all in him, for he will still be leaning on some
tree or other, and is so heavy and lubberly, that sometimes the tree will
fall, and he lie sprawling on the ground. He is so stiff in the hammes, as he
cannot make you a handsome leg, nor so much as kneel to his own Father to
ask him blessing. He can yet make shift to dance if he list, but that so
unhandsomely, as for shame of other witnesses he practices by Moone-light. He
has no lofty Galiards with him, but all his revelling is with ground tricks,
and then especially when he falls down flat, as he often does. He is very
religious, I should say superstitious rather, for they will flock in sholes to
worship the Moon at full, and the Sun at his arise. He is a sturdie Porter
that will carry you a whole Tower on his back, and yet will not sweat you a
hair for it. He is a good Swordman, and lays about him in the wars, but
cannot weild the two hand-sword nor is any Fencer at all for want of a Dagger
hand toward withal. He is a notable Birder too, for he is never without his
trunk in his mouth. But no Ratcatcher, while every mouse will be ready to take
him by the Nose, and make him roar like himself. They are not fruitful, for
they breed but once in all their life, and then bring forth but one at once:
whence it is they have no Gavelkin tenor amongst them, the occasion of much
strife, but every one is heir apparent to his father, but living as they do
three hundred years (as they say) they are feign to stay long ere they enter
into their lands. In a word, he is so intelligent, and has so good a memory
and judgment with him, that were he not where I find him amongst Beasts in
our Wilderness, I should think he were some one of Ulysses crew transformed
into that shape.

19. The Gnat
IF you take him as he is indeed, is but a point, but an Atome, but a little
nothing that flies in the air: but otherwise is a vaste Amphitheater, wherein
the divine wisdom takes pleasure to show his omnipotence. He has a curious
pallet of his own, which makes him so liquorish of humane blood, which this
little Caniball daily and nightly suckes at others costs. There is something
doubtless in the furnace of the stomach of this little piece of creature,
which causes such a raging thirst as cannot be satisfied. It is a pleasure to
see him swim in the air, where he flies without flying, or rather the air
flies for him, and serves him as a Coach to convey him at pleasure. They say he
has wings, but indeed he has none, for that which is fastened to his back
so, and glued at it were unto his skin, in form of wings is no more then
air, and a wind wrought to a stuff that has no name, nor all Chyna affoords
you any such, and that is it, they call his wings. And yet with them he will
skimme and vault in the air, like a Mountebanke upon the Stage. He is a
notable tilter, and with his lance, will not miss you his adversary, but
smite him full on the face, and that so dexterously as you shall not know who
did it, being the only recreation he takes. This is admirable in him, that the
Spear which is felt by night of such as sleep, cannot be seen by day by such
as wake. He never puts it in the rest in vain; for either he fetches blood
indeed, or leaves some mark of his valor and dexterity behind him. He is
but a Pigmie or Dwarf of himself, but being on his Stilts, he would make you
believe he were some body, and so he is indeed, for he is all body and no
legs. He has a voice notwithstanding like a Giant, and if he be disposed to
put it in tune, he sings you a deep tenor; and lays out such a throat
withal, that shall drown a Quire of better music. The harmony they make of
many parts is none of the best, the reason is, because they have no Treble
amongst them, but all trouble and confusion. When they go into the wars among
themselves, they keep no discipline at all, nor march all their troops in
files, but pelmel rush in one upon another, and every one sounds his own
Trumpet. When he sings he would make you believe he runs division, being no
more then a shaking of the body, through a foolish trick he has got, to
dance when he sings, or to sing when he dances. When he lists to taste a cup
of wine, he has his wimble to pierce the the vessel that holds his Hipocras,
which is likewise his Quill to sup his Possets. He is an excellent Surgeon,
who with his lancet will not miss you a vein, though at midnight. He is no
good Tobacconist, since what he takes he lets down, which makes him
dogge-sicke. Being bred in the marshes, he is much subject to rewmes and
grievous defluxions of the eyes, and therefore cannot abide a smoakie room,
but will immediately avoid it, and be ready to break his neck out of the
window for haste. They are notorious rebels, for if they rise once, they
chiefly aim at the head, witness the frequent ryots they make, especially
about our heads and faces. He is a great whisperer, and teller of tales in our
ears, but so as one is never the wiser for them. In fine, they are busy
bodies where they have no thanks for their labors.

20. The Mole
TAkes his name from his extraction the Mould, being of the ancient family of
Adam by the Mothers side. He has no Arms at all, though he be so anciently
descended, nor any legs that he can garter. For his square shoulders, he is
an Atlas right, for as he shores up the heavens with his, this bears the earth
on his back. He is in truth an Engener, who is wholly occupied in Mines and
Countermines. He is a great Lord, for he is master of many burrowes, which
meeting together with Streets and Lanes, make up a goodly City of his own,
which is not paved, because the Citizens there go all barefoot. He is a good
Ferrier under ground, but bolts no Rabbets out, because they are Country men,
and haile-fellowes well met. He has no eyes that he can see with, because the
Sun shines not in his Region, and as for Candlelight, he needs it not,
because his chiefest trade consists in groping out his work. The Waspes belike
do hire his vaults and Cellars to inhabit in, but what rent they pay him, or
what Tenants they prove, I cannot tell: but I should think he were even as good
to forgo his rent quite, as to demand it at their hands. He is the true Spirit
of the earth, that causes such Earthquakes, as would make a world of Ants
believe that Doomes-day were come. He is an Outlaw, and a public Bando set
forth against him, with a reward of fifty Maravedes proposed to any, that
shall bring him to the Lord of the Soil either dead or alive. Yea there are
some Braves of purpose set a work to cut them off, and yet as brave as they
are, they dare not set upon them, but creeping by stealth, and armed with many
Stillettoes at once. But yet for my part, I hold them good Swizzers that would
live contented in their Stoves; if they would let them alone: For alas! what
would they have them to do. To keep in always, and never to look out of
doors, were a hard case, while this is all the hurt I see they do.

20. The Peacocke
IS the Paradise among Birds, but not the Bird of Paradise, because not so
innocent. He is the heavenly Sphere in feathered things. For if the heavens
have one Iris, he will show you many Irises at once. He is a whole Court in
himself upon S. George his day, where all is nothing else but braverie. Or
rather is the Knight who rides in pomp at his Installment, attended with an
honorable train so awful and obsequious of him as they even tremble at every
motion of his body. He is very circumspect, but it is but to see who notes him,
and very careful of his carriage, because he knows he has many eyes upon him.
He is no Mercer of Cheape-side who keeps a constant shop at home, but a
Pedlar rather that carries his pack about him, which he will open every foot,
but sells no ware, he sets so great a price upon them. If you look on them,
he cares for no more; but if you take off your eye once, he will be in his
dumpes straight, put up his pack, and go his ways. He is no Goldsmith on the
other side, who utters plate and that by weight, but a right Ieweller who
deals with nothing else but jemmes, a commodity more light, but yet of
greater price. The truth is, rather, he is a true Featherman of Black friars,
but none buies at his shop but giddy heads; for the Estrige is more in request,
and puts him by his custom. It is a merry world with him, who always carries
his Spring about him, where every Feather is a rare Tulip. When he is disposed
he will keep State, but it is in the Hall only all for show, for in the
Dining room there is but poor doings, because he spends all on fine
clothes, and bestows nothing on his belly. He has a Turret to his Palace,
where his head stands like a Weather-cocke as fickle as it: for it will turn
and wind on this side and that side with every puff of vanity. When he has
all his accoutrements about him, you would take him to be a tall ship well
rig'd and decked with streamers top and top gallant, but no Merchant man,
because no substance in him. He is very spruce and neat, and can abide no
sordities at all, and will make you sport to see how gingerly he will pass over
a heap of dust. He is wise, but it is but in his own opinion, for he is such a
prodigal that once a year he turns bankrupt; and then shall you hear him cry
a mile off as one that had lost all. Were it not yet for his pride, he might
be an Angel among Birds, whereas now he is a Lucifer, and altogether as proud
as he: which may be the reason he hates the Serpent so much; for proud folks
can never agree together, or else because he borrowed his head of him, for
where you borrow once, you lose your friend and turn enemy.

22. The Batte
IS a right Amphibium; with the Mice, he is a Mouse, with Birds, a Bird;
complying so with both kinds to insinuate himself with either, and by the
privilege so of his double habit, makes an excellent intelligencer for either
State. He loves not the City, as being, he thinks, too full of tumults. The
Country he likes better, and especially the Yeomens houses, where he finds his
chiefest rostmeat. He is a great Student by day, but what he studies I know
not, unless it be the black Art, for he loves darkness, and hates the
light: Howsoever he keeps within doors all the day, to what other purpose I
know not. He is no great traveller, for he loves not to go far from the
smell of the smoke of that chimnie where he was bred and borne. He is a
notable good husband, who in an age will not spend you a penny in good
fellowship. If he walk abroad at any time, it is toward the evening, where
he will fetch you a turn or two, till he can see no more, and then goes to
bed to save candlelight, and perhaps supperlesse too, for I am not privy with
his ordinary diet. When they are Infants, and but newly weaned from the
breast, they feed them with Gnats, a great Regalo with them. They are well
toothed, for they bite shrewdly, the reason is, because they are not given to
fruit, so as it is a rare matter to hear of a Barber sent for to them to draw
a tooth. He that should see them but even now to walk on the ground like
drowned Mice, and immediately got up a cockehorse, not knowing the mystery of
their wings, would wonder what upstart fellows they were, so suddenly pricked
up to honors. They see nothing by day, and it seems as little by night, for
they will run full upon you, ere they or you be aware. Though he be no
Phaeton, because his wings are not of feathers, nor a Magus because not
borrowed, or any ways counterfeit or helped by art Magic, yet is he a very
impostour, for who would imagine them to be made of leather? They are most
sacrilegious, for they will make no conscience to rob Churches, which they do
as often as they come where Lamps are, for they love Oil beyond measure.
There is great aversions between them and the Ants, the reason thereof I could
never learn, unles it be for that they are both amphibiums alike, while Figulus
figulum odit; since the winged Ant is a mungrill between the Worm and the
Fly, as he between the Bird and the Beast. In fine, though he be a Batte,
he is no timber, especially of the Plane-tree, which he hates as he hates
plain dealings, which to the virtuous and good is a great jewel.

23. The Moss
IS properly the mantle of the Wilderness; a Stuff that is either Tapistrie,
Valence, Velvet, or Plush, or rather is all of them, according to the use it is
put to. It is ordinarily a winter wear, and then is most in fashion. It is
wrought truly not of Silk, nor woven with Thread or Cruel, but is rather a
downy stuff as will never be threadbare, though it be worn winter and summer,
or whole ages. It is commonly between an Olive color, and a Beazar, curiously
mingled in the stuff; not died, but natural, and so good the colors, that
they never fade or change the hew. The Birds make good use of it, who hang
their houses with that Dornix, and make it serve for flock beds under their
feather beds. The very rocks and stones of the desert are glad sometimes to put
on Ierkins of that Freeze, to defend them from the cold. It is a wool that if
it could spin and hold out a thread as well as ours, it would sell as well as
Cotsall wool, and make as good as any Kentish cloth. It were excellent to
make Felts with, as I should think as good as any Beaver, if we had but the
art to dress and handle it as it should be. He will sometimes seem to perke
up to honors, while he gets him on the tops of houses, but I dare say of no
pride, but charity to defend them better from the rain and weather when they
wax old. He is no greatfeeder, for he will live in the barren'st places, and
sterve the whole wilderness besides, ere he pinch a whit. He is never young,
or very old, but still keeps the same complexion he had at first, and bears
his years excellent well; a good Spring helps him nothing, nor a hard winter
empaires him a whit. He is ever in good state for soul and body no doubt, who
seems to be so mortified a creature, as to be always ready for the tomb, and
yet never comes there, but lives for ever, as one may say, in this very life,
enjoying an endless rest. He is most constant in himself, and hates
inconstancy in all others, so as by his will he will have nothing to do with
any such, as appears by the saying, that a rolling stone gathers no Moss. To
conclude, he has a good nature with him, and truly loves where he takes.

24. The Ant
IS a kind of Serpent, a Serpendo, not on his belly, as pleading not guilty to
that curse, but with his feet, and therefore a footman right. They are great
thieves, and live upon rapine, especially in filching of corn, and if they
lived in any other well governed Commonwealth then theirs, they should be sure
to be laid in the Iayle for it: but with them all is fish that comes to the
net. They have no King, because they will have none, and that is all the reason
they will yield for it. They like better of the Republiques, then of
Monarchies, for so they may come happily to shuffle their own cards
themselves. They have no gentry among them, they live like Switzers lazing in
their Stoves or Caves under ground. They are true Netherlanders indeed, because
their Country lies under the ground, and somewhat northerly, because likely
they see not the sun for half a year together. In stead of Ambassadors,
they have their agents abroad, true agents indeed as full of action. Their
Commonwealth is not governed by the prescripts of Solon, or those of Lycurgus,
whose laws were civil, but rather by the laws of their corrupt nature. For
though they live now in the time of grace, yet have they no benefit thereof,
being Atheists all. And if there be any that have any feeling of God, it is but
while the judgments of God light on him. They scarcely heed any of his
precepts, more then crescite and multiplicamini, which they truly observe to
the letter. Whence it is their commonwealth is so populous, that if they were
not very industrious, they might starve for ought I know. They have no state
houses amongst them, because no buildings there but caves in the ground,
according to the fashion of that Country. The Boores will assemble together to
betake themselves to several offices for the public good; some to carry
corn to their granaries, where a single grain is accounted a load for a sturdy
Ant, and he shall brag as much of it, as ours shall do for the carrying half a
seame of wheat, and if one cannot, two will join together, and carry it
between them. They go sometimes to the wars, but gain more by craft then
down right blows. They have no flying armies, because they are foot all, and
have no wings, but they have their running Armies, and then it is when they
show their heels. In fine, they have many enemies, but like the Fox, fare
best when they are most cursed.

25. The Ivy,
WHether a tree, or what it is I know not, at least has great alliance with
them, and some affinity, as having often matched with many of their stocks:
but is indeed it self a fatal and unlucky family to join with, as being the
ruin of many of them. He has great ambition to linck himself with the
ancientest houses he can get into, and so kind where he takes, as he kills
with kindness. He is a sure friend, for he never leaves one, till he has
brought him to the last cast. He shows himself to be very amorous, as being
full of his embraces, but they are traiterous complements. He reverenceth
Antiquity much, and will be always in the gravest company. He has the honor
to be joined with the Bays in Poets wreathes, in their laureat acts. He is a
right Noune Adjective, that cannot stand without his Substantive; but yet makes
a foul Solecisme, that never agrees with him in Case, because without; nor in
Gender, because of a different kind; nor Number, because the one is singular,
the other plural, being twenty to one. He is a very Leech, that sucks the
blood out of the veins, and sokes up the sap and humor so, as the party
grows old, and will decay in a short time. There are some Martialists amongst
them, as appears by their valor, who are so warlike, as to assault Castles,
scale the walls, and mount the battlements thereof. There is great contestation
between him and the Holly, and much part-taking on both sides about precedence,
and taking the upper place, which no Herald will or can, I think, take up. He
is all heart, you would think, that makes him so kind as he seems to be,
where every leaf is a token thereof; yet he is indeed a very dissembler, and a
right parasite, who can sooth and claw so for his own ends, using a dumb
Eloquence, and expressing with signs and tokens only, what his tongue, if he
had it, would do.

26. The Daw
IS a pert companion, and a right pedant, because he goes in black, and wants
the gravitie that coat requires. He is a Linguist because a man of his tongue,
but no Latinist, because his K is no letter in that Alphabet. He is a very
spalt, that carries his head so like a shittlecocke, and no marvel, who has
such a shittle brain of his own. He will stalk you up and down as he were
some body, and so he is, for he has a body, and that is all. He seems to
be a proud Jack, for what, I know not, unless for his Buckram jacket, which
he takes perhaps to be right Satin. He goes very spruce, in his Spanish leather
boots, but black, because suitable he thinks; and is so neat, that he wears
gamashes over them, of what color he cares not, though they be red, for so he
shall be more conspicuous. He has none of the Dove in him, for though he be
simple, he is not innocent, nor is a Serpent, because he has no malice in him,
and yet of the two, is more knave than fool. He is very ambitious, who always
aims at the soveraigntie of the highest Steeples, which he uses for Towers to
look about him: But is base in other things, who for his Tabernacle, is
content to put his head in a hole. The bells he cares not for a whit, who has a
bell of his own, which when he list to ring out indeed, they will rattle such
a peale, that will even drown the bells of Osney. They say he is no Gentleman
borne, but a yeoman, and therefore is called plain Jack, but they do him
wrong, for he will be very tame and gentle; while it is only his much
familiarity with us, that makes him called so: For the truth is, the Chaugh,
the Rookes, and they were all of a family once; but now are three distinct
houses, giving the Bill for Arms, but with some difference, whereby the Daw
appears to be of the elder house who has his without any difference at all.
In fine, I hold him a good companion, and as the world goes now adays, an
honest knave.

7. The Snake
OR Serpent, is that creature that deceived our first Parent Eve. For his skin,
he is a right Panther, but yet has nothing near so sweet a breath that ever
I could hear of. He seems to carry a whole heaven upon his back, it being
so variously distinguished here and there with little speckled clouds,
dispersed all over in a s^ren night. He has an ill tongue, that cannot speak
a good word of any one, and a shrewd wit with his ill tongue, for between jest
and earnest, he will sting one to the quick, and the worst is, they are such
cruel jests he breaks, that they even fester where, they light. He is a right
Forrester, for he never goes without his forked Arrow in a readiness, to shoot
and wound whom he list, and is so churlish in his office, as it is but a word
and a blow with him; and is so full of his windings and turnings to this side
and that side, as one knows not where to have him. He is some great
malefactor belike, for he lurkes continually in holes, as if he durst not
show his face: but it is indeed to work some mischief when he sees his time.
He is neat in his habit, and when it is a twelve-moneth old, changes it for a
new. He has no sleeves to his coat, and yet is straightly put to it, while he
gets it off; but he cares not what pains he takes, so he may be fine, and have
a new one. He is esteemed to be devour, while he mortifies his body so much,
for he cares not what they do with it, so they spare his head, the better
part, where chiefly his Soul resides. He is cold of complexion, but not good
of condition, who spits poison. It is true he has an ill name, whereas, were
it not for his sting which has made him to loose his credit so, I see not but
for his silver Coat and other habiliments he has, he might be received into
Ladies laps, and be hanged about their necks instead of a Carkanet.

28. The Crab
IS an Apple as well as the rest, though for his sour condition, he seems to
be shut out for an harsh companion. This is the rural Crab only, whereas the
Town Crab is of better respect, as more civil, and known to be of a sweeter
nature. He is a right Forrester, who is never seen without a green Suite, of
so good a color, as will hardly wear yellow. He is a Painter right, not the
Apprentice that makes no faces, but the Master himself, who will make you make
a face. He is very rich, who has so good a stock with him, whereof he is no
niggard, that so freely communicates himself to every one, that will but join
with him, nor shall they ever thrive indeed or fructify well till then. He
would feign turn Vintner, and utter Wine, Cider at least, but it is but Verges,
and he no more then a plain Chaundler. They should be Scholars, for they have
great Seminaries amongst them, but have no several classes, that makes them
stand so without order, till they ascend to the Universities, and then as
Graduats they take degrees, and keep their ranks, according to their standing.
He is a general man, and will close in with every man, but it is for his ends
only to be respected, for of himself, he knows none will regard him. He is
a very Hydra, for cut off his head, and he will have three for one, and those
much better then the old: or take him for a Martialist standing in his file, he
is a lame Soldier with stumpt Arms, wrapped up in searclothes, and this after
a hot skirmish, when they are put to it, for then likely they are fetched off.
They are not strong, but yet great bearers; for they will bring forth many
children at a birth, but those so weak, as they never come to any growth. If
he take upon him to make a Tart, he will be as good as his word, for you shall
be sure to have him tart enough, and so stern that all the sugared speeches in
the world will not qualify him. Though the Pippin be held to be the king of
Apples, yet is the Crab of an ancienter family then he; as he from whence the
Pippin fetches his chief blood, and derives his family; while the Crab is
descended from Adams time, from father to son, linea recta, without any
bastardy or attainder of blood. He is a right Britain, and true native of
this Land, and not a Gascoigne come in with the Conqueror; which is the reason
they desire to match into his stock; whereas the Gascoignes of curtisie only
made free denizons, are nothing so regarded for antiquity. He is a very
Critic, who sharply censures every thing, but it is no matter while no man
regards what he says, being known to have no judgment with him. In a word,
though he has lived thus long, he is a man of no experience, nor has much
knowledge in him, which is so much the better.

29. The Ape
IS a Mimick made by nature to play the Ape for his own ends: the truth is,
he is a true Buffon, as made for mirth. The sport is when he and his Couzin
Monky meet together, for they are somewhat of kin, but now there having bin so
many removes between them, their kindred is so worn out, as they are but
quater Couzins. He is a Savadge in the Wilderness, and in the City he is
every thing. In the Wilderness he contents himself with the Coat that Nature
has dressed him with; in the City he will be, as occasion serves: He has
notable cheeks of his own to make a Trumpeter, were it not for a great
imperfection he has, that he cannot hold his breath so long from chattering
with his teeth. He is a very sloven, yet he never eats without his cut
finger-gloves: He has but an ill-favored foot, and a worse leg. It is to be
feared he is much troubled with the stone, for he is a great sitter. He would
make a good horseman, for he never gauls himself. He has a good wit, but
the great agility and dexterity of his fingers is beyond bounds. Whereas others
have pockets in their slopps likely, he has his in his Chops. He should be a
Poet, for he has a running head of his own, as appears by the many pranks he
plays. He is no Musician, because he cannot keep an even stroke; and which is
worse would break all the strings, were it only to hear them knap asunder:
To conclude, his best trade is a true Comedian, to play a Zany or Pantalon on
the Stage, which he will do very naturally, and to the life indeed.

30. The Owl
Dear to Athens, sacred to Minerva, and the Muse as it were of nightly
lucubrations, is yet to others in the day held to be a Prodigy in nature: but
portends no more then a massacre of Mice. He is ever buckled as it were for a
journey; for he has always his riding cloak on, his hood with glasses for
his eyes to look out at, in the spanish fashion. When he perches on a tree,
he sits like a Prince, in his chair of estate, to give audience, which he
does full sore against his will, while every one has his own saying, and he
without any other reply, faigne to consent with his nod. For he is a man of few
words, and when he speaks, he shows to have a hollow voice; unless
sometimes when he puts it forth, for then he squeakes right out, and even
screeches again. He loves hunting well, and takes great pleasure to hallow to
the hounds. But for hawking, he has no maw to it; nor will once come near
that sport, for fear he prove an Acteon, and become the subject of the game.
For quickness of sight, though he yield to the Eagle in gazing on the sun
by day, without dazzling his eyes, yet he will challenge him by moone-light. He
would make a notable Watchman at midnight, as needing no other Bells alarm then
his own voice, nor Mastiffe dog then his own gripe. Though most unfit for a
Centinell in wars, because he cannot change his watchword, while every one
that could but hollow, might pass for him. But I should think him apter for a
quiet life to pray his nocturnes in the night, leaving the prime and other
hours to the Lark, and the rest of the quire of Birds, to sing their
Benedicite omnes volucres coeli, to their common Creator.

31. The Snayle
IS a Gentleman every inch of him; as ancient surely as Adams time; while for
Arms, he has had a house for Coat ever since, which he bears to this day. He
seems very stately in the manner of his gate, but he is not proud. He is cold
of complexion, because flegmaticke, which makes him so slow of his pace. He is
a Scholar, for he keeps his study, though he have no books. He is no
Accademicke, though a Philosopher, because not sociable, but rather a
Peripateticke, because a walker; but especially a Stoicke, because he carries
all whatsoever he has on his back. If he were confined to his five miles
according to the statute, it would trouble him nothing, while he would
travail where he list, yet not incur the forfeiture, or the penalty of the
law. He has indeed a certain house of his own, but no settled one, and a
fair porch to it, but no door. He is a freeholder, and no tenant at will,
or for any term that is less then his life. There is no covenant servants
amongst them, but are householders every one. They have no constant Cities of
their own, while their houses join not one to another, as others do. Though
they wander much, and gad abroad, yet they are not included in the Statute of
rogues. The Snayle and the Periwincle are much alike, with this difference,
that the Snayle with pains carries his house on his back, and the Periwincle,
house and all, is carried with the waves with ease, as held up by the chinne.
In fine, they are at peace with all the world, and have no enemies at all; and
so like the Hamburgers, trade and travail where they please; unless in a time
of famine, when perhaps for better food, they come to be snapt up, and made
good prize.

32. The Swallow
IS the little spirit of the air, who will be here, and there, and every
where, in the twinkling of an eye. He loves to dwell in the City for
societies sake. His house is built in the manner of the Antipodes, in the
vulgar opinion; for as their feet are opposite to ours, of consequence their
houses must needs be turned upside down; and so are theirs. They have no
windows, or posterns behind their houses, but all their light, egresse, and
regresse, is at the porch only, where they keep watch with their bills, both
night and day, for fear of foreign invasion. Their fare is light and easy
of digestion, which makes them so active and nimble as they are; not of worms,
for that they hold too gross and earthly: not of corn, not to put the world to
so much cost: nor of flesh, for they cannot endure the flesh pots of Egypt.
They hawke, hunt, and fish where they list, as being the Rangers of the
Forests, allowed by nature through the privilege of their wing. He must
needs fly well, that feeds on flies, who is so fleet, that he will stay by the
way for no man's pleasure, for he is always set on the spur, and, as it
were, the Post of the Eagles Court. The difficulty is, he can hardly stay so
long in a place, as to take his message ere he goes, so tickle he is. They
are notable Physicians, or Chirurgians, which you will, for they will cure you
the blind, as readily with the herb Chelidonia, as cause it with their dung.
In fine, they are welcome ghests when they come first, because they bring in
the Summer with them; and never depart without tears when Winter comes.

33. The Oak
IS the Atlas of the forest trees, for though the Pine and Cedar have a
loftier crest, and bear the head more high, yet not so full a breast, nor with
so square a pair of shoulders. Before Noah's time, it was a good provision for
a frugall family. It is even a market of corn and fruit; and a very prodigy
among trees, for whereas some have leaves, and no fruit, some fruit and leaves;
the Oak has both. If iron were to be sought for among trees, it would be
found in the heart of Oak. He is a tree more generous than the Walnut, while
the Walnut will endure to be beaten by every boy, and his nuts to be taken
from him: but the Oak will not part with his, till he let them go of his
own accord: he bears his years beyond measure, for let him alone, and he
will out pass Methusalems days, and often times wears out many ages and
generations of all his neighbors round about him. The Eagle willingly will
perch upon no other tree then him. He is no Jew, for he loves Porke well, who
feeds so many at his own cost. He is very stout, that stands so lustily to all
weathers, nor were it good to anger him, for as formicis sua bilis inest, he
has his gall, yet otherwise patient enough; for if you make him a Mill-post,
he will patiently bear all; turn him to boards, and he will humbly lie at your
feet, and suffer himself to be trampled on. And which is all that possibly
can be required, he makes himself a very Holocaust, while he is sacrificed
in the fire, and turned to ashes.

34. The Dog
IS a fit Groom for a Princes chamber, because loyal and trusty. He is a fit
companion for a Lady, if he can but creep into her glove, for then shall he
be taken up into her lap; yea, her bosom too, and happily be kissed, as a
better thing. If he be a right Island, and be put into the Lions cut, he is
then no more her servant, but her Guardian and Keeper rather; at least he will
be her Gentle man-usher, to lead her in and out. If she have no children to
play with of her own, he is like to be her only sport, without the which she
were no Lady. As we have our Vtopia, the Dogs have an I Will likewise, but not
set down in Mercator; therefore lost perhaps, or not yet discovered. He is a
great harkner after news, and therefore searches the privy pockets of all the
Dogs he meets with, perhaps to understand some tidings from the I Will of Dogs.
They had once a language sure, as well as Serpents, but lost their Alphabet as
well as they; save S and R, which still they keep. He is a slave by condition,
and made for waiting, and not for rule and command; for he is most imperious
and intolerable, where he feels any power and authority in himself, a great
token of his baseness. He is not for suits of law, because he cannot attend a
legal course, but will seek to right himself out of hand. He never makes
any set duels, or points any field, for all his valor is showed in hot blood;
they are frayes he makes, not single combats: yet if they be set on by others,
and have their Seconds, for so they must; they are Tyrants for fierceness.
They are very choleric, and great swearers, but their oaths are peculiar to
themselves. In fine, I hold him a good housekeeper, though otherwise of no
hospitality, that is so ready to shake up folks that enter in.

35. The Parat
IS the Jew among Birds, because he has no proper language of his own, that
he can speak, but what he learnes where he is bred and borne. Yet India is
his proper Palestin, that speaks the language he should speak, which because
it is so hard, he has the lesser difficulty, to frame and accommodate
himself to our Languages in Europe. He has the bigness of our Doves, but
nothing near the candor and simplicity of that bird: for if he be a fool,
he is also a knave, being waggish and unhappy enough sometimes. He is a
companion for great personages, and therefore is taken up in Court, to be the
Princes jester: where he will be very gay in apparel. He wears about his
neck a Collar not of S S, for that will not be allowed him, but rather a white
silk Rope, which is the cause belike, the Pages so upbraid him for it, in
saying, A rope for Parat. He loves all nuts, but Almonds beyond measure: so as
by his good will, he will talk of nothing else: When he awakes, he opens the
windows of his eyes, and begins to stretch himself, now one leg, and then
another, like a dottrel, then quivering with his wings, and shrinking in his
head into his shoulders in manner of an Italian shrugge, shake his ears; and
then is he up, for all that day. It is well he has such a thick short neck of
his own; else you would verily believe, he would break it an hundred times a
day, could he piece it together as often: For he will desperately cast himself
from the upper Rope, and dexterously take hold of another beneath with foot or
hand, and oftentimes with his very teeth. He is indeed the Ape of Birds, and
with his tongue will counterfeit more London cries, then any Ape shall play
tricks. He has a reasonable wit, and a better memory, but cannot a word of
the book; for he is all by roat, and will con very well by heart. Finally, he
is full of his wagers, that if he used the Cockpit, he would be quickly
beggered, for he will lay twenty pound at every word, when he has not a penny
in his purse.

36. Tobacco.
IS a sovereign plant of an active spirit, which being set on fire, mounts to
the upper region of the brain, and there plays Rex: Where like a Lord of
Mis-rule, calling the whimsies round about him, they all play Revell rout
together, and thence like a little Satan, he sends them here and there, as
spirits up and down to work wonders. It is a spice that comes from India, now
grown in more request then Pepper is; but will be sure to pepper them that
take it over much. It makes a very chimney of the body; else why do they wash
the tonnell so with Sack. He that uses it while he plays at cards, shall
be sure to have a flush at all times. It is the very incense of Vulcan, fumed
to his honor in a thurible of Cley. It is a Meteor, that being set on fire,
makes the Ignis f^tuus in men's brains; whereby they cannot find sometimes the
right way out of doors. It is the milk of Tellus, which suckles Mortals, with
as many tears, as earthen Pipes. It is immortal in a sort, which lives so in
his Ashes; and which after death, is so beneficial to man. The Physicians hold
him an Empericke, and but that he finds many friends in Court, he had been
exploded from the College long since. They would feign put him out of
practice, because they say he is no Graduate, nor ever commenced in any Act of
Physic: but they strive in vain; for so long as he is so reasonable in his
fees, he will have more practice, though not so full of gain. In fine, had he
but discourse to set forth himself, and the infinite cures he works, Galen
and Hypocrates might break their Vrinals, and carry his after him.

37. The Bay Tree
IS the Laurel, so dear to Apollo, for his Daphney's sake; so privileged by
nature, that even Thunder and lightning, are here even taxed of partiality, and
will not touch him for respects sake, as a sacred thing. He is a Scholar, and
studies standing, for I could not find that ever he sat to his book: And when
we see them stand so thick together in a knot or cluster, then it is they make
their Repetitions of the Lessons of Apollo. He is an enemy to fire, because
they both are hot and choleric by nature. He is fit for Halls and stately
rooms, where if there be a Wedding kept, or such like Feast, he will be sure
to take a place more eminent then the rest. He is a notable smell-feast* and is
so good a fellow in them, that almost it is no feast without him. He is a great
Companion with the Rosemary, who is as good a Gossip in all Feasts, as he a
trencher-man. He is made, as it were, all of tongues, so as had he fit Organs
to them, as teeth and lips, it is like with his eloquence, he would change the
whole world, and make them believe and do what he list. Of all Fish, he is
very much taken with the Spitch cock; for then he will be his own Cook, and
dress it, and make the sauce himself. He is fresh and lively, for he is
always green, and bears his years well, for he will look you as fresh at
sixty years as at fifteen. He is a man of excellent example, who leaves so
good an odor behind him; yet he is by Religion a Pagan; addicted to the
worshipping of the fained gods, and much versed in that Theology; nor is he
altogether free from superstition; for he will make you believe that if you put
his leaves but under your pillow, you shall be sure to have true dreams. In
fine, there is none without some faults; but yet take him with all his faults,
and in all the world for some things, you shall hardly find his fellow.

38. The Vine
IS that creeping worm, which with his liquours fills the head with spirits. It
is a Lymbecke which distills sweet liquors into those little bottles hanging so
in clusters. It is the Cloud that holds the showers which falls so plentiously
in Poets brains. Bacchus makes him his bosomed friend, while he tenderly
hugges him in his arms. Mars makes use of no other Squire then him, to put his
sword into his hand, which he readily does, and works you wonders. He is witty
and ingenious, and very learned, because well endowed with Sciences, who yearly
turns over many a leaf to good purpose. And though outwardly he show to be
but a plain fellow, he is rich, because he has his vintage every year,
which puts many Crowns into his purse. He is a good storier in Winter, that
has his Vaults of Wine so under ground: But yet prodigal enough thereof in
Summer, when like a good fellow, he brings his Hogs heads to light. When he is
in his Cups he is very brisk, and sparkles again. He is the Master Scavenger
of the City of man's body, and will scowre their gutters excellent well. There
are many Counterfeits that pass for Wine, as Cider, Perry, and the like; but
are not right, because they derive not from the true ancient stock of the
Vines, who are a great family descended from the time of Noe: Who for Arms
bear certain branches, vert, pendent, charged with the leaves of the same, in
a yard, instead of a field. He is not humble, for he cannot abide to be
trampled under foot; and yet is forced to endure it, that costs him his life;
but rises again to have the honor to be brought to the Princes Table.

39. The Fox
Seems in the Senate of the rest of beasts to be as grave as any of them: but
is indeed a slye and crafty Merchant. He is the Davus in Esops Comedies, and
the best jests in all those Interludes are fathered upon him. He has the
Monopoly of the best blades in his hands; witness his figure engraven thereon,
forbidding all to sell them without his stamp. He is so crafty a companion,
that he will not be drunk, because he will not be overtaken himself, but
still lies in wait to catch others: and therefore when men are overtaken with
drink, they are said to be foxed. He is a true Purveyer, because he provides
and takes, not for the King, but for himself, upon no price, and therefore is
hated and cursed where he comes. He makes no conscience of any shifts; and for
a Goose, or a Ducke, or such a matter, it is but a Scholars trick with him to
amend his commons with, and so passes it over without any scruple at all,
unless he be taken in the manner, and then proves it a hanging matter, which
halters the case quite. He is a great Lecturer, but reads to a company of
Geese only, when he will be sure to be well paid for his pains, with a
good supper, where some one of his Auditory are present. He is very neat in
his habit, for he always carries his brush with him, especially when he
rides, for then he carries it not at his pommell, for that were not fightly,
but carries it still at the Crupper. He has a slye look, and a notable
leering eye of his own; and so good a mar-kman, as likely he never misseth
his aim. For his eye, he would make a notable Gunner, but that he cannot
away with a piece, especially if it lie in Ambascado, for that puts him quite
out of his play. He cannot abide a pack of dogs, which if he should, would
cost him his life. He has his forts and holes to retire into, where he fears
nothing but countermynes to oppose and confront his; for then he is brought to
a parley with his enemies, and feign to yield to hard conditions: In fine, were
the world turned honest again, and all knavery banished thence, it would be
found in a Fox skin.

40. The Primrose
IS the principal of Roses, because the prime and first in her precedence; as
the Herbinger of Flora, the Queen of flowers. She is the true and proper rose
of the Wilderness, where she is in her element the earth, as fishes in the
sea, and fowls in the air. She is the lowly and humble flower, and if she
want the sweet perfumes and Civits the other Roses have, she is supplied with
a sweeter odor of meekness, which they want through the churlish guard about
them. She is very courteous, and disdaines not the lap of the Forest Nymphs
that greedily seek after her, as the Primitias of the Spring. They make a
dainty show with them, when they sit familiarly together with their handmaids
the leaves: But when they take their sister Violets into their company, then
they make an admirable enamell. She is a common Prostitute to eyes, but no
Strumper, because thereby she loses no Virginity she has, but still
remains humbly chaste in her mothers lap, till she be violently snatched
away, and ravished thence, keeping her integrity still, so long as forced
against her will. She keeps willingly in the wilderness, to shun the
company of men, but yet is no Anchoresse, because no recluse, but a right
Hermitresse, inhabiting in the deserts. Their habit and dressing is suitable to
the Spring, and the summers approach. In fine, I could wish the Primrose were
restored to her former state again; for then I should hope the golden age
wherein she flourished in times past, would happily return again.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the Contents of each several Character contained in this Book.
1 THe Lion. 2 The Squirrill. 3 The Bramble. 4 The Stagge. 5 The Golden Mine. 6
The Hedgehog. 7 The Pike. 8 The Rock. 9 The Goat. 10 The Echo. 11 The Lake.
12 The Cole-pit. 13 The Bear. 14 The Mustard Seed. 15 The Goose. 16 The Horse.
17 The Hawke. 18 The Elephant. 19 The Gnat. 20 The Mole. 21 The Peacocke. 22
The Bat. 23 The Moss. 24 The Ant. 25 The Ivy. 26 The Daw. 27 The Snake. 28
The Crabbe. 29 The Ape. 30 The Owl. 31 The Snaile. 32 The Swallow. 33 The
Oak. 34 The Dog. 35 The Parrat. 36 Tobacco. 37 The Bay tree. 38 The Vine* 39
The Fox. 40 The Primrose.
FINIS.

