The last TRVMPET: OR, A Six-Fold Christian Dialogue. Viz. 1 Between Death,
the Flesh, and the Soul. 2 Between the Devil, the Flesh, and the World. 3
Between Man and his Conscience. 4 Between Conscience, Sin, and Man. 5
Between God and the Soul. 6 Between the Soul and the City of Cod.
Translated from the elegant Latin Prose of RICHARD BR^THVVA^T Esquire. into
English Verse, BY JOHN VICARS.

Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Hor. de Ar^e Poetica. Decies repetita
placebit.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Robe^^ ^^^^ocke, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Kings Head, 1635.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, his ever most highly honored good friend, Sir
WALTER PIE, Attorney General of the Court of Wards, and to his truly
virtuous and religious Consort, the Lady HESTER PIE, I. V. most Cordially
wishes the Kingdom of Grace here, and the Kingdom of glory hereafter.
Right Worshipful,
MY thankful thoughts long wandering, seriously,
Which way I might my grateful heart apply,
Fully and fitly to express and show
The infinite perpetual debt Iowe
To both your Worship, and your Families,
For many free and friendly courtesies
To me and mine: In stepped this little Book,
And my desire t'accomplish undertook.
Upon which proffer, promptly I laid hold,
And most respectively have (thus) made bold
To dedicate both It and my poor All
To both your Worships due memorial:
Both, as a Symboll of my sincere heart
Obliged by indelible desert;
As also, that like Philips little Lad,
This Trumpet may sound a Memento glad
Unto your Worcester. Souls with comfort sweet,
Here, to prepare with God in Christ to meet,
To shake off all earths clogs and Remora's
Which hurt or hinder us with dull delays,
From running (here) our race with patience,
From winning the reward of recompense.
In both which bound respects, I humbly pray
That this my little Tract, Last Trumpet may
Sound sweetly in your Worships ^ares and mind,
And friendly favor and acceptance find,
To'rd him, who ever, every way is bound
To you and yours to rest and to be found
Your good Worcester. in all obsequious observance to be commanded. JOHN VICARS.

To the Worshipful, his very worthy and most ingenious and ingenuous learned
and religious Author, RICHARD BRATHVVAIT Esquire. I. V. wishes all true
holiness and happiness, here and hereafter.
Most worthy Sir,
WHen first by happy chance I cast my fight
Upon the sparkling luster, beauty bright
Of your rich jewel lockt-up and enclosed
In a neat Cabinet: I, strait supposed
It was great pity, such a pretty jemme
Should be shut up from public view of them
Who could not with the Latin Key unlocke
Your Casket, and partake of your rich stock.
I therefore have (most worthy Sir) made bold
To open the Lock, lay open your jemme of gold,
To every gracious eye and godly mind
That in such Jewels can pure pleasure find
And, thus with my weak breath your Trump to sound
In a known tone, whose echo might rebound,
And on the hearers hearts reverberate
To mind their present and their future state.
And (hence) I must ingenuously confess,
I primely should and would the same address
Unto your worthy-selfes sole acceptance
Were I not bound by most strict obligation
To those my honored friends forementioned
By cords of many favors thereto led.
But next to them, accept, I humbly pray
This borrowed-light from your suns lustrous ray;
These bubling streams, weak strains that have their motion,
From your full fount, as tribute to your ocean.
In confidence of which great courtesy
Thereof persuaded, by your piety,
Praying your Worship may be aye possessed
Of all true holy, happy joys; I rest,
Your good Worships in his best poor services to be commanded, John Vicars.

Authoris opinio de Interpret suo.
EX eo quod legi, te de Hippocreni altius ebibisse collegi. Optandum est, quod
Heliconiades nostri in hisce oleum operamque studiose impenderent, quo apud
posteros faeliciora Minervae monumenta relinquant. Interim, quae primum
conscripsi and edidi (modo Superiorum authoritas ijs suffragetur) ingenue
approbo, eo scilicet more, quo tu integre transtulisti.

Ingenij titulum meruit, mihi creed, perennem,
Qui cupit ingenio sacra levare suo.
Hoc tibi ^ICARIVS fecit; Musisque peregit
O^ficium vatis: dulce poema suis.
Imprimatur,

SA. BAKER.
April 14. 1635.
The last Trumpet: OR, A Six-fold Christian DIALOGUE.
The first, between Death, the Flesh, and the Soul.
The Argument of the first Dialogue.
The Flesh presenting the Souls Maid.
By Death encountered, sore afraid;
Shows forth voluptuous-Gallants state,
Whilst (yet) they be degenerate;
How prone to pride and vanity,
How feared of Death, how loath to die;
Until the Lady-Mistresse, Soul,
By Grace rowz'd up, does chide, control
Her servant, Flesh, her fit to make
To welcome Death, and Life forsake.
Death. HO, who is within? Open the door, instantly.

Flesh. Who Is that which knockes so bold and boysterously?

De. It Is He, that, till he enters, will not part.

Fl. Stay, I Will peep out; and see (first) who thou art,
And, whether thou deserve, here, to remain;
If not, knock long enough, and all in vain.

De. Well, now, what think thou? will thou open now?

Fl. O fearful monster! ugly beetle-brow,
Blind of both-eyes, without or lips or chin,
Hence, with a mischief, I Will not let thee in.
Knock on, yea knock thy self to death, thou may,
But, I Will not open the door, whiles there thou stay'st.

De. Open, for, I will enter: mark the event.

Fl. What? And without my Mistresses consent?

De. I, without leave of Mistress or nice Maid:
Yea, though by All within I be gaine-sayd.

Fl Is It possible? Whence came thou, hither, pray?
Who sent for thee? Thou might have kept away:
For, we have, here, within, far fayrer mates,
Fine fellows, merrier guests, within our gates:
Sure, thou art some Courtier, by thy sirly face.

De. Indeed, both Court and Cart, in Me have place,
And, I, in them, do challenge equal right.

Fl. I prithee, say, who art thou? what strange wight?

De. I, surely, am thy Sister and thy Brother.

F. Hence, Beast* thou art some Hermophrodite or other.

De. Therein (indeed) thy words are probable;
For, of both sexes I am capable.

Fl Capable? true, too much too, I believe:
But, if my thoughts do me not much deceive,
Thou neither look like male or female,
But, art, more truly, some Ghost lanck and pale.

De. I am a Ghost, yet, am thy Looking-glass,
Where, thou may see thy state like with ring grass.

Fl. Who were thy Parents?

De. They that thee begot.

Fl. That Is strange; but, surely, thus much I doubt not,
Thy Parents would have plucked out both their eyes,
Ere from their loins an Imp, like thee, should rise.

De. Yet, they me bred. For, biting-Death did spring
From their bold biting the forbidden thing,

Fl. Whence came thou then?

D. From thine own wilful sin.

Fl Alas, alas. Then we must needs be kin.

De. True. We are both of one stock, land and line,

Fl. Yet, small resemblance twixt thy state and mine.

De. True, I confess it, yet I tell thee plain,
Nor thou nor any that alive remain,
Can me, when I am present, pass, excel,
With fitter frame of joints though ere so well,
With more just mixture of the Elements,
With fairer structure of corpse lineaments,
Or stronger state of body; but I say,
^ being present, am more choice than they.

Fl. Me thinks this is most strange, how can this be?

De. Because, even Natures-selfe has chosen me
^or her Anatomy. Thou know right well,
that all that do in Surgery excel
and Physic, choose for their Anatomy
Corpse that surpass in beauties excellency.

Fl. It Is true (indeed) of such as hanged be;
Then, in that number I must reckon thee:
And therefore tell me for what fact so foul
Have thou been hanged, and so left thy soul?

De. Well, wanton wench, for all thy witty prate,
I Will be thy wooer and thy wedded-mate.

Fl. Ha, ha, ha, ha. I never shall desire
Such a yoke fellow to me to acquire,
As will me make quite weary of my life,
And fill my marriage bed with hate and strife:
When for my Spouse I shall embrace a Spirit,
And stinking smells of rottenness inherit.
No, with the proverb, rather I Would like well
To dye a Virgin, and lead Apes in hell.

De. So, so, mean while, I must, I will embrace thee*

Fl. hands off, or to thy Graves and Ghosts I Will chase thee*

De. Soft, sister, soft: untoucht, I Will touch and take thee*
Thou art deceived, if thou think to forsake me
Or escape my hands. Delay not, instantly,
If Death but say the word, thou (sure) shall dye.
I stand unmoved, when thou art moved, molested,
I rise unhurt, when thou by Death art rested.
He which thee spoils, spares not or sex or age,
Conditions rare, face fair or head most sage.
Perhaps thou wilt say (thou say no more than truth)
That nothing is, than Death, more full of ruth,
More tart and terrible, more cursed, unkind,
As who, to look on men's looks, is most blind,
Is deaf and dumb to hear or answer treats
Is pitiless, perniciously down beats
Without distinction or least difference*
All, liable to's lawless violence;
Not having least respect to good or bad,
But, forcing all to one condition sad.

Fl. Aye me poor wretch, must my flesh delicate,
Which fragrant flowers adorn and decorate,
Which sweet perfumes with odours rare perfume,
Must these fair joints to rottenness consume?
And all their moisture and their milk-white hew,
Be dried, drawn out, by such an Elfe as you?

De. Damsel, disdain it not, these sinews bare,
These rigid bones have grasped Ladies fair;
Equal to thee, for bodies beauty bright,
For dignities and honors utmost height;
For smooth and soft conditions dear as thou,
These, often, I make to my embraces bow.

Fl. Embrace them still, so thou lett'st me alone.
What? shall these dainty fingers, ever known
To touch and strike the warbling Lute-strings sweet
Enameled with pure azure-veines regreet,
Shall these, I say, once touch thy clay-cold wrists,
Or shall this hair of mine in curious twists,
And rare laid wreaths, bound up, with garlands decked
And odoriferous perfumes, to affect
The nisest nosthrils, like Sols sunbeams bright,
Shall these under thine Eagle-tallons light?
Shall this high forehead, and these temples fair,
Adorned with Aprils prime-sprung flowers most rare,
Fall underneath thy raw-bon'd fingers harms,
Shall these my snow-white alablaster arms
Fitted for only amorous kind embraces,
Feel thy cold-icey grasping paws disgraces?
Shall these my tinckling, teachable fine feet,
Accustomed to Measures, Dances sweet,
Dance into thy dark cell, the loathsome grave?
Or, finally, shall this my Body brave,
So neat, complete, so worthy admiration,
Yielding to amorous eyes such delectation,
Be shut up in a vile and filthy urne,
And into noisome putrefaction turn?

De. Spare farther speech, I none of these respect,
I neither do thy fingers fine affect,
Though ere so small or slender, shining fair,
With golden rings and sparkling Diamonds rare.
I care not for thy tender lovely locks,
Though glistring like pure wool among the flocks.
I care not for thy temples fair and high,
Though decked with fragrant flowrs most curiously.
I care not for thine arms more white than snow,
Or, than the purest Ivy that can grow.
I care not for thy tender tinckling feet,
Although for wanton dances ere so meet.
Finally, neither can thy body fine
Nor any of thy bodies outward shine
Allure my mind, entice me, thee to spare,
I, naught at all, for all thy neatness, care.
For, well thou know, for this thy Candor quaint,
Painters, do me, a man's dead karkasse paint,
Consisting of bare bones, with sinews joynd
Where, thou, nor ears, nor eyes, nor nose can find,
Naked, deformed, ugly to be seen
Of neither sex, handling a Sith most keen.
O artificial piece of Painters wise!
Deformed, indeed, but full of mysteries.
And, will thou (Damsel) hear me them relate?
For thy sake (then) I Will do it most accurate,
Although, therein, thy outward beauty gay
I naught regard. Then listen, these are they.
First, I am shown, with hollow holes, no eyes
To signify, I no man's person prize,
Of whatsoever power or dignity,
Of whatsoever wealth or quality.
I also am described without ears,
To show that death no man's petition hears,
And that no prayer or humblest supplication
Can of my fury find least mitigation.
I portrayed am, without a Nose to smell,
Thereby (vain dainty Damsel) thee to tell*
And thee lascivious wanton gallant brave,
That I, in thy sweet sents no pleasure have.
Again, I pictured am naked and bare
To intimate that I do nothing care
For earthly substance or for treasure great,
For bribes or gifts, which worldly wise do cheat.
I also am depainted without skin,
Or flesh or blood, all raw-bon'd, meagre, thin;
To show, assure, (O Damsel delicate,
O spruce nice youths, too fond, effeminate,
That neither your rare glistring beauty bright,
Nor vain fair out sides can me ought delight.
Yet further, I in neither sex am shown;
Whereby it may be eviden^ly known,
That I have firm resolved not to spare
Or male or female, whatsoere they are.
Finally, I am figured (still) to stand
With a most large and sharp Sith in my hand,
To show, that as the Mower in the field
Makes Corn and Grass unto his Sith to yield
So, I from off the earth do all men mow,
As (thus) the Poet pithily does show. Sicut ante falcem seges;
Ante mortem summi Reges.

That is, As Corn before the Sith most keen,
So in Deaths presence, Kings are seen.


Fl. And, art thou so inexorable, Death?
That thou spar'st none, bereavest all of breath.

De. I, I spare none, not one, who ere they be.

Fl. Alas, this seems most unjust to me;
What? do thou lusty lively youths destroy,
But newly stepped upon the brincke of joy?
Together with the old decrepid Sire,
Who, worn with age, seems every hour t'expire,
And breathe his last, by aches, curelesse pains,
And therefore counts thy presence precious gains.

De. All Is one to me, the youngling or the sage.

Fl. Alas, what profit's (then) in youthful age?
Since youth and old age have but one condition,
And must submit to Fates most dire commission.

De. Indeed, if thou do their condition eye,
They both are subject to Mortality;
But, if their probable-departure hence,
Thou may discern this only difference;
As, young men, soon may dye, though ere so strong:
So, old-men cannot alive continue long.
Death is for old-men ever at the gate,
For young men he with nets and snares does wait.
To old-men he is still before their eyes,
To young men close behind their backs he lies.
Death is the child hood of weak infancy,
Death is the lad-age of our childe-hoodry,
Death is the youth of our lad-age estate,
Death is the manly-hood of youthful fate.
Death is the old age of our manhood stout,
Death after old age does decrepid flout.
For Death is of Decrepid-age the Death,
And (thus) it is plain that None that ere drew breath
Could sheltred be in such a close estate,
But, Death made entrance in Him, soon or late.

Fl. Alas, I surely thought (but plainly see,
I did but gull my self) that None like Me,
So lusty, lively, in their youthfull-blood
So fresh in flower of age, so quickly shood
Be nipt and cropped, but, might make truce with death,
And so enjoy a longer, happier breath.

De. O no, for, short is that felicity,
Which still is tended with fragility.

Fl. Ah, though it is short, yet, who desires it not?

De. He that a tyresome tedious life has got.

Fl. Yet, even he would escape death if he might.

De. Have thou nere heard or read those lessons right.
That, it is far best, not to be borne at all,
Or soon to leave this life most tragical.
That, dead than living, are in happier state.
That, naught than Sleep does Death more personate.
That, Death's the hav'n of ills, the help against woe,
The only easer of all griefs that grow.
That all must dye, that death concludes all strife,
That death is better, happier, far than life.

Fl. That I have read them often, to mind I call,
But, held none true, and so forgot them all.

De. It seems indeed, they are all slipped out of mind.

Fl. True, for, those things, in which, no joy we find,
We scarce believe, and easily let them go.

De. But say, think thou that thou shall die, or no?

Fl. I think I shall, but yet withal I hope
The day's far off, ere Death with me will cope.

De. We hope things good, we hate things that are bad.
And, what can worse be either held or had,
Than a continual warfare, jarre and strife,
And, still to prop a transitory life?

Fle. O, but, what ere does please, gives ease to all.

De. And, can thou that a pleasant passage call?
Which is encombred with so many Straites,
Whereon, fierce famine, thirst, and labor waits,
Crosses and losses, and a sea of woe,
Which, from corrupted life do fleet and flow?

Fl. Men used to pain are not so passionate;
And we are so inured to such a state,
And, daily so acquainted with all these,
That, we scarce feel them; or, though felt, they plese.

De. Would thou not count it a choice benefit,
If, one would thee of these dire fetters quit?

Fl. Yes, I should hold it the best favor found,
If, first, I could believe that I am bound.

De. Peace, peace, for shame, can thou not plainly see
Life's discommodities base bonds to be?

Fl. O spare me, prithee, till I think them so,
Till I believe them such, pray let me go.

De. Nay, now I smell thy Foxe-like fallacy,
I Will not do so, nor shall thou so me tie
As (once* one did, who spying me draw near,
And brandishing this fatall-Sithe I bear
Still in my hand. This only suit did make,
That with my deadly dart I would not take
His life from him, until he quite had done
His deep devotions, pious prayers begun,
Which finished, he would thank me very much,
And, quietly to dye would never grutch.
I having ea^^ly granted his petition,
And bound my self by oath, to this condition,
Not once to touch him, till he quite had ended
His orizons and prayers so pretended:
He instantly left off, left me deluded,
And from that time he with himself concluded,
And made a vow, he never Death would pray
To spare him, more, unto his dying-day.
Maid, it is most easy, never to believe,
Things we desire not, and, which most us grieve,
But, I will deal with thee another way,
And cause thee (instantly) aside to lay
This vicious most pernicious fond opinion.
Then lend an ear, put off (thou wanton Minion)
Thy carnall-nicenesse, for, I Will now declare
Things which to thee most wholesome, healthsome are.
He Is teachable that diligently hears,
Show thy self such and lend me thy pressed ears.
So shall thou surely understand and find,
That I have (herein) bin to thee most kind

Fl. O Death, I Will hear thee most attentively;
But, O, I would not have thee in mine eye.

De. Then, shut thine eyes, only set open thine ears,
And now (first) tell me, how thou spend'st thy years?
How thou employst thy self, what pains do take?
What do thou daily thy chief pleasure make?
That thou art so much taken and delighted
With Life's false fleeting sweets? more fitly slighted.

Fl. O Sir, my Exercises be most sweet,
And to my nature, every way most meet.
I feel no frying heat, nor freezing cold,
My hand did never wheel or distaffe hold,
My heart in serious studies I nere pent,
To sweeter pleasures, I my self have bent,
Namely, in delicate delights to flow,
To please my tooth, to public sports to go,
To swim in luscious liquor, sparkling wine,
To be arayd in vestures rich and fine.
To be a guest at banquets, nuptiall-feasts,
To be at Plays and other joviall-jests.
To dance lascivious measures, spend the nights
With youthfall Gallants, juvenile delights,
On rich embroydered beds of Down to lie,
My flesh in sweet hot bathes to clarify.
Finely to feed, fully to sleep and snort,
To fill my flesh with pleasures of each sort.

De. But, that thou may thine own prime-state review,
And take a just account and reckoning true,
How thou have spent each day from morn to night,
What special work does this task expedite?

Fl. I never work, nor any work desire,
My only business is earths joys to acquire.

De. What joys are they? I prithee to me show;
Sure they be rare, whence such rare love does grow.

Fl. My chiefest care is for my clothes and meat,
My dainty breakfast in my bed to eat,
Which is provided in such costly wise,
That nothing wants my palate to suffice.
This proeme past; that all things may concur
To answer my desires, in bed I stir
And roll my self by soft-degrees most slow,
(As, when a door smooth on the hinge does go)
And, thus, a sweet and soaking nap, I take,
Desirous nothing more to shun, forsake,
Then foreign quarrels, and domesticke strife,
From public tumults, to preserve my life;
To shun all Courtly cares, to spend my days
In silent rest, and be at ease always;
To make my self most s^icke and smooth with fat,
At bankets full of merry-table-chat.

De. But, now I hope thou will at last arise.

Fl. Yes, that I will; for, I do not so prize
My Bed, to make it my worlds sole delight,
Nor my bedchamber a theatrick-sight.
But, now, Sols glorious rays paynting the skies,
With golden-beames and glistring on mine eyes
Through the transparent-windowes; nicely, I
Call for my Gown full of embroydery,
Of various, curious colors, wrought most rare
With Flora's imitable tap'stry fair.
Which, ere put on, how many thoughts have I
Touching its neatnes or its bravery?
Sometime, I such a gorgeous Gown do prize,
As may attract on me beholders eyes;
But, instantly, therewith some fault I find,
And then another Coat I call to mind.
For that, again (when brought) I do not care
For, either it is too-heavy for my wear,
Or, for the times not fashionate enough,
I therefore, quickly, cast it off, in snuff;
And, for another (yet) I forthwith send;
Thus I in choosing clothes whole mornings spend.

De. And thus, I think, by trying them they tear,
As much, or more, than if thou did them wear.

Fl. My Clothes, at last, put-on to my content,
Within mine own doors I cannot be pent:
But, instantly, gad-out, and thither go,
Where greatest concourse of fit Mates I know.
Nor am I mindful much of Novelties,
That is my Mistress Souls chief exercise*

De. Thou say most true, for, She intends the mind,
But, thou, thy meat, to feasting still inclinde.
For, it is the Minds connative quality
To be most greedy after novelty.

Fl. True. But I haunt not common-confluences
Of people, for such purpose; but my senses
Find (inwardly) selfe-tickling daintiness
Which, or I cannot, or I ^ill suppress.
This, thus, within me sparks more ardently
And, thus, thereto, more fuel I apply.
For, if in that concourse of Gallants great
I spy a prime-rose-youth most count and neat
He me, no sooner eyes then fries with love;
And from his guardian, soon, himself does move,
And follows me, where-ere m^ lust him leads.
If I but frown, a sigh his sorrow pleads;
If I but smile, he is most jocond, strait,
On each kind word, a laugh does ever wait:
He sports with his spoyler, ignorant, mean while,
That he (thus) dallies but with Ismael vile,

D. Thus whiles thou play'st, thou prey'st, yea stay'st the youth.

Fl. It Is so, indeed, thou say the very truth.
For, whomsoere I view, if he obey,
I either deeply wound, or deadly slay.
Yet, neither I my self unhurt depart,
For, I, by nature, have so kind a heart
That he, whom by my lust, I captive take,
Does me (thereby) his servile Captive make.

De. Thus, for the most part, it betideth, still,
The Spoyler proves a spoil, by after-ill.
But, prithee tell me, whither do thou lead
This lustfull-Lad, that thus thy paths does tread?

Fl. I Will freely tell thee all, and nothing hide.
This lusty Lecher still does by me bide,
And, if I find him worthy every way,
My best embraces to my bed most gay
Adorned with rich and rare wrought tapestry,
Full of love-sweets, I bring him by and by.
But, first, if Cupid call for delicates,
We have a banquet, which lust stimulates;
In which, and amorous tales we spend the day,
Or else go see some sight, or merry play.
Or, if we please to walk the pleasant fields,
Where Flora's Beauty fair much comfort yields*
We, hand in hand, or arm in arm do go
And, wanton jests and gestures, often, do show.
Our names we grave upon the bark of trees,
Or else (at last) we tired with all these,
Do lie and cool us under some cool shade,
Or else in some sweet hot-bath, ready made,
We both do bathe, our joints to supple more,
Thus, softly, sweetly, is my life past ore.

De. A brave account (sure) of a gallant state,
But, tell me, whether ought thou did relate,
Has made thee better or a jot more wise?

Fl. Pish, I least care to purchase such a prize,
As honesties or wisdoms ayrie-gaine,
Let him that will (for me) those entertain.
My flesh is tickled, touched with tenderness,
This world, mine Inn, does wholly me possess,

De. But, all wise men of whom I ever heard,
Have, evermore, that life, as best, preferred,
Wherein, they, every day, themselves have found
In gravity and goodness to abound.

Fl. Yet, did not they with all their goodness perish?

De. So thinks the world, but yet, in heaven they flourish

Fl. Well, be it so. And let them live there still,
So I may have worlds-pleasure at my will.

De. I? say thou so? yet, prithee say again,
Whiles thou do such a jocund life sustain,
In what case does thy Mistress, soul abide?
Does she not with thee sharply chafe and chide?

Fl. Indeed, she is somewhat angry with me, often,
But, with a smiling look and answer soft,
I can her quickly please, But usually
I leave her in her closets privacie,
Close at her prayers; where, if she stays too long
I cease not to suggest, with motions strong,
All my distracting-pleasures, to her mind,
Whereby, she, in that exercise can find
But little joy and comfort; which, to me,
Tedious and irksome, I (still) find to be.
Meane-while, my Heaven born Mistress Lady great,
Transported with celestial zealous heat
And sacred fury, chides me bitterly,
And, with these words, her anger out does fly.
"O! how perversely do thou show thy self,
"How troublesome to me (thou carnal elfe)
"Why do thou such base thoughts to me suggest
"When I am to my pious prayers addressed?
"Thou should me evermore, in all, obey,
"And not my heart with such vaine-toyes orelay.
"Have thou not read what I have writ and placed
"Over my Chamber-doore? there, read thou may,
"And rightly know, what I most wish, desire;
"My God to get is all I do require.
(For, this, indeed, is her inscription, still)
"O do not, then, pervert and change my will.
"I know whom I have served and obay'd,
"Nay, whose blest-bride, my self, I, thus, have made,
" Nothing, to me, more odious is than sin;
" Nothing, than Prayer, has, ere, more pleasant been.
"O! let the doors be, then, barr'd-up most fast,
"That all the House may inward luster cast:
"Let both the eyes be shut and closed ever,
"That, loathsome lust may be admitted never.
In suchlike manner (often) she uses me,
But, from my practice I Will not altered be*
For, ever still, I slily do foment
Some new and unknown tickling toy to vent,
Which may not only much distract her mind
From sacred meditations; but may bind
And reunite her love a fresh to me,
Then, I to her, make this complaint, most free.
"Sweet Mistress, you your-selfe too sharply use,
"And, too-too strict and rigid courses choose:
"O! will you, never, your own rare beauty mind?
"But, still, be to your self, so cursed, unkind?
"O! spare your eyes, weep not so much, so often
"Turn not, into hard horn, your knees so soft,
"By frequent kneeling; you have long enough
"Yea too-long led a life austere and rough;
"I Will find you merrier mates, if you will forsake
"Your closet, and, with me, worlds joys partake.
My lovely Lady, hereupon, replies:
"How merrily, at Dice, the time hence flies,
"How muddily, at Prayers, it sticks and stays,
"How still it steals away, at sports and plays?
"How slow it seems to go, how tedious spent,
"When, at Gods worship, we are most intent?
And thus, my Mistress heereto condiscends*
And ready ears to my allurement lends.

De. It seems, then, that the maid, her mistress sways.

Fl. Most true. For she, in nothing, me gaine-sayes:
But always holds me as her merriest mate,
Hugs me, with kisses does me consolate.
We be as one, `wee 'gree as one, in all,
Namely, that we quench nor the sparkles small
Of our sweet Loves dear lusts, but them fulfill
Not to deter, but to prefer them still.

De. Thus, thou (O flesh) given as thy Mistress aid
Art her destruction and chief scandal made.

Fl. O Sir, you are much mistaken in the thing,
Rather, much joy and solace, I her bring.

De. Thou do not joy, but her annoy with woe.

Fl. Nay, then farewell Sir, if you censure so,

De. Farewell? nay soft, there is no way to evade,
For (yet) more talk, I have thus long delayde.
Nay, whimper not, you do but beat the air,
If, for your struggling, you think I Will you spare.

Fl. Let me alone, or I aloud will cry;
If thou provok'st me with thy cruelty.

De. Can thou accuse me, now of fornication?

Fl. No, but for theft I Will bring mine accusation.

De. Indeed, if accusations may suffice,
The innocentest party guilty lies:
But, can it by thy nimble wit be shown,
To be a theft to claim and take mine own?

Fl. If those two Pronounes mine and thine might cease,
The worlds deep discord would not so increase.

De. How right thou hit'st the nail, yea, pampered flesh,
Whiles thou do live, jars will arise afresh.
I tell thee, Wench, thy white skin, painted face,
Does in a Realm raise more contentions base,
Than all thy Ladies utmost art or skill
And strength of wit is able (ere) to still.
But, I have caught thee, now, and thou art mine,
I Will now take care to end thy cheats most fine.

Fl. O, I had rather run into a Stews,
Than such a spighted Spittle-House to choose.

De. I easily believe thee, but, now know
Thou must such Brothell-houses quite forgo.
Death to the Suburbs now, has made his way,
Then (near the walls) thou inmate can not stay.

Fl. What do thou mean to touch me? raw-bon'd face,

De. To give thee (now) a deadly cold embrace.

Fl. Most irksome and unpleasant are esteemed
Th'embraces of a wooer, ugly deemed.
But what? is Death in love with flesh, I pray?

De. Yes eagerly, thy flesh to turn to clay.

Fl. Thou needs must be in love, who art in want.

De. I therefore covet, 'cause I feel such scant.

Fl. Will not a piece of me give thee content?

De. No, by no means, for it is most evident
That deaths devouring jaws, no parts will take,
But all or nothing is his proper stake.

Fl. Yet, many Gallants full of youthful heat,
Famous for beauty brave, and bodies neat,
Have thought themselves to have got an ample prey,
If, on these roseall lips they could but lay
And fix one only kiss, and wished no more,
And yet must thou, worn lancke and thin, all-ore,
And, as thou seemst to me, bloodlesse and bare;
Have me all-whole, as thine insatiate share?

De. I will not bare one inch, I Will have thee full.

Fl. Oh! whither do thou, thus, me hale and pull?

De. Even to my horrid-house of clay, the Grave.

Fl. O! must thou such an expiation have?
Must my fair corpse fill-up an uglie urne?

De. It must, indeed, and must to dust return.

Fl. And, what companions shall I therein find?

De. Only great crawling worms, bred of thy kind.

Fl. O! will thou not me spare, but one year more?

De. No, not one hour, I told thee so, before.
A Statute Law, herein, does on me lie,
And I my charge must discharge, instantly.

Fl. What? Instantly? Ay me most woeful wretch!
Spare me, but till I do my Mistress fetch:
For, she, alas, does little dream of thee,
Or, of thy now so near approach to me.

De. Indeed, I think no less; for I believe,
Thou friendlier entertaynment would me give,
If more familiarly thou did me know.
But, hence, such strangeness does between us grow:
And, hence, I am your so unwelcome guest,
'Cause, scarce, one thought of me is ere expressed.
Yet, call her forth, I Will promise make, nere doubt,
I Will thee not touch, before she, first, comes out.

Fl. O Mistress, Mistress! are you, now, asleep,
More sound than ere you used, that hence you keep?

Soul. Thou art deceived, Maid, if thou think so;
That ever I did sleep, I do not know.
But, what is the news? what is the cause and case,
That thou me call'st, with such a frighted face?

Fl O Mistress! there is extreme necessity
Fallen on us both; for, most impetuously
A stranger knockes at door, of horrid hew,
And (if I may speak what I think is true)
Of fierce aspect, a most deformed creature,
And every way of most uncomely feature.
He stands without, but spite of you or me
He plainly threats that he let-in must be.

So. Who is it, I prithee, that so saucily
Behaves himself? what? Is It not fit that I
Should mistress be of mine? bid him let us see
What right he has to enter, then, tell me.

Fl. Tender (indulgent Mistress) I you pray
Your tender Maiden, Flesh, I neither may,
Nor dare so much as look him in the face,
Much less expostulate, with him, the case
I would not for a thousand worlds and more
Go back again (alone) to him, to the door:
So ghastly, ghostly, frightfull, spritelike, he,
Fierce, furious, fatal, does appear to me.

So. Then tell me (prithee) what may be his name,
Or whence this formidable creature came.

Fl. Ask him your self (I pray) a monster, sure,
O, I cannot to talk with him endure.
For, such bold liberty of speech he used,
And me without least blushing so abused,
As that he, me, his Paramour did call,
And, on me laid his fatal Paws withal.
Only, he (herein) showed some courtesy
And plighted promise to me seriously,
That, until you (dear Mistress) came out hence,
He would not on me use his violence.

So. Alas, poor fool, and what will thou then be
When I thy Mistress, Soul, go out of thee?
Nothing (alas) but a poor karkasse dead,
On which, foul crawling worms must full be fed.
But, I Will go meet him and do what I may
Timely to tame his pride. Who art thou? say?

De. I am the utmost end of every thing.

Fl. O Mistress go not near him, fear his sting,
O, if you love me, send him (soon) away,
By treats or threats, by force or fullest pay;
By any means, we must him quickly quail,
And pack him hence, or our whole house will fail.

So. Peace peevish wench, I Will forth and talk with him.
Who ere thou art, under this vizard grim,
Horrid Hobgoblin-like, which do beset
And thus unseas'nably our household fret
And fright, and much disquiet our sweet rest,
Know this, that thou can naught at all molest
Or terrify my soul, no though thou bring
A thousand deadly darts, and do them fling
With utmost fury, and this Court surround,
Yet with least fear thou never can me wound.
What, though my carnal Maid, the flesh be frighted?
For, she is (indeed) with niceness o're-delighted,
And unacquainted with so grim aspects,
And such unpleasing spectacles neglects?
Yet, my prepared soul shakes off such fears,
And all such frights as buzing-flyes out-beares.
Then cut off all delays, make plain relation,
What is thy name, and proper compellation?

De. I fright not folks with any Titles strange,
Nor yet with many, mighty names do range;
My name is short, yet sharp to what has breath,
And I by all, am vulgarly called Death.

So. It Is very well.

Fl. But, fare you well were better;
His hideous presence does me fear and fetter.

De. But Lady, if you please, I will more plain
Explain my self; I, to the heavenly Train
Am hasty-Herald. Bodies Dissolution.
The Inevitable-End. The Resolution
Of all things. And, the Robber of Mankind.
To thee being sent, thee friendly to unbinde
And set at liberty: this thy nice-Mayd
The flesh, to see, in her Sepulture laid.

Fl. What Sepulture, I pray?

De. An earthly bed,
With a clay-pillow underneath thy head.

Fl. I have no need of such a Chamberlain
To make a Bed for me, so coorse and plain,
I have already, beds more soft and sweet,
And, than thy bed, for m^ (me thinks) more meet.

So. I think you mean the Grave to be your bed,

De. You think most true and hit the nail o'th head
This I have ready made, then let your Maid
Go down with me, for, therefore have I stayed,
And therefore am I hither come to thee,
And, this demand is thus commanded me.

So. Nor may I such Commission disobey.

Fl. O my dear Mistress, send him (soon) away,
O will you (now) forsake me? O, wherein
Have I (so far) to you offensive bin?
Thus to be left, have I not still regarded
And done your will? and must be (thus) rewarded?
Peace, Maid, we must resistlesse-Fate obey,
Death is not sent to be sent back with Nay.
And, surely, if thou soundly did conceive
And rightly weigh these things, thou would perceive
And see and say that (thus) thou much do gain,
Rather than any detriment sustain.

Fl. O when shall I this Paradoxe hold true?

So. When sense does yield, and reason does subdue

Fl. Must (then) my sense to reason so submit?

So. I, by all means, it is most just and fit.

Fl. O strange! then what have you (my Mistress done*
Who have bin still by my persuasions won,
And, all this while, to them have lent your ear,
Listening to me (your Maid) without all fear,
Whiles I my self was wholly led along,
And taken up with lustful senses strong.
I still was angling with this hook and bait,
And you to catch it, greedily did wait.
Thus, you with least allurements I could train
From Prayers to Plays; things sacred to profane.
Thus, not your reason but my carnall-sense
Led you along with fearelesse confidence.
Why (then) do you (now) reason so much press?
Which, you your self, so long, did thus transgress.

So. O Maiden, Maiden, this is it, indeed,
that makes me (now) so willing to be freed,
And thee forsake; unless my soul I Will kill,
^ freely must confess I did thy will;
But, O my soul, thou have an Inmate bin
Too long (alas) in this dark house of sin.
Yet, be not sorry that I now must leave thee,
And that thy Mother, Earth, must now receive thee.
^Whence first I thee received as my friend,
And, whither (now) I do thee recommend)
For, it is that I may thee enjoy again,
A body far more fair, without least stayne.

Fl. Is It possible that I can fairer be?
By lying in the earth disioyn'd from thee?
Who but a mad man can believe this thing?
that such a place should glistring beauty bring?
and make my flesh more fair? where earth's my bed,
^he Grave's my house, and worms on me are fed.

So. Yet, thus 'twill be. For, do thou not (now) find
that sleep makes thee of livelier, fresher mind?

Fl. What then?

So. What sleep is, that is death also.

Fl. But, death is too too long a sleep, I trow.

So. Why should thou judge so? who would think sleeps
Too long, whom, in her arms, his Mother keeps?

Fl. Rather his Step-dame, who'd not that refuse?

So. Thou do thy Mother most unkindly use.
Is not the Earth thy naturall-mother just?
From thence thou came, thither return thou must.
Thou, hitherto, art most unworthy known,
Of my abode with thee, and kindness shown:
I have but used thee as an Inn by the way;
Wherein, although, I, peradventure, may
Lodge for a night, yet may not there remain;
Fear not to die (then) death shall be thy gain;
Since, it is a Passage, and sets-ope the gate,
Of a more happy life, more blessed state.

De. Forbear, I pray, these tedious altercations,
Death cannot suffer such procrastinations.
Many great tasks on me imposed are,
Which I must expedite with special care.

So. And, we will readily heavens will obey;
Only, forbear a little while, I pray,
Till I have made my Maid more fit for thee,
For, she is nice and timorous, you see,
And is much frighted at thy fearful face,
Stand by (therefore) I pray, a little space;
Till I but only her more pl^ant make,
To thy unwelcome message; and to take
My wholesome counsels, admonitions free,
Which, being done, I will most ready be
To tread the footsteps of that Gorgias grave,
In sweet desire my passage forth to have:
Who, being asked (once) if willingly
He was content to leave this life and dye,
Answered; Yes truly; For, I go hence, glad,
As from a rotten ruined Cottage bad.

De. I pray proceed (then) and perform your mind.

So. Come near (my Flesh) to me thy Mrs. kind,
Prepare thy plyant ears, and facile heart,
To these last precepts, which I Will now impart.

Fl. Dear Mistress, speak, for whatsoere you say
I ready am to hear, to grant, obey.

So. Friends parting-words most inly penetrate
And ^he sad sighs they (then) ejaculate,
Do in the hearers heart stamp deep impression,
And make them yield far more intent concession.
We both are (now) a long-farewell to take,
And I from thee, and thou from me must make
A separation, and disunion large;
Come hither (then) and hear my parting-charge,
Prepare, and fit thy self, forthwith, for Death,
Before he fiercely comes to stop thy breath.
Forsake those pleasures, wherewith (heretofore)
Thou wast engaged, yea ingulft all ore;
Leave them, I say, and being left, despise them
And henceforth as thy souls chief murderers prize them,
And, now, the small remains of time yet lent,
To gain thy God in Christ, let whole be spent.
The fight is short, the victory is great.
And though the skirmish may much danger threat;
By how much more thou do in battle strive,
The more the joy, in conquest, thee'll revive.
For, mark this one thing in a special measure,
If, for the love of earth and carnal pleasure
Thou leave Gods love, and seem his Grace to scorn
Gods love will leave thee wretched and forlorn,
Even in thine hour of most necessity,
And give thee over to hels tyranny.
Thou art arrived (now) at the Haven of rest,
Where vessels must be firmly rig'd and dressed.
Thy day of death, which, as thy last, did fright thee,
Is thy eternal Birth day to delight thee.
Then cast off every clog that would thee stay
If any darling sin lie in thy way
Which thou extremely have delighted in
(As, with too many thou have tired bin)
Then leave it, loath it. For, thy foot must tread
A holier way, a happier life to lead.
What ere is brittle, is of little price,
And being frail does fail us in a trice;
And now thy feeble flesh must needs abide
The common-Chance which does all sorts betide.
Then, wonder not, thy Predecessors all
Did tread the selfsame path, both great and small,
How aptly answered they in suchlike case?
Whether we watch or sleep in any place,
Whether we talk or silent hold or peace,
Whether we walk or from our works do cease,
Whether we will or nill in any thing,
By times least minutes we do daily bring
Our sliding, gliding days (at last) to end,
And then to natures course must bow and bend.
Then weep not (my poor Maid) cease showers of tears
At this my parting from thee, cease all fears.
In heavens duetime, we both again shall meet,
And with full joy enjoy a union sweet.

Fl. Dear Mistress, these your admonitions kind
Do mightily prevail and ease my mind.
Yet, I cannot some struggling thoughts dissemble
To think to dye and be dissolved, I tremble.

So. Alas (weak Flesh) that is it I most desire;
To be dissolved, and fly to the heavenly Quire.
O do not thou indulge thy self too much,
Why do thou look so pale at deaths sweet touch?
Why do thou quake and quiver at his sight?
Since thou shall have a frame more fair and bright
Than ever (yet) thou had or can conceive;
These rotten mud-walls thou must only leave,
To be pulled down and be built up again
To turn to dust, then (ever) new remain.
He (only) fear of death is fit to show,
Which to his Savior Christ is loath to go;
^ go before that I may see his face,
We both shall join, and he will us both embrace.
Meane-while thou must sleep sweetly in thine urne,
And, there into thy native dust return,
from whence thou shall in far more beauty rise,
and see thy Savior, even with these same eyes.
^or, thou art laid in earth, to lay-away
Thy earthly-substance, corrupt state of clay.
Be then courageous. For, as corn, men sow,
Must, first, dye in the ground, before it grow,
Must, first, seem rotten, ere it rise again:
Even so thy Body, like unto the grain,
Must, first, lie dead and rotten in the grave,
Ere it in heaven, eternity can have.

Fl. Now, truly Mistress, you have sweetly said;
I now am much assured, and well apaid:
Being (thus) fore-warned, I am fore-arm'd from fear,
Death's face is (now) less terrible, than ere.
And (now) O lovelesse-life, burnt out enough,
Put out thy light, cease (now) thy twinkling snuff,
Farewell, dear Mistress, sweetest, soul, farewell;
In this assured hope, ring out my knell.
That in my Gods good time, I, raised shall be,
With thee, my soul, my Savior Christ to see.

So. Having this hope, in dying thou shall live;
And, I, with joy, shall me to thee, regive.

De. How hardly can these two divorced be?
Have ye done talking? and given way to me?
Your mutual last-farewell take (now) I pray;
Time and my task will (now) no longer stay.

So. O Death, I prithee (now) take thine own time;
Make haste, that I, to heaven my haven may clime
Come (now) and put thy charge in execution,
For, I, with this one well-fixt resolution,
Will wind up all. I have not so lived here,
In this vain world (yet, hereunto, I fear,
I have been too-inclin'd, too much affected,
Which, now I grieve, and leave thee more neglected
As that to live (here) longer, I should shame,
Or that I durst not dye for fear of blame:
And that because I serve a Master kind,
Whom I, in Christ, do reconciled find.
Thus, therefore to go out of this frail life,
Is to go into heavenly pleasures rife:
Thus, life to leave, is aye to live in Peace,
In full fruition of all joys increase:
Thus, thee my Maid, I to the earth commend,
Whiles I Heavens Kingdom happily ascend.

De. Thus (then) adeu
To both of you.

The end of the first Dialogue.
The Second DIALOGUE.
Between the Devil, the Flesh, and the World.
The Argument of the second Dialogue.
The World and Flesh to every evil
Are only Agents for the Devil:
But here, the Flesh being mortifi'de,
Satan's suggestions are deny'de;
Who can do naught but tempt to ill,
Has no more power, although more Will;
Which amply to the world he shows,
And how ore carnal men he crows.
But neither (yet) the world effects,
Nor, He himself his foul projects
Upon the sanctified Heart,
Dead to the world and hels black Art.
The Devil (thus) repelled each way
With rage recoyles, makes (there) no stay.
Di. WHere are ye my comragues, my servants true?
My Martiall-mates, by whom I must subdue?
What? is there no hope left to lift or force
The sullen Soul from her religious course?
Whereon she is so fixed and fully bent.
What? no devise this geere for to prevent?
Must my high glory suffer such eclipse?
And be so child, nigh killed with pious nips?
Surely, I ever since my first great fall
Have burned with lust, and boiled with bitter gall
Of deep desire to fence and fortify,
Yea and expatiate our large Emperie.
Yet still I find by old experience,
That whiles the soul gets the pre-eminence,
Ore thee the flesh, reason the soul subjects,
And grace guides reason, all has ill effects:
My projects perish and my engines fail,
My force grows feeble and my power does veil.
Be stirring (then) my Champions old and brave,
For, work enough to do, ye see ye have.
Fie, are ye not ashamed more sound to sleep
Now, than ye used, and sluggishly to keep
Your hands within your bosoms, since that you
Have for your Master so much work to do?
For shame arise, shake off this drowsinesse,
And hunt and haunt about with eagerness.
Now is my Summer-season, harvest fair,
Which, if by your neglect and want of care
It be let slip and fruitlesly past over.
Farewell all hope for ever to recover
My own peculiar strength and princely state:
O then fair flesh, neat, nice and delicate,
My faithful servant, whom above the rest
I most do trust and ever prized best;
And, on whose strong assistance and brave aid
I ever have my chief assurance stayde,
And justly too: For, a domesticke foe
Wounds the more deeply, gives the deadlier blow.
But what have thou been doing all this while?
Why do thou thus waste time? my hopes beguile?
What? will thou (now) prove turne-coat, backward fly
And leave me in my most necessity?

Fl. Alas, I know not what to do or say!
My Mistress has me starved and pined away;
And to hard fastings, she harsh stripes does add,
I wretch am naught but skin and bone; too bad.
Whereby I am not unto lust incited,
Nor with lascivious mo^ions ought delighted:
If I to walk abroad to friends affect,
I am recalled, shut up, and soundly checked;
If I desire full feasts enflamed with wine,
She uses on me most sharp discipline.
What ere is irksome to me she commands,
What ere delightsome, stricktly she withstands.
Then, in this case, alas, what should I do?
I cannot her content, and yet serve you.

Di. Thou say most true. But how may this thing be?
That she should so much curb and bridle thee?
What? have thou lost all power of reluctations?
All thy most slye acustom'd inchantations?
I have thee known a most facetious-Lasse,
A nimble Artist, apt to bring to pass
With fine insinuations her to prove,
And, so, thy self t'ingratiate in her love;
Where are those fiery tickling darts laid by?
Wherewith thy soul thou woundedst frequently*
Where are (I say) those carnal cogitations
Which with importunate rife molestations
Did beat upon thy heart? occasioned
By drink, sleep, pleasure, flesh-much pampered?
Have thou forgot, that death first entrance made
At those two windows which the soul betrayed?
Where are (then) those bright sparkling lights most fair?
Which used to be ensnared and to ensnare.
Can thou behold no face, as thy fit prize?
Or have thou pull'd-out lust-alluring eyes?
Or, is it for love of virtue, my chief foe,
That thou do life's sweet pleasures thus forgo?

Fl. My Mistress it is that on me does inflict
A rigid sparing course and life most strict.

Di. And, what of that? must thou therefore be nice?

Fle. O Sir, a moderate life does murder vice;
Quite quenches lust, does valiant virtue nourish,
Corroborates the soul, makes the mind flourish,
And elevate it self to things above;
Whereby it comes to pass that I still prove
More faint and feeble, she more active is;
She stronger; I more weak to do a miss.

Di. Thou do endure sharp slavery indeed;
I wish thee (then) shake off thy yoke with speed.
Deal roundlier with thy soul, her tartly chide,
For, if so Saint-like she in thee abide,
And exercise on thee such holiness,
Thou loosest me, and do thy self distress.
Thou must therefore, beginnings most withstand,
And have this Sentence ready still at hand,
Pleasure is of all ill the luscious meat.
This, thou must sugredly suggest, repeat
Unto the mind of thy great Mistress fair,
With this thou must her heart entice, ensnare,
Which part, by thee, with wit and craft well played,
Thou have the day, and victour shall evade.

Fl. But, these mine arms unarmed are and faint,
My courage dead; I can me not acquaint
With earths delights, nor seek nor yet suggest
To any pleasures, for I them detest.
My nimblenesse of wit does fail me quite,
Connative-lust in me has lost it is might.
I see not ought unlawfully to will,
I more wish food, than pleasures to fulfill.

Di. I? is it so? return (then) to thy dust;
Thou art not worthy my least love or trust.
Yet stay a while, for I Will to thee call forth
My other agent of more precious worth.
Which, with more care and sedulous respect
Will all my high designs fully effect.
^ome near, most worthy World, my steadfast friend,
My matchless Mouse-trap, whereinto I send
Besotted sinners, who, with heedlesse hearts
Are caught, whiles they neglect soule-saving parts.
Thou, world, I say, who when thou seem to smile,
Do much more hurt, than when thou do turmoile.
And, when thou do entice to be affected,
Art most to be avoided, disrespected;
Then, with supine neglect to be despised,
When men by thee are forced or advised.
Hence it is that they which have thy favor found,
Are like those men, which in deep seas are drowned.

Woe. Sir, I am ready and most promptly pressed,
In all things to perform your high behest;
Most forward, free, to endure all labors great
To suffer pinching hunger, cold or heat,
Yea, and what not? whereby I may express
My bounden Best, to you, with eagerness.

Di. Hark, do thou hear my most obsequious Client?
How readily addressed, how pressed and pliant?
With all approved care his best to bend
The confines of our Kingdom to extend.

Fl. I hear right well, and cannot choose but smile:

D. What makes thee smile, thou thin-skin'd queen most vile

Fl. His madness, which a measure does surmount

D. But, my wise world does thee most sottish count,
Whose rigid life, thy life has well nigh spent,
And struck thee dead to pleasure and content.

Fl. Nay rather: But what rage of slavish sin
Does vex and much perplex all those, within,
Which thirst so after worlds Wormwood and Gall?
And following him, do on life's shipwreck fall,
Enduring (thus) much mischief, and the power
Of impious tyranny, souls to devour.

D. What Is this? who made thee such a Preacher, pray?

Fl. She, which me governs and whom I obey.

Di. A wretched service it is to be regarded,
Where a sharpe-life is for full-pay rewarded.

Fl. Nay rather, he is to foolish bondage bent,
Which serves the wrangling-Divell, nere content.

Di. Is It possible thou should thus saucie be?
I Will plague this-pride with all extremity.

Fl. Your threatenings great do little me affright,
I need not fear the Devils fraud or might;
Having the Lord far stronger on my part.
I know there is nothing sweeter to thy heart
Than, at thy pleasure, me to make to sin,
And having sinned, mine overthrow to win;
But, now at last I have resolved to leave
Thy slavish yoke, which did me long bereave
Of my best liberty; for, now I see
How many sins, so many Devils in me:
And, that unless I these from me expel,
The others will within me lurk and dwell.
But, thou have surely lost a Maid of me;
And, blessed be heaven, whose grace has set me free.
The flesh, well ruled, is servant to the soul,
If this do rule, the other's in control.

Woe. Intolerable is thine insolence,
To hear thee longer, I want patience.

Fl. And, want it still, who cares for that, I pray?

Woe. Thou should (I think) give, to thy elder, way.

Fl. My elder, that thou art, indeed, I grant,
Not better, whiles thou art Satan's stiff servant.

Woe. Why? what had thou been (prithee) without me?

Fl. Nay, but for me, what had become of thee?

Woe. The World, I (surely) evermore had bin.

Fl. Nay, rather, a wild Desert, empty, thin.
For, what is the world? if men do it not furnish,
And, what is man? if flesh do him not garnish.

Di. Thou arguest wittily; But, yet, I say,
The world begirts and hems thee every way.

Fl. But, were not flesh, in being, presupposed,
It could not be begirt and so enclosed.

Di. Well, well, forbear, I can no longer bear thee:
Or hold thy peace, or I Will no longer hear thee.
But, if thou (thus) me cross and contradict,
I Will on thee (soon) my utmost rage inflict.

Fl. Thou can not hurt one-haire upon my head
Unless my Maker has so ordered.
Meane-while, I Will hear what exhortation fine
Thou giv'st the World to act all thy design.

Di. I Will let thee hear, if so thou will conceal it.

Fl. Nay, whatsoere I hear, I Will (sure) reveal it.
Lest, others, which thy counsels do not know,
Through ignorance, themselves do overthrow.

Di. Thou treacherous slut, go on (then) do thy worst,
If, thou forsake me, I have others nurs't,
And nuzled-up, and those of thine own kin,
And near acquaintance, who have ever binne
My far more constant active instruments,
Clinging close to me with their full consents.

Fl. I doubt it not; But, O that it might be,
That, them, by grace, I thoroughly clens'd could see!
Then, they, with me, would quickly thee forsake,
And, faithfully, their souls their sovereigns make.

Di. Come thou to me (my World) lend thou thine ear
Thou, all my crafts and counsels (now) shall hear.

Woe. Speak on (great Sir) thy world is still and mute, bold,
To hear thy hests, and then to execute.

Di. Brave World, my most renowned Champion
By whom, I most of my large Empire hold;
Whom, whither I may praise for readiness
To my commands; or for selfe-nimblenesse,
In thy enchanting Arts; I know not well;
So bravely thou, in both, do bear the bell.
Meane-while, what may I thee most fitly name?
A theater full of contentions flame.
Where all do act their parts, contend and strive,
But very few, with victory, do thrive.
Thou have circensean-games, those pristine sports,
Which have been exercised in Romes rare Courts;
And those, most exquisitely ready made,
Where, each may his affected course invade;
Where thou shall find a Miscellanie strange,
All of all sorts in their base courses range.
There, first and worst of all, thou may behold
The avaricious, greedy after gold,
Who want, as well, the wealth already got,
As, that, they tugge and toil for, and have not.
Who ride and run, and sweat and swear, and lie,
By right or wrong, by force of fallacy,
To gather heaps of wealth, and hoorded gain,
In using which, as hopeless, and as vain,
As if they never had them in their hands:
In which respect, here, all the difference stands
Twixt greedy havers, and those, nothing-having
That, these, in wanting; those themselves depraving
Of use of what they have, their state do show.
Either, things wanted, they do covet, so,
That, they may have them; or, things (now) enjoyed,
They fear to loose, or, lest they be destroyed.
They, filthy gain before plain loss esteem,
And wealth got any way, they pleasant deem.
All nets and snares, all gins and grins they lay
To compass coin, and make a gainful prey.
If profit but peep out with half an eye,
Then are they tickled, netled, eagerly;
They itch to be made rich, and fly to gain,
They Grace neglect, which makes me laugh amain.
They sing with franticks, and with fools they run
T'a painted pair of stocks, where they are undone.
For, what else do they, but make their own snares
Whiles hoording gold, they heap up galling cares?
Who knows not how that Achans wedge of gold,
And Dagons house, them to destruction sold?
Yet, with such subtle shifts I use to hide
And cloak and palliate their poysonous-side,
That, not least glimpse of my-sly-worke appears,
Nor of their owne-salvations-losse, least fears.
And, how (indeed) should they or fear or fly,
The danger, which they cannot find or spy?
Riches are got with toil, are kept with care,
With envy and distrust increased are;
At last, with gripes of conscience, grief of heart,
Or, they from us, or we from them must part:
Yet, these, the vicious Avaricious-man
Idolatrously love, yea worship can;
And in his heart to them a Church erects:
For, that, man worships, which he most affects.
They, then, that prize gold more than God above,
Their goods as gods; land, as their Lord, they love.
Next, my brave World, within thy compass wide
The puft-Ambitious round about do ride;
And, these are always fowlers for high honors
On highest turrets to erect their banners.
And, for this end, sleep from their eyes they banish,
And from their minds sweet rest and peace does vanish.
Proudly they perk aloft, unsafely sit,
Headlong they tumble, when their bark is split.
Wherein, they, me their Prince (right) personate,
Who, higher raisde, fell more precipitate.
Briefly, here, in thy courts take their carreire
Voluptuous-wantons, who no color fear,
Who, for a little posting-shade of pleasure
Hazard salvation, souls eternal treasure.
Here also run the Wrathful fretfull Rout,
Who swell and swagger, rage and rave about,
Who, Salamander-like, live best in fire
Whose grateful works answer my great desire.
For, if Peacemakers be Gods sons esteemed;
Then (sure) peace-breakers must my sons be deemed.
Here, run the rabble of hels Envious elves,
Who pine at others, but most pinch themselves.
Who are much vexed at their neighbors joy,
And no less jocond at their great annoy.
Whose base and most malicious inclination,
Is unto me of passing acceptance.
Here, finally, are sottish-Sluggish-ones,
Who pass their lives like lifelesse lazie-drones.
All these do ramble in thy circle round,
By whom our treasury most rich is found.
For, as Saints souls are Gods best treasures deemed;
So, I their spoil have my best sport esteemed.
Then, buckle to thy business, play thy part,
Now let me see thine active, expert heart.
I may suggest foul facts unto the thought,
Thou must them urge, and see the^ thoroughly wrought.
But, if thou long, our Empire to enlarge,
Thou must most chiefly execute this charge:
Namely, ith'first place, to remove or stay,
Occasions, tending to good, any way.
Thou, many-men (I think and hope) shall find,
To let alone forbidden-things enclinde,
More out of shame or fear, than for good will;
This shame, thou from their minds, must push-off still
That, neither sense nor shamefac'dnesse therein
May curb or keep them back from any sin.
This, if thou do, as easily thou may,
If thou flinch not, nor from my counsel stray'st,
That goodly troop, and train of seeming-Saints,
Shall, bare and blind and snared in sins constraints,
Run^e after thee, and thou with cords of vice,
Shall them to dance after thy pipe, entice;
And draw them up and down from sin to sin;
From one lust to another, them to win:
And, thus, they, tired and myr'd with sins, at length,
Shall pass before their driver, void of strength.
Meanewhile, my self, will nothing intermit,
Which may my thrones enlargement fully fit,
And, if thou show thy self my servant true,
I Will pay thy work the wages just and due.
I (as thou know right well) will exercise,
That expert art, practiced by hunters wise,
Who hunt in garments green like groves and woods,
Whereby the Dear, which 'bout the mountains scuds,
They, at more leisure with more pleasure may
Deceive, of life bereave and beareaway.
Just so, will I, most nimbly play my part,
Now, here: now, there: I up and down will start;
Sometime a lamb, sometime a lion stout,
Sometime thick-darknesse; then I Will light bring out:
And so to several times, conditions, places,
I Will put on most fit various tempting-faces.
For, to deceived men mourning, I Will be sad,
To cheat the cheerful, I Will be merry-mad:
To gull the godly (if so be I might)
I Will be transformed 'nto an Angel bright:
To sting the strong, I Will seem a lamb most mild,
To murder meeke-ones, ravening wolf most wild.
Yea, often, I openly rage, lyon-like,
Often, with the dragon, secretly I strike.
By these means (though, sometimes a strong knit band
May our temptations happily withstand)
Yet, there is no doubt, but (at the last) we shall
Upon an happy hoped issue fall.
For, no man (always) lives so cautelous
But may, sometime, ensnared be by us;
So he upon thy pleasing baits do rest,
And my most various pills do well digest.
For why? much difference must be in the essays,
To cross the craft of all my cheating ways:
To bear the frequent, yea continual blows
Of him, whose subtle nature plainly shows
His genuine-cunning and sly policy,
Got, by hid malice and antiquity.
For, since the time that I from heaven fell,
I fell a vexing those whom God loves well:
Even his dear sons: And, never (yet) did cease
My hatred against that creature to increase
Till I had utterly undone, destroyed
His precious soul, with me, to be annoyed:
That creatures soul (I say) which God did make
His masterpiece and image blessed to take,
That he might also, at the last, possess
That heavenly glory, matchless blessedness,
Which I through mine own pride most justly lost,
And, ever since, has me most dearly cost.

Fl. O, how most plainly have thou shown thy self
To be the devil (indeed) a damned-else.
But, all thy snares and gins are laid in vain
So long as I do none of thine remain:
Whom only, thou do greedily affect,
Whom wholly thou would impiously infect.
For, whom, indeed, can all thy snares allure?
If, he, relying on my counsel sure,
Refuse thy cheating counsel to obey;
It Is mine-owne simple softness that makes way
For all thy juggling tricks; I say, it is I
That fit Voluptuous-lust for Venerie.
The Avaritious for accursed gain;
The Ambitious for his swelling loftie-straine,
The Envious for his most malicious heart:
The Wrathful how to act his raging-part.
The Gluttonous for his lust-breeding-cates.
The Slothful, who for sleep and slumber waits.
Then, what needs all thy supersilious boast?
Thou can but tempt, and try, and move, at most,
For, then, if I resist, refuse, withstand,
Thou do but cast thy seed upon the sand.
They, then, which truly are discreet and wise
(And, herein, I ingenuously agnize,
I speak against my self) O let them ever
Curb my indulgent nature, nuzle it never;
O let them (always) use all rigidnesse
Against me, their Flesh, which work mine own distress
Let them delight to exercise on me,
What ere may cross me most, most irksome be.
But, as for pleasing-things, which me affect,
O let them quickly, wholly, them reject*
Which wholesome counsel if they timely take,
They shall, not only, thy hopes frustrate make,
And put thee, their arch-enemie to flight,
But, having with victorious sweet delight
Finished the battle, got the conquest brave,
At last, a Crown of glory they shall have

Di. Thou filthy queen; why do thou thy self show
Our most nefarious, most perniciou^ foe?

Fle. Because that He alone tha me created,
Thus, to Himself (by grace) me regulated:
When, to my lust I full allowance gave,
I was thy servant and thy wretched slave,
But, once recal'd and freed from that estate,
By holy abstinence made moderate,
I learned my God, whom best I ought, to serve;
From thee, whom first I followed, thus to swerne.

Di. And what? will thou, my World, forsake me too?

Woe. I must forsake thee; what else shall I do?
For, if the Flesh forsake me, what am I?
On whom my state has its dependancie.

Di. Nay, do not so: rather our darts let us cast,
And force her to our beck and check at last.

Fl. He which may forced be, knows not to dye;
But, I have learned to embrace Death readily:
And, dye I will to sin, thee to destroy,
And bid farewell to the world and worldly-joy.

Woe. If thou bid me farewell, I ill shall grow,
Forsake not me, for I with thee will go.

Di. Then farewell both, for Hell's my only due,
Thither I go, from whence I came to you:
Meane-while; let all know this, that boldly sin
And grieve not at it; they have hell, within;
A hellish-conscience lodging in their breast,
And I have slaves and whips the same t'infest.

An end of the second Dialogue.
The Third DIALOGUE.
Between Man and his Conscience.
The Argument of the third Dialogue.
Man and his Conscience altercate
About the Souls and Bodies state.
Man (here) complains of much unrest,
That Conscience does him sore molest.
Conscience, as much, of Man complains,
That his ill-doings her constraines
To testify against him still,
'Cause he resists his Makers will.
Where, by the way, Conscience displayes
Sweet rules for ordering all his ways;
And, to them both, true peace to win,
Finding the cause of all in Sin.
Man. Why, O my Conscience do thou so perplex me?
Why do thou so much gripe and grind and vex me?
Will thou, mine inmate, whom I entertain,
Tell tales of me, and against me (thus) complain?

Con. The charge, which I received to keep in trust,
Alive I look to: Dead, return I must.

Ma. Alas, poor conscience, if I ruined be,
I prithee what will (then) become of thee?

Con. How-ere thou fare, I Will bear thee company,
And the same smart we'll suffer mutually.
Alive or dead, I will thee not forsake,
If thou live well thou will me happy make:
If thou live ill I shall both figh and groan,
And all my griefs and wrongs I will make known.
For or against thee, I must witness bear:
A thousand armies (hence) cannot me fear.
And, this, I know, that though Revenge come late,
Yet, it is most sure, and layes-on heavy weight.

Ma. Wretch that I am, I (then) am quite undone,
What shall I do? O whither shall I run?

Con. Run? what? to hide thee? Ah, there is no place left,
I am of all retyring-holes bereft:
Though thou could creep into earths intrals low,
Earth, no safe shelter could on thee bestow.
If thou more swift than Easterne-winde could fly,
Thou could not escape my fierce velocity.
As swift as thought, I, the air can penetrate,
And, nothing can my course procrastinate:
But, I would follow, yea pursue thee so,
That I would still, in thine own footsteps go.
"Then, say not thou, there is none can me epsy,
" None can me hear, fast shut is ear and eye.
"Who can me view, since darkness me does hide,
"Since strong stone-wals close me on every side.
"Since none can see me, whom I need to fear,
"Tus^, God, my faults does not in memory bear.
Vain, most profane are all such thoughts as these,
Shall not the eyes-creator see with ease?
And shall not he that made the ear, soon hear?
Or, He that plants the heart, know all things clear?
All things to his Omniscience naked are;
Fly from the field to the town with frighted care,
Out of the street into thy house make haste,
Thence, though thou be in thy bedchamber placed,
Yet, know, that I, by thy Creators will,
Within thee rest, and am thy witness still.
Whom, if thou with an evill-eye behold,
To use those words, to me, thou will be bold,
Of Ahab to Elias (impiously)
What? have thou found me, O mine enemy
And, I, most readily shall answer thee,
I have thee found, and must against thee be,
'Cause, thou have sold thy self to work what is i^^
Before the Lord, which does thy guilt fulfill.
Behold (therefore) I now against thee rise,
And bring upon thee purchased miseries.

Ma. Alas, I then perceive, our foul offenses
Are most unsafe, though daubed with fair pretenses.

Con. What though they could be safe in their commission,
If, yet, they bring thee to unsure condition?
Or, what good comes to sinners by being hid,
If, guilt, to hope so, long, does them forbid?

Ma. Inform me (then) good Conscience how I may
Make thee, my gladsome witness, in me stay.

Con. The best and briefest counsel I can give,
Is, thee t'advise, a holy-life to live;
A life inculpable of crying-crimes,
Unspotted with the evils of the times;
A life declaring power of godliness,
A life that heavenly graces does express.
By dying to all lusts and foul desires,
By doing all good-deeds that love requires.
By giving freely, what to each belongs,
Forgiving, friendly, all received wrongs.
Not coveting what is another right,
To do, as thou would be done by, with delight.
By shunning that which makes the soul to dye,
Choosing what makes it live eternally.

Ma. These are hard tasks and bitter lessons, sure,
And, such, as flesh and blood cannot endure.

Con. O, but it will be far more harsh and hard,
To Endure the worm of Conscience and be barred
And shut out from the Beatifick-sight
Of Gods all-cheering face and beauty bright.
Which pain of loss, does doubtless far excel,
All other the most horrid pains of hell;
Namely to be, both, torn and tortured, there,
To be distracted and distressed with fear,
Where, neither, the tormentors tired be,
Nor, those tormented (ever) death can see.

Ma. Alas, that Death's most dire and tart, indeed,
Ah, show me how I may from it be freed.

Con. The onely-way is to the world to dye,
Before thy soul out of this world does fly.

Ma. What? must this spacious, specious, Aedifice
Adorned with rarities of precious price,
Full of so many various, curious pleasures
The only magazine of so much treasures,
Must this, I say, be vilipended so?
Must I this world, so rare, so fair, forgo?

Con. Undoubtedly, if thou in these delight,
With deadly danger they thy soul will smite.
For, look, how much the flesh this world affects
And the false-seeming-sweets thereof respects;
So much the more the soul will be perplexed,
And, with the fire of hell be plagued and vexed:
On the other side, How much the flesh is tamed,
So much the soul with heavenly hope is flamed.

Ma. But yet, we see, all men do still desire
The present-state, it is this they most require.

Con. But yet, I know, it is far the worst condition,
To Enjoy things-present in a full fruition;
But, therewithal, to be quite stripped and bare,
Of future-comforts to have part or share.
O, it is most sweet, only the world to use:
But, God alone to enjoy, and chief to choose!
Thou have not in this world a fixed station,
Nor, here, must (ever) have thy habitation:
Who, then, can sing his Song in a strange-land?
Who would build Castles on the sinking-sand?
Alas, we (here) our selves should so behave,
That, when the worms did eat our corpse in grave,
Our souls, in heaven, triumphantly might sing,
With quires of Saints and Angels to heavens King.
Thither our spirit ever should ascend,
Whither we do propound our journies-end.
Thither we should make speedy haste, yea fly,
Where we shall ever live, and nere-more die.
Do thou pure gold, nere to be spent, desire?
Eternall-life, which, never ends, require.
The land of Havilah, in Paradise,
Has in it, store of gold of precious price.
It Is Earth thou bear, that, thou must leave behind,
It Is earth thou tear'st, that, thou must nere-more mind
But, it is a land thou seek'st, and would receive,
That is the land which thou shall never leave.
Men, rather, are Gods Stewards, than Treasurers,
Riches (therefore) upon them He conferres.
What (then) we reap, we piously should sow
And liberally and lovingly bestow.
That, this true faith and due obedience,
Might be repayd with heavenly recompense.
The things we give are small and not our own;
Those we shall have are great* and from Gods throne*
M^n, whose affections are celestial,
Are justly styled Angels terrestrial;
And, no man shall (hereafter) God possess,
In whom, God dwells not (here) by holiness.
If Satan, Prince of earth, has thy least part,
God, King of heaven, will not dwell in thy heart.
The spirit of evil (then) cast out, disdain,
That so thou may Gods Spirit entertain.
Remember, whence thou came, thine offspring base,
And, this will make thee blush and hide thy face;
Consider, where thou art, and sigh for woe,
And, quake, to think, whither, thou (once) must go.

Ma. All are (I know) made of one Potters clay,
And, must resolve into the same, one day.

Con. Then, every man, being mould, must into earth,
Moulder away, whence, first, he took his birth.

Ma. Nothing's more true.

Con. And, Flesh is but a froth
Clothed with frail beauty, a mere menstruous cloth.

Man. It Is even so, I can it not deny.

Con. Why (then) do thou so fat and beautify
That Flesh of thine, which after a short while
Must be devoured, in grave, by worms most vile.
But, as for thy poor soul, thou let'st it pine,
Nor, do with good works make it fair and fine.
Which, thus, to God and's Angels thou should show
Thou do not (sure) the price of thy soul know.

Man. Yes, very well.

Con. I fear the contrary;
For, else, thou would not it so vilify.
Know, this, O Man, know this, I say to thee*
The loss of one soul, greater loss to be,
Than of a thousand bodies: for, it is plain,
Bodies may be revived, that have bin slain:
But, O, the soul which once by sin is dead,
Can never be to life recovered,
But by a miracle, Christ's blood applied,
Which cannot be, where it is still denied.
O, then, behold, and blush to see thy sloth,
Or, rather, sinful sottishness, or both:
In (thus) preferring bark before the tree:
Shells before the kernels, flesh before the soul in me.
Not only blush at this, but sigh and groan
Whiles thou considerest how thou art left alone,
Here, in a region full of enemies,
Ready and greedy the^ for to surprise,
Where are domesticke-traytors worst of all,
Where Death is in the pot to work thy fall.
And, where thy foe stands ready, thee to catch,
And thou had need to stand upon thy watch.
And, here and there to cast a careful eye,
And, every where all dangers to descrie.
Not only, blush and sigh, but quake with woe,
When thou remembrest whither thou must go:
Namely, into a land most dark and dry,
A lake that burns with brimstone furiously,
A place of punishment and tortures great,
Where hideous horror has eternal seat:
Where is no order, but confusion strange,
Where error, terror fiercely reign and range.

Ma. Is there no hopeful nor no helpful place?

Con. No, none at all. Where God is not by grace,
There he is present by revengefull power,
The wicked, like dry stubble, to devour.
For, if, thou have not God, thy Father kind,
A wrathful judge thou will him, surely, find.
But, if thou long and labor to avoyde
Gods vengeance, let thy pains be all employde,
In walking in the ways of Gods commands,
Wherein (indeed) a Christians beauty stands.
Which is the mirror or best looking-glass,
Where all may see the paths they ought to pass*
Which is the sum of our Religions state,
His image, whom we serve, to imitate.
Christ's lovely-lover, is his lively-picture,
As he is figured in the holy Scripture.
He bears a Christians badge and title true,
Which, him, a Christian, by his deeds does show.
For, it is but halfe-enough to bud and blow,
Unless in good works, we, full-ripe do grow.
He lives but badly, which don't well believe,
Faith, with unfruitful lives, does but deceive.
True faith will not be closed, but will break out,
If, life be in the tree, fruit forth will sprout:
So, if, firm faith has in the heart due place,
It will shine forth in virtues sparkling grace.
For, wherefore is Man's body said to die?
Because the soul does thence expire and sly:
So, how else is it that the soul is dead?
But, because faith is not there harbored.
Thy Souls life (therefore) is thy faith sincere;
And Faiths-life (best) by good works does appear.

Man. Alas, this being so, what is my case?
Having bin such a stranger to true grace.

Con. Sure, all the while that Grace has in thee ceast,
Thou have not bin a man, but a mere beast.
For, without knowledge of our God, indeed,
All men are like bruit beasts in fields that feed.

Man. This I confess, therefore I pray thee show
Which way I may God and my self well know?

Con. In Holy-Writ, thou shall the right-way find,
Into what Paths thy foot must be inclined.
There is the light, which will the way direct,
There is the life, which thou must best affect.

Man. But yet whiles thou, within me art offended,
All holy duties by me best intended,
Are tedious and most troublesome to me,
Nothing, well done (as I desire) I see.
Every thing clouded is with discontent,
Unsweet, unsavory, lumpish, negligent;
I therefore first, and most desire to see,
A reconcilement made 'twixt thee and me,
That so more freely and more fruitfully
I may perform all acts of piety.

Con. Would thou, indeed, have me full pacifi'de?
Thou (then) must please me, or else I shall chide,
For, whatsoere against me is committed,
Is but a building unto hellfire fitted.
If therefore, either fear of punishment,
Or, hope of high reward to full content,
Can win thee ought and woo thee to be wise
If quietness of mind, a precious prize,
If peace of conscience, a continual feast,
Which every good man strives to have encreast,
May thee incite, then do not me provoke,
Nor, with the grins of sins thy self fast yoke.
The Sea my Nature does most aptly show
Whereon, if any filthy foame does flow,
Any dead karkasses or slimy-weeds,
^t, into furious boylings, soon proceeds,
It rages, rumbles, tumbles, all about
And is not quiet, till it quite throw out
Those filthy scums upon the banks and shore,
Of which it seemed to labor much before;
That, thus, it eased of that superfluous stuff.
Might calmed be and cease to be so rough:
^o, I my self, thy conscience, use to swell,
To boil and toil, to rise and rage; until
The lees and dregs, the least Remains of sin*
Be utterly expelled from within.
For, nothing does me so much press, oppress,
As, wilfully-committed-wickednesse;
With whose intolerable burden pressed,
Till eased thereof, I can enjoy no rest.
^, would thou, therefore ever merry be,
Would thou, continually, me cheerfully see,
^ then it is thy part, timely, with due zeal,
My soars (thy sins) with Penitence to heal.
^or, look, how-much man sees and knows his sin,
The more to groan and grieve he does begin;
and, true repentant-teares are Angells-wine,
With these, the soul being washed, in heaven will shine,
Do thou desire (then) to be never sad?
It Is a good-conscience, that makes ever glad.

Man. Alas, I knew all these, before you spoke,
But, never yet, right use of them did make.

Con. Unprofitable is that science, sure,
Which, comfort to the conscience don't procure.
Indeed there is much-science every where,
But, little-conscience does abroad appear.
What good will science or great knowledge do?
If conscience be unclean, obscene, in you.
Thou shall not be, at Gods last dreadful day,
Arraigned by the Book of science gay;
But, by the book of conscience, every-one
Shall answer, at the Lords tribunal throne.
Such (then) as, at that great day, thou would be,
Such, let the Lord ( now, in this life) thee see.
Conscience, is a voluminous great-Booke,
Whereinto, whosoere does please to look,
Shall find all writ ith style of verity,
And with the pen of doubtless certainty.
And, thence (ith day of judgment) will be sought,
Not, how much have thou read, but how much wrough^
Not, how well have thou spoke, what good words given*
But, to live well, how have thou cared and striven?

Man. O! Woe is me; if this (alas) be so,
What I shall say or do, I do not know.
I see and have seen, shamefull-things, and yet,
I have not bin ashamed or blushed at it.
I find and feel things bitter and most tart,
Yet, have not (as I ought) bin grieved at heart.

Con. I, this is it (indeed) that makes me sad;
For, it is thy only grief that makes me glad.
For, by how much the more, thou senseless art;
So much the more I sigh and sob and smart:
Thy tears are healing-tents to cure my woe,
Which, if they from within do gush and flow,
Sins-pardon, life, unto thy soul thou gain'st,
And, peace of conscience, inwardly obtayn'st.
For, evils-past, hurt not, if not affected,
But, if sins shame be in this life neglected,
The future thought thereof will work much blame,
And, thou will grieve for want of former shame.

Man. But yet, this one thing* I would gladly know,
Wherefore thou do distract, distress me so?
For, if thy pricks did me not waking keep,
^ might, a nights, more sound and sweetly sleep.
Thou being quiet none would me molest,
Nor, with such turmoyles my fair peace infest.

Con. I told you at the first, and it is most true;
He that made you, made me a mate for you,
Yea, your in-mate and fellow up and down,
^o vex you, or with comfort you to crown.
Now, mark this well; a sinners sleep and rest,
Can never pleasant be, to him, at best.
For, all the naps Man takes not in the Lord,
Naught else but evil do to him afford.
Think not (therefore) thy self secure to be,
Although thou do no open witness see;
For, when a Body in a sunshine-day
Is seen without a shadow; then, I say,
And not till then, a man's soul may be found
Unto no Conscience-testimony bound.
But, why do thou still lay the blame on me,
Of all thy trouble and anxietie?
Behold, the spightfull sp'rite, to us, draws nigh,
That brings upon us-both our misery.

Man. Alas, what is it, where is it, I pray?

Con. Thou shall it see anon; but now give way,
And in those bushes hide thy self a while.
For, ever since sin did thee (first) beguile,
Thou cunningly knewst how thy self to hide
In shadie shrubs, thy nakedness being eyed:
Which nakedness being seen to thy disgrace,
Thou guiltily did fly from Gods blessed face.

Man. O that is too true; I think on it (now) with woe;
But, I Will forbear, since thou will have it so:
Go to that Witch, I pray, whiles I, a space,
Do up and down this Thicket walk and trace.

The end of the third Dialogue.
The Fourth D^ALOGUE.
Between Conscience, Sin, and Man.
The Argument of the fourth Dialogue.
Here Conscience does encounter Sin,
'Twixt whom, hot bickerings do begin.
For, tender Conscience easily spies
Sins Wiles and Guiles and Fallacies.
Sin, also boldly, by the way,
Her Soule-bane Baits does full display;
And feign therewith would conscience catch,
But Conscience wisely does her watch.
Man, to his Conscience comes at last,
And all due blame on Sin does cast.
Resolving, Sin, (now) to detest,
So, He and Conscience sweetly rest.
Con. WHat? Sin? Ill-met; whither so fast do go?

Sin. To meet thee still, whether thou will or no.

Con. I think no less indeed* else thou would not
So pertly and apertly plod and trot.
But, be assured thou shall as welcome be
To me and my house, when ere I thee see,
As water to a ship, clouds at a Feast,
Which (then) intrude, when they are looked for least.

Sin. Yet, who is he, that me not much esteems?
Or, me unworthy his acquaintance deemes?

Con. Yet, herein thou thy self most plainly show's^
A subtle Syrene, wheresoere thou go.
For, with thy most nefarious inchantations
Thy cheating charms and slye insinuations
Thou never ceasest to bewitch, abuse,
All that this worlds vast Sea to sail do use.

Sin. The fault's their own; why do they not forbear me?
And stop their ears and then they need not hear me?

Con. O that they would, how happy were they then*
But, O, thou have a hook, wherewith, poor men,
Poor careless men (thy wiles that have not watched,
Nibling the Bait) are couzned ( so) and caught.
For, to the proud and supercilious breast,
Thou, high and huge and hard things do suggest.
Persuading them inferiors to disdain,
And, at great meetings for prime-place to strain
To scorn the company of mean and poor,
Whereas indeed the gain would be far more
Unto their credit so to use inferiors,
As they would used be by their superiors.
So, when thou do the avaricious find,
With quenchlesse-thirst of gold thou fir'st their mind.
Who, still the more they have, do crave the more,
And, Tantalize in midst of copious store.
Tired all day, with toil; all night with care;
And (whereby they most miserable are)
The less they need, the more they covet still.
Now, every sin (chiefly this ancient-ill
Of avarice) is harder far to cure,
In old-men, than it is in young men, sure;
Which is most strange; since old-men near their grave,
In that respect, should, minds more holy have.
If thou (again) meet with voluptuous mates,
Thou, ready have for them, most pleasant baits,
Fair Ivory-beds, richly embroydered,
Whereon, themselves, at ease, to stretch and spread,
Adorned with flowers, perfumed with odours sweet,
'Tindulge their lewd and lustful bodies meet.
Faire-fac'd Companions, drencht in deeds unchaste,
Places and Plays, idly their hours to waste.
Finally, all in one word to conclude,
Thou, evermore, men's minds do vex, delude
With choice of cheating-tricks, new fopperies,
And, either having quite put-out their eyes,
Or, with full-sight do them so much bewitch,
That, headlong, they fall in thy deadly-ditch.

Sin. Why? what a stir is here? why brand you me
With this blacke-coale of odious-treacherie?

Con. Do ask me why? 'cause thou deservest worst
Of all men living, of me, most and first.
Whom, day by day, thou do so plague and pain,
As if those punishments which Poets feign
To be upon some men imposed, inflicted,
Who, in their lives had been to lust addicted,
To cruelty, beastiall licenciousnesse;
Were exercised on me; with such distress,
And deep distraction, am I daily drencht,
With such great gripes, I, inwardly am pincht,
That all my pains seem Hornet-stings or bites
Or Satan's Buffets, when to hell he smites.
And, which is most and worst, no help I find,
So long as thou art in my sight and mind,

Sin. These peevish Whinnels, ever, wretched are;
But, many, much more wretchedl^ do fare,
Than need requires, complaining causelessly.
But, I, even-now, observed thee testify,
And 'against me urge that I deserved worst
Of all men, but of conscience most and first.
Tell me, I pray, who, me, first Being, gave?
Was it not Adam that made all men have
By one-incessant-line, right to damnation?
For, all in Adam, sinning, lost salvation.
I, surely, mine own maker could not be;
He was my Maker, who, as soon as he
Was sensible of thee, flew from Gods face
To hide him amongst the trees in conscious-case.
Flew to the tree (I say) whose bitter fruit
Had he (herein, than any beast, more brute)
Never tasted; he had not offensive bin,
And, so had nere begotten Me, called Sin.
Why do thou (then) so much of me exclame?
It Is man alone, is worthy all the blame.
It Is he alone that dug his own pit,
And, by selfe-folly, so fell into it.
He waxed proud and saucily desired,
To be like God, to be a God, aspired;
But, thereby, he most like the Devil became,
Hence flow thy tears, this did man's mischief frame.

Con. Oh I confess it. Sin or Satan either,
Than this, thou say, spoke nothing truelier ever.
But yet I cannot choose, but much admire,
How thy incessant toil does thee not tire.

Sin. Pish. That which pleases, never tyreth any.
And herein, I find instigations many.
Hatred of good, love and delight in ill,
The depravation of man's first free will.
These are the Chariot-wheeles on which I roll
And range about to effect my fancie-foule.
My Waggoner is waggish-Vanity,
Which drives my Horses (lusts) most furiously.
Hence I, so indefatigable, rest,
Being of most various-pleasures (still) possessed
If, proudly, I to prance abroad affect,
With rich and rare apparel I am decked.
Which, of the newest fashion must be made,
Whereby beholders eyes on me are stayed,
With gazing admiration, and thus, I,
Admire my self, as much as passers-by,
If, I my flesh to pamper do delight,
My Table ready furnished is in sight,
With luscious cates and delicates most dear,
With all choice rarities that make good cheer.
If I be far from Sea, I Fish affect,
If near the Sea, I Flesh do most respect.
There Is nothing new, but I long for it, have it,
Nothing so costly, but my lust does crave it.
If, I a Dancing-match or Play would see,
Thither I haste, where thickest clusters be.
Nor can the Mimicke-Actors give content,
Nor fond Spectatours be to pleasure bent
If I be absent: For, in public meetings
Where I see vanity use pleasing greetings,
There I am quickly present, there I find
Not any, but is pressed to please my mind,
My pleasant presence yields such delight,
That all things are most joviall in my sight.

Con. Hence I collect, that sins most prompt intention
Is exercised in Actions of Invention.

Sin. You hit the very white. For, sin is ever
Pregnant and active, and is idle never;
But, one thing from another (still) begets,
And, so an edge upon her Lovers whets.

Con. Nay rather, sin makes them the more secure,
Security does them to sloth enure.

Sin. What if it do? with this soft lethargy
Whiles I do mine, thus, cocker cunningly,
I tie them closelier to me, every day,
They are my shades and follow me, each way.
They are my Soldiers and will for me fight,
They, as good servants, serve me with delight.
And, so much they express to me their love,
And their firm stedf^stnesse to me approve,
That, like good Citizens, they readily
Will lose their lives to prop my liberty:
Nor think they any toil too much, they take
To show themselves obsequious for my sake.
For, they which love, or labor not at all,
Or, love their labor, or account it small.

Con. But, certainly, nothing does sooner fade
And putrify, than love, thus weakly laid.
Since all thy promises so goodly thought,
Like snow before the sun do come to naught.
Nay rather, to the soul that in them joys,
They bring a deadly sting and dire annoyes.

Sin. Do thou not think my promise prevalent?

Con. Yes; for who ere is thereof confident,
Is pressed down t'eternall-Death, thereby;
For this men find by most sad certainty,
That naught is worse than sinners Happiness;
That, there is no woe, where is no wickedness.

Sin. But, one among a thousand, let me see,
That is of this severe conceit with thee.

Con. Ah, though I cannot one, amongst many, show,
Yet, more's their madness and sure overthrow.

Sin. This is your censure; who thinks so beside?
To Enjoy things present, all do (best) abide,
And ever have done so. Let them that fear
For future and contingent cases care.
Better's one Bird in hand, than two in the bush,
Future uncertainties who will prize a Rush?
Things present, being pleasant in our sight,
Are therefore more desired and most delight.

Con. Hence it is (indeed) that men so dote and err,
Hence they their Syrene-pleasures so prefer,
Because they walk not (here) by faith, but sense,
Hurryed along with loose improvidence,
But, if they did consider seriously
This life to be a perpetuity
Of sad repentance, since, all vices here,
The longer used, the stronger do appear;
And, what they loose by thus observing thee,
And what they get by being from thee free,
How little would they joy, how much lament?
How little time of grace would be mis-pent?
With how small pleasure and how slender joy
They (thus) incur perpetual annoy?
"Whereas, if all that ere from Adam came,
"And, all of these were Preachers of choice fame,
"And, all these Preachers hels least-pains should preach
" These all, could not hels least pain fully reach,
"Nor can it be imagined or known,
"What parts from torture: (there) will be alone,
"And, that no anguish of all temp'rall smart
"May to the eternal woes which pierce the heart
"Of damned souls in Hell, compared be.
If these, and such like things, men right would see,
And seriously consider; nothing, then,
(O, thou prodigious mischief of all men)
Nothing (I say) would they account or deem
More foul than thee, nothing more base esteem.
And so would shun thee, as a snake i'th'way,
Or, as a Viper on their hands that lay.
Yea, though they knew (which, then, man does not know
That, God, for such a sin, would mercy show,
Yet, for sins filth and self most odiousness,
Men would abhor and hate ( so) to transgress.

S. Forbear, I pray, whence gush these great complaints

C. Sins cursed incroachme^ts are their chief co^straints;
By whose most impious charms and flatteries fair,
Men, into bruit beasts metamorphiz'd are.
Who, doffing their most due humanity,
Put on most belluall inconcinnity.
For, unto whom, that has his eyes in's head,
Is it not palpably discovered?
How chastity is hazarded in pleasures!
Humility quite lost in beaps of treasures!
How piety is choakt in worlds-affaires!
How truth, by tatling falls on lying-snares!
How charity, by this worlds bravery,
Is froze to death, or turned to knavery!

Sin. Tush, tush, these hazards little trouble me.

C. Yet, thou, them breed'st, and they my burdens be.

Sin. I rather think, this thy minds malady
Proceeds from selfe-pusillanimitie.
Thou have (it seems) a stomach, queazie, sick,
On which, each little mote does nauseous-stick:
And, that, which others hold a tender sprig,
Precisely, thou, count'st, than a Beam, more big.

Con. A soft and tender-conscience man must cherish,
Not bruise or break it, and so make it perish.

Sin. Well, go-to, then; If thou so tender be,
Why art thou not to my delights, more free?

Con. Because thy pleasures make my heart more sad,
Nor, any true content in them is had.
Such an apertion, or by-way to joy,
Is joys desertion, highway to annoy.
Such toys and trifles, best effects of vice,
Cannot a good-conscience, to thy lure, entice.
But, tell me, did thou never hear or know,
Good conscience price, bad-conscience plague and woe?

Sin. I never knew of eithers price or pain.

Con. Now, then, thou shall, and understand them plain.
Good-conscience is a cabinet of treasure;
An everlasting-feast, full of true-pleasure.
Contrariwise, than conscience-naught and bad,
A greater plague and pain cannot be had.
For, it has made a finall-separation,
Twixt it and peace and constant contentation.
For, as, to good-men, goodness is rich gain;
So, wickedness is wicked-mens dire pain.

Sin. This thy preciseness and austerity,
Will never suffer thee live cheerfully.

Con. O, far be it, that any should suppose,
Such joy in Sin, as from sweet virtue grows.
Whose rich reward is God himself, no less,
Who, virtue gives to those whom He will bless.
In whom, my joy is safe lockt-up and hid,
In whose exchange, who ever would me bid
The world and all its pleasures in my hand;
Yea, though they were, in number, as sea-sand,
Yet, should they not my heart allure to leave,
My joy in God, and so my soul deceive.

Sin. But yet, for all this, this worlds happiness
(For, other I know none) I still profess,
Is the most excellent, and much depends
On choice of merry-mates and joviall-friends.
On hunting after honors, heaping treasures,
And, on enjoying various sorts of pleasures.
But, these (belike) are wholly opposite,
To virtues practice and approved delight.

Con. Thou art mistaken. Virtues are, indeed,
True riches; not base wealth, which earth does breed.
Worlds wealth to serve, is God to disobay.
And, though worlds-service does to worldlings, pay
Some seeming joy; yet (ever more) Gods Saints
Find it a clog and cause of great complaints.
These do it estimate their prime perfection
To pass this desert, by Gods Spirits direction.
This state of grace, heavens glorious place, they count
To be neere-kinne, and long to climb that Mount.
The worth of all this world, hels work they deem,
Earths honors, they, earths tumors do esteem.
But, to perform Gods sacred will and pleasure,
They count their souls most high and happy treasure.

Sin. What prat'st thou of thy silly Saints to me?
They are not of my fold, nor ere will be.
And, their increase, does decrease my great powers,
But, who comes yonder? a true friend of ours;
My docible young scholar; Man, no Saint,
And, that is my joy, whom I must (now) acquaint
With my rare rudiments. For, I suppose,
What Is humane (touching vice) within him grows.

Man. Aye me, of all men living, most forlorn;
I too-too long, in silence, have forborne;
But, now I neither can nor will forbear.
Will thou not cease to hunt me every where?

Sin. It Is thou that hunts and haunts me to and fro.

Ma. I must confess it: but, for doing so,
I now am overwhelmed with woe and shame,
Yet, this my sense of sins most deadly blame,
Being the first and firm step to salvation,
Makes me find hope of my Regeneration.

Sin. How Is that? this gives me very poor content.

Ma. I do confess (I say) with full assent,
That I have finn'd, and it was only I,
Not foolish fortune, or my destiny,
No, nor the devil, but evil in mine own breast,
I therefore only against my self protest,
And, if I should thee (O my conscience blame,
Or, think my sin from any other came,
I, to those dogs might be resembled right,
Which (as divine Plato does truly write)
Do snap and snarle and bite the rolling stone,
Cast at them; but, regard not whence it was thrown.
No rather, now at last, with weeping eyes
And woeful heart, against my self I rise;
Whom I have made my worst intestine foe,
And treacherously ensnared my soul in woe.
Nor, do I only against my self thus rise,
But, make a serious solemne-vow, likewise,
(Heaven ratify the same) that I will ever,
From this time forward, use my best endeavor
That, thou (O sin) shipwreck of man's salvation
Shall nere, in me, have willing habitation.
But, if by force, thou will break in again,
Yet, thou shall never domineere and reign.

Con. A pious vow, and godly resolution,
The Lord will (surely) bring to blessed conclusion.

Ma. I doubt it not, and therefore will persist,
And, since I seem, of two parts to consist,
A Soul and Body: If the first of these
By any smallest sin, has least disease,
It stings and wrings thee strait, with bitter s^art,
O my syntericke, sinne-opposing-part!
I therefore purpose a new course to take;
Whereby, my conscience, I may cheerful make
Whereby, my soul I may with grace renourish.
And, my internal family may flourish,
And, as for thee, my flesh, since thou art apt,
To draw in sin, and be by sin entrapt;
Yea, Sin, as water, to drink in, and suck,
(And, he which adds sin to sin, does pluck,
And hale his soul to hell, as with a rope)
Thou delicate fine-Philistine, I hope,
I shall thee tame, new-mould, and mortify,
Nere let thee rest, till thou, with me, comply,
To dye to sin, till I have run my race,
All this I trust, by power of heavenly grace.

Con. Most sweetly thou resolv'st; O ever may
God, by his Spirit, perfect it, I pray.

Sin. Well, if thou me forsake, I Will others find,
Who, will me entertain, and use more kind:
For, whiles, on earth, there any men remain,
I make no doubt, but I shall rule and reign.

Ma. But, I will frustrate all thy hope in me,
If, to my votes, my God propitious be;
Now (then) my conscience; let us both go in,
And, since we are thus fairly freed of Sin,
So hateful to us both, now, mutually,
Let us rejoice with sweet tranquillity.

An end of the fourth Dialogue.
The fifth DIALOGUE.
Between God and the Soul.
The Argument of the fifth Dialogue.
God (here) the Soul most kindly greets,
With many sacred sugared sweets;
Even wooes the Soul free-love to embrace,
Assures it of assistant-grace.
The sanctified-soule complies,
Bewailes her faint infirmities;
Resignes her self to Gods dispose,
And with his holy-call does close;
God helps it on, with fair directions
And cheeres it on, with sweet affections*
The Soul (thus) on Gods leisure waits,
Till, He, to glory, It translates.
God. A Rise, my Love, my Dove, most pure and fair,
To come to Me, make haste, thy self prepare.

Soul. What sacred voice is this? blessed invitations?
Candy'd with such sweet loving compellations?

G. His, who creating thee, inspired thy life,
Inspiring it, espons'd thee, as his wife.

S. My great Creator, and my glorious King?

G. Yea, thy free-lover, whence, thy good does spring

S. I know thee, O my God, that thou art he,
Who, fully, freely, firmly, love me:
Since, for my sake, thy Son, thou have not spared
To free me, when to hell I was ensnared.

G. My Son I gave, yea, and mine only Son;
That thou might not, for ever, be undone.

S And what (dear God) shall I repay to thee?

G. Nothing, but love for love, which pleases me.

S. What heart (O Lord) can be so stupifide?
As, by thy love, not to be mollifide?

G. That heart, which hides the favors I bestow.

S. Lord, what have I, that did not from thee flow?

G. Return me thanks (then) that thou may have more,
For, grateful hearts do find my favors store.

S. Let my poor prayer (good God ascend to thee,
That thy rich grace, my (so) descend on me;
For, by thee only, it is, I life retain,
To thee (then) wholly, Me I give again.

G. Thou giv'st thy self, to me: it is well. But, where
Where are the fruits that thou to me do bear?

S. Alas, O Lord, what fruits can I express?
As of my self, till thou me till and dress?
If thou vouchsafe upon my heart, thy field,
To sow such seeds as may thee good fruit yield,
Thou must (O Lord) by thy blessed hand of grace,
First, pluck up all my weeds of vices base.

G. Thou say most true; But, will thou, willingly,
Submit thy self to graces-husbandrie?

S. O, burn me, bruise me, break me, here, O Lord;
So, thou (hereafter) mercy do afford.
O, let that hand that formed me, me reform.
Let it correct, so it to thee conform.

G. Draw near to me (then) and I will thee draw;
And listen to the lessons of my Law.

S. Speak (Lord) for, I thy hand-mayd do thee hear,
And gladly bend my most attentive ear.

G. Then, first of all, thou must well know and see
Both, whence thou came; what thou art; what thou shall be.
If thou me please, whence (first) thou did proceed,
Thou, now art, and shall be, most blessed, indeed.
Thou wast, what now thou art not, and 'twas I
That gave thee, this, thy present-entity.
I have thee over others set and placed;
And thee with high prerogatives have graced.
Superiour-things, for joy; equal, for mates;
Inferior things, to serve thee in thy straits.

S. What can thou give unto me, for me, more,
If, thou, thy self do give, it is all rich store.

G. I gave thy self, to thee, when thou wast naught,
I gave my self, to thee, being worse than ought.
I have my self, for thee, at last, reserved,
That thou, in endlesse-blisse might be preserved.

S. O blessed mystery of most dimension!
O blessed benefit of large extension!

G. A mystery it is, wherein (indeed)
Thou must of three things take especial heed:
1. The mercy of thy ever-loving Lord;
2. The merit, which Christ's sufferings do affords
3. And the free grace of Gods most holy Spirit,
Which, the sweet Gospel calls thee to inherit.
1. My mercy loved thee, ere it thee created,
And thee from other creatures separated.
2. The merit of my Christ did purchase thee,
When, moved, merely, by his love most free,
Thy misery caused him the heavens to leave,
And, for thy sake, such wrongs (here) to receive.
3. The grace of my good Spirit thee (then) did call,
When it did preach and teach thee therewithal,
It freed thee fully, when thy state it saw,
And, from fouls, bodies, dangers did thee draw.

S. O, that I were of brinish tears a spring,
That I these loves might fully see and sing!

G. Thus, thou have, briefly, first, seen What thou wast,
Upon thy present state, thine eyes ( next) cast.
See What thou art Which (thus) is first defined;
The Soul is the plain image of the Mind;
The mind Gods Image is: But, God's more great
Than is the mind, and has ( there) supreme seat.
The Mind (again) is greater than the Soul;
The Soul does all the Bodies parts control*
And, thus (O soul) thy dignity is great,
Adorned with diverse ornaments complete:
(Even princely privileges) which remain,
To make thy luster of an higher strain.
On thee is graven the image of thy Maker,
Thou art redeemed with Christ's blood, and partaker
Of all he is; espoused by faith, to him,
Thy dowry is his Spirits graces trim;
Invested with his virtuous righteousness,
And, made, than glorious Angels, little less.
First (then) if any ask, Whose image rare
And superscription is this, thou do wear?
Well may thou answer, it is the image right
Of supreme Caesar, sovereign Lord of light.
If, yet, they ask thee, how it was defaced?
Tell them, by rust of sin, it was disgraced.
How wast repaired? By thy Saviors blood.
How wast espoused? By faiths-ring pure and good.
How is it endowed? with influence of Gods Spirit.
How is it adorned? with flowers of Christ's due merit.
How is it placed and graced with dignity?
Even, with blessed Angels in their purity.
Say, then, good soul, is not this state most blessed?
Yes, sure; unless earth has thy joy possessed.
For, who, except he a rank traitor be?
Traitor, I say, both unto me and thee,
Dares be so bold this image to put out?
Since it is heavenly Caesar's, past all doubt.
Who shall thy soul make vendible to vice?
Redeemed, with such a sum? thou art bloods price.
Who shall, thee, such an amiable Bride,
Unto thy heavenly King, in Wedlock tide
Once dare to violate or lay least stain?
Since, thee, my specious soul, I entertain.
Who shall endeavor to eclipse or dim
Thy sacred secret inward-light most trim,
Glistring most gloriously from heaven on thee?
Since it is the light of my blessed Spirit, from me.
Who shall, once, dare to crop those fragrant flowers
Of vigorous-vertues from our heavenly bowers?
Those precious aromatick-sents of grace?
Since they are thy beauties, sent from our blessed face.
Who can divorse thee from those blessed-mates
Promised my Saints, in their celestial states;
Yea, set about thee (here) still, to defend thee?
Since they are Angel-troops that do befriend thee.
Thus have thou seen thy first and present state:
Now, hearken, what condition does thee wait.
Namely, if ( here) thou live a Saint divine,
In heaven thou shall Angelically shine.
Be, therefore, ever going, growing ever,
Faint not in my paths, and go backward never:
But, to stand still is to go back in grace,
For, here is no medium, or abiding-case.
Thou either must go freely forward still
Or, certainly, thou will go back to ill.
In which thy pious progress have a care
Especially to keep thy paths most fair,
By that most holy grace, Humility;
Which, will thee lead with sweet stability.
Prate not of thy proficiencie at all,
Or growth in grace, lest pride do make thee fall.
For, what soere is done, 's undone again,
If lowliness do it not safe sustain.
He, therefore, which does other virtues get,
But, does not, with humility, them set,
Does like to one that carries dust in the wind
Whereof, he (soon) himself does empty find.
Men, therefore, fitly, call Humility
Rare virtues Queen; death of impiety.
Fair Virgins Mirror; and the mansion neat,
Which the blessed Trinity has made its seat.
Nor can that soul be counted poor and bare
That shines with beauteous beams of meekness rare.
For, this knows well to order its own mind,
Which, seldom I in rich and great men find.
And hence it is, that men say, Poverty
In good men's minds does guard humility.
In having which, they are far richer, sure,
Than he which could the whole worlds crown procure.

S. O, my dear Lord, whereof should I be proud?
Whose nature yields not ought by thee allowed.
In many things, I my deficience know;
In nothing I can least sufficience show.

G. Be of good courage (soul) for, usually,
He that most fears his own sufficiency,
Best fares in piety. For, how should he
Desire supply, which no defect does see?
Mine only grace which is sufficient still
Is most pure Balsum, which from me does thrill.
And it requires a vessel pure and sound,
And, in such, only, will be sweetly found.
I Will (therefore) cleanse the cisterne of thy heart,
And then the Balsum of my grace impart;
Yea, I will lead thee to yet higher things,
To yet more fluent and more pleasant springs,
Put forth thy hand, and I will thee embrace.
Know thou my presence is in every place?

S. Yes Lord, I know in every place thou art,
And yet not circumscribed to any part;
I know that thou art present every where,
Yet, neither place nor motion do thee bear.

G. And do thou know I have an all-seeing-eye?

S. I know, acknowledge it submissively;
And that thou, Lord, revenger of all ill,
Do eye and spy, see and foresee all still.
If I should hide my self in earth most deep,
Thy piercing eye could sentinel (there) keep,
If I in wilderness would build my nest,
Even there should I to thee be manifest.

G. And do thou know that I am judge of all?

S. Most certainly; and that my Savior shall
The whole world judge with equity and right,
Though he, on earth, was sentenced, with spite.

G. O, if thou did both know and well believe
That I thy God do every thing perceive.
Am present every where, and must judge all,
I think ( so often) on sin thou would not fall.

S. We all (O Lord) are very weak and frail;
And I know none, so apt, as I, to fail.

G. By how much thou thy state more frail do
So much the stronger thou shall daily grow.
But, tell me now this one thing, would thou feign know,
Be counted worthy me to entertain?

S. Blessed, thrice blessed is that soul most sure,
That can his God, to be his guest procure.
For, he can never want a sure protection,
In whom thou dwel'st, worthy thy sweet refection.

G. Thou shall be worthy if thou follow me;

S. Lord, to the cross, in Christ, to purchase thee.

G. That blessed author, finisher of faith,
Hanging upon the Cross, bequeathed has,
In his last-will of love and piety,
To diverse sorts, a several legacy.
To his Apostles, persecutions tart,
Unto the Jews his corpse and wounded heart;
His Spirit into his heavenly Fathers hands.
Unto the Virgin, John's firm fostering-bands:
To the beleeving-thiefe, blessed paradise;
To soule-slaying sinners, helt, just pay for vice;
And, to repentant-Christians, he set down,
A certain cross, before a promised Crown.

S. O Testament full of pure charity!
From whence I may collect infallibly
That all the hope of man's salvation blist
Does in Christ's meritorious death consist.

G. And whence thou may collect thy dignity,
The purchase of a soul, a price most high;
Which, at no lower rate could ransomed be,
But by Christ's blood shed on the Cross for thee,
Use (then) all care thy self to watch and ward,
Unto thy latter end have great regard.
And this most holy wholesome sentence grave
Be (evermore) sure in thy mind to have;
Whether I sleep or wake with watchful eye,
Or whatso'ere I do, continually
Me thinks, that last great Trumpets sound I hear;
Arise ye dead to judgment (now) appear.

S. A sound (O Lord) indeed, most loud and shrill,
To Saints most glad, to sinners sad and ill.

G. And yet (alas, I pity thy poor case)
This shaking sound which should all evil chase;
No sooner is remembered, than forgot,
And, this, the souls rich worth does stain and spot.
An ass falls in a pit, and is pulled out;
But, if a soul falls, no man looks about.
Every man does his bodies death much fear,
But, very few do for the souls death care.
And, whence (I pray) does this souls-slaughter rise?
Because men do that precious thing despise,
Which being lost and carelessly neglected,
A soul so fallen cannot be re-erected.
Nothing (men say) more precious is than Time;
And yet (alas, oh it is a common crime)
Nothing is (now a days) esteemed more base,
Nothing more slighted than these days of grace.
Yet, on this moment, which men (here) let fly,
Depends (most) man's blessed eternity.
Then let not Pastimes, pass the times away,
But up, be doing good in this thy day.
Correct thy self, and then my mercy crave;
No fault so great, which cannot pardon have.

S. But (O my God) I many things (here) find,
By liking which, I stain and soil my mind.

G. But, he them all, contemnes most easily,
Which always mindful is that he must dye.

S. O, but (dear God) I fear I shall dye never.

G. Dye to the world, and live with me for ever.
But, mark this well; unto the world to dye,
Is, to forsake this world primarily;
Not to be left, by it: for if that men
Begin Repentance, and to leave sin, then,
When they can sin no longer, and forsake
The world, when they no more of it can make;
Sin leaves them, they do not leave their sin,
The world leaves them, ere they this work begin.
Not to avoid a danger when thou may,
Is, not to have thy hope upon me placed;
But it is to tempt me rather, wilfully,
Leaving the rule, liking security.
In hope (therefore) fear, fearing take good heed;
Thus, of much danger thou shall (safe) be freed.
Bear trials then, and thou shall comforts have,
No conquest comes, without a battle brave.

S. Most holy Lord, I all things will forsake,
All trials I will gladly undertake,
That I (at last) may thee my God possess,
Who art my All in All, in all distress.
Forsake thy-selfe and then thou shall me find,
Put off all high-conceipts, all pride of mind.
A Christians prime-Praeludium and best trial,
Is to divorce himself, by selfe-denyall.
Thou art not mine, if thou prefer thy will,
Before my pleasure, in thy actions ill.
For, no man, here, can stand, which, heartily,
Will not himself, for my-sake, vilify.
Thou have within thee, from me, still to teach thee;
Or, stay with me, or else return and reach me.
When-ere thou shall be moved or avocated,
By ill-affects, nay, defects instigated,
Give me thy-selfe (then) and thou shall me gain,
Love me and thou shall my free love obtain.

S. Certainly (holy Lord) he loves not truly,
Who loves ought with thee, which thee loves not duly*
Love, to the thing-belov'd, transaminates,
And in its love, it-selfe (full) fatiates.
I wholly leave my-selfe, naught is in me,
I, totally being thine, will rest in thee.
And, in my Saviors arms I do desire.
My life to lead, and sweetly to expire.
But yet, I cannot comfortably sleep*
Until my Sovereigns arms me safely keep.

G. Be comforted (poor Soul) thou shall be sure
To be more safe, then, rest thou here secure;
A Christians-crosses are a Christians Crown
And shall obtain immortal high renown.
Persist, therefore, in this my Cordiall-love,
Wherein, if thou thy-selfe sincere approve,
Thou will a thousand deaths more soon endure,
Than, wilfully (by sin) my wrath procure.
Persist (I say) in my religious fear,
Wherein, if thou thy-selfe uprightly bear,
Thy House of Clay thou shall well regulate
Thy actions, thou shall, wisely, ordinate.
Thus, thou shall sweetly have repose in me,
Thou need'st not fear, because my love's in thee.
For, that soul (surely) cannot fear that loves
But, that soul, whom no love of me (once) moves.
For, perfect love all servile-feare casts-out,
And fortifies the soul from grief and doubt.
It brings-forth most enduring-dignity,
And, fits thee for my Saints society.

S. Most holy God, so write thou in my Heart,
By finger of thy Spirit, the sacred Art
Of memory of thy Mellifluous-name,
That blacke-Oblivion nere blot out the same.
Yea, print upon my soul and sincere mind,
And, graven on my Breast, let me (still) find
Thy sacred pleasure, which, no chance or change,
May violate or from my thoughts estrange.
Come, Lord, come perfect, what thou have begun,
And, in-mee, on-mee, Thy blessed will be done.

G. Goe-on, then, with thy gracious resolution,
Bring all to holy, happy Execution;
Live, here (as other Saints) a little space,
Then, thou, in Heaven shall have a glorious Place.

The end of the fifth Dialogue.
The sixth DIALOGUE.
Between the Soul and the City of God.
The Argument of the sixth Dialogue.
The Soul being (here) in heaven supposed;
And in its longed joys reposed;
Gods holy City is brought in,
Its gracious welcome to begin:
And to the Soul to demonstrate
Its most victorious, glorious state.
The Soul is ravished with delight,
At its celestial sacred sight;
Reproves the worlds fond aberration,
Neglecting this so great Salvation:
Whereof, it-selfe (thus) now, possessed,
Abides in endless Peace and Rest.
ALL-haile most holy City of the Lord;
What glorious sights are these, thou do afford*
Most blessed Spouse of Christ, beloved Bride;
What amiable joys in thee abide!
What sacred songs, what music do I hear!
What heavenly Hymns, with most melodious cheer
Do chant about mine ears, in every street!
What pleasant fruit trees! O what Manna sweet
Do I (here) see and savor, touch and taste!
In midst of what sweet pleasures am I placed?
What precious prizes are there, here, afforded?
O what most glorious matters are recorded
Of thee blessed City of our God of love,
And that most justly? for all true I prove!
For, in thee is (indeed) a habitation
Of only such as joy with exultation.
Even here where it is more difficult, to say,
What is not here, than what is, to display;
Yea, though mine eloquence did all is excel,
Yet could I not its glory truly tell.
C. Now then (most welcome soul) from this blessed sense,
Thou feel'st and find'st by good experience,
That one day in Gods house is better biding,
Than, elsewhere are a thousand days residing.

S. I find it so (indeed) and one day, here,
Does an eternal day to me appear;
To which no yesterday gives any place,
Nor any morrow makes to end its race.
Where nothing is that was not (first) here flowing,
Or, which (already) is not here, full growing.
So sweet and pleasant is this lasting light,
So full of rare and ravishing delight,
That, if the soul could it enjoy no more,
Than but one-houre and so must give it ore,
Even for this-onely sweet, the pleasures rife
And flowing temp'rall-ioyes of all Man's life,
Though ere so many years spent jollily,
Ought all to be contemned most worthily.
For, in thy sight (O God) a thousand years
As yesterday, instantly past, appears.

C. But, say (sweet soul) what do thou (now) esteem
Of that most slippery-age? What do thou deem
And judge of those thy former days (now) past?
Those fleeting-yeeres, quite spent, and could not last,
And which shall nere-returne? What think thou? say,
Of that fast fleeting time, now, fled away?
All that is past thereof, is (now) no more,
And all to come thereof, none can restore.
What, of that-day, whose morning-houres are fled?
Whose afternoones are not recovered.
What of that-houre, whose minutes from thee sliding?
For their remainder, there was no abiding.
Are not all these, as if they near had been?
Compared with this blessed state thou (now) art in.
For, in this most desiderable Land,
No troubling-toyle is to be took in hand.
No pining pinching-paine is to be borne
No grief whereby the Heart is hurt or torn.
But, here is the highest honor to be had,
Here Is mutuall-love to make the Heart most glad
Here, thou by knowing perfectly shall see,
Here, by delighting, thou shall loving be.
Here, by possessing, thou shall ever praise,
Here, to thy God, be chanting heavenly-Layes.
Whom, thou shall see to satisfy thy pleasure,
Whom, thou shall have to fill thy will, full-measure,
Whom thou shall to thy joy, enjoy for ever,
Whom thou to love and laud shall aye persever.
Where thou shall flourish in eternity,
Where thou shall glister in pure verity;
Where thou shall shine in perfect purity,
Where thou shall joy in sweet security,
Where thou shall find endless stability
Of perfect-knowledge rare facility.
Of sweet-repose and rest a happy sense,
Of all that may content, the Quintessence.
O how can I describe sufficiently,
This Holy-Cities fair felicity?
Whose Citizens are blessed Angels bright,
Whose Temple is the Father of all Light;
Whose splendor is the Son of Righteousness
Whose glorious-love the Spirit does express.

S. O sacred-City, joys variety!
O blessed state of Saints society!

C. And, we reciprocally are as glad,
Of this thy fellowship with us now had,
As we are of our-owne blessed happiness.
For, thou do now so sweet a place possess,
Where, One souls comfort, comforts all the rest,
None, here, anothers-good does ill-digest,
But, each of us does take as much delight
In others bliss, as in his proper right.

S. O then, how happy is my blessed-state,
Whom such choice mates do so associate?
So many sacred Citizens do meet,
So lively, lovely Saints so kindly greet:
How sweet was this blessed Cities meditation,
To me, when I on earth had habitation?
But, O how much more sweetness do I taste,
To be in it, of it, beloved, embraced?
To contemplate my souls fair Bridegroom blessed,
My souls sweet soul, my Prince of glorious rest.

C. But, come (fair sister) give me now thy hand,
And thou shall in me, see and understand
Our yet more sacred sweets, our mansions fair,
Glistring with gems and precious stones most rare.
I will thee into our Wine-Cellars guide,
Where, Flagons full of purest wine abide;
Into our Refectorie choicely decked
With heavenly dainties palates to affect.
Where neither longing does engender pain,
Nor fullness does least nauseousnesse contain.
Where, neither he that eats is over-cloyd,
Nor, what is eaten is not full-supply'd.
Where, ever overflowing floods of pleasure
Will cheer thy soul in most abundant measure,
And will thy heavenly heart inebriate
With love-divine, yet still most temperate.
Here run pure Rivers of the wat'r of life,
Here are fair meads, gardens of pleasures rife,
Here Is augmentation of felicity,
Glories-encreasings with sure constancy.
Beds of delight, boards of abundant joy,
All that may comfort, nothing to annoy.
Yea, from this mount of savorie spices rare
Behold, at full, a heavenly mirror fair,
And, therein, see Saints glistring splendor bright,
And all their honor of majesticke might.
In this fair port of peace is labors rest,
This creek of comfort foes cannot infest,
Here being safty with eternity,
Contentive joy with full satiety.
With various noveltie all rare delight,
And sugared sweetness in Gods sacred sight.

S. And, who would not both long and like it best*
To set down here his everlasting rest?
Both for its peace, and for its pleasant light*
For its eternity and Gods blessed sight.
In ever knowing God the Fathers power,
The wisdom of the Son, in's heavenly bower,
The holy Spirits tender clemency,
To have full knowledge of the Trinity.

C. It Is true, (sweet soul) Gods secrets open be,
There he will befull seen and loved of thee.

S. O, blessed-vision, in himself seen trim,
To see God in us, and our selves in him!

C. Yea to see him, who is the light of lights
The rest and receptacle of delights.
Life of all living, seat of travelers,
The palm, the prize, the crown of conquerers.

S. O, who can Gods great goodness understand,
How wondrous are the works of his right hand?
Yesterday I was in earths darkness dim,
To day in heavens resplendent luster trim.
Yesterday in the roaring Lions power,
To day, in the hands of my sweet Savior.
Yesterday, brought unto the gates of hell,
To day in Paradise, where joys excel.
Yesterday in the worlds circumf'rence round,
To day in Abraham's bosom blestly found.
O, that men living on the earth below,
Did least part of celestial joys well know!
Then, solely, seriously, all pains the'yd take
In holy duties: no least loss they would make
Of precious time, which no man can regaine,
Nor would so fruitlesly their lives retain.
Divines would (then) more study lives than learning
More to live well than quaint disputes discerning.
Their chief philosophy they would it deem,
To know Christ and him crucifi'de esteem.
Grave Orators would not so break their brains
To vent strong lines, invent such losty strains,
As, holily and heartily to speak,
And, by good works, from gilded words would break.
The worlds great traders would more piously,
Endure and not procure an injury,
And count a quiet and good conscience best,
Yea far beyond the greatest gain possessed.
Then, that intolerable beast most wild,
I mean, that canker covetice most vilde,
Would not so rage and rave in courses base,
But, yield to time, as the fit time of grace.
Yea all of all sorts would so spark and shine,
In holiness of life and gifts divine;
That, those two sayings, at the last great day,
Should never from their thoughts depart away,
Go, O ye cursed, into fire eternal.
Come, O ye blessed, to a crown supernall.
Oh, what can be more harsh, more full of woe?
Than (then) to hear that bitter saying, go.
But, what can better (then) pronounced be?
Than, that blessed invitation i^? Come ye.
Two sentences, than one of which, none sadder,
And, than the other, none was (ere) heard gladder.
Oh, if men would these thoroughly ruminate,
Then, they more soundly would recogitate
And think upon the last and dreadful day;
As that, on which, they must resolve to clay.
Yea, they the judgement-day would duly tender,
As that, on which, they must a reckoning render.
Then would they muse and meditate on hell,
As on that lake where woe and horror dwell.
And think on heaven, as on a glorious place,
And kingdom of incomparable grace.
Their time, yet left, to heaven they would consecrate,
Their lamp, yet light, aloft they would elevate.
No day without a line, no line should be
Without a guiding-rule to sanctity.
No smallest sand out of the houre-glasse,
Without (at least) one trickling tear should pass.
They, nothing, not time-present, would count theirs,
Whose only minute, all their due appears.
The morning they would make days inchoation,
The evening, that days due examination.
Their bodies from their beds they soon would raise,
Their drowsy sleep they would shun without delays:
Their candle lighted, they betimes would pray,
And, give their God the first fruits of the day.
Then, they would boldly look death in the face,
Yea, gladly they would invite his hasty pace;
And, being wholly dead to earths false joy,
They best would live, while they seemed life to 'stroy
By dying, so, they death would deadly wound,
And, by Deaths death, their life would best be found.
Thus, they would not count death a pang or pain,
But, rest from sorrow and their greatest gain.
Thus, earth disdained and heaven obtained, all blessed,
They would approach the haven of endless rest.
But, worldlings (always) find by proof most bad
Whiles they breathe out this sentence sour and sad
(O death, how bitter is the thought of thee!
To those that earthly peace, with wealth, do see?)
That unto whom the world's a blandishment.
To them it brings, from heaven, a banishment.
For, two most distant loves do men (still) make
Of two most distant Cities to partake;
The love of God, Jerusalem erects,
The love of earth, proud Babylon protects.
The place of peace, Jerusalem is named,
Babylon is Seditions seat proclaimed.
But, they shall nere in Peaces-city dwell
Which love not peace, but like confusion well.
O, then that men on earth these things would mind,
They (even on earth) an heavenly life would find.

G. Thou do (indeed) most sweetly meditate,
Things well befitting souls in heavenly state;
For, if men did these things, more seriously,
Discuss and scan, and to themselves apply,
They, to the world, would (sure) more strangers be,
And cleave to God in nearer amity.
But, we must joy in Gods revealed will*
Rejoice in Converts coming to us, still;
Pray the approach of all terrestrial Saints
Who, this our Cities ruin and restraints
Must restaurate and full re-edifie,
And make complete to all eternity.
Mean while ( sweet soul, beloved, lovely mate)
Come thou to us, with us cohabitate,
Blessed in thy self, grateful to us all blessed,
Most blessed in this blessed state of rest,
Come let us (now) with interchang'd embraces
With mutual joy, new songs, go take our places
In Gods most admirable Tabernacle,
All sacred Saints most holy habitacle.
Now, thy (once) Ministers become thy mates;
Now, amongst the lillies in most lovely states,
Amongst troops of glorious Angels shining bright
Thy luster (now) may glister, full of light.
Yea, now, thou may lie down on beds of roses
Amongst Gods lovely lambs in sweet reposes.
Come, come (I say) be now exceeding glad,
That thou art with celestial beauty clad;
Joy, in enjoying endless joy and peace,
In Gods blessed presence, which can never cease.

S. O, most mellifluous sweetness most admird!
O, heavenly honey pleasures most desired!
How sweet thou art in serious meditation!
How far more sweet in thy due declaration!
How much more sweet to view and contemplate!
How most transcendent sweet in blessed estate!
It Is not in all I am to set thee forth,
It Is past my power to blaze thy blessed worth.
But, it is enough for me that I possess thee,
That being in thee blessed, I, thus, do bless thee.
That I aloud, his laud and praise may sing,
That placed and graced me here, heavens glorious King;
To whom, with Jesus Christ and his blessed Spirit
Who does all power and praises, wholly, merit,
Even, heavens ineffable Trine-unity,
Be Halelujahs sung eternally.

Amen.
Ephesians. 5.14. Arise, thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light.

Bernard. An account must be given of all the time lent unto us, how it has
been spent by us.

Aug. upon Psalm. 36. My brethren, if ye are persuaded that we shall enjoy any
such things, in that country, whe^eunto the celestiall-silver trumpet incites
and summons us: and for their sakes ye are willing to abstain from things
present, that there ye may receive those future comforts more copiously: Do,
then, as those men, who being invited to a great feast, keep their stomachs
empty, and are content to abstain, that their appetites may attain an (even)
insatiate satisfaction.

FINIS.

