Abdias the Prophet, Interpreted by T.B. fellovv of Magdalene College in
Oxforde.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Jmprinted at London by Henry Binneman, for George Bishop. 1574.

To the right Honorable my singular good Lord, the Earl of Huntingdon,
President of the Queens Majesty's Counsel established in the North parts.
etc. Increase of grace, and peace in Christ, and continuance in the same unto
the end.
RIght Honorable, I confess that for lack of skill in divinity, and of
knowledge in other faculties, I am unfit to present any thing in vvriting unto
your Lordship, wherein divine eloquence ought to be shevved, seeing your honor
has been practiced these many years (as I may say) in continual hearing and
reading of the best learned, both of this Realm and other Realms: whereby
you are able to judge, and to correct that which is either unaptly or untruly
said of any man, concerning the knowledge of God and his true worship.
Notvvithstanding, considering my duty toward your honor, and also your
accustomed gentleness in accepting as well the good will of them which according
to their ability offer but a mite, as also the great lerning of those
Divines, which in their sermons and writings do much excel the most part of
those Pastors that are not unprofitable instructors of the unlearned: I am so
bold as to offer unto your Lordship this short exposition of the Prophet
Abdias, which not long since I have vttred privately to the commodity, I hope,
of a few, and now (if your Lordship will voutsafe to be the patron of so small,
and so rude an interpretation of this piece of Scripture) I mind to publishe it
to the benefit of many, if perhaps it may do them any good, into whose hands
it shall come. In it I have used the judgment of diverse learned men, whose
words I have translated out of Latin into English, and have disposed the^ in
this Treatise, as I have thought good. Therefore the doctrine therein contained,
which is sound, is other men's: the manner of ha^dling it, which is rude, is
mine. That which is lacking in the manner of handling, is reco^penced in the
truth of the doctrine. As the doctrine is true, so it makes the words of the
Prophet plain unto the simple and ignorant people: and also it helps not a
little to the understanding of the other Prophets, and of diverse places of the
Scripture therein recited, and gives some good instructions perteyning to
faith and good works. Therefore although it be but a small and short
Treatise, it may serve by the vvorking of the holy Ghost, both to the
increase of divine knowledge, and also of a godly life, in as many as shall
take pains too read it. My duty toward your Lordship, moved me to
dedicate it to your honor: that as through the help of your bou^tifulnesse,
many ignorant people are much instructed in diverse places in the word of God,
by the preaching of the Gospel: so by your Lordships succor toward the
publishing of this little book, many may something augment their knowledge in
the holy scriptures, by reading the interpretation of this Prophet. How so ever
it shall please God to work, my mind is to bestovv that little talent that
God has given me, to the setting forth of his glory, and to the profit of his
Church, not neglecting your Lordships honor: Much increase whereof God grant
you in this world, and in the world to come everlasting blessedness,
through Christ our Lord.

Your servant and daily orator. T. B.
The.xxi of August. 1574.
The prophecy of Abdias, translated out of the Hebrew into English.
THE vision of Obadiah. This has the Lord Iehoua said against Edom, we have
heard a voice from Iehoua, that an Ambassador is sent among the Nations
(saying) up, and let us arise against her unto battle.

2 Behold, I have made thee of small power, and of little reputation among the
Nations, thou art greatly despised.

3 The pride of thy heart has deceived thee which dwell in the caves of a
rock, having an high place for his habitation, saying in his heart: who shall
bring me down to the ground?

4 Although thou mount like an Eagle, yea although thou make thy nest among the
stars, from thence will I bring thee down: this is a sure saying of Iehoua.

5 If thieves should come unto thee, or robbers by night, how miserably
should thou be handled? (yet) would they not steal (only) so much as
should be sufficient for them? if grape gatherers should come unto thee, would
they not leave some small ones?

6 O how are the goods of Esau sought up and his treasures spoiled?

7 All the men that were confederate with thee, have driven thee to the
borders, the me^ that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, they have
prevailed against thee: they that have had mayntenance by thee, shall lay a
snare in thy way to catch thee: he shall not perceive it.

8 Shall not I at that day (says the Lord) cut off from Edom the wise men, and
understanding from the mount of Esau?

9 Ye moreover the courage of thy mighty captains (O Teman) shall be abated,
because every man shall be cut off from the mount of Esau by slaughter.

10 For the cruel spoiling of thy brother Jacob, thou shall be put to shame,
yea thou shall perish for ever.

11 At what time thou stoodest a loofe off, at what time strangers carried away
his substance, and aliants entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem,
then thou wast even as one of them.

12 But thou should not have beholden the day of thy brother, the day in the
which he was carried into exile, neither should thou have laughed at the
inhabitants of Iehuda, in the day of their destruction, neither should thou
have triumphed over them in the day of their affliction.

13 Thou should not have entered into the gates of my people, in the day of
their destruction, neither should thou then have beholden his misery in the
day of his destruction, neither should thou have laid hands upon his
substance in the day of his destruction.

14 Neither should thou have stand in the cross ways to slay those that
otherwise had escaped, neither should thou then have taken prisoners those
that remained of them in the day of affliction.

15 For the day of Iehoua is at hand upon all Nations, even as thou have done,
it shall be done unto thee: thy mischeeuous dealing shall return upon thy own
pate.

16 For even as you have drunk upon mine holy hill, so al nations shall drink
continually, yea they shall drink, and swalow up, and they shall be as though
they had not been at all.

17 But upon mount Sion there shall be salvation, and it shall be holy: and the
house of Jacob shall receive their possessions.

18 And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and
the house of Esau as stubble, and they shall kindle among them, and consume
them, and there shall be none left of the house of Esau, for Iehoua has spoken
it.

19 And they shall possess the south side of the mount of Esau, and the
champion country of the Philistines, and they shall possess the feelden
country of Ephraim, and the feelden country of Samaria, and Benjamin (shall
possess) Gilead.

20 And they of this host of the Israelites, that are in captivity among the
Canaanites, shall possess unto Sarephath, and they of Jerusalem that are in
captivity in Sephared, shall possess the cities of the South.

21 And there shall come up in mount Sion saviors, to give sentence against the
mount of Esau, and Iehoua shall have the kingdom.

A brief Paraphrasis of Abdias prophecy.
men, because they dwell in the rocks and mountains. Therefore they persuade
them selves that no Nation is able too prevail against them, and to bring them
too destruction. God which is the geuer of all good gifts, and handle the
people of God. the champion country of the Philistines, besides their own
country of Iewry and Samaria. They shall possess from the South to the
North, and from the West to the East.

Therefore God shall rule, and he shall be king over them. For they shall serve
him.

A larger interpretation of Abdias Prophecy.
THis Prophecy was written against the Edomites, the posterity of Esau: a
people bordering upon the Southe side of Iewry, toward Arabia. They were the
next neighbeurs of the Israelites, the posterity of Jacob. Jacob and Esau,
otherwise called Israel and Edom, were brethren, and the children of Isaac and
Rebecca. Genesis 25.22
When their mother was with child with them, they did strive in her womb,
wherewith she being moved, enquired of God what that strange fight should
mean. An. mundi. 2100.
Answer was made her, that she had two Nations in her womb, that is to say:
that two Nations should rise of their posterity, that they should contend the
one with the other, and the elder should serve the younger: that is, the Nation
that should come of the younger brother, should subdue the posterity of the
elder brother, and bring them in subjection. Which was fulfilled in king David's
time: 2. Sa 8 1^. An. mundi 2900.
who with his people, ye posterity of Jacob, ye younger brother, subdued the
Edomites unto him, and unto his Nation: unto whom they remained subject for
the space of an hundred and threescore years, unto the reign of Ioram, 2. Re
8. ^0 An mundi 3060.
the seventh king of Iewry from David. In whose days they rebelled, and ever
after hated the inhabitants of Judah, as before their father Esau had hated
Jacob. As at other times, so chiefly they uttered their malicious mind, when
Nabuchodonosor besieged Jerusalem: An. mundi. 33^^.
for they joined with him against Judah. It is not unlikely but that he desired
their help, because they were near borderers, and were acquaynted in the
country. But he was not so desirous of their aid, as they were to offer it.
For they rejoiced greatly at the misery of the Israelites, they triumphed over
them, and were partakers with the enemies in spoiling the city of Jerusalem.
Yea they persuaded them utterly to destroy it. As it is written: Remember the
children of Edom, Psalm. 1^^.
O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, which said, raze it, raze it, even to the
foundation thereof. By occasion of this misery and calamity of the
Israelites, the inhabitants of Idumea were merry and joyful, but Gods people
were full of sorrow and heaviness. Therefore almighty God pitying their
case, stirred up Abdias and other Prophets to comfort them, by declaring unto
them the destruction of the Edomites, their enemies, and by foretelling their
own deliverance out of captivity: which how comfortable a thing it was unto
them, we may understand by our own example: who in the days of Mary our
Queen, An. domini. 1553.
were oppressed with the members of Antichrist, the deadly enemies of Gods
people. At what time they endeavored as much as lay in them to destroy the
heavenly Jerusalem, that is to say, the true Christians, of whom they
imprisoned and burned a great number, and the residue they caused either to
flee into voluntary banishmente, or else to reuolte from the Christian
religion unto Idolatry, until it pleased almighty God to look upon them
with his merciful eyes, and to call them unto repentance. If in this time of
misery God had sent us some Abdias, to tell us that he would destroy our
enemies, and restore those that were banished into their ceuntrey, and advance
them to honor and wealth, this must needs have been very comfortable unto
us. And so it came to pass in deed: For God does not in any age leave those
comfortless that cleave wholly unto him. Therefore he sent his Prophet Abdias
among the Israelites to show them the destruction of their enemies, and their
own deliverance out of captivity, to comfort them, and to confirm them in
the true worship of God. This is the purpose of the Prophet, whose prophecy
may be divided into two chapters. In the first God threatens destruction unto
the Edomites: and in the second he promises deliverance, with great
prosperity and felicity unto the Israelites. The first Chapter consists of
four parts. In the first is declared the certayntie of their destruction: In
the second the stay and arguments whereby the Edomites might persuade them
selves of safety, are taken away and confuted. In the third, the greatness
of ye calamity that God would send upon them, is declared. And last of all,
are showed the causes of their destruction. It is not impertinent to the first
part, to note here the author of the prophecy. It is called the prophecy of
Abdias. But it was revealed by the holy Ghost, even by God him self, and
uttered by the ministry of Abdias. Luke 1.69.
As the Prophet Zachary says: The Lord God of Israel has raised unto us
a mighty salvation in the house of his seruante David, as he promised by the
mouth of his holy Prophets which were since the world began. And the Apostle
that writes to the Hebrews, Hebr. 1.1.
says: At sundry times, and in diverse manners God spoke in old time to our
fathers by the Prophets. And our Savior says: that David said in the
spirit, or by the holy Ghost: Mat. 22.43
the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy
enemies thy foot stool. Here our Savior signifies that David spoke not of
him self, but the holy Ghost by his mouth. So it appears by the words of S.
Peter, 1. Pet. 3.18.
that Noe in his time preached unto the people, not of him self, but our
Savior Christ in his Godhead preached by the mouth of Noe. For S. Peter
speaking of the death and resurrection of our Savior, says that he was
mortified in the flesh, but quickened or raised to life by the spirit, that is
to say by his Godhead. In the which spirit (says he) Christ came and
preached to the spirits that are in prison, which were disobedient in the
days of Noe. These words of our Savior, of the Apostles, and of Zachary,
teach us that it was our Savior Christ in Noe, the spirit of God in David,
and in the other Prophets that spoke unto the people. Therefore I conclude,
that the same spirit spoke in Abdias, and that God him self was the author of
his prophecy. This also is manifest by the words of the Prophet: For he says:
I have made thee of small power, and of little reputation among the Nations. The
Prophet had no such power, as to diminishe the reputation and power of ye
Edomites. Therefore it follows necessarily, yt he spoke not in his own person,
but that almighty God spoke himself by the mouth of the prophet. Therefore I
say (which perteyneth to the first part of this chapter) that the destruction
of the Edomites is certain. For God himself is the author thereof. Unto this
part also perteyneth the title of the prophecy, in that it is called a
vision. Of visions there is often mention made in the Scriptures, as in the
prophesies of Jeremy, Ezechiel, and Daniell, and in the Revelations of John.
Daniell Dan. 7.1.
in a dream saw a vision of four Beasts. And Saint John in a trance saw a
vision of seven candlesticks. Revel. 1.12
Of this and such other visions his whole book of Revelations consists.
Which are declarations of things to come by similitudes and dark kinds of
speech. But in this prophecy a vision is otherwise understood, for it
signifies here a declaration of things to come, in plain words, without any
similitude or allegory. As a Prophet in old time was called a Seer: 1. Sam.
9.9
so here the prophecy of Abdias is called the sight or vision of Abdias. 2.
Sa. 24.11
A Prophet in old time was called a Seer, because he did foresee things that
should come to pass afterward: so here Abdias prophecy is called a vision,
because it is a thing foreseen, that should be fulfilled in time to come.
These two are both one in effect, a Vision, and a Prophecy, yet some
difference there is between them. For a Vision is a revelation of that thing
which God has appointed to bring to pass afterward: and a Prophecy is an
vttring of that is revealed. As Prophets are diverse, so are prophesies, some
false, and some true, but a vision is always certain: so called because it is
seen, and reveled by god unto man. That is truly called a vision, whereof we
can testify that have seen it. Whatsoever writing may truly be so called, it
is an argument that ye doctrine therein contained is true. Therefore ye prophet
gives this title unto his prophecy to declare the certentie thereof. Our
Savior uses ye like argument in defense of his doctrine, saying: That which I
have seen I testify unto you. And after this sort s. John John. 8.38.
begins his first Epistle, 1. Ioh. 1.1.
saying: That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, which our hands have handled, that declare we unto you. The
title of this prophecy is almost one with this title of S. John's Epistle. For
the vision of Abdias is as much to say: as that which Abdias has seen, or
that which God has revealed unto him, for a certayntie to be fulfilled in
time to come. Therefore I say, this prophecy is called a vision, because this
word conteyneth in it an argument, that it shall come to pass in deed, as the
Prophet has spoken, or rather as God has spoken by the mouth of the Prophet.
And because God revealed it unto him, it is called his vision. At what time
this prophecy was revealed, or at what time Abdias vttred it, is not
expressedly declared either in this book nor in any other book of the
Scripture. The Jews write that this was the same Abdias that lived in the
days of king Ahab, and did save an hundred of the true Prophets, 1. Re. 1^ 3.
An. mundi. 3030.
hyding them by fifty and fifty in a cave, and gave them necessary
sustenance. But the opinion of the Jews seems contrary to the truth. For
there is good reason to show that Abdias lived at the same time that Jeremy
and Ezechiell prophesied. An. mundi. 3360. Ezec. 25.12 Ier. 49.7.
For they prophecy all against one, and the same people, they all declare the
misery and calamity of the Edomites, and the causes of their destruction.
Abdias does agree in words with Jeremy, as though he had learned the manner of
handling his prophecy of him, as the scholar of the master. Therefore it
seems that they lived and prophesied both at one time: which was when
Nabuchodonosor had destroyed Jerusalem, and carried the inhabitants thereof
prisoners unto Babylon: which captivity was full three hundred years after
the reign of Achab. Therefore that Abdias which was in his time could not be
alive in these days. Moses in his prayer a little before his death, Psalm.
90.1^ An. mundi. 2490.
says, that in his days the age of man was but threescore years and ten. In
Achabs time it is likely that man's age was rather shortened than prolonged,
because in his days the world was above five hundred years older than it was
in Moses time. For the older the world is, the shorter is the life of man.
Although some men live now a days longer than the common sort do, yet the
age of man commonly is but threescore or fourscore years. So Moses lived an
hundred and twenty years. And if God in like manner were so beneficial to
Abdias that was in Ahabs time, that he lived.40. years longer than the common
age of man, yet he could not live unto the captivity of Babylon. For then he
must have lived above three hundred years. Therefore our Abdias, and he were
diverse persons, as their state and condition was diverse: for the one was a lay
man, and the other a Clergy man: the one was a Courtier, and the other a
Prophet. But in this they do both agree, that they might both be truly named
Abdias: that is to say, the servant of God. For they both did God good
service: the one in saving his Prophets from the cruel tyranny of Iesabell,
and in giving them bodily sustenance, the other in uttering the Prophecy that
God had revealed unto him, and in feeding his people with spiritual food. The
food wherewith the Prophet feeds Gods people, is the food of consolation
and comfort, which is ministered by the declaration of the certain destruction
of their enemies, which is declared unto them in these words: Thus has the
Lord Iehoua said. The Lord has spoken it. Adonai is the Hebrew word,
which signifies such a Lord as is an helper, a sucourer, a preserver, one
that is of power and might, and also has a care of his people. Therefore was
Joseph called Adonai, because he was an helper and succourer of the Egyptians,
because he was of great power and might among them, because he had not only a
care of the people, but also by the policy and wisdom yt God had given him
they were preserved in time of derth. Such a Lord (says the Prophet) has
spoken these words which he vttreth unto the people. And because there are many
that are called Adonai, or Lord, for difference sake, he adds this name
Iehoua. That Lord (says he) whose name is Iehoua, has spoken it, who is
God, above all Lords, who is almighty and ruler of all the world, and
therefore is able to perform whatsoever he says, and he has already said
it, it is already determined, and therefore can not be altered. Although the
mind of man may be changed, God is unchangeable, he has said it, and
therefore certainly it shall come to pass. For confirmation whereof it
follows: We have heard this voice from Iehoua. The Prophet Jeremy Ier.
49.14.
has the same words in effect. He says: I have heard this voice from Iehoua.
He speaks of him self in the singular number. Although in effect there be
no more certeintie in the words of the one than of the other, yet in our ears
Abdias seems to speak more certeinely, because he speaks in the plural
number, not of him self only, but also of other Prophets: he seems to say
thus much: Not only God has spoken it, but also that you may understand I
speak of knowledge, I testify unto you that we have heard it, not only I
but also my fellow Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiel, for they have prophesied the
same things that I shall declare unto you. Thus he brings witnesses of that
he says. That which is testified by two or three, seems unto unto us more
certain than that which is witnessed by one only. Therefore for the better
credit of his words, he says: not I, but we have herd it, and that not of any
mortal man, but of Iehoua: the voice came from almighty God, whereof I, and
Ezechiel, and Jeremy are witnesses. And this is the voice: That an Ambassador
is sent among the Nations. Their is the Hebrew word, which properly signifies
the hinges of a door, upon which the door goes too and fro, and is thereby
ruled. But figuratively it signifies an Ambassador, such a one as is a
chief man under the Prince, by whose wisdom the common weal is ruled, and
upon whom the good estate of the Prince and people does depend. So this
Ambassador here mentioned is a chief man, by whom I understand the son of
God, the second person in trinity, who is the everlasting wisdom of the
father, Luke 11.49
by whom the world was made, John. 1.3.
and without who^ nothing was made, that was made, by whom the world is
governed, by who^ Princes do reign, and kings do bear rule, who sends peace
and war: he is the Lord that does all these things. It is he that moves the
Nations against the Edomites to destroy them. All Nations must obey this
Ambassador, he is not sent to one nation, but to a multitude of Nations, they
all shall come against the Edomites. Therefore their destruction is certain.
The Ambassador is already sent (says the Prophet:) This matter is not now in
consultatio^, it is already past, it can not be stayde. His commission is
delivered unto him, and he is gone on his journey. And this is his commission,
to the Nations to war against the Edomites, saying: Up, and let us arise
against her unto battle. In Jeremy it is thus: Gather your selves together,
come against her, and rise to battle. In Jeremy the Ambassador speaks unto
the nations, willing them to rise against the Inhabitants of Idumea: but in our
prophet Abdias, he speaks much more co^fortably, signifying that he him
self will go with them unto the war, that he will be a cheef captain among
them. He makes him self one of the number, showing thereby that they shall
have his help, that he will fight with them, who can compass and bring to
pass al things as pleases him. Let us (says he) rise against her: that is to
say, against the nation of the Edomites. God him self promises to fight with
his people, therefore the enemies shall surely be destroyed, and his children
shall overcome. For if God be on our side, who shall be against us. This is ye
first part of ye former chapt. declaring the certentie of ye Edomites
destruction. In the which there is to be noted a lesson for all ministers and
preachers of gods word, in yt the prophet entitleth his book a vision, and in
that he says: Thus has the lord Iehoua said, this voice have we herd from
Iehoua: whereby is given us to understand, yt he utters such things only as he
has seen, and such as God has revealed unto him. Such things as he has
heard of God, and nothing else but that which God has spoken. This was always
the manner of the Prophets, and also of the Apostles, as appears in their
Epistles, and in the revelations of S. John, not to speak their own fancies,
not to preach doctrine devised by them selves, not to be wise in their own
opinions, but to teach the truth, proceeding from God him self, and nothing
else but that which he has taught. This manner all Gods ministers ought to
observe: which they shall do, if they speak nothing rashly and unadvisedly, but
do diligently examine and search the knowledge of God in his word, which
teaches the true wisdom, Psalm. 19.7.
and gives good understanding, even to the simple, rude, and ignorante
persons, 2. Ti. 3.15.
and (as the Apostle says) is able to make a man wise as much as is
requisite unto salvation. If Gods ministers suffer their lips to utter
nothing but that which is truly grounded upon this word, they may be bold
to say: Thus has the Lord said, This voice have we heard from the Lord. This
every preacher ought not to say only, but also it is requisite that he be sure
that he may truly say it. For there are many false Prophets and false teachers,
that say, Thus says the Lord, this is the word of God, when they teach their
own fancies. Such take the name of God in vain, abusing it for the
aduauncing of them selves, and the increase of their own wealth. Such shall
be grievously punished: for God will not hold him giltlesse that takes his
name in vain. Therefore it is requisite that every one which takes upon him
to be a minister and preacher of the Gospel, do diligently examine his
doctrine by the word of God, and then he may truly say with the Prophet: This
has the Lord said, and that which we have heard we testify unto you. Then
he may say with the Apostle: 1. Cor. 11.23.
that which I received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you, and this is the
Lords saying, and not mine. This is a lesson for all the ministers of Gods
word, noted in this first part of the chapter. Here is also a lesson for the
instruction of al true Christians, in that the Prophet signifies that the
son of God the second person in Trinity, is sent as an Ambassador to
stir up the nations to war against Gods enemies: and in that he gives us
to understand, that God him self will fight with the^ against the adversaries
of his children: hereby we learn that God cares for his children, that he
helps those that call upon him in adversity, as he has promised, saying:
Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psa. 50.15.
and I will deliver thee. He fights for us against our enemies, therefore
they can not prevail against us. For it is written: Romans 8.31.
if God be on our side, who can be against us? Where God takes part, there is
the victory. In vain does any Prince make battle against his will, for all
the creatures in the world are ruled by him, man and beast, sun and moon,
fire and water, the earth, the sea, and the clouds are at his commandment, he
uses al these things to the benefit and commodity of his children, and is
ready always to deliver them in time of misery and calamity. Concerning
this matter, it is long to recite the examples of Gods goodness toward
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, toward Joseph, Moses, Joshua, David, Ezechias,
Esdras, the Apostle Paul, and many other. As in all ages, so especially in our
remembrance, since the man of sin began to be revealed, and the Gospel
published, the providence of almighty God in saving his people, has been
manifestly showed, as is to be seen in the Ecclesiastical histories of
Germany, of France, of England, and Scotland, and diverse other Nations. If
there were nothing left in writing hereof in all the world, yet every man by
the consideration of Gods works both in him self, and in other men, may
understand sufficiently how God cares for his people, in deliueryng them
from their enemies, which is the second note for our instruction, gathered
out of these former words of the Prophet. In the first part of the chapter.
Now follows the second part. Behold I have made thee of small power, and of
little reputation among the Nations, thou art greatly despised. Here God
speaks unto the posterity of Esau after this sort. Thou country of Edom,
thou think thy self so sure that thou can not be overthrown, thou
persuadest thy self that thou art loved of thy neighbors, and feared of thy
enemies, and therefore that there is no likelyhoode that thou should be
overcome of any nation. But this love, and this fear is but a rotten staff,
or weak reed, which easily will be broken. For I the maker of heaven and
earth, and ruler of all the world, have made thee of small power, and of
little reputation among the nations that are round about thee: they do utterly
contemn thee, and despise thee. I have made thee of small power (says God by
his Prophet) he speaks in the time past, of the time to come, signifying
thereby that it shall as certainly come to pass, as though it were alredie
fulfilled. Worldly Princes think their state sure, when they are loved of
their neighbors, and feared of their enemies. But the Edomites (says God)
have no such assurance of their state. For where love is, there is reputation,
but they shall be of small reputation, therefore they shall not be loved, and
where fear is, there is no contempt: but they shall be despised, therefore they
shall not be feared. Notwithstanding they persuaded them selves of safety, and
did triumph over other nations in their hearts, deceyuing the^ selves with a
false persuasion. Therefore the Prophet adds, The pride of thy heart has
deceived thee which dwell in the caves of a rock, having an high place for
his habitation, saying in his heart: Who shall bring me down to the ground?
Jeremy Ier. 49.16.
adds unto this, and says moreover: Thy fear, and the pride of thy heart.
etc. That is to say: the fear wherewith other nations do fear thee, or else
the opinion that thou have conceived, that other nations are afraid of thee,
and the pride of thy heart has deceived thee. The Edomites were lifted up with
pride, they did advance themselves above other nations, thinking them selves
invincible, whereas they were of small power, and of little reputation, therefore
they were deceived. The cause why they were so proud (as it seems by the
text) was the commodious situation of their country. They did dwell on the
mountains and rocks yt were inaccessible, they had the higher ground of
their enemies, no man (as they thought) was able to make a forte against them,
therefore they had the advantage of all that should come against the^. This
made them think with themselves, that no nation was able to overcome them:
therefore the Prophet says: He says in his heart, who shall bring me down to
the ground? Unto this proud heart God answers by his Prophet as follows:
Although thou mount up like an Eagle, yea although thou make thy nest as high
as the stars, even from thence will I bring thee down. This is a sure saying
of Iehoua. Jeremy says: If thou make thy nest as high as the Eagle, from
thence will I bring thee down. Unto this our Prophet adds more, and says:
if thou make thy nest as high (...) the stars, and so forth: that is to
say, Trust not to thy dwelling on high, for if it were a thousand times higher
than it is thou art not able to resist God, which is above it and thee, for he
dwells in a mount higher thou art able to dwell. ^o can throw down his
thunderbolts upon thee, and destroy thee, so that thou shalt never recover thy
self again. As it is written: If Edom say, Mal. 1.4.
we are impouerished, but we will return and build our desolate places, yet
says the Lord of Hosts, they shall buyld, but I will destroy it, and they
shall be called ye border of wickedness, and the people with whom the Lord
is angry for ever. Thus shall the Edomites be overthrown (says God)
notwithstanding the situatio^ of their country, and the love of their
neighbors, and fear of their enemies. Therefore the stays whereby they
persuaded themselves of safty is of no force to deliver the^ from destruction,
which ye Prophet techeth in ye second part of this chap. whose words serve for
ye co^solatio^ of all the faithful, in yt we learn thereby, that no power of man
is able to resist God, who fights for his people. Moreover al Princes and
Nations may learn thereby not to trust in any earthly might or strength, nor
in the aid of other men that are their confederates. For God is able to alter
men's minds, and to make them despised that before were esteemed and feared.
Here all nations may learn not to put too much confidence in the situation
of their country, be it never so well fortified. For God is able to bring
down, and to make weak by one means or other, those that are of most power
and strength. It is not the policy nor strength of man that overcomes in
battle, but God, with a great or small company of men, yea of himself without
the ministry of man, as pleases him. As we are taught by the example of the
people in Noes time utterly destroyed with the flood for their disobedience:
Genesis 7.21.
and by the example of the Sodomites, Ge. 19.24.
destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven. By hindering the buylding of
Babell toure through the confusion of the tungs Genesis 11.^.
of men: 2. Re. 25 9. Luke 19.43 and. 21.6. Exo. 14.27 Ios. 6.20. and 8.19.
and. 10.11. and. 12.9 etc. Iud. 7.22. 2. Reg. 19.35. Psalm. 27.1. Psalm. 18.2.
by the destruction of the great city Jerusalem, and by the victories that
Moses had over Pharao, that Joshua had over the Cananites, that Gedeon and other
Judges, that Ezechias and other godly Princes had over their enemies. Therefore
king David (notwithstanding his own policy and multitude of men) says: I
trust in the Lord, of whom shall I be afraid? And, the Lord is my fortress,
my castle, my tower, in whom I trust, my butkler, my shield, and my
salvation. In like manner, all Princes and Nations, using such ordinary means
as God has appointed, ought notwithstanding to put their cheef trust in God,
without whose help no Prince is able to mainteyne his estate, his own policy
is in vain, his own power will not help him. For God teaches us here by
this Prophet, that although we make our dwelling as high as the stars, yet
he is able to overthrow us, and to bring us to nothing. It follows: If
thieves came unto thee, or nobbers by night, how miserably should thou he
handled? yet would they not steal only so much as should be sufficient for
them? if grape gatherers should come unto thee, would they not leave some
little ones? How are the goods of Esau sought out? how are his treasures
spoiled? This is the third part of the chapter, in the which the Prophet
shows by a comparison the greatness of the misery and calamity that
should happen unto the Edomites. Great should be their misery if they should
be spoiled by thieves, for it is no small grief to a man to leess in one hour
that which he has labored for many years: Much more shall they be spoiled
of those enemies that God will send against them. For thieves will leave
something behind them, as lands, revenues, and household stuff: but their
enemies will take all, and will put them out of their houses, and dispossess
them of all their lands: also it is a great misery to be spoiled of their
grapes whereupon the wealth of their country does stand: yet that is not so
great as this misery that shall happen unto them. For the spoylers of grapes
will leave some rascales at the least that are unripe to succor them withal,
but the Nations whom God will send against them, will leave nothing,
therefore their misery shall be unspeakable. For this cause the Prophet
utters it by an exclamation, saying: O how are the goods of Esau sought
out, and his treasures spoiled? As though he should say: I am not able to
express how the Edomites shall be spoiled: yet this is the least part of
their misery, that is more which follows. All the men that were confederate
with thee, have dry o^ thee to the borders, the men that were all peace with
thee, have deceived thee, they have prevayled against thee, they that have had
mayntenance by thee, shall laid snare in thy way to catch thee, he shall not
perceive it. They shall not only be spoiled (says the Prophet) but also
they shall be driven out of their country: yea and that by those in whom they
trusted, of whom they looked for aid, with whom they were confederate, and so
forth. And this the Prophet vttreth in the time past, signifying that it is as
certain, as though it were already past. And he adds moreover that this
misery shall come unto them upon the sudden, so that they shall not perceive
it: and therefore it is like to be much greater than if they had foreseen it.
For a Prince that knows of his enemies coming, may leuye an army against
him, and so perhaps withstand him, or make some other shift for him self: But
the Edomites are bereft of this help, for they shall not perceive the misery
that is toward them, before it come, and therefore through their soden
oppression they are likely to be handled the more miserably. Against this it
might be objected: that it is not likely that they should be ignorante of that
which should happen unto them, seeing there are among them so many wise men,
so many grave Senators, that could foresee danger to come. Unto this God
answers by his Prophet as follows: Shall not I at that day (says the
Lord) even cut off from Edom the wise men, and utterly take away understanding
from the mount of Esau? Yea moreover, the courage of thy mighty captains (O
Teman) shall be abated, because every man shall be cut off from the mount of
Esau by slaughter. They shall not perceive or foresee the danger at hand
(says God) for he will destroy their wise Senators, and take away all men of
understanding from amongst them. This is a great calamity, yet he will not
only do this, but also he will dismay, yea and slay all their mighty
captains, so that there shall be none left able to defend them. This is
taught by the name of Teman, which was the chief city, and the most ancient
Dukedom in Idumea, so named of Teman, the eldest son of Elephas, Esaus first
son. Genesis 36.15.
How their mighty captains shall be dismayde, Jeremy declares, saying: Ier.
49.22.
Their heart shall be as the heart of a woman with travel: that is, full of
sorrow, always lamenting, continually looking for to perish. The cause of this
sorrow is the utter destruction of the Inhabitants, which unspeakable misery
uttered by our Prophet in one word, is more at large declared by Jeremy in
these words: Ier. 49.11.
There shall be none left to say: leave thy fatherless children with me, I will
preserve them alive, and let thy widows trust in me. As in the overthrow of
Sodom and of Gomorra, and the places near about (says the Lord) no man
shall dwell there, neither shall the children of men remain in it, Eze. 25.13.
So shall Edom be. And Ezechiell says: Thus says the Lord Iehoua, I will
stretche out my hand upon Edom, and will destroy man and beast out of it. This
is the great calamity that God says shall come upon the Edomites: they shall
be spoiled of al their goods, even to their bid treasures and most precious
Jewels, and not that only, but also they shall be driven out of their
country, sudden destruction shall come upon them unawares, Ez. 35.1. etc.
they shall all be destroyed, foolish and wise, weak and strong, small and
great, poor and rich, man and beast. This is the third part of the chapter,
which (as the former) so this serves for the consolation of the faithful,
and correction of the wicked persecuters of Gods people. For this is the end
and purpose of the Prophet, to comfort the Israelites being in captivity, and
to dismay the Edomites their deadly enemies. And what soever serves for their
consolation, is a general consolation for all afflicted Christians that call
upon God, and put their trust in him. And what soever serves to dismay the
Edomites, is a general correction of all wicked persons that afflict Gods
people. For in the deliverance of the Israelites, is declared the goodness of
God toward all men: for the goodness of God is one, for God is one, and his
goodness is immutable. And in the destruction of the Edomites is showed the
justice of God toward all men, for the justice of God is always one, for God
is one, and his justice is immutable. Therefore I say these words of the
Prophet serve for the use of all men, for the comfort of the godly, and
reprofe of the wicked. They are a sharp crimination or threatening against all
persecuters of the Christians, whereby in the misery and calamity of the
Edomites, the Prophet describes the lamentable state of all that do
obstinately set them selves against God and his people. They shall be
constrained to forgo all their riches whatsoever, their confederates and
aliance shall persecute them, and seek their utter destruction, their wisdom
shall fail them, their wise men shall become fools, and their strong men
shall be made weak, no wisdom nor strength shall be able to prevail against
God. Whereby we are taught that which the Prophet David says: it is better to
trust in God, Psalm. 118.8.
than to trust in man: it is better to trust in God, than to trust in Princes.
For man is mutable, but God is immutable: the wisdom of man and his strength
fails, but the wisdom and strength of God is above all, and endures for
ever, whereby he confounds the wisdom and strength of man, especially of
those that resist him, and afflicte his people. A notable example hereof are
the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the Apostles time, who persecuted both them
and Christ our Savior unto the death, therefore they were miserably handled,
they were not only spoiled of al their substance, but also most lamentably
destroyed, although they had many forwarnings thereof, yet they could not
perceive it. They interpreted all things for them that made against them, so
was their wisdom confounded, and they in the end utterly destroyed. But we
need not go unto Jerusalem for examples, we have examples at home at our own
doors: we need not go unto the Apostles time for examples, for we have
examples of our own time, in the memory of us that are alive, of the severe
justice of God toward the enemies of him and his people in the overthrow of
the religious houses of Monks and Friars, a most wicked kind of men, who had
great abundance of precious Jewels and treasures, they were spoiled of all, yea
they were disparsed, and their houses overthrown, they that were counted the
wisest of all men, could not foresee it, and although some of them did foresee
it, yet they could not prevent it. They which before had subdued unto their
obedience kings and Emperors could not withstand it. Their wise men were cut
off, and the courage of their mighty captains was abated. Many find much
fault that their goodly buyldings are decayed, but such men have not a right
opinion of God, such men find fault with the wisdom and justice of the Lord.
They do not understand the saying of the Prophet Amos: Amos. 3.6.
there is no misery that happens unto the city of the wicked, but God sends
it. If God did destroy his own city and temple that he commanded to be
builded, which was the most sumptuous buylding in all ye world, how could he
suffer the houses of them to stand, which were not only dissembling
Hypocrites (as were the Inhabitants of Jerusalem) but also manifest Idolaters,
most filthy adulterers, Sodomites, Thieves, and Murderers? It must needs
be that their buyldings should stink in the sight of God, and that they
should stir up his wrath to overthrow their godly houses, leaving only
the rubbishe and some old walls for a memory (as he did the salt stone of
Lots wife, and the barennesse of the country of Sodom) for a remembrance unto
the posterity, that when the children shall ask their fathers what houses
these were, they may answer: Here dwelled certain men of counterfeite
Religion, forsakers of the Gospel of Christ, and followers of their own
traditions, Idolaters, adulterers, thieves and murderers. For their manifold
wickedness the wrath of almighty God was provoked against them, he therefore
suffers the Devil to set them at discord among them selves, he caused their
own company to bewray their adultery, Sodomitrie, and their crafty
conueyaunce about their Imagerie, seruyng unto Idolatry, whereby he spoiled
them, dispearsed them, and ouerthrewe their costly buyldings. Thus God dealed
with these men. And why? The cause follows in the Prophet: For the cruel
spoiling of thy brother Jacob, thou shalt be put to shame and confusion, yea
thou shall perish for ever. The cruelty of the Edomites in spoiling Gods
people, was the cause why he would so grievously punish them, whose
wickedness the Prophet amplifieth by putting them in mind of their
consanguinitie with the Israelites. It is great wickedness, and deserves
great punishment at Gods hand, if they that are not alied do deal cruelly the
one with the other: much more heinous in the sight of God is the cruelty of
brethren one toward another. The Israelites and Edomites were brethren, for
they came of Israel and Edom, the sons of Isaac, of whom they had their
names, therefore the Edomites were nearer in blood unto the Israelites than any
other nation: also they were partly both of one religion, for they had both
received the covenant of circumcision, which God had given unto their father
Abraham, which God called his covenant, because it was a seal of that
covenant that he made with his children the Israelites, who only were his
people, for as much as they only had received the covenant it self. That is
to say, the promise, or the word of God preached, whereby God offers him
self unto us as unto children. If we receive the seed of Gods word, and like
good ground bring forth fruit, then we are in deed the children of God. But
the word was not offered unto the Edomites, therefore God refused them to be his
children, for among Gods elect these two can not be separated, the word and
the Sacraments. Notwithstanding the Edomites were brethren to the Israelites
according to the flesh: therefore the greater was their wickedness in
afflicting them, which was the cause of their own calamity. But least they
should excuse them selves, and say: it was the Babylonians and not they, that
did so cruelly handle the Israelites, the Prophet adds, saying: At what time
thou stoodest a loofe off, at what time strangers carried away his substance,
and aliants entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, then thou wast
even as one of them. This is it that the Prophet says: although the
Babylonians were the chief doers, yet the Edomites were not void of fault,
for they brake league with the people of God, they denied them aid, they took
part with the enemies, entered the City with them, and cast lottes with them
for the decision of the spoil: they carried away their substance, and in all
points showed them selves their deadly enemies. Thus the Prophet puts away
their excuse, and that they may appear the less excusable, he rehearses
particularly their faults, as follows: But thou should not have beholden
the day of thy brother, the day in the which he was carried into exile,
neither should thou have laughed at the inhabitants of Iehuda, in the day of
their destruction, neither should thou have triumphed over them in the day
of their affliction. Thou should not have entered intoo the gates of my
people, in the day of their destruction, neither should thou then have
beholden his misery in the day of his destruction, neither should thou have
laid hands upon his substance in the day of his destruction. Neither
should thou have stand in the bywayes to slay those that otherwise had
escaped, neither should thou have taken prisoners those that remained of
them in the day of affliction. Here in telling them what they should not have
done, the Prophet opens unto them the haynousnesse of their fault by
degrees. The first is, they did behold with a certain pleasure the misery of
the Israelites. The nature of true friends is to be grieved when they see one
an other in misery. It was not only no grief to the Edomites to see the
Israelites afflicted, but also they did laugh at them. Secondly they did
triumph over them, and (as the words do sound) did speak with open mouth
against them, and when they had entered their gates with the enemies, and
spoiled their substance, they did slay some of them, and other some they took
prisoners. This was the cruelty of the Edomites against Gods people, who
although they were not accepted of God, as his children, yet he suffers them
quietly to enjoy their civil estate in this life, until their cruelty was
come to the full. So he suffers all reprobates to enjoy their estate in this
life for a time, as he did the posterity of Cayn, whom at the last he
destroyed by water, so he suffered the Sodomites to live voluptuously many
years, whom in the end he destroyed by fire and brimstone from heaven. He
suffered Pharao king of Egypt to continue a long time in prosperous estate, and
afterward drowned him and his great army in the Sea. He suffered the
Cananites to triumph over other Nations, and at the length gave the Israelites
victory over them, until their estate was quite overthrown: So God suffers
many Princes and Nations to live quietly for a time, until their wickedness
be at the full, and then he cutteth them off as well in this world, as in the
world to come. So he did cut off the Edomites for their cruelty toward their
brethren: whereby we are taught brotherly love, and to avoid injurious dealing
one toward another, God has joined us all in one brotherhood, in the
confession of one faith, of one truth, of one religion, of one Christianity,
and has made us the children by adoption of one father (which is God him
self) and fellow heirs with our Savior Christ, to the intent we should
love one another: and if we love as brethren, God will love us, and accept us
as his children. Here for our better instruction in this matter, we may
understand by the words of the Prophet, that the properties of brotherly love
are not to murder one another, not to spoil one an other, not to triumph
over the afflicted, not to rejoice at their misery, nor gladly to behold
their calamity: but rather to be sorry for their heaviness, to weep with them
that weep, seeking to help and succor them, and to deliver them out of
adversity, of what country or nation so ever they be. The children of God had
not respect to countries, blood or such like, knowing this, that they have all
one father, and one country in heaven. They that do otherwise, or are
otherwise affected, shall be grievously plaged, they shall drink of the same
cup that they have given to other men, which the Prophet teaches us by the
words following, in that he says: For the day of Iehoua is at hand upon all
Nations, even as thou have done, it shall be done unto thee: thy mischeeuous
dealing shall return upon thy own pate. For the understanding of these words
we have to consider what the day of the Lord is, it is a day of affliction and
great calamity, a day of much sorrow and heaviness unto the wicked, but a day
of exceeding joy and gladness unto ye true worshippers of God. The Prophet
Esaias speaking of the same day, says: Houle you, Esa. 13.6.
for the day of the Lord is at hand, it shall come as a destroyer from the
almighty, therefore al hands shall be weakened, and all men's hearts shall melt,
and they shall be afraid, anguishe and sorrow shall take them, and they shall
have pain as a woman that trauelleth, every one shall be amassed at his
neighbor. Behold the day of the Lord comes cruel, with wrath and fierce
anger, to lay the land waste, and he shall destroy sinners out of it. For the
stars of heaven, and the planets thereof shall not give their light, the
sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her
light to shine: and I will visit the wickedness upon the world, and their
iniquity upon the wicked, and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to
cease, and will cast down the pride of tyrants. Also the Prophet Ezechiell
says: Eze. 30.3.
The day of the Lord is at hand, a cloudy day, and it shall be the time of
the heathen. And the Prophet Ioell says: Alas for the day, Joel. 1.15. and.
2.11.
for the day of the Lord is at hand, and it comes as a destruction from the
almighty. The day of the Lord is great, and very terrible, who can abide it?
Finally the Prophet Zophonie says: Zoph. 1.14
The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, eue^
the voice of the day of the Lord. The strong man shall cry there bitterly:
that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of
destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity and blackness, a day of
clouds and darkness, a day of the trumpet and alarm, against the strong
cities, and against the high toures, and I will bring distress upon men, and
they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and
their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung: Neither
their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the
Lords wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy.
For he shall make even a speedy riddance of all the^ that dwell in the land.
By these words of the Prophets it appears that the day of the Lord brings
most miserable destruction unto the wicked, which Abdias says shall come upon
all nations: that is to say: upon al nations that have dealt cruelly with the
people of God, for so in the scriptures an universal sign is often times
restricted. As for example. Genesis 3.20.
Adam called his wife Eve, because she was the mother of every living creature:
that is to say, she was the mother not of all living creatures generally, but
of all mankind, or of every creature endued with reason. And God said, Genesis
12.3. and.18.18.
In Abraham all Nations of the earth shall be blessed: that is to say, all the
faithful of every Nation, and not all generally without exception. Genesis 41.57
And it is written that every land came into Egypt for corn, that is to say,
all that were bordering upon Egypt, or all that were plaged with scarsitie of
corn. Also our Savior says: When I am exalted, Ioh. 12.32.
I will draw all men unto me: that is to say, all that do believe, and S. Paul
says: Phil. 2.21.
All men seek their own profit: that is to say, all men for the most part
neglecte their duty toward God and their neighbor. So in this place, where
the Prophet signifies, that God will plague all Nations, he understands all
those that are enemies unto the people of God, and not all nations universally:
as it is signified by these words, As thou have done, it shall be done unto
thee. For this is the purpose of the Prophet to comfort the Israelites, whose
consolation consists not in the destruction of all nations, but in the
overthrow of their enemies. Therefore he gives them to understand that their
enemies shall be utterly destroyed, saying: For even as you have drunk upon my
holy hill, so all nations shall drink continually, yea they shall drink, and
swalowe up, and they shall be as though they had not been. By this word
drink, metaphorically or figuratively is understood affliction oftentimes in
the scriptures, as in these words of our Savior: Lu. 26.42.
Let this cup pass from me, but if it can not pass from me, but I must needs
drink it, thy will be done. Here by drinking of ye cup, he means the suffering
of his most paynful passion. Ier. 49.12.
Also the prophet Jeremy preaching the destruction of the Edomites, with
Abdias, has these words: Thus says the Lord: Behold they whose judgment
was not to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall
escape free? Thou shalt not go free, but thou shalt surely drink of it. For
I have sworn by my self (says the Lord) that Bosra shall be wast, and for a
reproach, and a desolation, and a curse, and all the cities thereof shall be
perpetual desolations. These words do plainly teach us, that to drink
figuratively signifies to suffer affliction. This therefore is that he says
in the person of God, even as you that are my people have been afflicted in your
own country, which I have chosen as a peculiar place for my self to be
worshipped in: so all nations that have afflicted you, shall be plaged, yea
they shall be miserably scourged, and brought to perpetual desolation. Thus
the Prophet ends the first chapter of his prophecy, which concerns the
destruction of the Edomites, now he describes the felicity and prosperity
of the Israelites: But upon mount Sion there shall be salvation, and it shall be
holy: and the house of Jacob shall recover their possessions. And the house of
Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau
as stubble, and they shall kindle among them, and consume them, and there shall
be none left of the house of Esau, for Iehoua has spoken it. Sion is the hill
upon the which Jerusalem was builded, and is taken for the whole country of
the Israelites. They shall be delivered (says the prophet) they shall recover
their possessions, and also destroy their enemies even as fire does consume
stubble. For therefore are the Israelites likened unto fire, and the Edomites to
stubble, to declare ye sudden destruction, that God shall send upon the
posterity of Esau, by the hands of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Which the
Prophet Ezechiel expresses in plain words saying: I will execute my judgment
upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and they shall do in Edom
according to my anger, and according to my indignation, and they shall know my
vengeance, says the Lord God. Thus God threatens destruction to the
Edomites, but the Israelites shall flourishe, as in the words following it is
declared. Eze. 25.14.
And they shall possess the Southe side of mount Esau, and the champion
country of the Philistines, and they shall possess the feelden country of
Ephraim, and the feelden country of Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess
Gilead. Here the Prophet shows the Israelites how their dominion shall be
enlarged. The south side of Idumea or of mount Seir is the furthest part of
the country from Israel. This is it therefore that is given them to
understand, that they shall inhabit not only their own country, but also
the country of the Edomites, and the Philistines, and Benjamin, whose
habitation is in the west, shall possess Gilead, which is in the East: that is
to say, the Israelites shall have dominion from the west to the East, and from
the North to South, which in the words following is further declared: And they
of this host of the Israelites, that are in captivity among the Cananites,
shall possess unto Sarephath, and they of Jerusalem that are in captivity in
Sephared, shall possess the cities of the South. And there shall come up in
mount Sion saviors, to give sentence against the mount of Esau, and Iehoua
shall have the kingdom. That is to say, the Israelites dominion shall be from
the South to the North, and from the North to the South, from the one end of
the country to the other. For the Cananites dwelled in the South country, and
Sarephath, otherwise called Sarepta, was in the North, so was also Seraphad,
otherwise called Bosphorus (according to the judgment of some Interpreters.)
This benefit God promises by his Prophet unto his people, for bringing of
which thing to pass, he used the ministry of certain noble men and chief
captains, as Zorobabell, Nehemias, Esdras, and such other, who here are
called Saviors, because God by their hands chiefly saved the people. So in ye
book of the Judges, Othniell and Ehud are called Saviors, Iud 3. verse. 9. and
15.
because they were the captains, by whose means the Israelites were delivered
from the bondage of their enemies. The like prosperity God promises here
unto the same people, the which being brought to pass, the Prophet says,
that the kingdom shall be the Lords: that is to say, the Israelites shall not
only be restored to their country, lands, and possessions, but also they
shall serve God, and worship him according to his will. For although God
rules all the world, and all nations perteyne to his kingdom, yet that
properly is called the kingdom of the devil, where men follow their own
lust, and neglect the worship of God: and there is the kingdom of God, where
he is truly worshipped, the Gospel preached, and his laws obeyed. Where the
Lord is king there is no tyranny or bondage, but liberty and freedom, that
people that serves the Lord shall flourish, shall prosper, and shall be blessed
in this life, and in the life to come, for he is everlasting, therefore his
people shall be everlasting. Briefly, this is it that the Prophet in the former
words gives us to understand, that the children of God shall abound both in
earthly and heavenly possessions. Whereby we are taught to put our trust in
him, for he is able to help us, to pray unto him in all our necessities, for he
is ready and willing to help us, to give him thanks for his benefits: for
great is his goodness toward us, to extol and magnify his name, for wonderful
are his works, to our great profit and commodity. Finally, to obey his laws
and statutes, for he serves them that serve him: so doing God will send us
saviors to save us, and to deliver us from our enemies, and the words of the
Prophet shall be verified upon us, in that he says: The kingdom shall be
the Lords. For he shall be our king for ever, and we his people shall be
continually guarded under the shadow of his wings, and always defended from
all manner misery and calamity.

Hitherto I have opened the sense and meaning of the Prophet according to the
letter, which although for diverse causes it is very necessary to be
understood: yet being considered of it self, without any further
application of the same unto our selves, it is unfruitful and unprofitable. 2.
Cor. 3.6.
As the Apostle says: the letter kills, but the spirit gives life.
Therefore I have added moreover unto the letter, certain general lessons for
the instruction of all Christians. Which application of the scriptures unto our
selves the Apostle puts us in mind of, where he says: Rom 15.4
what soever things are written before time, they are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And as
in diverse other places, so especially in the thirtenth chapter of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, he has given us an example of this interpretation, where the
words of the almighty God, spoken only unto Joshua, and perteyning only unto
him, according to the letter, are used as a general lesson for all men, to
teach them to put their trust in God. After that Moses was dead, God appointed
Joshua to be ruler of the Israelites, and to bring them into the land of
promise: and because he should not fear nor be dismayde, God said unto him:
Ios. 1.5.
As I was with my servant Moses, so I will be with thee, I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee. Upon these words the Apostle groundeth this general
doctrine: Heb. 13.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with those
things that ye have. For he has said: I will not fail thee, neither forsake
thee. Thus the Apostle dissuadeth us through distrust of Gods goodness to vex
our selves with immorderate care of worldly riches, and the unlawful means to
enriche our selves, because God has said unto Joshua: I will not fail thee,
neither forsake thee: teaching us thereby to apply the holy Scriptures to our
comfort, and confirmation of our faith. Whose example I have followed by
adding the moral (as they call it) unto the letter of ye Prophet. But besides
this moral, there is also in the prophecy contained an allegory, concerning
the coming of our savior to judgment, and our full redemption by him in
destroying Antichrist, and in bringing us both body and soul unto the
everlasting blessedness, which he has prepared for all the faithful. For the
words and works of God are unsearchable, and do teach us a great deal more
tha^ the letter at the first sight offreth unto us. This I say, that in the
scriptures, especially in ye old testament, in ye writings of Moses and ye
Prophets there are for the most part three senses in one text, and according to
those diverse se^ses, three diverse interpretations. The first is called literal,
gra^matical, or historical: the second, tropological, ethical, or moral: the
third allegorical, figurative, or mystical. The literal interpretation is
called gra^matical and historical, because in it nothing else is noted, but
that which ye gra^mer rules, and the history it self in plain meaning gives
us to understand. This always is first and chiefly to be noted, as the ground
and foundation of the other interpretations. If we make not a good foundation,
that which we buyld thereon will be weak: so if we do not truly expound the
letter of the scripture, commonly we shall make an unprofitable moral, and a
false allegory. The bare letter, of the new Testament especially, is for the
most part very profitable and commodious to al Christians. There are five
general uses and commodities of the scripture, taught of the Apostle S. Paul
in the Epistle to the Romans, the.15. chapter, Romans 15 4
and in the second Epistle to Timothy the third chapt. 2. Ti. 3.16
First by it we learn patience in adversity, by it we have consolation in
persecution, and are thereby encouraged to continue unto ye end in the true
worship of God, through hope of life everlasting: secondly we are taught true
doctrine as touching ye articles of our faith: and thirdly, to improve false
doctrine contrary to ye same: fourthly by the scriptures we learn to correct
our wicked living, which is contrary to Gods co^ma^dements: and finally we are
thereby instructed in godliness, and in all such things as are acceptable unto
God. All these commomodities are found in the literal sense of the
scriptures. For what is more comfortable than the very letter of these words?
Ioh. 3.16.
So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, to the end,
that who soever believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.
Romans 3.28 Gal. 2.16.
And the letter of these words: We are justified by faith without the works of
the law, does teach us the doctrine of justification by faith, without any
desert of our good works, and also does improve the contrary. In like manner
the letter of other places does teach other doctrine. And where the Apostle
says: Gal. 5.19.
The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultry, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations,
wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness,
gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you before, as also I have told you
before, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie, against such there is no law. The
very letter of these words serves to correct and to instruct us in godliness.
So commodious is the bare letter of the holy Scriptures, and the moral thereof
(which is to gather out of the letter some good lesson for our instruction) is
no less profitable. For all the miracles of our savior Christ, as according
to the letter and history, they served to the commodity of those that were
healed by him, so they may be morally interpreted to our comfort, and to the
confirmation of our faith that are now living. For by his goodness thereby
showed unto other men, we have an evident argument of his readiness to help
us, when soever we in like sort do seek help at his hands: so that we have no
cause to mistrust his goodness, nor to seek help else where, of Saints and
Angels, that are no saviors. His miracles also do teach us his Divinity,
they teach us that he is Christ the savior of the world, and do improve the
contrary doctrine, as our Savior witnesses in the Gospel. Mat. 11.4. John.
5.36. and.14.11.
Moreover all the examples of godly men serve for our instruction: and the
examples of the wicked with their punishment, serve for our correction. After
this sort the Apostle Paul expounds the manyfolde plages of the Israelites
in ye wilderness, 1. Cor. 10.6
and according to the moral sense, applies them unto us, teaching us by their
example to avoid their wickedness. Finally, in the scriptures, besides the
letter and the moral, there is a true and a profitable allegory, type, figure,
or mystery. As for example: Genesis 22.9.
the offering of Isaac upon the altar, to be slain by the hands of his
father, as God had commanded, which as according to the letter, it was a
trial of Abraham's faith, and also an instruction for us (which is the moral)
teaching us to obey Gods commandments in all points, and to believe his
promyses, although they seem never so contrary to man's reason: So in that
Isahac was laid upon the altar ready to be slain, and then by the voice of
God delivered, and (as it were) raised from death to life again, he was a type
and figure of our Savior Christ, teaching unto Abraham and his posterity
salvation by the offering of Christ upon the cross, and by his resurrection
from death. Also Joseph being sold by his brethren unto strangers, cast into
prison, Genesis 37.2^ Genesis 39. and. 41. and.42. and.47.
and after made ruler of the country of Egypt, where he provided food, and
also a fruitful land for his father and brethren to dwell in (as it
declares Gods wonderful power and goodness toward him, and also the state
of Gods children in this life, being first by affliction thrust down (as it
were) into hell, and after exalted into heaven: So it was a figure of our
Savior: first sold and delivered into the hands of the Gentiles, even by his
own country men, and brethren, and afterward of his Resurrection and
glorification, by his Ascension into heaven, where of his mercy, contrary to
our deserving, he has provided for us a perpetual rest and habitation for
ever, even for as many as come unto him for succor. Ex. 1. and.14.
Moreover the bondage of the Israelites in the wilderness, and their
deliverance through the destruction of Pharao in the red sea: besides that it
declares the power and goodness of God toward them, and the state of his
children before rehearsed: it was a type of our bondage through sin, death,
hell, and the devil, and of our deliverance from the same by our savior
Christ, destroying our enemies, and bringing us unto everlasting felicity.
Likewise the Pascall lamb received every year, Exo. 12.3.
being a lamb without blemish, (the blood whereof was sprinkled upon the
posts of the door, over which the destroying Angel passed, hurting none in
the house where the blood was sprinkled) This Lamb, I say, in an allegory
signifies our savior Christ, being without blemishe and spotte of sin,
whose blood sprinkled upon the posts of our hearts by faith, delivers us
from everlasting destruction. We are taught this allegorical exposition of the
Pascall Lamb by John Baptist, where poynting unto our savior Christ, he
says: John. 1.29.
Behold ye lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. Also the
Apostles Paul and Peter, do liken our Savior unto the Pascall lamb, saying:
1. Cor. 5.7. 1. Pet. 1.19.
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, and we are redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spot. According
to this figurative and mystical interpretation, the Apostle expounds the
history of Abraham's two wives and their children: Gal. 4.22*
where he plainly poynteth at our adversaries the Papists, who seek
justification by their own works, and do persecute those, which according to
Gods promise, do seek life by faith in Christ: whose miserable state and
condition the Apostle shows, proving by an allegory, that all they which
seek justification, by the bondage of the law, shall be cast out of the land
of promise with the bond woman and her son, and shall not inherit the
everlasting kingdom of God with his children, that are free, and do seek
salvation through faith in his promise. Here it is evident that the Apostle
teaches us to expound the scriptures, not literally only, but also
allegorically, mystically, or figuratively. So he expounds those words: Deu.
25.4. 1. Cor. 9.9.
Thou shall not mosell the Ox that treads out the corn. In like manner the
rock in the wilderness, out of the which water flowed to satisfy the thirst
of the Israelites: Exo. 17.6.
besides that, it declares Gods power and providence for his children being
in distress, it prefigured the graces and gifts of God that flow out of our
savior Christ unto all that believe in him. For so the Apostle expounds it,
1. Cor. 10.3
where he says: Our fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and did drink
the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock that
followed them, and the rock was Christ. And the serpent that Moses set up at
the commandment of God, Number. 21.8.
besides the miraculous healing of those that were bytten with fyry Serpents,
teaches both the Israelites and us to lift up the eyes of our faith unto our
Savior lifted up upon the cross, seeking deliverance by him from the deadly
sting of the Serpent the devil. For that brazen serpent was a figure of our
savior Christ, Ioh. 3.14.
as he himself expounds it in the Gospel. Moreover where Moses tells the
people that God will raise unto them a Prophet like unto him self, even of
their brethren, Deu. 18.15.
unto whom they should harken: the letter teaches us nothing else but that
Joshua should govern the Israelites, and bring them into the land that God had
promised them. But the holy Ghost in the person of Joshua (whose name signifies
a savior) teaches us that Christ is our savior, who brings us into the
everlasting rest promised unto all the faithful, for so the Apostle Peter
expounds the words of Moses. Act. 3.^
Also even as the bonbage of the Israelites in Egypt, and their peregrinatio^
in the wilderness (besides yt is plainly expressed by the letter) does
represent ye state of Christians in this life, being full of afflictions: eue^
so the land of Canaan promised unto Gods people, in ye which they had a great
conquest over the wicked, and after quietly enjoyed ye country (besides ye
declaration of gods exceeding power and excellent benefits bestowed upon them)
does represent unto us the everlasting rest in heaven, which we shall enjoy
when almighty God has destroyed all the wicked upon the earth. So the Apostle
expounds the words of the prophet David, who concerning the same matter,
Psa. 95.10.
says: Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is
a people that does err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways, unto
whom I swear in my wrath, Nu. 14.23
that they should not enter into my rest. Which words written both in the
law and in the Prophet, according to the letter, do show the rest of the
Israelites in the land of Canaan, but according to the allegory, they teach
all the faithful the everlasting rest by Christ in heaven. Heb. 4.9.
But for the further declaration of this double, and triple sense of the
Scripture, and the manifold commodity thereof, 1. Sa. 18.11. and.19.11. and
23.8. and.26 2. etc. 2. Sam. 5.3
let us consider the history of David persecuted by Saul, and after exalted
to the kingdom of Israel. As touching the letter every Christian man that
has read the books of Samuel does confess that David was living about a
thousand years befere the coming of our Savior in the flesh, and that being
persecuted of king Saul; he was diverse times in danger of death, from the
which God did wonderfully deliver him, and also delivered Saul's into his hands,
but he would not lay hands upon him unto death. And when tidings was brought
him that Saul was dead, 2. Sa. 1.15.
he executed the messenger as a murderer, because he confessed that he had
slain him. 2. Sa. 2.4.
Then he was proclaimed king, and after that he was established in the
kingdom, 2. Sa 11. ver 4. and.17.
he committed adultrie with Bethsabe, and caused her husband to be slain, and
did other things displeasant unto God, for the which he was grievously
punished. This is ye truth of the letter. As touching the moral, we learn by
David's fall, and the punishment of his wickedness, to look circumspectly unto
our selves, and to fear the Judgment of God for our iniquities. We learn by
his whole life, that affliction is a good scholemaster unto godliness, in that
it restrayneth our carnal lusts, and keeps down our flesh, but
contrariwise prosperity makes us forget the laws of god: for David in
adversity would not slay Saul the king, 1. Sa. 24.7. and.26.9.
when he was delivered into his hands, although he were his deadly enemy,
giving us an ensample of our duty toward our Prince, so narowly did he look
unto his paths, but in prosperity he neglected Gods co^mandeme^ts, and swarued
from his ordinances by committing adultrie, murder, and other offenses. Whereby
we are taught that prosperity is a slipperie place to stand upon. It is like
an high steep mountain, narrow in the top, upon the which a man standing is
in danger of every wind to be blowe^ down, and to break his neck, except he
hold fast by some tree, or hide him self under some bush, or such like: so in
prosperity we are in danger of every assault of the flesh, world, and devil,
except we hold fast by a true faith in Christ, who is a sure stay, and our only
stay both in prosperity and adversity: without who^ we can not be safe,
neither in ye mount of honor and wealth, nor in the valley of affliction. For it
may be, that by ye means of much rain, the valley may be ouerflowe^ with
water, and they drouned that dwell in it, unless they save them selves by a boat, or such other means: so in adversity we are in danger to be
overwhelmed with the waves of affliction, and to be provoked to forsake God,
except we cleave fast unto Christ, by a lively faith: who is our only arc of
salvation. Therefore David does not say: I trust in the valley, but I trust in
ye Lord, Psalm. 11.1.
wherefore do they say unto my soul: fly unto ye mountains. Thus much of ye
moral in the history of David. There is in it also an allegory or mystery,
prefiguring our savior Christ: which we learn by ye words of ye prophets,
Ezechiel and Hoshea, where God speaks in the^ after this sort: Eze. 34.23
and.37.24.
I will set a shepherd over my sheep, and he shall feed them, even my servant
David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd, and I the Lord will
be their God, and my servant David shall be the Prince among them, he shall be
king over the^, and they shall have one shepherd, and my servant David shall be
their Prince for ever. Eze. 37.25. Hos. 3.5.
The children of Israel shall turn and seek the Lord their God, and David
their king, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness, in the later days.
These Prophets Hoshea and Ezechiel, lived the one three hundred years, and the
other four hundred years after David. Therefore seeing they prophecy of a
David to come after them in the later days, and because they call him an
everlasting king (which can not be verified of David literally being a mortal
man) it is evident that they do mean an other prefigured by David: that is to
say, our Savior, who governs the true Israelites: that is to say, the elect
people of God for ever, who also in the Gospel calls himself the good
shepherd: John. 10.11
giving us to understand that he is that David, the shepherd of Gods people,
of whom the Prophets do speak. Therefore the history of David is mystically
expounded thus: David in adversity, thereby brought down (as I may say) unto
hell, does signify our Savior, taking our nature upon him, and debacing him
self unto the lowest degree, hu^bling him self unto the death, even unto the
death of the cross: and David delivered from his enemies, and placed in the
kingdom, does signify our Savior rising from death, and ascending unto
heaven, where he is exalted unto the right hand of God, and governs all the
world. Thus this history may truly be expounded, whereby we may understand,
that in ye holy scriptures, much more is to be considered than the letter at
the first sight offreth unto us. After this sort also the Apostle teaches us
to expound the history of Solomon, David's son. 2. Sa. 7.13.
God said unto David that he would give him a son, whose throne he would
establish for ever, and he would be his father, and he should be his son:
where the letter directs us unto Solomon, 1. Re. 2.46
who then had established the kingdom unto him self, when he had put to death
those that rebelled against him and his father. But the holy Ghost in the
person of Solomon, as in a type and figure, teaches us that our savior
Christ, having subdued all the enemies of his father and of him self, shall
reign for ever, quietly with his faithful servants that harken unto his
laws, and submit themselves unto his government. Unto this exposition the
Apostle leads us, where he applies the words of almighty God unto our
savior, Heb. 1.4.
saying: Christ is so much the more excellent than Angels, as he has gotten
him a more excellent name tha^ they. For unto which of the Angels said he at
any time, Psalm. 2.7. 2. Sa. 7.14
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? And again: I will be his
father, and he shall be my son. Therefore seeing that the Apostle expounds
the words to be spoken of our Savior, which literally do appertein unto
Salomo^, I say that Salomo^ was a figure of our savior, and that in the
history of Solomon there is an allegory besides ye letter. Jonas. 1.17.
Likewise Jonas in the whales belly, and after delivered by the power of God,
was not only an example of Gods omnipotent goodness, but also a figure of the
burial and resurrection of our Savior: Mat. 12.40
as we are taught by his own interpretation in the Gospel. And Hoshea ye
Prophet declaring ye benefits of God toward the Israelites, Hos. 11.1.
and their unthankfulness for the same, recites their deliverance out of
Egypt. In whom God speaks those words: out of Egypt I have called my son.
Where ye letter teaches us nothing else but the deliverance of the Israelites
out of captivity: but the holy Ghost understands moreover ye returning of
our savior out of Egypt into his own country, after ye death of Herod. For so
the Prophets words are expounded in the Gospel. Mat. 2.15.
Finally the Prophet Jeremy declaring the deliverance of ye Israelites out of
captivity, describes first their great affliction, saying: Thus says the
Lord, Ier. 31.15.
a voice was herd on high, a mourning and bitter weeping, Rachell weeping for
her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not. Thus says ye
Lord, refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from teres, for thy work
shall be rewarded, says the Lord, and they shall come again from ye la^d of
their enemies. Here ye letter teaches us only ye returning of ye Israelits,
from ye captivity of Babilo^. But ye holy ghost thereby understands ye
lame^tatio^ of ye Israelites for their Infants, Mat. 2.18.
who^ Herod slew at the birth of our savior Christ, as ye Evangelist
witnesses. So I say in this Prophet Abdias, besides that has been already
noted, we are taught Christ, and the destruction of our enemies by him, for he
has applied the writings of all the Prophets unto him self, Lu. 24.27.
when he accompanied the two Disciples unto Emaus after his resurrection. For
S. Luke says that he began at Moses, and at all the Prophets, and interpreted
unto the^ in all the scriptures those things that were written of him. And S.
Peter says: Act. 3.24.
All the Prophets from Samuel and thence forth, even as many as have written,
have foretold of those days: that is to say, of the wonderful works then
wrought in the name of Christ, and of his death and resurrection. Also Zachary
John Baptist father, Luk 1.70
praises the Lord God of Israel, for our redemption by Christ our mighty
savior, as he had promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets that have bin
from the beginning of the world. Therefore seeing that all the Prophets have
forespoken of salvation by Christ. Abdias also, with the residue, has
prophesied of him: so that in this Prophet we may find our deliverance by
Christ, and consequently, the destruction of Antichrist. Which he does here
first teach us under the name of Edom and Esau. The signification of the word
Edo^ points us to the person, and also to the place, where Antichrist
dwells. For Edom in the Hebrew tongue, An allegory gathered of the
signification of the word Edom.
signifies red or bloody. The Bishop of Rome (which is Antichrist) shows
him self to be Edom, that is red and bloody, both in outward appearance, and
also in his secret devises, for he and his Cardinals, his doctors, and other
his adherents, are clothed in red, the serving men of his Clergy go in red.
This is their color wherewith they are delighted: So also their doings are
red and bloody. For this is the first decree of their secret counsel at Trent:
Al they that profess the Gospel, and are enemies unto the Church of Rome,
shall be rooted out, they shall be slain, and put to death, their blood shall
be shed upon the earth. This is their bloody decree which they have practiced
to ye utter most of their power, here in England, in Scotland, and of late in
France, and in many other places of Christendom, as Germany, Flanders,
Spain, and Italy: So that they are altogether delighted in blood, and will
never be satisfied. Therefore they may well be called Edomits, red and bloody
me^. Moreover not only the signification of the word, but also the testimony
of diverse ancient writers, leads us to understand by this name Edo^, ye
Antichrist of Rome, who are persuaded that he is not only in outward pomp
and show, and in deeds an Edomite, but also in blood and kindred, as one that
had his beginning of the Edomites. Ancient testimonies witnessing that the
Bishop of Rome is an Edomite, and consequently Antichrist.
For Moses Gerundensis writing of the beginning of the Romans, says: we have
heard in the books of the Chronicles of Joseph ben Gorian, and in other books
of Antiquities, that Sappho the son of Eliphas, the son of Esau, the father
of the Edomites, provoked Joseph the son of Jacob to war, when he was
governor of Egypt: In the which war Sappho the Edomite, and his valiant
captains were taken and carried into Egypt, and there committed unto prison,
where they remained as long as Joseph lived. And when he was dead Sappho fled
away, and went into Campania, and reigned over Kittim, at Rome. At the length
he was made king over all Italy, and this was the first king of Rome. Also
David Kimchi writing upon this Prophet, says: The Edomites are now so
mingled among other Nations, that a man can not know them from the Ammonites
and Moabites, and the people of other Countries, saving that the greater part
of the Edomites has been from the beginning of the kingdom of Rome. Esa.
34.6. Ier. 49.7. Lam. 4.21. Eze 25.13.
Therefore what soever the Prophets have spoken of the desolation of Idumea, in
the latter end of the world, they have spoken it against Rome. For when
soever Rome shall be destroyed, Israel shall be delivered. Thus besides that
these writers testify, that the Romans had their beginning of the Edomites,
Kimchi says, that by the Edomites the Prophets do understand the Romans.
And he says moreover: Abdias prophesies only against Edom, not that
external Edom (as it seems) but an other: that is to say, against the
spiritual Edom, the Antichrist of Rome: which was little and despised in the
beginning, but through the pride of his heart, much exalted, like an Eagle
making his nest above the stars, and rioting upon the mount of Sion.
Moreover an other old writer, the author of the book called Seder olam, that
is to say, a rehearsal of antiquities, calls Rome Edom, in these words:
Aspatian (for so he terms Vespatia^) came and wasted the temple, and carried
away many families of the house of David, into Spain, and this was the. ^80.
years of Edom, or of the Romans. Finally Jonathan the Chaldey paraphrast, in
many places, where the Prophets name Edom, in steed thereof he names Rome. As
for example: E^^ 34.9.
The floudes of Edom (says the Prophet) shall be turned into pitche. Which
words the Paraphrast interpreting, says: The floods of Rome shall be turned
into pitche. And upon the last verse of this Prophet, he says: And they shall
follow the savior from the mount of Sion, to give sentence against ye mount of
Esau, and that (says he) is the mount of Rome. Thus it appears by the
judgment of these writers, that by the destruction of Edo^, is understood
the destruction of the Antichrist of Rome. This is it therefore, that the
Prophet teaches us, besides that has bin already noted. The allegory of the
Prophet Abdias.
That almighty God has determined to overthrow the persecuter of his
children. The Ambassador our savior Christ is already sent, and proclaymeth
at this present, by the mouth of his Preachers war against him, saying: up let
us arise against Rome unto battle: let us with all ye gifts that God has given
us, overthrow the four of Idolatry and superstition which Antichrist has
builded to deface the glory of almighty God: let us deliver Gods children out
of the dangerous captivity and thraldom of ignorance, which brings
destruction of body and soul to all that continue therein. So God by his
Prophet threatens the destruction of this Edom, no less than of the other.
For (as by comparison it may appear) the same cause of destruction is in the
one yt was in the other: also the power and might as well of ye one as of the
other, is of late days by ye wonderful working of almighty God maruelously
diminished, and his glory defaced. The Edomites were beloved of their
neighbors, and feared of their enemies, therefore great was their pride, but
they were brought to desolation by their own co^federates: Eue^ so it was with
ye bishop of Rome, he was beloved of al princes in Christendom, they
reverenced him as a god, also they feared him, so yt they durst not stir
against him. For what Prince soever did not in all points submit him self
unto him at his pleasure, he excommunicated him, discharged his subjects of
obedience, and in the end deposed him of his kingdom: for besides the
translating of the Empire from one kingdom to an other, besides the deposing
of Hilderike king of France, and diverse other inferior Princes: Psalm. 91.13.
he excommunicated and deposed seven Emperors one after an other: namely Henry
the fourth, and Henry the fifth, Frederik the first, Philip, Otho, Frederike
the second, and Conradus his son. Therefore great is the pride of his heart:
so that he exalts him self above men and Angels, he compares him self with
the sun, and the Emperor with the moon, chalenging unto him self so much
more excellency than the Emperor, as the sun excels the moon. Even as
the earth (says he) surmounteth the moon seven times, and the sun
surmounteth the earth eight times (which being multiplied by seven makes
fifty and six) so be excels the Emperor fifty and six times. Neither is
he co^tnet with this superiority over the Emperor, but also he prefers him
self before the Angels, in jurisdiction, knowledge, and reward. This is the
pride of his heart, in the which Pope Alexander the third of that name, trod
upon the neck of Frederike the Emperor, saying this verse of the Psalm: Thou
shall walk upon the Lio^ and the Aspe, the young Lion and the dragon shalt thou
tread under thy feet. And Pope Adrian the fourth suffered the same Emperor
to hold his styrup twice, and gave him a scoff for his labor, because he did
hold the wrong stirup. Also Pope Gregory the seventh suffered Henry the
Emperor, the fourth of that name, to stand bare foot and bare legged at his
gates, with his wife and his child, three days and three nights in the
midst of winter. Such was the pride of his heart which had so deceived him,
that he thought it impossible that he should be overthrown. But (as it
appears this day) the Bishop of Rome is of little reputation, he is despised
of many nations, of whom in times past he was feared. The most part of his
confederates have forsaken him: as the Polonians, the Transsiluanians and
Hungarians, many Princes of Germany, the Princes of England and Scotland,
and many men in other countries. And it is not to be doubted but that shortly
by the working of almighty God the words of this Prophet shall be fulfilled in
him: that is to say, he shall be brought down to the ground, he shall be
spoiled of all his treasures, and utterly forsaken of all his friends, and cut
off from the earth upon the soden, with all his adhere^ts. For the day of the
Lord is at hand, a day of tribulation and anguish, a day of great sorrow and
heaviness, Zoph. 1.15.
a day (as the Prophet Zophony terms it) of desolation and destruction, of
obscurity and darkness, of clouds and blackness unto all the enemies of Gods
children. 2. Th. 1.8.
The day (I mean) when our Savior shall come from heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto all those that know not God,
^ that do not obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power. But upon mount Sion shall be salvation, the children of God shall have no
cause to lament, Reave 21.4
when the terrible day of the Lord shall come: for that day shall be their
deliverance. Then shall their enemies weep and lament, but they shall be glad,
and full of joy: for their sakes all the wicked shall be consumed as stubble with
the fire, for God will send his Angels, Mat. 13. v^ 41. and 49
and they shall gather all the nations of the world before him, and shall
separate the faithful from the unfaithful, as the husband man separateth the
wheat from the tares, and they shall bind the tares together, and cast them
into the fire that never shall be quenched: but the faithful which are the
wheat, shall be gathered into Gods barn: that is to say, they shall be placed
in his kingdom of everlasting joy, peace, and rest. And then all
principalities and powers being subdued, no man shall be able to stir against
God, or against his saints, which before were despised, trod under foot, and
most cruelly murdered: but now delivered out of all misery, exalted into
heaven, and glorified. So that in all points, and in all respects, the Lord
shall rule, he only shall be worshipped and glorified, the kingdom shall be
his. To whom be all praise, honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

THus ends the exposition of the Prophet Abdias, in the which ye letter has
his place and his commendation: that is, the plain meaning of the words of
the holy Scripture, without any moral or allegorical exposition (which I
call the letter) is profitable to comfort, to teach, to improve, to correct,
and to instruct in godliness, which is rather to give life than to kill.
Therefore here a man may ask this question: How is it true yt the Apostle
says: The letter kills, 2. Cor. 3.6.
but ye spirit gives life? for if ye letter kill, it is hurtful, if it be
hurtful, the^ it is not profitable, as is aforesaid. Here for ye better
understanding of ye Apostle, first it is to be noted, yt there is in one
sentence a christian and a true letter, there is also in the same sentence an
heretical and a false letter. As for example: Colos. 1.24
I rejoice (says the Apostle) in my afflictions for you, and fulfill the rest
of Christ's afflictions in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is ye Church.
Here by Christ's afflictions ye Apostle understands ye affliction of
Christians, who are ye body, whereof Christ is the head. The afflictions of ye
body are called Christ's afflictions, because whatsoever the body suffers, the
head, yt is to say, our fauiour Christ is partaker of ye same sufferings, as
appears by his own words, where he says: Saul, Act. 22.7.
Saul why persecutest thou me? and yet Saul persecuted not Christ in his own
person, as the Jews had done before, but in the Christians which are members
of his body. And where ye Apostle says, 2. Cor. 1.5.
as the afflictions of Christ do abound in us: so our consolation abounds
through Christ: it is evident that he calls our afflictions Christ's
afflictions, both because we are members of his body, and also because we
suffer like afflictions with him for his sake. Therefore as long as there
remains one alive yt shall suffer for Christ's sake, so long there remain
behind unfulfilled some of Christ's afflictions which his saints suffer for ye
church and for the confirmation of the same in the true faith, that it may
continue unto the end, and be saved. This is the commodity that we receive by
the sufferings of them that are persecuted for Christ's sake, as we learn by
the words of the Apostle, where he says: 2. Cor. 1.5.
Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is
wrought in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer: or whether
we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation. Mat. 24.13 Reave. 2
ver. 7.11.17. and. 26. and ca. 3. ver. 5.12. and. 21. and ca. 21.7.
Salvation is wrought (says ye Apostle) by enduring afflictions, because
except we overcome our enemies, ye flesh, the world, and the devil, by
continuing steadfast unto the end, we can not be saved. Therefore salvation is
wrought by suffering, not that it is meritorious, but co^ditional. If we
continue unto the end in the true worship of God, suffering all the torments
that are laid upon us to withdraw us from the same, there is laid up for us
in heaven an everlasting crown, which God of his mercy and goodness will give
us, and not for the desert of our own works. For as God for his promise sake
will give everlasting blessedness to those yt believe in him, Mat. 10.32
so he requires at our hands that we confess him before men, that we
continue his faithful servants unto the end, and that we do not shrink from the
confession of the Christian faith for any worldy respect. For this cause if we
endure afflictions, our sufferings do serve to ye salvation (as is aforesaid)
both of our selves, and of our brethren. Thus (if the true sense and meaning of
the Apostles words may be called a letter) it may appear what is the true
letter of the former words, recited out of ye first chap. of the Epistle to the
Coloss. There is also a false letter, which the Romans have devised upon the
same text. That is, that the rest of Christ's sufferings which were imperfect
in him, the Apostle has fulfilled in his own person, for the more full and
perfect redemption of the Church, whereupon they ground the merits of
Saints, satisfaction by our own works, making Christ's passion insufficient
of it self for our redemption, contrary to other places of the scripture: 1.
Pet. 2.24
As this, By Christ's stripes we are healed: and those: Heb. 7 25.
Christ is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for the^: Heb. 9.12.
and Christ by his own blood entered in once unto the holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption for us. For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the
ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the^ that are unclean, sanctified as touching
the purifying of ye flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, which
through the eternal spirit offered him self without spotte to God, purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living god? And again, Heb 10.14
With one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. Here
the Apostle teaches us perfect redemption by our savior Christ only, and by
no other. Therefore ye letter of the Romanists, which techeth us other saviors
beside Jesus Christ, is an heretical and false letter, not to be received.
Likewise in these words: The father is greater tha^ I, Ioh. 14.28.
there is a true and a false letter. The true letter is this: The father is
greater than Christ as touching his manhood. The false letter is this: The
father as touching Christ's godhead is greter than ye son. The false letter
kills, but ye true letter is profitable. Nevertheless, as the true letter is
always commodious and necessary to be known, so in some respect it may truly
be said that it kills rather than gives life: as if we rest upon the letter
of any history or prophecy, and neglect the moral and mystery therein
contained, or if we take part of the letter, and not the whole: or if we take
the letter in stead of the figure and allegory, where a figure or allegory is
necessarily understood. As for example: If we omit the moral and allegory
of the Prophet Abdias before noted, and rest only upon the letter which
pertains nothing unto us, it profits us little. Likewise in the
commandments: thou shall do no murder, thou shalt not commit adultrie, thou
shall not steal, and so forth: this is a true letter, that thereby we are
forbidden actual murder, and actual adultry, and theft. This is but a piece of
the letter, and not the whole: the whole letter is that thereby we are not only
forbidden to stay a man, to defile a woman, and to take away an other man's
goods secretly, or openly, out of his house, or by the high way side: but
also we are thereby commanded not to hurt our neighbor neither in word nor
thought, and to abstain from all manner of injuries, deceitful and hurtful
dealings, and also from al filthy cogitations inwardly, no less than from
violent, manifest, and covetous actions outwardly. Mat 5. ver. 11. and. 27.
Thus our Savior him self expounds the commandments in the Gospel. He that
takes part of this letter, and not the whole, is deceived, in yt he persuadeth
him self that he walks in godliness in absteining from outward actions that
are evil, whereas his heart is full of deadly poison. In this respect ye
letter kills, Luke 20.17 Act 4 11. ^oh. 10. ver. ^. and. 11. and 1^ and cap.
15.1.
rather than profits. Finally where our savior calls himself a stone, a
door a vine, and a shepherd, and where we are called sheep by a figurative
speech: if we take the letter in stead of ye mystery, the letter kills. And
in all the Parables of our savior, as in the Parable of the sower, Mat. 13.3.
and so forth, where a figure is necessarily understood, if we understand
the earthly and not the heavenly sower, the letter profits not. Yet this I
will say for the true letter of all necessary allegories, that it may be
likened to the wine vessels, and the allegory to ye wine. He that will have his
wine safe and sweet, must take heed yt his vessels be not broken, and that
they be well seasoned, for if they be broken his wine will be spilt, and if they
be not well seasoned, it will be sour: So if we will have sound doctrine, we
must be sure that we alter not the letter, that we neither add to it, nor
take from it, for if we do, we shall have sour wine, I mean, we shall have
false doctrine. As in those words: Except you eat the flesh of the son of
man, and of his Saints, and drink their blood, you have no life in you. Here
is an addition to the letter, which makes much for ye Romanistes, that teach
men to call upon Saints that are dead, and to pray unto the^, which we can not
do without a faith and a belief in them, as it is written: How shall they call
on him, To. 10 14.
in who^ they have not believed? But faith and belief is proper only unto
almighty God, and is the mean whereby we do eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of our savior Christ. As he teaches us in these words: John. 6.35.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst. John. 6.54.
The reason is this: whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat
in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. Here our savior techeth us that he
is bread, he is meat and drink unto us, we must come unto him, we must eat
him, we must drink him, and we shall not hunger nor thyrst for ever. And this
is ye mean whereby we do eat his flesh, and drink his blood, to put away our
hunger and our thyrst: eue^ to believe in him. For he says: He that believes
in me shall never thyrst. Therefore if the adversaries of ye Gospel might be
permitted to add unto the letter, saying thus: Except ye eat ye flesh of the
son of man, and of his Saints, and so forth: they might easily prove that
it is lawful for us to put our trust in saints, and to believe in them, as in
saviors, and consequently that it is good and necessary to pray unto the^. But
our savior without any addition says: John. 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. This is the true letter, which if we keep in this place, and in all other places of the scripture without any alteration, it serves so for the
confirmation of the truth, that ye adversaries can have no advantage against
it. But if we take ye letter only without the true fear and meaning thereof,
the commodity that comes thereby, avails us nothing, for that is to take ye
vessel without wine, which does us no good. Therefore in this respect also
it may be truly said: The letter rather kills than gives life. Moreover,
for the better understanding of the Apostles words, it is to be noted, The
letter diversely understood.
that the true letter is diversely understood in the scripture. First the
plain sense of ye scripture without any moral or mystery, is called yt
letter: of the which it has bin sufficiently spoken before. Secondly yt true
understanding of ye scriptures literally, morally, and allegorically, as it
co^teineth all necessary knowledge without the spirit of God, which causes
us to bring forth fruits according to the same, may be called a letter that
kills. They that are destitute of ye spirit of God (without the which no man
can live, although he have al knowledge) are like the high way side, or the
stony ground, or the briers and brambles, in the which, and among the which
the good seed can not prosper and bring forth fruit. This knowledge without
the spirit of God, is a letter that increases ye damnation of men, rather
than profits them. For our Savior says: that servant that knew his masters
will, Luke 12.47
and prepared not him self, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Of this damnable letter it may seem that the Apostle
speaks, where he says: Romans 2.27.
Shall not vncircuncision (which is by nature) if it keep the law, judge thee,
which by the letter and circumcision, art a transgressour of the law? For he
is not a Jew which is one outward, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one within, and the
circumcision is of the heart in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is
not of me^, but of God. Thirdly, not only al knowledge without good works, but
also external works that are done in hypocriste, as coming to the church to
hear the word of God, without a desire to be reformed thereby: may be called a
letter that kills. When men come to bear what the Preacher can do, and not
to learn what they them selves ought to do: when men pray with their lips,
and not with their hearts, or do any good work for vain glory, or to get them
a name among men, and so forth: this is a letter that profits not. Of this
letter the Apostle seems to speak, where he says: Romans 7.6.
Now are we delivered from the law, being dead unto it, wherein we were
holden, that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of
the letter. Finally the law considered by it self without Christ, is called a
letter that kills: As where the Apostle says: 2. Cor
God has made us able ministers of the new testament, not of the letter, but
of the spirit: for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. Where the
Apostle writes these words, he disputes against false Christians, that
received Christ, but not aright, for they joined the law with Christ as a
necessary part of our salvation, they would not acknowledge Christ of him self
to be a sufficient savior, they joined the law with Christ, as fellow in
office with him, in working our salvation, making him to be but half a
savior, alleging for their purpose the glorious promulgation of the law:
Exo. 19.16.
as that it was given with thunder and lightening, with the sound of a trumpet,
Exo. 34.30
with fire and great smoke. Also when Moses came from the mount with the two
tables, his face did so shine that ye people were not able to behold the
brightness thereof. 2. Cor. 3.11
Unto this the Apostle answers, that the glory of the Gospel darkneth the
glory of the law. For the law was given but for a time, but the glory of the
Gospel continues unto the end. Also as the brightness of Moses face was
glorious, so the veil wherewith he was covered, was a toke^ of imperfection, 2.
Cor. 3.13
and a type of infidelity in the people. But through ye grace of God offered by
the Gospel, 2. Cor. 3.18
we are made perfect, and are changed into the image of his glory, and are able
as it were in a glass to behold the same with open face. And ye more to deface
the law, being compared with Christ, 2. Cor. 3.9.
he calls it the ministry of co^de^nation, and a letter that kills. For
through our default it kills after a sort, in that it lays our iniquities
before us, and lets us see in our selves the image of death through sin,
whereby (as much as lies in it) it casts us down into the damnable pit of
desperation, and there leaves us sore wounded, without al hope of life. But
the spirit, that is to say, ye gospel (by means whereof the spirit of God
works in us a true faith) quickneth us again, and exalts us into heaven,
where we shall live forever in despite of all our enemies, through the benefit
of ye good Samaritane our savior Christ. Luke 10 53
Thus we may see how it is true yt the Apostle says: ye letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. Notwithstanding in some respect, and in some sense,
the letter is profitable, as I have said: and also the Apostle teaches us,
that the same letter or law, which kills, is not void of profit. For he
says: Gal. 3.14.
The law was our Scholemaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith. If then it did bring us to Christ, we had no small profit
thereby. And again he says: The law is holy, Romans 7.12.
and the commandment is holy, and just, and good. Was that then which is
good, made death unto men? God forbid: but sin, that it might appear sin,
wrought death in me by that which is good, that sin might be out of measure
sinful, by the commandment. For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, told under sin. Here the Apostle expounds him self, and shows
after what sort ye letter or the law kills, and yet nevertheless it
remains profitable, holy, spiritual, good, and just. Thus much of the letter,
and of ye diverse sense and meaning thereof, and what letter it is that kills,
how it kills, and how it profits. God grant us all the true understanding
and knowledge of his word, with a ready mind and will to follow ye same, that
bringing forth ye fruits of the spirit, we may live for ever in heaven with
almighty God. To whom the father, the son, and the holy ghost, three persons
and one God, be all praise, honor, and glory, for ever. So be it.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the print.
The first number signifies the leaf of the Book, the second the page of
the leaf, and the third the line.

The third leaf, the second page, and the eight line, for succor, read
favor. 15. 1. 17. for Their. read Tsir. 20. 1. 7. for higher thou, read
higher than thou. 23. 2. 17. for bid, read hyd. 25. 2. 24. for godly, read
goodly. 26. 1. 13. for suffers, read suffered. 27. 2. 6. for decision, read
derision. 54. 1. 13. for fear, read sense.


