A catechism, that is to say, a familiar introduccion and trainyng of the
simple in the commandments of God, and the principles of our religion,
much necessary to be taught and known to all good christian people, set
forth in questions with direct answers to the same: and translated into
English for the behoufe and commoditee not only of children, but also of al
such de^^^^^ lerners as are (...) in the Latin toungue.

Suffer the little children to come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of God.
Marc. x. Unto the faithful christian flock and congregation of Jesus Christ,
Edmonde Alen wishes, grace, peace, and mercy from God our heavenly father,
through our savior Jesus Christ.
THe almightye and merciful God our heavenly, gracious, and most dear
father, monisheth and warns us (ye dearly beloved in our savior Christ) both
by word and also by diverse exaumples, that we all should take earneste care
and ^^row for our youth, that it be we instruct and brought up in the true
fear of God, and after such a godly sort yt it might live in all virtue,
godlynes and honesty. And it is a thing whereunto not only the examples of
the heathen, but also our own natural reason, daily experience, and the love
of the common wealth ought lawfully to move and enforce us. For as much as we
daily feel and perceive right evidently, what inco^uenie^ce does ensue, where
youth is neglecte and not regarded. And again what a treasure, comfort and
commodity it is unto an whole common wealth, where youth is well brought up in
godly learning and example, and exercised in virtue and holiness. This I say,
might be sufficient to stir up and to kindle our hearts toward the right
institucion and bryngyng up of youth, although we were but very heathen. But
forasmuch as we are christian men and women, and through out savior Christ
become the children of God, therefore the most holy word of God and the example
of our savior Christ, ought most specially to allure and provoke us unto this
most holy and necessary office. For first it is evident enough by ye
evangelists what an high charge our savior Christ gives us over youth. Math.
xviii. and.xix. and Mark. x. Where, by his hertye and loving imbracyng of
them, he declares manifestly, that no service can be more acceptable unto
him, than that which is spent about them, to bring and induce them unto him.
Likewise how earnestly does S. Paul command all parents to bring up their
children in nurture and exhortacion? Ephe. vi. and Collo. iii. For the which
cause, all children have a special commandment of God to be obedience unto
their fathers and mothers, because they ought to be unto them, as the very
deputies and officers of God, in continually exercisyng them to the glory and
honor of God. And how highly almyghtie God regards the right institucion of
youth, we may learn out of ye old testamente sufficiently, and specially out
of the.xviii cha. of Genesis. Whereas God, openyng unto the faithful Abraham
his mind and purpose against Sodoma and Gomorra says these words. I
know, says the Lord, that his children shall keep the ways of the Lord,
and do that thing which is right and just, that the Lord may suffer that
thing to come to pass unto Abraham, which he has promised him. etc. This
holy sentence of God ought to be alone sufficient unto a christen man (which
is by faith a child of Abraham) to move him to apply all endeavor and study
to the christen educacion of youth. For here we have a singular comfort and a
sure promise, that if we be found true and faithful toward these gifts of
God our children, than will God daily increase and augmente his grace toward
us, and enduce us into further knowledge of his godly will, to the glory of his
name, and wealth of our souls. And beside this, God gives straight
commandment by express words in diverse places that we should in no wise
neglecte our youth. As in the.vi. and.xi. of Deu. where God commanded Moses
that all men should teach their children and childrens children, his laws
and commau^deme^tes. Likewise, through the prophet David, God speaks these
words in the.lxxviii. Psalm. The lord has made a covenant with Jacob, and
has given Israel a law, which their posterity and heirs should know, and
tell it unto their children, that they might also put and fix their hope and
confidence upon God, and keep his comaundementes and not for get his works.
etc.

By this we must needs confess and knowledge that it is an high thing, by god
our heavenly father, and the most requisite and special poyncte in a christen
congregation, that the children be well taught and instruct in the ways of
the Lord, and in the couenaunte which God has made with their fathers and
their posterity for ever in our Savior Christ. For by this means only they
must learn to know God, to be fully persuaded of his mercy and goodness
toward them, to put all their trust and confidence in him only and to love
and fear him. And this foundation once laid, they shall afterward frame and
build their whole life upon the same, and learn all humblenes, obedience,
modesty, virtue and godlynes, in word and deed, and daily be more inclyned
and bente to the true religion and knowledge of God, and evermore increase and
go forward in the same. And thus the whole commonwealth shall receive comfort
and joy by them: And they in process of time, shall learn to instruct their
children in the Lord, in like manner. And thus there shall never wax any
nettels, thistles or wedes in this tillage of the Lord, nor they shall not
perish through our negligence.

For God suffers us to remain in this world, (and takes us not away
immediately after we have atteyned to the knowledge of him) for no another cause,
but that we should help and further other unto the same, that the glory and
perfect religion of God might also be planted and wax in our children and
posterytie. And surely the negligence of men in this behalf has hitherto been
the chief cause of so many and diverse heavy plagues of God. As Christ does
manyfestlye declare where he says: Woo unto him that offends (or hinders)
youth. etc. It were better for hi^ that he were cast into the sea with a
mylstone about his neck and drowned.

Wherefore all they that will avoid this woe, let them apply all that study and
care with most earnest zeal and endeavor, that their youth be well instruct and
brought up.

For this can no man deny, that the very occasion and ground of all the
mischief and wicked dissolutenes that reigns in the world at this day, is,
that the bringing up of youth is no better nor diligenter regarded. Where
subjects are not so obedient unto their heads and rulers as they ought to be,
it is most specially in such places where the institucion of youth has been
neglecte. Likewise where parents are irreverently entreated of their children,
it is through the sufferaunce of God for a punishemente unto them for so evil
and negligently brynging of them up in their youth. And what has been the
cause of the heavy blindness and ignorance in the world, in the trwe relygion
and service of God, of the manifold ydolatry and supersticion, other than the
lack of the right and true institucion of youth? Wherefore if we will avoid
the wrath and indignacion of God, and all man^er of inconvenience, let us apply
more study and diligence that our youth may be better brought up in the
knowledge and fear of God, that in their young and tender age they may
learn the prynciples of Christ's religion and of our christen faith. Which
shall be a mean to a void all the inco^uenie^ce above rehearsed. And if we do
not this, let us look for no another but yt their blood, perisshing through our
negligence, shall be straightly required of our hands. And not only of
parents, but also of all such as have any cure and charge of youth, as
Scholemasters in their schools, pastors and ministers in their cures. These
should be the special instructours of youth. These should beat into
childrens heads the chief points and articles of the Christen doctrine. As
are, the.x. Commandments, the Artycles of the faith, the Lords prayer, the
institucion of the holy Sacraments of Babtysme, and of the holy Supper of the
Lord, and last of all, the institucion of the Ecclesiastical or church
disciplyne and exercise of brotherly correccion, etc.

These poynctes being first taught unto children by their parents word for
word, (which is the office and duty of all christen parents to do,) a
plain and simple understanding of them, might afterward be taught them either
in the schole by the scholemaisters, or else in the church by the pastoures and
ministers, geuyng them every Sunday one short article or question to learn,
repetyng it distinctlye twyse or thryse, and requiring it of them again the
next Sunday, and than to give and repete unto them in like manner another,
until the whole Catechism, be learned out, and than beginning again.

If but one hour were thus spente every Sunday of every pastor and minister
in examining the youth in the church before the face of the whole paryshe, or
of every scholemaister but once a weke, (their parents earnestly warning and
dryuyng them to learn and remember what is taught them) we should feel wtin
one year, what infinite profit should come thereof, and within few years
we should have a florysshing commonwealth: This does God most straytely
require of us, and we had never such occasion unto it as we now have,
considering how earnestly our most christen rulers, the Kings most
excellent Majesty, his right worthy and noble counsailour, governor of his
graces person, the lord Protectors grace, with other of his graces most
christian council, do intend and mind the true plantyng and setting forth
of Christ's pure religion in this realm. Whose feruente and most christian
zeal, if we should not withal pro^ptnes and thankefulnes receive, we should
show and prove ourselves no true natural subjects. Let every one therefore,
most faithful christians, apply his faithful study and endeavor to further
and help forward their gracious princes most godly travail and procedinges
in the kingdom of god. So shall it in short space flourish among us. And we
shall feel God to be our merciful, father indewyng us with the more plentiful
grace against ye assautes of all our enemies: And that men might have some
form and trade to instruct ye youth thereby, I have gathered out of diverse
learned and christian writers of Cathechismes, this brief instruccion, in such
questions as seemed unto me most necessary for children to learn. Whereof they
may learn every weke one (being so repeted as is above written) without any
difficulty at all. This I submit unto the judgment of ye faithful what
soever they be, desiring all men to interpret my faithful endeavor therein to
ye best, and to use it so far as they may have comfort and edification thereby.
Almyghtie God give all men generally grace to seek ernestly the furtheraunce of
his kingdom in the youth. And specially God give all parents and pastors
which have special charge and cure of youth, grace to instruct and bring
them up in his fear, as may be most to the glory and honor of his name. God
give also all children and youth his holy spirit, that they may receive all
godly and virtuous doctrine and ensample, that they may become the very
servants and children of God, and after this life with their angels, may
enjoy the perfect sight and fruicion of their heavenly father. Amen.

A christian introductio^ for youth co^^^^ing the principles of our faith and
religion. The master axeth the question according as he has taught all things
to the scholar before. The scholar answers as he has before learned and
received it of the master.
The Master. Speak my loving child, what art thou?


The scholar. Sir, according unto my first birth I am a creature of God endued
with understanding and reason, but yet borne in sin, and therefore of no value.


M. How and to what end has God created the?


S. When I was nothing, he of his exceeding grace and mere goodness created me,
that I might perfitely learn to know him, to love him, to fear him, to laud
and to praise him, and finally to be partaker of all his inestimable riches and
benefits.


M. How has God created the?


S. First he has made me a body out of the yerth, and furnyshed the same
withal necessary lymmes and members. Than has he endued the same body with a
precious, lively, and an immortal soul, eue^ after his own image, by reason
whereof I am, as it were, a lively image of God.


M. But how can the image of God be resembled in man?


S. For south thus: as God is everlasting and immortal, even so is the soul
of man also. And again, like as God is the lord of all creatures, so has he
ordained man to be lord over all bodily creatures, and has made them all to
be subject unto him and to serve him.


M. Is not the image of God righteousness, holiness, truth, everlasting joy and
salvation?


S. Yes for south.


M. How can thou than be a sinner and of no value?


S. I have inherited sin of Adam the first man that was created.


M. Was Adam than a sinner?


S. God created him after his own image, ryghteous, good and holy, and gave
him a commandment, not to eat of the fruit of knowlage of good and evil,
which commandment if he had observed and kept, he and all his posterity
should have remained holy and blissed for ever. But he tra^sgressed that
commandment, persuaded by decipteful instruccion and prouocacion of the
devil, and so he became a sinner.


M. But what makes that against the? Art thou a sinner because Adam was a
sinner? or through Adams trasgression?


S. Forasmuch as he displeased God, therefore did God punyshe him withal his
posterity, so that ever since that fall of Adam both he and we all are
deprived and spoiled of the image of God, and so are borne into the world even
from our mothers womb, sinners, unrighteous, and children of wrath.


M. Than can you not be saved.


S. After my first birth, I cannot be saved, but through my second birth in
Christ I have an undoubted hope and assured trust to be saved.


M. What art thou than after thy second birth?


S. I am a christian.


M. What is a Christian?


S. A Christian is one that acknowlegeth himself a sinner, and believes
steadfastly that God our heavenly father is merciful unto him, through the
glorious passion and blood sheddyng of our savior Jesus Christ.


M. Whereby know thou, that thou art a Christian?


S. Because I do faithfully believe the same, and upon this belefe am baptized
or chrystened in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.


M. What belieuest thou of the father, of the son, and the holy ghost?


S. I believe that the father is God, the son is God, the holy ghost is God,
and yet as these are three destincte persons eguall in substance, glory and
majesty, so is he but only one God eternal without beginning, everlasting
without end, almyghtifull and altogether bounteous, good, merciful, loving,
tender and beneficial unto man.


M. What dooest thou ferther believe of the same God the father, the son, and
the holy ghost?


S. I do firmly and stedfastely believe whatsoever is written of God in the
holy scriptures, and all that ever is contained in the special points and
artycles of the christen religion, which the lord him self taught us, and
commanded his dysciples to teach the same.


M. What are the special points of the christen religion and how many are
they?


S. They are six.


M. which six be they?


S. The first is the.x. commandments.

ii. The artycles of the holy christian faith.

iii. The holy prayer of the Lord.

iiii. The words and institucion of the holy baptism.

v. The words of the holy supper of the Lord.

vi. The words of the Ecclesiastical discipline and brotherly correccion.


M. Now rehearse me ye words of all the six pryncypall points and articles
one after an other as I have out of the places of Gods holy scripture taught
it unto thee before this time.


S. The.x. commandments are written in the xx. chapter of Exodus in these
words.

i. I the lord am thy God which have brought the out of Egypt out of the land
of bondage, thou shall have none other Gods beside me, or in my sight.

ii. Thou shall make to thyselfe no graven image, nor symylitude of any thing
that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneth, or in the waters under the
earth, thou shall neither bow thee down before them, nor show any service or
reverence unto them. For I am the lord thy God, a strong and gelous God, for I
avenge the unrighteousness of the fathers upon the children even unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate and despise me, and I show
mercy even unto the thousandest generation of them that love me and keep my
commandments.

iii. Thou shall not take the name of thy lord god in vain.

For the Lord will not suffer him unpunished that takes his name in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep the Sabbath day holy. Six days shalt thou
labor and do all thy buisinesse, but the seventh day is an holy Sabbath day
unto the lord thy god. Upon that day shall thou do no work at all, neither
thou thy self, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, neither thy manseruaunte, nor
thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy geast which keeps or lodges in
thy house. For in six days made the lord heaven and earth, and the sea,
withal that is therein, but upon the seventh day did he rest from all manner of
labor: therefore the lord has honored and hallowed the Sabbath day.

v. Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may be prolonged in the
land that the Lord thy God will give thee.

vi. Thou shall not murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit aduoutry.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall nor covet, nor lust after thy neighbors house, thou shall not
lust after thy neybours wife, nor his servant nor his maid, nor his ox nor
his Ass, nor after any thing that is thy neybours.


The articles of the holy Christen feith and belefe, are these, and they
conteyne.iii, pryncipall articles.
I Believe in God the father almyghtie maker of heaven and earth.

And in Jesus Christ his only son our lord which was conceived by the holy
ghost, borne out of the virgin Mary, suffered under Ponce Pylate, was crucified,
dyed, and was buried. Descended unto the helles, and upon the third day he rose
again from the dead, ascended unto the heavens and syttteth at the ryghthande
of God the father almyghtie, from thence he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead.

iii. I believe in the holy ghost, an holy Chatholyque Church, the communion of
saints, the forgeuenes of sins, the resurreccion of the flesh, and the
life everlasting. Amen.

The Lords prayer written in the.vi. of Matthewe and the.xi. of Luke is this.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done upon earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespace against us. And
lead us not in to temptacion. But deliver us from the evil. For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever. Amen.

The words and institucio^ of the holy baptism contained in the new
testament are these.
Math. xxviii. ANd Jesus came and spoke unto his dysciples, saying: All power
is given unto me in heaven, and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all
nations, baptisyng them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy ghost: teaching the^ to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you. And lo I am with you always even until the end of the world.
Mark.xvi. And he said unto them: Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to all creatures: He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. But
he that believes not shall be damned. Roma, vi. Know ye not that all we
which are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye with him? We are
buried then with him by baptism, for to dye, yt likewise as Christ was raised
up from death by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
a new life. Gala iii. For all ye that are baptized have put on Christ. There is
no Jew, neither gentile, there is neither bond, neither free: there is
neither manne nor woman. For ye are all one in Christ Jesus. If ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham's sede, and heirs according to the promise

The places of holy scripture, and the words making for the institucion of
the Lords supper are these here following.

Math. xxvi. When they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said: take, eat, this
is my body. And he took the cup, and thanked, and gave it them, saying:
drink ye all of this. For this is my blood, which is of the new testament
that is shed for many for the remission of sins. Mark. xiiii. And as they
were eating, Jesus took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and
gave to them and said: take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and
when he had given thanks, he took it to the^ and they all drank of it, and he
said unto them: this is my blood of the new testamente, which is shed for
many. Luke. xxii. And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake
it, and gave unto them, saying: this is my body, which is given for you. This
do ye in the remembrance of me: likewise also, when he had supped, he took
the cup, saying: this cup is the new Testamente in my blood, which is shed
for you. 1. Corin. xi. That which I have delivered unto you, I received of the
lord. For ye lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread:
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said: take ye and eat, this is
my body, which is broken for you This do ye in the remembrance of me. After
the same manner also he took the cup when supper was done, saying: this cup
is the new Testament in my blood. This do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this
cup, ye shall show the lords death till he come.

Wherefore whosoever shall eat of this bread, or drink of this cup of the
lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of
the cup.

For he that eats and drynketh unworthily, eats and drynketh his own
damnacion, because he makes no difference of the lords body.

The words of the ecclesiastical discipline or brotherlye correccion, are
these.
Math. xviii. THe Lord Jesus says. If thy brother sins against thee, go
thy ways and rebuke him betwixt the and him alone: If he hear the, than have
thou won thy brother. If he will not hear the, then take one or two unto
the, that every thing may be at a stay by the mouth of two or three witnesses.
If he will not yet hear the, then tell it unto the congregation. If he will
not hear the congregation, then take him as a heathen and as an unchristian.
Verily I say unto you: Whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth, shall also be bound
in heaven. And whatsoever ye shall leuse upon earth shall be also leused in
heaven. M. Well, now declare me the same points every one after other as I
have taught the here tofore: and first tell me: why did God give the.x.
commandments unto man?


S. Forsouthe to thentent we might learn his will out of them, Psalm. xi.
and know what he wylleth us to do, and what to leave undone. Esai. viii.
For the law of the.x. commandments is a perfect rule whereby the will of
god is known, Luke. xvi.
both how to behave our selfs toward him, our almighty everlasting god and
maker, and also toward our neighbor and even christen.


M. What means the Lord where he says, I am the lord thy God. etc.


S. He wylleth that we should believe and knowledge, yt he of his free mercy
through our savior Jesus Christ, Collo. i. Gala. iiii.
has redeemed us from the power of the devil, and from the bondage of the
world and of sin, and has received us to be his own peculiar, heirs into
ye fredome and fellowship of everlasting life, like as he received the Jews
unto him, Exo. xiiii.
when he redeemed them out of the tirannie of the Egypcians.


M. And what is the understanding of these words? Thou shall have none other
Gods: etc.


S. He wylleth by those words that we should withal diligence eschew and
be ware of all manner of Idolatry, and false service of God invented by man,
though it seem or be, never so high and glorious.


M. What is Idolatrye?


S. Idolatrye is to have besides the only right god our heuenlye father, Esa.
xlv.
some other to seek help at. Or Idolatrye is to make some other mediator or
advocate between God and us than alonely our savior Jesus Christ. i. Tim. ii.



M. May we not than use the help and intercession of the holy Angels and
saints, that they may make intercession for us unto God?


S. We ought to seek nor use none other means to obtain the favor of God,
and reconciliacion of Jesus Christ, than alonely such as the lord him self
has appointed in his holy word: but to put all our trust and confidence in
God, and in our lord Jesus only, and in no creature at all


M. When is this commandment rightly fulfilled and kept as it ought to be?


S. First when I believe and doubt nothing at all, that almighty God thorough
our lord Jesus Christ, will be my God and helper, and that he will deliver me
from all evil, and endue me with all felicity both here and everlasting.
Secondarily when I put all my trust and confidence in god our heavenly father,
through the lord Jesus Christ only, trusting and sekyng for all help and
comfort, of him alone, and of none other creature. And that through such means
only as he has appointed, forsakyng all inuencions and dreams of man. Math
xv
Thus doing I give him his Godly honor which is due unto him.


M. What is mente by the second commandment: Thou shalt make the no graven
Image. The second commandment.
etc. how is that to be understood?


S. We ought so to print the majesty of god, which is a spirit, John. v Exo.
xx.
in our hearts, yt we neither make nor set up no manner of image whereunto any
manner of honor or wurship due unto God only may be given either outwardly by
any gesture, Deuteronomy. v. Esa. xliiii.
or inwardlye in the heart.


M. When is this commandment transgressed?


S. As often as we ascribe any divine power unto any image or seek any help at
them, or give any manner of reverence unto them, as when we pray before
them, when we knele or fall down before them, or make courtesy unto them,
setting up any candels before them, or censing them, or showing any like
point of reverence: Likewise when any man does institute or imagine of his
own head without any authority of the word of god, any manner of false
service, under the pretense of devotion or holiness, as diriges, co^mendacions,
pardons, private satisfactory masses for the quick and the dead, with such
like supersticious gods service (though it has never so high and glorious a
shine) yet they offend against this commandment.


M. Why, do not all things please God, which are done of a good mind,
intent, zeal and devotion, Math. xv
and in the honor of God?


S. No forsooth: Deuteronomy. xii
for god abhorth as most detestable idolatry, all manner of service which
himself has not instituted nor commanded in his word: And wills us to
flee and avoid with all our hearts all such manner of strange and new devised
service of our Esa. ii.
own inuentyng, Ierem. vii.
as most pestilent and corrupt poison.


M. Why has God forbidden any reverence to be given unto images? Deuteronomy. v



S. Because that God being of his own substance everlasting, immortal,
incomprehe^sible and invisible, wills that we should wholly cleave unto his
word, Esa. xliiii Iere. xxiii
and record the same continually, both night and day bearing it about with us in
our hertes, lest through any image we might peradventure forget him, Osee. iiii
or be hindered in his true service.


M. What can images hindre any manne in the true service of God? Heb. ii.



S. There is nothing that so much withdraws us from the true and perfect
knowledge and service of God, as these supersticiouse, idolatries, images. Psalm.
xiv Ier. xxi
For the only sight of them draws us from the knowledge of God. For the which
cause holy scripture calls them deuyls, and traps or snares of souls, Sap.
xiiii
and the worshippyng of them it names idolatry, and a work of the flesh.
Gal. v



M. May not images be as lay men's books to put them in remembrance of God
or of the saints lives?


S. Whosoever sets up any image for any such purpose, declares evidently
that he has denied in his heart the very living god, and is in his heart a very
worshipper of idols. For the book which only can bring and lead all men both
lay and other to the knowledge of God, is only the word of God contained in
holy scripture, in the bible. That ought to be the book of every lay man. ii.
Tim. iii. ii. Pet. i
For therein is sufficiently contained all things necessary for the salvation
of man: and it needs the help of none other book, for it is sufficient of
it self.


M. Is there no manner of image whereby we may be put in remembrance of god?


S. Genesis ii
Yes mankind is the lively Image of god, made of god himself without the hand
of man: Likewise the heaven and earth, the son and moon, with other like
creatures of god: These may put us daily in remembrance of the infinite power,
goodness, and wisdom of God. Psalm. xix Romans i



M. What is the understanding of the third commandment: Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain. etc.


S. In this commandment is forbidden all manner of perjury, sweryng, Math. v
blasphemyng of God and his holy name.


M. Whereby is the name of God most specially blasphemed? Leui. xix and.xxiiii



S. By false doctrine, supersticious inuocacion, or prayer, mu^blyng of Matyns
or Euensong (in a strange tongue) without devotion.


M. Whereby else?


S. By false and customable swearyng, cursyng, charmyng, coniuryng or
inchauntyng by the name of God: also by any manner of supersticious vsyng the
name or word of God, or of our savior Christ.


M. Is it a great si^ne to swear or to curse rashely by the name of God, and
of our savior Jesus Christ, by his me^bres, works, wounds, and blissed
passion?


S, Yea, it is such an horrible, and an heinous blasphemye, that God did
command in his law to be punyshed with stonyng unto death. Leui. xxiiii.


M. But may a man in no case swear lawfully without offense to God? Exodus
xxii.



S. Yes if any man be required of a magistrate, and other wise also if it may
serve to the glory of God, to the confirmacio^ of the truth, Gene. xxi.
or to the wealth and profit of our neighbor in the same. ii. Chapter i
For by such oaths is the name of God sanctified and not blasphemed.


M. Wha^ kepest thou this commandment? Psalm. xlix Exodus xv.



S. Whansoeuer I confess, praise, extol and magnify his name, his words and
works in each time and place as I ought to do, committyng my self wholly unto
my heavenly father through Jesus Christ our savior, and calling upon his help
and aid in all manner of affliccion and necessity, rendryng unto him
continual thanks for all his benefits, and avoiding all manier of things
where through his word, his workyng, or his glory might in any wise be
hindered, contemned or diminished.


M. How understand thou the fowerth commandment. The.iiii. commandment.
Remember that thou sanctify the sabbath day. etc.


S. Like as there are two manner of sabbothes, a spiritual and an exterior
sabbath: so likewise is the sabbath kept or broken two manner of ways.


M. What requires the spiritual sabbath?


S. That we should continually mortify, tame, and crucify our flesh, with
all the lusts and concupiscence thereof, and have our continual meditacion
upon the kingdom of God, and that we should praise and thank him, as well in
prosperitye as in aduersitye, bearing all manier of affliccion patiently: And
whansoeuer we do the contrary, than break we this sabbath.


M. And when is the exterior or outward sabbath kept?


S. When every man applies himself to come unto the church and congregation
to hear ye word of god where it is preached, and to be present at the common
prayers, endeuouryng himself to pray with the faithful congregation, to
receive the holy sacraments with the same, according unto the institucion and
ordinances of Christ, and also to bring and give his alms in the
congregation for the succor and relief of the poor. And so to confirm and
strengthen his own faith, and to give a good example of virtue unto others.
And that we might the more quietly perform yesame with out any let or
hinderau^ce, therefore he commands that neither our servants, catell, nor
nothing about us should do any labor upon that day.


M. Why so?


S. Not as though it were sin to do any honest labor (for labor is
commanded of God) or as though it were vnpleasyng Gene iii. Ephe. iiii
to God that we help our self or succor our neighbor in time of need, but
that we might be more quiet to serve God, and that our children and householde
might have some time to here and learn the word of God, to remember and
considre his benefits, to invoke and to call upon him, to laud and to
thank him.


M. And ought a man to do no special labor upon that day?


S. No, not for any covetousness of worldely encreace or advantage, or for any
pryuate pleasure or commodity, nor except it be either for a common wealth
and for the behoufe of our countreye, as to serve his prince. etc. or for some
special case of necessity, whereby to do our self or our neighbor such a good
turn, as without peril may not be delaied (as in the harvest and such
othertymes to save from perishing that god has sent) and in such like cases.
For than a man may labor without scrupull of conscience.


M. And when is this sabbath violated or broken?


S. Whansoeuer the sincere preaching and diligent hearing of the word of God
is neglected, the holy Sacraments not ministered or not received after the
institucion of Christ, but otherwise or contrary to the same, or wha^ Idolatry
is in the stead of the true service of god exercised, the true and faithful
ministers contemned and not regarded, no prouysion made through the common alms
for the poverty, but the day misspent in idleness pride, wantonness,
voluptuousnes, glottony, dronkennes, riot, bankettyng, gaming, daunsing and
dalying, and such like, and the godly exercises above rehearsed, in the mean
time set a part.


M. And is it a great sin thus to violate the Sabbath? Esai. lviii.



S. Yea, it is a grievous offense. For it is as much as to break the couenaunte
of God. Therefore God commands the breakyng of this commandment to be
punyshed with death. Exo. xxxi.


M. What are ye works which we should do upon the other.vi. days.


S. Every man the works of his own vocacion and condition of life whereunto
God has called him, to exercise the same diligently to the glory of God, for
the maintenau^ce of his householde, and also yt he may have wherewith to
succor and aid his neybour in his necessity.


M. Why did god rest upon the seventh day? Heb. ii Esai. xlvi



S. To teach us what should be the end of all our labors and works, namely
everlasting rest and quietness in him.


M. What is commanded in the fifth commandment where he says: The fifthe
commandment.
thou shall honor thy father and mother. etc.


S. God wills that every man should honor, esteem, love, and obey with all
reverence and lowliness, their natural parents, as the lord himself, and
that we should serve, help and succor them to the vttermoste of our power in
their age, sickness and in all their necessities, for as much as they did bear
us and took much trauail and sorrow, in the bringing up of us.


M. And are none other to be honored, reverenced, and obeyed by this
comau^dement but only our natural parents?


S. Yes, all such as perform the duty and office of true parents toward
us, and all such as have any manier of cure or charge of us, as our kinsfolk,
teachers, tutours, overseers. And specially our gouerners, rulers, and
magistrates, with ye ministers of the church also which have cure of our
souls, our master also and mystres, and all such as do us any good through
teaching, instructing, admonishi^g, exhorting defendyng or maintenyng of us, or
through punishyng and correcting us for our fautes and evil doings, breking
and taming our natural frowardnes, stubbernes, proud stomakes, and
obstinatnes, intendyng nothing but to rule, govern, and bring us up to ye
glory of god, and ye wealth and profit of our souls: All such are we bound to
obey, and to submit our selfs heartily and willingly unto their instruccions,
admonicio^s, correccion. etc. taking all such things as they do unto us in
good worth, and withal thankfulness.


M. But what meneth the promise of long life annexed to this co^mau^dme^t?


S. It signifies yt all such as endeavor and apply themselfes from their very
youth upward to humble and submit themselves obediently unto every man that
seeks their furtheraunce in all godliness, they are worthy to live long
under good governance, and in quietness and peace. And all such as do the
contrary, deserve woorthily to have their life shortened, and for their
unthankfulness are to be judged unworthy to live, except in misery and
calamity. And in such state or case to live, is not a life but a death, or at
lestwyse a punishment wurse and more grievous then death of the body is.


M. And what if our parents, rulers, or superiors would command us to do
any thing contrary to the manifest word and commandment of God, ought we to
obey them therein also?


S. Doubtless they have power and authority over body, possessions, goods,
life, and what so ever pertayneth unto ye state of this tra^sitory world. All
which we ought obedientlye to submit unto them, without any manier grutchyng,
or murmouryng But if they go beyond this and will take upon them to rule also
over the soul and conscience of man, (which is the peculier regimente and
possession of God only) and to command us any thing that is expressly against
gods word, than we ought to say with the Apostles: Act. v i. Pet. iii.
We must rather obey God than man.


M. Yet s. Peter says that servants, or subjects should obey their
masters or superiors though they be cruel, froward, and extreme unto them.


S. So they ought to do in deed, so far as such extremity extends unto
the body or any thing in this mortal life, and no ferther. But if such
extremity stretche unto the conscience and soul of man, there is no obedience
commanded but only to god.


M. But how should a man do in such case, should he resist them with force
and violence?


S. God forbid: no in no wise. For it is an heinous and a grievous sin,
violently to rebel against our heads and rulers, or to give any manner of
occasion how light so ever it be, unto any sedicion, tumulte, or insurreccion
against the anointed of the lord. And ye terrible vengeance of god shall
doubtless fall upon all such, as it did upon Chore, Dathan and Abiron which
the earth did swallow up quick for rebelling against their rulers: but it is
ye duty and vocacion of true christians not to requite wrong for wrong, but to
be pacie^t and of ye suffering side, and obediently to suffer all troubles,
vexacio^s, peines, wro^gs, injuries, yea and even very death also (if it shall
be the will of god) without any manner of resistance, and to refer their whole
cause only unto the Judgment of God. The.vi. commandment.



M. Well, now what is meant by the sixth co^mau^dmente? Thou shalt not kille or
murder.


S. Therein is commanded that we should be ready every one to love other,
and not to bear any grutche, displeasure, hatred, or envy, in our heart toward
any manner of person, for any private matter, or quarrel, nor to show any token
or sign of malice to any man, but to be friendly, loving, mylde, gentill,
pacient both in heart, word, and deed, to every body, what soever any man
does unto us.


M. But this commandment makes mention only of murder.


S. Yea, but through that which is most detestable and horrible in this vice
of murder, it would fear us also from the natural rote and head spryng of
this sin, which is wrath, hastines, desire of reuengyng, and from all that
which may by any means ensue and spryng out of this evil root.


M. Is it lawefull than for no man to revenge and punyshe open syn?


S. Yes, the high powers and magistrates, and their deputies, officers and
lawful ministers under them have authorite and commandment of god (whose
minysters they are) to revenge with the sweorde all iniquity, Romans xiii
violence, and contempt of god, and to correct and punyshe all such
transgressions and offenses to the glory of God, and for the quietness of the
common wealth, so that it be done with all equity and justice, Sapi i. Deuteronomy. i.
and.xxiiii Leui. xviiii and.xix Exo. xxiiii
without any carnal respect or parcialitie, and so it be after godly laws and
ordynaunces, and not by any cruelnesse or tyranny.


M. Can not the higher powers or judges abuse their authority?


S. Yes, if they punish any man that is gyltlesse and innocent, vnlawefully,
of any malice, envy, hatred, being moved through covetousness, or some pryuie
grudge, or if they procure any man's death that is innocente, or consent unto
it, and do not resist all violence, and iniurye, or do not save all persons
from all mutual harms or oppressions in every behalf to the uttermost of their
powers, than they offend against this commandment.


M. What is mente by the seventh commandment which forbids aduoutry?


S. Thereby is commanded unto every man to keep himself pure and clean from
alll manner of unchasteness, filthiness and voluptuousnes, and from all manner of
prouocacions, or examples, through word or gesture, that might entice any
person either young or old to any unlawful, or inordinate lusts. Likewise
from all manner of excess in eating, drinkyng, or apparel, from all manner of
lasciuiouse and wanton gestures, filthy or baudye rimes or co^municacion,
whereby any man may take occasion of offense or evil, for Gods will is that we
should be pure and holy both in body, soul, and spirit.


M. Why so?


S. Because we are the temples of God, and redeemed, Leui. xix. i. These. v.
washed and sanctified with the most pure, dear and precious blood of Jesus
Christ.


M. But what thynkest thou of the lawful use of matrimony?


S. Forsouth the life and company of man and wife in matrimony after the
ordinance of God, is esteemed of the holy ghost honorable, and he prayseth it
as his ordinance, and the very right and only mean and remedy to live a
perfect chaste life. And therefore it is commanded, unto all men of what state
and condition soever they be, except they have a special gift, or that they be
unapt of nature thereunto.


M. Now to the.viii. commandment. The.viii commandment.
Thou shall not steal: what is bidden or forbidden in this commandment?


S. Not only to forbear stealyng, but also that I should not hindre or hurt
any man in his riches or worldely goods, through any subtlety, guile, craft,
deceit, pillage, oppression, extorcion, priuye or open, or through any manner
of unrighteousness or wrongful means whatsoever it be.


M. When kepest thou this commandment?


S. When I submit and offer up my self utterly to God our heavenly father
through our savior Jesus Christ, that he may mortify in me, all manner of care
and sorrow after worldly goods: likewise all covetousness, sekyng of private
lucre, and idleness, and that he may teach me to put my trust in him, and to be
helpful, beneficial and pitiful toward my neighbor, labouryng truly and
diligently in my vocacion, yt I may have also wherewith to help others. The
ninth commandment.



M. What is meant by the nynth commandment? Thou shall not bear any false
witness. etc.


S. That every manne should help to defend, maintain, and further his
neighbors good name, fame, and honesty, as his own. And that no man should
lie, dissemble, flatter toward his neighbor, or to bear or take any manner of
false record or witness against him, or to give sentence and judgment upon
any manne falsely and unjustly. And here is also forbidden all manner of
reuilyng, slaunderyng or back bityng of any man, all manner of false judgment,
wrythyng, wrestyng, and concealyng of the truth for any pryuate affeccion of
envy, malice, favor or lucre.


M. when kepest thou this commandment?


S. when I love and confess the truth in all my life, words and deeds
without any falsehede or dissimulacion, interpreting all words and reports of
my neighbor, as charity requires, to ye best, coueryng and excusing as far
as I can with honesty, all things that should hurt my neighbor, which might
redounde unto his slaundre, shame, confusion or dishonor. The tenth
commandment.



M. What is commanded in the tenth and last commandment? Thou shall not
lust after thy neyghbors house. etc.


S. That I should never have any unlawful lust, any wicked thought, desire or
affeccion to any thing contrary to the will of God, but be as pure and wholly in
heart, mind, wish and will, even as Adam was before his fall, and as heavenly
as the celestial angels of God.


M. How came any manne ever attain unto (...) my very enemies, without any
respect of persons at all. And all they whosoever have need of my help,
whether they dwell nygh unto me or far from me. For all these am I bound to
help and succor (so far as I can) by the commandment of god. And what I
cannot perform for lack of ability, there may I wish in my heart, and
bear a good mind and affeccion toward all men, and specially toward mine own
householde, kindred, and such as be of the householde of faith.


M. What promises of reward or thretnynges of punishmente are given to the
kepers or transgressers of these commandments?


S. Even those above rehearsed in the.ii. commandment: J am the lord thy
God, a strong and gelous God. etc. by the which words he declares unto us,
his everlasting and immutable justice, and again he shows us how highly he
estemeth this his commandment, that all mankind both small and great, might
learn to love fear, and humbly to obey him.


M. How is god a gelous god?


S. For as much as he has spoused and married our souls unto himself, Osee.
ii.
in everlasting love and in the highest truth and vnfaynednes, therefore he
neither can nor will suffer us to fix or hang our love upon any creature,
John. iii.
but only to be married unto him, and to love him as our only spouse with our
hole heart and affeccion.


M. When does God punyshe the children for their parents wickedness sake? Exo.
xx Eze. xviii



S. When the children are like unto their parents in wickedness, and follow
their parents wicked co^dicions.


M. And when does God show mercy unto the children for their pare^tes sake?


S. Eze. xviii xxxiii.
When the children are virtuous, and follow their parents properties in virtue,
and in the fear of God.


M. Is man able to keep and fulfill the law and.x. commandments of god, and
so to attain unto everlasting salvation, of his own natural power and
strength?


S. No, for than should the son of God, have descended from heaven in vain,
which came down for none other purpose, but to fulfill that for us, which no
man else was able for weakness and infirmity, to accomplish.


M. Why has not man free liberty to keep himself from syn?


S. In the first creacion of man before his fall, he was so created, and had
such liberty. But through the transgression of Adam, we were all deprived
thereof.


M. And why did God than give us such commandments, knowing before that we
were not able to fulfill and accomplish them?


S. There are two special causes why god gave the law of the.x.
commandments. First that we might thereby learn to know, both that
perfeccion wherein man was first created, and also the feebleness, weakness, and
corrupcion of our nature, being otherwise inclined and affect, than the law
of god requires. Secondarily that it might be our scholemaister and guide
unto the only savior and mercy stole Christ, which is the end of the law.
For seeing we perceive by the law that we are miserable sinners, and not able
to perform that which the law requires, we must needs flee unto Christ for
help and comfort, staying our selves upon him only through a true and a
perfect faith.


M. Well, God give us all such a faith. Now what is the second special
point or article of the christen religion?


S. The articles of the holy Christian faith.


M. Declare me those articles of the faith, and first what faith is.


S. Faith is a sure trust and a steadfast confidence in the very true,
eternal, living god, wherthorowe our hearts are thoroughly persuaded that he
will be merciful unto us, through the death and passion of his only begotten
son our lord Jesus Christ.


M. Whereunto serves this faith?


S. It serves and profits us for this purpose, to teach us what we must
hope and look for to receive of God, whereby we may learn to know what god
is: And it teaches us also how we may perform all that God requires of us in
the.x. commundementes.


M. What does it teach us of God?


S. To believe all things that are written in holy scripture of him, the sum
and effect whereof is contained in the articles of the common creed: J believe
in God. etc.


M. How may those articles be briefly divided?


S. They may be divided into.iii. chief and principal articles: The first of
god the father our creator: The second of god the son our redemer: The third
of god the holy ghost our sanctifier, which has sanctified and brought us to
the knowledge of the father and of the son.


M. Me think by this division thou makeste.iii. gods: god the father, god the
son, and god the holy ghost.


S. No, the whole scripture teaches yt there is but one god, as in the.vi. of
Deuteronomy. The lord our god, is one only god. There is but one God and one father of
all. etc. Ephe. iiii


Item. i. Timo. ii. There is one God and one mediator. etc. But in the same one
Godhead are three sundry persons of like substance according unto the three
sundry works which are known of God, namely the creacion, the redemcion, and
the sanctificacion.

Whereof the first is ascribed unto the father, the second to the son, the
third to the holy ghost. And for this cause we say and believe that there are
three persons, and but one God.


M. Which are the words of ye first chief and principal article.


S. I believe in god the father. etc.


M. What is it to believe in god?


S. It is to know god as he is.


M. What is God?


S. God is the everlasting and endelesse welspryng of all goodness, Iac. i.
Roma. iii
by who^e we may seek whatsoever we lack, to who^e we may ru^ne and complain
in what sorrow, vexacion and need soever we be, and we shall be sure to find
comfort, help, succor and defense at him.


M. Why does the scripture call God a father?


S. To confyrme and stablishe our faith, and also to comfort the weak and
feeble hearts of all faithful beleuers.


M. What comfort is it unto the to believe that God is an almyghtye father?


S. It is a singular comfort unto me to believe that the almighty God, the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ will also be my father, and take no less,
but a thousand times more care, charge, and sorrow, for me a miserable worm,
than any natural father can do for his child: and will repute and take me for
a child and heir of his kingdom, and everlasting life.


M. Is God such a father unto all men without excepcion?


S. No, although he be the lord, creator, and susteiner of all, yet he is
only the father of the faithful which know, fear and love, his only
begotten son, and put their whole trust in him.


M. What comfort is it unto the to believe that God is almighty, and creator
of heaven and earth?


S. Through beleuyng of that I am assured that I may boldly and safelye trust
and commit my self unto him, who^ no creature can hinder or let: which, as
he of his fatherly goodness will help us, so can he through his almyghtie power,
give to us his heritage, and aid us in every ease wherein and wha^soeuer he
will. Wherefore under his proteccio^ we may be of good comfort and without
fear of any manner of creature. For all creatures must serve us for our wealth
and profit.


M. If God be such an almighty father, why does he suffer his children
sometime to be so grievously, afflicted and vexed, and does not help them?


S. He suffers it, not as though he would not or could not help them, but
because it is for the glory of his name. and for the sufferers soul health
that it should so be.

And although it seems contrary to the affeccion and desire of the flesh, yet
the spirit of faith feleth continually the present aid of god, in such
affliccion.


M. Is it sufficient for us thus to believe of God ye father as is now
rehearsed?


S. It is sufficient enough, so that we learn thereby to put all our hope
and confidence of everlasting life and salvation in him only as the head and
welspring of all goodness, co^mittyng our selves unto his almyghtie power and
fatherly loving goodness: Which declares himself through his unspeakable
wisdom in the creacion of ye world after such sort, that no man can be
excused which does not put his trust in him, and ever more adore, worship
and glorify him.


M. well, what follows next?


S. The second principal article of God the son our savior Christ.


M. what are ye words of this article?


S. J believe in Jesus Christ. etc.


M. What is all that to say?


S. It is thus much to say: I put al my trust and confidence of everlasting
life and salvation in Christ Jesus the son of God, which is not only a
mighty and puissaunt lord over sin, death and hell, (all which he has
utterly deprived of all their power and might, that they can never overcome
more) but also he is such a lord unto us as has boughte and redeemed us from
the bondage of sin, and delivered us from Satan's iurisdiccion, and has
taken such charge of us, that he will from henceforth continually defend and
preserve us, as any lord will do his natural people that are sworn and
subject unto him.


M. Why do we call him Jesus?


S. Because he is an healper and savior, which saves and helps the
children of god from sin and from all kind of evil. Math. i. and ix Luke. ii



M. Why do we call him Christ?


S. Because he is the anointed king of God, which governs the children of
God unto everlasting life.


M. Wherein consists his governance?


S. In obteynyng us remission of our sins, and in geuyng his spirit.


M. Why do we say, his only son?


S. For a difference between him and us. For he was borne very god, ye very
brightness of his beauty and glory, out of the very nature and godly substance
of the father, without all sin. But we are the children of god through
adopcion and grace, which else by nature must have remained ye children of
wrath and of everlasting death.


M. Why say thou, Esai ix Math. xii. Collo i. i. Cor. vi.
our Lord?


S. Because he only has broken the yoke of Satan, and delivered us from his
tyranny, redemyng us with the precious price of his blood. Wherefore we are not
our own but his, and we ought to serve him only, and to live after his will
and not after our own.


M. What follows?


S. Which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne out of the virgin Mary.


M. What beleuest thou by this?


S. That our savior Christ for our wealth is become very manne, but without
all manner of sin.


M. Whereby gatherest thou that he is without all manner of sin?


S. By that that he was not conceived by any manne, but by the holy ghost, and
borne of the pure virgin Mary.


M. What profit or comfort have thou by this belefe?


S. This comfort have I thereby, that I believe that he through his holy and
heavenly concepcion, has sanctified our unclean and earthly concepcion, and
that he will take away the uncleanness of my birth and nature, and will make
me partaker of his blissed birth, and of the holiness of his nature.


M. Why, is thy nature unclean and unholy?


S. Yea, for as much as we all are conceived and borne in sin.


M. what other profit is it unto us that the son of god took man's nature
upon him, and became man?


S. We are assured also thereby, that he is our brother, and that he and we are
partakers of one flesh and blood. And for as much as he would overcome satan
in our flesh, we are sure that his victory is ours, and that we are admitted
and received unto the everlasting participacion of all his heavenly goods and
richesse.


M. What has the son of God Jesus Christ done for our sake?


S. He suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dyed, and was buried, and
descended unto hell.


M. what beleuest thou in this?


S. Hereby I believe that Christ did suffer for us the most vilaynous and
bytterest death, to reconcile us, through the oblacion of his own body unto
god the father, and to take away our sins, and so to deliver us from the
devil, death, sin, and hell.


M. why was it the most vyllaynous death?


S. Because he was condemned unto death, as a blasphemouse, and a sedicious
person, and the wicked vyllayne and murderer Barrabas, quit and delivered.


M. Why was it the most bytterest death?


S. Because he was mocked, scourged, crowned with pryckyng thorns, and nailed
unto the cross.


M. Why say thou, Died, was buried, and descended to hell?


S. Because he dyed verily, and his body was laid in the grave, and his soul
went unto the souls that were before departed.


M. What, went he in to the pains of the damned souls?


S. No, but unto the holy souls which did rest from the time of Adam and Noe,
in the bosom of Abraham, waytyng for Christ's joyful cummyng.


M. And why did he descend unto them.


S. In token that the fruit, virtue, and effect of his passion did not
apperteyne only unto them that were than alive, but also unto them that were
dead before.


M. what may thou learn by all this?


S. Forsooth.iiii. special lessons.

First I may well consider thereby, the great heauynes of my sin, which the
Lord did rau^some with so paynfull smart and tormente.


M. What is the second.


S. Secondarilye I find also a singular comfort herein, which is this, that
the Lord has satisfied and taken away all my sins, together with the pain
which I had well deserved to have suffered for them, thorough his own death
and bitter passion.


M. And what is the third?


S. Thirdly I may learn hereby patiently to suffer whatsoever it shall
please the Lord to lay upon me, and to bear my cross mekelye after him even
unto death, seeing he through his Cross and passion has sanctified all manner
of affliccions, and made them sweet, pleasant and fruitful for us. And we
may be assured that if we suffer with him, we shall also live and reygne with
him.


M. Now what is the fowerth and last of all?


S. Forsothe that is this, that I may learn hereby, the high and inestimable
love of God, toward mankind, which did not spare his only dear beloved
soonne, but gave him unto such a cruel and villaynous death for us
unworthy, mysyrable, filthy and wretched sinners.


M. What beleueste thou more of our Lord Jesus Christ?


S. That on the third day he arose up again from the dead, ascended into the
heavens, sets at the ryghthande of God, the father almyghtye.


M. What is all this to say?


S. Thus much: I believe and confess that Jesus Christ the son of God,
being without spotte or sin, could not be kept, or holden with the bands
of death which came into the world, by reason of sin. And therefore thorough
his godly power, he vanquysshed both death and hell, and upon the third
day he arose again, appearyng unto his disciples in a gloryfyed and an
immortal body.


M. What does the resureccion of Christ profit us?


S. For sothe very much, for thereby are we assured that death, hell, and the
devil are overcome, and that sin is taken away, and everlasting
righteousness set in the place, and purchased of the father for us, if so be
that we believe in him. Furthermore it is a sure pledge unto us, that our bodies
shall also have free passage into the everlasting glory, without any
interupcion of devil, death or hell.


M. What meanest thou by this, where thou say that Christ sits at the
righthand of God?


S. It is a common manner of speaking used among men, whereby is sygnifyed yt he
has received even after his man's nature, a power and honor above all Angels
and creatures wherein he rules with ye father in everlasting glory as they do
about kings and princes which sit at their ryghthandes.


M. Whereunto exercises ye lord this his high and godly power and dominion?


S. He exercises it in the governance of all things in heaven and upon
earth, continually presence thereby unto all faithful here upon yerth, to
deliver, preserve and defend them from all evil, peril and danger, and to
purchase them of the father all that is good and necessary for them praying for
them continually as a true and a merciful priest, patron, and advocate,
until such time as they be also exalted and taken up like unto him and
with him in heaven unto everlasting honor and glory.


M. What does it help or profit us to believe that Christ is ascended into
heaven, and that he sits at the right hand of God?


S. First we are assured thereby that the way, door, and entreaunce into
heaven, which was before locked unto all men by reason of our sin, is now
opened. Secondarily, it is a syngular comfort unto us to confirm us in
patience in all manner of adversity, forasmuch as we are sure (by this faith)
that we have a myghtie and a loving protector, advocate and spechemanne, with
the father in heaven. Thyrdly this faith reioyseth and lifts up our
hearts from all yearthly, transitory, visible, and carnal things, unto
heavenly, eternal, invisible, and spiritual things, and puts us in
remembrance to lift up our hearts from this yearthly and sinful life, and
to serve our God with heavenly and spiritual service, and not only with
yearthly and bodilye ceremonies.


M. Beleuest thou any thing else of our savior Jesus?


S. Yea forsouth, that he shall come from thence to judge the quick and the
dead.


M. What confessest thou by this?


S. Forsouth, that my lord Jesus Christ shall come again from heaven with his
very body, and shall appear before all ye world visiblye in the glory of
his father, and shall judge all men both such as shall than live and also
those which were before dead, to the everlasting comfort and felicity of all
faithful which have honored him, and taken him for their brother, advocate,
patron and defender: And again to the utter confusion and condemnacion of all
unfaithful, which would never believe his word, nor suffer him to rule nor to
have dominion over them.


M. But when shall this judgment once come?


S. The day and hour is unknown unto all men, wherefore no man ought to busy
or trouble himself much about it, but every one of us ought continually to
look diligent about us, that we do and fulfill those things which pertayne
unto our vocacion committed unto us of the lord, that that time and day come
not upon us suddenly, unawares and out of season.

For the ignorance of the day and time, ought to put us continually in
remembrance that we never live securely and rechelesselye, Mat. xxiiii and.xxv
Luke. xii
but continually watchyng in the fear of God, standing always prepared with
the loins of our mind redye gyrded up, i. Peter. i. Ti. iii
and waiting for the Lord Jesus Christ, showing our selves good, willing,
diligente, and redye unto all good works whereby we may help and further our
neyghbor by any means.


M. Do our works than merit any thing of God?


S. Our works merit nothing of God, for any worthynes in themselves, but yet
God which of his mercy works them in and by us, will also of his mercy
highly reward them in us.


M. Now what follows next?


S. The third principal article of the holy ghost our sanctifier


M. What are the words of this article?


S. J believe in the holy ghost. etc.


M. What is that to say?


S. Forsouth, thus much: I believe yt there is an holy ghost which proceeds
from the father and the son, with whom he is one very living God, the third
person in the godhead, which works so in us that we shall be partakers of the
saluacicio^ that is purchased by Christ. Through whose power and operacion
only, all holy men have spoken, and without him can no man speak or do any
thing that is good and godly. For we have nothing in us but very darkness,
ignorance and hypocrisy.


M. what is the proper office of the holy ghost?


S. It is to sanctify all those which are in the bond and couenante of God
through Christ, unto the holy temples of the Lord, that they hereafter may
contend and begin their viage unto the everlasting life, in their mortal
body: and also that they may even here in this life, have their God dwelling in
them. And again it is his office to lyghten their hearts with the knowledge of
the father and the son, to lead them into all truth, to comfort them in all
manner of temtacion, necessity and adversity, to prepare us unto a new life,
to strengthen us unto all goodness. And so to renew all christen men's
hearts that they may be changed and made new men.


M. But seeing there are many and diverse spirits, how may a man discern and
know the holy spirit, from the worldly, deuelishe, evil and wicked spirits?


S. By the fruits and properties above rehearsed, but specially by the holy
scripture.

For seeing it is certain that scripture was inspired by the holy gooste, all
manner of doctrine that is not consonaunte and agreeable unto it, is of an other
and not of the holy spirit. For the holy spirit is never contrary to him
self, nor never brings in any strange doctrine in religion.


M. What follows?


S. I believe an holy christen church, the communion of saints.


M. what is that to say?


S. That is: I believe and confess one company and congregation of faithful
christians upon earth from the time of Adam until this day, and until the
end of the world: which is sanctified and incorporate into one body under
one head, through the holy ghost. And they consent and agree together in our
savior Christ, as the very members of one body, in all things pertaining
unto edyfying in faith, and in all Godlynes.


M. But how may this congregation be gathered, and such edifying in faith
and all godliness performed?


S. Through the word of pure doctrine and exhortacion. And through the right
use of the holy sacraments: And through other ordynaunces of discipline in the
church, whereby the christian congregacyon is kept in order, after the word of
God, and sundered from all manner of of strange sects.


M. Why call thou the church holy and christen?


S. For the causes above rehearsed: because the holy ghost has peculiarlye
gathered and sanctified it in a godly and an holy exercise and life, i. Tho.
vi
in body and soul: and also because Christ has sanctified it through his
precious blood.


M. Why call thou it, the communion of saints?


S. Because all they which do truly believe in Christ, and are so sanctified
through his blood (which are the very right saints) whersoeuer they be
scattered in the whole world, i. Tho. xii
they are one body, one temple, under one head Jesus Christ, with whom and
with the father, they have fellowship: i. John. i
and through the holy ghost they are joined and knitte together in one God,
one faith, i. cho. vi.
Ephe. iiii
one baptism one love.


M. And have they no manner of fellowship with the wicked and unfaithful? ii.
cho. vi. i. cho. v



S. None at all, so nere as they can know and discern them, lest they
might seem to consent unto their ungodliness, or peradventure might be
infecte through their wicked exaumple: ii. these. iii
For the holy ghost commands all such to be avoided, except they will
suffer themselves to be admonyshed and exhorted, ii. Chapter vii ii. these. iii.
and will earnestlye repent, lamente their sins, and amend.


M. Now what follows next?


S. Remission of sins.


M. What beleuest thou herein? Esai. xxxiii Iere. xxxi and.xxxiii Mat. xviii



S. Here I confess and believe that in the holy christen church, and no where
else, I and all faithful beleuers have daily forgiveness of all our sins
(so that we hartylye repent and be sorry for them) and that the Lord will
never enter into Judgment with us, nor never reckon our sins unto us unto
dampnacion, nor never punish us for them with such pain as they have
deserved. i. Cho. v



M. So hear I well that the christians have still sin.

But how agrees with this the former article, of the holy communion of
saints?


S. They are both true. For the church of Christ through perfyte faith in her
brydegrome and head Christ, is pure and holy. Ephe. i. v
For as much as there can be no sin nor vnpurenesse in Christ, but of her
self, she is co^pased with diverse infirmities and sins, which she daily
feleth, confesses, and lamenteth with an heavy and sorrowful heart: And seeks
for help and grace at Christ, and so renews her self daily through ye holy
ghost, and laboreth contynually in mortifying the residewe of the old man that
still remains.


M. But how may we obtain this daily remission of sins.


S. Esai. xlv.
Not through any works of our own, nor yet through the merits, Ti. iii
works or deserts of any saint that is dead, but only through the mere
grace and mercy of God, Ephe. ii.
undeserved of us, and through the free rede^cion of our savior Jesus Christ,
which has purchased and bought us this pardone and forgiveness, with his
precious blood. Esai. liii.
For his innocent death is the ransom of our tra^sgressions and iniquities. As
the gospel testifies.


M. For as much as thou have made mention of the gospel, tell me, what is
that ghospel? Luke. i.



S. To speak properly, it is a glad and joyful tidings and message of the
grace and love of God toward us, through his son Jesus Christ.


M. Unto whom is this gospel preached and publyshed?


S. Unto all men universally, Mat. xvi
saving only such as wilfully and malyciouslye, contemn, mock and blaspheme
it. But it shows her virtue and power specially, in them that are poor in
spirit, and are ouerladen with the burden of their sins, Mat. xi.
laboryng to be rydde quite and eased of them.


M. What follows?


S. Resurreccion of the flesh.


M. What beleuest thou herein.


S. By this I confess and believe that all men that are dead shall be raised
up again at the latter day from death. Exo. iii Esai. xxvi. Eze. lvii. Job.
xix. John.v. ii Cho. v. ii Cho. xv.
So that every body that is dead and rotten in the earth, or consumed with
water, fire, or by any other means, shall receive his own form and
proporcion again and shall be united and knytte again with the soul, and
shall rise up again from the dead, Mat. xxviii John.xx. Exo. vi.
immortal and incorruptible: Like as Christ our head is risen up with his
very true body.


M. But how can that be possible?


S By God which is the woorker of it, Act. xxvi. ii. cho. v. Phil. iii. Gene.
ii
is nothing impossible, no more than it was impossible for him to make and
create mankind of naught.


M. What, is the resurreccion of the body necessary? Were it not enough that
the soul alone should reign either in glory and honor, or else in shame and
confusion?


S. It pleased not God that man being made unto hope, and created unto
salvation of two parts, (body, and soul) should only remain with the one
part, and enjoy everlasting life with ye one alone: but that ye body also
should receive reward with the soul: and remayn for ever, holy, immortal,
ii. Chapter v
without any manner of temptacion or infirmity, decked with power and honor
even as the Angels of God, yea even after the example of Christ himself as he
was transformed before his disciples upon the mount Tabor.


M. He that could believe this perfitely, how could he be afraid of death?


S. Luke. xxii
The fear of death is of very nature, as we may perceive in Christ. And
forasmuch as death is the punyshemente of sin, Gene. iii
therefore mankind dredeth death by reason of his sin the more. Which fear
and dread yet the faithful beleuers do overcome, Philip. i
forasmuch as they know that it is ye rediest way unto everlasting
felicity, to die. And for this cause the faithful are not so vnmeasurablye
heavy and sorrowful for ye death of their faithful friends, Apoca. xiiii i.
these. iiii.
as the hethen and unfaithful are, which have no belief in the resurreccion.

Like as the housebande manne takes no thought nor sorrow for the sede that is
cast into the earth, because he has a sure trust and hope that it shall come
again with a plentiful and an excedyng recompense.


M. Now what is the last article of our christen faith?


S. And the everlasting life.


M. What is thy belief in this? Soph. iii.



S. Hereby I confess and believe, John. v i. Cho. v i. Peter. i
that I with body and soul united and knitte together again after the
resurreccion, shall enjoy the kingdom of God, and live euerlastynglye in the
joy and felicity of heaven with our savior Christ the soonne of God, i.
these. iiii Mat. xxv.
i. cho. xv.
as one of the members of his body.


M. what manner of joy shall this be?


S. That can no toungue express, Esai. lxiiii i. cho. ii
nor no heart comprehend. But it shall consiste specially herein, that the
faithful shall know and behold euerlastynglye, Ion. xix John. xvii
even with their corporal iyes, the everlasting light and the highest joy.
And being incorporate with God for ever, shall have perpetual participacion of
all heavenly treasures with him. Apoca. xxi Luke. xxii Psalm. xvii i. Chapter xv
For as than God shall be all in all.


M. But tell me more plainlye what manner of persons shall enjoy this
everlasting life?


S. All they that believe in Christ. John. iii.v.vi.


M. But how must a man believe in Christ?


S. Forsouthe that he is the son of the living god, John. vi
which was sent from god and came into this world and took man's nature upon
him, Math. xvi
and took upon him to dye for our sins, i. John. iiii
and was crucified upon the cross, and through ye power of his godhead, rose
up again from death for our iustificacion. Roma. iii
This must every man believe in his heart, and also openly confess with his
mouth. Roma. x.


M. But here thou makeste no mention of the unfaithful: What shall be done with
them?


S. They, Dani. xii. Ihon. v Luke. xvi Esd. xxx Math ix
like as they shall rise unto everlasting shame, condemnacion, and confusion,
even so shall they be clear destitute of the blessedness, joy and felicity
of the faithful. And their part, shall be in the everlasting fire, and in the
exterior darkness, where everlasting woo, waylyng, and gnashing of teeth
shall be.


M. And is this article of everlasting life, of necessity to be believed?


S. Yea, most necessary. For if this article be not believed, than are the
other also either not believed at all, or else they are believed in vain.


M. why so?


S. Because much profit ensues of the belefe of this article (if it be
truly believed.) As peace and quietness of conscience, reioysyng in God and in
his workyng, and upon that, patience and constancye in trouble and adversity,
and also tontempt of all transitory things, whether it be goods, honor, or
life. For the scope and end of all that is prescribed and promised in the
scripture, is everlasting life unto the glory of God.


M. But who will give us such a faith?


S. Forsouth, that will God our heavenly father do, if we call upon him
therefore through instante and earnest prayer.


M. Now God the father, son, and holy ghost, give us and all men this
faith, and preserve and strengthen us therein unto the end. Amen.

What is the third chief point or article of the christen doctrine and
religon?


S. The lords prayer.


M. Declare me the same, and first what is prayer?


S. Prayer is an hearty inuocacion and calling upon God our heavenly father,
Math. v. vi Mark. x John.xvi. Iaco. i
desiryng of him in the name of Christ, all our necessities, with a sure trust
and confidence that he will hear us.


M. Forasmuch as thou say that prayer is an inuocacio^ and calling upon
God, is than the inuocacion of saints which are in heaven no right prayer?


S. Math. vi
Our savior Christ speaking of that prayer which he promises to hear, says
that we should invoke and pray unto the father only.

Wherefore he that prays otherwise: First he makes such a prayer, whereof he
has no promise of God to be heard.

Esai xlv.
Secondarily, he commits also idolatry, forasmuch as he ascribes that thing
unto dead saints and creatures, which is due unto God only. As to be our
God and father, to be almyghtie, to search and to know the inward secrets of
ye heart, i. Pa. xxviii Iere. xvii.
to be the fountain of whom all that is good proceeds, and of whom all
succor, help, and comfort in any manner of necessity is only to be hoped and
looked for. etc. All these are due unto God only. He is only to be adored or
invoke. Esa. lxiii Abraham knows us not. etc.
He is only to be wurshipped and served: wherefore to ascribe or attribute any
of these things unto any other, than to him only, Mat. iiii
is manifest Idolatry.


M. But now tell me, what is it to pray in the name of Christ?


M. It is as much as to pray for such things as becummeth us to axe, and
him to give: namely for such things as are wholesome and necessary for us. Or
else it is as much as to pray after the commandment of Christ, and for his
sake. i. Timo. ii
For the father gives us all things whatsoever he gives us for Christ's
sake. Heb. ii
For the which cause they only can pray in the name of Christ, that believe
in Christ, and are very right christians, which will never desire or pray for
any thing that is or may be, against the glory and honor of Christ.


M. Does not God know whereof we have need, before we pray?


S. Yes, he does. Math. vi


M. And what need we than to open our necessities unto him through prayer?


S. For gods be half we need not at all. But for our own behalf it is
necessary and good, that we may knowledge and confess that we have nothing of
our selves but all of God: which thing makes us meke and humble.


M. well, how and after what manner ought we to pray?


S. Even as our savior Christ taught his disciples and no another wise in
effect.


M. Why no notherwyse? Roma. viii Math. vi



S. Because all manner of prayers that are not consonante and agreeable unto that
(which contains all necessary peticions both for body and soul) they are
not good nor auaylable. i. John. v



M. What are the words of the prayer.


S. Our father which art in heaven. etc.


M. Why say thou father?


S. Because I learn thereby that I am a child of god, and therefore ought to
take my leave of the devil for ever and to live only after the will and
pleasure of God, and not after the desire and lust of mine own flesh.


M. why say thou our father?


S. To put me in remembrance of ye brotherly love yt I owe toward my neibour:
For seeing god has received us all together and all a like, (through his
soonne our savior Christ) unto his children, and chosen us to be the heirs
of all his goods and treasure, therefore we ought to take and to love one
another, even as brethren, and as the children of one father, and truly to
pray unto the father each one for other.


M. Why say thou? In heaven.


S. To remember thereby, his high power, and heavenly glory.


M. what comfort have thou by that?


S. Even this, that I may (by reason of that) the more suerly set all my
trust and affiaunce in gods aid and help, having all my joy and delight in
heaven.


M. what is the effect of all the peticions that follow?


S. The effect of all is this, that the lord will make us partakers of al
things that may be good unto us, and deliver or preserve us from all that
may be evil and noisome unto us.


M. And what order is kept in those peticions?


S. First we desire and pray therein for spiritual and heavenly things,
and after, for worldely and transitory things.


M. For what spiritual things?


S. For faith, virtue and godlynes, and for remission of our sins.


M. And for what worldly or transitory things?


S. For all bodily nourishment and sustentacion, whereby we may be the more
able to serve god with, in this life.


M. what is the first peticion?


S. Hallowed be thy name.


M. What prayest thou in this pecicion?


S. That God our heavenly father may be perfectly known and glorified throw
the whole world.


M How may that be done?


S. Through the pure doctrine of the holy gospel when it is syncerelye
preached and received with a true and constante faith in all obedience,
humblenes, holiness, and godlynes, to the confusion of all sin, of ydolatrye,
of blasphemy, and of all ungodliness.


M. what is the second peticion?


S. Thy kingdom come.


M. What prayest thou for, in this peticion?


S. That God will overthrow and destroy in us the kingdom of Satan, of sin,
and of the world. And that he will gather us to gether, through his word and
spirit, into the kingdom of his son (namely the christen church, and
congregation,) and govern and rule us in the same, that we may serve him and
live after his will in one consent, and when the number of the faithful,
through daily increase, is once full and perfect, than that we may together
inherit and enjoy that everlasting kyndome.


M. what is the third peticion?


S. Thy will be done upon earth. etc.


M. what praiest thou for in this peticion?


S. That we may conceive such a lust and a desire unto his will in all things,
as the holy Angels and saints in heaven have.


M. Why say thou in earth as it is in heaven?


S. Because that in heaven nothing resists the will of God, but in earth the
will of God is much and often resisted.

Therefore do we pray in this peticion that God will hyndre and let whatsoever
is against his most holy will, give us grace to forsake our own fleshly
will and desire, and withal humbleness to obey his most godly will,
submittyng and geuyng over our selves willyngly unto the same, whatsoever he
shall lay upon us.


M. what is the fowerth peticion?


S. Give us this day our daily bread.


M. What prayest thou for, in this peticion?


S. That God will give us all manner of necessary sustinaunce for this life, as
meat, drink, clothyng, godly and virtuous magistrates and rulers, health,
peace, and quietness, and all things whatsoever is necessary for us to live in
this world, to the glory of his name and the profit of our neighbor.


M. Why say thou, this day and daily?


S. By those words I am put in remembrance that I should take no thought nor
be careful for the time to come, but should daily labor (in my condition of
life) and pray therewith, and than nothing doubt but that God will give me both
that day, and all days as long as I live, whatsoever I shall need, and may be
profitable and expedient for me.


M. What is the fifte peticion?


S. For give us our trespaces. etc.


M. What prayest thou for in this peticion?


S. For remission and forgeuenes of such sins wherewith I daily diplease my
heavenly father, and that God will not enter into judgment with me, but be
merciful unto me.


M. And why than kepest thou not thy self from sinning?


S. I ought so to do withal diligence and endeavor, but our natural
ignorance, with the weakness and infirmity, wherein we were borne, is so
great, that we ouersee our selves evermore, and therefore are we constrained to
desire God of forgeuenes.


M. Why addest thou further, as we forgive our trespacers?


S. For the lord will not remit or forgive us at all, if we forgive not the^
that have grieved, offended, or displeased us.


M. Why so?


S. Because our heavenly father wylleth that we should well consider and
acknowelege our own sins, and take all manner of displeasure of injury that
our neighbor does unto us, patiently and with thankefulnes, even as a most
worthy deserved punishment of God our heavenly father: and therefore (for our
own part) to be well content with all such, through whom God does chastise or
punish us, whatsoever they be.


M. What is the sixth peticion?


S. Lead us not into temptacion.


M. What praiest thou for in this peticion?


S. That God our heavenly father will mercyfully assist me in all manner of
temptacions, and bring me through, whether it be in prosperity or adversity,
and will keep and preserve me by the very right faith, even unto the end.


M. How does god lead men into temptacion?


S. Whenever he permits the wicked ghostely enemy, to withdraw us through
transitory fortune or misfortune, prosperity or adversity, and also through
other gostly assaults from faith, virtue and godliness.


M. What is the seventh peticion?


S. But deliver us from evil.


M. What prayest thou in this peticion?


S. That our heavenly father will redeem and deliver us from the snares,
subtlety, tyranny, and power of our old wicked enemy.


M. Has he than any power against thee?


S. Yea forsouth, by reason of my sins wherein I am borne, god gives him
power against me, from the which he himself alone through our Lord Jesus
Christ, must needs deliver me.


M. And what means that clause and sentence whereas thou say? For thine is
the kingdom, power and glory for ever.


S. That sentence puts us in remembrance, that we ought to conclude and
end all our prayers in lauding and praysyng of god, and to think thus in our
hearts: O heavenly father I have desired of the to the glory of thy name, and
to the wealth of all men (both in body and soul,) high and excedyng great
things which are by men impossible to obtain or atteyne. But thou art a
glorious and an almyghtie puissaunte king everlasting, which canste easily
procure and provide all that is good for thy children, and canste also break
and avoid all contrary power of our adversaries, wherefore help and deliver
us from all the power of hell, and restore us unto everlasting life.


M. But now how concludest thou thy prayer?


S. With this word. Amen.


M. What is that to say?


S. Forsouth, thus much: O heavenly father, grant of thy mercy, that all
these things may come to pass which we have desired of yt in this prayer.
And forasmuch as thou haste promised to hear all those that call upon the in
true faith, in the name of thy beloved son, we hope and trust steadfastly that
it shall so happen unto us.

Notwithstanding if there be any lack of defaute in our faith by reason or our
natural infirmity, than strengthen thou good lord, our faith, and grant us
thy holy spirit, that we may pray this thine own prayer with a true and a
perfect faith, and that we may speak from the botome of our hearts unto the
in all our prayers, Amen, Amen, Sobeit.


M. Almyghtie God grant that thou and all other may always pray in such a
faith?


S. Amen.


A declaracion of the holy sacrament of Baptism.
M. Now what is the fowerth principal article of the christen doctrine and
religion?


S. Forsouth that is the institucion of the holy sacrament of baptism.


M. First tell me, what are sacraments?


S. They are holy visible accions and exterior exercises instituted, ordained,
and appointed of almighty God to be used in his church and congregacyon of
his faithful to represent unto them after a most lively sort, his heavenly
gracious benefits, that they may thereby be confirmed in their faith, and of
purpose to excite ye mutual love of one toward an other.


M. Why did Christ ordain such sacraments?


S. For.iii. special causes.


M. What is the first?


S. The first is, that they should be tokens and witnesses of the grace,
mercy and promises of God toward us, and as the most sure seals, whereby our
participacio^, fellowship and incorporacion with Christ, is confyrmed, consigned
and sealed up.

And also that our faith, which is otherwise veraye feeble and weak, might
through the use of them be exercised and lift up from all earthly things,
unto the consideracion, estimacyon, and expectacion, of celestial and heavenly
things.


M. Is not that the peculiar operacion and office of the holy gooste?


S. Yes it is the very proper operacion of the holy ghost. For he gloryfieth
Christ, and he is the eternal and effectuous worker and executour of all the
doctrine and ordinances of Christ. But yet he perfourmeth and executes yt
work through ye word and use of the sacraments, if they be truly ministered
and received: And it is therefore ascribed unto them, because we should
understand and know that the sacraments are not bare, vain, and
unprofitable tokens.


M. What is the second cause?


S. The second is this: that they should admonish us continuallye of our
office and duty as long as we live. For seeing we profess by receyuyng and
vsyng of the sacraments, that we are incorporate and made one body with
Christ through participacion of him, we ought to know also that it is our
bound duty to express and represent the very image of Christ in our whole
life and in all the exercises of the same. And if we do not so, than we
contemn the sacraments and use them unworthily.


M. What is the third cause?


S. That they should be tokens of the people of god, whereby the whole company
and congregation of god might be gathered together as it were into one body,
and separated or divided and known by such several tokens and peculiar
exercises (which no another congregation does use,) fro all other false
sects. And they serve also for this purpose that the congregation of Christ
may show and declare by them their service, reverence and obedience toward
God, and so may provoke others also through their example unto the true
religion and service of God.


M. What think thou of them which use the sacraments unworthily and
irreverently?


S. For as much as they break and violate the couenaunte of the Lord thereby,
they are accursed and abominable in the sight of God. And therefore they shall
be rejected and refused of the Lord for ever, as perjured rebellions, if they
do not turn and amend.


M. Who uses the sacraments irreverently, and unworthily?


S. Forsooth he that does not use them in true faith, love, and obedience
toward God: and specially he that uses them not to provoke, stir up, and
to nourish, the forsaied virtues. For thereunto ought the use of all external
or outward sacraments to serve.


M. But are the sacraments necessary unto salvation?


S. Forasmuch as they are the ordinances of God, and commanded unto us to be
used in perfect obedience toward God: therefore can we not forbear or
neglecte the use of them, without manifest peril and hinderaunce of salvation.


M. What persons are to be taken and reputed for contemners and dispisers of
the sacraments?


S. Such as use them not when they may have them ministered after the
institucion and ordinance of Christ.

For whosoever believes our savior Christ, and is a true disciple of his, he
can not chose but to use all things with high reverence and devotion, what
soever our savior Christ has ordained to be used.


M. Well, now let us come unto baptism? what is Baptism?


S. It is an ordinance and commandment of our savior Jesus Christ,
joining all such as shall enter into the cumpany and congregation of Christ,
to be baptized, yt is, to be sprincled or dipped with water in ye name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.


M. But in what text of scripture is such commandment grounded?


S. In the last of Matthew, and Mark, in these words: Unto me is given all
power in heaven and earth, therefore go your way, and teach all nations,
baptisyng them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. etc.


M. What is to be noted and learned out of these words?


S. Forsooth.iii. things.


M. what is the first?


S. The first is this, that our savior Christ unto whom the father has
given all power in heaven and earth, wylleth that his holy gospel should be
preached unto all men in the whole world, and that all people should be made
his disciples.


M. what is the.ii. note?


S. The.ii is this, yt the holy sacrament of baptism is commanded of god the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, to be asure testimony of the
inestimable love and favor of God toward us, whereby the promises of the
gospel, concerning the free remyssion of sins, the new birth, and
everlasting life purchased by Christ, are sealed, confyrmed and made sure unto
us.


M. And what is the third note?


S. The third is this, that those that are baptized ought to remain in the
couenaunte of God, and to apply themselves to learn and to keep all that the
Lord has commanded, to dye unto sin, and to cast of the old Adam, with
all his lusts and affeccions, and to put on the Lord Jesus every day more
than other in a new life, which will be present with us until the worlds
end, and graciouslye aid and help us thereunto.


M. Unto what persons does baptism appertain?


S. Unto all such as the couenaunte of God and the doctrine of the gospel
preached by the Apostles pertayneth unto.


M. Must infantes and young children also be baptized?


S. Yea forsouth if it may be done, forasmuch as the covenant of ye lord
perteyneth also unto them, and they are also of the flock of God, and
partakers of grace. And therefore the sign and seal of the promise and
couenaunte (which is baptism) must needs also perteyne unto them. And again
seeing they are in the favor of God, as his dearly beloved, and partakers of
Christ and of his merits (as they must needs be if the kingdom of god be
thence as Christ says) than baptism which is the seal of all this, must
also needs perteyne unto them.


M. But how can they be baptized seeing they have no faith?


S. Forasmuch as they have ye favor of God through Christ, whatsoever is
required in them, that have they also sufficientlye in and through Christ,
which has taken their weakness upon himself, and is become their
satisfaccion as he is to all others. And his faith and obedience is (of grace)
imputed unto them, and through his spirit they are sanctified to be the
temples of God, whose head and savior is Christ, and they members of his body.


M. Than may they be baptized with a good conscience?


S. Yea no doubt. For seeing they are reputed as faithful in ye syghte and
judgment of god through Christ, they ought as faithful to be baptized, that
through ye ministracion of the church they may have a sure token and witness
that they are the heirs of the blessyng promised unto the sede of the
faithful, the members of our savior Christ, and clean purged and washed from
all their sin in his blood.


M. From what sin needs a child that is new borne (which has wrought
neither good nor evil) to be purged or washed?


S. From original sin, which is the very root of all other sin.


M. What is original sin?


S. It is the poison, infeccion or corrupcion, of nature wherein we are
conceived: Which always resists, rebelleth and lusts against the will of
God, and is ever inclined and redye unto all evil and wickedness, and has a
lust and delight therein. From the which we can none otherwise be delivered or
pourged, but alonlye through the power of God in our savior Christ.


M. But how are we pourged from this sin through baptism?


S. In as much as in baptism we have a promise that it is forgiven us and not
imputed to damnacion unto us. And again that the holy ghost is also given us
which shall daily mortify, kill and subdue this sin and wicked inclinacion
in us, beginning and daily increasyng in the stead thereof, a new affeccion
and nature in us, obediente unto the will of God and deliting therein, which in
the blessed resurreccion shall be altogether perfect.


M. Now tell me what ought our baptism to work in us and to put us in
remembrance of?


S. First we ought to be thankful unto God for it, and unto our parents
also for furtheryng and healpyng us unto it, and to receive all doctrine and
correccion of them obediently and redily.


M. What more?


S. It ought also to put us in remembrance of the remission of our sins, of
the grace and mercy of God, and of the blessed resurreccion wherein we shall
arise again unto everlasting life. By the remembrance whereof we may have a
singular comfort against all sin, against the devil, death, hell, and
damnacion.


M. And what else?


S. Finally, it ought to work in us a perfect obedience unto the will of God,
to lead our lives in continual repentance and amendment, praying ernestly
that he will strengthen and make more perfect in us, through his holy word
and spirit, the new birth which is already begone in us: and daily to
mortify our flesh and to practice with all faythfulnes and diligence to serve
God and to keep his commandments.


M. Now, what is the.v. special article of the christen doctrine or religion?


S. The holy supper of ye lord.


M. What is the supper of the Lord?


S. It is an holy ordinance and institucion of our savior Christ, whereby
christen people are commanded to eat and drink the bread and cup of the
Lord together, and thereby to remember his passion, and to be assured of their
communion with him in his body and blood. For it is a pledge and an assurance
that the Lord gives them his body and blood to be the food and nourisheme^t
of their souls unto everlasting life.


M. Than is it not a bare sign and an unfruitful token?


S. No. For we receive in the supper a spiritual meat and drink, wherein by
ye lords own institucion, the true communion and participacio^ of the body
and blood of Christ is most lively represented and confirmed unto us. And at
the ministracion thereof, being ministered after Christ's institucion, it is
certain that he is always present, and works effectuously therewith.


M. How ought this supper to be ministered?


S. In every point and condition as the Lord himself did ministre and
ordeyne it.


M. Where is it written how the lord did ministre and ordeyne it?


S. In the holy Evangelists, Mat. xxvi. Marc. xiiii Luke. xxii
Matthew, Mark, Luke. And in the.xi. Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians in these words. In the same night that the Lord Jesus was
betrayed, he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it.


M. What learnest thou out of these words?


S. First I learn that this supper seals up, confirms, and assures unto
us, the very true communion of the true body and blood of Christ, with all the
fruits and benefits, which he did ever pourchase and merit through his body
and blood.


M. How canste thou prove that?


S. By the very words of the institucion. For whereas he commands us to
eat his body and drink his blood, that is to say, to receive our
nouryshement unto everlasting life, through faith, of his body and blood, he
adds immediatlye: Which is given up for you, and shed for you. By the which
words he signyfieth, seeing we are partakers of his body and blood, and in
faith flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, he our head and we his
members, that we are also partakers of all that he did ever purchasse or merit
through his passion and blood shedyng, that is, reconciliacion with God the
father, remission of our sins, righteousness and everlasting life.


M. What lernest thou more out of the forsayed words?


S. I learn also that the Lord gives me through this supper, a sure hope and
comfort that I am partaker of the new testament, and of the covenant of grace
which he confirmed and sealed with his precious blood.


M. What is that new Testamente or couenaunte of grace?


S. It is this, that almyghtye God, for the bitter passion and deaths sake of
his dear beloved son, will freely pardon and forgive me all my sins, and
take me for his child and heir, and at the latter day will raise me up
again unto everlasting joy, requiryng that I should believe all this
steadfastly, and love and serve him obediently.


M. And is nothing else to be noted in the words of the institucion?


S. Yes, this also is to be learned, that al they which minister or receive
this holy sacrament must celebrate and keep the memorial or remembrance of
our savior Christ Jesus.


M. Wherein consists this memorial or remembrance?


S. It consists specially herein, that we being assembled and gathered
together in his name, considre and setfoorth with all diligence and reverence
all the benefits of our Lord Jesus, which he has done and suffered for us,
or will yet hereafter do for us: And again that we render most high lauds
and thanks unto him for such excellent benefits, geuyng up and yeldyng our
selves wholly unto him.


M. What manner of people are to be admytted unto this supper?


S. All that are truly repentaunte and sorye for their sins, and yet believe
steadfastly that god for Christ's sake will be merciful unto them, and that
they are the true members of Christ, living in the fear and true obedience of
the Lord, and in perfect love of their neighbor, as brethren of one kingdom,
members of one body, and redeemed with one blood of Jesus Christ, redye to
confess the doctrine of the holy gospel, in the mids of all persecucion and
affliccion, and to defend it even unto death.


M. what think thou of the^ which will never receive this holy supper with
the faithful congregation of Christ?


S. If they abstain from it wilfullye of concempte and stubbernes, that is to
say, if they may have it ministered unto them after the institucion of the
Lord, and yet regard it not and will not receive it, it is an euidente token
that they pertayne nothing at all unto the body of Christ. For whosoever
believes in the Lord truly can not neglecte or contemn any of his hollye
ordinances, but with all reverence use them, as often he may.


M. Where as s. Paul says: Let every manne prove himself, and so eat of
that bread: What is mente thereby, or when eat we this supper wurthyly.


S. Of our selves we can never be worthy unto it: But God of his grace and
mercy, reputeth us worthy of his heavenly mysteries and benefits,
whansoeuer we refer the remission of our sins, and our salvation unto the
death and resurreccion of Christ, and seek it thereat only.

Wherefore whansoeuer I receive ye holy supper, with this faith and belefe that
Christ Jesus gave his tender body unto death for me, and shed his precious
blood for me, and so redeemed me from everlasting death: And that his flesh
and blood are the food and sustenaunce of my soul whereby I am refresshed
and nourisshed unto everlasting life, submitting my self, in this faith,
hartilye and fullye both body and soul unto ye will of god, and utterly
detesting in word, deed, and example almaner of sin, and wickedness, and
whatsoever may give any occasion thereunto. etc. then receive I this hollye
supper wurthyly. For this is the true communion and participacion of Christ's
body and blood, whereby we are sure yt he dwells in us, and we in him. For
else we could do none of this at all.


M. Me thinks by thy answers, that the holy supper of the Lord sends and
refers us all together unto the death and passion of Christ, that we may
so and by that means enjoy and have fruicion of the same.


S. Yea forsouth, for when he suffered upon the cross then he was made the
only and everlasting sacrifice, sufficient for our salvation: wherefore there
is nothing remaynyng for us more, but that we may enjoy and have the fruicion
of him.


M. And was not the supper ordained of God to be a propiciatory sacrifice,
wherein the body of Christ should be offered unto God of fresh or of new?


S. No forsouth. For that were injurious unto his death. And the words do
sound thus, take and eat. etc.

Where he commands us not to sacrifice or to offer his body, but only to
eat. etc.


M. And why was it ordained to be received in two diverse kinds?


S. That was done for our infirmities sake, to teach us the more plainly that
he is not only the meat wherewith our souls are norished, but also the very
drink wherewith they are refreshed, that we should seek no part of our
spiritual life any where else, saving at him and in him alone.


M. And ought all men generally without excepcion to receive both kinds?


S. Yea for south, so do the words of Christ command, saying, drink ye all
of this: from the which to derogate or mynishe any thing it were an heinous
sin.


M. But now, how oughteste thou to behave thyselfe after thou haste thus
received this holy supper?


S. I ought first to rejoice in the remission of my sins, in the life of
Christ in me, and in the blissed resurreccion, when as he shall live fully in
me and in us, and be all in all. And thus to auaunce my self against sin,
against the devil, death, and hell: And to give God eternal thanks for all
these his excedyng benefits.


M. What ought thou else to do?


S. I ought also to subdue, to tame, and to crucify, mine own flesh and
blood, with all manner of wicked lusts and affeccio^s, and to live, hereafter as
a member of that body only, whose head is Christ, and not as a membre of any
other body. But utterly to yield and give over myself unto my lord God, to
be one bread and one body with all faithful christians which do truly
invoke and call upon the name of the Lord, to live with them in perfect love
and charity and with this band of love to have my heart fixed and knitte unto
theirs, and thus evermore to remain and continue.

And I ought also to confess and magnify my Lord Jesus in his church and
congregation with all my words and deeds, awaytyng daily to have this life
changed with a better and into a better life.


M. What if we receive the supper with such as be unworthy, do we make our
selves also unworthy by reason of that?


S. No we do not, if so be that we consent not unto their sins, but have in
mind and will if we can know them and may come unto them, to exhort and
admonish them faithfully our selves, or else cause some other to do it. For it
pertayneth unto no private person to exclude any man out of the church or
congregation, but only unto the whole church, or unto them that are chosen
and appointed of the same unto that office. And their duty it is to considre
both in this matter and all other, what may be most profitable and expediente
unto edificacion.


M. But now, why should men receive this sacrament often, seeing they receive
the sacrament of baptism but once?


S. Baptism is a sacrament of enteraunce into the religion of Christ, and
betokens that men are now dead unto the old life, and will from
thencefoorth walk in a new life. Wherefore like as Christ died but once, and
that for our sins, and shall from hence forth dye no more, even so ought the
sacrament of baptism, which represents the same, to be received but once.
But the holy supper is a sacrament of procedyng and going forward in ye
religion of Christ, and signifies that the manne which is once incorporate
unto Christ, and fed or sustained continually through him, will evermore
continue, proceed and go forward in a perfect christian life. And forasmuch
as many impedimentes, lets and temptacions, do chance unto such men by the
way, which notwithstanding do still hungre and thurst after righteousness.
And this supper is a comfortable pledge or seal of the true lively food of
the soul, it is the heavenly bread, without which this hounger can not be
satisfied nor assuaged. Therefore should they receive this sacrament often,
because they have often need of such comfort.


M. Now which is the sixth special article of the christen doctrine?


S. The ecclesiastical or church discipline or brotherly correccion.


M. Where is any commandment thereof in the scripture?


S. In the.xviii. cha. of Matthew in these words. If thy brother sin against
the, go thy way and correct him between the and him alone. etc.


M. What is to be noted out of these words?


S. Three special points. First, that every christen man ought to correct
and admonyshe other of his fault pryuately and gently. And if he cannot do it
himself, than to cause some other to do it for him.


M. What should be the cause that every man ought to admonish other? Shall
not every man answer for himself?


S. Forsouth this is the cause: for as much as all faithful are incorporate
unto our savior Christ in baptism, as me^bres of one body, and are
altogether children and heirs of God, and have like part and fellowship of
one everlasting heritage, therefore ought each one to save and preserve the
other from hell and from everlasting damnacion, through godly correccion and
admonicion, and so to further his brother unto heaven and unto everlasting life.


M. But how should this brotherly correccion and warnyng, be put in ure and
be exercised?


S. With all humbleness and frendlynesse, and also with such wisdom and
sobrenesse, that his good name be not hyndered, but that he may perceive that
none other thing is sought thereby saving alonely his wealth and emendemente.


M. How often should he be thus admonyshed?


S. Even as often as there is any hope of his amendment by such correccion and
warnyng.


M. why does Christ command the to take one or.ii. unto the, if thy brother
will not amend at the warning and correccion of thee alone?


S. That he should the more earnestlye be convinced of his fault, and not
hable to deny it being correct or admonyshed thereof by.ii. or.iii. witnesses
(as the lord teaches,) only to win him thereby.


M. What is the second note out of the fore rehearsed words?


S. The second is the correccion of the church.


M. who should execute that correccion?


S. Forsouth such as are chosen and appointed by the whole congregation to be
assistente unto the minister in that behalf.


M. Toward what manner of parsons should such correccion and admonicio^ be
exercysed?


S. Toward such as either regard not the private and secret warnyng, or else
as offend the church and congregation with some grievous and notable
enormytie, that is manifest and open.


M. Out of which words learnest thou that?


S. Out of these words where ye lord says, if he hear the not, (being
admonished before.ii. or.iii. witnesses.) Than tell it unto the whose
congregation. etc.

And S. Paul writing unto Tymothe the ministre of the church of Ephesus
confirms the same, where he says: such as have sined, correct or rebuke
them openly, that other may be afraid by their exaumple.


M. And should all that offend be put unto open shame before the whole
congregation?


S. No, not put to open shame, but earnestlye driven and monyshed unto
repentance. And such moderacion must be observed therein, as may be thought
best and most conueniente to move and win the sinner unto perfect and true
repentance.


M. Is it the duty of those that are chosen and appointed of the congregation
to be assistente unto the ministers, only to correct and admonyshe such as
have committed open and manifest crimes, and such as would not receive the
pryuate and brotherly correccion, and none other?


S. No, not this only, but as true fathers and phisicions, they ought to have
an iye and a regard unto all men, and to warn and exhort every one, as
they can think it most necessary for the edificacion and emendemente of
every one.


M. Where have thou any scripture for that?


S. Paul writing unto the Thessalonians confirms it by his own example in
these words. You know, says he, that we have exhorted and comforted every
one of you, even as a father does his children, and we have testified that ye
should walk worthily as it becomes you before God which has called you
unto his kingdom and unto his glory.


M. Well, what is the third point that thou notest out of the fore rehearsed
words?


S. The third is the byndyng and the loocyng.


M. What is it to bind?


S. It is as much as to exclude a man out of the fellowship or company of
Christian people, whereby he may be ernestlye forced unto a special and an
unfeigned declaracion of true repentance and amendment of his life.


M. What manner of people ought so to be bound?


S. All such as will not hear the Church and congregation reprouyng and
admonyshyng the^ for their soul health, and all they also which have offended
the church and congregation with any manifest, grievous, and notable crimes.


M. The lord makes mention only of such as will not receive the warnyng and
correccion of the church.


S. But he has taught us also through the holy Apostle. i. Co. v.
s. Paul to exclude out of the fellowship and congregation of Christ, all such
as are fallen into whoredom, and other notable vices, and to force or drieue
the^ unto some special penance to be unto the^ as a correccion until they
declare with manifest fruits of repentance, an ernest ame^dme^t, whereby they
may edify and content the church and congregation again which they had
before through their greuouse sins offended.


M. Now what is it to loocen?


S. It is as much as to pronounce forgeuenes of sins, unto such as have
declared their repentance and amendment with a perfect ernestnes, and to admit
and receive the same persons again unto the fellowship and communion of the
church or congregation, and also of the holy sacraments.


M. And must none be looced from their sins but such as declare earnestelye
their repentance and sorrow for their sins with plain and euidente
amendment of their life?


S. No, none else: For the Lord commands remission and forgiveness of
sins, to be pronounced and declared only unto such as repent and bewail
their sins, and desire and purpose truly to emende themselves. For the
ecclesiastical disciplyne ordained of God for the order and edifiyng of his
church, ought to be executed and practiced truly and earnestly, and not
fayntlye or feynedlye for a shine and a color only.


M. In which words is that commanded of the Lord?


S. In these words, where he says: Verily I say unto you: whatsoever you
shall bind upon earth, that same shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you
shall looce upon earth shall also be looced in heaven.


M. Under whose name and authority must this power be exercised?


S. Under the name and authority of our savior Jesus Christ, also in the name
of the whole congregation.


M. After what manner and form?


S. with all godly feruentnes and earnest prayer unto God. For the which cause
also it must be done in the open congregation being assembled together, and
with their consent.


M. Prove me this by the word of God.


S. The Lord says in the chapter before rehearsed: whansoeuer two or three
among you do consent together, whatsoever they shall pray for, that shall be
done unto them of my father in heaven. For whersoeuer two or three are gathered
together in my name there am I in the midst among them.


M. Here the lord makes mention of two or three only.


S. That he does to confirm the greater nu^bre, by ye smaller.


M. But show me some scripture that makes express mention of the whole
congregation.


S. The holy Paul writes thus.i. Corin. v.

J as one that am absent from you in body but yet present with you in spirit,
have already (as present) determined and concluded (against him that has
committed that deed), in the name of our lord Jesus Christ and in your
congregation with my spirit, and with the power or authority of our lord
Jesus Christ, to give him ever unto the devil, to the confusion and perishyng
of his flesh, that his spirit may be safe at the day or cummyng of the lord
Jesus.


M. And what is the ministers or pastors duty to do in all this?


S. He ought in no wise to admit unto the communion of the sacraments such as
be excluded by the church or by the appointed elders, until such time as
they be reconciled thereunto again. And besides that, he ought to be as it
were the mouth of the congregation to open and to declare unto the
transgressors the heaviness of their sins, and to move them unto hearty
repentance, that they may come out of the devils snares.


M. But now concerning these that be sick, how shall the minister order them?


S. If he perceive that they be sorye and repentaunte for their sins, and are
desirous of the favor of God and of remission, than ought he to comfort them
with some promise of grace, and to preach unto them free remission and
absolucion in the presence of such as are there by assistente, lest
peradventure their conscience being vexed and their sickness increased, the
wicked enemy prevent and ensnare them, and so seduce and conueigh them into
desperacion.


M. Where have thou any example of scripture for that?


S. Our savior Christ as soon as he saw the bedredde before him (doubtless
in fear of his sins) he said unto him: My son be of good comfort thy
sins are forgeuen thee. And again to the woman that had sinned he said. Go
thy way in peace, thy faith has saved thee.


M. Have thou no further commandment of the visitacion and comfort of the
sick to be done by the ministers of the church?


S. Yes, the holy Apostle S. James teaches that the prayer of faith which
the seniors or elders of the church do make for the sick, shall help them
and the lord shall comfort them, and if they be in sin, it shall be
forgeuen them.


M. Now what fruit and profit ought all this to work in thee?


S. First I ought to learn hereby, to receive of any manne thankefully all
manner of christian and brotherly correccion, warning, and informacion. And also
by the very duty and bond of love truly and faithfully to admonish and
reprove my neighbor (which is every christian man) if I shall see him offe^de.


M. why, what have thou to do with thy neighbor:


S. Forsouth forasmuch as we are all the me^bres of one body. If I ca^ find
in my heart to see any to loyter and perish in his sin, and not so much as
to admonish him thereof, than it may appear that there is no christian love in
me.


M. Well, what other fruit may this doctrine work in thee?


S. This also, i. Corin. v. ii. These. ii.
that I contemn not in any wise the disciplyne of binding and loocyng of the
church, but esteem and dread it reverently: eschewyng and avoiding all
fellowship and familiarity of such as will not conform themselves unto
the same.


M. what scripture haste thou for that?


S Even the words of our savior Christ where he says: Jf he hear not the
church or congregation, than take or repute him as an heathen and an
unchristian, that is to say, as an infidele that is sundered and separate from
al christian order and fellowship. But yet we ought not utterly to reiecte and
to hate him in our hearts, but to pray heartily unto God for him that he may
be converted from his wickedness again: and than with all ioyfulnes to receive
him into all christen fellowship again.


M. Well, this is sufficient of this article also. Now tell me what is thy
daily exercise in the service of God?


S. Morning and evening when I arise or go to bed, likewise before and after
meat, I use these prayers following, or such like.

First at my vprisyng I fall down on my knees and lyftyng up my hands and
iyes unto heaven, I confess my sins unto God my heavenly father after this
manner.


A general confession of sins to be said every morning.
O Almyghtie God our heavenly father, I confess and knowledge that I am a
miserable and a wretched sinner, and have manifold ways most greuouslye
transgressed thy most godly commandments through wicked thoughts, ungodly
lusts, sinful words and deeds, and in my whole life. In sin am I borne
and conceived, and there is no goodness in me, in as much as if thou should
enter into thy narowe judgment with me, iudgyng me according unto the same, I
were never hable to suffer or abide it, but must needs peryshe and be damned
for ever. So little help, comfort or succor is there either in me, or in any
other creature. Only this is my comfort (o heavenly father) that thou did
not spare thy only dere-beloued son, but did give him up unto the most
bittur and most vile and slau^derous death of the cross for me, yt he might
so pay ye rau^som for my sins, satisfy thy judgment, still and pacify thy
wrath, reconcyle me again unto the, and pourchace me thy grace and favor and
everlasting life. Wherefore through the merit of his most bitter death and
passion, and through his innocent blood sheadyng, I beseech thee, o heavenly
father, yt thou wylt vouchsafe to be gracious and merciful unto me, to
forgive, and to pardon me all my sins, to lyghten my heart with thy holy
spirit, to renew, confirm and strengthen me, with a right and a perfect
faith, and to inflame me in love toward thee, and my neybour, that I may
he^ceforth with a willing, and a glad heart walk as it becu^meth me, in thy
most godly commandments, and so glorify and praise thee everlastingly. And
also that I may with a free conscience and a quiet heart in all manner of
temptacions, affliccions, or necessyties, and even in the very panges of death,
cry boldly and merrily unto the and say: I believe in God the father
allmyghtie, maker of heaven and earth. And in his only son Jesus Christ
our lord. etc.

But o Lord God heavenly father, to comfort my self in affliccion and
temptacion with these articles of the christian faith It is not in my power. For
faith is thy gift: and for as much as thou wylt be prayed unto, and called
upon for it, I cumme unto thee, to pray and beseech the, both for that and
for all my other necessities, even as thy dear beloved son our savior
Christ Jesus has himself taught us.

And from the very botome of my heart, I cry and say: O our father which
art in heaven. etc.

This done, I add this prayer for the morning.
O Merciful lord God heavenly father, I render most high lauds, praise, and
thanks unto the, that thou have preserved me both this night and all the time
and days of my life hitherto under thy proteccion, and have suffered me to live
until this present hour.

And I beseech the heartily, thou wylt vouchesafe to receive me this day and
the residue of my whole life from hencefurthe into thy tuicion, rulyng and
gouernyng me with thy holy spirit, that all manner of darkness of misbelefe,
infidelity, and of carnal lusts and affeccions, may be utterly chaced and
driven out of my heart, and that I may be justified and saved both body and
soul through a right and a perfect faith, and so walk in the light of thy
most godly truth to thy glory and praise, and to ye profit and furtheraunce
of my neybour, through Jesus Christ our Lord and savior. Amen.

Or thus more brieflye.
O Merciful lord God, heavenly father, I laud and praise the that thou haste
preserved me this night, from all peril, danger and evil. And I beseech the
of thy mercy to keep and preserve me from henceforth likewise. And drive all
manner of darkness out of my heart, that the light of thy truth may shine
before me and gyde me in all my ways: And thou will vouchesalue also to keep
and preserve our most noble king with all our rulers magistrates, teachers,
parents, and all our friends, through Jesus Christ our Lord and savior. Amen.

A prayer to be said at night going to bed.
O Merciful Lord God heavenly father, whether we sleep or wake, live or dye,
we are always thine. Wherefore I beseech the hartilye that thou will
vouchsalue to take care and charge of me, and not to suffer me to peryshe in
the works of darkness, but to kindle the light of thy countetenaunce in my
heart, that thy godly knowledge may daily increase in me through a right and
a pure faith, and that I may always be found to walk and live after thy will
and pleasure through Jesus Christ our lord and savior. Amen.

Or thus more briefly.
O Merciful lord God our heavenly father, I laud and thank the most
heartily for that thou have so graciously kept and preserved me this day,
besechyng the to forgive me all my sins which I have committed against the,
and I beseech the to preserve me and all men this night, from all snares and
wyles of the wicked fiende. And grant that although our corporal iyes shall
sleep, yet that our hertes and minds may continually watch and wake in the,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and savior. Amen.

A prayer to be said before meat.
O Merciful father, thou fedest and nourishest all manner of creatures,
vouchesalue to nouryshe and to refreshe us now with thy gifts, so that we do
not misuse them, but that we being strengthened through them, may be more
hable to serve thee in our calling and condition of life, and to walk and live
before the in all virtue and honesty: through Jesus Christ our Lord and
savior. Amen.

After meat.
O Merciful Lord God, our heavenly father, we laud, praise and thank thee
for thy most holy and excellent gifts, wherewith thou have so graciouslye
nouryshed and refreshed us: And we beseech ye heartily, grant that we may
never forget thy merciful goodness toward us, but that we may cast al our care
and sorrow upon the only, and may always seek and receive, with a perfect trust
and confidence, all manner of sustenaunce both of body and soul, at thy hands
which art the fountain and welspryng of all goodness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and savior. Amen.

Certain godly lessons for all faithful people, young and old.
HArken Israel, the Lord our God is one God. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
ferue^tly with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength.
All these words which I command the this day, shall remain continually
in thy heart. Thou shall beat them diligently into thy children, and thrust
them sharplye into their hearts. And let all thy communicacion and talkyng
be of them, whether thou be in thy house or go abroad, whether thou
go to bed or rysest up. Thou shall bind them for a token upon thy hand:
And let them evermore glister before thy iyes. Thou shall write them upon thy
doors and upon thy gates.

Micheas. vi. I will tell the, O man, what is good, and what God requires of
the. Namely nothing else but that thou kepest judgment, and do ryghteousnes,
and that thou apply thy self unto all godliness and walk humbly before thy
Lord God. Iaco. i. This is the pure and undefiled religion before God our
father, to visit and coumforte the wedowes and the fatherless, in their
sorrow, affliccion and misery and for a man to keep himself without spotte
before the world. i. Timo. i. The end and fulfyllyng of all the law is this,
namely love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and a perfect unfeigned
faith. John. xiii. By this shall all men know, that ye are my scholars, if ye
love one an other, like as I have loved you. i. John.iii.iiii.v. God is love,
and he that remains in love, remains in God, and God in him. He that has
love is borne of God and knows God. He that loves not, he knows not God,
for God is love. If we love one another, than remains God within us, and his
love is perfect in us. And hereby do we know that we are the children of God,
and that we have love, if we love God and keep his commandments. And this is
his commandment, namely that we believe in the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one an other. M. The God of all grace and mercy, strengthen
thee and all men in the knowledge of his son our savior Jesus, and in the
power of his heavenly and godly spirit. To him be all laud, praise, thanks,
glory, power, rule, and honor world without end. Amen.


Imprinted at London in Flete-strete at the sign of the Sun over against the
conduyte, by Edward Whitchurche. The.xix. day of October the year of our
Lord. M.D.XLVIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


