THE TRAGICOMOEDI of the virtuous Octauia.

Done by SAMVEL BRANDON. 1598.

C^rmen amat, quisquis carmine digna gerit.



LONDON Printed for William Ponsonbye, and are to be soulde at his shop in S.
Paul's Churchyard.

To the right honorable, and truly virtuous Lady, the Lady LVCIA AVDELAY:
health, honor, happiness and heaven.
RAre Phoenix, which your life do sacrifice,
In virtues flame, to find a life divine:
Rich treasurer, of heavens best treasuries,
In whom worth wisdom honor virtues shine.
Sdaine not, these art less humble ^ines to view,
With honors eyes let virtues plaints be scanned,
That she whose virtues doubled are in you,
By you may escape from Lybitinas hand.
Her dying fame, by you may be preserved,
Whiles time, and men, and memory endure:
Your living name by hirs might be reserved,
Did not these lines, too much her worth obscure.
These lines, wherein, if ought be free from blame,
Your noble Genius taught my Pen the same.
All' autore.
THe Thracian Poet, that revived his wife,
Breeding in ^urtes, pity, and delight;
Whose fame do^th yet sur^iue his shortened life,
Must honor yield to what thou do indite.
For he, who oftentime^ by Musickes force,
Did serpents charm, streams stay, and trees remove:
In women's minds, could never move remorse,
As his unhappy end does plainly prove.
Wherefore most praisd be thy praise worthy muse,
Which far surmounts the might of antique age:
Winning that sexes grace, which did refuse
By hearing Orpheus, to relent their rage.
Because no music with their mind accordes:
But that which virtues harmony affordes.
MIA.

Prosopopeia al libro.
WHen barking envy saw thy birth,
it straight contemnd the same:
And armed his tongue, to give a charge,
thy weakness to disfame.
But seeing honors golden hook,
so linckt to virtues line:
He fled away as half afraid,
yet ceast not to repine.
But fear not Momus, make return,
and happily for thy pain
Thou ma^st Antonius coullors bear
when he reuiues again.
S. B.

The Argument.
AFter the death of Julius Caesar, and the overthrow of Brutus and Cassius the
chief conspirators: the government of the Romain Empire, remained unto
Octauius Caesar, Mark Antony, and (at that time) Sextus Pompeius. Mark
Antony, to confirm an inviolable league of amity, between Caesar and
himself: took to wife Octauia, the sister of Caesar. Antony and Caesar
falling at debate, met at Tarentum with their armies, and had bin the cause of
much bloodshed: but that they were appeased, by the wisdom of Octauia. Not
long after, Antony going to make war with the Parthians, and coming into
Syria: the place renewed the memory, and the memory revived the long
intermitted love, he once bare to Cleopatra the Queen of Aegipt: he therefore
wholly subiecting himself to the desire of this Cleopatra: forsakes his
virtuous wife Octauia. Whereupon, her brother Caesar disdaining that she should
suffer so great an indignity: makes war upon Antony, and ouercometh him,
first at Actium, and then at Pelusium, to the utter ruin and destruction, both
of Antony and Cleopatra.

Octauiae tragicomoedia.
The stage supposed Rome. The Actors.
Octauius Caesar who was afterward called Augustus. Octauia the sister of
Caesar and wife of Antony. Two of the nobles of Octauius Caesar.
Maecenas. Agrippa
Roman Ladies.
Camilla. Iulia.
Antonies children. Syluia, a licentious woman. Consuls.
Titius. Plancus.
Geminus a Captain. Byllius nuntius. Chorus. Romano.
Actus primus.
Octauia. Camilla. Iulia.
CAmilla, now me thinks this golden time,
Inuites our minds to bathe in streams of joy:
See how the earth does flourish in his prime,
Whose livery shows the absence of annoye.
These woods, how they bedeckt with natures pride,
Show inward touch of new conceived myrthe.
The pretty birds, that in their couerts hide,
(Free Citizens, even happy from their birthe)
How they rejoice! and every senseless thing,
Even smiles with joy: the earth perfumes the air,
The air, sweet Nectar to the earth does bring,
And both with joy, beget these children fair.
How richly nature does her wealth enrobe:
Giving each thing his beauty, form and grace.
Eye-pleasing green, circle of this our globe,
Great myrrour of Apollos youthful face*
Coulor of life, youths liuerie, how delight
Dwells still with thee, whiles we, whom reason named
(But falsely namde and if I judge aright)
Princes of all the rest that nature framed:
Still subject are to sorrows tyranny;
Slaves to mischance, vassals of fortunes power;
Bearing the yoke of endless misery:
Fair baits of time which does us all devour.
Now raisde aloft in honors highest seat,
Yet in that height far short of sweet content,
Now, thrown down headlong, be we nere so great,
In gulf of grief, which we may not prevent.
Our pleasures, (posting guests,) make but small stay,
And never once look back when they are gone:
Where greefes bide long, and leave such scores to pay;
As make us banckerout ere we think thereon.
Yet this same earth with newborn beauties graced,
Does say me thinks in his dumb eloquence:
Thus shall you spring, among heavenly angels placed,
When deaths cold winter once has snatched you hence.
These flowers, do bid us in their language, read
In beauties books, how beauty is most frail:
Whose youthful pride, th'vntimely steps does tread,
To deaths black kingdom, dark obliuions veil.
These natures quiristers, do plainly say,
Waste thus your time, in setting forth his praise:
Who feeds, who clothes, who fills our hearts with joy:
And from this dead earth, does our bodies raise*
Thus all their mirthe, are accents of our moan:
Their blis full state, of our unhappiness,
A perfect map, where only we alone,
May see our good, but never it possess.
Came. Madam, as nature more then perfect is,
And far more fair, then that we fairest call:
So you as heir apparent to her bliss,
Chief treasurer of her perfections all;
Will show you^ self most wise, and most divine,
In curious search of her most hidden will;
And following but her footesteps, yet refine:
The universal secrets of her skill.
Yet I admire, your Eagle-sighted eye,
Which has truths sun-bright cyrcle so well known:
In others worth, discernes each Attomie,
Forgetful most, of what is most your own.
These other creatures, have their properties,
Which show, their Sire no niggard of his store,
But such great guiftes our minds immortalize,
As proud ambitious self, can wish no more.
And you, great Lady, whose high honor flies,
With virtues wings, in admirations air:
Towering, an Eagles pyche, above the skies,
Where vulgar thoughts, are settled in despair;
You, whose designs, have put out enuies eyes,
Whose lamp of virtue gives the purest light;
You, that enforce weak fame to royallize,
Such high reuolues, as far surpass her might,
You, whose large praise, makes naked virtue lowre,
And tyres report, in painting out your story;
You, in whose lap does stream the golden shower,
Of all good fortune, gracing highest glory.
O how can you, once entertain a thought,
That these high joys should stoop to sorrows lure?
Or how can true felicity be brought,
The smallest touch of passion to endure?
Let those complain, which suck misfortunes paps:
Who know naught else of virtue but the name,
Who seeming wise, are snared in follyes traps,
Whose rash attempts, breed swift ensuing shame,
But you heavens day star, pillar of our bliss,
O want you ever, clouds of discontent:
You are our joy, we all joys, all should miss,
Did not your sun beams guild our firmament.

Oct. Did not thy true love seal this president,
I should suspect a serpent among the flowers:
And hardly judge fair words from false intent,
Pore niggard truth, rich flattry, powers down showrs.
But loyal Ladies, do you think in faith,
That highest honor, joys most sweet content?

Came. It does no doubt, for high, and heavenly says
The proverb old, to which I give consent.

Oct. The^ hear me speak, what I shall say by proof,
And what experience printed in my heart?
Perhaps a story for your own behoof,
Where I my self, have played an actors part.
In youth, I thought though falsely thought) that best
Which fairest seemde, and my aspyring mind
Disdaind (though not with pride) that there should rest
Amean borne thought, within my thoughts confined.
Treading this path, I was at last desired,
By Lord Marcellus, for his spouse, and wife.
Marcellus, he whose worthy fame aspyred,
To the highest top of honor, during life.
If wealth, (nurse of delight) might breed content:
I had no want of store to make me glad:
My greatness did ambitious thoughts prevent:
Such high success Marcellus honors had.
Proud Carthage knows, his youthful sword did pay
Large tribute of their souls to stygian lake:
His middle age, the stoutest Gauls did fraye,
Marcellus name made their huge armies quake.
His ancient years, made crafty Hanniball
Admire the proves, and valor of his foe:
Thrice bitter name, that cursed Canniball,
By bloody treason, made him life forgo.
Five times this city graced my worthy Lord,
Or rather he them graced, with Consuls name.
What they to others suites would scarce afforde,
They ioyde to see my Lord accept the same.
Now Ladies to forget my present state,
Did joy think you this while orecharge my mind?
I ioyde I must confess, to see how fate
With bounds of honor, had my life confin'de.
But when I found, how monster envy, feeds
On highest honor, as his daintiest pray:
How brightest fire, great store of fuel needs,
To keep his light, and beauty from decay.
When that I found the music of my mind,
Tunde to the concord, of Marcellus bliss:
And saw, true valor had his life assignde,
To haughty Mars, whose course most dangerous is.
I lived in him, he spent his royal days,
In bloody bosom of life scorning wars.
Safety may breed delight, not nourish praise;
Hard is the way, from the earth unto the stars.
Whiles thus our state, depended on his sword,
And thousand thousands sought his final end:
Could my true love, in all this time, afforde
One quiet thought in perfect mirthe to spend?
So many perils as on earth are found,
So many dangers as on raging seas,
So many terrors all my joys confound,
For true love passions are no weak disease.
But is this all? no, more if more may be,
It Is greater care, to keep, then get, a crown.
Virtue does raise by small degrees we see:
Where in a moment Fortune casts us down.
And surely those that live in greatest place,
Must take great care, to be such as they seem:
They are not princes, whom sole tytles grace,
Our princely virtues, we should most esteem.
The sands on Neptunes shores, and beamy stars,
Do not exceed the number of those cares
Which in our minds, do stir up civil wars,
And cross delights accountes, at unawares.
Let this suffice, the tempest soonest tears
The highest towers, and who will mount alofte,
The more he climes, the more his footing fears:
Often he slides, but sildome falls soft.
What words, can paint the infinite of woes?
What tongue, can half those miseries relate?
Which thundering fortune, threatened to impose
Upon my head, at Tarent, but of late.
When as mine eyes might see (though loath to see)
The suns, with whose eclipse, my fortune changed:
Mine own dear Lord, and brother, both to be
In mortal arms, against each other ranged.
Which tempest calmed, the storm begins again,
On mischiefs maine, full sails mishap does bear:
I know not now what does my Lord detain,
But for I know not, I know cause to fear.
To visit him, at last I was contented,
And in those foreign coasts to make appeal:
But my access, at Athens he prevented,
Which makes me think, more then I will reveal.
And can I then with sorrows weight oppressed,
Think to enamell my conceit with joy?
Can I, that am with fortunes wrack distressed,
Hope to escape the Ocean of annoy?
Why, this is joy, to taste no scence of death,
Till dying hour, have stopped our vital breath.

Iulia. It Is true delight, to know no cause of greese,
Although the outward signs of joy be small:
Who most rejoicing, feels that inward thief,
A stained conscience finds no joy at all.

Came. Indeed I think, true joy, a thing severe,
Springing from fountain of a virtuous mind:
From spotless faith, and conscience pure and clear,
The chiefest good, the heavens have us assignde.
For as some weep, that are not passing sad:
So many laugh that are not rightly glad.

Geminus. Titius.
Say worthy Titius, what rare accident,
In so short time, did bring to happy end,
The cruel wars; which Caesar's discontent,
Against Lord Antonius, lately did intend;
How could so many weapons thirsting blood,
Be satisfied with unexpected peace?
What powerful stars importuned us such good?
And did their angers tyrranny suppress?
Titi. That will I do, my good friend Geminus.
And much the sooner, for that you may know,
No force, or weapons, has procured us,
The happy truce, wherein we glory now.
It was the time, when the declining sun
Made greatest show of least performed light:
And by his swift departure had begun,
To yield his interest, to th'encroching night.
When as the seas, even burdened with our weight,
Delivered us unto the perfect view
Of dreadful Tarent: where for us did weight,
Antonius fleet, with all their martial crew.
There did our drowned anchors make us stay,
Within the jaws of dangers tyrranny:
There, we discovered by the flying day,
The agents of our threatened misery.
Who can express the horror of that night,
When darkness lent her robes to monster fear?
And heavens black mantle banishing the light,
Made every thing in ougly form appear.
Until Aurora, with fair purple flowers,
Like loving spouse, had strawed Tytans way:
Whose glorious beams, began to guilde the towers,
As joyful post, of pleasure-bringing day.
Then did loud Martial music charm a sleep,
Each languishing conceit, in doubtful breast:
And newborn comfort, now began to creep,
In every mind, with causeless fear oppressed.
Then, pride of honor, made us scorn our foes:
And courage added wings to our desire.
To present fight, we all our selves dispose:
With bloody showers, to quench incensed ire.
But ere our armies, had their charge fulfild,
Ere weapons, had our inward rage expressed:
Lo where Octauia, comes into the field,
Twixt both our armies, she her self addressed.
Where with the Nectar of her eloquence,
With words that might relent indurate frost:
With majesty, and beauties influence,
She stays our Captains, and affronts each host.
O how I see that wonder-breeding face!
O how I hear those hart-enchaining words!
O face! o words! that merit highest grace!
Immortal sure, base earth none such affords,
No woman's weapon blindes her princely eye;
No woman's weakness, her tongues passage stays:
Like one, that did both death, and fate defy,
Minerua-like she stands, and thus she says.
Here will I bide, and this same breast oppose
To all your weapons, and whose wicked hand,
Shall first begin t'assaile or strike his foes,
Shall strike this heart, and break this vital band.
No bloody deed, Octauiaes eyes shall gain,
A witness of your loathed cruelty:
But through this body shall the first be slain,
That in this battle, is compelled to dye.
If honor, virtue, worth, or piety,
Live in your minds, which bear such lofty names:
Return your weapons, and here quietly,
With reason, quench the force, of angry flames.
Else, let some bloody executioner,
First rob this i^alious tomb, of loathed life:
And then, no longer need you to defer,
The issue, of your more then mortal strife.
Much more she said, which none but she can say,
And with her sugered speech, so much preuaild,
That like Medusaes marbled creatures, they
Amazed stood, so was their fury quaild.
Look how that trydent scepter bearing king,
His often rebelling subjects, does suppress,
And with a sudden beck in order bring,
Their disproportion, with a quiet peace;
When that the pride, of some truce-wanting storm,
Does summon up their treason-working power;
Now gracing terror, with huge mountains form,
Now with steep whirlepoole, seeking to devour:
So stood the Emperors, with her words amazed,
Her words, which seemde the myrrour of hi^ deed^.
As men enchanted so on her they gazed,
And in her face, new lectures ganne to reed.
But when she saw, hi^ words did take effect,
Then powrde she forth the quintessence of wit:
And never did her enterprice neglect,
Till both the Emperors bewitched with it;
Not only, did forget all former hate,
But even there, before Octauiaes face,
A league of friendship they did consumate,
And lovingly each other did embrace.
O what a joyful sight, 'twas to behoulde
A dangerous fight, turned to a dainty feast.
To see how ^riends salute each other could,
That but even now, each other did detest.
There did both armies sport in great delight,
And enterchangeably their loves express:
As captives, foild without blood, wound or fight;
They praise the conquest, and the victor bless
Then did Antoniu^, for (...) sake,
Give unto Caesar twenty Brygantines:
Which Caesar did in courteous manner take,
And in requital of his kind designs,
Did twice five hundred armed soldiers, give
To Anthony: and quickly one might find,
The sparks of emulation made them strive,
Who might do most, to please Octauiaes mind.

Gem. O noble deed, deserving highest praise,
Well worthy ^o out-liue all memory:
Life saving Empress, how thy wisdom stays,
Even swarms of souls, from Plu^oes tyranny,
But why did not Antonius, in like sort
Return to Room, to pay delight her due.

T^t. He presently to'ards Parthia did resort,
Against their King the wars for to renew.
And recommending all his own affairs,
His wife, his children, and what else was dear,
To Caesar's best disposing: he repayres,
To Syria, and entends to winter there.

Gem. Room thou that keepst, the pearl that does enclude,
Heavens dearest treasure, in earths finest frame:
Be never so ungrateful, to obtrude
Night-blacke oblivion, to her noble name.

Camilla. Geminus.
Come Geminus, and unto me relate,
What made the Empress, alter her intent:
What did your voyage thus abbreuiate,
And all your expectations prevent.
Fame (bad concealer of our close entents)
Said, that the Empress would to Syria go:
To see Antonius, who himself abscentes,
But your return, does show it was not so.
Gem. Madame, when Aeolus had once conuai'd
Our moving houses, unto that same place,
Where noble Cecrops, the foundations laid,
Which are the Grecian confines chiefest grace:
There, long before we could approach the gates
Of that fair City, we encountered were,
With people of all ages, and estates,
Who in their hands, did boughs of Laurel bear.
Some on their knees, with joy, and wonder filled,
Salute the Empress: some rich gifts present.
Some straw'd the way with flowers, and some distilled
Their sweet perfumes, along the fields we went.
Thus to the City were we guarded straight,
Where for our coming, all the states awaite.
There were our eyes, invited to behold
Most sumptuous shows, with many pleasing sights:
There did we hear, their learned tongues unfold.
The muses skill, with rauishing delights,
Their loud applause, which pierced the very skies,
Extolde Octauia past the reach of fame:
And silent Echo, wakened with their cries,
Taught all the neighbor hills, to bless her name.
Thus frankly did two days themselves bestow,
To gratify our entertainment there:
Whiles Antonie, who as it seemed did know
Of our approach, and thereof stood in fear:
Sent Niger, unto Athens, with all speed,
Who to Octauia letters did convey:
Requiring her no further to proceed,
But for his coming in that place to stay.
For thither meant he shortly to repair,
And therefore would not, she should undertake
So long a journey, which might much impair
Her health, and quiet, bootlesse for his sake.
She, half suspecting (as there was good cause)
That this was but a practice of delay:
Although unwilling, yet she made a pause,
As one that knew not how to disobay.
But finding all his words to want effect,
And seeing nothing might his mind recall:
Such things, she does unto him straight direct,
As she had brought, to pleasure him withal.
Which was, two thousand chosen men at arms:
Great store of horses, wont to win their price;
Much armor, to defend themselves from harms,
As richely wrought, as cunning could deuize;
Guiftes, to reward his bestdeseruing friends;
A sum of money for his soldiers pay;
And briefly all her care, and study bends,
To save his wayning honor, from decay.
But when she saw, naught might his thoughts recline
Unkind, says she, seno^lesse of thine own shame,
I Will be my self, since thou will not be mine:
Thus she concluded, and away we came.

Came. O peerless paragon! O natures pride!
Fair Cabinet, where wisdoms treasure lies,
Earths glory, and the heavens beloved bride,
Rich seat of honor, virtues paradize.
Most noble Empress, praise of women kind,
Whose faith endures the rage of fortunes flame:
Whose constant truth, and truly virtuous mind,
Scorns smallest touch of iust-deserued blame.
How natural, and undivided, (...)
The sparks of honor, in a noble heart:
How industry, and wit, may not compare,
With that true touch, our birthright does imparte.
Live virtuous Empress, myrrour of our age,
Though chance discharge whole vollyes of reproach;
With fortitude withstand proud fortunes rage,
Let not despair, near thy sweet thoughts encroache.
Time must needs turn thy mourning unto joy,
For true delight from hence his spring does take:
When we with patience suffer sharp annoye,
Not for our merits, but for virtues sake.

Chorus.
Heavens, hear poor earth complain,
How we, your frowns do bear:
When all things else rejoice,
Joy scorns with us to dwell.
And reasons self can tell,
Each mirthe discovering voice,
Assures our judging ear,
How all things else want pain:
Scence-following creatures know
No cause, why to lament,
In them, remorse does sow,
No seeds of discontent.
We see, and know, but want our bl^sse:
Imperfect nature causes this.
Yea nature most unkind,
Contriuer of our fall:
Begins our life with tears,
And ends the same with woe.
Greese (pleasures mortal foe)
Confounds our hope with fears:
And sowers our sweet with gall.
This Tyrant of the mind:
By reason, w^t, or skill,
Can never be withstood:
These aggrauate our ill,
By showing what was good.
And want of that torments us most:
Whose worth appears in being lost.
Were nature falsely named
A stepdame to mankind,
That sex, which we account
Imperfect, weak, and frail,
Could not in worth prevail:
And men so far surmount.
We should Octauia find,
In some sort to be blamed.
She winnes immortal fame,
Whiles he who should excel:
Dishonored has his name,
And by his weakness fell.
For double shame he does deserve,
Who being guide does soonest swerve.
And Lord Antonius, thou
Thrice woman conquered man:
Shall not thy heart repine,
Their triumphs to adorn?
Octauiaes virtues scorn,
That wanton life of thine:
And Cleopatra can,
Command thy ghost even now.
And feign would I refrain,
From Fuluiaes stately name:
Which does thy manhood flaine,
And makes thee blush for shame.
In this one thing, yet happy may thou be:
They Princess are, that triumph over thee.
Dwell in fames living breath,
T'eternitie resign'de,
Ye fair Mars-conquering wights:
And fear not Lethes flood,
Your virtues always bud,
Your story, honor wrights,
And Phoenix-like you find,
A new life in your death.
Arm but your Angel-soules,
With perfect virtues shield,
That Thanatos controules,
And makes Erynnis yield,
Then shall the heavens your worth descrye:
Earth, sing your praise, and so will I.
Actus secundus.
Octauia. Byllius.
OThrice, and four times, happy messenger,
Have thou from Parthia made return of late?
Can thou declare the issue of the war,
And make me know, Antonius happy state?
What causd my Lord in Syria make such stay,
Since he against Parthia did his forces bend?
When does he mean, to'ards Room to take his way^
And to those wars, impose a final end?
Unkind he is: not so, but distant far,
And his great trouble, much my good impayres:
Else would he not mine ears so long time bar,
From much expected news of his affairs.
Byl. Madame, these eyes have seen what has bin done
In Syria, Parthia, and each other place;
I present was, when Lord Antonius, won
Eighteen great battles, in a little space.
I often saw, when mischief, in the field
Had all her force against my Lord brought forth:
How he with valor, made even fortune yield,
And chance, awaight on well approved worth.
I was in Media, when Phraortes slew
Great Tatianus, fighting for my Lord:
I saw when he our engines from us drew,
And put ten thousand Romans, to the sword.
I was in presence, when a sudden fear.
In blackest horror of the darkest night,
So much astonished all that present were,
With shriking cries that might even stones affright:
That Antony, with fear of treason moved,
Made Ramnus humbly swear upon his knee,
To strike that head, that head so much beloved,
From of his shoulders, when he once should see,
Inevitable danger, to lay hold,
Upon himself; yet could not all this, quail
His haughty courage, but as vncontroulde,
He still proceeds, his stoutest foes t'assaile.
And having now, sum'd with the Parthian blood,
The largest scores, of wrongs we did sustain,
Thence to retire, he now has thought it good:
And for a time at Blanckbourg to remain.
Blanckbourg a City near to Sydon placed,
Unto the which our whole Camp did resort,
There he entends to stay, and not in haste
To visit Room, as most of them report.

Oct. O what should move my Lord thus long to stay?


Byl. An others tung might better yt bewray.


Octa. What do thou know more the thou have ye^ said?


Byl. Madame no more.


Oct. Why the^ am I dismaide?
Why do I see thy sorrow-clowded brow,
Seem to conceal I know not what annoy?
Say Byllius whence those troubled looks may grow*
Is my Antonius safe? does he enjoy
That body free from hurt, wound or disease?
Does he yet live and draw his vital breath?
Speak, quickly speak, truth cannot me displease,
Where now suspicion wounds as deep as death.

Byl. It cannot be but that your grace does know,
For what can be concealed from Princes ear?
And further speech might seeds of discord sow,
Between your highe^ss and my Lord I fear.

Octa. O how delay torments a doubtful mind.
I know, no, ^e procures I may not hear
Of any thing from thence, whereby I find,
Although unknown yet double cause of fear.
Then banish doubt, and see thou plainly tell,
What strange occasion does enforce his stay?
What can Antonius princely mind compel,
In foreign coasts to make so long delay?

Byl. Madame, the cause that made him to remain
In Syria, so long time when as we went
To'ards Parthia, is the same that does detain,
His highness now and thus your grace prevent.

Octa. Am I an Empress still thus disobay'd?
And do thou dare to dally with me still?
I first inquired, what him in Syria staide.
Why do thou fear to tell the worst of ill.

Byl. If this likewise be hidden from your grace,
In humble sort a pardon I beseech:
That high displeasure against me take not place,
For what shall be disclosed by my speech.

Octa. I pardon all, so long as all be true.


Byl. Who does delude let sharp death be his due.
Then if you list the truth to understand,
The truth is this: that fond Aegiptian Queen,
Queen Cleopatra does your will withstand,
And him detaines, who else had present been.

Octa. By force?


Byl. O no, worlds could not him constrain
To stay this long in any place by force:
But his affection is the loving chain,
That from your highness does his mind divorce.

Octa. What chilling fear does stream along these
What frozen terror makes me thus to quake?
What monstrous grief, what horror, thus constrains vains?
My stiuing heart, his lodging to forsake?
Tell me, from what conceit may this be guest?

Byl. They live together, who knows not the rest.


Octa. I must believe it sore against my will.


Byl. Hardly we credit what imports our ill.


Octa. But slow belief from wisdom does proceed.


Byl. But mortal wounds of present cure have need.


Oct. Some fond report has made thee falsely deem.


Byl. I shun report, and lightly it esteem,
But this I saw, when we to Syria came,
Antonius straight to Cleopatra sent,
A messenger Fonteius was his name:
Whose swiftnes did even have it self prevent.
More, then we knew not, but within short space
Came Cleopatra royally attended,
And met directly at the appointed place,
Which for their stay they had before pretended.
There did they sport a time in great excess
Of all delights which any eye has seen,
And there Antonius his great love to express
Did frankely give to this Egyptian queen,
Phoenicia, Cyprus and Cylicia,
Part of Arabia where those people dwell
Called Nabatheians, part of Syria:
And finding that she could prevail so well
With Antony, she further (...) proceed,
And begd part of that land we Iewry call.
From whence might be transported at her need,
True balm, for to preserve her grace withal.
This done, my Lord, to'ards Parthia took his way,
Which we with fire and sword did waste and burn,
But in those confines did not long time stay,
But back again to Blanckbourge we return.
From whence, a post was speedily addressed,
For to conduct this Cleopatra thither:
She kindly condiscends to his request,
Thus there they met, and there they live together.

Octa. O what hart-piercing grief does the^ torme^^,
That are thus countercheckt with riualles love?
What worlds of horror do themselves present,
Unto their minds that do like passions prove?
O Ielous^e, when truth once takes thy part,
What mercy-wanting tyrant so severe?
What Syl^a, what Charibdi^, can impart
But half those horrors which in thee appear?
Poor Pluto, why do we thy rigor dread?
All torments are containde within my breast:
Alecto does whole troops of furie^ lead
Within my soul, with endless grief oppressed.
O deserts, now you deserts are indeed:
Your commonwealths are coucht within my heart,
Within my heart, all ravening beasts do feed:
And with mad fury, still increase my smart.
O grief, I feel the worst that thou can do.
I taste the powerful force of mischieses pride.
I prove the worst that chance can put me to.
The deepest wound of fortune I abide.
But stay Octauia, if this be a lie:
If thy dear Lord do constant yet remain,
Whom do thou wrong, is it not Antony?
O fault too great, recall it back again.
Can thou be so unkind, nay so unjust,
To censure, judge, condemn without a cause?
Shall flying tales make thee so much mistrust,
Him bound to thee by Gods, and natures laws?
O traitor passion, if thou could subdue
Thy sovereign reason, what ill tragedies
Would thou soon act, but Jealousy adieu,
My Lord is constant, and these are but lies.
Did not he swear on that our nuptial day,
By all the sacred rights we holy deem,
By those immortal powers which we obaye,
By all things else which dearly we esteem,
By his right hand, by this our wedding ring,
By all that might a perfect truth entend:
One time, one day, one hour; should surely bring,
His life, and love unto a final end.
Did not he say, the stars from heaven should fall,
The fishes should upon the mountains range,
And Tyber should his flowing streams recall:
Before his love should ever think on change.
But what of this? these are but only words,
And so are those which do his faith impeache.
O poor Octauta, how thy state affordes,
Naught but despair to stand within thy reach.
The seat of truth is in our secret hearts,
Not in the tongue, which falsehood often imparts.
Have back then Tyber to thy fountains head,
Descend ye stars, and this base earth adorn,
Let Neptunes people on these hills be fed,
For Antony is fled, false, and forsworn.
But it is not so, my Antony is true:
His honor will not let him basely fall,
Octauies name will faithful love renew.
His In^ate virtue will his mind recall.
As fear of torment houlds the wicked in:
So virtues love makes good men loath their sin.

Byl. Madam, I cannot force you to believe
That which I speak, but that I speak is true,
I knew too well it would your highness grieve,
And would be loathe your sorrows to tenew;
But would to God that all my words were lies,
So my disgrace might work your sweet content;
Would this my soul might be the sacrifice,
To reconcile his love thus fondly bent.
O virtue, thou that did my good assure,
Arm now my soul against proud fortunes might:
Without thy succor I may not endure,
But this strong tempest will destroy me quite.
O sacred lamp, pure virtues living flame,
That never fails sweet comfort to impart:
I feel thy power and glory in the same,
I hear thee say in closset of my heart,
Octauta, live, and show thy self a Queen,
Tread thou my path, make constancy thy guide;
Let no base fear within thy mind be seen,
Let thine own foot into no error slide;
Make thine own thoughts no witness of thy miss;
Let thine own conscience know no cause of blame;
A bulwark strong, a brazen wall this is,
That will resist, both sorrow, grief and shame.
Antonius fall, his own disgrace procures,
His is the fault, and on his head shall fall,
The storm of mischiefs deep-reuenging showers:
When thine own worth, in heaven shall thee enstall.
His is the fault, but what? mine is the wrong.
The error his, but I endure the smart;
O virtue, if thou be so passing strong,
Yet once again remove this from my heart.
Why, virtue grieves but at his own disgrace,
And minds distressed, with patience does relieve:
With wisdoms light it still directs his pace,
And cannot fall and therefore cannot grieve.
Well grief, I feel that thou art grief indeed,
But patience is a prince and must not yield:
O sacred virtue help me at my need;
Repulse my foes with thy all mastering shield.
But what, I must not here stand and lament,
Thy deeds Octauta, must approve thy worth:
It Is wisdom, must these injuries prevent,
I will no more excuse thy wrongs henceforth.
I Will seek by all means thee to reconcile,
And in my thoughts revenge shall find no place,
But if thou needs wilt work a thing so vile,
To seek my ruin and thine own disgrace,
If nothing can prevail, I Will make it seen,
Thou wrongst an Empress, and a Roman queen.

Iulia. Camilla. Syluia.
O dear Camilla, what a woeful sight,
It Is to behold the Empress doleful state?
Though others burdens in our eyes seem light:
Death in my heart, her grief does intimate.
O what exceeding pity it is to see,
Such noble virtues nursed in wisdoms breast:
Snared in the trap of human misery,
By others baseness thus to be distressed.
Came. Madame, the case is pitiful indeed,
And such as may relent a flinty heart:
A patient mind, must stand her grace instead,
Till time and wisdom, may his love convert.

Iul. But who dares tell a Prince he goes aside?


Came. His conscience best, if wisdom were his guide.


Iul. But they are great and may do what they will.


Came. Great if much good: not great if they do ill.


Iul. But we must yield to what the Prince will have.


Came. He is no Prince, that is affections slave.


Iul. Be what he will his power is ouer-stronge.


Came. Heavens will not suffer sin to flourish long.
And sure who list but to behold the end,
Shall see Antonius dearly buy his lust:
They never prosper long that leawdly spend
Their granted time, for God is not unjust.

Syl. Well, let them talk of virtue, those that list,
Of patience, justice and of constancy;
For me, I think the Empress sure has mist,
The only way to cure this malady.
Buy living fame that list, with pinching pain,
And starve themselves with feeding fond conceit:
Were I Octauta I would entertain
His double dealing, with as fine a slight.
I would nor weep, nor wail, but soon return
Upon his head the wrongs he does pretend:
I would compel him spite of him to learn,
It were no jest a woman to offend.
He (...) not now the grie^e that makes her smart:
But I know what would touch him to the heart.

Iul. What force, what wit, can Antony compel,
Now to forgo his late ill-placed love?

Syl. One nail you see another will expel,
When nothing else can force the same to move.
Should lie that swims in streams of sweet content,
Make his delight the agent of my pain?
No, no, ^e rather were a president,
How to (...) him with the like again.
Had I bin touched with (...) of inward grief,
When such like chances had be-fallen me,
Or at their leisure hoped for relief,
When I my self, might best my self set free:
I had bin dead for many years ago,
Or must have lived in endless misery,
But I take order not to perish so,
He shall c^re little, that cares less then I.

Came. But does not Syluia blush to disanull,
Her own good name, her faith, and constancy:
Does not she fear, the wrath of heaven to pull
Upon her head, for such impiety?

Syl. The wrath of heaven, why no, the heavens are just,
And Justice yeeldes a man his due desert:
Then sith I do no injury, I trust
Not I, but he, for both our faults shall smart.
And for my faith and constancy, no doubt
I Will deal for that as well as others shall:
But it is most strange to see you go about,
To praise the thing that works all women's fall.
Why constancy is that which marreth all.
A weak conceit which cannot wrongs resist,
A chain it is which binds our selves in t^rall,
And gives men scope to use us as they list,
For when they know that you will constant bide,
Small is their care, how often they do slide.
O if you would but mark the little map
Of my poor world, how in times swift careere
I manage fortune, and with wit entrap
A thousand such as hold these courses dear;
Then would you say you want the art of love,
For I fear nothing less then such relaps,
The frowardness which I in men approve,
Most troubles me for fear of after claps.
And Lord, you cannot govern one alone,
When I have many subject to my beck:
I always pleasant, you still making moan,
You full of fear, they dread my frowning check.
Nor do I marvel, for this union breeds
A loathing sure, by nature unto things:
And constancy the mind with quiet feeds,
And settled quiet soon corruption brings.
Thus first we loathe, and then we straight ways hate,
When to one object we entend our mind:
But I with choice do still renew the state,
Of fainting love, and still new pleasures find.
Look how a Be amongst the verdant fields,
From diverse flowers extracts the pleasant thyme,
Which well compounded, one sweet matter yields:
So do I spend my pleasure-tasting time.
I seek not grains of gould in barraine ground,
Nor hope for fruit, when harvest is once past:
I like not where affection is not found,
If any fall, I fly from him as fast.
And surely who will taste the sweet of love,
Must not be tied unto one poor conceit:
One cannot work or half his practice prove,
Upon one mind which will be dulled straight.
But there must be an emulation placed,
Among favorites as spur of swift desire:
By letting one still see another graced,
As though the on's deserts did so require.
Two at a time I seldom entertain,
Nor one alone, but always if I might,
Whiles any one to court me I detain,
Some other of the crew should be in sight:
Who might behold, how frankly I bestow,
Both smiles; and favors, where it pleased me;
They thinking this from his deserts to grow,
Will strive for to deserve as well as he.
Thus I abound with store of proferred love,
With vowed faith, with presents and what not:
When in the end one fortune all must prove,
And all these favors must be clean forgot.

Came. But will not all thy servants thee forsake,
To see a ryuall such high favor gain?

Syl. If any iealious fool a surfe^te take,
Then thus with art I bring him on amain.
Some extraordinary favor falls
On him unawares, which may new fire his mind:
Or else some trusty agent him recalles,
In secret manner thereunto assigned;
Who tells him (as of friendship) I admire
His discontent, and my unkindness blame;
How I do oftentimes of him enquire,
And still a sigh awaites upon his name.
This way I seldon fail, till at the last,
In follies lap affection has him lulled.
From whence with fresh desire he flies as fast,
As if (poor fool) his wings had nere been pulled.

Iul. But since thy mind can never be so free,
But that affection will on thee lay hold:
That being partial, me thinks should be
A cause, that others love would soon wax cold.

Syl. Affection, no, I know not such a thought,
That were a way to make my self a slave;
I hate subjection and will ne^e be brought,
What now I give, at others hands to crave.

Iul, But yet I know some one above the rest
Is most beloved, but that you list to jest.

Syl. I love one most? I favor, love, and grace,
Most every one, whiles he in presence is:
But being gone, look who comes next in place,
He Is next my heart, my course is always this.
And if that any chance to fall away,
Shall loss of him thus vex me at the heart?
No grief, I never mean to be thy pray,
My care and he together shall depart.

Came. Of straying, falling, and I wot not what,
So many words has Syluia spent in vain:
That time, and truth, and purpose are forgot,
To Antony let us return again.
We speak not of thy suitors, we complain
Of his untruth, that second unto none,
In faithlesnes: of duty should remain,
For ever constant unto one alone.
Of his untruth, who has his honor stained,
By base defiling of his marriage bed:
Who being vowed, and by oath detained,
Is false for sworn, seduced and fondly fled.

Syl. Why all is one, no wedlock can compel,
No law, no fear, no reason can constrain
Our minds, whiles we in natures castles dwell,
The pleasing course of nature to refrain.
Nature it self does most delight in change,
The heavens, by motion do their music make:
Their lights by diverse ways and courses raunge;
And some of them new forms do always take.
Their working power is never always one,
And (...) it self least constant is of all:
This earth we see and all that lives thereon,
Without new change, into destruction fall.
Nay what is more, the life of all these things,
Their essence, and perfection, does consist
In this same change, which to all creatures brings
That pleasure, which in life may not be mist.
Since then all creatures are so highly blessed,
To taste the sweet of life in often change:
If we which are the princes of the rest,
Should want the same me thinks it were very strange.
For proof hereof, I need not to vn^old:
Such far fetched secrets, scence will make it plain.
What pleasure has the eye, when you behold
One only object: is it not rather pain?
What sweet delight does charm the listening ear,
When only one tune it does apprehend?
In taste and smell, like loathing does appear,
Whose evidence, no wit can reprehend.
Since nature then has framed for the eye,
Such sundry coulors to delight the same;
And for the ear such strange variety,
Of sweetest tunes, which do our music frame;
Such diverse meats, to please the dainty taste;
So many savors to delight that sense;
Each other part, with diverse pleasures graced;
Least want of change might happily breed offense.
What, shall the heart the master of the rest,
Be more restrained then any savage beast?
Shall not the heart, on whom all those depend,
Have greater scope then any of them all,
To taste the pleasure of each pleasing friend?
Faith mine has had, and so it ever shall.

Came. Peace wicked woman, nay foul monster peace
Whose very steps defile the guiltless earth:
Stain of thy sex, thy poisoned speech surcease,
That has from sin, and wickedness, his birth.
Is It not too much to glory in thy sin,
Leawd creature, that have ouer-liu'd all shame?
Imbouldning others to persist therein,
When thou thy self should shun and fly the same;
But thou must make the heavens a president,
For thy misdeedes, which on thy head will power,
Eternal vengeance, unless thou repent,
And stay the force of mischiefs dreadful shower.
These moving things are constant in their kind,
Unto the end for which they were ordained:
Not mutable like thy ungodly mind,
Whose very thoughts with wickedness are stained.
Our scences their peculiar objects have,
Whose store, and number, does unto us show,
How reverently we should our selves behave,
To'ards him whose bounty did the same bestow.
O Chastity bright virtues sacred flame,
Be never woman lovely wanting thee.
Be never woman wronged adorned with thee.
Be all disgraced that merit not thy name.
Come Iulia, we have tarried here too long.
Sy^uia adieu in faith I wish thee well,
No honest mind I think will do thee wrong.
It Is punishment enough to hang in hell.

Chorus.
GReat guide of this same golden flame,
Which days and times deutdeth.
Whose beauty ever is the same,
And always one abides.
Why have thou such a monster made*
which always thus rebelleth:
And with new torments does invade,
The heart wherein it dwells.
Affection is the savage beast,
Which always us annoyeth:
And never lets us live in rest,
But still our good destroys.
Affections power who can suppress
And master when it sins:
Of worthy praise deserves no less,
Then he that kingdoms wins.
Were Antony a Prince indeed,
That base affection scorned:
Him to bemone we should not need,
With vicious life deformed.
But this seducing virtues foe,
In whom all pleasure shines:
Does all our scences overthrow,
and reason undermines.
Who does not joy, when from his neck,
The yoke of bondage slideth:
And wish to live without the check,
Of him that others guides?
Yet what more hard, then to observe,
In such licentious pleasure:
The golden mean, which does not swerve,
From sacred virtues measure:
Who know, and see, the way of sin
Beset with dangers many:
Yet still persist and walk therein,
As negligent as any.
The mind with deepest wisdom fraught,
That mischiefs hand escheweth:
And enuies craft does bring to naught,
Affections force subdueth.
The haughty heart with courage bold,
That deaths pale face despises:
The Prince which scorns to be contrould;
Affections power surprizeth.
And having made it self a king,
Our mind with error feeds:
Till we our selves effect the thing,
Which our destruction breeds.
The path of error, is so graced,
With sweetest seeming pleasures:
As if delight had therein placed,
The store house of her treasures.
But who to prove the same are bent,
In sinful maze encluded:
In vain at last will sure repent,
with shameful end deluded.
Where virtues little beaten ways,
with diverse troubles cumbred:
Direct our steps, unto true ^oyes,
Amongst the Ange^s numb^ed.
Actus tertius.
Octauia. Caesar.
OFearce desire, the spring of sighs and tears,
Relieved with want, impouerisht with store,
Nursed with vain hopes, and sed with doubtful fears,
Whose force withstood, increases more and more.
How does thy pride thus torture my poor heart,
Whiles I for bodies shadows entertain:
And in the harvest of most high desert,
Do reap no fruit, but scorn and deep disdain.
No fearce Hyrcanian forest does possess,
So wild a Tiger, nor no Libian coaste,
Has ever known a greedy Lioness,
Robbed of the pray which she affected most,
So beyond measure full of furious Ire,
As is the mind robbed of his chief desire.
O destinies, that draw the golden twine,
Which does conduct the neuer-tyred post,
Why have you lest vnclos'd these eyes of mine,
To see the field of all mine honor lost?
In vain I sought a while, to cure the wound
With balm of hope, drawn from a constant mind,
But now the truth is manyfestly found:
I hear, I see, I know, I feel, I find,
The shameful wrong, the scorn and high disdain
Which faithless he most falsely does pretend,
To power on me whiles from despair in vain,
With constant hope, my weakness I defend,
O torment, worse then deaths most bitter gall:
Worse then is found in that infernal place;
To see another glory in my fall;
To see another proud with my disgrace.
Why do thou stay, distressed Octau^a dye.
Dead to all joys let death thy torments end,
Who gave thee life, the same does now deny:
And to another his affection bend.
Another does thy interest enjoy:
And yet thou live, and yet thou do delay,
To calm with death the tempest of annoye,
When to disgrace (...) does thee betray.
Dye dead Octauia. What? and basely dye?
Shall I sit down and ye^ld my self to shame?
Shall I content my self with wrongs? not^.
Revenge Octauia, or thou art too blame.
Dye never unrevenged of such a wrong.
My power is such that I may well prevail.
And rather then I will endure it long,
With fire and sword I will you both assail.
My nature does abhor to be thus used,
My heart does scorn such monstrous injury:
My birth, my state, disdain to be abused,
And I will deeply score thy perjury.
Then grief give place a (...) unto disdain.
Mylde pity, make thee wings and fly away:
And death, withdraw thy hasty hand again,
Whiles with advantage I their debts repay.
How now Octauia, whither will thou fly?
Not what thou may, but do thou what is just:
Shall these same hands attempt impiety?
I may, I can, I will, I ought, I must,
Revenge this high disgrace, this Caesar will,
Birth, nature, reason, all require the same.
Yet virtue will not have me to do ill.
Yield, all things yield, to virtues sacred name.
Howthen? even thus, with patience make thee strong,
The heavens are just, let them revenge thy wrong.
Cruel to me, selfe-wronging Antony,
Thy folly shall not make Octauia sin:
I Will be as true in virtuous constancy,
As thou art false and infamous therein.
I Will be as famous for a virtuous wife,
As thou notorious for so leawd a life.
Caesar. As is a sweet pearl dropping silver shower,
Which some mild cloud down from the shadie skies
Upon the parched flowrie fields does power:
Such is Octauiaes sight to Caesar's eyes.
Has ^asons travail gaind the goulden fleece,
Or has Octauia faild of her intent?
Is Antony within the bounds of Greece,
Or does he stay at Blanckbourg malecontent?

Oct. O Caesar, how my now distracted mind
Unites it self to render worthy thanks:
But woe is me, no way, no means I find,
No hope to hide Antonius lustful prankes.
I him besought, by all that words might say,
By this same ring that knit the Gord a^ knot:
By all the rights past on our wedding day,
But all in vain, for all is now forgot.
Look how some proud hard hearted mighty rock,
Which makes the sea a mirror for his face,
Repell's the waters with a churlish stroke,
Which mildely strive his body to embrace:
So his indurate mind reiects my words,
And rudely makes me and my hopes forlorn,
His flinty heart naught but repulse affoords,
And my deserts return me naught but scorn.

Caesar. Were not Octauia precious in my sight,
Whose will withstood what I did most desire:
The bloody lines had not been now to wrighte,
Of such revenge as his leawd deeds require.
But worthy branch of brave Octauius line,
In Caesar's thoughts live and predominate:
Yours is my kingdom and what else is mine,
My self* my scepter and my royal state.
Then since I ever granted your request,
And let you prove al means his love to win:
Since you and we in vain have done our best,
To stay his foot out of the sincke of sin;
Now for my sake, if I may ought prevail,
For dead Octauius never stained worth:
For dear Anchariaes love, and your avail,
Excuse no more his faithlesnesse henceforth,
Yield but to this, live here and banish care,
Forget his name that traytor-like is fled:
Live like a Queen, remember who you are,
And let me rouse him from his Lemmans bed.
Leave you this house of his, and what is his,
Stand of your self since he entends your fall:
Dishonor not your name with others miss,
If love cannot recall him terror shall.

Oct. Dishonor not my name! O Caesar no,
My misery is not of that degree:
Wrought by my folly or forced by my foe,
Which might attribute that disgrace to me.
It Is pain, and grief, to bear and suffer wrong,
But shame and sin to him that does the same:
True patience can mildly suffer long,
Where rage and fury do our lives defame.
It Is fortitude which scorns the force of wrong,
And temperance not to be moved withal:
It Is constancy makes us continue strong,
And wisdoms work to free our selves from thrall.
But I am wronged you say, and it is base fear.
Without revenge to suffer injury:
Its cowardice unworthy wrongs to bear,
And madness to give way to treachery,
Well then, revenge, but what? Octauiaes wrong,
Of whom? of Antony. And who is he?
Ah my dear Lord, that will return ere long,
And hate his fall, and be most true to me.
If not, I Will then revenge, but how? with death?
He is my self, his grief procures my pain.
With spoil and loss? O no that were not good,
By certain loss to hope for doubtful gain.
How then (...) be false as he is most untrue.
One wound does not an others balm procure.
Flame is not quenched with flame, but both renew,
A double force not easy to endure.
Whence springs revenge? from malice and disdain:
Then speak not of it, for it is in vain.
Earth'open first thine undivided Jaws,
And swallow me in thine infernal womb:
Ear willingly I swerve from virtues laws,
Truth my loves childbed was, truth be his tomb.

Caef. Were Antony as loyal in his love,
As he is false forsworn, and fondly bent:
Then would I think it reason to approve,
And highly praise your virtuous intent.
But since he willingly does you forsake,
And wilfully persistes to do us wrong:
High honor does require our swords to take,
Most just revenge, which we may not prolong.

Oct. His falsehood does not malice raise in me,
But rather shows how frail man's nature is:
An argument which bids me careful be,
Least I my self should like wise do amiss.

Caes. Can my persuasions then no wh^t prevail?
Can my request no thought of yielding find?
Can you esteem of him whose truth does fail?
There are few women of Octauiaes mind.

Octa. Too few I grant, and therefore am I such,
And though alone, yet will persevere still:
We imitate the multitude too much,
Most do, as do the most, and most do ill.
The number of the virtuous is so small,
That few delight to tread that loanely way:
But wisdoms heirs are iealious of their fall;
And think it shameful all should go astray.
A virtuous act seems strange in some men's sight,
Because they seldom saw the like before,
But noble minds are careful of the right,
And others errors make them fear the more.
How sencelesly we sleep in follies bed,
How few there are indeed, how all would seem
Wife, honest, just, how fondly are we led,
To use that least which we do most esteem?
Then ought a prince to fear much more then any:
Least his fault be a president to many.

Caes. And is it virtue then to be misused?


Octa. To give no cause why we should be abused.


Caes. Do but consent, I Will act and bear the blame.


Octa. To give consent to sin, is sin and shame.


Caes. And is it sin to punish leawdnesse then?


Octa. Sin to exulte upon repentant men.


Caes. But he persists in hateful treachery.


Oct. True love may spring from pardoned injury.


Cae. How may they love, who^ worlds of distance part?


Octa. He is not far that's lodged within the heart.


Cae. But time, and absence, will consume all love.


Oct. Sooner the heart, which does those passions prove.


Caes. Not so, no mortal darte near love is found.


Oct. But we are mortal which endure the wound.


Caes. Yet leave this house, if not his love deny.


Oct. First let this soul out of his lodging fly.


Caes. Can nature then no privilege obtain?
Are his deserts in such abundant store?
Must all I do be fruitless and in vain?
Antonius be your guide, I say no more.

Oct. If that my words so much offend your mind,
O silent death, thou my best refuge art:
O break my heart, for Caesar is unkind,
In silent grief, O break my wounded heart.

Caes. What in a trance? O sister, sister dear,
Light of my life, dear model of my soul:
Hurt not your self, O banish needless fear,
Woe, woe, to me, that did you thus control:
O dear Octauia, I spoke but to prove,
How far your thoughts were bent with jealousy;
To see if malice had exilde your love,
To find how you esteemed of Antony.

Oct. O Caesar more beloved then these same eyes,
More then the light which glads my tired life:
Do not my truly loving mind despise,
Kill not my heart with this your factious strife.
Alas it is not his house that I respect,
His wealth, or trypartite high regiment:
I would the worlds great treasury neglect,
Rather then hazard Caesar's discontent.
It Is not affection that enchaines my mind,
Or partial love that makes my faith so strong:
Too well alas my self abusde I find,
And this my heart too sensible of wrong.
And what is worse, this wrong so full of scorn,
As might incense the mildest mind alive:
To see my Lord a graceless Queen suborne;
And my dishonor carelessly contriue.
Nay worse then that, if worse then that may be,
No creature ever felt the like disgrace:
Each wronged wight may hope for remedy,
My shameful story nothing may deface.
For if my Lord would cure this wound again:
Yet woe is me, the scarre will still remain.
In these respects, perhaps I could be brought,
To strike revenge as deep as any could:
I want no means whereby it might be wrought,
For many thousands wish it if I would.
And what is more, my self can scarcely let:
But Caesar's sword for me would pay the debt.
But when I find in closet of my heart,
How I have paun'd my faith to Antony,
How I have vowed that naught but death should part
From him my love, and my fidelity.
When that I see the vulgar peoples eyes,
Make my designs the pattern of their deeds:
How with my thoughts they strive to simpathize,
And how my miss their certain error breeds.
When that I find how my departure were,
The opening of a gate to cruill wars:
Then Atlas-like I am constrained to bear,
A hated hell though not the happy stars.
I Will rather dye then witness with these eyes,
In mortal wounds and bloody lines enrowled,
The argument of my calamities,
Whom proud mischance, unjustly thus controwled.
Shall never two such noble Emperors,
Their dearest lives adventure for my sake:
Shall never for my sake such mighty powers,
The doubtful chance of battle undertake.
Shall never tongue recount Octauiaes error,
An instance of his faithless perjury
I Will rather dye the world unspotted myrrour,
And with my faith surmount his injury.

Caes. Well sister, then I see that constancy
Is sometimes seated in a woman's breast:
Your strange designs even from your infancy,
Can never without wonder be expressed.

Oct. I know not what you think of woman kind,
That they are faithless and unconstant ever:
For me, I think all women strive to find
The perfect good, and therein to persevere.
Even as a Torche, or Sulphur poudered light,
Whiles any nourishment maintains his flame,
Fayles not to burn, and burning shines bright,
Till a^te obscure, or force put out the same:
Such is the mind in woman's breast contained,
With the true zeal of virtues love enflamed,
We may be dead, but living never stained,
We may be wronged, but never rightly blamed.

Caes. Well, for your self proceed as you think best:
Time and the heavens, must see these wrongs redrest.

Caesar. Titius. Plancus.
Great peers that strive with wisdoms sacred fame,
To over live all human memory:
Show me, for what intent you hither came,
What causde you to reuoult from Antony?
Tit. By our access we nothing else entend,
But humbly to beseech your majesty:
Under your gracious favor to defend,
Our wronged selves from hateful injury.
Proud Cleopatrae, Aegypts crafty Queen,
Rules Antony, and wrongs she cares not where:
So insolent her late attempts have been,
As no pride-scorning Roman heart can bear.
She is become our Queen and governor,
And we whose courage fears the force of no man:
By servile baseness of our Emperor,
Must be content to stoop unto a woman.

Caes. What Angel Queen rules those Nyleian coasts,
Whose beauty can so overrule men's minds:
What goddess can command the man that boasts
To equal Iu^ius, in his high designs.

Plan. If in those gifts, by nature we enjoy,
Unto Octauiaes sacred majesty,
She be but comparable any way:
Be never Romans so disgraced as we.
But for her artificial ornaments,
For pomp, for pride, for superfluity,
For all excess that folly represents:
She does exceed the height of vanity.
Her sunne-burnt beauty cannot please his sight,
That has a mind with any reason fraught:
But it is her Siren tongue that does delight,
Her crafty Cyrces wit which has him caught.
As when from Athens, Niger made return,
And did relate the Emperesse intent,
Which he of purpose had in charge to learn:
And did her princely gifts to him present.
And further did with truth discovering words,
Octauiaes well deserved praises frame:
An argument which to that Queen affords,
A furious blast to raise a Iealious flame.
Then did she nothing unattempted leave,
That art might frame, or wit might well deuiz^
Which might his mind, of reason quite bereave:
And thus she straight began to Syrenize.
She pines her body with the want of food,
That she might seem to languish for his sake:
And by her gestures would be understood,
How from his absence she her death should take.
Her deep lamenting looks fixed in his face,
In silent terms present an earnest suit:
As who should say, O pity my hard case,
Whom violence of passion makes mute.
Then would she stand of purpose in his way,
In any place where he should passage make:
And there as though unwilling to bewray,
What bitter grief she inwardly did take:
Down from her eyes distills a Crystal tide,
Which at his coming she would dry again,
And suddenly would turn her head a side,
As though unwilling to reveal her pain,
Thus in his presence ravished with joy,
She smiles, and shows, what mirth she can deuize*
But in his absence drowned with annoy,
She seems to take her life from those his eyes.
Then Meeremaid-like his scences she inuades,
With sweetest nectar of a sugered tongue:
Unto her will, she ever him persuades,
The force of her words witchcraft is so strong.
Then came the kenell of her flattering crew,
Who largely paint the story of her death,
Like feed Atturneys they her suit renew,
And hunt Antonius spirits out of breath.
Wherewith assayl'd, he like a man enchaunted,
To make her know she need not to misdoubt him:
Or like to one with some mad fury haunted,
Assembleth all the people round about him.
In that fair City royalliz'd by fame,
By that great Macedonian monarke builded:
Of whom it took beginning, birth and name;
Where on a high Tribunal seat which yielded,
A large prospect, were placed too chayres of gold;
One for himself, another for her grace,
And humbler seats which might her children hold,
Of such like metal, in the self same place.
There he established Cleopatra, Queen
Of Aegipt, Cyprus, and of Lidia:
And that his bounty might the more beseene,
He joined thereto the lower Syria.
Caesarion, heir apparent to her grace
Was constituted King of those same lands.
His own two sons by her were there in place,
Attended with great troops of martial bands.
These two, the mighty Kings of Kings he called,
And to the eldest gave Armenia,
The country Media, and forthwith enstalled
Him regent of the Kingdom Parthia.
To Ptol^my he gave Phoenicia,
And all the terrytories there adjoining:
The upper Syria, and Cilicia,
Unto them both peculiar guards assigning.
A Median gown the elder of them ware,
And all the Armenian soldiers so instructed:
Accomplishing the charge they had before,
About him came and thence they him conducted.
In Macedonian robes the other stands,
In distance from his brother little space:
About him came the Macedonian bands,
And guarded safe his person from the place.
These things proclaimed, the trumpets lowdest voice,
Unto all peoples ears forthwith imparted,
Whereat some frown, some murmr, some rejoice,
Whiles he, with his immortal queen departed.

Caes. Immortal? why you said she was not such.


Pla. Not she, but her attire did claim thus much.


Cae. Was her attire so admirable then?


Pla. Scorning the baseness of us mortal men.
Clad like the Goddess Isis she did go:
Then what hard heart would not have thought her so

Caes. When that Appollodorus on his back,
A flockbed did to Julius Caesar bring:
With thongs of leather trust up like a sack;
As though there had been need of such a thing,
Where was the Goddess when this came to pass?

Pla. She, noble she, was ryding on her Ass.


Caes. When Antony about the streets does run,
Listening at each man's window in the night:
To hear what in the house is said or done,
And with strainge noyses passengers affright.
Where is this Goddess then so highly blessed?

Pla. She ambles after to laugh at the jest.


Cae And shall our state maintain their hateful pride?
Shall bleeding Room procure their wanton peace?
It Is time we stould a remedy provide,
And their ambition speedily suppress.

Chorus.
WHat gilded baits of sin,
Do still procure our miss:
And seek our souls to win,
From their intended bliss?
Even natures self does draw,
And force us still to slide:
And violate the law,
Which reason makes our guide.
Of pleasures we allow,
Which do our thraldom bring:
When starueling virtue now,
Is scarcely judged a thing;
The one a poor conceit, the other proou'd a King.
If that it be so sweet,
To tread the path of sin:
And so exceeding meet,
We should not walk therein;
O nature most unkind,
That proves weak reasons foe:
O reason too too blind,
That crosses nature so.
Three mal-seducing foes,
Conduct false errors train:
Misleading most of those,
Which virtues praise would gain.
Whose force unless we foil, we labor all in vain.
The Examples of the most,
Which most do take least care,
To anchore on the coaste,
Where sacred virtues are.
Sweet Syrenyzing tongues,
In flattery most expert:
Whose ill persuading songs,
Our scences do pervert.
And men's injurious deeds,
Do cause us to digress:
Our error fury breeds,
When wrongs our minds oppress.
These treason working mates, still work our great distress.
Examples make us bold.
To tread the doubtful way,
Which we before were told,
Would lead us quite a stray.
Perswations kindly move,
And win us to dpe ill:
Whose poison when we prove,
We poisoned, love it still.
But injury more strong,
Does fiercely us incite:
By suffering to do wrong,
Forgetful of the right,
All these thrice virtuous Queen, assail thee with their might.
Who can vile deeds despise,
And flattering tongues neclect:
With malice temporize,
As wisdom does direct.
Give him the laurel crown,
Triumphant victors wear:
The tytles of renown,
Which virtues monarkes bear.
And thou most glorious queen,
These traitor foes repel:
That virtue may be seen,
In that your sex to dwell.
And bravely vaunt thy worth where he most basely fell.
Actus quartus.
Octauia. Mecoenas. Agrippa. Caesar.
YOu haughty Lords, that bury death and fate,
In living monuments of lo^ty fame:
Whose worthy praise does claim the boundles date,
wherewith eternity does blaze her name.
Against whom raise y^u these forces in such haste?
Against whom lead you this danger threatening power?
Does hateful Hanniball your confines waste?
Or Brennus sword your lives seek to devour:
No no my Lords, this your concea'ld design,
Resounding Echoes of most strange debate:
With tragike tydinges filled these ears of mine,
That powered on me the storm of all your hate.
Never since princely hand of Syluias son,
Laid the foundations of these stately towers:
Did sharp mischaunce so much eclyps the sun,
Of our good fortune, with such fatal lowers.
But if that wisdom ever found a place,
Within your souls, which beautifies your praise:
Now show the same, and save from high disgrace,
Our bleeding honor, and death breathing joys.
You know how blood maintains the life of wars,
As doubtful as dear bought the victory:
Man's destiny is chained by unknown stars,
To happy joys or mournful misery.
If you triumph, you conquer not your foes,
But neighbors, kinsefolkes and your dearest friends:
Whose wounds bleed shame, and deep hart-peircing woes,
Instead of conquest this is your amends.
But if my Lord obtain the laurel wreath,
And fortune smile on him with like success:
What fatal tempests, furious rage will breath,
From his hearts cave, your selves may easily guess.
You know when touch of honor wings his mind,
What lion thoughts tire on his haughty soul.
Where wronged valor reigns it is hard to find,
Such pity as may honors pride coutroule.
Then since your course to loose your selves is bent,
To loose your lives or purchase living shame:
Let wisdoms eyes, blind errors faults prevent.
With ease a spark, with pain is quenched a flame.
Be advocates for me to Caesar's grace,
And stop in time the current of his hate:
Let gentle pity in your minds find place,
When swords have pleaded, words will come too late.
You know my fortune ever has been such,
As dazeled Enuies eyes with honors shine:
But since Antonius has augmented much,
This sovereignty, and great estate of mine;
Since nature, fortune, birth and majesty,
In fields of glory stir up civil wars,
Which of them most should raise my dignity,
And lift mine honor nearest to the stars;
Since these two Emperors whose princely hands,
Do sway the scepter of the Roman state:
The one my brother, linkt in natures bands,
The other is my spouse and loving mate;
Since heavens themselves did in my life provide,
To show the map of their felicityes:
This Room my Lords and all the world beside,
Make me the object of their wondering eyes.
Thus I that was more happy then the rest,
And did excel in glory and renoune:
With more then most disgrace shall be suppressed,
No fall like his that falls from a crown.
And that which nature grantes the meanest wight,
They cannot loose which have the conquest won:
Yet with this strange Dylemma works my spite,
Who s'euer win Octauia is undone.
Great Empress, this bright sun can witness well,
So can these heavens before whose powers I stand:
That against our minds Caesar does us compel,
This enterprise you see, to take in hand.
But for my self, and if the case be such,
That but report is auctor of this jar:
If Caesar's honor may be free from touch
Of any stain, relinquishing the war.
I Will do my best, and what I may persuade,
To lay down arms, wherein if I prevail:
A perfect league of friendship shall be made,
That may the fury of this tempest quail.
And pardon me (dear sovereign) though my speech
Include exceptions in this doubtful wise:
I may not Caesar move, nor him beseech,
What may his majesty disroyallize.
This said, behold my hand, my sword, my soul,
Here humbly prostrate at your princely feet:
What you command let none dare to control,
This Caesar will and this we think most meet,
Arg. Madam; your speech I think does not extend,
To the disparagement of your own blood:
And sooner shall my life have final end,
Then I refuse to do your highness good.
Though last my speech, yet second unto none
Is my desire, t'effectuate your will:
But lo where Caesar comes himself alone,
Arm we our tongues with words, our words with skill.

Caes. Fayer issue of renoun'd Octauius race,
My second self, Rooms glorious Empress:
Behold us all assembled here in place,
To work your safety and your wrongs redress.
Your Lord Antonius (as we hear) does threate,
To power sharp storms of deep revenging Ire,
Upon our heads: and make the imperial seat
His sole possession, ere he hence retire.
But let him know, though finely he pretend,
To guilde injustice with a Princes name:
Though he triumph in words, yet ere I end,
What he begins, he may repent the same.

Oct My gracious Lord, high words do but increase
The flame of valor in incensed minds:
Leave arms my Lord, and let us treat of peace:
Who best does speed in war, small safety finds,
Full well the world your noble worth has known,
Let not new dangers needless tropheies raise.
Let not the effect of hateful deeds be shown,
Against my Lord who may deserve your praise.

Caes. Shall he be praised that is become our foe,
Stain of our name, foil of the Roman state:
A servile man, contriuer of our woe,
And from all honor does degenerate?
Nay what is more, it is said he does pretend,
To work our ruin, and our fatal end.

Octa. Can foul suspicion then, and false report,
In wisdoms confines hold so large a place:
That it can foil our reason in such sort,
To fly the good, and work his own disgrace?
The ancient Romans wont to draw their swords,
To purchase honor, of their stoutest foes:
But you whose grounds are vain surmized words,
By seeking honor, shall your honors loose.
Fame has two wings, the one of false report:
The other has some plumes of verity;
Why then should doubtful rumor, raise a forte
Of mortal hate, against my Lord and me.
Suppose he raised as you have done, a power:
He to defend, not to offend his friend,
The heavens forbid that any fatal hour,
Should your proceedings turn t'vnhappy end.
Unhappy no, he never falls amiss,
That foiles his foe before his final end:
High honor, not long life, the treasure is,
Which noble minds without respect defend.

Oct. The prize of honor is not always blood.


Cae. It Is honor all whose end imports our good.


Oct. O wretched state where men make haste to dye.


Cae. True valor feels nor grief nor misery.


Oct. He is your brother, be not then unkind.


Cae. Justice, not pity, fits a Princes mind.


Oct. He has done nothing, spare an innocent.


Cae. He does too much that bears a false intent.


Oct. You both are strong and both will buy it dear.


Cae. I armed with justice, know not how to fear.


Oct. O Caesar shall my heart be made a stage,
For you to play a bloody tragedy?
Shall fearce misfortune, breathing spiteful rage,
Make me vicegerent of all misery?
If both of you misled in ^rrours maze,
Do seek revenge of misconceiued wrongs,
For your own sakes out of your fancies raze,
The spots of malice grafted with your tongues.
But if mischance have offered disgrace,
To either party: O let me entreat,
That for my sake, kind pardon may deface,
A fault so small, with breath of words made great.

Caes Bright lamp of virtue, honors living flame,
Whosoever win, you can no loss sustain:
Whom partial fortune list to crown with fame,
His be the day, the triumph and the gain.
The victor must be either your own Lord,
Or else your brother, who will both consent,
To try their fortunes with the dinte of sword.
But shield you as the worlds chief ornament.
If both we fall, (which hap the heavens forbid)
All that survive, are subject to your will.
Your birth, your state, your virtues are not hid:
But known, and lo^'d, and will be honored still.
no ear so deaf which has not heard your name;
Whose ears have heard, their minds your worth admire
Whose minds admire, their hearts love does inflame,
And winnes them subject to your own desire.
No perils threaten you, you need not fear.

Octa. But many you, and I their burden bear.


Caes. It Is reason I, none else my griefs sustain.


Octa. Where nature forces, reason is but vain.
And therefore Caesar here I thee beseech,
By these same scepter-bearing hands of mine:
By these same tears, true witness of my speech;
By that same princely port and grace of thine;
By all the love thou bear to Acciaes ghost,
By all the rightes that loving minds hold dear;
Lay arms aside dismiss this puisant host,
Let friendly truce release my mind of fear.
If not, i will drown my life in these same tears,
And tire with plaints the Pandionian birds:
Tire the Halciones, with grief that bears
To high a strain, for highest clyming words.
I Will make the sun for pity cloth his steedes
In sorrows livery, and disdain your sight:
Force niggard Pluto with my woeful deeds,
To entertain my souls disgraced flight.
Else will I fly and shrowde my face from shame,
Where Pyndus hides his head amongst the stars:
Or where ambitious Othris, wanting flame
Of heavenly lamps, the clouds swift motion bars.
Ought will I do, before these eyes behold
Death's vissage painted in that princely face:
Before i will see captivity, lay hold
On those fair lims, which merit highest grace.
Before i will see their bloody weapons drink,
The nectar of thy life, or Iuorie stained,
With ugly gore: O let me never think,
Or hope till then, to have this life maintained.
Before that time, death is a welco^me guest
To my lives lodging: and O sisters dear,
If ever pity dwelt in dyrefull breast,
Draw not my thread till that news pierce mine ear.
How often when sleep inuites my drowsy eye,
With natures curtain to repel the light:
And hide my mind from sorrows tyranny,
Under the darkness of the silent night?
Shall thy pale ghost defiled with deaths foul hand,
Stand in my sight, as in the cleerest day:
And fury-like armed with black fiery brand;
Affright my mind and chase dead sleep away?
Which being gone, fierce sorrows cruel claws,
Seize on my waking thoughts like tigers fell:
And gripe my heart with sharp tormenting paws,
That thousand times deaths rygour does excel.

Caes. O perfect virtue gracing woman kind,
Invincible Octauia cease to plain:
O had Antonius half so good a mind,
No discord could betwixt us two remain.
My Lords what think you, how may we proceed?
High honor cries revenge upon our foes:
And yet Octauia crossing this our deed.
Cannot resolve which of us she would loose.

Agr. I think it is a brave and Princely thing,
With fire and sword to ruinate our foes:
But greater glory is it for a King,
To save his subjects from wars common woes.
It Is wisdom noble Caesar, must advance
Our state beyond the reach of fortunes arm:
Not fierce revenge which works effects by chance,
And glories most when most it works harm.
And valor, such as does contemn all fear,
And guild our acts with honor and renown:
With gentle clemency, our deeds endeare,
And mount with virtue where chance throws us down.

Mecoe. The rarest thing a Princes fame to raise,
Is to excel those that are excellent:
All other to surmount in virtues praise,
And be his kingdoms chiefest ornament.
Make quiet peace within his coasts remain,
And succor those that live in great distress:
From bloody slaughter ever to refrain,
With time, and wisdom, passions rage suppress.
These are the wings directing virtues flight.
This is the fuel feeding honors flame.
This is the path that leads to heaven aright.
and sun-bright beams that guild brave Caesar's name.

Caes. Pity my Lords, is often like a mask,
That hides our eyes from seeing what is just:
Inuiting any t'vndertake the task,
To work our woes and execute their lust.
For to neclect the course we have begun,
Were to betray our selves unto our foes:
Where keeping strong though no exploite be done,
Yet gaining nothing, nothing shall we loose.
Why you'are ill informed of Antony,
And his attempts exceed your knowledge far:
I fear me when you know as much as I,
You Will plead as fast to prosecute the war.
But see a stranger hasts into our sight,
With further news, and if I judge a right.

Byl. Thrice noble Caesar, hither am I sent,
Having in charge from great Mark Antony:
Th'ambassage of his pleasure to present,
Before Octauia and thy majesty.
First he commands Octauia to depart,
Out of his house, and leave all that is his:
The reason why, he list not to impart,
It must suffice that such his pleasure is.
He likewise will, thy highness knowledge take,
How much he scorns thou should his will withsta^^
And thereof means with fire and sword to make,
A perfect demonstration out of hand.

Caes. Will Antony our confines then invade,
With Civil wars, contriuer of our woe?
Great reason preparation should be made,
For to withstand so puisant a foe.

Byl. Five hundredth sail of warlike ships he brings,
Wherewith the froathing Ocean he scoures:
And in his army are eight foreign Kings,
Eight Kings in person with their mighty powers.
A hundred thousand well armed foot, are led
Under Canidius their chief general:
Twelve thousand horse most strongly furnished,
All these are known, and known these are not all.

Caes. How now my Lords, is this think you a time,
To talk of clemency? or of delay?
Is not this mischief in his chiefest prime,
Before we could the speedy spring bewray?
What says Octauia to these tidings strange,
Are our conjectures upon falsehood grounded?
Can this suffice your settled thoughts to change?
Are not our lives with mischiefs Ocean bounded?

Octa. Had I so many tongues to paint my woes,
As ever silent night had shining eyes:
Yet could not all their eloquence disclose,
The throws of grief which do my mind surprise.
But would to God, this world of misery,
Might presently be trebled unto me:
So that from imminent calamity,
My dearest brother Caesar might be free.
For me, long since I well discerned the storm,
And sought by all means how I might prevent it:
But since no wit can Antony reform,
O it is not I, but he, that will repent it.
I feared the stroke before I felt the wound,
But now resolved the worst of chance to bide:
True fortitude does in my soul abound,
My honor scorns the height of fortunes pride.
The worst that can befall me is but death:
And O how sweet is his lives sacrifize,
On virtues altar that expires his breath,
And in the arms of innocence dies.
They only fear, and only wretched are,
From whose bad lives staind with impiety:
Their dying fame does to the world declare,
Most shameful stories of foul infamy.
But those that know not, let them learn in me:
That virtuous minds can never wretched be.

Caes. My Lords, I will ye presently proclaim
Mark Antony, a foe unto our state:
That all his soueraignties ye straight reclaim,
And all his dignities annihillate.
We will not see the Roman Empires shine,
By any servile mind to be defamed:
To manage steel our nature does incline,
Of women's wanton toys we are ashamed.
And therefore with such have, as may be-fit,
A matter that imports our dearest blood:
We Will meet Antonius, if the heavens permit,
And what we say, there will we make it good.
Adieu Octauia, and your self prepare
To run what course of fortune I approve:
I^ happy stars to us allotted are,
I Will never be forgetful of your love.

Oct. Honor attend thy steps, and till I see,
The period of my worlds declining state:
I Will never to my self a traitor be,
But seek the means to stay your mortal hate.

Chorus.
EArth-ruling heavenly powers,
Great Jove's immortal mates:
That from your Crystal bowers,
Dyrect all mortal states,
And us like Actors do dispose:
To play what parts you list t'impose.
Must we* poor we, consent
To call you ever just?
Though you our hearts torment,
Even after your own lust?
And for each drop of hoped joy:
Power down whole tempests of annoy.
And that which is much more,
Look what we best do deem:
Does vex our minds more sore,
Then that we least esteem.
And that which nature says is best:
By trial yields us smallest rest.
Who does not wish, to wear
The terror breeding crown:
And direful scepter bear,
As badge of high renoune?
Yet who more justly do complain:
That they the brunt of woes sustain.
Stand who so list for me,
In highest slipperie place:
Though great their glory be,
Yet greater their disgrace.
And who so subject to mischance:
As those whom fortune does advance.
These base earth-creeping mates,
Proud envy never spies:
When at the greatest states,
Her poisoned quiver flies.
Each tempest does turmoyle the seas:
When little lakes have quiet ease.
Not those that are bedight,
With burnisht glistering gould,
Whose pomp does steal our sight,
With wonder to behoulde:
Taste smallest sweet without much ga^le:
Nor find true joys within their call.
This did the heavens impose,
Not that they are unjust:
But for to punish those,
Who glory in their lust.
And our misdeeds procure us still:
To seek our good amongst much ill.
A monster honor is,
Whose eyes are virtues flame:
His face contempt of this,
Which we pale death do name.
His Lion heart naught else does fear:
But crowing cock of shame to hear.
His wings are high desires,
His feet of Justice frame:
Food dangerous aspires,
His seat immortal fame.
Only the train of Enuies plumes,
With others growthe it self consumes.
Actus Quintus.
Iulia. Geminus. Camilla.
Has Geminus beheld th'Aegyptian Queen,
The auctor of the troubled worlds distress?
Have thou her gifts and rare perfections seen,
That makes Antonius scences thus digress?
Tell us, is she so admirable fair,
That Italy has none which may come nigh her?
Does she all beauties else so much impair,
Or else indeed, does partial fame be lie her?
Have those her eyes so rare an influence,
To houlde and captiuate men's senses so,
That foyling wit, and reasons best defense,
They ravished, must needs themselves forgo?
Gem. I know not what may seem fair in your sight,
Because some like what others discommend:
But for my self, and if I judge aright,
Speaking of Cleopatra as a friend.
The fairest thing that in her may be seen:
Is, that she is a Lady and a Queen.
Madame, that sunburned coast, yields not a face
Which with the Romain beauties may compare:
There might be found a thousand in this place;
Whose natural perfections are more rare.

Iul. How passing strange it seems that Antony,
Should leave the paragon of natures pride:
And follow her whose shameful luxury,
Does make the world his folly to deride.
Whence should it spring that such a thing should be?
Is this his folly, or the heavens decree?

Came. His fault no doubt, and crosses natures laws.


Iul. And I think not, for nature is the cause.
By nature we are moved, nay forced to love:
And being forced, can we resist the same?
The powerful hand of heaven we wretches prove:
Who strike the stroke, and poor we, bear the blame.

Came. Love sure, from nature took his birth by right,
But love of what?

Iul. Of beauty loves delight.


Came. And what is beauty?


Iul. first say what is love?


Came. Love's a desire of what does liking move.


Iul. Desire does spring, from what we wish, and want,
Does loose himself in winning of his saint:
Enjoying does that humor quite supplant,
And therefore cannot this loves nature paint.
If love were a desire, as you do guess,
Since none desires that which he does enjoy,
We could not love the thing we do possess:
For why, enjoying, would our love destroy.
But this is false, and you have judged amiss.

Came. Speak you the truth, whose judgment better is.


Iul. I think this love a deep affection sure,
Wrought by th'instinct of natures hidden might,
Which in our hearts an union does procure,
With that which perfect seems unto our sight.
Such is that love which in us does arise,
When such a beauty we do chance to see:
As with our nature best does simpathize,
Which nature, faulty is, and not poor we.

Came. Well, what is beauty?


Iu. that which likes best.


Came. Which likes who^?


Iul. Some one above ye rest.


Came. Why? some do like what others disalowe.
Some love, what others hate: and few there are
In whom a like affection does grow,
Of any one thing, though the same be rare.
Were beauty then such as you here do name,
One thing should be, and not be beautiful,
One thing should be, and yet not be the same:
And that me thinks were strange and wonderful.
I rather think these outward beauties grow,
From just proportion and right symmetrie:
Of these same gifts which nature does bestow,
Upon us all in our nativity.

Iul. Indeed we see a mixture far more fine
In some, then others, wrought by natures frame:
To whom the praise of beauty we ascribe,
Yet do not all alike affect the same.
Now, if this were the object of our love,
We all should like some one that were most fair:
Who should alone most deep affection move,
Whil's vulgar minds might drown in deep despair.
But as no woman easily can endure,
To be deprived of beauties lovely praise:
So is there none so much deformed sure,
That in some minds, affection does not raise.
There Is none so fair whose beauty all respect,
Although we were enforst it should be so:
Some nothing fair, whom we must needs affect,
Though reason, wit, and all the world say no.

Came. And what should be the cause of all this same?


Iul. I think because we lodge in natures frame.
Look how the Loadstone draws naught else but steel
Though metals far more precious are about it:
Yet this as his fit subject seems to feel
His power attractiue, and mooues not without it,
Or as in diverse instruments we see,
When any one does strike a tuned string:
The rest which with the same in concord be,
Will show a motion to that senseless thing;
When all the other neither stir nor play,
Although perhaps more musical then they:
So are our minds, in spite of reasons nay,
Strained with the bent of natures sympathy:
Whose powerful force, no wit, no art, can stay.
And if you ask a farther reason why:
In these two things, but show the cause of both:
And then i will tell you why we love, and loathe.
Now, if the power of nature be so strong
That even senseless things yield thereunto:
O why should we endure so great a wrong,
To bear the blame of that which others do.
What living man can cease himself to be,
And yet as possible as to refrain,
From that whereto our nature does agree:
And spite of us, does us thereto constrain.
Who can be angry with the scencelesse steel,
For cleaving unto this hard-harted thing?
Or blame that which can neither hear, nor feel,
For moving to the other sounding string.
If these may be excusd by natures laws:
O how much more should we be free from blame,
Within whose tender hearts affection draws*
Such deep caractars leading to the same.

Came. Is beauty then, sole object of our love?


Iul. That which seems so, does our affection move.


Came. I ever thought that virtue had been best.


Iul. We praise that most, but yet esteem it least.


Ca. Why disestemd, whose worth is so well known.


Iul. To show that vice the world has ouergrowne.


Ca. The name is often hard in each man's mouth.


Iul. The thing more rare then Eagles in the south.


Ca. The thing contemnd can we the name esteem?


Iul. Yes all that are not such as all would seem.
But since this is the beauty of the mind,
And nothing fits our natural discourse:
Let us excuses for Antonius find,
And to our former purpose have recourse.

Came. No Iulta, no, your harvest is too long,
For such a simple croppe as you receive:
You may not thus persist the truth to wrong,
And with your wit, the world seek to deceive.
But Lord how willing are we to invent,
And find out couerts to obscure our sin:
As though to hide the same, and not repent,
Could us preserve from being drowned therein.
It Is true, that nature did these buildings frame.
And true, that they to natures power are thrall.
And true, that imperfections foil the same.
And true, that we by natures weakness fall.
And this is true, that God vnnatured all,
And gave us wisdom to suppress our will:
He gave us perfect reason to recall,
Affections scoutes from following what is ill.
Why we are men: and this same spark divine,
Our trouping thoughts should marshall in such wise,
That no affect from reason should decline,
Nor rebel passion in our hearts arise.
Th'instinct of nature, which does all things move,
Bids love whereas you like without regard:
But piety says, where it is lawful love,
Or else hell torments shall be your reward.

Octauia. Antonyes children.
And is it true, is Antony unkind?
Has this new love, of faith and troath bereft him?
Can fond affection so obscure his mind,
That not one spark of honor should be left him?
Can he so far forget his own good name,
As to dishonor all that are about him?
Ah can he not without a further blame,
Permit them dye that cannot live without him?
Come poor companions of my misery,
The issue of the faithlest man alive:
Support the burden of his treachery,
Whose base reuoult, our ruin does contriue.
Come poor beholders of your mothers fall,
Whose innocence might greater pity move:
Your impious father does despise us all,
Forsaken we, must other fortunes prove.
Come poor attendants of a falling state,
Whose silent sadness does my grief renew:
Yet be you all much more unfortunate,
Ere any seeds of leawdnesse rest in you.
Come let us go, and leave this loanly place,
Your fathers dying love bequeaths you hence:
O (...) this house, as from your own disgrace,
It Is his command you should be banishtt hence*
Dead Fuluia, how can thy imperious ghoast
Endure to see thine Orphants thus oppressed?
Yet of mine honor though his love be lost,
Whiles I survive, they shall not be distressed.
O Antony, borne of no gentle Sire,
Some cruel Caucasus did thee beget:
Even scencelesse things thy scencelesnesse admire,
And seem to feel, what thou seemst to forget.
Often have I seen. these stones with pity moved,
Sheed dropping tears, lamenting my disgrace:
When in thy heart where most it most behooved,
No kind remorse could ever find a place.
More mild then thee, I find each cruel beast,
For they but give a smale-time lasting death:
With endless grief, my soul thou do molest,
Which ever killing, never steps my breath.
O failing pillar of my falling state!
O fading flower of virtues fairest field!
O why should thou so much degenerate,
And honors byrth-right to dishonor yield.
Yield to dishonor all that dear bought wealth,
Which earthly kings does in heavens kingdom place.
Let thy minds treasure fall away by stealth.
By stealth contriue and work thine own disgrace.
O Erecina that my Lord did know,
As thy fond boy shootes shaftes of swist desire:
So mighty Jove, sharp thunder-boults does throw,
Confounding such as from his laws retire.
He nursed in sin, sees not his own disgrace,
Augmenting still, our sorrow and his shame:
That greatness hides the danger from his face,
But yet my care is doubled with the same.
The greedy Wolf, and cruel ravening bear,
Touched with th'extremitie of hungry pain,
The guiltless cattle furiously do tear:
And being fed, from cruelty resraine.
But tyranizing grief prays on the heart,
And cloyed with sighs and tears does still persevere:
His raging fury nothing may divert,
But still, still fed, is satisfied never.
O happy he, a thousand times and more,
Whose quiet thoughts so mild a calm do gain:
That neither hope can force from safeties shore,
Nor deep despair can sincke on mischiefs main^.
But majesty, and honor, for these too,
Shall Be the only objects of mine eye:
What virtue faith is just, that will I do,
Thus I resolve to live, thus will I dye.
Geminus. (...). Octauia.
And are you sure that Antony is slain?
May we believe that this report is true?
Byl. Why should you wish me to recount again,
The story that does double grief renew?
O had you but discovered with your eyes,
The face of woe in all that pre^ent were:
Or heard their doleful noy^e and shriking cries,
You would have cause to grieve and not to fear.

Oct. What tragic tidings bring these wo^ull wights,
That ring such peales of horror in mine ears?
What unknown cause your martial hearts (...)?
What silent grief in your sad looks appears?

Byl. Did but our words import the sound of woe,
To wound your ears withal were double sin:
But sith your highness will, it should be so,
And that your safety is contained therein;
We will not from your grace conceal the same;
And though we should, yet time will open all.
From Aegipts common woes I lately came,
And did bewail Antonius wilful fall.

Oct. Is Antony ore'throwne?


Byl. Yes all is lost.
His power and forces wholly are decayed:
He is deceived by her he loved most,
By Cleopatra shamefully betrayed.
And she that taught him first to swim in sin:
Was even the first that drowned his life therein.

Oct. Ah, by what means did she my Lord abuse?


Byl. By such a means as leawd offenders use.
For when the wars at first pretended were,
And that Antonius with him would not take her:
She fearing least her self not being there,
He happily might be moved to forsake her.
She ^ees Canidius our chief General,
Him to persuade, that she might present be:
He sues, obtaines, and we embarked all,
Make joyful have our woeful end to see.
For whiles our powers of equal ^orces were,
And neither side could disadvantage spy:
Like one that knew a secret cause of fear,
Out of the army she began to fly.
Lo, how no greatness can our conscience free,
From inward horror of our wicked deeds:
For that same better part of us does see,
A greater power whose Justice terror breeds.
But he, whose thoughts were to her looks enchained,
Although the army did not loss sustain,
As though for her he had the world disdayned:
Forsakes them all, and after flies amain.
Whose causeless fear so much dismayed the host,
Who scorned to fight for him which run away:
That with small hurt, the battle there was lost,
And Caesar had the honor of the day.
The Legions, thus deprived of a guide,
Themselves to Caesar's clemency submit:
Antonius baseness they do all deride,
And think a chamber were for him more fit.
But Lyon*harted Caesar still proceeds,
His strength is doubled, weakened is his foe:
Unto Pelusium hastily he speedes,
These fugitives may not escape him so.
There lay Antonius navy in the rode,
Who yielded when Augustus fleet was seen:
And likewise showed how Antony abode,
At Alexandria with this fearful Queen,
Who seeing thus himself deprived of aid,
Cries out that Cleopatra has betrayed him:
She whether guilty, or perhaps afraid,
That from her slaughter nothing could have staid him;
Flies from his sight, and falsely sends him word,
That she (drowned in despair) her self had slain:
Wherewith enraged, he takes a bloody sword,
And breathing out these speeches all in vain;
O Cleopatra princess of my heart;
And art thou dead? lo dying I adore thee:
This more then death, does now procure my smart,
That wanting courage* I went not before thee;
With that, yet warm death-couloured instrument,
In his fair breast he did the gate set open,
Which to the earth, his bloudlesse lims has sent:
His dying soul up to the heavens I hope.
And is he dead?

Byl. His better part yet lives,
But to his corpse a tomb sweet qui^t gives

Octa. O poor (...), now I feel thy pains,
Greefes greedy vulture feeds upon my heart:
Upon my head a shower of mischief raines,
And all the heavens conclude to work my smart.
O my Antonius, O my Lord, my Lord:
O that Octauia had been slain for thee;
O that the heavens would unto me afford,
That this my blood might thy lives ransom be.
Mine was the wound thou gave that noble breast,
That purple stream extracted from my heart:
In my deep passions is thy death expressed,
Thou feltst the stroke, but I endure the smart,
And O that grief did not thus stop my breath,
And all my words dissolve in showers of tears,
That I might worthily lament thy death:
And Catadupa-like, dull all men's ears.
Unhappy world, the pilgrimage of pain,
The stage where mischief acts a dyreful part:
What have thou had, what do thou now contain,
Which but a thought of pleasures might impart.
Not one care-wanting hour my life has tasted:
But from the very instant of my birth,
Incessant woes my tired heart have wasted,
And my poor thoughts are ignorant of mirth.
Look how one wave, another still pursues,
When some great tempest holds their troops in chase:
Or as one hour an others loss renews;
Or posting day supplies another place;
So do the billows of affliction beat me,
And hand in hand the storms of mischief go;
Successiue cares with utter ruin threate me;
Grief is enchain'd with grief, and woe with woe,
Yet must I bear it with a patient mind:
For why the heavens have this to me assigned.

Chorus.
IN exorable fates,
That on both high and low,
Your equal rigor show:
Correcting all estates,
and stately minds suppressing.
Your favor none (...) win,
No cloak or faults can hide:
But needs we must abide,
The punishment of sin,
And hope for no releasing.
No greatness may withstand,
No words can pity move:
But we must all approve,
The vigor of your hand:
Great Jove's decrees expressing.
Great Jove's decrees, which some,
Fate, fortune, chance, do name:
Are not indeed the same,
But heavens eternal doom,
Our witless steps directing*
Their speech exceedes our skill,
Their words pierce not our ears:
But in our life appears,
The legent of their will:
Our errors miss correcting.
Then let the greatest know,
Dole on their ruin feeds:
Whiles they obscure vile deeds,
Under a glorious show;
The vulgar sort infecting.
Octauia still distressed,
Does not to us declare,
How they most wretched are,
Who are with griese oppressed:
But shows what heaven requires.
How through affliction great,
Great troubles and annoy:
We find the doubtful way,
That leads to virtues seat:
Which wisdoms self desires.
In fairest crystal stone,
Let men her tropheys show:
That all the world may know,
Here lives such a one,
As virtues height asspireth.
Sharp grief and sweet delight,
Are Giants to approve:
If ought may us remove,
And turn us from the right,
Thence double error springs.
The weakest wrought his fall,
Whiles that Octauia true:
The other did subdue.
And purchased therewithal:
That fame her honor sings.
A monument most rare,
Of pure Arabian gold,
The highest worth t'vnfold,
Let art for her prepare:
Who time in triumph brings.
Time shall endeare thy name,
With honors breath make sweet:
The garland is most meet,
For such as win the same;
Thy virtue best deserved.
Whiles any spark of worth,
Does lodge in woman's breast:
Thy praise among the rest,
Be evermore henceforth,
In noblest minds preserved:
Of Diamonds most pure,
A tomb let Angels frame:
And there engraue her name,
For evermore to endure,
T'eternity reserved.
L'aqua non temo del'eterno oblio.
FINIS.
To the honorable, virtuous, and excellent: Mistress Mary Thin.
WOrthy of all the titles of honor, yt nature, virtue, wisdom and worth, may
bestow on their worthyest, and most favored possessors: having lately
extracted the memory of Octauia out of the ashes of oblivion: my thoughts
continuing (perhaps longer then was fit) the current of that stream, have
made some idle hours convert themselves into the missiue Epistles between the
virtuous Octauia and the licentious Antony, wherein although my slender skill,
has no way bin answerable to the height of your noble conceit, that the sight
of them might breed you the least content: yet since they are done (presuming
upon your accustomed Clemency) I humbly submit them to your favorable censure.
If you therefore who are the mother, or (under your correction, to say better,
the murderer) if concealing may be called a murder,) of such excellent, and
virtuous knowledges and perfections, as are able to register a vulgar mind in
the famous roules of neuer-ending eternity, will allow the mean and humble
conceiptes of others: your honor shall be advanced to the highest pitch of their
possibility. If you will esteem the small portion of judgment in other men,
the excellency whereof you will not acknowledge in your self: their industry
shall never cease, to wing your fame, till it have towred beyond the reach of
death, and oblivion. Accept therefore I beseech you the memorials of this
virtuous Empress: that your worthiness may indeare these worthless lines;
these lines record her memory, her memory advance your glory; your glory
purchase all wished felicity, and your high felicities, ever increase till
time give place unto eternity.

Humbly yours, S. B.

The Argument.
OCtauia seeing the long stay of her husband Mark Antony with Cleopatra the
Aegiptian queen: And finding by often trial, that nothing might prevail to
recall his obstinate mind from her unlawful love: Intended a voyage to visit
him her self in person. But in in the way she received letters from him,
requiring her not to approach or come near him, but to make her stay at Athens
(where she was at that time) for that he meant without longer delay there to
come unto her. She expecting his promise (as at all other times) in vain: and
finding her self frustrate of all hope to attain her desire: writes unto him
(as it may be supposed) to this effect.

Octauia to Antonius.
NOw when these lines (mine own dear Lord)
Shall first approach thy sight,
(These lines which sorrow, fear and love
Compelled my hand to write)
First but behold the writers name,
Which does thine eyes awaite,
(Her name as full of constant truth,
As thou of false deceit)
And see if any memory,
Of her do yet remain,
If not, reject it from thine eyes,
To read it were but vain.
From thence (if shame will thee permit)
Proceed unto the rest:
It is not much to view my deed,
Tough thou do me detest.
When true relation (woe is me
That I must call it true)
Of thy most odious faithlesnesse,
First came unto my view:
Even as a man with sudden stroke,
Of thunders mighty force,
Which for a time both life and scence,
From body does divorce,
Bereft of motion, stands amazed
With terror of the blow;
And though alive, yet cannot tell
Where he do live or no:
So stood I sencelesly appal'd,
With horror of the thing*
Which now alas, too well I find,
Does my destruction bring.
How feign I would not have believed,
That thou should faithless be:
How feign I would have made my self,
A liar false for thee.
But thou art gone, fled and forsworn,
And naught may thee recall:
Thou live secure and take no care,
What may poor me befall.
O deep dissembling faithless man,
That do me thus beguile:
S'daine not of her thou louedst once,
To hear the truth a while.
Was it for this thou shedst those tears,
O Crocodile un kind,
When lastly thou did part from me,
With show of constant mind?
Did not those showring eyes assure
A neuer-changing love?
Did not that perjured lying tongue,
Their evidence approve?
Did not those foulded arms, embrace
This body now despised?
And that dissembling heart relent,
With too much love surpised?
O dear Octauta (did thou say)
Though we must parted be:
But for a time, yet that small time
Seems thousand year to me.
When I from thee shall be removed,
From all joys I shall part:
Yet farthest when I am removed,
With thee shall rest my heart.
Then sweet take thou no care for me,
But sighs and tears neclect:
And shortly if the heaven permit,
My safe return expect.
Here would I have replied feign,
When grief me tongue did stay:
And al my words disolu'd to tears,
Whiles thou did part away.
Shall I expect him that entends,
To see me never* then?
O deep deceit! o fraud! o guile!
O vain dissembling men!
What honor, worth, or honesty,
In him what pity were,
That being mine without remorse,
Could these abuses hear?
But thou thy self, my Lord, to be
The agent of my pain:
O how can words but make thee know,
The grief that I sustain?
The golden pyllers of thy youth,
Did promise unto me:
The building of ensuing age,
Should better furnished be.
How might I but conceive, what cause
Might thee heereto compel:
Unless my self have been the same,
In loving thee too well.
What beauty, pleasure, wealth or wit,
So rare does Nilus breed?
But Tyber may therewith compare,
If not the same exceed
Some fond affection has bewitched,
Thy Princely mind I fear:
O* that I could my doubtful thoughts,
From such suspicion clear.
What is there no more power, or force,
In virtues sacred shield:
But noble minds must basely fall,
And to affection yield?
Or was this sweet eare-pleasing word,
But placed on thy tongue?
And never planted in t^y heart,
Still nursed with poison strong.
No such inordinate affectes,
In virtuous minds have place:
True noble hearts can not endure,
So mighty a disgrace.
He is no prince that subject is,
And subject unto sin:
But slaue-borne witches, they are called,
Which do delight therein.
Vain, foolish, blind, vnpure,
Dishonest, idle minds,
Unlawful love, to vile desires,
With fond affection binds.
This is the hand, which does the raynes
Of modesty undo:
And nothing is so base or vile,
Which it persuades not to.
The mortal foe of reasons good,
Th'inuenter of deceit:
The plague infecter of the mind,
The deadly poisoned bayte.
The furious-tempsst-breathing breath,
To every quiet mind:
The map of mischief, where the world
Naught else but grief can find.
The noble (...), whom the world
So highly does adore:
Could not be conquered by this foe,
And honored was therefore.
It Is greater shame, to him that should
Correct another miss:
To merit well deserved blame,
Then to him that subject is.
It Is greater glory to defend,
Or selves from errors great:
Then by supplanting other men,
To gain a Princely seat.
Then suffer not thy self alive,
To be entombed in shame:
Remember how thy former deeds,
Deserve immortal fame:
Procure not to thy golden day
Of life, an evening dark.
Within the haven of repose.
Drown not thy conquering bark.
Though this licentious life of thine,
Sweet pleasures seem to bring:
A bitter sweet thou shall it find,
Which flows from such a spring.
But Aegyptes fertle soil, perhaps
Thy greedy thoughts does hold:
Allured with th'aboundant store,
Of minde-bewitching gold.
If virtue, honor and renown,
Be of a smaller prize:
Then misers food which thou esteem'st*
Thou may us well despise,
But if more worth remain in them,
Then thou could ever see:
Then Antony thou art not him,
I took thee for to be.
O basest mind that ever lived,
And bare so brave a name:
To fly the silver streams of worth,
And base in filthy shame.
O that thou could so leave thy self
A while that thou mought'st find:
How hatefully the world does scorn,
The baseness of thy mind.
How feign I would not now believe,
That thou so object art:
To sell thy self for store of earth,
Which can no worth impart.
The basest thought that any mind,
Upon the earth may have:
Is seruilly to make it self,
To any thing a slave.
And by how much the thing more vile,
Which does our liking move:
By so much more, more object he,
Which there with is in love.
Then base earth creeping mind adue,
Since this is thy delight:
I blame thee not though thou do blush,
At noble honors sight.
Had Julius Caesar loved gold,
More then a noble name^
He never had been royalliz'd,
By such immortal fame.
The Macedonian monarke, whom
Aeternity shall praise:
Disdain*d that any golden steps,
His glorious name should raise.
But Mydas purchased endless shame,
By being as thou art:
And Cressus for his store of gold,
Had store of bitter smart.
The gods for this do plague us men,
We men each other hate:
From hence, as from a fountain, spring*
Strife, murders, and debate.
O scencelesse mind of foolish man,
Which sees not what it has:
But wanting in excessive store,
Continues errors path.
Thou shall not need such store of wealth,
Thy waftage for to pay:
When thy offending soul to hell,
Old Charon shall convey.
O seek thy wealth in virtues mines,
If thou true joys wilt find:
All other things vuconstant are,
And lighter then the wind.
But wanton lust procures thy fall,
And works my world of woe:
An enemy of honest minds,
Rare virtues common foe.
What plague infernal worse then this,
Whose poisoned bait does gain:
Both to the body and the soul,
An everlasting pain.
What multitudes of souls are lost?
What Cities overthrown?
What Kingdoms by licentious lust,
With ruin ouergrowne?
Let deep lamenting Greece, declare
The Effect of hateful lust:
Or that which once was called Troy,
Now nothing else but dust.
And had not women had the wit,
The danger to repel:
The Sabines swords had made us feel,
The smart thereof too well.
O let the bleeding memories,
Of many in like case,
Be dreadful motives to thy mind,
To leave this wicked race.
How can thou censure others miss,
And yet not see thine own:
Can wisdom joy at others joys,
And see it self ore'throwne*
O since the cause of this effect,
Is so exceeding ill:
The horror of the thing it self,
With terror might thee fill.
Who soever with the like offense,
His body has defiled:
Of virtues dearest ornaments,
His soul was first despoiled.
Of honor, worth, and fortitude,
He lost the sacred name:
And like a coward* did subject
Himself to sin and shame.
He da^es, and nights, has wholly spent
In dronkennes and play:
By folly, and by necligence,
Has wrought his whole decay.
Or else these cousin-germaine sins,
He happily did connect:
Base slouthfulnes, and luxury,
Which work the same effect.
O fly inordinate delights,
Each pleasure has his pain:
And he that stained is with sin,
Cannot be clean again.
Let Deniz torn vntombed corpse,
Sufficiently declare,
How this same loathsome vice does make
Her best attendants fare.
Do thou not know, the sages teach,
A man should never do:
The thing that wicked is and vile,
Nor yet consent thereto?
Though warely he did foresee,
It might escape the light:
And be most secretly conceald,
And hid from all men's sight?
How far thou art (which should excel)
From being excellent:
Do but behold and view thy self,
By this their president.
Who publikly have sold thy self
Unto eternal shame:
And like a scencelesse blinded man,
Perseuer'st in the same.
Or have some other pleasures strange,
Estranged thy mind from me?
For (as men say) in that same court,
Great store of pleasures be,
We want not here our true delights,
But if we had less store,
Of wanton sports: thou ought no^
To shame thy self therefore.
Our pleasures here, may satisfy
And please each virtuous mind:
And he no spark of virtue has,
Which other seeks to find*
Alluring pleasure, stain of life,
Sower mischiefs sweetest root:
By it, all noble thoughts and deeds,
Are trodden under foot,
A mind corrupting monster vile,
A mal-seducing guest,
Nurse of repentance, pain, and gree^e,
Depriuer of sweet rest;
Prince-haunting fiend, sweet poisoned bayte,
False thief of happy bliss;
Who seems a guide to hoped joys*
But leads us still amiss.
Do but recount with wisdoms eyes,
Those pleasures which are past,
And see what pleasure, profit, gain,
They yield thee now at last*
So when thy ill spent granted time,
His course has fully run:
Then shall thou find thy pleasures fled,
Hopes vain, thy self undone.
Learn to take pleasure in such things,
Whence true joys may arise:
Thou can not do more like a prince,
Then vain things to despise.
Bring not thy self, thy house, thy queen,
Unto eternal shame:
In being much more then thy self,
And far less then thy name.
Let no delight, make thee forget,
What best befits thy state:
He is no Prince, which his affects
Cannot predominate.
Who for his pleasure poison drinks,
Though mixed with things most sweet*
Should have a name by my consent,
For such a man more meet.
Or do thou here dislike perhaps,
That Delta bears such swaye:
And sacred virtues holy rights,
Have made thee fly away.
Is chastity so loathsome then
Unto a wanton ear:
That beauty is no beauty, where
Such chaste desires appear?
Can looseness, which the wise dispraise,
So please a noble mind:
That true nobility contem'nd,
Sole pleasures there they find?
Then must I needs displease indeed,
And know not what to say:
For why the swine do most delight,
The most defiled pray.
The silver fish, by nature do
The purest streams delight:
The stately Faulcon, midst the clouds,
Directs her towering flight.
The Eagles seldom sit in dales,
But perch on highest hills;
And every thing delights his like,
And natures course fulfils.
But thou less constant then all these,
Though far more base then they:
Instead of Crystal streams, do love
In puddles vile to play.
Thou borne by nature to advance
Thy thoughts to honors height;
Do carelessly stoop unto shame,
And fall with thine own weight.
Then never think, I think it strange
That thou art fled from me:
The heavens forbid my lowest thoughts,
Should simpathize with thee.
But herein thou art wise indeed,
To hide thy self away:
And such as never have thee known
By falsehood to betray.
For why, assure thy self, all those
That do thy baseness know:
Thy faithlesnesse, and perjury,
Do much detest thee now.
The heavens will sharply punish sin,
And fly where so thou can:
Thongh for a time they do defer,
They Will plague the periurde man.
Then view thy self in glass of truth,
And be not thus abusd:
No honor ever crowned the man,
That honesty refusd'.
The nobler is the birth and place,
From whence thine honor came:
The more notorious is thy fault,
If thou debase the same.
No, it is her wit has thee bewitched,
Her sweet delighting tongue:
Which does enchant thy wondering mind,
And makes thee stay this long.
This wit, indeed, were something worth,
Were wisdom joined thereto:
Yet not so much, that it should serve
So many to undo.
The earth has not a thing so rare,
Which wisdom would not fly:
Yea rather hate and much detest,
Then purchase shame thereby.
Who can so love a sporting wit,
That it procure his fall:
His kindness may be judged great,
But sure his wit is small.
Then let us love base Catiline,
For wit and noble blood:
No, loathe him rather, for his wit
Knew never what was good.
And let us Varro likewise praise,
For he was witty sure:
But wicked too, and therefore Rome
Could not his wit endure.
The more a man excels in wit,
And ill imployes the same:
The more do all men him detest,
That love a virtuous name.
Though sweetly did the Sirens sing,
Yet who to them gave ear?
Their message to the Ionian deepes,
He presently did bear.
Or is it beauty, that does set
Thy heart so much on fi^r:
And captiuate thy senses so,
That thou can not retire?
The rarest beauty of the face,
Cannot enforce the wise:
With pain to purchase living shame,
And better things despise.
Nor are the fairest always found,
The best, (as I suppose)
Some noisome flowers, do seem as fair,
As does the fragrant Rose.
That wonder breeding beauty sure,
Which thou do so esteem:
Shall come to nothing at the last,
As first it was I deem.
The Rose and Lyllie cannot long
Content and please, the sight:
No goulden day could euerscape,
The dark ensuing night.
Proud time will bury beauties youth,
In furrows of decay:
Were thou ten thousand times a prince,
Thou can not force it stay.
All these fond pleasures (if fond things
Deserve so good a name)
Should not seduce a noble mind,
To stain it self with shame.
The time shall come, when all these same,
Which seem so rich with joy:
Like tyrants shall torment thy mind,
And vex thee with annoy.
When all those honye-tongued mates,
Can but weep and lament:
That they by force, must part from thee,
Whose vital course is spent.
When all thy greatness must be left,
To such as shall succeed:
When sweetest pleasures memory,
Most dreadful thoughts shall breed;
When this so much desired Sun,
Shall but displease thy sight;
And all things else shall seem to want,
The taste of sweet delight.
When all the creatures of the earth,
Cannot procur^ thine ease:
And friends, with showers of vaine-shed tears,
Cannot thy grief appease.
When tyranizing pain, shall stop
The passage of thy breath:
And thee compel to swear thy self,
True servant unto death.
Then shall one virtuous deed impart
More pleasure to thy mind:
Then all the treasures that on earth,
Ambitious thoughts can find.
The well-spent time of one short day,
One hour, one moment then:
Shall be more sweet, then all the joys
Amongst us mortal men.
Then shall thou find but one refuge,
Which comfort can retain:
A guiltless conscience pure and clear,
From touch of sinful stain.
Then shall thine inward eyes, behoulde
The loathsome path of sin:
And thy proud heart repine in vain,
That thou have walked therein.
Then shall Octauiaes wrongs appear,
Like monsters to thine eyes:
And thou shall curse the time, and day,
That thou did me despise.
Then shall my sighs, and tears, inflame
A bonefire in thy mind:
And thou thy self, thy self shall loathe,
For being thus unkind.
At thy right hand, my wronged ghoast,
Shall just complaints renew:
And on thy left, that queen shall show
What has been wrought by you.
Above thy head, thine eyes shall see
The heavens to justice bent:
Below thy ^eete, the pit of hell,
Ordained for punishment.
Ah poor Antonius how will thou,
Abhor thy wretched state:
And most entirely then repent,
But then it will be too late.
But thou great Emp^rour do disdain
Such sharp rebukes to find:
For piety, and pity both,
Are strangers to thy mind*
Thy brave heroic thoughts do scorn
To stoop to these conceits:
To humble for such high (...),
As honors praise awaight^.
Then great (...), worthy prince,
What Trophyes may we r^ise,
To equal these thy (...) designs
And manifest thy (...)*
Who may enough augment thy ^ame,
To answer thy desert:
Who do attempt with (...),
To break a woman's (...).
A glory great, a (...),
For such as faithless be:
Form thy deeds, the world may view,
The worth that is in the^
More then a man thou would be thought,
And should indeed be so:
But let thy deeds more manly be,
Or else that name forgo.
That man which seems a man in show,
And is not such a one:
Deserves another name by right,
For he by right is none.
O do not think a woman's death,
Can much endeare thy name:
But think how this unmanly deed,
Will work thine endless shame.
What man, that were a man indeed,
(Much less a Prince) would see,
His wife, and Queen, a spectacle,
Of grief and misery?
Would to the pity of the world,
And to all wondering eyes,
My constant loving mind reject:
And guiltless me despise.
Would such incessant streams of tears,
Draw from these restless springs:
And load my ^eart with endless grief,
Which utter ruin brings.
But hide thy head and all is well,
Thy faults cannot be spied:
No, thou must know the ^eauens are just,
And must their sentence bide.
When all those powers which thou have wronged,
Shall punishment require:
How (...) wretch be half enough,
To satisfy their ire?
How can thou ever hope to pay
The forfait of thy miss*
When powerful Justice shall impose,
The just revenge o^ this.
Which makes me pity more thy state,
Then grieve at mine own wrong:
To think how he whom I have loved,
Shall plagued be (...) long.
Yet know, though I detest thy fault,
I bear thee no ill will:
For if Antonius will return,
He shall be loved still.
To which she received this answer following. Antonius to Octauia.
AMongst the monstrous storms of woe,
Which do my soul surprise:
Thy direful (...) (...), were
Presented to mine (...),
O heavens! how erosly have you set,
Your still repugnant stars?
Which crosly, cross my tired life,
With mortal civil wars.
I see, and know, that to be true,
Which thou do here object:
I see thou rightly call that wrong,
Which I may not correct.
I find my self engulft in grief,
Entrapt in mischiefs power:
Yet cannot I avoid the storm,
Though it my life devour.
Of force my heart must condescend,
To what thou do require:
Yet cannot I perform the thing,
Which is thy chief desire.
I know the safe, and perfect way,
Which reason says is best:
Yet willingly I follow that,
Which wisdom likes least.
What reason will, that same would I,
And wisdom would so too:
But some thing greater then us all,
Will not consent thereto.
That time, that day, those looks, those words,
Are yet fresh in my mind:
When my (...) grief,
Unto us both assigned.
Those tears, I yet remember well,
Whiles I did thee imbr^ce:
Those settled silent (...) looks,
Placed in each others face.
My words which true love did endite,
And faith confirm the same:
(For constant truth did at that time,
Secure my thoughts from blame.)
My heart was free from thought of (...),
My mind from false intent:
I scornd a false dissembling word,
And naught but truth I meant.
But since mine eyes enricht their sight,
With Cleopatraes face:
My thoughts another object found,
My heart another place.
Which object so allured my mind,
With rauishing delight:
That wanting her, I thought each day,
An endless tedious night.
My very thoughts framed all my words,
To Cleopatraes name:
Yea, when most great affairs withdrew,
My fancy from the same:
Mine eyes were blind, mine ears were deaffe,
My mind did scencelesse prove:
But when they saw, heard, or perceived,
Her face, her name, her love:
No pleasures could my fancy please,
No mirth it self endeare:
Wherein th'Idea of her face,
Did not to me appear.
What reasons left I vnapprou'd,
What counsels force? to break
The sweet captiuing band of love,
But all I found too weak.
He is deceived, that thinks to find,
A countermine in love:
And woe is me, that speaking this,
I speak but what I prove.
Thus I my self the agent m^de,
And traitor of my (...):
Can never hope to contradict,
Or to encounter this.
But though my yielding heart as then,
Thy true love did detain:
That deed of (...), a greater power,
By force reuokes again.
And those truth-telling sages teach,
That every motion small:
Is by a greater overcome,
Or hindered therewithal.
O then, though reason, reason be,
Yet must it condescend:
And yield to that, against whose force
It cannot us defend.
And never me so sharply blame,
As actor of this ill:
It Is not Antonius, but the heavens,
Which do withstand thy will.
And what the heavens do force us to,
We may not disobay:
When their decrees are once enrould,
O who may then say nay?
These moving stars which we behold,
Our minds do rule and guide:
And look what course they set us in,
Therein must we abide.
This spark of reason is not ours,
But lent us from above.
The Gods do give and take the same,
They make us loathe and love.
Then dear, why should thou so vpbraid
And sharply reprehend:
Thy Antony: for such a fault
As he may not amend.
If in my heart I did thee hate,
Then were I worthy blame:
But I have ever loved thee well,
Who well deseruedst the same.
And though I cannot thee afford,
The dearest of my heart:
Yet needst thou not thus to complain,
Who have so large a part.
No day, no night, their posting course,
So speedily could frame:
But they beheld, my thoughts, return
Due homage to thy name.
When bloody terror, danger, death,
Upon me did lay houlde:
Thy memory revived my mind,
And made my courage bold.
No not a thousand fierce assaults,
And perils many more:
Could ever force my loving heart,
Octauia to forgo.
But tyrant love, me from my self,
And from my Queen does steal:
And pardon me though I perhaps,
Too great a fault reveal.
And pardon needs, I must obtain,
If this so much offend:
For here my love did first begin,
And here my li^e must end.
Here will I show, I neither am
Unconstant, nor unkind:
For Cleopatra whiles I live,
Shall me most constant find.
Why am I called an Emperor,
If I should subject be:
And be compeld to leave the thing,
Which most delights me?
No dear Octauia, thy request
Can never be fulfild:
Let Gods be Gods, and Kings be Kings,
For none but cowards yield.
Were she as Baucis, when she lodged
Her unknown greatest guest:
Were she a Lion, Lybert, Wolf,
Or some worse sauadge beast;
Were she a fury, or what else,
Whose presence glads my heart,
And to my ravished captive soul,
Such sweetness does impart;
I would exceed Jove's simple guiftes,
And give the machine round,
And all the treasures, wealth, and store,
Which therein may be found.
I would from parents, children, friends,
My dearest thoughts remove.
Surrender scepter, kingdom, crown,
For to enjoy my love.
And by my bounty, truth and zeal,
The erring world should see:
No base, or servile, scorned thought,
Had ever place in me.
I would disdain a monark should,
But equal my desire:
My constant faith should far exceed,
The height of all aspire.
They do but blow the coals of hate,
Which my designs improve:
If ever fault may pardon get,
O pardon faulty love.
I grant, I were a monster vile,
Unworthy of my life:
If I should hate, or thee disdain,
Who wast my spouse and wife.
But Cleopatraes dearest love,
In me does bear such sway:
That I envy or malice none,
So I may her enjoy.
And say not, it is a shameful thing
To love a stranger so:
For love I must, and love I will,
Though all the world say no.
The gods I hope will not be moved,
Such sharp revenge to take*
On those which er^e, but in such faults,
As they themselves did make.
Were it dishonor to be kind,
To those we best esteem:
Great Jove himself could not be free,
From such disgrace (I deem).
That monster quelling Hercules,
Should have been called base:
When his victorious conquering arm*
Did Omphale embrace.
No, I disdain, the brauest mind
That draws this vital breath,
Should think me base, who have contemned,
The very face of death.
It Is rather base, to be compelled
To that we fancy least:
O why am I a Prince, if not
To do as likes me best?
Suppose within my settled mind,
There could be such a thought:
That to consent to thy request,
I happily might be brought.
Would not the Princess of my soul,
My Cleopatra, pay
The largest tribute of her life,
Her Antony to stay?
Are not her words, her sighs, her tears,
Most precious to my heart?
Does not her face, her tongue, her wit,
My souls delight impart?
How then can I (unhappy man)
My self so well dispose:
As might content and please you both,
Who both your selves oppose.
No Hercules can this perform,
No Sphynx this doubt exclude*
Yet thus I fully am resolved,
And thus I do conclude;
The knot which cannot be undone,
In sunder thus I strike:
Here will I live, here will I bide,
And love you both alike.
Let Caesar fight, Octauia frown,
Let children wail and weep:
Thus I resolve, and thus I vow,
Which vow i will firmly keep.
And if your malice, and perhaps
My fortune, do procure:
That all my words and deeds, the worst
Construction must endure:
My constant truth and mind resolved,
That worst must needs abide:
For why from this well grounded love,
My heart shall never slide.
Thou all things truly see indeed,
But never spyest the wound:
By which my sweet affecting thoughts,
Their endless thraldom found.
By which my prayer-scorning heart,
Is brought to condescend:
To which that this my chief desire,
Might not too much offend.
Ask, take, assume all that you list,
Perform your hearts desire:
So that you neither her from me.
Nor me from her require.
While I my Cle^patra may,
Between these arms ensold:
I envy not great Cresus wealth,
Nor Midas store of gold.
But if inevitable fate,
Her presence should deny:
Though all the world were mine besides,
With penury I dye.
Nor let it seem so passing strange,
That I cannot be moved:
By thy entreaty to forgo,
The thing so much beloved.
Through thine own heart, do but behold
And see how small avail:
Perswations, reasons, words, and wit,
Affections force to quail.
If none of those can take effect,
To win thy love from me:
Why should thou think that from this Queen,
I can divorced be?
Since wisdom then can never show,
It self more wisely sure:
Then to forgo that thing with (...).
Which pain cannot procure.
Ah strive not thus against the stream,
But dry thy tears again;
For to persuade me booteles is,
To force me is more vain.
Though all the world should me withstand
I will not be withheld,
A Prince dislikes to be gaine-said,
But scorns to be compelled.
And it may be (for who can tell,
What abscence may procure)
That ^aire Octauia never could,
So long time chaste endure.
Ah, can I think in such excess,
Of liberty and store,
Of Ceres, Bacchus, and what else,
May be desired more.
Amongst so many tedious days,
And nights, of great disport;
Amongst such brave heroicke Lords,
As to that Court resort;
That thy unmoved mind, can be
So tied to Vestaes rightes,
But that sometimes it will consent,
To Venus sweet delights?
Can that fair face, which in all hearts
Does high affection move:
Resist so many strong attempts,
As will assault thy love?
No, no, they are not always true*
Which do most truly speak:
If it were so, how then am I,
More then a woman weak?
And yet my conscience does descent,
And plainly this deny:
And yet suspicion does maintain,
It cannot be a lie.
O how can he be ever brought,
To think another true:
Who through the guilt of his own mind,
The others life does view?
And should I then return to Room,
Mine honor thus to foil?
No, rather let me find a tomb,
In any foreign soil.
And since thou know (O too too well)
Antonius high disgrace:
He must provide of all the world,
Not to behold thy face.
Thy face the lecture of his miss,
The mirror of his shame:
The ever wounding rod, and spur
Of my eclipsed fame.
The disproportion of our thoughts,
Could never well agree:
Thou still should hate my faithlesnesse,
I blush thy truth to see.
A fault does never with remorse,
Our minds so deeply move:
As when another guiltless life,
Our error does reprove.
But be it, that from all those doubts,
I could my mind set free:
Yet whiles ambitious Caesar lives,
I may not come to thee.
Let all the world perswations use,
And their best counsel give:
For me, I never will be drawn,
In dangers mouth to live.
I cannot brook, another should,
Be mightier then I:
An equal in the imperial seat,
My heart does much envy.
And who so simple, that will look
For faith or truth in those:
Whose faithlesnes may hap to gain,
Whose truth a crown must loose.
There is no truth in such, whose hearts,
An Empire do affect:
Competitors may talk of truth.
But do all truth neclect.
And be it, that we could agree
Which has been seldom known:
Yet still in time, from private grudge,
Such quarrels great have grown.
Such bloody deeds, such strife, debate,
Such outrage, murder, death:
That words, and oaths and al, have proved
But vain dissembling breath.
No nature, reason, counsel, wit,
Ambition can constrain,
To hold unviolable truth:
Or conscience to detain.
Pale fear, mistrust, unlooked for chance,
And fortunes dyreful frowns:
Most deep suspect, and swift revenge,
Attendant are on crowns.
Not that I dread or stand in fear,
What Caesar can procure,
But that this absence better might,
My safety assecure.
And it may hap (for none can tell)
In time what may be wrought:
Since un expected chauce, my love
To Cleopatra brought.
So happy time; so good an howe^,
For thee may hap to fall:
Which may my love and fancy, back
From her again recall.
In hope whereof, (...) must
Her sighs and tears suppress:
Until Antonius find the means,
These errors to redress.
FINIS.
Errata.
Act. 2. page 3. line 8. for highest read highness.

Act. 2. page 22. line 8. for frowardnes ^ead forwardnes.

Act. 5. page 4. line 1. for ascribe read assign.

Epist. 1. page 1. line 16. for Tough read Though.

THE EPILOGVE.
OUr Play is done, now what your censures a^e,
If with, or against Arts i^dustrie, the care
Took by the Author (and our pains to pease)
We know not yet, 'till judgment give us ease.
Why should we do^bt? this Theater does appear
The Music Rome of concord; you being here.
Let no harsh jarring ^ound of discord then,
Echo dislike; claps crown the Tragic Pen.
FINIS.

