A VVATCH-MAN FOR THE PEST. TEACHING The true Rules of Preservation from the
Pestilent Contagion, at this time fearfully overflowing this famous City of
LONDON.

COLLECTED Out of the best Authors, mixed with ancient experience, and molded
into a New and most plain Method; BY STEVEN BRADVVELL of London, Physician.
1625.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for George Vincent, and are to be sold at
Pauls-gate at the sign of the Crosse-keyes. 1625.

To the Reader.
HIPPOCRATES says, Li. de Probitate Medici boni, ad tempus appositi sunt, ad
occasionem eripiendum acco^modati.
That good Physicians do apply themselves to the present Time, and to take
hold of the Occasion. The present Time (good Reader) is Woeful, and the
Occasion, Dangerous: I know it was not his meaning that we should only grieve
for the first, and flee from the latter; but to lend our assistance to the
necessity of the Times calamity. I have but little water to draw, yet would I
gladly bring my bucket-full to the quenching of this contagious flame; and if
it be but kindly regarded; I am friendly rewarded: for I profess, not
affectation, but true affection; not a hope of praise, but a heart of pity,
draws me (or rather drives me) to offer my counsel in this case. LONDON is my
Mother; in her womb had I both Birth and Breeding. What Son can see his
Mother woefully afflicted, dangerously sick, and desperately forsaken; but he
must needs weep for her tears, labor her recovery, and lend a hand (at
least) to hold her up? I may not take upon me to cure the Sick, because I
meddle not with the Sickness (for to practice on the Plague now, would prove a
plague to my Practice hereafter) but I must labor to preserve the sound;
because by profession I am a Physician. Therefore I call this Book, A
Watchman for the Pest, because it does only (as if it were a Warder) stand at
the door without, and deliver things necessary for preservation to those
within; but neither enters the infected house, nor meddles with the Cure of the
Contagious. I expect from diverse conceits diverse Censures of this Book. It
is too long, too short, too solid, too idle, too full, too slender; and I know
not what. Yet I hope the judicious will vouchsafe it the reading; and the wise,
the observing: as for the rest, I will neither favor the Frivolous, fear the
Envious, nor flatter the Curious. I know though Hercules labor his heart out,
he shall not be able to appease a Juno, nor please an Eurystheus. Therefore if
I be not relished, I shall think the mouth is out of taste, since there is
scarce a word, but I can prove his worth from good Authority. If I be
grateful to thy palate (good Reader) I will not be ungrateful to thy person;
But if ever thou will use me, thou shall find me

From my Study in Mugwell-street. July 18. 1625. Ready to my power to do thee
any pleasure, STEPHEN BRADVVELL.

A VVATCH-MAN FOR THE PEST.
TVLLY (whose Method was as pleasing as his Matter) sets this down as a
savoury Maxim in Method; Proemium.
Omnis quae a ratione suscipitur de aliqua re institutio, debet a Definitione
proficisci, vt intelligatur quid sit id de quo disputatur. l. 1. de Officijs.
To follow him therefore, though (but as Ascanius followed his Father Aeneas)
non passibus aequis; Him, I say, whom hardly any has happened to go along
with foot by foot in fluent sweetness: I will begin this Discourse with the
Definition of the Pest; And while I lay open the several points of the
Definition, I will discover the Causes, the Kind and Qualities, and the Signs
and Symptoms of it. And withal (in their several places) I will lay down
the Rules of Preservation, with good Medicines; whereby the further spreading
of the pestilent Infection may (by Gods blessing) be prevented.

The Definition.
The Name.
The Plague, is a popular Disease: sent immediately from God; The Causes.
wrought by the Constellations of the Heavens, the Corruption of the Air, and
the Disorder of Man's Diet: At the first striking to the Heart, The Qualities.
is Venomous, Deadly, and Infectious: And for the most part accompanied with a
Feavor; The Symptoms and Signs.
As also with Spots called Gods-Tokens, or with a Blayne, or Botch, or
Carbuncle.

The Name.
This word Plague; in Latin Pestis; in Greek (...): signifies a deadly
fretting. (...) being the same with (...), a (...), quod efficiat defectum
hominum; or (...) Pernicies, seu exitium. Hippocrates gives it a style of
distinction, calling it (...), Morbus communis: a common or Popular Disease.
That it is a Disease, needs no proof at all, since it manifestly affects
the body contrary to nature, and hurts the actions thereof. That it is
Popular is also apparent, in this, that when it once enters into a Country,
City, or Town; it over-runneth the same like a torrent, and few escape at
least a scratching with it, if they be not deeply bitten by it: yea more are
stricken and slain by it, many times (especially in the place where it has
gotten full strength) then of all kinds of diseases else what-soever. And so
much for his Title.

Now, That It is immediately sent from God, The first and principal cause is
God.
it is evident by many proofs of holy Scripture. As Deuteronomy. 28.21. and in the
same Chapter at the 22. verse, he says; The Lord shall smite thee with a
Feavor, and with a Consumption, with an Inflammation, and with an extreme
burning. In which words are expressed the painful Symptoms of the Plague: viz.
a Feavor, (which I shall prove hereafter) a Consumption (which being understood
of Calor naturalis, the heat and life of nature, is apparent) an Inflammation,
by which the swelling called the Botch is signified; and by an extreme
Burning, the deadly Carbuncle is lively described. If we desire examples; the
Botch is plainly specified in the plague of Pharaoh and his servants; Exodus 9.
Chap. 10. and 11. verses, and in the Sickness of Hezekiah, Isaiah 38.21.

Seeing then the All-mightie God of Heaven and Earth in wrath and justice
sends this Plague upon us, The way of Cure.
let us know that as the Triacle for our bodies is consected of the flesh of
earthly Serpents: so the Triale for our souls must be made of the blood of
that brazen Serpent, which was lifted upon the Cross for our sins. Let every
man be to his own soul and family an Aaron to take with speed his Censor of
Repentance; fill it with fire from the Altar ( of the exceeding great and
precious promises of God in Christ. 2 Pet. 1.4.) and put the Incense of
faithful Prayer thereon; and run quickly and make an atonement: for there is
wrath gone out from the Lord; the Plague is begun.

Sometimes the Constellations of the Heavens are the second cause by which God
works and brings these Judgments on men. For Astrologers are of opinion,
The influence of the Stars, the second cause.
that if Saturn and Mars have dominion (especially under Aries, Sagittarius,
and Capricornus) the Pestilence is shortly to be expected. Or if those two (the
most maleuolent) be in opposition to the gentle Planet Jupiter; the effect of
that opposition is the Plague. As the Poet sings: Coelitus imbuitur tabo
difflatilis aura,
Mars quando obij^itur Falcitenensque Iovi.


I know there be many learned men that think the stars because they are good
and pure creatures, can bring forth no evil, nor impure effects: And amongst
these Valeriola (in Append. ad loc. com. cap. 2.) thinks he has so absolutely
satisfied the point, that no objection may ever be made more: yet I am of
Mercurialis his opinion, that though of themselves primarily they do no evil;
yet accidentally, they may and do.

For the Sun of it self being the purest of them all, by drawing the vapors
out of dunghills and other corrupt things, causes a noisome stench by
accident. But I intend not this Treatise for disputation.

The cure of this Cause, is the same with the former.
If the Stars be pestilently bent against us; neither Arts, nor Arms;
perfumes, nor prayers, can prevail with them, who have neither pity nor
sense, nor power to alter their appointed motion. But He that commands their
course, and alters them at his pleasure; He that made the Sun and Moon
stand still for Iosuah: yea, drew the Sun back ten degrees for Hezekiah, and
caused the Stars to fight in their courses against Sisera. He is able both to
hinder and heal all Infections can arise from their Influences. The cure of
this cause (therefore) is the same with the former.

The Corruption of the Air, the third cause.
The third cause of the Pestilence, is; The corruption of the Air. Which
corruption arises as well from sublinarie accidents, as from the Influences of
the Stars. For noisome vapors arising from filthy sincks, stinking sewers,
channells, gutters, privies, sluttish corners, dunghils, and vncast ditches; as
also the mists and fogs that commonly arise out of fens, moors, mines, and
standing lakes; do greatly corrupt the Air: and in like manner the lying of
dead rotting carrions in channels, ditches, and dunghills; cause a contagious
Air. As the Poet affirms:

Corpora foeda iacent, vitiantur odoribus aurae. And even without these
vapors, The Air is corrupted by the winds and weather.
the Air sometimes is corrupted by the unseasonableness of the weather, Quum
tempestiva intempestive redduntur, as says Hippocrates: when the weather is
unseasonable for the season of the year; being hot when it should be cold;
moist when it should be dry; and contrarily. These preposterous orders, or
rather disorders in the constitution of the Air, render it unwholesome, and
infectious. And this is caused chiefly by the Aspects of the Planets, and many
times also by unwholesome Winds; as especially the South wind, who (being of
temperature moist and warm) fills the Air with such a corrupt quality, as is
soon turned into putrefaction, and many times does easily transport a
contagion from one coast to another.

Now for the Temperature of the Air, What Constitution of the Air is most
Contagious.
the whole stream of opinions runs upon hot and moist, as the fittest
matter for infection, because most apt to putrefaction. So Hippocrates (in the
second of his Epidem.) says, that in Cranon a City of Thessalie, there arose
putrid Ulcers, Pustuls, and Carbuncles; through the hot and moist constitution
of the Air. And the same he urges again in the third Book of the same
Treatise. And Galen in 1 de Temperam. cap. 4. affirms, that the hot and moist
constitution of the air does most of all breed pestilent Diseases. And from
these a multitude of later Writers have learned to speak the same thing. But
for all this we know that the hot and dry weather also may cause a pestilent
Air. And so says Avenzoar in his third book, third tract. and 1. chap. And
Titus Livius in li. primo, decad. 4. records that Rome was once infected with
the Plague by a hot and dry distemper of the Air. And we cannot forget what
a hot and dry parching Summer we had this last year; most fit to be the
unfortunate forerunner of this years pestilence: which now being seconded with
such abundance of moist weather all this Spring and Summer hitherto; we may
well doubt that a deluge of destruction is coming upon us.

Hence we may see the misery of man, The necessity of the Air.
that (be the Air never so corrupt) he must draw it in with his breath
continually, for without it we cannot live a moment: for as meat and drink
are the nourishments of our bodies, so is the Air the nourishment of our
Spirits: As therefore by corrupt meats our bodies are corrupted and diseased;
so by corrupt Air our Spirits are easily infected, and soon extinguished.
Therefore we have great cause to take heed that the Air we draw be pure and
wholesome.

The Cure of this Cause.
And this may be effected two ways: either by flying into a good, or by
purifying the evil Air.

Flight.
The surest way to safety is to fly from the impure into a pure Air. Those
therefore (that have means, and no special Calling to hinder them) do well
to take hold of this counsel. Which 1. Nature teaches in giving Man two legs,
as well as two arms, that if his enemy be too fierce for resistance, he may
escape by running. Now Nature has no worse enemy then Death; nor Death a
better (...) then the Plague. Secondly, the holy Scripture teaches it. (...)
verse. Come my people enter into thy secret place, shut thy doors about thee,
hide thy self as it were for a season, until the indignation be over past. So
Pro. 22.3. The prudent man foreseeth the plague, and hides himself. And David
was this Prudent man, for (1 Chronicles. 2^. last) he durst not go to the
Tabernacle to offer at Gibeon, because he feared the sword of the Angel. And
thirdly, Physic advises it. For Hippocrates, the Prince of Physicians (in
his Book de Natura humana) counsels it in these words; Providendum est vt
quam paucissimus Aeris influxus corpus ingrediatur, et vt ille ipse quam
peregrinissimus existat: Regionum etiam locos, in quibus morbus consistit,
quantum eius fieri potest permutare oportet. By which he intends that a man
must be careful to let into his body as little Air as can be possibly; and
that that Air which he does entertain, be a stranger to the Infected. And
this be interprets in the clause following, where he says, He must (as far
as he may) change the place of the Region in which the Sickness reigns, for
some other that is free from it. And this is that which is meant by Cito,
Long, and Tarde. Which Iordanus calls an Antidote made of three Adverbs: and
thus versifieth upon them.

Haec tria tabificam pellunt Adverbia Pestem:
Mox, long, Tarde; cede, recede, redi.
I will be bold a little to Comment upon these words, in this wise.

Fly with speed from the infected place, Cito Cede.
lest by a little lingering, that infection (which you would leave behind you)
go along with you. And nothing can be more dangerous then for one to travail
with his humors already corrupted by an infected Air. For with the motion of
his body, those humors are stirred, disturbed, and heat; which causes them to
putrefie presently: by which putrefaction of the humors, the vital Spirits are
instantly enflamed and infected, and life it self soon extinguished. Besides
that, in their going forth, before they are gotten beyond the limits of the
evil air; in the laboring of their body, they fetch their breath oftener and
deeper then at other times; whereby they draw in a greater quantity of the
corrupt Air to minister more matter to the putrefaction begun. Therefore fly
quickly, and in flying go softly, till you be quite out of the contagious Air.

And fly not a little way, but many miles of, Long recede.
whither there is no probability of common trading, or recourse of people from
the place forsaken: and where there are high hills betwixt you and the infected
coast; which may break of those blasts of wind that would at sometimes blow
that corrupted Air from thence upon you. Moreover, if you be able, choose your
habitation well and health-fully situated.

A house is well situated that stands on high ground, Choice of habitation.
far from fennes, moors, marshes, and mines: having the doors and windows
opening to the North and East; not to the West, for that is not wholesome; nor
(by any means) to the South, for that being hot and moist, is most subject to
contagion in sickly times. Let the house be large, and the rooms many and
spacious. How to let in fresh Air.
In hot weather, open those windows that are toward the North; in cold, those
that are to the East. If there be doors or windows toward the other coasts,
keep them for the most part very close shut. In the night, leave no window
open at all. If the weather be moist, open your windows toward the good coasts
two hours after Sunne-rising, and let them not stand open above two hours
space: and so again, for two hours before Sunneset.

Tarde redi.
Lastly, be not hasty to return, so soon as you hear that the heat of the
Contagion is abated; but keep away as long as any sign of the Sickness
remains; taking this for a sure rule, That it is less danger to tarry still
in the infected Air, then to come into it from that which is pure and
wholesome: for a fresh commer is aptest to catch the least contagion, and the
very relics of infection are sufficient to kill him. Learn therefore of the
Wolves of Thracia, who in Winter, when the rivers are covered with ice, will
not venture over for their prey (though they be never so hungry) till they have
laid their ear close to the ice; then if they hear no noise of water under
it, they know the ice is thick enough to bear them, and over they go;
otherwise not. Let the space of three months pass upon the last infected
person in that quarter whither you desire to resort: and let the house all that
time (and all the stuff therein) be thoroughly well aired, and perfumed before
you return. For the infection will cleave to the walls and stuff a long
time, and will hardly be purged out of them: especially garments and bedding,
if they have been used by the sick of the Plague. Woolen clothes will retain
the infection three or four years, except they be well and thoroughly aired.
Blankets, Coverlets, and Ruggs must have much airing before they may be
trusted. Furs also retain it long, and it is hardly gotten out of them; as
appears by a story which Fracastorius tells of a Furred Govvne that was the
death of five and twenty men in Verona, in the year 1511. who one after the
other wore it, thinking they had still aired it sufficiently. Featherbeds will
remain seven years infected, if Alexander Benedictus may be believed; and
these are best to be purged by opening the Tikes, and spreading the feathers
abroad very thin, perfuming them very often, and ever as they are airing, let
them be turned with staves or sticks; and let this be so done for many days
together. As for Mattrises, Mats, and such like, it is best that they be burnt,
for that is the surest way to free them from infection.

But now, Some men cannot, and some must not fly. Who must not flee.
Some through poverty, and want of friends in the Country; or by reason of
the dependence of their living upon the Town infected, cannot leave it. Others
whose calling and learning has set them apart for the common good, must not
go. As Maiestrates and other officers who are called to see the peace and good
orders kept. Ministers that have pastoral Charges, and are commanded of GOD to
preach in season and out of season, and to administer the Sacraments to those
which are able to repair to the church. Also Physicians, Chyrurgians,
Apothecaries, Midwifes, Keepers, and Searchers, whose callings are to be
helpful to the sick and weak (though not of the Plague, yet of other
griefs) they ought (at least a convenient number of them, for the number of
people remaining) to tarry and follow those Christian employments which they
have undertaken, not for their own benefit only, but for the Commonwealth
chiefly.

Such therefore as must tarry, let them observe these rules following.

First, fly from company, How those that tarry are to order themselves.
and be contented to live as solitarily as your calling and buisinesse will
give leave. Let those that come to speak with you, come no nearer you then
they must needs; and if you stand to talk with another, be distant from him
the space of two yards. But if you suspect the party to have the infection, let
the space of four yards at the least part you. Let the sound man be careful
also to give the other the wind; that is, so to stand that the wind may blow
from the sound to the suspected, and not contrarily: and let the sound man
turn away his face from him, holding and champing also some fit thing in his
mouth, and smelling to some odor all the while he is in discourse with the
other, or near unto him: (which things in particular I will prescribe
hereafter.) Shun all places that are moist and wet. In Summer keep you
temperate, but always dry: in Winter keep warm, and as much as you can,
near the fire. At all times avoid all close alleys and lanes (especially to
lodge in them) or near common sewers, ditches, or such like noisome places.
And keep out of crowds and assemblies of people as much as you may. Dwell not
in an house that is pestred with much company in little room. It is good also
for those that are able, to shift beds, and chambers often, airing them every
day.

When the Air is cloudy, thick, moist or misty, go not forth but upon
necessity; and in such weather, keep the doors and windows shut. Walk not
abroad in the morning (if you can choose) till two hours after Sun rising;
nor at all after Sunne-set, unless urgent occasion enforce. And in the heat of
the Sun in Summer (especially about noone) tarry not abroad; neither sit,
stand, nor walk in the heat of the same. For then is the brain more full of
excrementitious humors and the whole body abounds more with moisture;
therefore more apt to entertain putrefaction. Purging of the impure Air.
In the full of the Moon, go not forth in the night, and keep your head
something warmer at that time then at other times. Keep moderation between
heat and cold in your lodging and bedding. Last of all, whatsoever you receive
from the hands of another (especially if suspected) touch it not before it have
been cleansed, by boiling, or at least by washing in warm water; if it may
not spoil or deface the thing: otherwise, air and perfume it well. And thus
much for flying into a pure Air.

Now we are to purify the purified Air. And herein first I must distinguish
Air into two kinds, viz. General and Special. By Air general, I mean the
whole open Air of the Region. By Special, I intend, either that which is
enclosed in houses; or that which is immediately next the person of every one,
for the space of some few yards compass round about the Body, whether within
doors or without, wheresoever it goes or abides.

And first for the general Air of the Region. Purging of the General Air.
That is to be purged and rectified, first by clean sweeping and washing of
the streets, lanes, courts, allies and other ways and passages of the City;
leaving in them no durtie puddles, dunghills, or dead carrions. Also by often
casting out the mudde of the Town ditches, and other standing waters. Every
morning and evening sweep clean the streets before every man's door: Wash
down the channells to keep them sweet. But I like not that slabbering of the
pavement before the house, which I see many use in moist wether; for it
increases the dampishnesse of the Air: excpt it be before the stalls of
Butchers and Cooks: or except the dirt can no other-wise be purged away; and
then let it be swept dry again, except the Sun do shine so clear and hot,
that it is likely to be soon dried thereby.

But indeed there is no way of purging the Air like to the making of Fires in
the streets: Fire purges the Air best.
so it be done with good discretion; that is, In the evenings; when the weather
is moist; and not soultry hot. We read that Hippocrates freed the City of
Cranon (before mentioned) and Athens also ( as Galen testifies li, 1. de
Theriaca ad Pisonem cap. 16.) by making great bonefires, and burning sweet
odours and costly ointments in them. Aetius also ( li. 5. cap. 94.) reports the
like to have been done by Acro Agrigentinus, whereby he delivered the greatest
part of Greece from the Pestilence.

Some Physicians that they may be singular, invent strange ways by themselves
to purify the Air. Strange counsels of Some learned Physicians.
As Cardan persuades to burn leather, or any thing that smells strong though
never so stinking; But for my part I am of opinion with Rodericu a Castro, and
Laurentius Ioubertus, that stinking smells cannot make a wholesome purgation of
the Air. Therefore I leave his conceit to accompany that of Alexander
Benedictus, who would have the dogs that are killed, to be strewed in the
streets, that the vapors of their putrefying carcases, might expel the venom
of the putrefied Air. With which may also be exploded Averroes his potion of
urine, which he esteems an excellent Antidote: I think that which is odious
to the nostrills, by which way aliment is conveyed to the Spirits: And that
which is noisome to the stomach, by which nourishment is brought to the Body;
can be no Cordial. But for the purging of the Air, Rodericus a Castro has
another way, and that easy and cheap (if it be as good.) He affirms that it
was wont to be much used in Spain in pestilent times: and that is, to drive a
great drove of Oxen or Kine through all the streets every day; that their sweet
wholesome breath may cleanse the impure Air. It is true, that the breath of
those Cattle are very sweet and wholesome: But it is to be doubted, that the
impure Air being much more in quantity then their breath, will sooner infect
them, then they purify it; which if it do, then surely all their flesh will
prove but unwholesome meat, and may infect more bodies after they have been at
the Butchers; then they have purified streets while they went before the
drovers. But the Spainards eat so little Beef, as they needed the less to
fear such poisoning.

The Authors opinion.
Now for my opinion what way is best to purge the General Air of the Region. I
must needs say that of Hippocrates (before mentioned) is the best, but too
costly to be received of our Citizens. Therefore I would advise that Muskets
and such like pieces might be discharged in every street, lane, and corner of
the City every morning, and every evening. This way (in hot weather) does not
inflame so much as bonefiers do by their continued heat, but purify as much,
or rather more. For by the blow, the Air is first forcibly moved, shaken,
divided and attenuated, and so prepared for purification; and then immediately
(by the heat of the fire) purified: and that kind of fire purges it better
then others, for (by reason of the Sulphur and Sault-peeter) it is exceeding
drying; and very wholesome. And that this opinion is not any conceit of mine
own; let those that will, Read Levinus Lemnius de Occultis Naturae Miraculis,
or Crato in Consilio 275. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Or Raymundus Mindererus li. de Pestilentia cap. 20. The Heathens could be at
great cost in contagious times; as appears by the precious odours and sweet
ointments that Hippocrates consumed in the fires for those Cities before
mentioned. Why may not We be at a lesser cost, for the safety of a greater
City. GOD is nearer to us, then he was to them; we have his promises to keep
us in all our ways; and to prosper our handy works; they had no such comforts
to rest upon; Yet they endeavored and obtained: we obtain not, only because
we endeavor not.

And now I come to the Fourth Cause of the Pestilence, which is

The Disorder of Man's Diet.
In the name of Diet are included six things, Diet in six Points.
wherein a man ought always to be moderate and regular.

1. The Air, and I mean the Special Air. 2. Meat, and Drinck. 3. Repletion,
and Evacuation. 4. Exercise, and Rest. 5. Seepe, and Watching. 6. Passions of
the Mind.
These are the six Strings of Apollos Violl, wherein consists the whole
harmony of health. If these be in tune, the Body is sound; but if any of
these, be either too high wrested, or too much slackened (that is, immoderately
used) then is the Body put out of tune, and made subject to any sickness. As
one says well, who has thus composed those six points, in these two verses.

Aer, Esca, Quies, Repletio, Gaudia, Somnus:
Haec moderata iuuant, immoderata nocent.
Let every man (therefore) be careful in these things, and if his own skill
be not sufficient to teach him what is temperance; let him observe these rules
following.

First for the Air.
The Disorders of Diet in respect of Air, or ill choice of habitation;
walking, running or riding at unseasonable times, The Disorders in the Point of
Air.
as in fogs, mists, dew, rain etc. And in unwholesome places, such as have been
reckoned already: as also in drawing into the Body too much of such Air as is
Pestilent and contagious.

To cure this point of Diet, we must proceed in purging the Air; and having
done with the general, let us now go to purify the Special, The Cure of the
Special Air in Houses.
and first of all that which is enclosed within the House.

Let every room be kept continually very clean; leave no sluttish corners;
let no water stand in any vessel so long as to putrify, which in a corrupt
Air (especially in hot weather) it will soon do. Cleanse all your vessels
often; wash those rooms that are in continual use (both floores and
wainscoting) every morning; and (those which are able, wash the Windows,
Tables, Cupboards, Stools, Benches, and all wainscotings, in summer with
rose water, and vinegar: and in winter with the Decoction of Rue, Worm wood,
Balm, etc. And after these are washed, wipe them always dry again: (for as
I said before of slabbering the streets; so, much more unwholesome is it to leave
the rooms of the house wet) and having wiped them as dry as you can, air
them also presently with fire. A pan of fire set on the floor in the midst of
the room is the best and quickest way of aireing it. In the mean time let the
windows and doors be shut. Observation.
But observe this: Enter not into the room, (at least to tarry) till it be
aired, and the fire taken away: because then the heat and moisture are buisily
working together, which for the time of working (till the heat have prevailed)
is unwholesome. And if you must needs go in, during that time; make have out
again; and set the door wide open while you tarry; for such vapors kept
close, have suddenly deprived some of life, before they have felt themselves
offended: as Skenckius (in his observe. li. 2. De Partibus vitalibus: If you
must needs be in the ^ome, let the fire be in the chimney.
observe. xix.) proves by diverse examples. And I could name some also of mine
own knowledge, if need were. Moreover while these rooms are thus aireing, you
may cast into these fires, in Cold weather; Juniper, both the wood and the
berries; Pitch, Turpentine, Franckencense, Storax, Benjamin, Oken-leaues,
Airing in Cold weather.
Bay leaves, etc. Also at such a season, you may strew your windows, shelues,
and ledges; with Balm, Mints, Lavender, Worme-wood, Rue; and such like warming
smells. And if the heat of them offend, steep them in Vineager six hours, and
then strew them as before.

In hot weather. Take a tile, or a fier-shovell heated hot, In Hot weather.
and pour into it an equal quantity of whitewine vineager and Rosewater
wherein a little camphor has been dissolved, and with this perfume the rooms.
At such a time likewise, strew the rooms with Primroses, Rose-leaues, Violets,
or some such cool or temperate smelling herbs, as the season will afford.

In temperate weather, Rosemary and Bay-leaues, in Rosewater, heated in a
perfuming pot is very sufficient. Or take Pitch, In temperate weather.
Tar, Turpentine, Rosin, of each a like quantity, melt them together on the
fire, and to every pound put in a pint of vineager. Boil them to the
consumption of the vineager. Burn some of this daily at all seasons, and in
all weathers. And if you add to it the wood of Juniper made into powder: It
will be excellent.

If any vault or unsavory sincke be so near as to offend any room of the
house: Air that room most, and use it least.

The other kind of Special Air is said to be that which is immediately next
to the person of every one. Cure of Special Air about the Body.


This is to be purged Four ways.
1. By things held in the mouth. 2. By odours held to the nose. 3. By Apparel.
4. By Amulets.
For the first. Of things held in the mouth, Things held in the mouth.
some be Simple, and some Compound.

Simple, are Cloves, Citron pills, Roots of Tormentill, Angelica, Zedoarie, and
such like.

Compound, are such as these following.
Take of London Triacle half an ounce; mix it with the muscilage of Gumm,
Dragagant and Rose water, and a little sugar. So make it up into Rowles or
Lozenges, hold one in your mouth; and let it dissolve therein, all the while
you are near any place or person suspected to be infected.

You may also, hold Mithridate in your mouth, if the heat offend you not.

But a piece of a Citron pill alone is best of all in summer; And in winter, a
slice of Angelica root.

Likewise generally at all seasons Juniper berres steeped all night in
whit-wine Vineager. Or Cloves steeped in Rose vineager.

And in like manner may you steep slices of the Roots of Angelica,
Enulacampane, Zedoarie, Tormentill etc. In Rosewater and vineager; for they are
too hot of themselves.

And for those that have cold stomachs, green Ginger is exceeding good.

Odours, Simple.
Secondly. Odours that are to be carried in the hand and held to the nose, are
also Simple and Compound.

Simple, are Balm, Mints, Rue, Wormwood, Penniroyall, Myrtles, Lauender, etc.

But these hot herbs are not fit for any but cold and flegmaticke complexions
to use them Simply and alone. And it is a strange thing to see how all sorts of
people play the fools with their own noses; all carrying Wormwood, and
thrusting it up into their nostrills. Wherein ten do themselves injury, for
one that does good. For though they perceive not the danger presently; yet it
must needs inflame their brain: which being over heat, will send down such
juices to the heart, as shall inflame that also, and so bring them into a
burning Feauor, which is the high way to that Sickness they most desire to
shun. For the Brain is the continual spring that cooles the heart; which
office if it perform not; the heart will soon over heat it self: how much
more will it be over heat then when that which should temper it brings
distemper to it? But people will be so skillful, that they think they need
ask no counsel in these matters: but like a flock of sheep leap one after
another, they neither know whether nor wherefore.

It is good therefore to take the juices of such herbs as these and mix them
with Rose Water and vineager, and so carry a sponge, or handkercheif dipped
therein. And observe this.

Always mix cold smells with hot; and (even for cold constitutions also.) Let
the cold odours be most praedominat: for the greatest danger is in
over-heating. For hot things though they purge the Air, yet they inflame the
Blood and humors. Therefore temper them according to the constitution of the
body and weather. Let them likewise be something Sweet. For unsavory smells do
dissolve the Spirits, and weaken the faculties. It is a sure rule, that those
things which nature abhoreth, will always hurt her, but never help her: except
it be to euacuate in some case of repletion only.

Now for Compound Odours. Compound Odours.

Take of London Triacle half an ounce, Vineager an ounce, Rose Water two
ounces. Mix them together till the Triacle be well dissolved.

Then dip a piece of a Sponge in this liquor; and carry it in some little box
peirced full of holes, to smell through.

Or, Take liquid Storax, wash it well in Wine-vineager and Rosewater, wherein
some Camphor has been disolued. Then mix with it, of the powder of Cloves,
and yellow Sanders, as much as will make it thick like Tar; carry it in some
Sevit or Pomander-box.

As for Pomanders; which are the best, both for handsome carriage and
continuance of sent. If any will resort to me, I will fit them at diverse prices.

To wash the face.
Furthermore, It is good also to wash the face, mouth, and nostrills often with
strong Vineager, Rose Water and a little Wine, wherein has been steeped (for
six hours together) some thin shavings of Zedoarie or Angelica, or Tormentill
roots.

The poor people may wash them with Fair water and Vineager, and the juice of
Rue.

Apparel.
Thirdly. Apparel is to be a defense against the infectious Air. Which
becomes so, by being well made, and well kept.

To the well making of garments in this respect, there go two points; the
Stuff, and the Fashion. For the Stuff, all woolen cloth would be avoided,
because it retains the infection long: Buffe also, Shamoys, and such kinds of
leather are naught, because they (through their sponginesse) do draw and keep
it much more then other wearings: Feathers likewise and Fans; being the most
needless ornaments, should now be laid aside, for they are also of a nature
that retains infection long: and so are all kind of Furrs; therefore wear
none of these if you may choose. But if your purse will serve, buy Grograms,
Chamlets, etc. Such as may be watered: for the watering of stuffes through their
gumminesse, does best exclude the Air from entering or taking up any loging in
the stuffs so dressed. And let the doublets and hose be lined rather with
Linen then Fustian, because the woolinesse of Fustian is of kin to the other
already found fault with-all. As for silks, as Grograms, Taffaties, Sattins,
they are also very good, but Veluets, Plush, Shag and such like are not so
good. Let them be also fitted with linings according to the weather, that they
occasion not the Body to sweat through heat, to be tired with weight, nor to
catch cold with thinness. For these inconveniences may be occasions of much
harm; But taking of cold is the most dangerous of all; for there upon follow
putrid Feauors: and all of them are friends to the Plague. For the Fashion,
avoid much Quiltings, and stuffing with Bombast and Hair, for into such things
the infected Air will easily get, and hardly forsake them.

Women usually have Whale-bone bodies which are as good armor as any other.
Let the greatest care be to guard the vital parts: But withal there must be
some care of all the body: which to guard the better, it is good to wear long
Cloakes of such watered stuffes as I have mentioned; which being outermost,
excludes well the outward Air while one is abroad; and when one is come home,
they may be laid by, till they have been aired. But for Physicians and
Chyrurgians, and such as come among the sick: it is good for them to have long
Gowns of such stuffes; which as soon as they come forth of the sick
Chambers, they may throw off to be aired. And so much for the Well-making. Now
for the Well keeping of Garments; this is done by keeping them clean and
sweet. To keep them clean, requires variety and often shifting. To keep
them sweet is required much airing and perfuming. As when you put them on, or
lay them by, and that according to the Weather.

As in cold Weather.
Take Juniper slices, Juniper berries bruised; Rosemarie, Perfumes for Apparel.
Bay-leaues, and Wormwood cut small; and Franckincense grossly powdered.

Burn them together on a chafing dish of coals, and so perfume your Clothes.

In hot Weather.
Take dried Rose-leaues steeped in Rose Water, wherein Camphor has been
dissolved, and add to it a little vineager.

Upon a hot fire-shouell make a fume: and perfume your apparel.

In temperate Times.
Take Juniper berries, gum Dragagant, and Franckincense, all grossly powdered;
of each a like quantity. Steep them in vineager and Rose Water, six hours.

Then spread the same on a hot tile or fire-shouell, and perfume your Clothes
therewith.

Fourthly, Amulets, Amulets.
are things made to hang about the neck, to touch the naked skin next the
heart. These are of some with a kind of superstition esteemed. But though
Carpus the Chirurgian of Bononia persuaded himself and others, that he was
preserved from the Plague by wearing Arsenicke in a clout upon the region of
the heart; yet many in London have died of the Plague with those bables about
them: and as for Arsenicke and other such poisonous stuff, I could speak
enough against them; Dr. Herring.
but a learned Dr of Physic has saved me that labor. But for some cordial
things; I will for the Readers satisfaction give a taste of them. They may be
of two sorts, Simple, and Compounded. Simple, as Unicorns horn, Bezoar stone,
(which is the best of all, if a man can get it) the Hyacinth also and
Smaragdus, and such like; but how the influence of such stones may be conveyed
out of their hard bodies to the heart, is hard for me to understand. The former
are more likely; for Galen reports ( li. 6. de Simp. Medic. facult.) that he
cured a boy of the Falling Sickness, by hanging a Paeonie root about his
neck. Yet I think he could never say so but that once: Therefore I would wish
none to put any confidence in such disputable things. Nevertheless, since I
have divided them into Simple and Compounded; I will give you a Composition,
which may be used in stead of an Amulet, and that to good purpose.

A good Quilt to be used in stead of an Amulet.
Take the leaves of red Roses dried, two drams, all the Saunders, Lignum,
Aloes, Zedoarie root, Angelica root, Sage, white Dittanie, Baulme, Citron
pills, of each half a dram.

Make them into powder, and sew them up in a piece of red Taffarie or Calico;
and make a Quilt thereof. Heat it on a pewter dish upon a chasing dish of
coals; and sprinckle it with Rose-vineager: so apply it warm to the place,
and renew it once in six hours.

I cannot but let thee know (good Reader) that even now while I was writing
upon this subject, there has been a patient with me, who is poisoned with
with a venomous Amulet. Be warned therefore by the harms of others to take
heed of such pernicious things.

Thus have I finished the first part of Diet; concerning Air. The second part
follows.

Which consists of Meat and Drink. Meat and Drink.


Disorder in meat and drink is chiefly committed either in regard of the
Quality, or Quantity of them.

In Quality, when that meat or drink which is used, Disorder in their
quality.
is either generally unwholesome for all men (as venomous Mushroms; stinking or
raw meat; musty, or new, or dead drinks; these breed venom in the humors, and
so a just occasion for infection) or else particularly naught for the proper
constitution of him that eats or drinks it. As meat of hard digestion to a
weak stomach, (for that denies nourishment) meat of easy concoction to a
strong stomach, (for that putresies in the stomach, and so corrupts the blood)
hot spices and inflaming drinks to a hot constitution, etc. these breed many
diseases in the purest air; and in a contagious, they easily make way for the
Plague. Therefore we are to be careful what we eat or drink.

And our Care must be two fold; first, to refuse things noisome; secondly, to
choose things wholesome.

In refusing things noisome take these rules.

Beware of piercing and attenuating things; Qualities of meats generally to be
refused.
for they are heating; and by opening the body, they expose it to the
corruption of the Air. On the contrary also thick and slimie things are
stopping, breeding crudities and putrefaction; by reason of that crassitude,
moisture, and accidental heat which is in them. Sweet and fatty things
likewise are to be avoided* because they easily turn to choler, and so kindle
hot feavors. Very moist meats, as we see they are hardly kept sweet in hot
weather, so by the heat of the stomach, they easily turn to putrefaction;
especially to hot and chollericke constitutions. But of all things those that
are both moist and hot (especially wherein the moist is predominant) are most
dangerous, because they are as it were the very seed of putrefaction. Cold
mixed with moist is not so ill, because not so apt presently to putrefie; but
wheresoever the moist is stronger, the blood is made watrish and weaker; and
therefore not so nourishing as Nature needs it. Also meats of hard digestion,
melancholicke, salt, and windy are to be eschewed. Beware of all things that
are hot and enflaming. Much use of very sharp things, are very hurtful.
Shun also all things that increase much blood, for the body must be kept low
in contagious times. Also all things that are loathsome to the pallat or
stomach must be rejected; for that which nature abhors, dissipateth the
Spirits.

Particular meats to be forborne.
Having thus taught by their Quality in general what meats and drinks are to
be forborne: Now I will more particularly reckon up such as are most commonly
known and used: being most to be avoided in times of Infection.

And first for your Bread. Bread.
Be careful that it be not mustie, nor mouldie: neither eat it hot, nor before
it be a day old. It is best for them that can have Ouens at home, not to send
their bread to other houses to be baked: nor to receive any continually from
the hand of common Bakers that serve to many several houses.

Flesh of beasts.
Very salt and long powdered Beef (though never so much watered afterward to
get out the salt) is not good; yea all that watering and moystening makes it
worse. Also Bacon, and Porke, especially boiled: the Hare, especially when he
is old. Venison both of fallow and red Dear, that live in a corrupted air,
are unwholesome: not alone for the reason that some give of their living always
in the open air; and much running and heating their bodies therein (which
makes them apt to be corrupted by the contagion) but also in regard of the
manner of killing them; which is by hunting them to death: for in that action
they poison their flesh very much by tyring their bodies and weakening their
spirits to the death; and by the infinite working of the passion of fear in
them: which how apt that is to poison any body; I shall show in his place.

Fowls:
Fowls that live in fens or waters, are all naught, as the Goose, Ducke,
Mallard, Teale, Hearon, etc.

Inwards.
Meats made of the Inwards of Beasts, are not good, as Puddings, Tripes,
Chitterlings, Kidneys, Livers, Lights, Milts, etc.

Of Fishes, Fish.
such as live in standing Pooles and Ponds, (especially in muddy waters) are
very evil; as, Carps, Eeles, Lampreys, and such like: for they corrupt the
humors and breed obstructions. Salt-fish and Sea fish, sharpen the humors.
Oysters, Cockles, Muskles, Peruinckles, are hurtful. Grisly fish (as Mayds,
Thornbacke, and such like) are to be avoided.

Eggs of Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, etc. are to be rejected. Eggs.


Milk, Milk.
(because it is of all meats most easy of digestion) soon corrupts in the
stomach, and therefore is disallowed. So is Cream, because it makes gross
blood. Likewise Cheese, because it is stopping. And also Whey, because it is
opening, and not nourishing.

Of Fruits, Fruits.
all such as are Worme-eaten, are to be accounted corrupted and naught. All
sweet and luscious fruits; as Cherries, Plums, green Figs, sweet Grapes,
Black-berries, etc. Also Melons, Pompions, Pomcitrons, etc. Forbear generally
all Summer fruits; because they breed crudities and gross humors. Among the
rest also Beans and Pease are accounted unfit meats.

Roots, Roots.
such as are watrish, are to be refrained; so also is Garlic; (for all it is
called, the Poore-mans Triacle) because it opens and heateth too much;
therefore it is seldom fit in these times.

Herbs that are hot are not to be used but with good advise, and tempering
them with such as are cooling. Herbs.
And beware of Cabages, Coleworts, Lettice, and Rocket; and all moist and cold
herbs; for they breed obstructions and crudities.

Let not your Sauces be sweet; for such increase choler; Sauces.
nor too full of taste, for that whets the appetite beyond the desire of
nature, and provokes to too liberal feeding. Among other sauces, Mustard is
chiefly to be forbidden, because it opens, and discusseth.

Beware of hot Spices, Spices.
use them sparingly; and then well allayed with cooling things.

Pottage and Broths, Broths.
are no fit food for these times: because if they be thick and strong, they
nourish too fast: or if they be thin and not nourishing, they fill the body
with moisture more then needs. For Manardus (li. 5. epist. 3.) says, The body
ought rather to be dried then moystened.

Mushroms.
Some have (from strangers) taken up a foolish trick of eating Mushroms or
Toadstooles. But let them now be warned to cast them away; for the best Authors
hold the best of them at all times in a degree venomous, and therefore in time
of Pestilence much more dangerous.

What manner of dressing meats are worst.
Now for the manner of dressing your meat, briefly observe; that baked meats
(because their vapors are restrained within their coffins) are not so well
purified by the fire, as meats otherwise cooked: therefore they are suspected
to have in them a degree of venom; especially, if the meat have been kept any
long while in the infected Air: much more if it be Venison, for the reasons
before-named. But if any be earnestly desirous of Baked meats, let them first
take heed they be not too full of taste and gluttonous: and also let the pie or
pastie, be opened as soon as it comes out of the Oven, and so let it breath it
self till it be cold.

Also sowsed and pickled meats are not good; neither are boiled meats so good
as roasted.

What drinks are unfit*
Of Drinks. Beer or Ale that is new, strong, heady, and fuming; also bitter,
fl^t, dead, or fusty, are to be avoided.

Compounded drinks.
Likewise such as are sophisticated with Lemons, Spices, etc.

And those that are made with Sage, Wormwood, Scorby-grasse; and other such
Ingredients: unto which may be added Metheglin, Mead, Bragget, Vsquebath,
Hippocras, Aqua-Vitae, Rosa solis, Aqua Composita; and all strong and
Compounded waters. As these are indeed no other then Medicines, so neither are
they otherwise to be used; that is, always with good Caution, upon good cause,
and with skillful Counsel

Pery and sweet Cider, Pery and Cider.
are to be refused for their sweetness and coldness.

Wines, Wines.
though they are frequently used among sober people; yet they are not so fit
for the constitution of English men, as Beer and Ale. And this is evident in
that the only wise God (who knows best what is fittest for every Region)
has forbidden this Soil to bring forth such things; because they are either
needless or not natural to the Inhabitants. Therefore it were good if all
kinds of Wines were used of us, but as so many kinds of Medicines also; that
is, only to help Nature when she is too weak to help her self in
Concoction, Retention, and Excretion. And among Wines (in regard of the
Sickness) those that are new, sweet, black, and troubled, are forbidden.
Piercing Wines; such as White and Rhenish (for the reasons already alleged in
Piercing and Attenuating things) I cannot allow of for ordinary use: though
some Physicians do. As for Muskadell and Malego, their sweet taste, and that
dullness of Spirit which is caused by them, betrays their unfitness in times
of Contagion.

And before I leave this point, let me leave with you this Caveat. Good Caveats.
Take heed into what houses you enter to drink with your friend: lest in stead
of a health, you drink your death. Let every man drink in his own cup, and
let none trust the breath of his Brother. Also take heed of all drinks that
smell or taste of the Caske.

Now me-thinkes I hear one whisper in mine ear, he would feign know what I
think of Tobacco; he takes it to be the only Antidote against the Plague.

I cannot stand to dispute the case deeply: Tobacco.
But I will briefly show my opinion. Tobacco has these manifest Qualities: It
is Heating and Drying; it evacuateth gross Humors; it draws away Rheums; it
provokes Urine, and keeps the belly soluble. There may be some times, and
some bodies wherein a Medicine having these opening qualities may be used; as
namely, to a Cold and Flegmaticke complexion, full of gross humors; the party
for the time keeping himself warm, and within doors. But for the common
fashion of taking it, by every man, every day (yea almost every hour) in shops
and open places, without consideration of constitution, or just cause; I cannot
approve of it at all: much less as any Antidote. But let us examine it a
little further, for their sakes that would use it more orderly: and see whither
it may be accounted a Preservatiue Medicine or no. I have already reckoned the
best qualities it has, being taken in the Pipe (for so only I discourse of
it) and the first of those qualities indeed shows a fair countenance to the
case: But the four latter talk too much of penetration, and evacuation:
wherewith it opens the pores, and makes the body fit to receive the contagious
air; it also dissolues the brain, and causes the humors thereof to fall
down into all parts of the body distempered with a heat contrary to nature;
whereupon it enflames the blood, turns it to melancholy, and rests not till it
have also turned Black Choler into Burnt Choler. And in all this doing, his
heat carries no cordial to the spirits (which must never be absent from an
Antidote) for it is mixed with a nauseous quality, noisome to the stomach, and
offensive to nature; as appears by the violence it offers in vomiting, when a
little of the juice is given to that purpose. These things considered, I think
Tobacco has very little good use in Pestilent times. And thus much for noisome
things to be avoided.

The Cure of this Cause. Qualities of meats and drinks generally to be chosen.
Now we come to reckon up wholesome things to be elected.

Let the Qualities of your meats and drinks be temperate betwixt hot and cold,
and rather dry then moist. And (if the stomach may endure it) let them for the
most part have a sharp or sower smacke with them. Let them be of easy
digestion, breeding good blood, and sincere humors in the body.

Bread.
Let your Bread be made of the best and purest Wheat (which alone makes the
best Bread) or mix it with some Rye. Let the Corn be such as harvest has
housed before the Air became infectious. Leauened bread is the most wholesome,
because of the sowernesse. Let those that may, bake their bread at home.

Flesh of beasts.
Roasted Beef may be eaten with Vineager. A rosting Pigge is not to be denied,
if his belly be stuffed with Sage, sweet Marioram, Spinach, Parsley, and
Mints: the sauce also made sharp with Vineager and spiced with a little
Pepper, or Ginger. Veale, Mutton, Lamb, Kid, and Coney are very wholesome: but
let them not be very fat.

Of Fowls, Fowls.
such as fly nearest the Sun, and build their nests on high, feeding on sweet
and wholesome grain, are best approved by the best Authors: because they receive
less infection from the lower air, which is the most contagious. But if we
examine which are they, we shall find but a few that keep all these
conditions. For the Hearon flies high, and builds high; but feeds in fenny and
moorish places, and on moist meats. The Kite, Hawke, Raven, and such like,
feed on carrion, and are never counted worthy to be served as a dish at the
Table. The Lark flies high and near the Sun, but has his nest on the
earth. The Rookes in deed fly something high, build high, and feed on the best
Corn; and their young ones are esteemed dainty food: but these are not for
every ones dish. Therefore we may not be so overcurious in the choice of these
creatures. Let these suffice as most wholesome, viz. Capon, Turkey, Hen,
Pullet, Chicken, Partridge, Pheasant, tame Pigeons, young wild Pigeons,
Turtles, Larks, Black-birds, Thrushes, and Finches.

Some Inwards of Beasts and Fowls also, Inwards.
are very good and wholesome: as the Gizards and Livers of Hens, and Capons: the
Hearts of Veale, Mutton, and Lamb: also Lamb-stones, and young Cock-stones are
excellent meat, and fit for the state of some bodies. But whosoever he be that
makes choice of them for the nourishment of his lust, let him remember the
Israelites Quails, and tremble; lest while the meat is in his mouth, the hand
of God be at his heart; Numb. 11 33.
and in the mess of his sin, the Plague salute him with the message of death.

Fishes that are of Rivers, and clear running waters are best: Fish.
as Plaise, Flounders, etc. Fresh Salmon, Trouts, Barbels, Shrimps etc. Of
Seafish there are but a few fit to be used in these times: and those are
Gogions, Mullets, Soales, Gurnards, Lobsters, and Cray-fishes: But fish must be
seldomer used then flesh; and only for change of diet to weak and longing
stomachs. For all kinds of fish breed but a watrish kind of blood.

Eggs of Hens (if they be eaten new and rear dressed) are good, whither they
be roasted, boiled, fried, or poached; Eggs.
and eaten with Veriuice, or Vineager, and the juice of a Lemon. Also Turkey
Eggs so used are good: but eat them seldomer, because they afford a little
too rank nourishment. In Summer time, eat flesh and eggs more sparingly
then in Winter, lest you increase blood too much, or turn it to choler; which
also turns to inflammation, and putrefaction.

Butter.
Butter is very good, and so is Buttermilke: (if moderately used) but they do
easily inflame a chollericke stomach: and send up hot fumes into the head. The
milk also purges some bodies: such therefore are the more to forbear it.

Fruits may be allowed (but seldom and in little quantity to be used) the
sower and sharp are best; Fruits.
as sower Cherries and Plums (but these preserved, or in tarts, or at least
scalded, rather then raw) the Norwich, and Katherin Pears: the Peppins,
Pearmains, and Harvie Apples being grown old; are counted Cordialls. Also
Peaches, Quinces, Pomgranets, Oranges, Lemons, Medlars, Sarvices, Strawberries,
Gooseberries, Barberies, Raspes, Mulberries; likewise dried fruits, as dried
Pears, Plums, Cherries, Figs, Raisins, Damask proins, etc. Those that have hot
stomachs, and desire Cucumbers, may eat them beaten with an Onion and Salt, and
sauced with Vineager, and a little sprinkled with Pepper. French Beans also
(called a forma, Kidney Beans) may now and then be used, as the best sort of
pulse for meat. So may Hartichokes with Butter and Vineager, or the juice of a
Lemon. If you earnestly desire sometime to eat of the moyster fruits: eat
after them an Orange with a little Fennel and Salt. And if you feel your
stomach over-cooled with such kind of moist fruits; drink also a draught of
good white Wine: at such a time; that Wine is good to warm the stomach, and
carry away the crudities.

Of Roots, Roots.
these are the best, Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips, Hartichokes of Jerusalem. Also
Onions, and Radishes, for they are esteemed of great virtue against venoms. And
so are Leekes, because they cleanse the blood.

Of Herbs; Herbs.
the warm and drying are of greatest use, as Rue, Wormwood, Baulm, Mints, Peni
royal, Rosemary, and many such like; with which you may stuff and temper
moist meats. But for Sallets and Sauces: Fennel, sweet marior^m, Sage, Time,
Parsley, Succorie. But of all; sharp and sower herbs are best: and therefore
Sorrel is in good request, and Endive or Succorie mixed therewith; because of
themselves they are opening.

Hot Spices may be used in moist meats, Spices.
and to temper cold and sower fruits. Also in Winter time, and to a cold
stomach, they may be allowed simple; or with little qualification: otherwise
there is no use of them, but to mix with sauces. What Spices I mean, are
easily known: viz. Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger; and to these I add
Saffron, and the roots of Enula Campane, Zedoarie, Angelica, and Tormentill;
which are very useful.

The fittest Sauces are sharp and sower ones. Sauce^
As Sorrel and Vineager, or Veriuice, or the juice of Lemons, or Oranges. Also
Capers and Vineager, are very good. When the weather is cold and your stomach
craves it, you may mix them with Spices to make them warmer; and in these
cases if you doubt the weakness of your stomach, and the binding in of your
spirits, by cold sower Sauces; then temper your meats with Sugar, a little
Salt, Cinnamon, Pepper, Safron, and some Fennel: or with Eggs, Butter, and
the juice of Lemons, and a little Fennel and Saffron.

Broths must be very thin, Broths.
and something sharpened with Lemons, or Vineager. In stead of them also you
may sometimes use Posset-ale turned with Vineager, or a Lemon; and after boiled
with some of these herbs before commended. Or Aleberries for those that cannot
away with flesh. And let those that feed on these things, forbear drink.

Gellyes also are good for weak bodies, Gellyes.
if they be not intemperately Spiced.

As for the manner of dressing: Roast is better then boiled; What manner of
Dressing Meats is best.
Fish is beft ^^ fried then boiled. But if any desire boiled meat rather, then
let it be flesh of the drier sort: or if yet it must needs be of the moyster,
let it be well sauced with sharp and sower things, with a little Pepper,
Cinnamon, prepared Coriander seeds and salt. Sorrel and Marigold flowers may
be added at your pleasure.

Vineager his virtues.
I have still prescribed Vineager as a thing of general use, because being
cooling and drying, it resists all kinds of poison, and repelleth
putrefaction. Which is apparent (as Ambrosius Paraeus li. de Peste. cap. 8.
testifies) in the embalming of dead bodies, who are washed in Vineager, to
keep them from putrefying. Not so good for Women.
But here I must give a Caveat to women: for (as Crato in Consil. 275. says)
it hurts the Mother: therefore they must allay it with white Wine and Sugar.

Beer and Ale.
Now for Drink. Middling Beer or Ale is generally best for common use: But the
constitution of every one must fit it self. Only take heed of extremities;
very strong enflames: and very small makes watrish blood. Let your drink be
well boiled, and stale; but quick and fresh.

Cider made of sharp Apples is not amiss to be used sometimes, Cider.
to refresh the pallat with variety.

Wine.
Those that have need of Wine to help their stomachs, let them use good Claret,
Sherries sack, or Canarie: and now and then a draught of White Wine. But if
your stomach do not much require them simply: allay them with water. Let your
wine be clear, brisk, old, and pleasant.

Who are fit to use Wine.
To a weak stomach, and a feeble nature, Wine is an Antidote against all
poisons; as Celsus li. 8. de Re Medica. cap. 27. affirms. And Senectutis
summa est Medicina: it is the best Medicine for Old age, as Aetius teaches in
Tetr. 1. sermon. 4. cap. 30. But let not youths, and men of strength think they
may be so bold with Wine in these contagious seasons, as they have bin wont to
be at other times. For it must needs inflame their blood, and inflammation is
certainly seconded with putrefaction; and putrefaction is no less then a
degree of poison in the humors, which will easily turn to the Pestilence.

Quantity.
And so much for the Disorder of Man's Diet in Quality of Meat and Drink. Now
we come to Quantity. And herein; The disease is Surfeiting, and the Remedy
must be Sobriety. I will therefore lay open, first the Danger of the Disease,
and then the Course of the Cure.

In this Disorder of Quantity, Gluttony.
I cannot but admire at my Country men: for if Heliogabalus were now among the
living, he might find enough companions among Englishmen. It was wont to be
said, The Drunken-Dutchman: but the Dutch have played the Godfathers, and have
too kindly, bestowd their names upon our men, such names I mean as Diotemus of
Athens had; who was entitled the Tunnell, for his filthy delight in drinking
and drinking in a Tunnell. For the lives of many are so monstrous, that a man
might say of some among us, as Valerius Aurelianus the Emperor was wont to say
of Bonosus, a Spaniard: That he was borne; not to live, but to drink. These
riotous abuses of Gods good gifts, are a maine cause why the Lord at this time
strikes this Land with Sickness, and threatens it with the Famine. And if
any of that Luxurious Sect be at this time sober, let them but listen to the
testimonies of learned experience, The dangers of Surfeiting.
who will tell them into what bodily dangers they plunge themselves by this
detestable disorder.

Hippocrates has an Aphorism to this purpose, Li. 2. Aph. 17.
that Meat or drink immoderately taken causes sickness.

Paulus Aegineta goes yet further, saying, De Re Medicae* li. 1. cap. 32.
That the veins being filled too full; are afflicted, distended, or else
broken: obstructed, filled with wind, and overcharged. And of all diseases,
he affirms, that the over-charging of the veins is the worst.

Galen affirms, In Com. 2. Hipp. de Natu. Humana.

Li. de Causis morboru^. cap. 3.


that Drunkenness and Crudities (which arise from intemperance) do breed new
diseases.

And in another place, he says, Whereas wine moderately taken increases
natural heat; as being his proper aliment: by Drunkenness comes
astonishment of the brain, the Falling sickness, or some mayme either to
Sense or Motion. And so, the best Meats, which afford most nourishment, being
immoderately eaten, engender cold Diseases.

But Avicen more particularly lays down the dangers that follow this over
Repletion, in these words: Eating much nourishes not; De Removendis Nocumentis
in Regimine Sanitatis. Tract. 4. cap. 1.
but fills the body with crudities and raw humors stops the pores, weakens the
powers of nature; causes putrefaction, mixed feavors, short breath, Sciatica,
and ioynt-Aches.

Again, in another place he speaks of drinking, thus: Much drinking of Wine
in sanguine and chollericke complexions, Ibidem. cap. 19.
overheats the blood, and causes choler to superabound; and by too much
Repletion of the veins and vessels, there may follow a hot Apoplexy, and
sudden Death. In cold Complexions it breeds Diseases of the sinews; and that
for two causes: The first is the over moystening of the sinews; the other, the
turning of the drink into Vineager before it can pass through the body: So
the Nerves are by the former relaxed, and by the latter corroded. Whereupon
follows the cold Apoplexy, Astonishment, Senslesnesse, Lethargy, Palsy,
Trembling of the limbs, and convulsions of the mouth.

These are the fearful mischiefs that befall their bodies; besides the
miserable wants that grow like eating Cankers into their Estates, and the
hideous Hell Torments which attend their Souls.

And note this also, that what these have said of Wine, the same is true
likewise of all other strong Drinks.

The Cure.
Now to Cure this brutish Disease, there is no better way then Prevention; and
Gluttony is prevented by Sobriety. Therefore again hearken to Avicen, who
advises always to rise from meat with some remainder of Appetite: for within
half an hour, or as soon as the meat (first eaten) begins to digest, our
hunger cease. li. 1. Fen. 3. Doct. 2. cap. 7.

And hence it is, that some (greedily following the sense of their appetite)
overcharge their stomachs even to vomiting, before they feel themselves
satisfied; because, though the vessel be over-full, yet the Appetite is not
appeased till Concoction have begun her work upon some part of that which is
already received. These things are especially to be regarded in a contagious
time. For Repletion is the original of all mischiefs that Crudities can
produce, and they can cause speedy putrefaction, and that speeds them with the
Pestilence.

But as for a strict Quantity of eating and drinking, I cannot stint every
man's stomach; but must conclude with Hippocrates, Aph. 17. li. 1. Concedendum
est aliquid Tempori, Regioni, Aetatt, et Consuetudini. The Time, Place, Age,
and Custom, must bear some sway in these things. Only in these times, I
would wish all men, women, and children to be so moderate (as Avicen
counsels) that they still keep in the fire of their appetite; Be sparing in
eating.
and how sparing so ^ver they are wont (naturally or customarily) to be; let
them be now something more sparing. Make sewer and shorter meals. I would wish
those that have not very weak and windy stomachs, to eat but twice a day:
that is, Breakfast and Dinner: to go to bed without a Supper is very wholesome;
thereby we give Sleep leave to supply the evenings nourishment, which it will
better perform when neither the stomach troubles it with vapors; nor it
hinders the stomach from digestion.

Let your drink also be less then your meat: Be more sparing in drinking.
And drink not between meals, if you can forbear.

Laertius li. 2. says, that Socrates lived in Athens in diverse Plague times,
and was never sick of it: and the reason was, his great temperance in diet.

In Winter and cold Weather, eat your meat hot from the fire. In Summer eat it
for the most part cold. Let the times of eating be; for your breakfast two
hours after you are up, and have taken some Antidote. And your dinner five
hours after that again. Your Supper also (if the weakness of your stomach
crave it) five hours after your dinner.

Frame not to your self an Antidote without skill: Antidotes must be first
taken in the morning.
but take advice of the Physician: who will consider what will best agree with
the particular temper of your body: for Mithridate and Triacle, are generally
good for all; but not particularly for every one.

But because every one will not be brought to break their old customary times
of meals; as dinner at twelve, and supper at seven: I am content to yield to
custom in these cases. Only let them never go forth without their breakfast:
that they may be armed against Wind and Emptiness. And their Antidote taken
two hours before; that they may be armed against evil Aires.

Breakfasts.
Now for those that must therefore make three meals a day; let their breakfast
(if they be of a cold constitution) be some bread and butter with Nutmeg
grated, and a little Citron pill powdered, and strewed upon it. Or else bread
and sallet Oil (for such as love it) spiced with the powder of Enula campane
root. Or else (especially in cold and moist weather) eat a few figs with a
little Penniroyall and salt. But for hot stomachs and chollericke complexions;
let such dip some bread in Beer and Vineager, and eat it. Or take good Wine
Vineager, steep in it (for three days together) the powder of Brimston and a
few Fennell-seeds, soppe your bread in it, and make it your breakfast And for
those that must make three meals a day, let their breakfast be little in
quantity. At other meals, eat the lightest meats first, and then those that
are more hard of digestion: Eat no butter last, and drink not last after your
meat. Neither is Cheese so commonly to be eaten at these times, for if it be
full of Butter, it is fuming; if not, it is binding: and both these are faults;
except the inclination of the body require it at sometimes.

After dinner also, if you have a cold stomach, close it with a bit of bread,
and a few Coriander seeds prepared. And this likewise will do well for
breastfast, if you be troubled with wind and gripings.

Variety of meats are naught a^^ one meal.
Eat not of above two or three dishes at Dinner, and at Supper, let one
suffice you. Quercitavus (in Diaetet: Polyhist. Sect. 2. cap. 8.) proves, that
the eating of variety of meats, and drinking of diverse kinds of drinks at
one meal, makes such a confused heap in the stomach, as turns to infinite
tumults in Concoction; while some are sower, and some speedier in softening,
digesting, and distributing into the parts of the body.

To conclude; Let Custom something prevail in all points of diet, with those
that have used temperance in former times; and only pare it something thinner
in respect of the present pestilent time. As for those that never knew the
rules of order yet: let them learn shortly, if they desire to live long. And
so much for the second part of Diet: Meat and Drink.

The third Point of Diet, is Repletion, and Evacuation.
Galen (li. 1. de Differ. feb. cap. 4.) says, that the body ought especially
to be kept free from superfluities. The Cause.
And Hippocrates (in the third Aph. of his first Book) proves that
Plethoricke bodies are subject to great dangers: wherefore he counsels
Evacuation; and yet withal to go no further therein then Nature will safely
bear. For as too much Repletion is hurtful, so too long fasting makes the
stomach languish; therefore suffer not too much emptiness. Hunger sharpens the
humors and weakens the Spirits: And Thirst makes the heart hot, and enflames
the Spirits; who therefore desiring to be cooled, do draw in more quantity of
the evil Air by breathing, then they should, and that I have already proved
to be dangerous. Therefore it is better to eat the oftener, so it be the less
at once.

When you rise in the morning rub your sides, arms, The way of Cure.

What is to be done when one rises in the morning.


and legs a little: your cloths being on; comb your head, and rub it; hawk
and spit; and blow your nose, to evacuate those excrements. Then wash your
hands and face with fair water first, in regard of cleansing; but afterward
(in respect of preservation) wash your face, nose, mouth, and eyelids (closing
your eyes) with Rose Water and Vineager and white Wine. Or with fair water and
a little Vineager, wherein Rue has shred and steeped all night. Assay also to
make water, and go to stool. Be careful to bring your body to a custom of
evacuation at that time. And after that eat your Antidote.

If you be costiue, use some Suppositorie, or Clyster; Keep the body soluble.
if such slighter means (whereof every man can prescribe one or other) will
not prevail, consult with the Physician: and suffer not two whole days to
pass without such evacuations.

Be Cleanly.
Be careful likewise to keep your self neat and cleanly at all times. Wash
your feet once a fortnight in warm water, wherein are boiled Rose-leaues
(either fresh or dried) Vine-leaues, Bay leaves, Rosmarie, Fennel, Camomill,
and some Bay Salt. Flee all other Bathings, and especially washing and swimming
in Rivers, Ponds, and such open places, (as the Thames, and such like) within
the region of the Air infected: for it is most dangerous.

Urine and Menstrua.
If Urine stop, or Menstrua flow not as they should; seek remedy of the
Physician speedily.

Venus.
Fly Venus as much as you may, for she has an ill report in times of
Pestilence.

Prevention of ill Humors.
In a Pestilent Air, every disease becomes something Pestilent, and more
deadly then ever before: And any kind of Feavor easily turns to the Plague
it self. Therefore if any perceive blood, or any other humor to abound, or to
be corrupted (what time of the year, or what weather soever it be) let him
begin to abate it by moderate Abstinence; or else take the advice of a
Physician; for opening a vein, or some other course, such as the Artist shall
think fit. And let them not put it off till they be worse, in hope of growing
better by their own strength: For Nature for the most part struggles in vain
without help: and contagious cases are not to be trusted to.

Sweating.
Natural Sweating, that comes easily, and of it self is good; hinder it not
therefore, and yet embrace it not too earnestly.

Issues.
To conclude; If a man or woman have an Issue, or Fontanell in arm or leg; or
have any running soar; heal it not up, for it is a good means to keep safe
from infection; because Nature will (lightly) be strong enough to expel any
venom by such a common sewer. But yet make not this thy shield of confidence,
for though few such have been stricken; yet I can name some that have died of
the Plague, for all that they had issues, and those at that time well and
plentifully running.

The fourth Point of Diet, is Exercise and Rest.
Some are so lazy as they will not stir their bodies at all; The Cause.
these suffer superfluous humors to increase, because they do not breath them
out by exercise. Ovid. de Ponto, resembles such to standing Pooles, which
corrupt for lack of purging themselves by motion.

Cernis vt ignavum corrumpunt otia corpus?
Vt capiunt vitium ni moveantur Aquae?
Others again are so violent in their labor and exercise, that they
prodigally waste the treasure of those good humors that should nourish them. Of
these again the Poet sings;

Otia corpus alunt, Animus quoque pascitur illis.
Immodicus contra carpit vtrumque Labor.
Such exercises as Running, wrestling, much leaping, What Exercises are not
good.
violent dancing, hard riding, foot-ball-playing, tennise, and the like; which
cause a man to swear in open air, are very dangerous. For thereby the pores
are opened to let in that air which brings poison with it. Also the lungs
fetching short and deep breathing (as I have else where said already) draw it
as fast into the vital parts.

Moderate exercise stirs up and nourishes natural heat; What Exercise is
best.
fills the members thereby with activitie and aptness to motion; also it helps
concoction and evacuation of excrements. Therefore let your exercise be
Walking, and gentle stirring, ad Ruborem, non ad Sudorem: till you be warm,
not till you sweat.

Let the time of Exercise be the morning fasting, The best time for Exercise.
two hours after the Sun is up; for by that time, his beams will have
dispelled and dispersed the night vapors.

The fittest Place, is some large room, The Place for Exercise.
enclosed from the common Air; and where is little or no company, that their
breaths distemper not the Air wherein you are (by motion) to breath something
more largely. And it is good to perfume the room also before hand, that the
Air may be the purer.

Beware of taking Cold.
At all times, beware you take no cold. For great Colds and Rheums do easily
breed Putrid Feavors, and they as easily turn to the Plague.

The fifth Point of Diet, is Sleep and Watching.
Inconveniences of much sleep.
If Sleep be immoderate or unseasonable, it hinders concoction, it heapeth up
many crude and superfluous humors, it extinguisheth the vital Spirits, and
takes away the liveliness of the Animal faculties.

Inconveniences of much watching.
Overmuch Watching also and want of Sleep, dries up the good humors, and sets
them in a heat, and (which is most dangerous) weakens the Natural Forces.

Times for sleep.
Therefore observe due Times for Sleep. Go to bed betimes, and rise betimes;
for that is holsomest.

Sleep not upon meat, or after dinner; especially if you have fed any thing
liberally: and by no means give way to sleep at such times lying along: but
if you must needs take such repose, sit in a Chair upright, and do but take
him napping; let not such a sleep be above half an hour long; for a little
yielding satisfies; and by further indulgence the head will grow the more dull
and drowsy. I counsel therefore rather to yield a little in this aforesaid
manner, then by striving too much against it, to make the head ache; But let
some friend or servant (within the time limited) awake you gently, not suddenly
to make you fright or start; for that would disturb those spirits and humors
which your nap had settled. The night is the natural time for Sleep. But let
it be two hours at the soonest after Supper (if you must sup) that the stomach
may have made some good progress in Concoction, before Sleep make holiday
with the Functions of Nature. And then Sleep not above five or six hours at
the most.

Let the Chamber wherein you lie, be conveniently warm, The place to sleep in.
the doors and windows close shut, to keep out the evil air of the night;
and beforehand perfumed to expel the Pestilent. Sleep not without doors;
neither sit, nor lie upon the ground or grass in the fields or garden plots;
for the nearer the earth, the more deadly is the Air: and the immediate stroke
of the cold ground is very dangerous.

The sixth and last Point, is the Passions of the Mind.
All kinds of Passions if they be vehement do offer violence to the Spirits.
Yea though they be of the better, The dangers of violent. Passions.
and more natural sort. As, Joy and Laughter, if they be unbridled and too
profuse, do exceedingly enervate and resolve both the Spirits and Body; in so
much as the breast and sides are pained, the breath is streightened, and many
times the Soul it self is ready to depart. So also Care, Suspicion, Envy,
Jealousy, and such like vnquietnesses, do ouer-heat the Spirits, and dry up
and consume the good humors.

But there be four Passions more violent then the rest. viz. Immoderate Joy,
Sorrow, Anger, and Fear.

Immoderate Joy, Immoderate Joy.
by sudden and violent dilatation of the heart, lets the Spirits fly forth so
abundantly, that natural heat is left naked and so is suddenly extinguished.
If it break forth into laughter, the danger is as I have already said.

It is recorded of Chrysippus, Examples of unbridled laughter.
that only upon seeing an Ass eat figs, he fell into such an unmeasurable
laughter, that he fell down and died.

And Zeuxis that excellent Paynter (who made a most curious beautiful picture
of the Spartan Helen) upon the sight of a very ill favored old woman, burst out
into such an unmeasurable laughter, that he laughed himself to death.

But sometimes this Immoderate Joy kills before it venteth it self in
laughter. Examples of immoderate joy without laughter.
For so Sophocles the Tragedian receiving a wonderful applause of the people
for the last Tragedy he writ; was so over-ioyed at it, that he fell down and
died presently. And it is recorded of one Rhodius Diagoras, who when he saw his
three sons all at one time crowned with victory at the Olympian games, ran
to meet them; and while he embraced them in his arms, and they set their
garlands on his head; he was so overcome with Joy, that he fell down dead in
the midst of them; and so turned their Triumphs into a Funeral.

Sorrow.
Sorrow on the other side afflicts the heart, disturbs the faculties, melts the
brain, vitiates the humors; and so weakens all the principal parts; consumes
the nourishments of the Spirits and natural heat; and sometimes brings sudden
death.

Examples.
As Adrastus King of the Argiues, being told of the death of his Son, was
taken with so sudden a Sorrow, that he fell down and died presently.

And so Iulia the daughter of Julius Caesar, and wife of Pompey; when she heard
the news of her Husbands death, fell down also suddenly and died.

Anger.
Anger is so furious a Passion, that it works wonderfully upon the spirits
and faculties; disturbing them exceedingly, as appears by the shaking and
tossing of the body too and fro; the fiery sparkling of the eyes; the color
coming and going, now red, now pale: so that the humors appear to be inflamed
(especially choler) and the spirits hurried this way and that way; sometime
haled outward, and presently driven inward again. By which violent motions an
unnatural heat in the spirits, and corruption in the humors are engendered.
Hereupon (many times) follow Burning and choleric Feavors, Pulseys, Iaundis,
Pleurisies, and all kinds of Inflammations; violent bleeding at the nose which
can hardly be stanched; and sometime death it self.

Examples.
Nerva the Emperor, being highly displeased with one Regulus, fell into such a
fury against him, that he was stricken therewith into a Feavor, whereof he died
shortly after.

Wencestaus King of Bohemia, in a furious anger conceived against his Cup
bearer, would needs kill him presently with his own hand; but in the endeavor
he was stricken with a Palsy, whereof he died in few days after.

Valentinianus the Emperor in a great rage would needs destroy the whole
Country of Sarmatia; but he breathed forth his menaces with such unbridled
fury, that he burst out into bleeding and died.

In the year of our Lord, 1623. A poor old Man in the North part of
Devonshire (dwelling in a part of a little Village called Little Poderidge)
came to the house of Sr Thomas Monck (where I at that time was) and standing at
the Buttery door to receive some Beer (which, together with other victuals,
was every day given very liberally to all the poor thereabouts) because the
Butler did not presently fill his tanckerd; the old Man fell into such a
furious rage against her, that with the very Passion, he presently fell down;
was taken up dead, was with much ado (by me) recovered to life and sense; but
never spoke more, and died within two days after.

Fear also gathers the Spirits to the heart, Fear.
and dissolues the Brain, making the humors thereof to shed and slide down
into the external parts, causing a chillness, and shaking over all the body:
It abuses the Fantasy and Senses, brings a Lethargy upon the organs of
motion, and depriues the heart of all spirit and vigor: sometimes also it makes
a Man's Will for him, and unkindly bequeaths his estate to Death.

As Cassander the Son of Antipater upon sight of Alexanders statue, fell into
such a terror and trembling, Examples.
that he could hardly shift himself out of the place, and had much ado to
recover his spirits again.

I could relate a story of one who (receiving but a slight wound in the arm,
in a place of no danger, and with very little loss of blood) died presently
with the very fear of being killed. But I should be too tedious if I should
reckon up more examples.

Now, if these Passions could be so deadly in pure Aires, Fear, how it is most
apt to bring Infection.
and wholesome seasons; how much more (think we) are they pernicious in
pestilentiall times? But in respect of Contagion, there is no Passion so
dangerous as Fear. For by it the Spirits are enforced to retire inward to the
heart, to guard that Prince of life from the danger feared. By this retiring
they leave the outward parts infirm, as appears plainly by the palenesse
and trembling of one in great fear. So that, the walls being forsaken (which
are continually besieged by the contagious Air) in come the enemies without
resistance; the Spirits which are the Soldiers that should repel them, having
cowardly sounded a Retrait. And hereby there is not only way made for the
evil Air to enter, but also the Spirits (wherein is all our heat) being all
drawn inward, do draw in such vapors after them as are about the body; even
as the Sun draws toward it, the vapors of the earth. And here-hence it
is, that Fear brings Infection faster and sooner then any other occasion.

The Cure.
Now for Remedy against these Passions, we must know that they are diseases of
the Soul, and the cure of them belongs chiefly to Divines. They are the
Physicians to deal inwardly with these diseases: To purge out the Love of this
World, and the distrust of Gods Providence and Mercies, as also to minister the
Cordialls of Faith, Hope, Patience, Contentedness, etc. and to ordain the
strict diet of holy Exercises, a good Conversation, and Walking with God. We
that are Physicians to the Body, are but Chirurgians to the Soul: we can but
talk of Topicall remedies, as to apply Mirth, Music, good Company, and
lawful Recreations; such as may take away all time and occasions for careful
thoughts and passionate affections.

Thus have I brought you through that part of the Definition, wherein are the
Causes of the Plague discovered. Now we are to lay open the Qualities of it,
described before in the Definition, thus

The qualities of the Plague.
Which at the very first Strikes to the Heart, is Venomous, Deadly, and
Infectious.

How the Sickness strikes first.
At the very first it strikes to the Heart. Therefore it is called Morbus
Cordis, A disease of the Heart. And that this is first stricken, is apparent by
this, that at the first infection the vital faculty sinkes, and languishes;
the whole strength of the Body is suddenly turned to weakness; the vital
Spirits are greatly oppressed and discouraged. Whereas the Animal faculty
commonly remains (for a while) in good plight and perfect in the use of
sense, understanding, judgment, memory and motion. The Natural faculty also
is not so presently hurt, but there is concoction and all other actions
performed by the liver, stomach, reyns, guts, bladder, and other parts, as
Nature requires. Though indeed in a little time, these and the brain also are
overcome, as appears by the Symptoms that follow, as Lethargies, Frenzies,
Vomitings, Fluxes, etc.

That it is Venomous, The Plague is Venomous.
is granted of all both Physicians and Philosophers. And it is apparent by his
secret and insensible insinuation of himself into the vital Spirits; to which
as soon as he is gotten, he shows himself a mortal enemy, with sudden
violence choking and extinguishing them. Therefore, his subtle entrance, his
sly cruelty, his swift destroying; the unfaithfulness of his Crisis, and
other Prognosticke Signs; and the vehemency, grievousnesse, and ill behavior
of his Symptoms, are manifest proofs of his venomous Quality. For in this
disease, the Seidge, Urine, and Sweat, have an abominable savor; the Breath
is vile and noisome; evil colored Spots, Pustles, Blisters, Swellings; and
Ulcers full of filthy matter arise in the outward parts of the body: such as no
superfluity or sharpness of humors, nor no putrefaction of matter (without a
venomous quality joined with it) can possibly produce.

It is Deadly. Deadly.
This needs no proof, the weekly Bills argue it, and our own eyes witness
it, while we see continual Burialls, and some die in the very streets: and
while we find also that few of those that are stricken do recover again.

But that It is Infectious, Infectious.
is among many of the common ignorant sort more disputable, then among the
learned. Yet is it apparent enough by much experience; For Garments and
Household Stuff have been infected, and have infected many, as I have showed
already in the examples of a Gown and a Feather-bed. Now though this
Infection be not apparent to sense (as indeed the deadliest Poisons have
neither taste nor smell) yet their lurking quality may be plainly
demonstrated by such as are sensible. For we know that garments will a long
time retain any strong or sweet sent wherewith they have been fumed, or with
which they have been laid up; now the Sent is merely a quality, and his
substance is the Air, which is the vehiculum or seat of the Sent wherein it is
carried, and by which it is made permanent. Other experiences we have also; as
live Pageons being laid to the soars, are taken away dead, having not been
wounded, crushed, nor hurt by any hand at all. And lastly, many that are
infected, can directly tell where, and of whom they took it.

Objection.
But say some again, then why is not one infected as well as another? I have
eaten and drunk, and lain with them that have had it, and the soars running
on them. And yet I was not infected.

Answer.
I say they have the more cause to magnify the Mercy of God to their
particular; and not to obscure it, by saying it is not infectious. This
argument is not unlike that of the Mountebanks, who tell you that such and such
have been cured by his Medicines, but conceales how many have died by the
misapplication. If one should ask this man, I pray you, how many have so
conversed with the infected and have so escaped? I am sure they cannot name one
of twenty.

A new Opinion.
Yea but says Another, I hold the Plague to be nothing else but the very
Influence of the Striking Angel, sent of God to destroy here one and there
another, as He has particularly fore-poynted them out.

Answer.
Such kinds of Plagues indeed we read of in sacred Scripture, as Exodus 12.
Numb. 11. v. 33. Numb. 16. Numb. 25. and 2 Samuel 24. But there is great
difference betwixt those Plagues and these of ours. For in those, Great
multitudes suddenly, and all at once (as one would say) in a very short space
of time were both smitten and slain. The longest time of Striking being but
three days, namely that for David's numbering the people. In those plagues
therefore the cause was only supernatural: for there was no time allowed for
corruption and putrefaction of the Air. But in these of ours (and in very many
more in all Countries and Kingdoms, and in all Ages of the World) there has
been sufficient time to breed and increase the Contagion in the Air: in which
time of breeding also, the ancient natural observations have been found true
from age to age; for many noisome things have apparently discovered themselves,
as fruits of the Aires putrefaction, and Prognostics of the Plague threatened.
And when it has begun, it spreads but by degrees; first striking one man
only; then two or three; after that a few more; and so multiplying the
succeeding number, as it evidently grows more contagious by the number of
bodies already infected. Besides those Plagues before mentioned, do discover a
stroke, but no sickness; but that of Hezekiah discovered a sickness and no
stroke of any Angel. For it is plainly said, that Hezekiah was sick. Isaiah
38. And that his sickness was the Plague, appears by the Soar which was upon
him, and the Medicine by which that soar was cured. This to the reasonable is
reason sufficient.

But ere I part with this Point of Infection; What bodies are most apt to be
infected.
I think it good to discover what bodies are most, or least apt to be Infected.

And to find this we must first know that bodies are infected two ways;
first, from without, in regard of the Air; and secondly, from within, in
respect of the present state of the body.

From Without, those are most subject to it, Who are apt to receive infection
from Without.
who have thin bodies, and open pores; and whose hearts are so hot, that they
need much attraction of Air to cool them.

From Within, they are most apt, whose veyns and vessels are full of gross
humors, and corrupt juices; Who from Within.
the evil matter (being thick, and therefore cannot breath out through the
pores) increases her putrefaction (by the heat within) unto the greater
malignitie, and so becomes Pestilent.

Therefore those bodies that are moist, and full of juice; whose veins are
streit (and therefore apter to intercept then intertaine the juices) and the
thickness of whose skin denies the transpiration of the excrements; these are
easily poluted and infected.

And such are Women; especially women with child, for their bodies are full of
excrementitious juices, and much heat withal; which is as oil and flame put
together.

Also those that are very Costiue, or have their water stopped; the noisome
vapors that are by these excrements ingendered, make the body subject to
infection.

Young children, in regard of their tender and soft bodies are apt to admit of
any alteration upon the lightest occasion: and because they fetch their breath
short (having but little room for respiration) they draw in much Air, with
which the seed of Contagion is attracted: and so are apt to be infected from
without. And likewise because they are naturally moist, and feed upon the
moyster kinds of meats; and feed also with more appetite then judgment; they
are therefore the more subject to pestilent infection from within.

Likewise, the sanguine and delicate fair complexion, (whose blood and juices
are finer and thinner then others, and therefore more subject to mutation) are
quickly infected: for the Plague is able to insinuate it self into all the
humors; but into some more easily then others; as into Blood first, Choler
next, Fleam after, and Melancholy last.

Poor People, (by reason of their great want) living sluttishly, feeding
nastily on offals, or the worst and vnholsomest meats; and many times too long
lacking food altogether; have both their bodies much corrupted, and their
Spirits exceedingly weakened: whereby they become (of all others) most subject
to this Sickness. And therefore we see the Plague sweeps up such people in
greatest heaps. Indeed in regard of the Air, the rich are as subject as they;
for both breath the same: and delicacie of feeding makes the rich as apt to
corruption: But then they have means to get wholesome food, good attendance, and
precious Antidotes to preserve them; for we see by experience that ordinary
things do little prevail. And this is the reason also why fewest of the Rich
do die of the Plague.

Great Eaters and Drinkers (who can never be free from crudities) as also
Luxurious idle livers, and Whore hunters (who spend the strength of their
bodies prodigally) are very apt to be infected.

Also such as in former times have had customary evacuations by sweat,
haemorrhoids, vomitings, menstrua, fontanells, or other like ways of expelling
noxious humors; and have them now stopped.

Those likewise that fast much (their bodies being empty) receive more Air
in, then they let out.

Those also that are Fearful; as I have already showed in the point of
Passions.

Furthermore, nearenesse of blood or kindred, by reason of the sympathy of
natures, makes men very apt to receive infection from one of their own blood.

And so those that are near the sick in body, being continually conversant
with them, or often coming about them; as Chirurgians, Keepers, Searchers, and
such like.

Lastly, Virgins that are ripe and marriageable; are apt to receive infection,
and being once stricken, seldom or never escape, without great and precious
means. Quia spirituosum semen in motu cum sit, facile succenditur; vel, quia
intus detentum facile corrumpitur, and in veneni perniciem abit. Mindererus de
Pestilentia. cap. 10.

But some think by the strength of Nature to prevail against against this
infection. But we see strong and well nourished bodies die as fast as others:
and that not because it is safer to be weak; but as Hippocrates says, Corpora
impura quo magis aluntur, eo magis laeduntur. Their taking of the infection
proves their body to be impure (though strong) and the more an impure body is
nourished, the more it is endangered.

Who are the most likely to escape.
But those are most likely to escape Infection, that are troubled with the Gout;
in whom the nobler parts of the body do expel the noxious humors to the
ignobler.

Those that have Fontanells, or any other kind of issue, as ulcers,
haemorrhoids, or plenty of other evacuations; whereby the hurtful humors are
drayned away.

Old folks, whose bodies are dry and cold.

Also bold and confident Spirits, whose courage can resist all fears, are to
themselves an Antidote; if their body be withal kept clean and pure by the
common rules of preservation.

Lastly, those who keep themselves private, and use Antidotes and means
preservatiue, reposing themselves in God with David in the fourth Psalm, and
last verse. He will give his Angels charge over them, to keep them in all
their ways, etc. Psalm. 91.5.6.7. and 3. verses. But they must then walk in
the Way that God has set before them, and that is, the use of Physic. For,
The Lord has created Medicines out of the Earth, and he that is wise will not
abhor them. Ecclus. 38.4. And with such does he heal men, and take away
their pains. verse. 7. And in the sixth verse, He has given men skill, that he
might be honored in his marveilous works. Then forsake not the Physician;
neither by thy scorning of his skill, force him to forsake thee: for as St Paul
said of the Mariners in his Ship. Acts. 27.31. so may I say of Physicians in
this City; Except these tarry, we cannot be saved.

And so much for the Quality of the Plague.

Now I come to the last Part of the Definition, discovering the Signs and
Symptoms of it, The Signs and Symptoms of the Plague.
in these words: And for the most part is accompanied with a Feavor; as also
with Spots called Gods-Tokens, or with a Blayne, or Botch, or Carbuncle.

I say, for the most part it is thus accompanied; but not always. For some are
suddenly stricken, and die before they have any acquaintance, either with
distemper or outward pain.

Some have thought there may be a Plague and yet no Feavor: But Mindererus
proves that to be an idle conceit. li. de Pest. cap. 6.

Some also, have died of the Plague, and yet nothing has appeared outwardly:
and such as die suddenly, have seldom any Spots, or such like outward sign:
and are therefore less infectious then others, if they be not too long kept
unburied.

But to come to the several Points, which have two Generals, to wit, Inward
Signs, and Outward Signs. The Inward is a Feavor, and his Symptoms. The
Outward are, The Tokens, the Blayne, the Botch, and the Carbuncle.

The first and Inward Sign, is a Feavor. Feavor.
As soon as the Heart is stricken with the putrid vapor, the Spirits grow
distempered and inflamed. And this distemperature is a Feavor (not Proper, but
Symptomaticall or Accidental) and this Feavor is not of one kind in every
one; but diverse, and such are his Symptoms also. As sometime Pleuriticke,
sometime Squinanticke, sometimes Choleric, sometimes Continual, and
sometimes Intermitting.

These distempers relate the cruel Combat begun betwixt Nature and her
M^^^all Enemy.

The outward Signs bring News of the Hopes or Fears to which side the
Victory is like to fall. For, if Nature expel any part of the venom outward,
it is a sign of some strength in her.

If the Tokens appear, either the Enemy is but weak; What kind of fight is
discovered by the Tokens.
or else Nature is but weak, and shows her good will more then her power. For
except the assault be but slight; those repulses will not get the Conquest.

If there be a Blayne or Blister, Blayne.
it shows Nature is a little stronger, and the enemy not a little curs^er.

If the Botch or great Apostumation rise. Botch.
Then has Nature a crowd of corrupt matter to encounter with; an Army of
Enemies, against which she stoutly bestirres her self. If she drive forth a
great quantity of matter, and withal be well fortified (within by Antidotes,
to maintain her Spirits, and strength: and without by perfumes) that while the
Body of the Battalion is driven out, the skouts of straggling vapors that
arise from it, steal not in again by the mouth, nostrills, and other outward
passages; then is she like to win the day.

And by the places where she drives them out; it appears, against which of the
three Castles of Nature the greatest assault is given and continued.

What part is most affected.
For if the Swelling arise in the Armepits, it shows that the the Seidge is
continued (where it first begun) at the Heart. If in the neck, then is the
Battery laid at the Brain. And if in the Groyne, then is the Liver
beleaguered. But sometimes these Princes are all at once assaulted; and then is
it altogether unlikely that Nature can recover. For though both she and they be
never so stout, and seem for a time to prevail, by expelling abundance of
matter (in the breaking of the Botches) yet Nature may be so overcharged; and
the enemy (whose venom is sly and subtle) may show himself such a
Machavilian, as one way or other he weakens her forces, puts her brave Spirits
to flight, and tyrant-like demolisheth all her beauteous Buildings.

Carbuncle.
If the Carbuncle arise. Then we may say, Nature plays the Lion, but alas she
has to deal with a fiery Dragon: this of all venoms being the most malicious
and cruel.

But that the colors of these bloody Ensigns, may the better be discovered, I
will play the Herald, and blazon every Sign by himself. So many (I mean) as
are most inseparable from the Plague, and therefore chiefly to be respected. As
for the rest, (though they be many) they belong as well (and more properly) to
other diseases; and are more deceitful, and less useful to any but the
Physician only.

The Signs of the Plague (therefore) are commonly these.

Signs of being Infected.
First, a secret sinking of the Spirits and Powers of Nature, with a painful
weariness of the bones, and all without any manifest cause. Then follows great
trouble and oppression of the heart, that the party unquietly rowles up and
down for rest from one place to another; sighing often, and either offering to
vomit, or vomiting filthy stuff of diverse colors, yellow, green, and
blackish; then come pains in the head, which still increase; and faintness.
But after these come the surest Signs, which are the Tokens, Blayne, Botch,
and Carbuncle.

The Tokens are Spots of the bigness of Flea-bitings, The Tokens described.
some bigger, some as big as a penny. They show themselves commonly in the
breast and back; but they will sometimes appear in other places also. In some
they will be many, in some but a few, in others but one or two. In color they
are for the most part of a pale blew, but sometimes also purple or blackish,
circled with a reddish circle.

The Blayne is a little Blister somewhat like one of the Swine-Pocks; and many
times of the same color; The Blayne.
but sometimes, of a bluish or leaden color; and being opened, affords
filthy matter of the like complexion. Round about the Blister, there is a
redness the breadth of a groat, sixpence, or nine-pence: These will rise in
any part: sometimes one alone, sometimes two or three; but never very many. And
these will break, and fall, and leave a dry crust, which will scale off.

The Botch is a hard swelling, The Botch.
rising as I said before in the neck, under the ears, or under the chinne; in
the armepits; and in the groynes. It swells sometimes no bigger then a Nutmeg;
sometimes as big as a Wall-nut; others as a Hens egg, and some as big as a
Man's fist. Also in some it swells out very fully to be seen plainly, and
becomes so soar that it can endure nothing to touch it; in others it lies
low and deep in the flesh, only to be found by feeling; and sometimes also
scarcely to be felt; but if you touch the place, it is painful. Those that lie
high and plain to be seen, are more hopeful; the low lurking ones are very
ominous and pernicious.

The Carbuncle rises like a little push or pustle, The Carbuncle.
with a pretty broad compass of redness round about it. It is wonderful
angry, and furiously enflaming, as if a quick coal of fire were held to the
place: whence it has his name Carbunculus, a little coal of fire. It creeps
secretly in the flesh next under the skin, and is full of such a furious
malignant poison, as it will quickly consume and eat out so great a piece of
flesh (for the capacity it is in) as a man would wonder how it could so
suddenly be done: being as if one did burn a hole with a hot iron. And it is
strange to see that so small a tumor should be so devilish and dangerous to
life: for if it be not with great care, and exceeding good means attended, it
brings speedy death.

How to know if one be dead of the Plague, when neither Spots, Blayne, Botch,
nor Carbuncle appear. Mr. John Banister.
But moreover observe this. Sometimes (as I said before) a man dies of the
Plague, when neither before nor after he is dead, there appears any Tokens,
or Blayne, Botch, or Carbuncle. And yet there will be a sign which few have
observed; My Grand father (who was a famous man, and of great experience) has
taught it me; and my Father (a Physician of above forty years practice and
experience) has confirmed it unto me. That is, that after such a body is dead,
in one place or other the flesh will grow softer then the rest: and the whole
body will also grow softer and softer, and the longer the body lies, the softer
will be the flesh. Which shows the vileness of the putrefaction within.
Heurnius mentions this also among his signs in his book De Peste; and adds
also these. Heurnius his signs of a body dead of the Plague.
That in a Body dead of the Plague, The nose looks very blew, or blackish
blow; as if it had been beaten or bruised. The like color is in the ears and
nails: and ever worse colored then other dead bodies use to be.

Thus have I displayed those Signs which are least failing: that the Searchers
may rightly informed themselves; and not mistake (as many have done) calling
the purple spots of the Pestilent Feavor Gods Tokens. And sometimes letting
Bodies pass as not dead of the Plague, because they had neither Tokens, Botch,
nor Carbuncle. I have done it also to teach people how they may know when they
are stricken with this infection; that they may presently have recourse to some
skillful man, and good means to recover them before it be too late. An hour
is a precious space of time, and cannot be let slip but with hazard.

And having thus showed you what this dreadful Sickness is, what are the
Causes, Qualities, and Signs of it. Before I leave you, I will leave with you
a short general direction to keep your body safe from infection: and also (if
you feel suspicious signs of being taken) how to begin to drive the venom
from the heart, till such time as you may have some more special means
(particularly fitting your present constitution and state of body) by the
counsel of some skillful Physician.

While Health continues,
It is necessary that twice in the week, Preservatiue Medicines.
the body be evacuated with some gentle purging Pill, to keep the humors from
superfluous increase. For Men and Women generally to be used.
And in this case the Pills of Ruffus (which are to be had in every
Apothecaries shop) are very apt and good. Or take of these Pills of mine twice
or thrice in a week.

Rs. Aloes Rosatae, vnc. j. Pillulae Bradwelli.

Rhabarbari,
Croci, ana drach. iij.
Myrrhae, drach. vj.
santali citrini, drach. j.
ambrae grifiae, scrup. j.
Cum sir. de succo Citri, q. s.
fiat Massa Pillularum.
Make Pills of 8. or 10. grains a piece. Take ij. or more of them in the
morning fasting, four or five hours before meat; They may be taken best in
Syrup of Roses solutiue, or in Conserve of Violets. And presently after them
drink a little white Wine mixed with a little Balme-water (in cold weather):
with Rose water, and a little Rose-Vineager (in hot weather): and with Carduus,
or Scabious water in temperate weather.

On the other days wherein you take no Pills. Take every morning fasting a
dram or two (or the quantity of a Nutmeg) of London Triacle, with as much
conserve of red Roses: this is for a temperate Constitution.

A cold constitution may take the Triacle alone, only sweetening it with a
little sugar.

And a hot complexion may mix both the Triacle and Conserve in a few
spoonefulls of Rose Water and Vineager.

These Powders following are good to cast into the Broths of such as are sick,
or have weak stomachs.

Take of Red Saunders, half an ounce,
Cynamom iij. drams and half,
Saffron, half a dram.
powder them fine, and mix them together.

Another.

Take of Cynamom, half an ounce.
Cloves, half a dram.
Red Coral, ij. scruples.
Saffron, half a dram.
And the weight of all in Sugar.
Make these into Powder, and mix them together.

Some give this.

Take of Pearl prepared, ij. drams.
Coral red, and white, of each half a dram.
Red Rose leaves dried, Saffron,
Spodium, of each a scruple.
Cynamon a dram.
Make them into fine Powder, and mix them.

This is my counsel for those of ripe age, and for Women that are not with
Child.

But for those Women that breed Child, and also for Infants or young Children,
there ought to be another way of preservation: in whom Diet, must be most
intended, and no purging used.

For Women, therefore,
Let them keep their body soluble, For Women with Child.
by some gentle and familiar Suppositories; or gentle Clysters, made of
Posset-ale with Camomill flowers, and a little new-drawne Cassia. Take these in
the afternoon: now and then.

Let them also every morning take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Medicine
following.

Take Harts-horne, Cynamon, Nutmegs, all the Saunders, of each a dram. Roots of
Angelica, Zedoarie, Enula-Campane; of each half a dram. Powder all these.

Then take Conserve of Bugloss and Borage, of each iij. drams. With an equal
quantity of Syrup of Citrons, and of dried Roses.

Mix all together, and make a Conserve.

Take it (as is said) fasting, and fast two hours at least after.

Or else, Take Hearts horn, red and yellow Saunders, of each two drams. Cloves
and Cynamon, of each one dram.

Beat them into fine Powder, and mix them together.

With some of this, spice your Meat, Broth, or Cawdell; or whatsoever you have
to breakfast: and squeez into them a little juice of a Lemon. You may add also
some Sugar as you please. Let this be your Breakfast.

For young Children.
There is nothing better then Bole armoniake, For young Children.
with a little Tormentill root, and Citron Pills made into fine Powder: which
you may mix with their meats, or cast into their Broths: for their breakfast.

If they be costiue, put up a violet comfit or two for a Suppositorie. Or mix a
little Cassia, newly drawn, in some broth of a Chicken, and give it them now
and then in a morning fasting. Let them fast two hours after. And that day use
not the powder, before prescribed.

Observation.
And note this. When you suspect a Child to be sick of the Worms, in a
Contagious time; use not Wormeseed and those common trifling things: but order
him as if you suspected he had the Plague; for that disease (coming of so much
Putrefaction, as it does) is as apt to receive the infection of the Plague, as
is Tinder to take fire. It must not therefore be dallied with.

But at such a time, you may give twenty or thirty grains of this Powder
following, for two or three mornings together.

Take Harts-horne, j. dram.
Citron pill,
Roots of Angelica,
and Tormentill,
Rhubarb, and Coralline, of each half a dram.
Make these into fine Powder, and give it as is said in a little Carduus water,
sweetened with some sugar.

Thus much for Preservation in Health.

What course is to be taken with him that is Infected.
But if there be Suspicion of Infection, you must then look about for a new
course.

In which case generally I condemn both Purging and Bleeding: for I know no
use of them in resisting or expelling the Venom; which is no other way effected
but by Sweating and Running of the Soars.

Yet I confess Phlebotomie has his use in Sanguine and Strong bodies; so it
be at the very first, while the Spirits are strong and able of themselves to
make good resistance. But if that first opportunity be let slip; I think it
better to let it alone altogether; then to do it out of season; and so to
impair natural strength, which in this case ought most especially to be
preserved and augmented.

Again, though Sweating be the true way, yet it must not be violent; for that
also weakens the Spirits, and makes the body faint, therefore those Sweating
Medicines must be mixed with Cordialls.

As for example.

Take Mithridate, or London Triacle, one dram. Myrrh, Enula Campane root, and
Butter burre root, of each ten grains.

Mix these in a quarter of a Pint of Posset-ale and white Wine mixed together;
to which you may add some sugar to make the taste something grateful.

Go into your warm bed, then drink this draught prescribed, and cover you
with a reasonable weight of cloths; and so sweat two or three hours, or
somewhat more, as your strength will bear. But take heed you sleep not in
this while. Then by degrees let the clothes be taken away, first one, and then
another; when you have sweat sufficiently, or as much as you can endure. And
let some one with warm Napkins wipe you dry, and shift your linen; being
very careful of taking cold.

Then presently take this Iulep.

Take of Carduus water three ounces. Syrup of Lemons one ounce. Bole armoniake,
Tormentill, Angelica root, of each one scruple.

Mix all together, and drink it off.

Do this once in twelve hours, if you find strength to bear it, till you
have performed it at the least three times: and at the second and third times,
before you begin to sweat, bind under either arme-hole, and to either
groyne, some thin slices of Radish roots, beaten with a little bay salt, and
sprinkled with a little Vineager and Rose Water: wrap them up in four little
thin rags, and apply them.

Also, apply to the region of the heart, that Quilt which I have prescribed in
stead of an Amulet.

When this is done, and the Soars begin to show themselves; follow the advice of those that are appointed to that purpose. For I must not enter into
the infected house. Therefore farewell.

And the LORD in Mercy look upon this afflicted CITY.
FINIS.
IF any be pleased to use my Antidotes; I have two Powders, one is for daily
use, called Pulvis Pestilentialis; the other in case of special danger, called
Pulvis Vitalis. I have also an excellent Electuarie, which I call Antiloimon,
for his singular virtue against the Plague. I have likewise Lozenges, and
Trochisks to hold in the mouth; and rich Pomanders to smell too. They were all
of my Grandfathers invention, and have been proved to be admirably
effectual, both by his and my Fathers experience. I confess they are costly:
but slight means and cheap Medicines (how ever they promise) prove as dear
as death. For we see by woeful observation, that the Plague will not be
repelled but by imperious encounters. I could relate very true and admirable
stories of the effects of those three Medicines above mentioned, but I will
beg no man's belief. Whosoever knows any thing of the name of John Banister,
must needs have heard of many famous Medicines by him invented. The first
Powder is 12. pence a dram: his quantity, to be taken at once is half a dram.
The second is 3. pence a grain: the quantity is 10. or 12. grains. The
Electuarie is, 2. shillings 6 pence an ounce: the quantity is one or two drams.

Because many men know that I have a whole volume of excellent Receipts left me
both by my Grandfather, and my Father; and lest they should censure me as too
strict and covetous in keeping all secret to my self, I have thought fit for
the common good; to divulge this excellent Antidote following.

Electuarium De Ovo,
Stephani Bradwelli.
Rs. vitelli ovi vnius,
Croci pulveriz. scrup. ij.
Conterantur simul donec in Pultiformam rediguntur. Postea imponantur in alia
testa vacua, cum exiguo foramine in capite facto; been obturetur: et lento igne
donec testa nigrescit assetur. Dein exempta materia, exiecetur and subtilissime
pulverizetur. Cui

Add rad. tormentillae,
zedoariae,
Angelicae,
Valerianae,
Dictamni,
Aristolochiae rotunda, ana vnc. j. ss.
Myrrhae, scrup. iiij.
Baccarum lauri,
Baccarum Iuniperi, and drach. ss.
Corticis citri, scrup. ij. ss.
sem. citri,
sem. cardui Benedicti,
ligni aloes, ana scrup. ij.
Cornu Cervini,
Boli armeni, ana drach. j. ss.
Moschi gr. x. Pulveriz. omnia subtiliss.
Add etiam Conservae florum Calendulae, vnc. ij.
Theriacae Land. vnc. j.
Cum aqua Cardui, et sacchari. q. s.
fiat Electuarium. s. ae.
THere is a Fellow in Distaffe Lane, that disperseth Bills abroad, bragging of
a Medicine that was my Grandfather Banisters; thinking upon the fame of his
name to get both glory and gain to himself. But let me warn all men to take
heed of such impudent liars. My Grandfather was very scrupulous of giving any
special Receipts to others. But if any man can say he has any Receipt of his:
I am sure, (if it were of any value) I have the Coppie of it.

But I profess upon the word and credit of an honest man, that among all his
Receipts, he has not prescribed one Preservatiue Drink for the Plague: And
besides, his judgment ever was, that the best form of an Antidote was either
Powder, Pill, or Electuarie. Therefore this Drink that he talks of; was
either none of my Grandfathers; or else some very slight thing, by him little
esteemed.

I cannot bear it, that any should abuse the Kings people with sophisticate
Medicines; and lay the imputation upon so famous, and so all beloved a Man as
Master John Banister was.


