ANNIVERSARIES UPON HIS PANARETE; CONTINVED:

With her CONTEMPLATIONS, penned in the languishing time of her Sickness.

The second Years ANNIVERS.

Et novus iste novo dolor astuat ortus ab anno. LONDON, Imprinted by Felix
Kyngston, and are to be sold by Robert Bostock, at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1635.

Anniversaries The second Years ANNIVERS.
upon his PANARETE, continued.
LAst year I wrote of my dear PANARET,
To pay my dearest Dear her duest debt;
But who is He knew her and knows not
How many things I in my Threnes forgot,
Which should have been expressed? but such as we
Who share in griefs, fall short in memory.
This to supply with teare-distilling eye,
Still to one Task I must my self apply;
For we an Anniversall mean to rear
In honor of her virtues every year:
Where though our Pencyle cannot well set forth
The riches of her goodness and true worth,
It shall appear we have desire to do it,
By the ceremonious zeal we bear unto it.
FIRST, -- lachrymisque revisimus umbras.
in my weekly visit to her shrine,
I bathe those corpse with tears which once were mine;
Once mine, now Earths: Nor do I, trust me, stay
In any superstitious sort to pray
For her reposed Soul, which being at rest,
My Prayer would seem superfluous at best:
Ye^, I should injure her, whose boundless bliss
Is such, none can be happier then she is.
Yet give me leave to eye her scatt'red dust,
Which in the resurrection of the just
Shall be united to her better part,
And reunited never to depart
One from another, but must jointly share
^n those choice comforts which eternal are.
O Earth, Earth, Earth! O triple style of man!
Earth, for from Earth his first beginning came;
Earth by affection too, because, heavens know,
What we should hate, wee're most affected to;
^arth by his dissolution, since he must
^eturne from whence he came, his mother dust.
Dear Dust! whose small^st atoms shall not be
trained through the Crevet of my memory
without religious reverence! I will give
^hese precious grains for relics while I live
To such as honor her, whose virtuous fame
Before all Monuments, preserves her name.
In my diurnall sorrows, I do muse
Discoursing, as I many times do use,
Of this unequalled Subject, Et lach^ymasse juvat* --
those that hear
My Scenes of grief, should not afford a tear
To every acc^nt: every trifling toy
Sprung from the ashes of consumed Troy Can force distreaming passion, though
this woe,
This feined woe, were many years ago:
Yet in that great destruction show me one,
Whose loss might really exact our moan
By her exemplar virtues, as this did,
Or ever strove to have her worth more hid.
Some were held fair, but they were vicious;
Others deformed, though they were virtuous:
Scarce one of that pure temper should we find,
Where beauty vy'de with graces of the mind:
But Mine was fair and good, chaste, choice and free
In all, save what she had engaged to me;
A sacred-secret gage, which I still keep*
In lieu of Her, who now is fallen asleep.
A Model of her feature yet I have, Et meminisse juvat.

Which I will carry with me to my Grave*
And this in private am I wont to eye,
And view't from top to toe, then set it by,
Then take it up again to feed my sight,
Which cheeres, but cannot cloy mine appetite.
Sometimes opinion does delude conceit,
And makes me think She h'as dispensed with fate,
While sweet stolen blushes from her Cheeks appears
Mixed with the ^lixer of pure Amber tears,
Which with a careful hand I wipe the while,
And she requires me with a winning smile.
But what are these, but fancies that are bred
From the distempers of a troubled head?
Heavens bless me! now, how melancholy seem
Those shady walks, and that Olympic Green
Where nimble youths their exercises did,
And yearly for her sake solemnized?
With what enwreathings would my Love and I
TO encourage young endeavors there stand by,
While with a modest smile She Would deigne to grace
The blessed Spectators of that happy place?
Blessed by her presence! for I freely vow,
Naught but was graceful what she deigned to do.
Often have I seen her from her Dayry come
Attended by her Maids, and hasting home
To entertain some Guests of quality,
She would assume a State so modestly
Sance affectation, as she struck the eye*
With admiration of the Stander by:
That He who saw her from the Dayry pass

Would scarce believe her for the same She was.
So well She could upon the selfsame day
Both Ci^ile Courtier and the House-wife play.
But to survey the passage of her life,
With Offices belonging to a wife,
A modest Ma^ron, and a Courtly Bride,
Dispencer of a Family beside,
Hear but a little wha^^ I shall relate;
And you may find one fit to imitate
In th'posture of all goodness! which may give
Example unto others how to live.
Draw hither then, ye Formalists of the age,
Who make your life a Progress to a Stage,
Your Chambers Tyring-houses, where to pray
Were such a tedious task, as you delay
To take acquaintance of it; or decline
Your thoughts from heaven, because you have no time
For such reserved vows: no more you have,
Nor can you dainty-Ducks a moment say.
For all your precious Morning-houres are given
For you to paint and deck you till eleven;
And then an hour or two must be the least
To jeere your foolish Lover, or to feast,
Or court your amorous ^^inging Favorite
With a bare-bathed breast to feed delight,
And purchase more Spectators: -- but time's lost
Till a Play-bill be severed from the Post
T'informe you what is to play; then comes your Coach,
Where numerous light-ones, like your self approach.
But where is Devotion all this while? asleep,
And for her self sole-Centinall may keep.
But now you are seated, and the Music sound
For the Actors entry; pleasures do abound
In every Box; sometimes your eye's on the Stage,
Straight on a lighter Object, your loose Page,
Or some phantastike Gallant, or your Groom,
But when this Emblem of your life is done,
This piece of witty art, what do you then?
To your sinne-shrouding Coaches straight again
You make repair, where you relate^^ be
Of what your Ear did hear, or Eye could see*
Then to a luscious Supper, after this
To a reere banquet, or to some quaint dish
To move a sensual slumber, and delight
But never sat your boundless appetite.
Thus you in painted joys mis-spend your days
More to your Suitors than your Makers praise.
But think not, Fair Ones, that I am too bitter,
For I do hold no Recreation fitter
Than Moral Enterludes; but have a care
You do not make them too familiar;
For that were to invert a Recreation,
And by day-practice make it a Vocation:
Though Some have writ that I do hate a Scene,
Their judgments err, nor know they what I mean;
I Am no Stage-Stinger, nor will ever be,
But do prefer a pleasant Comedy
Before a Tavern, where so many sit
To drench down care without a drop of wit.
But see the effect of grief! how glad would I
To any forced Digression rather fly
Than to our teare-swolne Subject, where relief
Has made it self a Stranger to our grief?
But now I haste to thee, my Dearest Dear,
To show what precious treasures stored were
In thy religious bosom: nor shall love
Cause me speak more than I can duly prove.
FIRST, Education of her Children.
for her nursing care; She held no stat^
Fitter for Mothers than to educate
Those they brought forth, and make their life a line
To teach their children how to spend their time*
And this she did; for even her Nurserie
Appeared a private School of industry,
Where the Elder taught and taskt the younger sort,
As th'Mother taught the Elder; none fell short
In their Endeavors: but if so they did,
They were by Her so sweetly chastized,
(And rare is such discretion to be known)
Both Love and awe were foulded in her frown,
Yea, such a lovely reverence did attend her,
They Would rather be corrected than offend her.
But no delitious fare could she endure
Her Children to be used to, but inure
Their youth to timely Moderation now
TO enable them when they should riper grow.
For she was wont to say, "When God shall call
"On us, Heaven knows in whose hands they may fall*
"Let Us then so breed them as may best become them,
"And to endure whats'ere may fall upon them.
With wholesome temperate diet she would supply
The luscious fruits of Mothers vanity.
Observe this, Mothers, for'tis unto you
I speak, who so much delicacy show
To your too tender offspring, and like the Ape,
Annoy them most of whom you most do make.
Where be these native Arguments of love
Which you express? Or, wherein do you prove
Your selves true Mothers? none can gather this
From pleasing of your Younglings with a kiss,
Or indiscreetest dandling on your knee,
Or cockring them with your indulgencie,
That you are natural Mothers, unless we
By natural mean foolish; so't may be
You may be tender Ones, I Will not deny,
Who, when they put their finger in the eye
For such a foreign Fashion, or a Feather,
Rather than grieve them you will deny them neithe^,
But cloth them in their folly: but are these
Expressions of Parentall Offices?
Oh no; while you are thus indulgent to them,
Through too much love you utterly undo them.
For when they are attyred gorgeously,
Their formal habits crave more liberty;
Their eyes must have new Objects, which impart
Secrets of love unto a wanton heart.
Dinah must roame abroad, but ten to one
She loses honor ere she visit home.
Prevent this, modest Matrons, let no stain
Impeach their youth; vessels, you know, retain
A taste of their first liquor; season them
With that at first which may accomplish them.
All this my Dear One did, and so must ye
That hope to live in your posterity.
NEXT, Government of her Family.
Fame reares to her Name a monument
For house-affaires and private Government,
While her well-guided Family might seem
A Pattern unto others to demean
Their actions by; since all desires were bent
To close in one harmonious consent.
No spleenefull Waspe might lodge within her roof,
All discontented Spirits stood aloof.
With willing care her pleasure all attend,
Fearing n^ught more than that they should offend*
For she with mildness did her Servants win* (...) to her

Sweetning the endeavors they were busied in*
Yea, so much had her candid nature won,
They Evening joy'd ith'Day-works they had done.*
How far swerve ye from the Pattern instanced here,
Who over your Servants use to domineere,
As if they were your Slaves? which is no way
To make your people cheerfully obey.
^his but begets Eye-service at the best,
and makes an Holy Day when you are at rest.
Others there be, who have occasion ^ought
^o beat their Servants, though it were for naught,
Like Vedio, who for breaking of a glass
Would drown his Page: let such Examples pass
Unworthy your Observance: better far,
And to discretion far more regular,
To imitate Architas, who in's field
Finding his Servant loyt'ring, would not yield
Forthwith to Passion, but entreats him thus,
Which may be presidentall unto us:
"Sure I would beat thee, were I not in anger,
"But that secures thee for this time from danger.
But other virtues now I hasten to,
Which did my late endeared Spouse endow.
NEXT, to the Love she to her Neighbors Love to her Neighbors.
bar^^
Than which no Creature ever had more share;
Were they infirm, she would not nicely stand,
But to their griefs apply her helping hand,
And dress their wounds her self, for she was rare
Both for her happy cure and holy care.
Herbals She Would read, but timorous to err,
With men of choice Experience She Would confer,
Which so enabled her, as she was still
By doing good, improving of her skill.
Not like blind Herbists, whereof there be store,
Who have but one bare cure for every sore:
These, if they kill, they kill, and if they cure,
The effect is far above their reason sure*
Now, to the last not least, for it is this
Which gives us speedy Convoy unto bliss;
And that was, Hospitality to Strangers.
Strangers Hospitality:
Where her Provision ever would supply
Their necessary wants; nor all her tim^
(Wherein her thoughts did ever close with mine)
Would she avert her ear from any one
Who sor^eliefe did to her Portell come.
Her Cruse was ever open to the poor,
Calling them Scholars of our Savior:
If they were old, or feebly impotent,
An Alms with more bounty might be sent.
No Stranger ere did to her gate repair
Confined to anguish, or surpised with care,
She would not comfort, and with dropping eye
Afford compassion to their misery.
None hungry but She Would feed; no thirsty wretch
But She Would refresh; Nor naked but she would fetch
Garments to cover them. How far be ye
From these expressive Acts of Charity,
Who fed with Amber broaths, delitious fare,
Have of your starved Sisters little care?
Their rags are your contempt; their shre^kes and crye^
Are boulted from your Ears, fanned from your eyes.
But how should you take pity of these Elves,
Who have no greater pity on your selves?
How should you cover them whom Colds molest,
Who will not cover your loose-bared Breast
In sharpest airs, but rather starve your skin,
Than shroud the coccasion of alluring sin?
O do not so; let gracious thoughts appear
To mould you to that Pattern you have here.
But I must leave; He clozeth this second Anniversary, as a votive Sacrifice to
her memory.
but never leave to love
My glorious Saint, which now is sphear'd above;
Who, if she daigne to accept this Sacrifice
Dipped in a throbbing heart, and streaming eyes,
I Have got my Gole, and she a treble rest,
In Heaven, in Earth, and in my naked breast.
When Just ones die, then they to live begin,
"They live to Si^n, when they die to Sin.
FINIS.
THE DISTINT TITLES OF THESE CONTEMPLATIONS.

1. The Souls Sole-Love. 2. The Wounded Heart. 3. The New Dress.
WITH LOVES LEGACY, OR, PANARETES Blessing to her Children.

Contemplations of PANARETE, penned in the languishing time of her Sickness.
The Souls Sole-Love.
CONTEMPLATION I.
THou have, my dear Soul, engaged thy faith: Thou have betaken thy self to
thine heavenly Spouse. A divided Heart cannot live; how should thou live
without thy Sole-love? Adulterine Colors cannot hold; nor adulterate
affections retain their color. ^ezabels feature was more beholden to Art than
Nature. Such is the complexion of that love, which makes lust her lure: vain
is such a tincture, that makes a servi^e desire her applyer. Maiden honor
consists not in formality: There is ever something more real in it. Flourishes
are but printed blossoms: they may work upon the outward sense, they cannot
captivate the Reason. The inward beauty is of more extent than any outward
varnish. Thou have reason, O my Soul, to preserve that, which solely makes
thee graceful to thy Spouse. Conceit nothing seemly, but what may beseem
him that made thee. Thou art not made for a slavish fancy; thou have one
sole-love, to cleave to another, were a frency. Affection is no Tennis-Ball,
for struck into another hazard, it is lost. One Sun cannot shine in two
spheres; nor one sphere contain two Suns. The Sun of Righteousness is
the Sphere of my Soul: she is a Planet, when she shines elsewhere. Graces
are divine beamelins, the inward house is dark without them: and these shine
most, when least interposed with any earthly clouds. What is it (O my Soul) to
sparkle like a Glo-worme by night, or like rotten wood to send forth a
deceiving splendour? What is it, with a gloss of dissembled purity to take the
eyes or ears of erring judgments? Thou have within thee to witness for thee,
or condemn thee. Then, even then, my soul, when the great Book shall be
opened, the secret Cabbinet of thy retiredst thoughts unlocked, and no
subterfuge for guilt admitted: thou shall find, that good works must pass
for ill, being not done well. The intention then must crown the action. Alms
with a trumpet, Fasting with a dejected countenance, Praying and Tithing with a
Pharisaicall affiance, must have no acceptance. Be thy discipline never so
severe, if it be not sincere, it receives no reward. Honor must not be thine
harbor, if devout intentions Crown not thy labor. Reflect on thy sweet
Spouse, and meditate of his Pilgrimage on earth. He offered his childhood to a
Cratch, his youth to Care, his Manhood to the Cross. He entered the world
naked, He lived in it despised, and went from it with sorrows burdned. There
was nothing so grievous which was not with patience suffered by him, to make
thee gracious in His sight who sent him. Shall a little Cloud then change thy
countenance? Shall a minutes distaste amate thee, or make t^ee forgetful of
his sufferings, who subjected himself to death for thee? Who ever enjoyed a
sweeter Spouse? He confirmed his love with the loss of his life: and shall
every small cross in this life devide thee from his love? Behold and see
(says thy dis-passionate Spouse) if there were ever Sorrow like to my Sorrow!
No, my Sole-Love, needs must thy Sorrow be great, when with the offering up of
thine own precious life, thou could hardly gain any love. The Rocks were
dissolved, the Temple divided, the Graves opened, the Heavens darkened, all the
Elements suffered, yet Man, for whom thou became Man, and dyed, became most
hardened. Lost were thou, O my Soul, and eternally lost; and to re-gaine thee,
He lost his own life: Such were those Adamantine ties of his immutable love.
Many sheep he had, and those he left, to seek thee lost: so plenteously did
those roseat Torrents of his sacred compassion flow, to wash away those
crimson-dyed sins, which had left that dying tincture in thy wounded Soul.
How often has he sought to gather thee, and thou would not? to espouse thee
to himself, and thou assented not? to bring thee to his Marriage Feast, and
thou attended not? Mean time, when thou saw a Thief, thou run with him,
and with the Inordinate divided thy portion; both which with the cords of
iniquity drew thee headlong to perdition. Conceivest thou yet no compassion of
thine unhappy condition? shall not one poor tear witness thy contrition?
Will thou become of thy wounds so altogether unsensible, as by thy want of
sense to make them uncurable? Run to the Rock, and quenc^ thy thirst with
those living streame^ which flow from it. Apply thy mout^ to the hole of the
pipe, that thou mais^ be refreshed. Beg of Him water, who shed for thee water
and blood. Dry eyes will not bring thee to heaven Sin is of such a deep
stain, as true penitential tears are of only forc^ to take away that dye.
Thou see the Turtle how she mourns for the loss^ of her Mate. The desert
becomes he^ Recluse, consorrshe will not with any fearing to forget the
occasion of he^ misery. Brouze she will not, nor res^ nor roust on any green
Branch Grieves are her inseparable Companions; other Consorts she admits not
because they suite not with her condition. Contemplate these, O my soul* and
reflect upon thy self. Let thine eyes be estranged from sleep. Let sighs and
groans be thy food. Water thy Couch with incessant rivers of tears. Great
sins require great sighs; perilous soars precious salves. Consider poor
Soul, where thou art placed; with what innumerable dangers enclosed; again,
how those which were given thee for defense, are most ready to betray thee to
thine enemy. Again, reflect upon the benignity of thy good God; who, if he had
been as ready to punish thee for thy ^inne, as thou have been to commit sin,
had long since drenched thee down into that bottomless pit of eternal
bitterness. Death had been thy due; and Hell thy Portion. And can thou now
look upon thy self without loathing; or consider thy woeful estate without
trembling? Was ever any one more bound to his Maker; and less thankful? More
watered with the sweet influence of his grace; and less fruitful? In no place
could thou promise to thy self p^ace; within fears, without fights. Yet
have the wings of the Almighty been so graciously spread over thee; as neither
fear could oppress thee at home, nor fury surprise thee abroad. And this was
His work, who has so constantly loved thee, as He would never leave thee.
For whenever thou wandered, he recalled thee: when ignorant, he taught thee:
when thougsinned, he corrected thee: when sad, he comforted thee: when
desperate, he supported thee: when fallen, he raised thee: when standing, he
held thee: when walking, he guided thee: when returning, he received thee:
when sleeping, he kept thee: when crying, he heard thee. What will thou
render then, O my Soul, to Him, who has done such wonderful things for thee?
Will thou stay in the Marketplace idling? Will thou address thy self to no
employment in thy calling? Is it enough for thee to retain the style of a
Christian, and presuming upon that style, to corrupt the state of a Christian?
Will thou make thy whole life an Holy Day; and by thy profane conversation
cloze it up with a fearful day? Will thou not yet after so many sweet
invitations, to allure thee? So many sharp comminations, to deter thee? Such
gentle touches on thy right hand and on thy left, break these bonds of thy
Transgressions, and return to that overflowing fountain of divine
compassions? It is fearful, thou know, to fall into the hands of the Lord.
For who is he in all the world, so just, that he may with confidence presume
to be saved, if Gods mercy (the sole Salve of humane misery) be from him
removed? Yea, know, O my Soul, that thy justice consists in Gods indulgence,
who has an Ear open for thee, if thou cry unto him; an arm to embrace thee,
if thou fly unto him; an heart to receive thee, if thou return unto him; an
hand to succor thee, if thou come to him; a wing to cover thee, if thou cleave
to him. And will thou still feed on the husks of vanity, and despise those
delicious cates of eternity? Shall one poor moment of vading pleasure deprive
thee of those joys which last for ever? By enjoying thy Spouse, thou enjoyest
all things: his presence will be meat to thee hungring; drink to thee
thirsting; health to thee languishing; way to thee wandering; light to thee
erring; life to thee dying. Be he then to thee all things, seeing without him
all things are nothing. All things are vanity, save only to please God and
serve him: And such a Service is a Christian Solace; without which, as all
things are vanity, so man of all others, the lightest vanity: How can thou
then be at peace without him, since he only in the bond of peace unites all
that are espoused unto him? If man love man with such affection, as the one
scarce suffers the other to be absent: if a Spouse to her Spouse be joined
with such ardour of mind, as through the excess of her love she can take no
rest, brooking the absence of her beloved not without great sorrow: then with
what af^ection, with what desire, with what fervorous devotion oughtst thou, O
my Soul, whom thy best Spouse has espoused to himself in faith and mercy, to
love Him thy true God, and most beautiful Spouse, who has so loved and saved
thee; who has done so many, so great and exceeding things for thee? Why
stayest thou (O my Soul?) find thou ought here worthy of thy Love? Will thou ever to thy baine, be ^ibbling at the bait of vanity? Have thou not
found much bitterness in these deceiving shadows of humane happiness? Have
not thy delights been most crossed, wherein they looked to be most cheered? Yea,
when thou enjoyed thy delights to the full, had they not ever bitterness in
their farewell. Take a short Survey of the d^ies of thy vanity, and see what
day in all thy Pilgrimage has been so propitious, as it was not encountered
with some discontents! Has not a merry Evening made an heavy Morning? Nor a
glad going out, a sad returning? Did hear no report of a private foe; nor no
death of a constant friend? Were thy affairs so well carried, as nothing
miscarried? And admit all this; how long did this Calm continue? Had this
forward Spring no nip? If not, then so much more unhappy, in being ever so
seeming happy. The Saints and Servants of God do in this world more fear
prosperity than adversity: for that, the height of prosperity is in danger more
to press them, than the weight of adversity to depresse them. These through
many tribulations passed; and passing profited; and profiting prevailed; and
prevailing were victoriously crowned. If the Devil be dead, then are
persecutions dead: but so long as our Adversary lives, can thou think that
he will not suggest to thee tentations? The enemy cease not, dies not, but
in the Resurrection of the dead. Short is the fight, but great is the victory.
Learn then from that vessel of Election, to rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. Romans 5.
And not only so, but to glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation
works patience: and Patience experience: and experience hope: and hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy
Ghost, which is given unto us. O divine gradation! O gracious consolation! If
thine heart then be right, O my Soul, whatsoever shall befall thee, thou will
rejoice in it for his sake who sent it thee; and conclude with that Pattern of
Patience: Job 1.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.
Pitch upon this resolve, O my Soul, and thy sweet Spouse will stay thee with
flagons, Cant. 2.
comfort thee with apples. Nothing shall separate thee from the love of Christ.
Neither tribulation, Romans 8.
nor distress, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor
sword. For, 1 Pet. 3.
who is he that will harm thee, if thou be follower of that which is good?
Betake thy self then to thy Bel^ved Spouse, and he will give thee thine hearts
desire. None can take thee forth of his hand, nor devide thee from his heart.
The delights and riches of an heaven-ravish'd Spirit, are divine Songs, where
tears are not without joy, nor sighs without comfort. Now, my good Jesus, if it
be so sweet to weep for thee, how sweet will it be to rejoice with thee?
Whatsoever then I shall feel, by the presence and assistance of thy grace, I
will not fail to give thee thanks in my suffering, equally as in my
rejoicing: For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, Romans 8.
are not worthy to ^e compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. To
confirm this resolve, and inflame thy desires, retain the memory of his
presence ever with thee, who gave himself for thee. Let thy Conversation be
in heaven, during this thy Pilgrim-reside on Earth. So delight thee in him, as
no delight may take thee from him. Then may thou freely say, Cant. 2.
My beloved is mine, and I am his: He feeds among the Lillies: among the
Lillies of Chastity, borders of Sanct^ty: Follow thy Love with chaste thoughts,
and thou shall live with him in glory.

The Wounded Heart.
CONTEMPLATION II.
SHall the Har^ long after the water brooks, when he is with thirst ann^yed?
or fly to the Herb to cure him, when he is wounded? And shall my thirsty
Heart (the princely sea^ of my mind) never fly to those living streams of
ever-flowing waters? Sick she is, and heart-sicke, and will she never repair
to her best Physician: in whose heart is a fatherly care, and in whose hand a
speedy cure? Will she never taste of that Herb of grace, to eas^ her griefs,
cure her wounds, and restore her decayed Spirits? Whence is it, O my benumbed
heart, that thou are become so insensible of thine own misery, as thus to make
thy wounds incurable through thy security? Why do thou not cry out in the
bitterness of thy Soul, with that afflicted Patient, and m^morable Mirror of
patience: Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, Job 3.
and life to the bitter in Soul? For thus by meditating of thy gri^fes, thou
would sooner labor for relief, and seasonably partake of comfort after thy
long affliction: For who can search into the Source of thy Sorrows, or know
the depth of thy griefs or joys, unless thy self discover them? The Heart
knows his own bitterness: Prove. 14.
and a Strang^r does not intermeddle with his joy. The way to cure thy wounds,
is to open them; The way to ease thy Heart, is to discover the sorrows of it.
Should thou with that Sacred and Elect vess^ll, be pressed (and happy thou if
so afflicted) out of measure, ^ Co^. ^.
above strength, insomuch as thou should despair of life, call but upon the
Lord, and he will deliver thee. For he, and only he, can heal the broken
spirit; comfort the contrite Soul, and make the bones which he has broken to
rejoice. For he it is, who is the hope of the desperate, the comfort of the
desolate. Weep he cannot, who is so solaced; fail he shall not, who is so
succored. Apply thy self then to him (O my wounded heart) and repose thee in
his wounds, for they are full of compassion; rely on his promises, for they
sound nothing but consolation. Should thou (o my languishing heart) be driven
to that extremity, as thou could find no comfort within thee; no hope of
relief without thee; nothing but clouds of heaviness to encompasse thee; none
but Jobs Messengers to encounter thee: should thou rore forth in the
bitterness of thy soul: How long will thou not depart from me? (how long will thou thus afflict me? nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? Yea,
Jo^ 7.
should thy belly tremble: thy lips quiver at his voice: should rottenness
enter into thy bones, Habac. 3.
and thy strength fail: yet would the hand of the Almighty, by disclaiming
thine own power, and flying to his mercy, so support thee as thou should not
fall. But thou art wounded, o mine heart, and o I wish that thou were sensibly
wounded! Mean time, let the desires of thy roaring intrals beat at the gate of
his Compassions. Let the cries of the tears of thine eyes, poured forth with
fervor of affection, pierce the clouds, and seal to thy numerous sins a
gracious remission. O that thou were so pure, that thy dear and loving Spouse
would say unto thee: Thou have ravished my heart, Cant. 4.
my Sister, my Spouse: Thou have ravished my heart, with one of thine eyes,
with one chain of thy neck. O fly unto him, and thou shall find this Love in
him! Let the world have no part nor portion in thee. He is jealous of thy
love; thou must love him only, if thou love him truly. A divided Love, because
distracted in her Object, cannot live. Fixed must thy resolves be, and those
for eternity, if thou mean ever to reign with him in glory. She deserves not
a loving Spouse, that is not faithful in her love to her Spouse. To keep thy
Nuptial bed undefiled, is an honor; to violate that Faith thou have plighted,
were piacular. Two hearts cannot rest in one breast, but two Souls may repose
in one heart. Thou have often vowed to keep thy self to one, and He thine
only one: and how soon were those sweet vows made bitter, when thine eyes,
taken with outward Objects, begun to wander? Tell me (my wounded heart) who
was ever sick, and knew himself so, and desired not health? who ever wounded,
and sought not for a cure? Now, if outward discontents occasion such Care, what
should our inward griefs do, which minister hourly occasions of greater
fear? Thou have long suffered, and desired to be solaced; but thou sought not
where Comfort was to be found: and therefore thou found not that which thou
sought. The place or repose of an humane or natural heart consists in the
delight of this present ^ife. But no sooner is thy heart touch^d with divine
aspiration, than the seat of our heart becomes the love of eter^ity, and
receipt of heavenly consola^ion. That heart is truly styled the friend of
truth, which is a lover and approver of every right action; and makes Heaven
the sole object of her contempla^ion. The truest proof of love is the fruit of
a good life. Divine love consists not ^n voice and air. Should thy voice ^ound
like a Trumpet, and thy life si^ent: all this airy Music would give ^ut a
dead accent. Thy tongue praises ^or an hour, let thy life praise for ever.
For as Divine praise in the mouth of a ^rophane sinner, can send forth no
sweet smelling savor: and Prayer* the only precious pearl of a pure soul,
returns without fruit, when hypocri^ie seazeth on the heart: and al^ humane
wisdom becomes folly, being not directed to Gods Glory: so unless thou (O my
Wounded Heart) only love God for himself, thy mixed an^ divided love can
return no comfor^ nor profit to thy self. It is this divine and
purely-refined love which onel^ makes a rich and wise Soul. For, without
this, what has the wise more than the fool? Eccles. 6.
what has the poor, that knows (...) walk before the living? Whatsoever
(...) by thee (O my languishing heart) abov^ all others affected, is by thee
adored Prefer nothing, in the true value o^ love, before Him that made thee;
le^^ thou make an Idol of the Creature, an^ so dishonor Him, who made all
inf^riour things to serve thee. Do tho^ his will by serving Him, and all hi^
Creatures will serve thee accordin^ to his will. Yea, even He, who has
commanded the Morning: Job 38.
and caused the dayspring to know his place; shall show the light of his
Countenance upon thee: and thy longing E^res shall hear that voice of comfort
uttered by thine heavenly Spouse, the fountain of all comfort: Cant. 4.
Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee. And in the affiance of
his love to whom thou art espoused, shall thy wounded Heart, then cured,
return turn this answer to thy Beloved; Cant. 2*
My beloved is mine, and I am his. Cant. ^.
His left hand shall be under my head* and his right hand shall embrace me.

The New Dress: OR, Motives to a New life.
CONTEMPLATION. III.
O My Soul, how long will thou ^ttire thy self in these rags of Sin? how
long in these (...) of Shame? when thine heavenly Bride groom comes, H^e will
not endure to look on thee; he can by no means like thee, nor love thee, nor
espouse himself unto thee, so long as these sullied garments of sin cover
thee. To a clean Lord must be a clean habitation. A pure Heart must be his
Mansion; purged by Faith, adorned with good works, inflamed with heavenly
thoughts. No Edging of vanity, no purle of vainglory, no tinsell-lustre of
hypocrisy must set forth thy Nuptial garment; for these would detract from thy
Virgin-beauty. Those Egyptian laces and Babylonian borders might attract a
wandering eye: but purely fixed be the eyes of thy Spouse. Whatsoever is without
thee cannot take him: it is thine inward beauty that does delight him. Let thy
affections then be renewed, thy Virgin-beauty restored, thy de^aies repaired.
Come not in his sight, till thou have put off those rags of sin, and having
put them off, say with the Spouse in the Canticles: I have put off my co^te,
Cant. 5. 3.
how shall I put it on? Let thy New Dress be a New heart: so shall thy Spouse
take delight in thee, with his sweet arms embrace thee, and be enamored of
thee, when he looks on thee; and in the knowledge of thy beauty say thus unto
thee: Thou art all fair, Cant. 4.
my love, there is no spot in the^. Cast thine eye all about thee, O my Soul,
but let it not wander, least thou loose thine honor. Take a full view of the
renuall of all Creatures; and ref^ect upon thy self, who, though Soveraignesse
over all, becomes least renewed of all. Thou see the Heart, the Eagle, the
Swallow, how hey are re^^ed; nay, even the Snake, how by casting his Slough,
he is renewed. Again, thou observest, how years, days, hours and minutes
are renewed; how the Earth it self is renewed: She is with fresh flowers
adorned, with a native tapistry embrodered, with a new beauty refreshed. Mean
time, how art thou renewed? Where be those fresh fragrant flowers of divine
graces and permanent beauties, wherewith thou should be adorned? Must all
things change for better, and thou become ever worse in the sight of thy Maker?
None more inconstant than thou in humouring the fashions of our time; none more
constant than thou in reteining the fashion of sin. What can thou see in
thee, that may please thee, or appear pleasing to Him that made thee? Sin is
a Soil, which blemisheth the beauty of thy Soul. In this then to glory, were
the highest pitch of infelicity. Thou art only to approve that with a discreet
Choice, which may make thee most amiable in the sight of thy Spouse. When thou
eyest the vanity of Earth, fix the eye of thine Heart on the eternity of
heaven. Mix not thy delights in such Objects, where surfeit or excess begets a
loathing; Luke 21.
but in those lasting pleasures, where fruition begets in thee an affectionate
longing. Fashion not thy self after this world; where there is nothing that
tempts but taints. Desire rather to be numerous in hours than years: so
dispose of thy time, that time may bring thee to eternity. Ever consider (O my
Soul) how thou art here in a Wilderness, and far removed from the (...) of
true happiness. A Captives proper Melody is Lachrymae: he cannot raise his
voice to any other Note, unless he mad himself in his mis^ry, and forget
his own State. Vye then in sighs with sins. Take compassion of thy woeful
condition: Be not commanded by thine Handmaid. Restrain her* lest she grow
imperious; show thy self a Mistress* that she may become more obsequious.
She is worthy to obey, that knows not how to command. Do not loose thy
Prerogative; Preserve thy Style, retain thy State, and make Her know how
dangerous it is to incur thine hate. The more thou bring her to contempt,
the more shall thou partake of content: Should thou delicately feed her, or
in her desires supply her, or loose thy reins and give liberty unto her, she
would not stick to deprive thee of thine honor, and by thy unworthy
^ubjection become an usurping Co ^mmander. To free thee from this danger, let
Devotion be thy Succor, so shall the Shadow of the Almighty be thy Shelter.
Though the Servant earnestly desire the Shadow, Job 7. 2.
and the hireling look for the reward of his work, or rather the end of the
day, to conclude his work: tarry thou the Lords leisure; with patience endure
the heat of the day, the weight of thy labor. Though a Pilgrim be wearied, he
must not fail nor faint, till his journey be ended: Wherein, He accounts
himself so much the happier; as he is to his own native Country nearer. If
thou fit and furnish thy self in all points for this journey, thou shall be
joyfully received in thine arrival to thy Country. Run then to the Goal,
which is set up for thee; Strive to come to the mark, which is before thee.
Let no impediments foreslow thee; no delights on E^rth divert thee. Seal up
thine eye, if it wander; but open it, if it promise to fix on thy Savior.
Hourly thy dissolution is expected; the Marriage Feast prepared, and thou
invited; Let thy garment be holiness, so shall thine end be happiness.

LOVES LEGACY, OR, PANARETES Blessing to her Children.
DRaw near me, and hear those last words which I must ever on Earth speak
to you. Sure I am, that the dying words of a tender Mother, cannot but fasten
deeper, and retain a memory longer; than the Speech of the movingst Orator.

Fear God above all things; it is the beginning of wisdom: and will enrich
you above your Portion. You are now in your Childehood, let that season you: so
shall His blessing, who has blessed me, crown you.

Be honest in your ways; spare in your words; plenteous in good works.

Proportions God has given you; Portions by Gods providence, I have left you;
enrich these with the best portion, the ornament of virtue.

Specious Features are not to be valued to the precious embellishment of virtue.

Be what you seem to be; and seem what you ought to be: I never loved that
Countenance, which could promise much, and perform nothing.

Ever reflect on Him that made you: and make devotion, your constant Diarie to
conduct you.

Be tender of those you rank with; either to better them, or be bettered by
them.

Be humble to all; Humility is the way to Glory: This it is will make you
amiable to the Creature; glorious in the sight of your Creator.

Learn how to obey, that you may know better how to command.

In the consideration of humane infelicity,
there is nothing becomes more incurable, than what is habituate: when Custom
of sin takes away all sense of sin.

In holy Places is the Devil ever busiest.

No disease more dangerous than the Lethargy of Sin. This Sleep brings ever
an heavy awake: for though like a tender Nurse, She sing a sweet Lullabee to
her deluded Child, it is ever in worser case the more it sleeps; for it dies
in sinnes-slumber, and perishes untimely by the enchantment of her Mother.

Consider this, my dearest ones, Resist the Devil, and be will fly from you:
Suffer not the first motions of sin to seize on you. Pray continually,
because you have an Enemy assayling you incessantly. The Combat is short, your
Crown eternal.

In the heat of the day, think of the Evening: The earnest-penny will
recompense your pains: Continue to the end, and your reward shall be endless.

Be not too curious in inquiring what you are to receive after this life; but
so labor, that you may receive your reward of glory after this life. Many by
too curious an itching after wh^t they were to receive, have deceived
themselves, by loving their reward more than God.

Let nothing on Earth take your hearts; Let the divine Love only possess them,
so shall you find quietness in them.

That heart cannot want, that possesses God. He will be a Light to direct it,
that it stray not: A Comfort to refresh it, that it fail not. For all earthly
helps, they must either leave us, or we them. Wherein it falls oft-times
forth, that we are most afflicted even in those, wherein we expected most
comfort.

It is one thing to live on Earth, another thing to love Earth. To be in the
world, and of the world, are different conditions. Tabernacles are not to be
accounted Habitations. While we are sojourning, we must be journeying
toward Canaan: Nor may we rest, till we get home.

O my tender Ones (for never were Children more dear to a Mother) make every
day of your life a promising passage to your native Country.

As every day brings you nearer to your grave; may every day increase in you
the riches of his grace.

Let the joys of heaven and torments of hell be familiar with you; by
meditating of the felicity of the one, and infelicity of the other: these to
de^erre, those to allure.

Be not too much taken with Fashion; it is the disease of this age:
Comeliness is the most taking Dress to a discreet eye; whatsoever is else,
borders on sin, and becomes reputations stain.

I am not now very old, when I leave you, yet did never that spreading vanity
of the Time much surprise me.

For my part, I did ever rather affect not to be known at all, than to be
known for singular. It is a poor accomplishment that takes her essence from
what we wear. The rind makes not the Tree precious, but the fruit.

My desire is, that you would be circumspect in your discourse. Though no
Society can subsist without Speech, yet were it very necessary to be cautious
of the Society to whom we direct our Speech. Few or none have ever been hurt
by Silence; but many, too many, by too prodigal Speech, have engaged their
freedom to the power of their foes.

Let your whole life be a Line of direction to your selves; and of instruction
to others.

Be more ready to hear than to ^each: and above all things, let your Fame be
a living Doctrine to your Family.

Be diligent in the Vocation you are called unto: And be ever doing some good
work: that the Devil may never find you unemployed: For our Security is his
Opportunity; to prevent then his Sleights, give no way to Sloth.

When you come into any Holy place, call Him to mind, to whom it is dedicated.
Hold your selves then, as retired from the world: and lift up your hearts to
Him, who is your Hope and Help, both here and in a better world.

Esteem of all men well; and of your selves the worst.

Suffer with others, when you shall hear them defamed: and preserve their
report as well as you may. For it is not sufficient to be tender of our own,
and impeach others: but to tender others as our own.

Stand always in an humble and religious fear.

Be not ashamed to confess, what you were not ashamed to commit.

If at any time, through frailey, you fail; with tears of unfeigned
Contrition redeem your fall.

Walk with an undefiled Conscience, knowing that you are in his presence,
whose eyes are so pure, as they cannot abide iniquity; and whose judgment so
clear, as it will search out hypocrisy.

Keep your Bodies undefiled; Temples should be pure and unpolluted.

If your desire be to honor your Maker; you must make your heart his harbor.

Every Country has one chief City, and that situate in the Heart of the
Land; and becomes the Kings Seat. Your Heart shall be the City of the King of
kings, so you guard the Gates of your Little City, that no sinful Intruder
enter nor surprise them; no corrupt affection win in upon them.

Now the better to secure your State; let your Eyes, your City-Centinals, be so
directed, that they become not distracted: by wandering abroad, they beget
disorder at home.

All neighbourly Offices I commend unto you; they gain love, which is the oil
of our life. But too much familiarity I do not admit; Charity is expedient to
all, Familiarity to few.

Let not the Sun shine upon you, before you have commended your selves to
that Sun of Righteousness, to direct you in all your ways, and enrich you
with all good works.

To conclude, (for I feel my failing Faculties drawing near their conclusion)
Let your youth be so seasoned with all goodness, that in your riper age, you
may retain an habit of that which your youth practiced.

Well-spent Minutes are precious treasures; whose reviving memory will refresh
your fainting Souls in their sharpest gusts of misery.

To speak of Marriage to you, I will not; for your Childhood cannot yet
conceive it: May your Choice be with discretion, and without Change^ so shall
succeeding comfort second your Choice.

Prefer your Fame before all Fortunes: it is that sweet odor which will
perfume you living, and embalme you dying.


I find my self now breathing homeward: the eye of my body is fixed on you;
the eye of my Soul on heaven: Think on me as your natural Mother; and of
earth as your common Mother. Thither am I going, where you must follow. Value
Earth as it is; that when you shall pass from Earth, you may enjoy what E^rth
cannot afford you; to which happiness your dying Mother commends you.

FINIS.

