A very fruitful Exposicion upon the syxte Chapter of Saint John, divided
into. x. Homelies or sermons: written in Latin by the right excellent clarke
Master John Brencius, and translated into English by Richard Shirrye, Londoner.

Inclyte Ioannes Germane gloria gentis
Qui toties magno resonasti pectore Christum,
^ternum viuis: non inuida tempora nomen
Obscutare tuum poterunt per secula foelix.
O quam dulce fluit colamus tibitum bone Bre^ti,
Cum seruatorem placidus depingis Ie^sum.
Quae tu Germanis, Anglis ego munera grata
Far meis curiens, sermones transfero denos
Quos conscripsisti sextum in caput alti Ioannis.
To the right Honorable Lord Wentworth, Lord Chamberlain, one of the Kings
most honorable Counsel, Richard Schirrye, wishes health everlasting.
WHa^ I had fynyshed this trea tise which I took in hand to tra^slat of good
zeal toward ye most sacred, and holy word of God, deuisynge with my self
under whose proteccion the same being printed might be published abrod,
although I know not your Lordship by any co^uersacio^, and acquaintance,
but only by a general fame that makes you to be gra cious, and acceptable to
the world: for this cause specially, that you favor all good letters, and
chiefelye the holy scripture, with those expositours which most sincerelye and
purelye expound the same: I could find out none to whom for the said
respects, I thought more convenient to dedicate this my tra^slacio^ than to
your good lord ship. To whom although I be vnworthi to offer this present,
boeth for my baseness of degree, and also of learning, yet is the work it self
of such price, that it may iustelye challenge so worthy a patron. In this
Chapter ben certain textes, which being cropped out from the rest, have
ministered to learned men much matter of argumentacion: some expoundynge them
one ways, some an other.

And forasmuch as there is nothing, but by evil enterpretacyon it may be
depraved, and that in all al controversies to find out the truth, there is no
rediar ways tha^ to hear the hole tale told, I thought it a deed worthy the
labor to set out in our English tongue the exposicio^ of ye right excellent
Clarke John Bren cius, which he writes upon the sixth Chap. of John: not
leapyng out from one text to an other, but thorowely expounding it eue^ in ye
self same order, in which the Evangelist wrote it: so yt the circu^staunces
shall not a little help to the true sense and vndersta^dig thereof, which ma^er
of exposicio^ is much to be co^me^ded. And contra ri they are worthi dispraise
which rashli plucking out the texts as they come first to hand, not wayinge
the^ with the rest that either follow or have gone before, make the^ serve to
their own pur pose: and apply them to such an exposicio^ as they the^ selves
have conceived before in their own mind. Whereupon often time arises much
altercacio^ i worcester des, which would easily be avoided, if at y^ beginning had
been laid a suar fundacion of reasonyng. But this expositour Brencius
declares his mind in ^o clear an order, that avoiding all confusion, the
diligente reader may sone perceive how iustlye one thing depends upon an
other: so that for this point, that is in declarynge how the textes should
ryghtly be understand, by the judgment of well learned men, he may be
compared to the best interpretoures that have been in any time long before.
What should I speak of his eloquence which may be sooner maruayled at, than
followed?

If it please your Lordshyppe fauourablye to accept these my labors, not a
little shall I be encouraged to goo forward with the rest of the Homelies, or
some other thing of like Profit: and acquaynte my self again with those
studyes, which being begun of me in youth, and so continued forth certain
years, have been a long season, although not quyghte left of yet very much
remit ted, and slacked.

The living God which now of his infinite goodness has sent us peace from
mortal bodili war, give us also concord of minds y^ agreyng in one sound
doctrine we may be united and knyte as members of one mystical body, to our
head Jesus Christ our lord, to whom be glory for ever.

The Preface to the Reader.
IN these our days when the monime^tes of soexcel lent wits so
plentifullye come abroad, that therebye it may right well be known, there be
right many not only perfectlye seen in all humayne sciences, but in
special, in the most fyrme, and undoubted Christian religion: no doubt there
is great cause unto all good men, and to al such as love knowledge, greatly
to rejoice. And yet to follow these principal guides, and chief leaders not a
few are put in dout: either for that y^ judgments of men be so various, and
the wylles of most part so froward, y^ to up hold either this opinion or yt, I
wot not whither it may seem less apt to receive thank, or more ready to dau^
ger of evil speech, and extreme ieoperdy. Which thing of some men is so feared,
yt it boeth takes away their wits, and wylles to do good, and therefore
pass their life in silence. But if this mind should be to all that ca^ do well,
yt is, that for fear of such diuer sitie in judgment of al sorts of me^, they
should leave of to do such profit as they might do, than might it fortune to be
a great while, or ever the truth were spread abrod, and or knowledge should
have the vpperhand of ignorance. Which thing certain persons encouraged by
the spirit of God right well perceiuyng, have valiantly put forth the^ selves,
and adventured ye dangerous charge of evil tongues, secretly regarding ra there
ye right judgment of a few, tha^ disco^forted by obloquie and evil spech of a
great many. Thus did yt noble Poet Horace, when he was content with the assent
of a few well learned, to whom he recited his worckes, as appears in his
sermons. Thus do also now a days such as seek not for ye vain praise of the
multitude, but only to rest in y^ bosom of the well learned. But since talkyng
there of is so common, and wits so many and diverse, there seems to lack
nothig rather than a judge to give sentence of this great diversity: which
rises not so much by douts in seculer science, as by sundry opinions in most
weighty controversies of our faieth and religion. Of these is now al men's
talk, I say they talk of diuinitye, yea the learned, and the unlearned, the
woman as well as the man, the rych we the pore. Unhappy be we christian men if
in this our religion, we be more uncertain than were the heathe in their
doctrine. What is more displeasant to man touching the bo die than darkness, what
to the mind more grievous tha^ ignorance? Tha^ if it be so, what can be on the
contra rye side more pleasau^te than knowledge? which if yet we have not
obtained being even in the very last end of the world, what hope is to be
had of learning it, or by whom should it be taught? God has done his part,
which sith y^ beginning of the world has not ceased to teach ye whole world
by patriarchs, and holy Prophets, and at last even by his own son Jesus
Christ al yt that he would mankind for to know mete for his salvation: which
doctrine, and learning is contained in the most ho ly bible. And for because yt
this say ing is worthy to be marked as a sa ing, whereupon our salvation
depends, therefore it must needs follow, yt the readyng of yt book not only is
profitable, but also most necessary to all that desiar health everlasting. The
learning yt is contained therein has his undoubted author, god and not man, and
therefore it must needs be of great price, and dignitye. And as it is so in
deed, so now thanks be to God, it is most plentifully showed forth both by
the preaching, and wrytinges of most godly, and well learned men: whose
judgment ought to be unto other less expert in scripture, as a certain guide
and rule, to y^ true understanding of it. Wherefore at the request of some of
my frindes, and for the profit of such as understand no latin, I took in hand
to translat the exposicio^ of the sixte Chapter of John, written in the laten by
y^ right excellent clarcke John Brencius, and divided into. x. Homelies or
sermons. This I have done more homelye than eligantlye, observing as nigh as I
could, the meaning of the authoure, in plain (...) mete for every man's
understanding. If it please the Gentill reader favorably to accept this my
poor diligence, and that thereby does come to the any profit, I have that I
lo ked for* Al glory be to God for ever. So be it

An Exposicion upon the. vi. Chapter of John. The first Homely.
IN the Chapter before the Euaungelyst first has rehearsed y^ great miracle
that Jesus showed upon the man that had the palsye, being. xxxviii. year
old.

And after that he recited the excellent sermon which Christ made of his own
majesty after he had done the miracle: Eue^ the very self same order does
the Euangeliste keep in this syxte Chapter also. For first he tells that
miracle which Jesus showed by fedyng so many thousand men in the desert: after
that he reherseth an excellent Sermon, which Christ made of true fayeth in
him. And verily he shows the matter in a mete and decent order. For Jesus
Christ would not put forth his doctrine to the herers, naked and bare, but well
defensed with diverse miracles, that by them, as it were by heavenly witnesses,
the truth and his authority might boeth be opened and also established. We
have showed also before that Christ sometime used his miracles as belles, to
call the herers to sermon, and stir them up to take the better head.
Wherefore first of all let us also hear the sound of his bell, that is, the
historye of his miracle done in the deserte, that we may take the bet ter head
as well to the sermon which follows after, as to all the doctrine of Christ,
which must be learned by fayeth. After this says the euaungelist: Jesus went
over the sea of Galile which is called Tiberias, and a great multitude followed T
him, because they did se his miracles which he did upon them that were sick.

It is not to be thought that Jesus strayte after his Sermon, which is all
written in the Chapter before, went secretly away over the sea of Tiberias, but
as the other Euau^ gelistes testify, he went away with his Apostles into a
desert place, after that he had sent them before to preach the Gospel, and
had given them power to cast out devils, and to heal sycknesses, and that
now they were come again, and had showed all that they had done and taught:
Jesus then taking them with him departed aside over the sea of Tiberias, in
Galile, unto a desert place of the city, which is called Bethsauda, and said
unto them: rest a little, for there were among them that went and came, and
had not so much leisure as once to eat their meat.

Wherefore he with his Apostles, went aside from the people, that being
refreshed they might come a gain to their busynes cherefullye For in this
weakness of man, which Jesus also had taken upon him, what is durable that
lacks the course of rest? But yet not by this neither could they have
quietness, for when the people had perceived that Jesus with his Apostles did
take his journey into the desert, they were so desirous to se him, and hear
him, that some in deed went into the deserte before him, and some followed
after. Thus it came to pas that a great multitude of men came unto y^ deserte,
whyther Christ had secretly gone to rest him. What shall we say then of this
people? In deed by the great miracles they were stirred up to follow Jesus, but
I pray you for what purpose did they follow The Dysciples of Christ were
diversely minded.
him? For that they had not all one intent y^ thing it self does show: for some
followed him for curiosity to se his strange miracles. Some of vnlustines and
sluggyshnes to live here with him in the world ydelly. For they judged that he
was Messiah, not such one in deed as the holy ghost had taught he should be,
but as they them selves had Imagined in their minds, even an erthely Monarch
and chief gouerner, which would give unto his folowers al earthly joy and
pleasure. Some followed him, to take of his words somewhat to show the folishe
priests and pharisees, and by this service to get their good will and favor.
Uerye few followed Jesus, to learn of him justice and heavenly health. Men
comonlye be in this mind. The greatest part seek for nothing else but
worldly wealth, and carnal rest. They think yt by their own means, they can
lyghtlye get heavenly justice and health if they may once get earthly
felicity. Let god, sai they, give me life and riches, and as for a good mind
I will get it my self. But this is a very corrupt and evil opinion. For that
justice that stands in the sight of God, cannot be gotten by man's
strength, nor cannot be found in riches, in ease, or pleasures of this world,
but it is only found in Jesus Christ, and is gotten by fayeth, which is
given to Jesus Christ, and his Gospel, not in deed that thereby thou
should get yearthlye filicitye, but forgyuenes of sins, and health
everlasting. For God the father had not set before the world his son for
this purpose, to give to the covetous man bags full of gold and silver, or to
the voluptuous, diverse kinds of carnal delyghtes, or to the ambicious, office
and honors, or to the sluggishe, idelnes, and feasts, that is to say he has
not set him before us to be a carnal and yearthelye, but to be a spiritual
and heavenly Messiah, which should give to sinners pardon of their sins
and al goodness, and to them that de gyltye to eternal damnacion, yet bileuyng
in him, a kingdom andioye everlasting Wherefore we may not abuse Christ to the
lusts of the flesh, but we must use him to get those things that be good
in deed and last for ever. And since it is so, let us hear of his miracle.

And Jesus went into the mountain, and there sat with his Dysciples. And the
pass over, the Jews holiday was nie. So when Jesus hadlyft up his eyes, and
had sen, that much people came unto him, he said e unto Philips whence shall we
by bread that these may eat? And he said this to prove him. For he him self
knew what he would do. And Philip answered. Two hundred peniworth of bread will
not suffice them that every man should have alitle. One of his Dysciples said
unto him Andrewe the Brother of Symou Peter: Here is one that has five Barlye
loves and two fyshes, but what be these among so many? And Jesus said. Make
these men sit down. And there was much grass in that place: so they sat
down, almost five thousand men in number.

The miracle, that Jesus fed in the deserte with five loves and two fyshes
more then five thousand men and the which the Evangelist has taken in hand to
discribe is great and worthy to be remembered and even of the men them selves so
much set by* that moved therewyth they would have made Jesus a king, which
was the doar of the miracle. Wherefore the descripcion of it is diligently to be
marked, and discussed, that the truth of it may be unto us most certain. And
first as touching the writer him self John the Apostle and Euangeliste, there
is no douqte but he is most worthy to be believed. And to bear witness with him
come three other Evangelists, Mathewe, Marcke and Luke, which each one have
described this miracle of the. v loves and. ii. fyshes. In the mouth of two or
three stands al wytnes.

And they have described this miracle, not forgynge it among them selves and
layinge their heads together, but in diverse places and times and specially
then, when as yet many were alive, which if they had fained these things,
could have proved them liers. Further John with great diligence does rehearse
all the circumstaunce of this miracle. He shows the place, that is, the
deserte beyond the sea of Tiberias in Galile. He shows also the time of the
year, saying: the feast of Easter was nigh, the feast of the Jews. Some also
have marked y^ time of the day, saying: the day began to go down. There be
showed also witnesses of this so great a miracle, for there were present the
Apostles, among whom Christ chieflye disputed the matter with. ii. of them,
that is, with Philip and Andrewe. There were also almost v. thousand men beside
women and children: all the which truly if need had been, could have openly
borne witness of this miracle.

Ihon also does rehearse what the ground brought forth in that place. There was
there says he, much gras. All these circumstances the Evangelist so diligently
reherseth, to tell us plain lie, that in no wise he forged the tale of this
miracle, but that he put in writynge a thing that was done most certeinlie.
Beside this he describes the fashion also, how Christ took in hand to do this
miracle. For Christ by his invisible power, has saved all them that followed
him to the deserte without external meat, that they should not peryshe with
ho^ger, as in time past Moses and Elias were saved, and he also him self in y^
desert. lx. days and. lx. nygh tes. He might also by his invisible power have
put bread into eueri one of their laps unlooked for, but se what he does. In
deed he knew yt there was a great multitude of men, he knew what things hongry
men had need of, and he thought upon how to feed the^ He said this, says the
euangeliste, to prove him, for him self knew what he would do: and he set not
meat before these ho^grie me^ forth with, but dissimu led al things, and so
behaved him self as though he had taken no keep at al of this matter. So when
the evening drue nie, and Christ seemed to think upon far other things, se
then the disciples busilye preassed and cried upon him, to send away the
people to the villages and streets that were next by, that they might bye them
some meat. Yet not for all this did Christ show that he took any care to feed
these ho^gry, but went on as though he cared not, saying: give them sumwhat to
eat. Wherefore y^ disciples by this answer getting opportunity to declare
their wisdom and show their poverty: What (quod they) should we feed so great
a multitude? Twenty or. xxx. pieces of gold were scant enough for us to bie
bread And who should pay us so great a su^me of money, and although we had it
in our chest, what? would you have us lay it out for other men and lack our
selves? Here Christ, as though him self had doubted and neded other men's
counsel, spoke unto Philip alone, saying: whence shall we bye bread that
these men may eat, what think you is best to be done? But Philip referred
him self to the mind of his fellows, saying: I judge plainly as my fellows
do, for although we bought as much bread as would cost. xxx. pieces of gold, yet
would it not be enough every man to have a little. How many loaves have you then
quod Christ? And Andrew told him that there was a young man amongst the^ which
had. v. barley loaves and. ii. fyshes. But not by this means neither seemed the
matter to be helped, but what be these among so many? Mark I pray you how
constantly Christ dissimuled the en tente of his mind, and what compasses he
uses before he feed y^ hongrie: what shall we say then? Did Christ take so long
deliberacio^ with his dis ciples, because yt either he knew not what ye people
lacked, or either would or could not remedy their honger? Nothing so verily but
he would that the lack of bread should be manifest and known, that the greatness
of y^ miracle which he would do, might well be known. For saying the apostels
should be teachers of the gospel of Christ, and witnesses of his deeds through
all the world, it was necessary that they should thoroughly se and perfitly know
ye miracles of Christ. Here is an other thing also to be marked. For Christ
the son of God teaches us by this dissimulation and prolongyng to do the
miracle, for what purpose God is wont sometime, although he be long call led
upon, and weried with many prayers to defer ye help and deliuerau^ce long
time. No man did ever se God says the Evangelist, the only son that is in ye
bosom of his father, he has showed him. And again: No man knows y^ father
but the son. Wherefore in y^ son of God which is Jesus Christ, the will of
God must be known, and his counsel seen. And we see in this place the
son of God to tarry long in fedynge the hongrye, and yet in conueniente
time, he feeds them after a meruelouse fashion. And even so plainly be the
manners of our hea uenlie father: for he is wont to seem almost deaf at the
prayers of good men, and to take no care to save the^. For what purpose does
he that? God se meth deaf to the pray er of good men.
For that, that he hears the prayers of good men and will not save us? God
forbid. What things so ever, says he, you shall axe in your prayers, and
believe, ye shall have them. And again: I will hear them before they cry,
and hear them while they be yet speaking. And again: Call upon me in the
day of tribulacion, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt ho noure me. God
therefore called upon in fayeth slacketh in gyueynge healpe: not because he will
not save you; but he tarieth first that by this delay he would stire up in the
trobled a greter desire to call upon him, that is, to do true godly honor.
For the more ferue^tly ye call upon God, the more ye serve God. And we are made
for this purpose, to worship our Lord God. Sertainely he tarieth to give to
the afflicted greater benefits, whereby both the afflicted may get greater fe
licitie, and the glory of the name of God may be more showed out. For as a
grain that is cast in the ground is not lost, though it be covered with
earth and to dye, but rather is increased, which in the harvest time apereth
manifestlye: so Prayers of fayeth.
the prayers put in the bosom of god through fayeth, are not in vain,
although they seem not to be hard, but in their convenient time they bring
fruit plentifully, and God so much the more aboundantlye is wont to give his
benefyte, how much the more so^dli he was thought to have been a sleep. This
entente of god in differring his help must diligently be learned. For as it
helps a seru^e ^uche to do his master good (...) if he know his will and
purpose: So it helps us to serve our lord god well, if by prolonging the
help of god which we call for in our trouble, we know what is the will of god
and his entente, that is, that god does not defer his help be cause he will not
save us, but that he will save us more gloriously and profitably then any man
can think. Thou will say, what helps us then this knowledge? First it
keeps in us sufferau^ce, which virtue as it is great, so is it a plesaunt
service to god. For he that through the holy ghost is persuaded that God
differreth his help, not to take it a way, but to give it more abundane lie
to him that axeth, it can not be but he must suffer patiently whatsoever
adversity happens. More over this knowledge keeps him yt does pray, in
doing his duetye, and perseueraunce of prayer. This also is a great virtue and
service very ac ceptable to god. For he that with a suer hope, trusts that
the benefits of God shall be made more, how should not he continue still in
prayer? how should not he get forwards co^ sta^tly? last of al it keeps him
y^ does pray in obedience of those offices which by godds vocation he owes to
God and to his neygheboure: for he that through the holy ghost sees that he
shall receive so much ye grea ter benefits of God how much the longer the
help of God is differred, he can not be holden, but most diligently will
follow the calling of god, lest the benefactor being pro uoked to anger through
disobedience he receive an evil turn for a good. And what work pleases god
better then obedience? Better is obedience says god, then sacrifice. Where fore
when adversity increases and ryseth against us, let us not think that god
has forgotten us, or that he cares not for us, but let us acknowledge and
well consider gods intent, that strengthened in faith, we may go forwards in
the office of our calling. But that the miracle which Christ will do, may ye
more plainly be known, the lack of bread ought to be known, not only to the
Apostles, but unto the people also. So Jesus said: Make these men sit down.
For there was much grass in the place, so there sat down a M. and almost v.
C. me^ in nu^b^e

Other Evangelists rehearse also the order of their sittinge, that is, that
they sat in the grene fields in sonder by hundredes and fyfties, and show
that beside almost five thousand men in number, there we^ women and children
also. And what then means Christ that he would not distribute the bread,
except they first sat down, yea and that every man in his order? Could not
the me^ have eat, except they first had sitten? yes they could. But as we
said before, the lack of bread ought to be known also to the people, that the
miracle might be the more evident. For now when the men wet set down and were
set in order, they were through this sight stirred up to feel and search out
betwixt the^ selves, what the matter meante, who should give them meat, where
they should have bread, for none of the^ had brought bread with the^. So here
their lack was opened, and they were quickened to look that Christ should
give them meat. Yea the order of their sitting made the miracle more to be
marked. So when these things were thus prepared, Jesus began to work the
miracle.

For he took bread, and after he had given thanks he distributed them to his
disciples, and the disciples to the^ that were set down. Likewise of the fish
as much as he would.

We maruayle what Christ meant by bidding them sit down, and now we more
marvel what this ceremo nie of thanks giving means: for he dealt not the
bread before he had first lift up his eyes to heaven and gave open thanks in
the sight of al Christ ueth th kes.
men. What need had Christ to these ceremonies? Is not he the word of god and
god him self? He spoke and things were made, he commanded, and they were
created. Why now therefore say but even a word that the loaves might be
multiplied? Christ might not only if he had spo ke^ but one word, but even
also by a thought only have multiplied these loaves, but it plesed him to use
these ceremonies first to show in the sight of the people that he taught them
none other God, but him the true God, maker of heaven and earth: and that he
did not his miracles by iugglyng, but by heavenly, and power of God. Moreover
he would teach us what gyuinge of thanckes was, and how much it was hable to
do. For where John says, he did thanks, the other say: He blessed: for by the
doing of thanckes, the. v. loves and two fishes were so blessed increasid and
multiplied, that by the^ not only. v. thousand men even with women and children
were abundant ly fed, but also there was gathered xii. cophins full of
fragmentes. So in ye last supper Jesus took bread: and that one Evangelist
says, he gave Giving of thanks, is blessing
thanckes, yt an other says he blessed: for by this giving tha^ckes Christ so
blessed y^ bread and the cup of his supper, yt to them that believed in Christ
not only they were meat and drink for the bodi to keep the corporal life, but
also meat and drink to y^ soul, yea of the whole man, to keep his life
spiritualli and eternalli: wherefore to give God thanckes for his benefits
given and showed, is to bles his benifits offered unto us, to make them fortu
nate, to increase them and multiply them: and therefore he that does desire to
increase and multipli the good things which he has received by the favor of
god, ca^ not do it more godly nor more ha^dso^ly, the^ if being content wtthe
benefit yt he has, be it never so little, he give thanks to god and as he may
do, show kindness again. These things must diligently be mar ked yt we may
learn a true and godly wai to encrese our riches or other be nefites of god.
For me^ through their corrupt nature be so minded yt what soever benefit they
have received of god they think it les the^ it should be. Wherefore in all their
thought and dili gence they bend the^ upon this study to increase that, yt
they have taken, if not godly and justly, yet ungodly and vniustli, by what
means so ever they may, so yt they may increase it. But by this means the
benefit yt they have taken is rather cursed the^ blessed, and more diminished
the^ increased, for the scripture says. If you hear not the voice of thy Lord
to keep and do al his commandments, cursed be thy barn, cursed be all that
thou leauest behind the. And among the co^maun dementes, this also is
contained: thou shalt not steal. Whereby are all deceites forbidden, with the
which me^ are wont to increase their riches. And again, shall I justify the
wicked balaunce and the deceitful weight of the bag, by the which rich* me^
are filled with iniquity? Thou shall eat and shall not be filled and thy humi
liacio^ shall be in y^ midste of thy self. Wherefore craft and deceytes in
merchandise is not that way whereby riches are truly blessed and increased,
but to do that ryghtely, we must learn of the example of Christ. Christ took.
v* loves and two fishes into his hands, and although this meat seemed nothing
to be sufficient for so great a multitude, yet for this being very little, he
gave thanckes to God his father. By which thanks gyuyng it came to pass that
so many thousands were filled of this very little meat. Let us also do like
wise. Let us take those few things which God has given, in our hands, with
a faithful mind, let us be content with these, yea though they be very few,
let us acknoweledge that through our own goodness we have not deserved them,
but that we have gotten them of the liberal mercy of God, and give thanks for
them both in words and deeds. For so it shall come to pas yt these our things
be they never so few shall be increased, and may be sufficie^te both to our
selves and to our family. But thou wylt say: I am not Christ which by my power
can so multiply either bread or other things, nor I have not the gift to do
miracles. Thou say well. Thou art nor Christ: but if thou believe in Christ
thou art a member of Christ. Think thou yt no blessing comes from the head
into y^ member? Is not the head and the member so joined together that they
have a common virtue? Wylt thou not multiply thy bread by thanks geuynge with
some external and visible, but by heavenly and spiritual, increase? Lo says
he, thy servants shall eat, and you shall hunger: they shall drink and you
shall thriste, they shall be glad and you shall be confounded. And again: God
shall not ponishe with hongar the soul of the just. Wherefore if by thanckes
gyuynge, thy bread shall be increased, so that thou dye not for hongar, but
obtain in deed everlasting life perpetuallye, what can be more plentiful,
more profitable than this increase? But let us go forth with the rest.

And as soon as they were filled, he said to his Dysciples. Gather together the
fragme^tes that be left, that nothing be lost. So they gathered together and
filled. xii. cophe^s of the fragmentes of five barley loves, which were left by
them that had eaten.

What means this? Some Sicophante would say: Is not this covetousness, that
Christ commaun death to gather together the fragmentes so carefullye? Is he
also care full for to morrow? That that Christ does is no covetousness or
wicked carefulnes.

(...) never did syn, neither in his mouth was found any deceit, but it is a
great wisdom and worthy to be marked. For first he commands The fragmentes
be gathered.
the fragmentes to be gathered toge there, that the truth of the miracle may
be the more seen and better tried: for if he had not multiplied five loves with
very bread, and had not fed so many men in very deed, suerlye they could not
have gathered so many fragmentes: but the Iuglynge would have been perceived
in very deed. But now the fragme^tes be gathered together, and in very deed
are good to be eaten. Wherefore it is plain that there was a miracle done in
ded^. Further Christ teaches, that we should not abuse the gifts that GOD
gives us here, and that it is lawful for us in deed to take the fruit of
them as far as necessitye requires, and yet not to tread under our fete that,
that ^s left of the^, as for example of corn ^f wine and of riches. And the
lea^ynges of corn and wine and of ^uch other things, are trodden under ^ur
fete, not only when they be tro^en with men's fete upon y^ ground without
regard, but when men devour them glotouously, when they ^owle up cups of
drink who ^aye do most, and when they spend in waste the riches that they
have received of their fathers. This ^erely is a treadinge under our fete,
which when we do, the anger of God comes upon us inobedie^t children, to ^e
punyshed with batayles an scarcitye of all things. Woe says the prophet to
you that rise erlye in the morning to follow dronckennes, and ^o swyll till it
be night, to boil in ^yne. Harp, lute, timpane, ^eute, and wine, be in your
festes, and ye look ^ot upon the work of God, nor you do not consider the
works of his hands. Therefore is my people led captive, because they had no
knowledge and their noble men be dead for honger, and the multitude is dried
away for thrist. Therefore the fragmentes are not to be trodden under the fete,
but to be gathered together, that using well the benefits of God, we may be
saved in the day of necessity. But now it is time to speak somewhat to what
use this miracle serves. For although it may be easily perceived, by those
things that were spoke before, how great fruit this miracle does bring to
the church of Christ, yet because Christ him self does teache two things why
it serves chiefly, we must not negligent ly pass over the matter: for he
reherseth that one in that sermon, which is afterward described in this
Chapter. For it is not to be thought that he has done this miracle to sig
nifie that he was an earthly Messiah, and an outward king, to rule in ^is
world after the manner of other ^inges, and one that would keep in ease and
abou^dance of al things in this corporal life al such as would so take ^im, In
deed he would no suffer, that ^ose yt followed him should lack any necessaries
as long as he lived here in his world. When I sent you (quoth ^e) without
wallet scrip and shoes ^yd ye lack any thing? He would not ^y this miracle
testifye yt he was an earthely king, and bring unto men an external felicity
of this world, but rather he would confirm the veritye of his gospel, in the
which he taught yt he was the spiritual and heavenly Mes sias, and that he
brought to men spiritual and heavenly gifts, that is to say, forgyuenes of
their sins, a^onemente with God, to be chose^, to be unto the sons of God
deliverance from death, and everlasting joy in the kingdom of heaven. This
is the bread, this is the meat which Christ would principallye to be sought
for in him. Whereupon he fled away: when he perceived the commons to take
council to make him a king, and afterward when a great multitude of men were
come unto him, he said: I tell you for a suertye you seek me, not because you
have seen the tokens, but because you have eaten of the bread and are filled:
that is, you seek me not by this miracle to strengthen your fayeth which you
ought to give unto my Gospel, ye seek me not to obtain in me true justice and
health before God, to the sekyng whereof this miracle chiefly ought to move
you, but you seek me to have your meat and drink and abundance of all
things with me, in rest and idleness: ye seek not to provide for the mind but
for the bellye. But I say unto you: work that meat which perishes not, but
that tarieth into everlasting life, which the son of man shall give
Miracles be done be cause of learning the gospel.
unto you. By these words Christ plainly teaches, that by this miracle,
Christ would stir up me^ to learn his gospel: by the which they may know,
that he is the very heavenly bread, the which who so ever eats that is
believes in Christ, may be saved with eternal felicity.

Of the which thing because Christ afterward will preach at large, we now
will not tarry longer. An other use of this miracle is in the. xvi of Matheu. For
when the disciples took thought for bread, Christ says: what think ye of
within your selves, o me^ of little faith, that you have not brought bread? Do
you not yet understand nor remember those five loves, when there was above. v.
thousand men, and how many cophins ye bare away? Here Christ tea cheth us
that he did the miracle of ye bread for three causes also: first to signify to
his disciples, that as long as he lived with them in corporal presence, they
should take no corporal harm: also when I was with the^, says he, in ye
world, I saved the^ in thy name. Those that you haste genen unto me, I have kept
them, and none of the^ is perished, but the son of perdicio^, that the
scripture might be fulfilled. Hitherto also this apper teineth, yt in Mark,
their unbelieving error is cast in their teth whi che they had when they saw
Christ walking upon the sea. Merueilously and above measure says the
Evangelist, were they astonished and marueiled. For they did not understand of
the bread, for their heart was blinded: that is, although a little before they
had seen the miracle of ye bread, yet were they not so witty to understand by
that, yt Jesus was the very savior which could and would not only save him
self, but also al other ye were with him, as well in the flouddes of the sea, and
tempests, as in all other ieoperdies. Also he showed this miracle to confirm
the verity of this saying: first seek the kingdom of god and his justice, and
al these things shall be cast unto you. For this miracle is an heavenly seal,
whereby god does testify that he will give unto every man that walks in the
vocacion of God in faith, sufficient meat, drink, and clothing. For like
as in a well ordered householde, the good manne of the house requires this of
his familiars both children and servants, every man should do his duty,
and that one in deed should se the ground tilled, an other cut the vine, an
other wood, and some sweep the house, and he him self takes care to prepare
meat, and to give it to every man in due time though not with his own hand,
yet at the least way, by his own ordinance and commandment.

And so what could be worse, then if the servant would set light by his
masters commandment, neither would till his ground, and yet take upon him too
provide for meat, whereby he would wander up and down to take bread? So our
lord God, he is a great housekeper, and God is the housekeper, and ca reth
for his household.
we men are his household: And every one of us has his vocacion, his office,
which he is ordained of god to do. Seeing therefore that we be the householde
of God, we ought not to be thoughtful what we should drink, or what clothes we
should wear, for this care god, as master of the householde, has taken upon
him: but we ought to be careful, how diligently, how obediently, and how
godly we do our duetye. Let this be our work, let this be our labor, to
seek after virtue.

For God says he will not destroy with honger the life of a just man. And
the Lord knows the days of the undefiled, and their inheritance shall
last for ever. In time of trouble they shall not be confounded, and in the
days of honger they shall be filled.

These are so much the more diligently to be considered and followed, how
much the common sort of men is wont more to offend in getting them their
living. For men commonly are thus minded as we se that Philip and Andrewe in
the declaracion of this miracle, were. For as they think that neither a little
money, nor a little meat do suffice to feed so great a multitude of people,
and when they se no meat before their eyes, they wot not whither to turn
them: So men when they se in getting their living that nothing is left in
earth, they think also that nothing is left in heaven: and where man's
help wants, they suppose there also the help of god to lack, and therefore
they lift not up their mind to god, but rather turn to the crafts of the
Deuell. They rob, they steal, they trifle, they study for deceiptes and
crafts only, yea how soever it be, to get them sustenaunce. And when they be
rebuked, they make ex cuses: I must needs, says one, have to find me and my
householde.

Thou say well. Thy householde in deed must be found. But to Thy house
hold must bekept, but sin thou must not.
steal, and to study for deceytes and crafts, that is not to keep an
householde, but to destroy an household: for the scripture faith. If thou keep
not the commandments of God, and among the co^maundme^tes of god is
contained: thou shalt not steal, God shall send famine and hon ger upon the,
a cursing upon al thy works. And again: Some give part of their own and
wax rycher: some steal away that is not their own, and they are always in
poverty. And again: They could not do Deceiptes do not pro spear.
right, says the lord, treasuring up iniquity and rapine in their houses.
Therefore thus says the lord god: The land shall be troubled and be
besieged, and thy strength shall be drawn out of the, and thy houses shall
be spoiled. Thou see that to take yt is other men's, and get riches by
deceytes, is not to norishe thy self and thy household, but rather to cast the
into poverty and ho^ger. But to walk through faith in the vocacion of god and
in thy business to follow ryghteousenes, this in deed is to noryshe thy
household. For the just shall enherit the earth, and shall dwell upon it for
ever. And the health of just men is of the lord, and he is their protector in
the day of tribulacion. Therefore all disceite must be avoided, justice and
ryghteousenes must be done, that being received into gods kepinge, we may
be saved, not only with bodily noryshement, but also, which is greateste of
all, with heavenly and spiritual meat, through Jesus Christ our Lord: which
is together with the father and the holy ghost, the blessed God for ever.

Amen.
The second Homely.
WE have heard how liberally, how marueilousli Christ has behaved him
self to ward this multitude of men, which followed him into deserte. For
with five loaves and two fyshes he fed more then a thousand and five hundred
men.

Let us heat how this people showed them selves again toward this
marvelous feder.

These men than (says the Euaungeliste) when they had fene the sign that
Jesus had done, said: This is in very deed that prophet that should come unto
the world. So Jesus when he had known that they would come and force him to be
a king went aside him self alone into the mountain.

There be two things that these men take upon them to show their kind mind
toward Christ. The one is that they praise him in words, and speak openly
and confess that he was the prophet which Mo ses wrote should come into the
world, and the which the Jews looked for at that time. An other that they cou^
sailed among them selves to make him a king: for Messiah is as much to say,
as one anointed, or a king. They think they should do very great service to
God if by their consentes they should lift him up to the dignity of a king.
And in this the peoples doing some things are worthy praise, and some thing
to be rebuked. It is to be commended that stiered up by this miracle, they
grant to the doctrine of Jesus, and perceive that he is very Messiah him
self. But it is greatly to be rebuked that they think the kingedom of
Messiah should be a corporal kingdom here in this world, and that Messiah
should rule after the facion of the kings of this world: and now they think
the^ selves very happy that they have got a king, which not only is hable by
his mi racles to gather unto him a great at mie, and overcome all the world, but
also by whom they may be fed without any labor of theirs, and may get al
earthly felicity. This opinion of Messiah kingdom is carnal, and worthy to be
condemned. For the Messiah whom the prophets promised is no earthly king. And
our blessedness rests not in this that the bo die should fare well, and that we
should rest us carnally and sluggeshly and be fed for naught, but that we should
be well in spirit, and be fed with meat everlasting: of the which thing
Christ him self will preach after wards more at large. And not only the
carnal opinion of the peo ple of the Kingdom of Messiah, but also their
lyghtnes, their wauerynge and inconstaunce, yea and the rashenes also of the
people, is worthy to be rebuked. For they whom now when he fedeth them,
desiar to make him a King, and set him as hye as heaven, him afterward when
he was led prisoner to the cross, either dysdaynefully they dyspised, or
spitefullye mocked, or even with the other they cried to nail him on the
Cross.

This is the nature of the common people that they never in a mean either
favor them that do them good or hate them that they thyncke to be euel doars.
This is a syknes and fu rye not a judgment or sou^dnes. For although we
ought to be mindful and kind toward him that does us good, and hate evil,
yet has kindness his bounds, that is that we do not as the Paganes have done,
to make gods of men, or as is the manner of the Hypocrites to do, to make of
saynctes our redemers and sa uiours from evil: for we so must hate evil that
for all that we forget not what we ought to do, and recompense not evil with
evil, but with good. Which things being thus, let us se now how Christ
behaved him self toward this favor of the people. When he had known says
the Euangelyste, that they would take him and make him a king, by and by as
Matthew says he compelled his Disciples to take ship, and to go before him unto
the other side of the river: but he him self fled, and went again aparte in
to the mountain alone. Thou will say: what means this? Why does Christ
fly? Why does he not take upon him a princely majesty, which is offered him
of the people? Is the office of a king so abominable before God, that it may
not be lawefull to take it upon him and bear it? Uerelye nothing less. There
is The majesty of a king is the ordinance of God.
no power (says Paul) but of god. And the powers that be they be ordained of
God. Wherefore he that is lawfully called to office of a kings majesty, may
with good conscience be occupied in that kind of life.

But what say you? Would Christ by this runnynge away sygnifie that although
the office of a king of it self be exceptable to God, yet should good^e^
through humilitye fly man's glory and majesty, and cast them selves into
some vile kind of life, as Christ speaks at an other time: learn of me for
I am meke and lowlye in heart. Nay the going away teaches not this another.

For although Christ do bydde us follow the example of his humilitye, yet is
it no humilitye, rashelye to cast away his lawefull vocacion, and to take
upon him a more abiecte kind of living without the commandment of God,
but it is very humilitye to serve obedientelye to Gods will, and his
ordinance in every vocacion be it no ble or vile. Thus, lowlye was Job, that
is obedyent to the will of God as well in riches as in pouertye, when he said:
GOD has given, God has taken away: the name of God be blessed. Thus was
Dauyd lowlye, that is, obediente to the will of god, whether he were in his
kingdom or banyshement. For he said: If I find grace in the eyes of the
Lord, he will bring me again. But if he say, thou pleasiste me not, I am
tedye: let him do that he thyncketh good with him self: so Christ him self
the very Dauyd was lowely. For when he was called by GOD to bear his cross
he bare it obediently. Afterward be ynge called to recey^e the heavenly
majesty in the kingdom of his father, he took that also obedientlye. This is
very humility, whereby you cast not away your lawful vo cacion, but that in
every lawful vocacion thou obeist thy Lord thy god Wherefore Christ would not by
this going away teach good men, that either they ought not to take upon them
the doing of a kings office, if they be lawfully called unto it, or that they
should rashly and without the calling of God cast it away, if they have taken it
vpo^the^ before, what is the matter than, that he fled away, and would not be
made a King? And verelye, if you consider his doctrine, he took upon him much
greater and nobler things, than if he had a uau^ced him self an outward king
of Israel. He preached that he was the light of the world, that he was the
life and resurreccion. He said he was the son of god, yea and equal to God
him self. These things in deed be much greater and more excellent, than if
he had taken upon him the majesty of a King amongeste men. Why is it tha^,
that he refuses this, and takes upon him that other? The calling of GOD is
the cause, and his office. For Christ was not sent from heaven into yearthe
for this entente to do the office of a kyn^ge in this world, and to bear rule
upon the earth, after the manner of a king, but he was sent to be a prophet
and a preacher of y^ Gospel Christ's calling.
in Israel: and as Paul calls him, a minister of circumsicion for the truth
of god, to confirm the pro mises of the fathers. For the Lord says by Moses
of Christ: I will raise up a prophet in the mids of his brethren, like to
the, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto the^ al
things, which I shall command him. I will (says he) raise up a prophet,
yt is to say a preacher, not a worldly king or chief gouernoure. And I will
(says he) put my words in his mouth, not a corporal sweard in his hand. And
he shall speak unto the^: he says not, he shall correct them by outward and
corporal violence. And in Esaye. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
that he has anointed me, and sent me to preach the gospel to the lowely: he
says not: He has sent me to rule among men after the fashion of a King,
but to preach the Gospel to them that be in sorrow and misery. For although
the Prophets do sometime so describe the kingdom of Christ, as though it
were a corporal kingdom, yet is yt description so defenced with circumstaunces
ine specially when they say, that his kingdom shall be everlasting, that
needs you must understand that his kyngedome is not corporal but spiritual,
neither yearthlye but heavenly, and that he will give, not external but
eternal gooddes, name ly forgyuenes of sins, eternal justice, everlasting
life, and filicitye. Wherefore that Christ follows not the peoples mind, and
takes not upon him the princely majesty of this world, and yet for all that
teaches that he him self is y^ very son of God, yea and god himself
which is greater than all the majesty of man, boeth things he does
according to his office, and the vo cacion of God. And by his example he
teaches us, that no man should follow the common peoples delier, to sin
against god, neither that we should take upon us an other vocacion without the
commandment of god. For it cannot be that he that follows another man's plea
sure without gods calling in ta king upon him to exercise common matters,
should have any happy or prosperous success of his purpose. For what cold be
happy with out god? They have reigned says he, but not by me, they have been
princes but I have not known the^. And he says straight way: Now will he
remember their iniquites and viset their sins. And a little after: I will send
fire into there citis and it shall deuor their houses Wherefore, eueri man ought
diligently to study for this, that what so ever he takes in hand, he may take
it by gods calling, that he may call upon God in faith, and in that that he
has taken upon him, to be occupied with a good conscience. We have heard what
he did upon the land, let us hear now what was done upon y^ sea. When it was
evening says y^ evangelist his disciples went down to the sea took ship
passed over the sea and came to Capernaum. For after that Christ had perceived
the comme^ peoples purpose tomake him a king, he would not suffer his
disciples to tarry any longer with the common people: but forthwyth compelled
the^, as Matthew and Mark sai to take ship and go before him unto y^ other side
of the bancke, until he had sent away the multitude.

For peradventure he saw, yt if his disciples should tarry among y^ people still
in his absence, they would have be come helpars of this sedition, in cho sing
him a king: because yt they also thought yt Christ's kingdom should have been
worldely. Wherefore although they thought it more wisdom either to tarry
among the peo ple or with Christ, yet are they con trarye to their mind, and
whether they would or no compelled to go a way, and that for a very good pur
pose of Christ, partly yt they should not wax sedicious with the people, and
partly that by risyng of the tem pestes in the sea, they might the better know
the power and majesty of Christ: by which exampel we are warned, to take
pacientely, if to the meaning and will of our mind which seems good unto
us, a stop We must not wythstand gods will.
be made by gods provision and worckynge. For it is God the which as he
rules al, so also provides for all. And berynge a fatherly love to al those
yt believe in Christ, he does with so great care keep the^ that he makes
provision long before, y^ nothing come unto them yt may be contrary to their
health. Wherefore if in some thin ges he let the^ not have their will, he does it
not to do them hurt but to do the^ good, and to bring to the^ greater co^
modities, than they at that time are hable to perceive. Do ye not se how
ernestlye the Carnal fathers wrythe out of their young Chyldrens hands,
knives and little swerdes which they by chance have gotten? And they in deed
weep, and strive against the^ as much as they can, yet do the parents still
break the^ of their mynds, not because they hate their litel children but
because they love them, and fear lest with these knives they should hurt them
self unawares, or parauenture kyl them selves: so also god y^ father lets
the desiars of his children, not to destroy the^ but to save the^. There is no
more therefore when that god is against our purpose be it never so good, but
that we should knoweledge his fatherly affeccion and suffer his hand
pacientelye. Further Jesus when he had sent away his Disciples to ship, and
the people were gone, him self alone went unto the mountain to pray. And his
Disciples, night being at hand, began to pass over the sea toward the town
Capernau^. Let us hear now, what happened to his Dysciples in the sea when
Christ was away.

It was now darcke (says he) and Jesus was not yet come unto them. And there
blewe a great wind, and the sea began to rise. So when they sailed almost*
xxv. or. xxx. furlo^ges they saw Jesus walking upon the sea, and draw yng ^ie
to the ship, and were afeard. And he said unto them. It is I, fear ye not. So
they would have take him into the ship, and forthwith the ship was at the
shore whyther they went. We have rehearsed that which John has towched in a
few words: but we woll join those things also, which the other Eu^gelistes
wright more largely of this historye, that we may ^e more diligently consider
the multitude of the miracles that were here, and the majesty of Christ. So
the Dysciples compelled by their master, sailed over the sea. But behold, when
they were now come into the deapth and that it was very darcke, a great
wind arose, and the sea waxed so big that the Disciples were in extreme
^eopardy. What trow you, the Dysciples thought now, what counsel took they?
Truly it is lykely, yt they thought thus in their mind: Behoulde our
master, by his strait commandment has cast us into these so great
ieopardies. He has thruste us from him to be drowned in these floudes.
Wherefore of al men we be the most folish that both before this we have followed
his doctrine, and now have obeyed his commandment. For whither be we brought
but into utter destruccio^? But Christ although he was far of, and that it was
very darcke, yet saw he in what ieopardy his Dysciples were: and they had de
served in deed to be left in this ieoperdye and to have be drowned, because
that boeth forgetting Christ's teaching and his miracles, they did despair.
But Christ has a greater regard of his own mercy and goodness, than of their
desert: Wherefore when that now they were gone with great labor and study
about. xxx. furlonges, Jesus came unto them walking upon the sea, as if he
had gone upon the hard ground. By which miracle he did not signifye that he
had not a very and natural body of a man, but he signified that as he was
the Lord of heaven and earth, so was he also the Lord of the sea. Well what
do the Disciples than? At the first they know not it is Jesus Christ, but
they think it is a spirit: they think it a devil without a body which
came to take from them their life. And therefore their fear was dowbled, and
they horriblye cried out. Here is no fayeth, no calling for healpe, but as the
heart was blinded, so was it in despair. For they did not understand, as Mark
says, of the loves: that is they had not conceived by the miracle, which the
same day was showed with five loves and two fishes, so great knowledge of
Christ, that they trusted them selves to be salfe, by his forecare, power,
and healpe, as well in the perils of the sea, as also in the middell route of
diuylles. But whom Christ by his commandment had cast into perlis, those
same also did he save. He opened him self therefore with his voice, criynge
out again: It is I, be not afearde: to which voice al his Dysciples being
conforted, and in especially^ Peter, Lord (quoth he) if it be thou, command
me to come to the upon the waters. And it was well and wyselye done of Peter,
that he wo^ulde not put him self into the waters of the sea, but being
commanded and called of Christ. For we ought to put our self in no peril
rashelye, and not called of GOD. So Jesus called Peter and he walked upon the
waters: but as there came up on him a great wind, he was so afraid, that his
fayeth fell from him, and began to syncke. But when he had called for the
help of Christ, in deed he was rebuked because he douted, and was of a weak
faieth, but Christ took him by the hand and saved him. And so boeth went
into the ship to the rest, and than the tempeste did not only cease, but
the ship was also in the haven, and was come to yt part of the shore from the
which it was far of, wha^ Christ came. Thou have here a great heap of
miracles: Jesus was far of from his Dysciples, the darckenes of the night was
very great, and yet he saw in what ieoperdye they were on the sea. This
agrees with the miracle, wha^ Jesus saw Nathanael under the fig tree, and saw
Lazarus when he was dead, being yet far of from Iurye, where Lazarus dyed.
And afterward he walked upon the waters as upon the dry ground: which
verily was a wonder full miracle. And not only did he that him self with his
own body, but also he bad Peter to do the same and Peter obeyng his words,
walked likewise upon the water, and was preserved that he was not drouned: By
the which miracle the power of Christ is manifestly proved. Moreover by his
presence he alayed the tempest of the sea, which self thing also is a proof of
the majesty of Christ, to whom yea the sea and the winds do obei. Finally
the ship was sodaynely in that haven to the which they could not come before
with great labor. These miracles be so great that the Dysciples which be in
the ship did worship him and that worthily, as Matthew does wryghte, and
confessed him to be the very son of God. And now we may not think that
these things were done and put in writing for the Dysciples sake only, but
they partaine to the whole congregation, and set before us an Image of things
which be done in all ages in y^ church of God. For although there be not here
in the ship very many Disciples, yet are they the church of god, they are the
chosen people of God. the church in one ship.
In this place is also Christ him self, head of the church. Wherefore y^ y^
here is done is an image of those things which are always wount to be done
betwixt the church, and Christ the head thereof. The sea is this world. And
in this world is the church of God. I pray not (says Christ that thou
would take them out of the world, but that thou would save them from
evil. In this world you shall have trouble and affliccion. And again: you
shall weep and Lamente, but the world shall be glad and rejoice. And Paul
says we must enter in to the kyngedome of God by many affliccions. Further
Christ was away in the mountain, and yet he saw his Dysciples that were in
great ieopardye. For although Christ be ascended into heaven, and is now
invisible to our corporal eyes, yet the church that is in ieopardye is well
seen to of him, and he is ready to healpe his church: he takes care for it,
and looks upon all the pains and trobles of it to help and save it.

For he sits at the right hand of GOD, and is thee almyghtye governor of al
things. Wherefore neither heyth, nor length, nor depth can let him, that he
should not healpe his church being in pain and sorrow. But like as he came
to his Dysciples in the myddle of the tempest, and was thought to have been a
spirit of the dyuell, that would have drouned them in the watters, so he
came in deed accompanied in thysworlde with a cross, and covered with diverse
affliccions. Wherefore in very great aduersitye men that be of a weak
fayeth, thyncke not that Christ the savior is there, but a legion of
dyuylles, that would destroy them even out of hand. For they give not
suere confydence to this promise of GOD, which is in the* lxxxx. Psalm: I am
with him in tribulacion, I will take him out and glorify him. But by cause yt
the^ they se nothing but adversity they think much rather that the devil is
there to oppress them, than Christ to deliver. But Christ opened him self
to his Dysciples by his voice and by speaking unto them, saying: It is I, be
not aferde: so also he shows The Gospel is the voice of Christ.
him self to his church by his Gospel. For the Gospel is the voice of Christ
whereby he declared that he him self to was sent into the world for this
purpose, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have life
everlasting. He says also in another place: I am the resurreccion and life,
he that believes in me although he be dead he shall live, and every one that
lives and believes, shall not dye ever lastyngely. Wherefore when great
troubles arise, we must give care to the voice of Christ and to his gospel,
that thereby we may take comfort, and be saved. But as Christ walked upon
the sea, and yet did he it not alone, but he called also Peter to do y^ same.
And although he, when the wind blewe sore upon him, began to doubt and syncke
down: yet when he called upon the help of Christ, he is saved, being caught
by the hand of Christ: so Christ preached not his own gospel alone and
confirmed it with mi racles, but he chose unto him Apostles to be his fellows,
and unto the also he gave the gift to do mira cles. Then after them follow the
ministers of the church to show out the gospel that they have received of the
Apostels. What has happened then? That that was spoken to the Apostels:
Behold I send you into the mids of wolves. That saying stretches out not
only to the ministers, but also to the self office of preaching of the
Gospel. For in this world so grievous calamities, are wont to rise against
the ministers of the church, that it lacks but a litell, to be utterly
destroyed. Therefore they that be a little to weak, are diversely minded, and
almost fall in despair. But it is happy, Christ is ready at hand: and being
called upon, puts out his hand, and preserves the ministerye of the
church: which seems to other, to be destroyed. The gates of hell (says he)
shall not prevail against it. And again. Lo I am with you, all the days,
even to the end of the world. Finallye Christ being received into the
ship, there is made a great calm, and the ship is in ye heaven. For he that
by the Gospel will knoweledge Christ, and receive him by fayeth, how can not
he be in safty, and (as the proverb is) have his ship in the haven in deed.

For where Christ is, there must the streme needs be a calm, and death life. He
that believes (says he) in me, although he be dead shall live. Let us take
Christ therefore into our ship with obediente fayeth, that we may safelye
come, by the storms of al affliccio^ and death, in to the haven of
everlasting life, through the grace and help of Jesus Christ our Lord: which
together with the father and holy gooste, is god blessed for ever.

Amen.
The third Homily.
THey be great and excellent miracles which hitherto the Euan gelist has
reher sed and we have metely expounded, but much greater and more excellent is
the sermon which Christ made: taking occasion of the corporal bread, for
the which the multitude of men followed more than for the spiritual bread. Of
the Sermon before we now speak, we will a little touch these things, which
happened after that Christ and his Apostels had passed the sea.

The next day (says the Evangelist) the multitude which stood on the other
side the lea, after they saw that there was none other vessel there but that
only whereunto his Dyscipels were entered, and that Jesus was not gone into
that barge with his Dysciples, but that his dysciples only where gone: (And there
came other boats from the sea of Tibirias, nigh unto the place where they had
eaten bread after the Lord had given thanks) So when the people had seen that
Jesus was not there, nether his dysciples, they also went into boats, and came
unto Caparnau^ sekyng for Jesus. And when they had found him on the other side
the sea, they said unto him: Master when came thou hither?

The miracles that were done in the sea none know but his Dysciples. But now
the whole multitude of men knows also, that Jesus was not come on yt other
side of the bank without miracles. Where fore when they axe of Jesus when or
how he was come thither, they testifye that they did knoweledge the majesty
of his power, and maruayle much at him. But Jesus answered them far other
wise than they had thought. For he said.

Verily, verily I say unto you: ye seek me not because you have seen y^
miracles, but because you have eat of y^ bread and are filled. This is a sore
and earnest rebuke yt they should abuse y^ miracle: I have showed a miracle
(says he) with. v loves and two fyshes, not for this purpose to show that I
would be a worldly king, and bring unto those that follow me felicity of
this corporal life, and feed them idle and sluggish, but that by this sign
and miracle they being stirred up, should knowledge the truth of my doctrine,
and seek for the meat of true, and everlasting life. But you follow me not
because ye se the miracles, that is not to use the miracles ryghtely, and seek
for in me the meat of everlasting life, but to fat your bodies with idelnes
and sluggishnes: you seek not for justice but for surfettes, you care not for
heaven, but your belie. Get ye hence therefore and your belies to. I desire
to have fa^ other folowers, than such as care for nothing but their belies.
What would you than have us to do? It follows.

Work not the meat that perishes, but that abides still into everlasting
life which the son of man will give you. For god the father has sealed him*

This is a necessary admonicion. For men be so corrupt with sin, that they
take much greater care to nouryshe the bealye, than to nouryshe the mind, and
more follow after the corporal bread and that which shall peryshe, than the
heavenly and everlasting bread. But this is the preposterous and perverse
care for things. For man is made not after the similitude of oxen, swyne or
other beasts, which study only for the bealy, and do nothing but this to
follow after corporal meat, but he is made after the Image and similitude of
GOD, that is, to know God, and study for divine things, and that shall last
for ever. For whether ye behold man's body, or his mind, we be monished by
the nature and syghte of these things, that we seek not for corporal meat
only after the manner of beasts. Other creatures given to the bealye, look
downewardes to the grownd, but man's body is vpryght to loks upon heaven. Man
therefore ought to care for heavenly things not yearthlye. And of the mind
what should we say more? It is the chie fest part o^f man, which in very
deed is not preserved by bodilye su stenaunce, but by other that is far more
excellent: that is heavenly and of God. Wherefore whither ye consider either
the body or the mind of man, it is mete by no reason, that a man should study
chiefelye and special ly of al to save and trim the body. And if man had not
sinned, he should have led such a life, as should have been troubled with no
affliccions at all, and should so have used his corporal meat, that for all
that with all his mind and thought he should have been in the contemplacion of
heavenly and Godly things.

This should have been the life in Paradise. But after that man had sinned,
for sin he was cast out of Paradise into this woeful wretched life: not to
tarry in it forever, but for a time, as it were in a prisonne and dongen,
because he should conceive a desiar to be delivered, and should thyncke to
recover the happiness yt he had lost. But he that drowneth The ^uge g^shnes of
man in seking heaven ly things is reproved
him self wholly in the cares of cor poral and earthly things, I pray you
what other thing does he, tha^ if a man thrust and shut in to an horyble
prison, would not labor for this to be delivered out, but rather to tarry
long there and delight in fylthynes and stink? What thing should be more
folysh or more mad than this? And yet the same plain ly do they, which
neglectinge and despising heavenly things, droune them selves altogether upon
these earthely. But mark thou me what the first and chief commandment of
God means: I (says he) am thy Lord God. Thou shall not have any other
gods in my sight. And again: Thou shalt love thy Lord God with all thy
heart, with all thy mind and with all thy strength. Although no man in this
world can perfectelye fulfill this commandment, yet does it put every man
in remembrance of his duty, that he should know what he ought to do to his
true Lord God. For it techeth yt this is the office of man, not that he should
make of his belly a GOD, and serve only for his bealy profit as swine do, but
that he should worship the true, omnipotente and heavenly God our lord, and
seek for heavenly and Godly things with all his heart. This service we owe
to God first for his creacion, because he has made us men after his own
Image and similitude, and after because he has made us again by an other
creacio^ and has redeemed us by his only son our lord Jesus Christ, by whom
he has de liuered us from the power of darkness, and borne us up to his
kingdom. What is tha^ more foul or shameful than despisynge God, and
neglecting the service that we owe un to God, to follow only after manny she,
bodily and earthly things? Well go to, we woll count some part of the time of
our life, and we will compare with that our study, that it may be plain, how
great our sluggyshenes and dulnes is in learning, and considering those
things which pertayne to our very hauenly and everlasting health. One weke is
made of seven days, and one natural day is of. xxiiii. hours. Now number
the hours of one weke, and thou have an hundred. lx. and right hours. What is
done now?

There is commonly among men so great negligence of heavenly things, that in
so many hours of one weke, they take not an hour or two in the which
earnestly, they think of their heavenly salvation. But let us speak also of
the year. One of our common years is made of three hundredth, threscore, and
five days. And where every day is of xxiiii. hours, there are numbered in
one year eight thousand, seven hundred, and threescore hours.

And you shall find some that in so many thousand hours, will not take
them three or four, in the whyeh with all their mind and all their thought,
they will talk of heavenly things, either with them selves, or will hear
them talked of openly of the ministers of the church: and yet for all that
bestow all their hours in sleep, in meat, in handy labor, in feasts, in
bathes, in talk of most vain things, in walkyng abroad in, iorneis, in
being and sellinge of marchau^dise: and who is hable to reherce up all bodilye
men's occupacions? Is not this not only a very foul thing, but also a
most perilous thing? The hystorye Ecclesiastical does declare that one
Pambus are Heremite, did come at Athanasius desiar, from the wyldernes to
Alexandria. He, when he had seen there a woman (as men say) much like a
player, decked with much gold and precious stones, he wept. Being axed why he
did so, Two things (says he moved me. That one, the death of this woman. The
other, because I do not so much study to please God my savior, as she to
please ungracious me^. Pambus in deed said very godly. But this is with
earneste tears to be wept for, that not only one or two women, but almost
all the whole sort of men watch with great care and al their thoughes only for
this to serve the bealy: y^ which what other thing is it, than to go to his
own present death and destruction? Meats (says Paul) are appointed for the
bealy, and the bealy for the meats: And god will destroy both the one and the
other. And again: ma ny walk, of the which I have often showed you, and now
I speak again wepinge, that be the enemies of Christ's cross, whose end is
destruction, and their bealie their God, and the glory shall be to their shame,
that ca^e for earthlye things. And Christ says: what profitteth it man if he
win all the world, and have the loss of his sole? Likewise what pro fitteth
it to have your body full of al kind of diliciouse meats, and for all y^ to let
your mind pyne away for lack of haue^ly meat, which saves you for ever.
For I pray you co^s^der me what yt end of these studyes is. For if thou work
as Christ speaks, or only follow after that meat that perishes, that is to
say bodily and earthly, thou semeste in deed to save thy body for a time, and
that nothing long, but shortly after thou shall lose even together with the
life of thy body, thy whole and everlasting health. And so both the body,
and the sole be lost together. But if y^ work the meat which abides still
into everlasting life, than although thy body be sometime hungry, yea I say
more, die also, yet is thy soul saved. And thy soul being saved, the body
also is saved through the Lord Jesus Christ, which will transform our yearthly
body to make it like unto his glorious body, according to that his mighty
power in workynge, by the which he makes all things subject unto him.
Wherefore let this be our only study and care, let this be our thought, to
work meat that remains ^n to everlasting life. But I say, must we do
nothing else in this world: is it not lawful to seek for bo dilye meat? So
thought certain folyshe Hypocrites, which after they had shut the^ selves up
in their The sluggishnes of Hypocrites is condemned.
celles, than took meat of other men ydellye. Christ does not teach us this.
For when he bids us pray: give us this day our daily bread, he shows
plainlye, that we ought to seek also for bodily meat after the facion in deed
that-we should seek. And Paul also: when we were wtyou (says he) we gave you
this co^ maundement, that if any man would not work he should not eat nether.
And it follows: We hear say that some men order them selves among you
inordinatelie, doing no work but live curiousli. To those that be such we
command you, and we desire you through our Lord Jesus Christ, that worcking
quietlye, they would eat their own bread. What means this than yt Christ
says: work not the meat that perishes? He does not condemn an honest
way to seek for bodily fode, but he condemns the lewd and bacward study of
men. Men are wont to have a greater regard of bodilye fode than spiritual,
and they more care for the health of the body than of the soul. But these
things you must needs do, and not leave the other undone. That you should be
kept to heavenly and everlasting life, it is necessary if you will be sa ued.
But that you should be kept in this mortal life it is not necessary. First
(says he) seek for the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be cast
unto you. And man does live not by bread only, but by every word that
comes out of the mouth of god. This world is not our very country, but a
strange We be pilgrims in this world
land, in the which we go in pilgrimage. And likewise as if a man iorneied
forth in far countries, he knows that this he should do only that when he
has done his business for the which he went out, he should come home again
as soon as might be, and although that in the mean time, he turn in sometime
to his friends houses, and behold the buil dynges of other Cities, yet this is
his chief purpose to come home again to his own: so when we go on pylgrimage
in this life that we should come again to our heavenly country, although
we may seek for our bodilye meat as it were in our Inn, yet most of all
the heavenly meat is to be sought for, by which we may be s^ued to
everlasting life: For this our journey is taken for that cause. But thou will
say: what is y^ meat yt bydeth for ever unto everlasting life? I (says
Christ) am y^ heavenly Bread which am come down from heaven. If any manne
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. Of the which thing, because we
will speak more at large hereafter, we will not now tarry long, but will go
forth with that we have now in hand, and we will se who can give unto us this
meat or bread. For Christ adds: the which the son of man shall give you.
For GOD the father has sealed him up.

That these be spoken by an Antithesis, those things will playnelye show
which anon after shall follow. For the son of man which is Messi^ as, is set
against the Patriarckes, Moses, the Prophets, circumcision, and all the law:
and this is the meaning. Neither the Patriarekes nor Moses, nor the Prophets,
are that person, for whose sake men be justified and made aly^e. Neither
circumcision, nor all the law be those things for the which men obtain
justice before God and everlasting life: But only the son of man which is
Messiah, Jesus Christ our Lord, is that person and thing for the which men
are saved, that is, are counted just before God, and receive everlasting
health. In deed the patriarckes serve for great purposes, so do the prophets
and the law: But only Messiah is the true health. Abraham was a very holy
patriarcke, and very worthy praise, and yet for Abraham's sake no man ob tayned
pardon of his sins. Moses was a very good law maker, and a valiant Duke of
the Istaelites, but for Moses sake no man is saved when he dies. The Prophets
were very well learned, and very holy preachers of the word of God, but for
the prophets sake no man obtained the heavenly kingdom. Circumcision was a
very profitable sacrament, but no man had eternal salvation because of circum
cision. The Sabbath, the sacrifices and other worckes of the law had their use
and profit, but for these no man came to everlasting salvation. Only the son
of man, Messiah only, is the bread of life. For whom to all that believe in him,
there comes forgyuenes of sins, justice, health, and life everlasting: And
that right worthilye. For it is he whom God the father has sealed up. For
first God the father has sealed him from the beginning with his own Image,
that he should be even together with him the true and eternal God, of the same
substance and majesty. He (says the Apostel) is the image of y^ invisible
god. And again. He is the brightness of his glory, and express Image of his
substance. Wherefore seeing he is marcked with the deuyne power, it is no
maruayle that he is hable to save them that believe in him, and to give unto
them eternal life. Further, after he was made the son of man, god sealed
him by open witnesses, that he is the true Messiah and savior of all them that
believe in him. For as the seals of common writings do testifye of the things
that be done, which are rehearsed within the letters, so God the father
testified by many miracles, as it were by heavenly seals, of Jesus the son
of Marie, that he had sent him and anointed him unto the true Messiah, and
gyuer of everlasting life.

The Angel Gabriell was sent to show his concepcion and his natiuitye. He
was borne of a woman that was a Uyrgin. He was preached of by the Angels. He
was vysited and worshipped of the, wise kings: and when he was Baptized of
John in Iordane, the voice of GOD the father was heard wit nessynge openly
from heaven that this was his well-beloved son in the which he was pleased. The
holy gooste also came in the lykenes of a Dove. Afterward when he preached
his own Gospel, he did show very great and excellent miracles. All these
are Heavenly seals, whereby GOD the father has testified that he has
sent this Jesus, and confyrmed that he was the very savior of mankind.
Which seals afterward by ^synge from the dead, by his ascendynge into
heaven, by sendynge of the holy ghost into his Disciples, and by spreading
abroad of ye Gospel were made so strong, that now there is no dowt at al, but
that he is the very Messiah, for whose sake only men obtain everlasting
salvation. Wherefore although there be a dew labor and care for bodilye
sustenaunce, which when it is occupied, does perish: yet above al things must
we labor dili getly, to get the meat that abides into everlasting life,
which is Jesus Christ our Lord GOD, even with the father, and the holy ghost
blessed for ever.

Amen.
The fourth Homely.
Although it is said that the bealye has no ears, yet the Jews given to the
bealy, seemed not to have herd Christ's serm^ deaffly. For when Christ did
rebuke the^ because they followed more the bodily meat, than the heavenly, and
exhorted them to work the meat that lasted into everlasting life, they did
well perceive, that the^ were bydden to do true justice, and to do this Godly
worship, that they might obtain everlasting and perpetual good things.
Therefore they said unto him.

How should we do, to work the worckes of God?

Whether they axed him in earneste or in game, verilye this is their meaning:
What preachest thou unto us of working the meat that lasts into everlasting
life, that is, following justice, and doing service to god, whereby we should
come to perpetual bless? Be we not just inoughe by the works of our law,
may we not come unto everlasting joy by the merits of those worshyppynges
of God which our law has prescribed unto us. We be circumcised, We keep the
sabbath day, we offer sacrifice, we steal not, we rob not, we give the
tenthes, we give alms, we fast at times appointed, and we do many other good
worckes. What requier you of us more, or what should we do to be more just,
and please god better? Lo this is the old blindness and ignorance, borne in the
nature of man, to thyncke that gods law may be fulfilled by our worckes,
and that they are inste enough before GOD if they follow a civil honestye of
living. And although we must always to our power obey the law of GOD, and
that every good work which god requires, has somewhat wherefore it serves,
yet is there no man in the world which is able to fulfill the law by his
own worckes. It is said in the eight Chapter of Genesis. The feeling and
thought Noman (...) perfectely good.
of man's heart is euel even from his youth.

But the law of God requires a meaning and thought of man, that is good:
wherefore if it can not be that as long as this natural malidye stycketh in
man (and it sticks because of original syn ne, yea even in man also that is
good, and borne again by the holy Gooste; and it abyddeth even until he ^ye)
he cannot perfectelye fulfill the law of GOD.

The Psalm does say: in thy sight is not justified al living creatures. But
the law requires to the fulfillyng of it, just and holy men. Since therefore
that no man of his own nature is just and holy before god, it is plain that
no man of him self is hable to satisfye the law.

The law, says Paul, is spiritual, and I am carnal: and I know yt in my
flesh dwells no goodness. If there be not in the flesh, yea though he be a
good man, goodness, how should he fulfill a good law? And again: The affeccion
of the flesh, is enmity against god. For it is not under the law of God, nor
in deed it cannot. And although carnal affeccion bear not the rule in a good
man yet does it abide in him still as long as he lives in this world.

Wherefore he never fulfilleth the law. And again: The flesh coueteth
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. These things be one
against another: so that thou can not do those things, that thou would.
Thou herest that the fight between y^ flesh and the spirit, is perpetual, not
in wicked men yet, which altogether follow y^ affeccio^s of the flesh, and have
not the holy ghost, but in good men that be endued with the holy ghost. But the
law of God will not suffer any rebellion against the holygoost, but it
requires a perfect obedience. Where fore seeing in a man be he never so good,
there is a continual fightyng between the flesh and the spirit, it is plain
yt he never fulfilleth perfetly the law of god by his works. And since it is
so, ye se how far and mischeuosly they er whether they be Jews or Christian
hypocrites, which think with their holy things and good works to satisfy
the law of God, and to be just before god. What should we do the^ to work the
worckes of God, that is to do true justice and service, that pleases god best:
and to fulfill the law of god. Of this thing we must hear Christ.

For he answered and said unto them. This is the work of God, to believe in
him whom he sent.

If ye will do the greatest and most excellent service to god, if ye well get
true justice before God, and be saved, this work, this holy service, this
honor of god must be done, that is to believe in him, who^ he set, I say, to
believe in Jesus: yt is the godly service, Fayeth is the most excellent (...) of
god
in the which god so delights that he will repute y^ beleuer as just as if he
had fulfilled all the whole law with his worckes. Thou will say than: what is
it to believe in Jesus? To declare this very plainly, it is to believe the
gospel, and receive (...) in fayeth.

And Jesus preached this gladd^ What it is to believe (...) Jesus.
^dynges, that he was sent of God, y^ he is the very true Messiah which was
promised by y^ prophets. Where fore to believe in Jesus, is to give him the
honor and the majesty of Messiah, yt is to knowledge him a clenser of sins,
an appeaser of the anger of god, a savior in death, a gi uer of life and
blessedness, and in deed to put in him al our whole trust of sal uacion. For
these things do the pro phetes ascribe unto Messiah. But here we must consider,
whi to believe in Christ, is the greatest work, and the most excellent
worshyppynge of God. And first: Fayeth in Jesus Christ is therefore called
the excellent serving of GOD, because it is an instrumente whereby we take
hold on Christ, and by the which he that does believe, is ^raffed into
Christ. And there can ^thynge come unto us either ^ore excellent or more
happilye, than that Christ should be ours and we Christ's. For if Christ be
ours and we Christ's, what remai neth but that all the good things of Christ
be ours, and that al our euyls by the goodness of Christ, are put away.
Wherefore perfect justice is ours, the holiness and blessedness of Christ, is
ours: in respect of which things, our sins be not laid to our chaurge:
and our death, which in this world is the last kind of all miserye, is not
the gate of hell, but of reign everlasting through Christ. Wherefore seeing
Christ is taken and graffed into us by fayeth, it is manifest that we cannot
do a more excellent and a more holy service, than to be leave in Jesus
Christ. And so farforth also we be said to be justified by faith, not that
faith in Christ of it self is a work of so great dig nitye, that for the
worthynes thereof it does instify us before god, but because it takes Christ:
for whom only we are counted just before god, and chosen into ye sons and
heirs of god. Furthermore faith is called the most excellent worshyppynge of
god, because it gives unto God the honor of the truth of his pro mises, and
knoweledgeth God to be very true. For God although he has promised many
other things as well bodilye as spirituallye, yet is this the chiefest thing
among all his promises, that he well send Messiah into this world. And he
has openly proved, and declared by great, and many testimonies, that this
Jesus of Nazareth is the same Messiah that was promised before. Wherefore he
that believes in him, does give glory to God for his truth. And so to
gloryfye god, it is to god a thing that pleases him far above all other. It
pleases god in deed: if thou walk according to the law, and do the worckes
of the law: but so if thou do them in faith, yt is to say if thou knowledge
god to be very true in his promise of his Messyas. For what honor should be
acceptable to God, if y^ should judge him in thy heart to be vain and a liar?
A ^a^ will not care for ye bowing down of thy head, thy kneling, thy giving of
the wai if he should perceive y^ tokest him for a vain man and a liar, and
would y^ yt god should regard them? Saying therefore that faith gives to god
y^ honor of truth, it is worthily prefarred before al other holiness, and
service of god. Finally seeing the faith in Christ receives even together with
Christ the holy ghost also, which is the renuer of man, and the maker of
obedience in man, it is plain that faith is the fundacion and beginning of
all good virtues and good doings. Other that have not fayeth in Christ, are
sometime garnyshed with other virtues: one is just in civil bargains, another
is patience in aduersitye, this man is chaste, he is gentell to speak unto,
that man is merciful to the afflicted, and some man is true of his word and
promise. These be diverse virtues, and he that has one it may happen that he
lacks all the other.

For you shall find that where as they will keep their promise well, yet are they
very cruel to them that be in misery. Ye shall find other, which for all that
they keep a civil chastitye, yet are they very liars. But he that has fayeth
in Christ he also has the holy Gooste, which leads him into all kinds of
virtues, and good doings.

For although faith so far forth justifies not a man before God as is the
beginning of good works in a man, and that there is always left a weakness in
the flesh as long as we live in this world, although the holy gooste govern a
man, yet is not that spirit of faieth idle and dull, but works stoutely, it
mortifieth the desire of the flesh, and brings forth diverse kinds of
virtues, charity, joy, peace, lenitye, benygnitie, goodness, truth, mekenes,
temperaunce, chastitye, and who is able to rehearse all the fruits of the
spirit? Wherefore fayeth in Christ for this cause also is the most excellent
worshyppyng of God, because it is the beginning, and commendacion of all good
worckes: and he that will do the holiest work to God, he must needs work
this work also. For this is the highest serving of God which the Patriarchs
and Prophets and all good men have done. By this service, they have gotten
justice and health, as many as were received to the favor of god. They were
not justified by the desert of circumcision, of their sabbothes, of their
sacrifices, nether yet of their moral virtues, but the were justified by this
service, that is by fayeth in Christ, and yet that not for the desert of the
work of fayeth, which work yet itself is wont even in the beleuer to be
fainte, but for Christ only, which is grafted into man through fayeth and
applied unto man. But thou wylt say, what? If to believe in Christ it be the
hiest and the most excellent worshipping of god, than is nothing more easy,
than to do this service to God, inespecially to us which even from our youth
have been instructed in the Apostles Creed, wherein all the doctrine of fayeth
is shortly contained. Thus in very deed it appears unto men which be without
all temtacion, and in prosperitye of al things. But the truth proves that ye
faith in Christ is not so often in the. For when Satan assauteth man, y^ may
plainly se that fayeth is no^ all men's acts, as Paul speaks, and that
there be very few that believe. And the devil fyghteth against Faith is not
every man's.
men diverse ways. Some time he styreth them to desiar of revenging by making
to them an ene mie, likewise by offering riches to covetousness, and deceyte,
besides this, by showing an other man's woman to lust, and by showing an
office to ambicion, and such other infinite worckes of the flesh. And how
many be there, but that they have not a fall, and that yeldeth not him self
prisonar to the diuyll, and that does not obaye the affeccion of the flesh
stired up by the deuyle And they the which lie down, either they believe not
in Christ, or else they lose their fayeth. They that be in the flesh (says
Paul) cannot please God. And again, if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye.
And Christ says him self. Every man that does sin is the servant of
sin. And John: all that do not justice, be not of God. Sometime be sent us
persecutours of the Gospel of Christ, through whom the devil entiseth men
to forsake Christ, and to fall to sin. And i^ is manyfeste how few always
have stand in the confession of Christ, specially if the persequucions have
been notable cruel. And to deny Christ in persequucion it is a manyfeste
proof, that either your fayeth was not suer or that Christ was cast away.

Sometime the Jews ate se^ fore us, the Turks which despise our religion,
and the Epicures. By these Satan brings to pass, that the wyckednes of the
people is opened. For when they boaste of how all things come well to pass
in their naughty, or rather no religion, and say: Tushe, It thy Christ were
true God and cared for me^nes matters, why does he not healpe you Christen men,
why does he not defend you? I pray you, how many been there comonlye among
the common people, which at these words although they be openly against
God, and blasphemous, will not begin to doubt of Christianitye, and if he were
set upon by persecution, would not fall away to ungodliness and despising of
Christ? This is a plain token that a great sort of men among Chrystyans
does not knoweledge God in dead, but only dream of him. And at last are
cast against us in our conscience, sins, death and the pains of hell. How
many thynkest you in these most grievous temptacions, and in the strait
judgment of God do fall down and peryshe? For if the multitude can not stand
fast at a trifling and plain wicked objection of a Turcke, or an Epicure
against the doctrine of gods gospel, how would he stand against the fyrie
dart of the deuell, which he is wont to cast against men before the
fearful judgment seat of God? Wherefore fayeth in Christ is not as easy
and common a matter, as easylye and commonly we speak of it: but as it is
most ex cellente honorynge of God, so does it pass al man's strength, and
needs we must receive it from heaven, and must be raised up in us by the
might of the holy gooste. Flesh and blood (says Christ) has not opened
it unto them: but my father that is in heaven. Let us call therefore upon God
y^ father that he will set on fire and instame our hertes with true faith,
whereby we being justified, may get salvation through the son of God Jesus
Christ our savior, which is God with the father and the holy ghost blessed for
ever.

Amen.
The fyfte Homely.
Jesus has preached great things, and excellent things of him self, saying:
the son of man shall give unto you meat which lasts into life everlasting.
And, this is the woreke of God, to believe in him, whom he has sent. By the
which saying he signified that the best, and most excellent worshypping of
GOD, is to hear him, and believe in him. Uerily this is to lift up him self,
not only above the common state of men but also above all Patriarckes and
Prophets. For there never was any Patriarcke and Prophet that took so much
upon him, nor promised so great benefits of him self to his hearers. Let us
hear now therefore, how the Jews took this Sermon, or how they judged:
this his pride.

Wherefore they said unto him: what sing do thou show, that we may se
and believe the, what workest thou.

Our fathers have eaten Manna in the deserte as it is written. He gave them
bread from heaven to eat.

This is y^ meaning of y^ Jews answer. Thou crakest that thou will give us
great benifits and thou tellest us that thou art the Prophet whome^ Moses
commanded to hear, and that thou art Messiah i^ whom the Prophets badde us
be leave: but yet haste thou not proved it by any signs, nether haste decla
red thy self in deed such one as thou art. If thou would give us Man na from
heaven, as our fathers have eat in deserte, after the saying of Psalm. lxxvii.
He reigned Manna for them to eat, and gave the^ bread from heaven. If thou
woldeste deliver us from this hard bondage wherewyth we be oppressed of the
Romans, as Moses delivered us from the bondage of Egypt, we would believe
that thou were sent of god, and to be the very Messiah. But now seeing that
thy self art a poor man, and although one eve nyng thou feddest us, yet to
day b^ we never the less hongry, nedye and wretched, we can not knowledge the
for so great a Lord, and for the true Messiah. Here again man may se that the
Jews lusted after nothing but, that was good for the body, and to seek only
an yearthly kingdom and They seek for an worldly Messiah.
^eshly joy in Messiah, a woeful matter and ernestlye to be wept for, that men
are wont only to care for this that their body may fare well, and thyncke all
the rest safe, if the bodilye commodities be safe. For if they may get the
pleasure only of this world, they thyncke that heavenly joy will follow of
it self, and therefore they take all the care and thought, all the pains,
labor yea I say more, all iniquytye and ungodliness to get unto them these
yearthely pleasures. Lay unto this that they maruayle at, and worship those
men only, whom they se to be happy with these earth ly commodities, and whom
they hope shall be the helpers, that they them selfs also may get these gay^
things.

Among them were had in great price, Theodas, Judas Galileus, and
afterward also Cochabas, because they promised them here earthly joy,
filicitie, and deliue raunce from the bondage of the To maynes: where as not
wythstanding under pain of death the Apostles were utterly banyshed which
prea ched true, and heavenly felicity, and good things that should last for
ever. What shall I speak of the Ethnikes? They honored not only as men, but as
Gods, all those which did bring unto them any thing profitable for the
body. Bodily co^ modities are counted the chefest.
They hallowed Bacchus for a GOD because he had showed unto them, the making
and use of wine.

They worshypped Ceres as a Goddess, because she did teach how to order corn,
and wherefore it served: where before they eat Okecorns. Hercules was set among
the Gods, because he saved the citisens that were overcome of their enemies,
because he restored banished me^ again to their Cities, because he made the
land saufe from thieves, and the sea from pirates.

These virtues although they be great, and mete for a Prince, yet because the
heathen did consecrate Hercules into a God, for these virtues, they did
playnelye declare, that their mind was only in yearthely commodities, and
profits. I will show you that, that scarselye may be honestlye spoken
openly in the congregation, and yet it ought to be spoken of, that you may
se that men have no regard, save only that they may Lacta^c^ in his bok^
of fal^e religion. La. xxix.
have joy in yearthely pleasures. Flora, when by harlotes craft she had gotten
great riches, she made the people of Rome her heir, and leaft a certain
money, by whose yearly increase thereof, the day of her birth might be kept
solemly, and plays be made, which they call Floralia: what came to pass than.
Did the Romans knoweledge Floralia.
so foul and fylthy things? Not only did they gladlye receive them, but
made Flora a gods, that should be gods of f^owers. O stynckyng beasts, O
detestable men, which gave also to harlottes Godly honors, because they had
received of them a bodily benefit, when for all that, right honest men either
their oratoures or Philosophers that taught virtue, they greatelye dyspised
them, yea and sometime also killed some of them. And in this thing not only
the heathen, but the Christen men, them selves also have done amysse. For in
the worshyppynge of saynctes, which Hypocrites have followed very hertely, and
much un godly, they have worshypped those saynctes specially, by whose healpe
they have hoped to have had either some corporal benefits, or escaped hurtes.
To those they have appoin ted holy days, temples, offeringes, pylgrymages,
feloshyppes, and as they call them, brether heads. To be short, A great sort
of those that be called christians, have so burned with desire of yearthly, and
temporal profits, that they would have worshipped Satan him self for a
saint, or for a God, so that he would send them money, and give them
corporal benefits. Which thing verily even by this is plain, that although
nothing is better known tha^ that deceites, trifles, lies and periuries be
mischeuous things, and worckes of the diuyl, yet men to ge^ riches and bodilye
profits with so great redines of mind they follow their mischieffes, that
neither by any respect of honestye, neither by any warning of gods word,
no nor by other crueltye of punyshmente, they may be wythdrawen from that.
What is blindness, if this be not blyndnes, and ungodliness? For me^ be so blind,
that they think these corporal and temporal good things, to be true
felicitye. Let us hear therefore what Jesus answers to y^ Jews disirynge
only corporal meat, and an yearthly deliverance.

So Jesus said unto them. Amen, amen I say unto you. Not Moses has given
unto you bread from heaven (that is to say the true bread) but my father
gives unto you the true bread from heaven. For the bread of god is that, which
is descended from heaven, and does give life to the world.

This is the comparynge together of Moses and his benifites, with Messiah, and
his benifites: which Messyas gives to them that believe in him. You (says
he) glory very much of Moses, and for the benefits which be given to you
for him: and first, although Moses has been a great Prophet, and
fayethfull minister of GOD, yet was he not that person, for the which men do
get true health.

But Mellias, whom the Prophets have promised, and ofwhom Moses him self
has preached, and whom GOD now has sent into the yearthe, is that person,
for the which true health commyth to men.

Furthermore the good things which God has done by Moses, in deed htey are
great, and very excellent, and yet not everlasting, neither sufficient.
Moses ministered to you by gods liberalitye, Manna from heaven, yet that Manna
was not the very meat, which of it self has saved the eatars into
everlasting life. All the Israelites have eaten Manna in the deserte, yet
nevertheless, all they also be dead, and many of them God has not allowed,
which also have dyed for ever. But Messiah which is the natural son of
God, and whom his father has sent from heaven into the earth, which now at
this time lives amongeste men, is the true meat, which so conserueth al y^
eat him, that is believe in him, yt they shall never dye: but although they
seem to die, yet may be saved into everlasting life. Moses delivered the
Israleites from the Egipcians bondage, and led them by y^ deserte even unto the
land of Canaan. This was in deed an excellent benefit, and very acceptable
to the Jews that were afflicted, but yet was it not a very deliverance: for
although they were delivered from the tirauntes of Egypt, yet were they not
delivered from there spiritual tyrauntes, that is from sin, the diuyll, death
and hell. But Messiah brings true deliverance.

For to them that believe in him, he forgeueth sins, and causes, that they
which receive him through faith, are counted just before God. He overcomes
the devil, and so delivers the servants of the diuyl, that they be chosen
into the sons if god.

He over comes death, and brings to pass, that they which were in the
danger of death, never dye but live for ever. He overcomes hell, that they
which were in danger of hell, should go into heaven, and enjoy everlasting
felicitye.

These in deed are the true benefits which as they are in no wise to be
compared to those corporal profits, so do they bring everlasting health. It
comes down (says he) from heaven. It brings therefore heavenly and
everlasting good things, not earthly and those that shall vade away. And it
gives life, it gives not money, which covetous men seek for: not corn,
which vsuras heap together: not wine, which bybbers seek after: not earthely
Empyres, with whose desiar men of this world be on fire: But it gives life,
that is blessed for ever. And it gives it unto the world, it offers it by
his gospel, not to the Jews only, nor to the gentiles only, but to all
creatures: that is as well to the Jews as to the gentiles, as well to honest as
unhonest, to the poor as well as to the rich, to the princes and to the
subjects, and to be short, to all the world. Wherefore although these
corporal, and yearthely good things have their use, and God (if they happen)
is to be thancked for them, yet must you not set your heart upon them, as the
Psalm says, but set all your heart upon this study, to get true, and
heavenly good nes in Messiah. This thing does Christ plainly declare, where
he says: my father gives you the true bread from heaven. For it is the
bread of GOD that comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world.
But the Jews yet dream of bodilye good things. Therefore they said unto him.

Give to us this bread always. That which before the woman of Samaria
answered unto Christ speaking of the fountain of water, that sprange up into
euerlast ynge life, saying: Lord give us this water that I may not be dry
nor come hither to draw: the same do now the Jews answer unto Christ
speaking of the bread which gives life to the world, and folyshelye axe of
him, that he bring to pass, that the same lyfegyuynge bread may raygne down
from hea uen plentuously: for they would take it with both their hands, and
hold up their lappes. Furthermore, they plainly signifye that they so
understood the words of Christ, that he taught him to be only but a
minister of this lyfegyuyng bread, as Moses was of Manna, and not the bread it
self. Give us (say they) this bread always. We se thou art a man, which
dyffereth nothing ^ro^ us in weakness, we se that thou haste all things as a
man has.

And if thou be some great manne, certes thou can be nothing more than the
minister of God, as were the Patriarchs ^rophetes: wherefore if thou have
received this ministry of god to give unto us new Manna, whereby we may be
saved always in this life, go to on fellowship, give us that you have received,
yt through the we may enjoy this hea ue^ly benifite. Here consider me, how
diverse the judgments of Christ's larnyng be. One understands his promises
fleshely, an other judges them triflinges, or vain, and lies, thynckynge that
they cannot be full filled: an other that seems to have a good opinion of
Christ, thinks that they differ nothing from the sermons of the prophets,
because he thyncketh him to be a docter, or a promiser, and not to be a
savior, but only a minister of salvation, a^ were the prophets. But Christ
according to his goodness, corrects these errors of the Jews very gentely.
And said unto them: I am the bread of life. He that comes to me shall not
honger, and he that believes in me, shall never thyrst.

You do so axe of me this bread of life, that you plainly declare that you
judge me to be but a minister of this bread: But I as much as lies in me,
will not suffer you to err. I am not as you trow, such a minister of this
bread of life, as were your Prophets, which did preach also even the^
selves, of gettinge true salvation. But I am the bread of life it self, and I
offer to him yt earth of this bread, not such good things as happened to ye
Israelits by Moses Ma^na in the desert, but I bring unto you heavenly, and
everlasting good things, yea I my self am that heavenly, and eternal good
thing the which whosoever can get, he shall lack no joy. Look upon al other
good things yt ca^ be spoken of in this world, yet shall ye find none of the^
yt is the bread, which will take away al honger, and that is drink yt will
quench al thyrste. The deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt, was a great
benifit, but it was not yt bread which filled the Israelites hongar. For they
lacked yet many things both bodi lie, and spiritual. Manna that rained down
in the desert, and the water that flowed out of ye stone, were marvelous
gifts of god: but of the^ self they put not away the honger and thurst of
the Israelites. For be side other corporal things, which they had need of,
how many I pray you of them died in the desert, not only with outward
death but with eternal death.

How many I pray you for they^ wyckednes were cast into the perpe tuall
prisons of hell? And what shall I say of the common profits here in the world,
that is of bodily health of lands, of monye, of civil honor and office? I will
rather speak of the kingdom it self, and empire of this world, which seeing
it can not put away the hongar, and thyrst of man, I pray you what is it that
among these earthely good things is able to do it? Alexaunder sur named the
great, when he had herd say that the Philosopher Anaxagoras had disputed that
there were innumerable worlds (for this was the wicked opinion of-some
Philosophers) it is said that he wept.

And when men axed him, what he mente by his weeping. May I not worthily weep
(says he) that sith the worlds be innumerable, we be not yet made Lords of
one? A won derfull matter. The empire almost of the whole world, which Alexan
der had now in possession, was not able to fill his mind. And yet to say the
truth, it is nothing to be maruaylled at at all. For the Empire of this world
is not that bread that will healpe a man's houngar. But Jesus Chrsti only is
the bread of life, which who so eateteth, shall never hongar. Thou will say
than: how eat we this bread? It follows: he that comes to me shall not
hongar. To come therefore unto Christ, is to eat of this bread. And we must not
thyncke that we speak now of that coming which is with our bodily feet. For
although that at that time which Christ preched his Gospel in this world,
men must needs come to Christ with their bodilye fete, to hear his Sermons,
yet now he speaks not of bodily coming, but of spiritual, which is by
fayeth. For so Christ him self expounds when he says: He that believes in
me shall never thrist. Therefore to come to Christ, is to believe in him that he
is by God our wysdom, justice, sanctificacion, and redemption. For he that so
comes unto Christ, I pray you, how shall he hongar, how shall he thyrst,
or what shall he lack? If poverty be grievous unto him, Christ is rich, which
has given him self wholly with al his riches to him that will believe. If sins
threaten unto us the anger of God and damnacion, Christ has cleansed our
sins, has pleased god and redeemed us from damnacion.

If death threaten eternal destruction, Christ has overcome death: and to
them that will come to him by fayeth, has he prepared heavenly, and
everlasting life. I say, can bodilye health, can money bearing of office,
ciuyle honor, king domes, and empyres, can they give us so great benifites?
What do these avail without Christ?

What do these contrary things, pouertye, and death, hurt with Christ? Let
us come therefore un to Christ, let us come to him by fayeth, that by this
bread, and drink, we may so content our hongar and thrist that we may
live euerlastyngly through Jesus Christ our savior: which even with the father
and holigost is god blessed for ever.

Amen.
The syxte Homely.
WE be yet still in the declarynge of that co^municacion and dysputacion,
which Jesus Christ by the oc cacion of bread had with the Jews: and the
talking is not as the proverb is, of the moon shine in y^ water, but of very
weighty matters, and necessary to be known for our salvation. For it teaches
difference betwixt Moses and Christ: and it teaches that the benefits of
Christ are far other tha^ the benefits of Moses, it teaches of the true
office of Christ, that is that Christ came from heaven for this purpose, not
to bring transitorye, and worldelye pleasures, but everlasting, and heavenly.
Wherefore this dysputacion is so much the more diligently to be marcked, how
much heavenly health is more necessary. And before in deed Christ plainly
declared, that he was that life ge ^ing bread, the which who so eat of (and
we eat of it if we believe in Christ) should never honger nor thyrst, but
shouldbe filled, and have health everlasting. But now he makes against the
Jews, that al though he did playnelye preach of his own person and
office, and openly confyrmed his preachings by great and marvelous miracles,
yet they would not believe him, nor knoweledge him to be the very Messiah.

But I told you (says he) that you have also seen me and yet will not
believe.

If ye will search somewhat openly for the meaning of this saying it must be
thus understand. I have in deed to complain of your naughtines and vnbelyefe,
but it is not new unto me, nor to be maruayled at. For I said, and said unto
you a good while a go by y^ prophets, that although I come unto you
Israelites, and show my self to be seen, handled, and heard of you, yea and
do great miracles, yet you will not receive me or believe my Gospel. In the
Psalm I said that I would be the stone, which the buylders should reprove. In
Esai I called my self the stone of stomblinge, and the stone of slander to
the two houses of Israel: and the snare, and ruin to Jerusalem. And it is
said further. Many of them shall stumble, fall down, be bro ken, entangled and
caughte. And again: Blind the heart of this people, and stop his ears, and
shut his eyes, least perhaps he se with his eyes, and hear with his ears, and
understand wthis heart, and be turned, and I help him. Many years before I came
into this world, I preached these things of your unbelief. Wherefore
although I be sorye for your naughtines, yet neither is it unprovided for of
me, nor yet unthought upon. But and if you will understand this saying
playnelye, this is the meaning. Uerely^ I do mine office, I preach my gospel,
and I confirm it with miracles.

And what do you again? I told (...)
an other time, that although the worckes, which my father gave me to do, do
bear wytnes of me, that my father has sent me: yet do not you believe him,
whom he has sent. I toulde you also, I came in my fathers name, yet will ye
not receive me. I say the same now, that although you have seen so many,
miracles, wherewyth GOD him self confirms the veritye of my doctrine from
heaven, and opens my majesty, yet have you no trust to me. No new thing to
Christ him self, b^ in deed much to be maruayled at. Christ was promised even
from the beginning of the world, and was looked for so many thousand years.
And when he was come, and did preach his Gospel, and showed miracles, even in
the same people, in the which with so many promi ses he had been told to, and
was figured with so many holy rites, yet have they not believed. I pray you
what is the cause of so great blind nes? The first manne in deed after The
cause of unbelief what it is.
sin, kept still some knowledge of gods law, but by his own nature he
has no knoweledge of Christ the savior, but needs he must know Christ
by his word and promise of God through the holy ghost. Secondly although the
Jews have had the word, and the promise, and gods promise of Christ, yet
did they not well under ^ande his kingdom, but they drea med that Christ
should rule in the world after the manner of a king, and promised unto them
selves an earthely felicity. Wherefore when they saw Jesus, not like as they
carnallye looked for, they so dyspised him, that at y^ last they put him up upon
a cross. Thou wylt say then: why therefore did not Jesus compel them to
believe his Gospel? If he had in him the power of god, why did he not draw
the^, yea whither they would or no unto the faith, so that they should not
chose but receive him? Christ preaches of this thing when he says further.

All that my father gives me shall come unto me and him which comes unto me,
I cast not out of the dares. For I am come from heaven not to do my will, but
the will of my father, which has sent me. And this is the will of my father,
which has sent me, that I should not lose any thing of all that he has
given me, but raise them up in the last day.

This is a Sermon worthy remembrance, and has this meaning: I could in
deed compel all the Jews, yea all men, to come unto me, and receive me. For I
am the very Son of GOD, equal in nature, Majesty, and power, to my father,
and I am not come into this world I have not taken manhodde upon me, that in
this my first coming I would auaunce, and openly take upon me, and use this my
divine majesty, but so far as miracles are to be done, to testifye the
truth of my doctrine.

But I am came, that taking upon me the form of a servant, christ has
taken upon him the fashion of a servant.
and Messaunger, I may obey the will of my Lord, which has sent me into
this yearthe. It is the office of a servant not to do what him lists, but
what lyketh his master.

It is the office of a Messenger, not to do that the can do, but that is
lawefull for him to do, and commanded of him that sent him.

Wherefore seeing that I have taken upon me the form of a servant, and a
Messenger, I will compel no man to receive me: but I hang of my fathers will,
which has sent me into this world boeth a servant and Messenger, and I
tarry for them that he will bring unto me. For, whom soever he will give unto
me, al those, even as they come to me, and acknow ledge me, so also I
knoweledge the^, and receive them. And as I compel no man vyolently, so do I
cast a way none, whom my father has brought unto me. I receive them al
whether they be Jews or gentiles, noble or base, honest or sinners. And I
receive them not to make them kings of the earth but to keep them that they
peryshe not. I receive them, not that in this world they should have none
affliccion, or that they should not be overthrown with death, but that
although they be troubled, and seem to dye, yet they should not peryshe, but
be saved with everlasting life. For I will raise them up again in the last
day, that they may live eternallye, with me in joy in my heavenly kingdom.

This is the meaning of the sermon of Christ. Now will we touch a little the
parts thereof. And first, Christ teaches that he has not come into this
world to take and en crease his kyngedome, with outewarde corporal and
violente power. For the Jews looked for such a Messyas or Christ which
ioynynge unto him an army of the Jews, should bear about harness through all
contreyes, and subdue unto him all nacyons whyther they would or not, as
either Cyrus, or Alexander Magnus, or some other great king was.

Men that have no knowledge mar uayle also how it happens, that when Christ
is endued with divine majesty, he brings not to pass by his omnipotent
power, yt al his ad uersaryes, and blasphemers against his name either be not
slain with lightening, or be maruelouslye drawn to believe, and obey Christ.
But Christ in this place does refute the vain expectacion of the Jews, and
a reason why he will compel no man violently, to submit himself unto him
tells he saying: Al yt my father gives me, shall come unto me, and him y^
shall come unto me, I will not cast out: that is, I am not come into this world
to make men under me by violente power, but I look upon the hand of God my
father, and I hang upon his will.

Whom soever he shall give unto me, and whom that he shall raise up by his
spirit through my Gospel to confess, and acknoweledge me, he receives me,
and I will receive and keep him again. And what is the cause that thou do
not compel men by thy kyngly power to knowledge the, and submit the^ selves
unto the? Because I am come down (says he) not to do my will, but the will of
him that has sent me. I am come down from heaven not as a master but as a
servant. And it is the duty of a servant to apply him self not after his
own will, but after the will and beck of his master. I am come down from
heaven, not as a cheyfe Lord and Emperor, but as a messanger or one that is
sent. And it is his office that is sent, to do and perform not his own
opynyons, but the commandments of him that has sent him.

Wherefore in this mine Embassye, it is not lawefull for me to do any thing
beside the will of my father, whose Messengare I am. Tell us than I pray the,
what is the will of thy father? This says he, is the will of my father that
has sent me, that I lose not annye of those men which he has given me,
but raise them up in the later day. It is not my fathers will, that I should
take upon me the rule of a king, in this world, and by strong hand to subdue
men unto me, but that I should save them which he by his holy spirit has
brought unto me, and that I should keep them that they perish not, but
although they should seem to dye, yet that they be raised up again and live a
joyful life for ever. To this pertayneth also that Christ says in another
place of his own office. The son of man is come, not that he should be
served, but to serve him self, and to give his life a redemption for many,
that is, Christ came not, that horsemen, and soldiars should fight for him, and
should get for him by their life, and their blood, victory, that he after the
manner of a king should bear rule in y^ world, as an Emperors army shedeth
their blood, y^ Emperor may be defended, and may have the victory of his
enemies him self being safe, but he came that he him self should give his
soul, and his life, and shed out his own blood, that they that acknow ledge
him, might be redeemed, and saved from their enemies. And in an other place
when the Dysciples exhorted Christ to be revenged up on them that set light
by him with fire from heaven, he answered: You can not tell of whose spirit you
are. The son of man is not come to destroy the souls of men, but to save
them. Wherefore it is an obedience of gods vocacion, that he will not subdue
men by kyngly and strong power. But thou wylt say: Christ is ascended now
into heaven, and has laid away the form of a servant, and sytteth in the
glory of God his father, why than does he now suffer blasphemers, why now
that he is in such majesty, does he not compel violentlye or by his almighty
power the inobediente to the obedience of his gospel. Of this thing Peter
preaches thus. Jesus Christ must needs take heaven even until the time of
restitucion of al things, which God spoke by the mouth of al saints, even
from the time of the Prophets. For although that Christ sit at the right hand
of God, and has his omnipotent majesty, yet will he not show that maiesti
openli before the world before y^ last day, but he will gather together his
church by his Gospel through out all the world, until the last day do
come, in the which he will come openly, and will so in deed cast under his
ennemies y^ they shall be thruste down into perpetual prysones, and never be
let out: but his fryndes and those that believe in him, he will axate unto
perpetual kingdom and joy.

He must (says Paulle) reign, until he has put al his ennemies under his
fete. And then shall all be put under his fete, when death, which is the last
enemy, shall be put away. Wherefore as long as this world shall stand, and
that Christ shall not apere manifestlye, (for he shall not appear so til the
last day) he does not compel men unto the obedience of ^ayeth, by worldelye
power, but he calls them by preaching his Gospel, that as many as being
moved up by the holy Gooste, do receive him, may be saved. What shall we
The office of a magistrate and house*
say than of the offycer, and master of an howseholde? Because Christ does
not by violente hand subdue men unto him, is it not therefore the office of a
good magistrate to co^pel his subjects to live an honest ly^e and to hear the
Gospel of God? Is it not also the duetye of a good housekeper to enstruct with
threatenings, and rods his servants whither they will or no, in the
instruccio^ of Christen learning: God forbid: for as touching this purpose ye
vocacio^ of christ is noe thing and an offycer or housekeper is an other. For
Christ came not into this world, to use an outewarde office. So he sent not
his Apostels also into the world, to take upon them external governance.
Where fore it was not their office to compel men by vyolente hand to obey the
Gospel. And the officer and the housekeper first in deed ought to know the
truth of Christ's Gospel, that they also through says in Christ might
get justice, and health, and after he ought to teach his householde to
learn the true doctrine of christianity, yea and if they will not, to compel
them, after his manner of vocacio^ to follow virtue, and the other to his power
ought to provide that in the churches of his country, the right, and sound
doctrine of Christ may be taught, that blasphemers may be punished, and that
as well the teachers as he^ers of godly doctrine may be defen ded from y^
oppression of sedicious per sons* and thieves. It is plain in deed, that the
fayeth in Christ cannot be fastened in man's heart by man's force, nor this is
not the purpose, y^ men should be compelled to take the fayeth of Christ's
Gospel by the power of the magistrate: but outward, and open Idolatrye as it
may be taken away, so it ought to be, by ye magistrate: A godly doctrine also
to be preached openly may be, and ought to be appointed: Public
tranquyllitye also may, and ought to be kept, and open blasphemye may, and
ought to be punished, least the weak be offended, and lest that GOD for open
blasphemye that is not punished, be stirred to anger, and destroy all the
people. For Esate did say that kings should be Nurses, and queen's should be
nurces, of the church. The Psalm commanded kings to understand, and those
that judge the earth to be learned: and that the son of man should be
kyssed, least he were angrye, and they peryshe out of the right way. He
commanded also the princes of y^ earth to open the gates of their cities, yt
the king of glory might go in* Wherefore although no man ca^ de compelled by
man's power to be lene in Christ, truly yet officers and housekepers ought
to do their duetye, that putting away open Idolatrye, the Gospel of Christ
may have place, and the enemies of sound doctrine, and blasphemers may be
kept short and repressed. Moreover christ techeth us in this littell ^ermon,
that he indifferently^ acknoweledgeth all, as many as be given him of his
father, and receives them. The Jews do think that Messiah does take the
Jews only for his people: and if any of the Gentiles would enjoy the
benefits of Messiah, that he must needs receive circumcision, and be made a
Jew. The Hipocrites do think that Messiah receives those men only, which
be much given to ho lie service, and use many ceremonies. Other men thyncke
those men only to be loved of Messiah which in this world be rich, noble,
and mighty. For they are wont to say: he that beggeth in this world he must
needs beg also in an other world, that is, he that is unfortunate in this
world, he shall be also unfortunate in (...) other.

But Christ refuteth these very vain opinions, when he says. All yt my
father does give me, comes to me: and him yt comes to me, I will not cast
out. He says, all. I make here no difference, whether there come to me of the
Jews or of the Gentiles of honest, or sinners, I will knoweledge them, and
receive them. And afterward. That I lose not any thing of all the which he
has given me. And again. That all I say all that sees the son, and
believes in him may have everlasting life. Hitherto also pertayneth, that
Paul writes to the Romans. The Gospel (says he) is the power of God to
all that believe. What? Is it but only to one kind of men? No not so, but to
all that believe: to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. And afterward.
All that trust in him, shall not be shamed. For there is no dystinccion either
of the Jew or of the Grecian. For he is al one Lord of all, plentiful to all
them that call upon him. And again. God has shut al me^ under unbelief, to
have pity upon the^. Of whom? Of the Jews only or of honest men? No no. But
of all, whither they be Jews or gentiles, whither they be honest or dishonest,
whither they be mighty or in misery, if so be they be given to Christ, of God
the father, and be come to Christ. I pray y^ than: whom does the father give
to his son Christ? And what be they that come to Christ? we need not take
much thought to look about what answer to make.

Christ him self in this sermon de clareth this plainly. For when he had
said. This is the will of my father which sent me, that I should not lose any
of all those things which my father has given unto me, he shows anon after
to expound him self, which they be that his father gives him, and that
comes unto him, saying: this is his will that has sent me, that all that
sees the son, and labors in him, should have everlasting life. Wherefore
the father gives those unto his son, and they come unto the son, which
hear the Gospel of his son, and know him by the Gospel, and believe in him,
that he is the true savior. For in this weakness of our flesh, we may not
come to y^ throne of Gods majesty, and search out his unsearchable
judgments, because he dwells in light that cannot be come unto: but we
must come to that mau^ger, of the which the angel preached unto the
shepardes: You shall find an infant wrapped in swa^hell bonds lyinge in a
mannger. We must come to Jesus, which showed him self openly by taking upon
him man's f^esh, by preaching of the Gospel, and by miracles, and the which
showed him self to his church to be seen of our senses, by baptysme, in the
Gospel, and the lords supper. These things are Christ's face, whereby God is
seen, and his will is openly known. No Man (says he) ever saw God. The (...)
whereby god is se*
The only son which is in the bo some of the father, he has showed him.
And again: Philip, he that sees me, sees also my father. Where fore we must
do this one thing, that we he^re the Gospel of Christ and receive Christ
through, faith. For if we find our self in Christ through fayeth, nothing
shall be more certain nor true unto us, the that the father has given us to
his son, and that we be come unto his son.

Therefore it ought not to be douted, but the son cares for, and prouydeth
that we do not peryshe. For this (says he) is the will of my Good father
which of his goodness has sent me into this world, that I should not lose
any of all those, which he has given me. Last of all Christ does teach
that he gives not worldelye and transitorye things, but heavenly, and
eternal benefits.

The Jews have looked for, and yet do in their Messiah, for corporal
commodities, and profits, and to bear rule in this world. Carnal men,
which seem to knoweledge Christ, thyncke them selves lost, of Christ wyncke,
and they be greuyd with pouertye, or dye.

And then in deed they would love Christ well, if he would give them
yearth^lye riches, and long life in this world. But Christ teaches
playnelye, that he gives heavenly, and gifts everlasting. I will not lose
(says he.) And again: he has life everlasting. And I will raise him up
in the last day.

For although he wyncke, that they that believe in him should be oppressed
with pouertye, sick* nes; and death, yet suffers he not that they should
peryshe, but through his power, and aboundante mercy, he brings to pass
that they may have life everlasting: and he rayseth them up again in the
last day, that they may raygne with him in everlasting bless.

This is a great comfort, and great is all their salvation, that believe in
Christ: for what need they now to fear? They are troubled with pouertye* but
they have Christ obediente to his father, whose will is, that he lose none of
all, which his father has given unto him. They arefore diseased, but Christ
provides that they dye not in their sickness: they are condemned for sin, but
christ has cleansed their sin: They dye; and return to duste, but Christ
saves them unto everlasting life, and will raise them again in the later
day. Wherefore although all the myschefes of the world ran, and were
joined in one, yet must you trust well, and know that they shall be an
healpe to our profit, through Jesus Christ our savior, which is with the
father, and the holy ghost, God blessed for ever.

Amen.
The seventh Homily.
Now will we talk of the Jews murmuring against christ: For although the
Jews, which by this murmuring declared their rudenes, ignorance and
naughtines, be unworthy to take any care for their vain words, yet because
that through this occasion Christ is stirred up to declare his Gospel the more
playnelye, how so ever it be, it is not negligently to be passed over. Let
us hear therefore, what the Evangelist writes.

The Jews murmured (said he) for that that he had said, I am that bread
which am come down from heaven. And they said: Is not this Jesus the son of
Iosephe, whose father and mother we know? How than (says he) I am come
down from heaven?

I dowbte not but if Christ had preached either of theft or of murder, or of
adultrie, or any other such part of the law, that not only they would have
understand his sermon, but also if there had been any amongeste them that had
loved honestye, they would have prayesed him. For man's reason although it be
viciate, and corrupted with original sin, yet has it kept still some
intelligence of natural law. But now because Christ teaches true religion,
of Messiah, and of his eternal benefits, not only they not understand
them, but they also grudge, and speak against him. For although the Jews
had heard many things out of the sermons of the prophets, of Messiah yet
because they were not lyghtened with the light of the holy ghost, they did
not understand the true meaning of Messiah, and of his kyngedome. The
fleshely man says Paul, perceyueth not those things which be of the
spirit of God. For they are folyshnes unto him, and he cannot know. For they
must be judged spiritually.

Furthermore the Jews dreamed that the kyngedome of Messiah should be a
perpetual worldelye kingdom. And having this opinion, they could not
understand those things that were spoken of the spiritual benefits of the
kingdom of Messiah. Beside this the common sort of the Jews thought that
their Messiah should have been a great Lord in deed, and borne of the house
of Dauyd: but yet that he should be a man, and not also the very, and
natural son of God, as when they were ax ed in Mathewe, whose son Christ
should be, they answered, Dauides: that is man, only of man.

Wherefore when Jesus taught far other things of Messiah, they be so offended,
that they thought his teaching to be very vain. What say they? Although
this were Messiah, of whom we perceive he boasts, yet can we not maruayle
inoughe what he means, yt* he affyrmeth he came down from heaven. Will he
take upon him to be God? Uerely Messiah shall be a man. We know also the
kyndered of this Jesus. We know his father and mother, poor folks, and
abiecte persons. How dare he be so bold therefore as to say he is god? Here
is a double error. One that of Messiah promised by the Prophets, they
think no hier, than of a man, in deed very excellent, but yet but a man,
when for all that god calls him openly after a syngular Messiah y^ very son
of God.
manner, his son, saying: Thou art my son, this day I have be gotten the.
And Dauyd by the inspiracion of the holy gooste does knoweledge him his
Lord, and set teth him at the right hand of his father. An other error is
that they judge him after the outward sight of his stock or kindred, yea y
wys as though Dauyd also being so great a Lord, did not confess the
baseness of his kindred, and had not been written of Messiah which should be
borne of Dauydes sede, that he should ascend as a young graffe, and as a rote
out of a drys grownde, neither that he should have any fayrenes or beutye,
but should be the worste, and most dis pysed. Let us consider therefore
what canse Christ does rehearse of y^ Jews error. Jesus answered and said.

Murmr not emonge your selves. No man may come unto me, except the father
that sent me, has drawn him: and I will raise him up in the last day. It
is writen^ the Prophets. And they all shall be taugh^ of God: All men
therefore that has heard of my father, and has learned, comes to me: not
that any man has seen the father, save he which is of God, he has seen the
father.

This is a memorable Sermon, which although it seem hard; yet is it
necessary to be known: and if ye will understand it, it is very pro fitable. It
needs not (says he) that any man should show me why ye murmur, I know both
that ye mur mour, and why ye murmour. This does offend you, because I said:
I came down from heaven. And this is neither new, nor maruaylouse, that you
will not knowledge me, that is very Messiah. For no man can come to me, no man can knowledge true Messiah, and partake his benefits, except the
heavenly father draw him. The knowledge of Messiah lies not in man's wit,
nor in carnal reason, nor in man's merits, but it is the work of gods
mercy, and of the holy gooste. But you Jews, you lack the holy ghost, and
the heavenly father draws you not. Wherefore it is no maruayle that you
knoweledge not me, that is, the true Messiah. But how is this proved that
Christ says: No man may come to me except he draw him that has sent me?
Although Christ have such great autoritye that all his sayings, although
they have no proof joined to them, must be taken, and kept for heavenly
reuelacions, yet in this place he brings out for wytnes, the sayings of the
Prophets, saying, in the Prophets it is written: all shall be taught of God.
All therefore that have heard of my father, and has learned comes to me.
Let us seek now in what Prophets, this is written. And it is plain in very
deed, that this saying is contained in the. xlv. Chapter of Esaie. For when the
Prophet did discribe the kingdom of Messiah, and rekened up his benefits,
which be given to those yt be subjects of his kingdom, among other he
reherseth up this also: that al they that pertayne to this kyngedome are
taught of god, and are lightened by the holy ghost.

I will (says he) make all thy children the Dysciples of the Lord: For god
him self shall be their teacher. And the holy ghost shall teach them: that
both they shall knoweledge the true Messiah, and obtain the true benefits of
Messiah. With this saying agrees this also that the same prophet writes of
in an other place: All nations shall slow (says he) unto the mountain of
the lord, that is to wit, when the kyngedome of Christ is opened, and much
people shall go and say: Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,
and the house of the god of Jacob, and he shall teach us his ways. The Lord
him self (says he) shall teach us, that all may be taught of the Lord. To
this agrees also Hierimye in his. xxxi. Chapter: after those days (says the
Lord) I will give my law in their bowels, and I will wryghte them in their
heart, and I will be their GOD, and they shall be my people. And a man shall
no more teach his neighbor, nor a man his brother, saying: know the
Lord. For all shall know me from the lest to the hiest.

Uerely this is it yt Esaias had said also before: Al shall be taught of god.
There be also some things or places in the wrytynges of the E^angelistes and
Apostles yt agree with these sayings of the Prophets* and by which it is
playnelye showed, yt as all that pertayne to y^ king dome of Messiah should be
taught by God, so no man can acknowledge or confess Messiah, except he be ligh
tened with heau^nlye doctrine. In Mathewe Christ says: no man knows the
son, but the father: nor no man the father but the son, and he to whom the
son will open it.

And a litell after, when Peter did confess of Jesus boeth in his own name,
and in the name of the other Apostles, saying: thou art that Christ the son
of the l^uyng god, Jesus answered him. Flesh and blood has not opened this
unto the, but my father that is in heaven. Here it is openly said, that the
knoweledge of Messiah, which is our true health, and as Christ him self
says, everlasting life, depe^ death not by man's reason or industrye, nor of
man's merits, but only of the heavenly doctrine, and free mercy of God. It is
not (says Paul) in the wyllar, nor in ye tunnet, but in God that has
mercy. And it is said to Moses: I will have mercy of whom so ever I will
have mercy, and I will show mer cye to whom so ever I list. There be many
also such like sayings of Scripture, which testifye that men can get the
knoweledge of Messiah and their salvation only by the fre mercy of God,
which will draw by his holy spirit, whom so ever he will, and list. Here
now ryseth a great sort of questions, and as well the ignoraunte as the
conning, the good as the badde, may dyspute in this matter. For some say: If
needs al men must be taught of god, what need we to hear sermons made by men,
to what profits the outward preaching of the Gospel? I will tha^ hear no
more what any man says unto me, but I will look for reuelacion from heaven,
to be light ned by the holy ghost. Other make obieccion. If no man may come
unto Christ except he be drawn by God the father, the fault of unbelief
shall not be in the man: which if he were drawn, must needs obey wha^, God
draws because his virtue is omnipotent. For why does not god draw all
men, seeing he is hable to do it. Why drew he Ia cob and not Esau? Why drew
he Paul, and not Caiphas? Other think: If man's salvation depend only of the
fre mercy of God which choseth whom he will, what and if thou werte not in the
number of them, that are chosen by God, what if God had cast the away when he
chose his at the beginning: he those his before the foundacions of the world
were laid. These and many other things are wont to be reasoned of by me^,
when there heat that no man comes to Christ, nor gets salvation except
he be chosen of god, and be drawn, and taught by god. First therefore, you
must hold undoubtedly, that all the hole scripture, in the which this thing
also of gods predestinacio^ is contained, The end of Scripture.
is inspired of God: and put in writing for this use and purpose, to show unto
us Christ, to teach Christ, to set out Christ, and to stir up, kyndle, strength
and keep our faith that is in Christ. It is plain that Moses which is the
first, and chiefest minister of holy scripture, sends the people away from
him self to Christ, say inge: The Lord GOD shall raise up unto the a
Prophet of thy people, and of thy brethren.

^ym thou shalt hear. And Peter says: all the Prophets from Sa muell, and
after as many as spoke, has also showed of these days. For there is none
other name under hea uen given among men in the whiwe must be saved. Wherefore
what soever place of Scripture seems unto us either to take Christ away or to
weaken and break y^ faith in Christ we must thyncke, that either we do not
understand it ryghtlye, or that it is the tentacion of the spirit of the
diuyll: For it cannot be, that it should be the holy Ghost that does lead
away men from Christ, and the fayeth which is in him. Furthermore, where
Christ says: That no man comes to him except he be drawn of God the
father. And Esaye: that all be taught of GOD, It puts not away the
outward ministry of the preaching of the Gospel, but rather confyrmeth it.
For whom the father draws, those he draws by preaching of the Gospel.
And those whom God teaches, those he teaches by the outward or as we be
wont, by the vocal word. The ministry of the Gospel is necessary.


Go you says Christ into y^ universal world, and preach the gospel to all
creatures. Why would Christ so sadly, and with so great ieopardye also of
his Apostles ordain through the whole world the open preaching of his
Gospel, if it served not to learn true godliness and to get heavenly bless?
The majesty and authority in deed to teach, and show Christ, that is of
salvation to be given through Christ is only in the power of God the father,
and his holy gooste. But the ministry, and the instrument where by the
spirit teaches, and opens Christ, is the outward and vocal predicacion
of the gospel. For that, God uses this organe, and is effectual in man, by it
the matter it self proves, and many places of the scripture witnesses. I
have appointed you says Christ to his A postles, to go and bring fruit, and
that your fruit should abide. And it is manifest y^ Christ has sent his A
postles to preach his gospel. Therefore he speaks of this ministry y^ it
brings fruit, which also tarieth. And Paul: The gospel (says he) is y^ power
of god to all yt believe. And again: faieth is by hearing, and hearing is by
the word of god. And again: We thancke god and ceas not that when you received
the word of us, whereby you learned God, you received not the words of men,
but as it was in deed the words of god which also works in you that believe.
Paul speaks of two things touching y^ preaching of the gospel The one, yt it
is not y^ words of me^ but y^ words of god. That other, yt it is effectual in
those yt receive it in says. What could be spoken more excellent of this
ministerye? Let us hear also Peter: being borne again (says he) not by
mortal sede, but by immortal, by the words of the living god, and that
remains for ever. And says further: And these be the words, which was
brought unto you by the gospel. You se that Peter gyuethe to the instrumente
of outward preaching of the Gospel, a new birth, without the which no man
can get salvation. Nor all be not borne again that hear the Gospel: and in
The salua cion of infantes.
fauntes which for their age cannot hear the Gospel, are borne again
through gods mercy by Baptism. For they although they be not liable to
receive the outward word, yet be they hable to re ceyue the holy ghost,
which thing the example of John Baptiste does prove.

But we now speak of the ordinarye way to receive salvation. For in that
some, although they hear the Gospel, are not borne again, other, although
they here not y^ outward voice of the Gospel, by the singular power of God,
are borne a gain, it takes nothing away from the dignitye, and profit of
the ministerye, which is ordained by Christ with great authority. Many sow
sede which brings no fruit, and yet the corn is good, and the sede also. I
(says Paul) have planted, Apollo has watered, but God gives the increase.
And although it follow: Neither he that planteth is any thing, neither he
that waters, yet anon after it is said. We be healpers together with god,
that is: the planter, and the waterar is nothing in deed if you consider y^
authority of increase: but it is much if you consider the instrumente, the
ministry the plantynge, and waterynge by which god is wont to give increase.
And on that other part, the rod of Aaron floryshed without plantynge, and
wateryng. What shall we say then? Shall we therefore take away all plantynge,
and waterynge, because God sometime brings things to effect without them?
Nothing so at all. But rather is the power of God to be maruayled at in his
miracles, but we must use the instruments that he shows us to serve our
vocacion, and offer our selfs to god the father, and the holy ghost, to be
facioned through Christ. And touching the use of outward preaching the
Gospel, thus far be it spoken. But now let us search to whom the faut of
ignorance, and unbelief is to be laid. For (say they) If no man come unto
Christ, except the father has drawn him who shall be the maker of
incredulitye but god him self, because he draws not al men, and yet may do
it? Lord, what a blasphemy is this. For god is not y^ author of evil but of
good, not of vices but of vertus. For as touching God, he in deed draws and
teaches al me^, but most God draweth^ how
part of men draw back them selves, and wythstande the doctrine of Christ.
How often (says he) would I have gathered together thy sons, as the bird
her young under her wings, and you would not. And Stephan says: you hard
necked, and uncircumcised, in heart and ears, you always have resisted the
holy ghost, and as your fathers have done, so do you also. Thou wylt say then:
what is the cause that God changes not their will, and makes them of not
willing, willing, of styffe necked, redye to be turned?

For who is hable to resist his omnipotent power? This in deed is to bring god
under, and make him subject to man's wisdom. There is no doubt but god could
as well have changed the will of Caiphas as he changed the will of Paul: but
these secrets shall than be opened when we shall se him in the world to come
as he is in deed, and when we shall know him, as he knows us. But now as
touching these mysteries, we must cry out with Paul: O deapthe of the
riches and wisdom and knowledge of god, how vnsercha ble be his judgments,
and his ways hard to found out. For it is plain, yt through one man's fault as
Paul says evil was engendered upon al men to their conde^nacio^. Wherefore god
by no right may be rebuked, and accused of injustice, although he change no
man's will, but leave all men in perpetual damnacion, which through their
evil they have deserved. But in that he delivers, and saves some, it is his
gentilnes, and mercy which we be bownde to knowledge and praise, Christ was
opened among men even from the beginning of the world.
and not to rebuke. For so great is the benevolence of God toward me^ that
although he owe them nothing, yet will he show that very and true health
ought to be taken of all men, and would as much as he has showed us in
Scriptur by the holy gooste, make al men saved. Did he not even from the
beginning of the world, after man had sinned, and deserved perpetual
disstruccion, show out unto us his son Christ, to be received in faith that
men through him might get the salvation which they had lost? Which Sermon of
Christ was first showed a broad among the Patriarckes, which were not only
y^ fathers of the Jews but of the Gentiles also. Afterward were the Jews
among whom were put the promises of Christ, spread abroad by diverse
occasions among the Gentiles, that by them the gen tiles might learn what
was promised of Christ from heaven. And the last of al when Christ was come
and had fynished his journey in this world, the sound of the Apostles went
through all the earth, and their words went into the ends of the world.
Wherefore as touching our Lord god, man never lacked any thing whereby he
might know Christ, and by him to get salvation. But in that, y^ al men have
not gotten or do not get the knoweledge of Christ, and their salvation, it is
not gods fault, but men's. For they as they do not receive Christ offered
unto the^, and their salvation offered unto the^: so they will not receive him,
yea, they do not once desire to have a will to receive him. What should god do
then? Would ye have him thrust out his benefits unto them that be not
willing, against their wills, and resistynge him as much as they can? Caiphas
heard the Gospel of Christ, he saw him him self, and speak with Christ face
to face. I dout not but y^. Nero which killed Paul, heard speaking also of
Christ. But what was done? They not only would not learn y^ truth of
Christ, but were so wicked, that they had not once a will to desire, and if a
man had wyshed a better mind unto them, they would yea have abhorred that.
Wherefore the fault of the utter destruction of wicked men is not to be ascribed
un to the majesty of God, but to their naughtines, which when they be drawn,
and taught of God, put away salvation from them, not only with foot, and
hand, but with al their heart. Furthermore what shall we say of them, which
being weak in fayeth, by consideringe of this matter, make them selves more
weak? For they think with them selves.

If no man come unto christ but who^ the father has drawn, what and if thou
werte not in the number of those men, whom the father is wont to draw? For
the father draws who^ he will, and whom he has chosen according to his
mercy? How than if thou were not chosen? For so although thou seem to thy
self to believe in Christ, yet at the last thou shalt fall from C^iste. And
further, they compare them selves with so many mighty men, wise men, learned
and honest in this world, and thyncke: what?

Should thou alone with a few yea, and those very vile, and abiecte men,
be the chosen church of god, and those be mighty princes, so very wise
gouernoures of the commonweals, so excelent men in all kind of virtue, which
know ledge not the Gospel of Christ, should they be shut out from heavenly
salvation? Should God despise them, and care for the and a few other?
Therefore in these and like tentacions, we must diligentelye consider that we
spoke of before, that is gods eleccion to be showed in the scripture, not to
weaken but to strengthen the faith of good men in Christ. Is it not a point of
rash madness, to abuse a sweard to The end of scripture is to co^firm fayeth.
destroy t^y self, which is delivered the to defend thy life? This word y^
is said. I will have mercy upon whom so ever I will have mercy. And it is not
of y^ wyllar nor of the runner, is the swearde of the spirit, which is given
us for this purpose, first that when we manifestly should perceive that our
justice is more impure, the yt by the deserte thereof, we may be received to
God, and that our strength is so weak, that by it we can not asce^de into
heaven, we should fly to thee fre mercy, and eleccion of God. But thou will
say, it is unknown un to us, whom god has chosen. God forbyded. God has
opened very playnelye in our savior Jesus The predestinacion of god is
(...) led in christ*
Christ his will, and eleccion. And if thou will assaye to come unto god
without Christ, thou can not search* his secreat counsayles. But if thou
come accompayned with Christ, that eleccion shall be no more darcke, and
unknown unto the. For there is nothing more certain then that, god through
his mercy has chosen him which trusts to his only son Jesus Christ.

This (says he) is the will of him that has sent me, that all that se the
son, and believe in him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up
in the last day. And again, all the Prophets bear wytnes to this, that he
shall have pardone of his sins through his name, whosoever shall believe in him.
And again: As many as has received him, to them he has given power that
they shall be the sons of God, namelye to those that have believed in his
name. To be short. This is the chief point of all the gospel of Christ,
that he so loved the world, yt he gave his only son, that all that believe in
him should not perish, but have life euerlastig. Wherefore whosoever has
found him self in Christ through fayeth, he suarlye has also found him
self in the fre, and merciful eleccion of god.

For Jesus Christ, is the book Christ is y^ book of life
of heavenly life, into the which whosoever shall be written by fayeth, there
is no doubt, but that he is written in the heart of GOD, and that he pertayneth
to the congregation of the celestial Citizens. But thou will say: I fear
least my faith, either be not pure, or fail at the last. What? Thynkest thou
that God will break a bruised read or quench lint yt is smokynge? The mother
will not yet cast away her litel babe, either being yet but tender of age, or
weak by reason of sickness, but will so much the more take head of him, how
greuouser his syckenesses be: and should GOD the father be more hard thanne a
man's mother against him be he never so weak in faith, to whom he has
promised all mercy in his son Jesus Christ?

Know thou not whither this saying calls the? Lord I believe, help mine
incredulitye. It is not to be feared therefore, lest god will cast the away
for thy weak faieth, but rather thou must labor, by continual occupiynge
of the word of god, by prayer, and obedience, that fayeth, through the holy
ghost may be often increased more, and more. And what means that, that thou
shouldes be thoughtful of thy continuance in faith? Do thou while thou art
hear thy duetye. Let god alone with the rest. Know thou not that god is
fayethfull which will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are hable, but
makes increase even with the tentacion, whereby we may be hable to suffer. My
sheep (says Christ) hear my voice, and I knoweledge them, and they follow
me, and I give un to them life everlasting, another shall they peryshe for
ever, nor no man shall take them out of my hand. But now thou art made a
sheep of Christ, because thou know ledgeste Christ through fayeth. What
fear thou than lest any man should take the out of the hand of Christ?
Uerelye as touching the will of Christ which is showed through the whole
gospel, thou can not dout, peradventure thou doutest of his power. But he
adds, my father which has given them to me, is greater then they all, and
no man can take them out of my fathers hand. What? Thynkest thou that Christ's
prayer was vain, and of no strength? I pray not (say eth he) only for them,
but for those which will believe in me through their preaching, that all may
be one as thou O father art in me, and I in the. Paul also says: I
thorowelye believe, that neither death nor life, neither Aungeles, nor rulers,
neither powers neither things that be now, nor things that be to come,
neither heith nor deapth neither any other creatur shall be hable to separate us
from y^ love with which god loves us through christ our Lord. Hear also this
saying of the Prophet. Mountains shall be moved, and hills shall tremble, but my
mercy shall not depart from the, and my leage of peace shall not be moved says
the merciful Lord. Wherefore thou must be very suer, that god which has given
the his son and whom thou haste received now by fayeth, will provide also
that thou keep still his son, yea in the mids of death also: or rather to
speak more rightly, thou shouldeste be kept of him and saved. Furthermore
the holy gooste has opened in the Scripture the doctrine of free eleccion of
GOD for this purpose, that good men should not be offended either with the
small number or vylenes, but should trust: and that the evil men should
not be proud of their multitude, power, wisdom and majesty which they have
in this world, but fear. For if ye compare together the congregation of the
good and the badde, in this world, ye shall always find the badde higher in
degree, more in number, in more dignitye, honor, and greatenes, and in all
other things.

In the beginning of the world the congregation of Cayne, seemed to be best,
and that only should possess the world. And the church of good
Patriarckes, as it was small in number, so was it counted very litell worth.
Abraham when he was called out of his cou^trye, had no great authority among
the Gentiles, and yet he with Melchisedech, and few other was the very true
church of GOD.

Other nations were bygger in number, power and wisdom, and yet were rected of
God. In Egypt the Israelites were the church of god, which although they
were encrea sed in number, yet were they oppressed with bondage, and the
Egipcians in the mean season which were the church of the wicked bare great
rule, and were in very* great majesty of this world. What shall I say of the
examples of those times that followed after? In the same people which were
called by the name of god, one was the very church of god, an other fained.
When Ahab was king of Israel, the church of god seemed to be the king, the
queen, the courtiers the priests, and all Israel, but a few other, that is
to wit: Elias, Abdias, and some that were hyd in the caves by Abdias, were
thought to be abiected from god. But they were the true church, and that other
the feigned. What time Christ was borne, the bishops, the scribes, the
Pharisees were judged the church of god, and as many as favored the
authority, and doctrine, but zacharias, Elizabeth, Marye, Iosephe, Simeon, and
a few other as in comparison of the mulitude and majesty of the other, they
were counted nothing, so were they not taken another for the true church. But
the judgment of god is one, and the judgment of men another. And
afterward, John Baptiste. Christ, the Apostles, and certain other were the
very church of god when for all that, Annas, Caphas, the byshopes, the
priests, the scribes, y^ Pharisees, all the other company, of the Jews held
the hieste place, and dygnitye in the church, in comparison of whom, they
were counted vile, and abiecte. These things verilye are wont much to offend
good men. They se they are but a few, and dyspised, and to have no show of
the church of god: and that their adversaries are many, great, mighty, wise,
and not only bear the title, and name of the church, but also have the*
chief place in it. God therefore showed the doctrine of his The cause of
gods predestinaci on.
fre eleccio^, and comforted the good me^, and byddeth the^ have a good hope,
saying yt everlasting salvation stands not by man's authority, multi tude,
power or wysdom, but only by y^ fre eleccio^ of god. And seeing god has chosen
the^ out (which thing is manifest by this yt the know Jesus Christ, the son
of God, and believe in him) they ought not to be fered by y^ hie dignity of
their enemies, and fall away from true godliness, but stand so much y^ more
strongly, y^ vilar they be taken in ye eyes of me^. I thank the (says Christ)
O father lord of heaven, and earth, that you have hidden these things from
witty, and wise men, and showed the^ to ye little ons. Uerely father this was
thy good will. And again: fear not little flock, for it has ple sed your
father to give you a kingdom. And Paul says: you se your vocacion, that not
many wise me^ after the flesh not many men of power, not many of noble
blood, but those that were folishe after ye world god has chose^ to make ye
wise ashamed. Wherefore, ye more suar that it is, that God does chose his
church not after the merits of man or flesh ly majesty, but after the purpose
of his own mind, so much the greater owghte they trust of good men to be: yt
when they know Christ in who^ god has opened yt they be the elect members of
the church, it is no doubt, but they shall be saved for ever, yea although
the whole world would say contrary, and threaten the contrary. But we have
now spoken inoughe of this matter, we will turn again to our purpose.

All that have hard (says he) and learned of my father, comes unto me. And
it is said more, not that any man has seen the father, but he that is of God
he has seen the father.

What shall we say then? If none other has seen god the father but he, which
is of God, that is, but Jesus Christ the only son of god which is in the
bosom of his father, what remaynethe, but that none other also has hard god,
and learned any thing of him, and can not obtain salvation. What shall we
thyncke than of Moses, and other Prophets, of the which the scripture
witnesses that they have seen God, and learned many things The difference of
the prophets visions, and Christ's.
of him? But great dyfference is betwixt the seynges of the Prophets, and
Christ's seynges. For y^ Prophets are said to have seen God in deed, but they
have not seen his substance, and being, but only certain signs of his
presence. But Christ sees the being of God, yea, and is one God in deed with
his father. Moreover, the Prophets have heard the voice of God, not the
natural, but that that was taken for a time, by which the will of God should
be declared.

But Christ is the very natural voice of GOD, and his eternal word.
Finallye, the prophets and other good men have gotten salvation in deed, but
not by their own merit, but by an others benefit, but Christ is salvation
it self from the beginning, because he is very God. It remains therefore
that he that desires to se, and bear god, and to learn of God, must needs
se, and hear Christ, and learn his Gospel, and keep it through says, that
he may have true salvation. No man (says he) in an other place, has ever
seen God. The only son that is in the bosom of the father, he has declared
of him. And again, no man knows the father but the son, and he to whom the
son will show him. And again: Phylip he that sees me, sees my father
also. Wherefore in y^ desire to se God, and to hear his heavenly doctrine,
and to get salvation, we have no need to say (as Mo ses said) who of us shall
ascend into heaven to se, and hear God? But Christ must be seen, and heard,
we must believe in Christ through his Gospel. For this is the face of God,
that is the express Image of the substance of God, this is the voice, and
word of God. This also is the life, and health it self, that whosoever ever shall
believe in him, may have life, and health everlasting, because he is even
with the father, and the holy gooste god blessed for ever.

Amen.
The eight Homilye.
Christ after the confutacion of the Jews mu^ muringe comes again to his
Sermon that he had begone. Let us also come again to the declaracion of it,
that by the meditacion of gods word, we may do our duetye, and show our
self to the holy ghost ready to be taught true godliness.

Verelye verelye (says he) I say unto you, he that believes in me has
everlasting life.

That which Christ rehearsed some time before, the same now does he repete
with plain, and open words. And this is the sum not only of this sermon,
which Christ has in this place, but also of the whole Gospel of Christ. Moses
called us to hear the Sermons of Christ, a thousand, and five hundred year
before Christ was borne, saying: hear him. And Christ was sent of God the
father for this office, to show his Gospel: and we men were called for this
point, and be here in this world to this use, to know Christ our savior
by the Gospel. Wherefore, seeing this saying of Christ that we have showed is
the sum of all his whole Gospel, it must be so much made of, that every
word owght to be considered. And first se with how great asseueracion
Christ affirms his word.

Uerelye verily (says he) I say unto you. This is the oath of Christ,
whereby he sygnifieth, that nothing is more fyrme, nothing more true, nor
nothing more suer. How much mischeife does he than which will not believe the
son of god no not when he swears? And secondlye he makes no dyfference of
persons, saying: he that believes in me, whether he be Jew or greek whyther
he be circumcised or uncircumcised, whither he be man or woman, rich or poor,
master or servant, honest or dishonest, I say if he believe in me, he has
life everlasting. I find it true in deed say eth Peter, that there is no
respect of persons with God. But in every nation he that fears GOD, and
worcketh justice (but that no man can do well, except he believe in Christ) the
same man is accepted of him. And Paul says: who soever of you is Baptized,
has put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
servant nor freman, there is neither man or woman. For all you are one in
Jesus Christ.

Moreover, when Christ teaches in this place how to get, and, have life
everlasting, he requires not circumcision, not the sabbath day, not
sacrifices, and such other leuiticall holy things, which were in deed in
their time, the worshypping and service of God, and had a good use, but they
were not the deservings of eternal life. Nor Christ says not, he that has
honored father, and mother, he that has not killed, he that has not
stolen, he that has had pitye of the poor has life everlasting.

For although these be good works commanded of GOD, to the which precepts
we must needs also obey, and these worckes should deserve life everlasting,
if a man were just, and spiritual in deed, and could do these worckes
perfectlye as the law of god does perfectlye require them: If thou will go
into life, keep my commandments, yet because man is carnal, sold under
sin, and does not these good worckes perfectlye, it cannot be, that they
should deserve eternal life. What says Jesus than? He that believes,
believes (says he) in me. He requires faith which we must show to him. And
what is that fayeth? What is to believe in Jesus? We will show you in very few
words, because in other places we have spoke of it at large: for to believe in
Jesus, is to believe yt the same Jesus the son of Marye is the true Messiah or
Christ, the Son of GOD, which was made an oblacion for our sins, and an
expiacion, and which was made for us as Paul says, the wisdom of God, the
justice, sanctificacion, and redemption. Therefore to believe in Jesus, is to put
al thy trust in Jesus: as true Christ, so also a true redemer, and savior.

Thou will say: this we will do easilye: for what is more easy, specially
among Christen men, than to believe this Jesus to be true Christ and redemer of
our sins. Happy are we therefore, that eternal life is so easily gotten.
Thus the flesh sometime either does swetely laugh at the doetryne of the
Gospel, touching the fayeth in Jesus Christ, or vng odlye abuses it to his
license, and lewd liberty. But the thing it self does teach, that fayeth
in Christ is a far other work, than the flesh imagines: and many thin ges
do testify how hard, yea how impossible it is to the flesh to believe in
Jesus christ. For consider me with how great authority Christ him self the
only son of God has taught his own Gospel, and with what miracles he
has confirmed the truth thereof, and how few were there that believed him.

In the people of the Jews, were so many wise men, so many witty me^, which
verelye, if fayeth in Christ might have been conceived by carnal reason, and
strength of man's wisdom, they would with great obedience have taken
Christ. For faith grows not in the f^eshe, but the holy ghost gives it by
the gospel from heaven. No man (says Christ) can come to me, except my
father that has sent me draw him. And it is said to Peter: Flesh and blood
has not showed unto the but my father which is in heaven. Hitherto comes,
that wise men in this world, not only not have bele ued in Christ, but also
have persecuted with all the crueltye they could, this fayeth, and profession,
as well among the Jews as among the gentiles. And if it were so easy a thing
to believe in Jesus Christ as the flesh makes it, who would sooner have
conceived fayeth than these wise me^? Set also before thine eyes, how great a
multitude of men is wont in persecucion to deny the faith in Christ. For as
sometime the Jews and Ethnikes, so now the Bishops, and Turks persecute y^
doctrine of Christ, and the faith in Christ. But as in time past ye greatest
multitude of people among the Jews and Ethnikes did in persecucion fall from
Christ, so also in these times under bishops, and Turks, sometime when no man
does vyolently compel them, they fall away, which certainly is a manifest proof
that says in Christ is not of all men as Paul says: also reken me ye
hypocrites among christen me^ that put their hope in the merits of their
worckes: number also wicked me^, and that do not repent, which hold on still
to lead a naughty, and sinful life. Think thou yt both they and these
would live so wickedly if true faith in Christ were as common, as y^ name of
faith is common among Christen men? What shall we do then? We must not
thyncke that faith in Christ is borne in man's flesh, and that it can be
conceived by man's strength, but to be geu^ by the gift of the holy ghost
from heaven through the Gospel.

Wherefore let our cares, and thoughts awake to this, that we may learn
the Gospel, and call upon the lord, yt the holy ghost may work in us, and not
only give us true fayeth in Christ, but also keep, and increase it, that we
may walk obediently in the callynges of god. But let us hear now what they
get, what they have, that believe in Jesus. What says he than? Says he they
shall get worldely Empire, riches of this world, Or other earthelye gooddes?
In deed these be the gifts of god, and serve for somewhat in the earth, but
they are not true felicitye. Neither did Christ come into this world to give
to them that believed in him yearthelye, and traunsitorye good things, but
rather heavenly, and everlasting, saying: he that believes in me has life.
What manner of life that fades away, or yt shortly shall perish? not so, but
everlasting. Also in y^ name of eternal life he understand and comprehended
althynges yt pertain to everlasting life: yt is, for giuenes, of sins,
chosyng into the sons and heirs of God, righteousness before God, the holy
ghost leadynge to obedience of Gods vocacion, deliverance, and preseruacion
in death, and finally heaven lie, and everlasting kyngedome.

Wherefore he that believes in Jesus Christ, has forgyuenes of sins, is
chosen unto the sen of God, is counted just before god, is endewed with the
holy ghost, that he may obey the calling of God, is saved in death, and
receives the inheritance of heavenly kingdom, the which he shall enjoy for
ever: Than the which good things, nothing can be spoken more greater nor more
excellent. But I pray the what thing is that, through whose merit he that
believes in Christ, gets life everlasting, and so great good things of
it? Is that through the merit, and dygnitye of fayeth, that is, of the woreke
that the man does? Nothing less verelye. He that believes in Jesus Christ,
obtayneth in deed everlasting life, and the profits of it through faith, but
not for the merit or dignity of fayeth, because that fayeth is always weak,
while we live in the flesh, nor never so great as the word of God requires.
But it gets those things for Jesus Christ's sake, which is received by
faith. For so it is added.

I am the bread of life.

That is: He yt believes in me therefore has everlasting life because that I,
whom he receives, and possesses by fayeth. am the bread that gives life. I
am life it self, and perpetual salvation. Wherefore he that has me through
faith, he also has life, and health everlasting. What lacks he than that
believes in Christ? He has not a rych house in this world, but he has
Christ, the Lord of heaven and earth, through whom he is made the heir of
all the heavenly good things. He is not garnished with some noble kind of
life, in this world, but he is garny^hed with Christ, and for through whom he
is noble not only before the angels, but also before the majesty of GOD in
heaven. He has not strong health of body, and long life in this world,
but he has Christ, which is perpetual life, and felicity. There is no true
goods than yt he wants, which believes in christ. And contrary, he yt
believes not in christ, has none of these good things. He has earthli riches,
but because he lacks christ, riches, are rather hurtful unto him, than
profit. He has in this world noble kynred, but because he lacks Christ, he
is not only obscure before GOD, but also shall be coueted with perpetual
darcknes. He has prosperous health, and leads a merye life in this world,
but because he laketh Christ, it shall at last be said unto him, that Abraham
said to rich gloton, saying: son remember that thou haste received thy
pleasures in thy life, therefore now art thou condemned.

Wherefore with all the thought of our mind we must bend our selves to
this study, to knowledge Christ through fayeth: and when we know him, keep
him. But after that Christ makes mention, again of bred, wha^ he says: I am
y^ bred of life, by and by y^ Jews thou ght upon Ma^na, as they did before, so
that they thought with them selves: What do thou boaste that thou art the
bread of life, which has come down from heaven? What shall we say than of
Manna, which our fathers did eat in wylder nes? Will thou give more
excellent bread than Moses ga^ (...) our^ fathers? Of this thing also
Christ preached before, and yet ^owe also he reherseth again the comparacion
of Manna with him self, that his majesty should be the more opened, saying.

Your fathers have eaten Manna in desert and are dead. This is the bread
descendyng down from heaven, that a man may eat of it, and dye not. I am the
living bread that am come down from heaven. If any man eat of this ^de, he
shall live for ever.

This is the meaning of that, that Christ says. There is great difference
betwixt Manna, and (...) bread, that is my self. For Ma^na has not
browghte life to them that did eat it: for they that did eat Manna, they are
all dead. But my bread, or I my self, bring life to them that eats me.
For they that eat my bread, that is my self, never dye, but live for ever.
And Christ in deed seems, when he says: This is the bread descendyng from
heaven, that a man should ^t of it, and not dye, and adds. I am the living
bread, which am come from heaven: If any eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever* to rehearse again playnelye all one thing, but this rehearsynge
again, neither is in vain, nor for naught, superfluous, but y^ one saying is
the interpretacion of y^ other.

For to eat Christ or the bread (...) Christ, in this place is to believe ^o
(...) Christ is to believe.
in Christ, as it follows afterward. Therefore when he says: This (...) the
bread descendynge from hea ^n, because that no man should ^rstande this
saying, neither of that bread, wherewyth Jesus a little before had fed five
thou^ ^en, or of any other earthely, and corporal bread, anon he says
further. I am the living bread, which am come down (...) heaven, that we may
plainly understand him, that he speaks of him self. And when he says
after wards y^ a man may eat of it, and dye not, straight ways he does
expound, what to dye means, and says: if any man eat of this bread he
shall live euerlastyngly. For not to dye, is to live euerlastigly. What shall
we say then to these things? If in this comparynge together of Manna with
Christ, the communicacio^ is of a spiritual, and heaven lie life, how shall
this that is said: your fathers have eaten Manna in deserte, and be dead, be
true of Mo ses, Aaron, Phinees, Iosue, Calib, and many other good Israelites,
which them selves also have eaten Ma^na with the rest, and yet be not dead
spiritually? but as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, live before god, so do those
live also. And if this speaking be of corporal and earthely death: How can
this saying, if a man eat of this bread he shall not dye, but live for ever,
be true of John Baptist, and afterward of Peter, and of the other Apostles,
and Dysciples of Christ? Did not all these eat* of Christ, that is believe in
Christ, and yet be dead: not only* corporallye but also were cruellye killed
of their adversaries? What ^eth it than that is said: the fathers that have
eaten Manna be dead, but he that eats this bread dies not, but shall live
for ever. First here in the beginning we will speak of Moses, and other
good men, that eat Manna in deserte. For these in deed were preserved in
death, and live before God, but they were not saved; nor live not for Manna,
which they eat, but for Jesus Christ in whom they did believe when they eat
Manna, by the promises that were spoken of Christ. For except they had eaten
him together with Manna, under Manna, truly they also them selves had died by
death even with the ungodly, of whom Paul spea keth. All did eat that
spiritual meat, and al did drink that spiritual drink: for they drank of
that spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ. But God did
not allow many of them: For they were overthrown in the wyldernes. And now
because Mo ses, and other good men, in eating of Manna believed also in Christ
that was promised, therefore through Christ they were saved in death, and got
everlasting life. That that we have spoken of Manna, the same must we thyncke
o^ the Supper of the Lord. For the bread and wine of the Lords supper, are
heavenly meat and drink because they be hallowed, and sanctified by the lords
institucion, the they may be his body, and blood. And although al eat of
the Supper of the Lord, yet are not al saved in death, nor have everlasting
joy. For some in deed eat the supper of the Lord, and yet believe not verelye
in Christ, they trust not in the body, and blood of Christ, which they
receive in the sacrament. Wherefore as to the wicked, the ea tynge of Manna
nothing profited, so to the unbelieving, and vn^epentaunt, the eating of y^
supper of the Lord nothing profits. Other, not only eat of the Lords
supper, but believe verily y^ Christ has given his body for their sins,
Christ only (...) our health
and has shed his blood, that they might be made clean from their sins
before god. These there fore be saved in the hour of death, and live for ever,
not in deed for y^ self eating of the supper, but through Christ in whom they
verily believe, and in whose ^ayeth, they be stre^g thened by y^ sacrament of
the supper. For Christ only by ^ayeth through the gospel, taken either with the
sacraments or without the sacraments is he, through whom, men get true and
everlasting health. The sacraments have in deed their use in confirmynge the
faieth of him y^ receives the^, and must diligently be taken and obediently,
but our health is not set in y^ self taking of the sacraments, but in Jesus
Christ only received through ^ayeth. For this is the living bred, coming
down from heaven, y^ who so ever shall eat of him, or believe in him, should
not dye, but live euerlastinglye. Furthermore, where it is said of the death of
John bap tist, and y^ Apostles and of other good m^ that believed in Christ, we
must think y^ although they be killed, and (...) to men to be dead yet are
they dead before god: for before him they live yet still. For their soul is
not lost because Christ Keapeth it, neither perishes their body. For
although it turn again to duste, yet shall it be raised again in the last
day into life everlasting. Therefore when Christ says, that the fathers be
dead, although they have eaten Manna, but those that believe in him, not to
dye: he sygnifieth, and teaches, that the carynge of Manna did not bring of it
self, life, and health, no not to Moses, and other good men (for if they had
eaten Manna only, they also them selves even with the other ungodly, should
have been dead for ever) but that only he him self that is true M^ssias
received in fayeth to be the author, and gyuer of life, and health. But because
Christ calls him self the bread of life, he shows the manoure also how
he is made bread, that is our life and health, and says.

The bread which I will give you is my flesh, which I will give for the life
of the world.

Hitherto I have made mention of my bread, and have promised life unto him,
that eats of this bread: Wherefore because you should not care and look for
of me, for such bread, as Moses has given unto you in deserte, or such as
you had a litell before, when with that and two fyshes, I fed more than
five thousand men: Go to, I will declare unto you playnelye, what I
understand by bread. For the bread which I speak of now, is my flesh,
which I will give to get life unto the world. I came in to this world, I took
man upon me, and I took also all the infyrmi ties of man, not to sin as manne
did, but y^ through my passion and death, I would put away the sins of men,
and reconcile men with God the father, that they might get not only pardon of
their sins, but also life everlasting. Therefore my passion which I shall
take in flesh, or after my humanitye, is the deliverance of the world: and
my death which I shall suffer is the life of the world, that as many as
believe in me may be saved, and live for ever. This verelye is that that Christ
says: The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for y^
life of the world. They be very few words in deed, but in them is
comprehended the su^me of all the gospel, and the greatest benefits of Christ
are set before our eyes. For first when he says, I will give my flesh for
life he signifies that his death shall be our life. And plainly, diuydeth his
The^ating of Christ's flesh^ is necessarys to salvation.
death, from the death of all other men, whither they were patriarckes or
Prophets, Apostles or Mar^rs. For although they were cruellye slain of the
wicked, and did not deserve before men, either for their naughtines or for
their myscheuous deeds, to be so cruelly kyl led, yet is not their death our
life. Just, and holy Abell was killed of his brother. Esaias is said to have
been cut in two pieces by king Manasses. Hieremye was stoned to death of his
people. These men's death was precious in deed in the syghte of God, and
brings much fruit to the church of GOD. What pro fit y^ death of sayncte^
has*
For it teaches that good men be sore troubled in this world, and it teaches
yt the kingdom of christ is not of this world: it teaches that there is
another life after this life, for else good men had been happy in this life, it
exhorts also by examples, that we take pacientelye the affliccyons of this
world, but it is not (...) putting away of our sins, it is not our life,
and redemcion, yea the death of saynctes has not put away, no not their own
sins, nor has not brought life unto them, so far forth in deed as
apertayneth to the nature of that death, but only the death of Christ puts
away the sins of men, and brings life unto the^. Wherefore, when we be cast
into peril of death, as we ought not to thyncke that we by our death should
satisfy for our sins, so that death must not be looked upon, and considered,
after his own nature, which he has by sin, but according to the death of
Christ, into the which we be Baptized, and buried. For so it shall* come to
pass that likewise as we be made and graffed into the death of Christ, so
also we be made pertakers of his resurreccion. Furthermore Christ says not
simplye: I will give my flesh for the life, but he says more, of the world.
By the which word he signifies, that he should suffer death, not only for
the Jews, but also for the Gen tils, and for all men in this world, what time
so ever, in what place so ever, and of what nations so ever in all the world
they have been. He says in an other place, yt he should die for the nation yt
is of the Jews and not only for that nation, but that the children of God
which were dispersed, should be gathered together in one. And again: He is
the propiciacion for our sins, and not only for ours, but of all the
world. What is the cause then that all the world is not saved, but a very
great forte of men, which are sygnified by the name of the world, is lost?
This death is not to be ascribed to the passion and death of Criste, but unto
the wyckednes of men. For as touching y^ death of Christ, it is a sufficient
expiacio^, for all y^ sins of al men, and set out by the gospel to be received
of al me^: but al ine^ will not acknowledge and receive it through faith, but had
rather dye in their wickedness, than be saved by y^ death of Christ. And what
is more folish, what is more mad, than wha^ you have health before you, to follow
distruccion, when life is offered, to chose death, and when heaven is opened,
to go into hell? What is more furious also, tha^ if thou through the doutynge or
unbelief, separate thy self from Christ, yt is thy hiest felicity seeing
that he does not seperat him self from the, nor cast the away? I will give
(says he) my flesh for the life of y^ world. Art not thou a part of the
world? Nay thou art y^ world it self. For the old men did very well cala man
a litel world. And if thou be part of the world or the world it self,
verily Christ gave his flesh also for the, and that thou should have life.
For not only Kings, not Princes, not wise men only be the world, but
the most abiectes of all, which in this world also are so much the more
seen of God, the hyar that he dwells. The Lord is hye (says the Psalm)
and looks upon low things. And he raises from the ground the nedie, and
lifts up the poor from low estate. Seeing therefore that Christ never
fayteth us with his benefits, we must not ^ure selves set naught by our health
but receive this present life obediently^ through fayeth in Jesus Christ our
saueou^e: whicht with the father* and the holy Ghost is blessed for ever*

Amen.
The nynthe Homilye.
MAny are the ears of men, many are their deeds, and occupacions, but there
are none more noble and more profitable, I say also more necessary, than
those that he taken to teach the word of God. Blessed is the manne, says
the Psalm, whose will is in the law of the Lord, and that does ^dye in his
law day, and night. Seeing therefore, we are now come together, to learn
those things which the holy g^st has taught us by John the Evangelist, goto
good fryndes, let us now hark those things which follow after the ser^o^* of
Christ, y^ we have here before declared as our little power serves. For
Christ said: The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the world. How did the Jews than take this saying?

The Jews (says he) strove among them selves, saying. How can this man
give us his flesh to eat?

Right will said Solomon: if thou beat a fool with a pestel, as weate in a
mortar, yet will not his folishnes depart from him. Jesus in this sermon which
he made in the city of Capernaum, so often warned the Jews of the faith in
him, and plainly declared unto them that under the name of eating of bread
he spoke of faith, which ought to be had in him as a true gyuer of life, yet
for all that be they never the wiser, but continue still, and hold on in their
folishnes, in the which they dream a carnal tearing of Christ's flesh. What
say they? Seeing we thought that this was Messiah, we promised our selves, that
we should get liberty by him, that we should have abundance of al things
in this world, worldly kingdoms, and all the pleasure of this world. Now in all
this gapynge for, he offers us his flesh to be eaten. What an absurditye is
this? If we should needs eat flesh, we had rather have calves flesh, than
man's flesh. I pray you what is ignorance, what is folyshenes if this be not
folyshnes? The Jews saw a miracle a little before, which Christ had showed in
the deserte of five loves, and two fyshes, and they confessed, that he was the
very prophet, which the stripture promised should come, but now for a word or
two, as they thought in deed not worthy to be heard, far out of tune they
judged him a very fool, and a mad man. What can be more folyshe, or more
impudente? Wherefore when Jesus saw their so great rudenes, he went not
straight way about this, to declare his words which seemed obscure unto
them and far out of the way, but he continued to speak still that seemed far
more out of tune, y^ their folishnes might iustlye be punyshed: and that after
the Prophet, the heart of the people should be made more blind, and their
ears more hard to heat, and their eyes stopped, because that those things,
which if they had take good head, they might playnelye have understand, they
had rather lewdely interpretate, and set naught by then to learn the^ well.
For when Jesus before had resoned of the eating of his flesh, as though it
had been a thing indifferent and at their liberty to eat his flesh or not
eat it, now he requires the eating as a thing necessary to get true life
and salvation. For Jesus said unto them: Verily ^erely I say unto you, except
you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have no
life in you. He that eats my flesh, and dryncketh my blood, has life
everlasting, and I will raise him up in the day.

You se with what asseueracion he does affirm the eating of his flesh to be
necessary, and the drinking of his blood. He says not simply, except you
eat, and drink, but he adds an oath, Uerelye verily I say unto you, y^ not
so much the truth of this saying may be confirmed, as the necessitye of
eating, and drinckyng signified. And because no man should dout of what life he
speaks, straightwaie he expounds it more plainly saying: he that eats my
flesh, and dryncketh my blood, has life everlasting. For he speaks of
true and eternal life, not of this transitorye and mortal life: where upon he
says more. And I will raise him in the last day: for although they that eat
Christ's flesh, and drink his blood seem in the eyes of men to die yet before
god they are kept in deed in this life which also shall be opened by
resurreccion. Your life says Paul, is hyd with Christ in god. Whansoeuer
Christ shall be made o pen, which is our life, than shall you also be showed
openly with him in glory. But there be some which have wrythe^ this saying of
Christ, of the eating of his eshe, and drynkyng of his blood to the taking
of the Lords Supper: and because they saw that by this saying of Christ that
the eating of his flesh, and drynckynge of his blood was necessary to have
life, therefore they decreed that the supper ought to be given unto infauntes
also. But Christ in this place speaks nothing at all of the eating of that
supper, which afterward he ordained for a remembrance of his death. For
this eating of Christ's The eating of Christ's flesh is nece ssary to salvation.
flesh, and drinking of his blood yt we speak of now is plainly necessary to
salvation. Uerely verily (says he unto you) except ye shall eat y^ flesh of
the son of man and drink his blud, ye have not life in you. What can be
spoken more plainly of the necessytye of this eating and drinckyng? But the
eating of the lords supper is not simplye necessary to salvation. In deed
great is the pro fit of that supper, and in deed when you may, must be taken,
and that after the institucion of Christ, and in very deed great thanks must
be given unto the Lord for this gift, but the use of it is not simply
necessary. For Christ says in Paul, do The use of the Lords Supper.
this as often as you shall drink in the remembrance of me: he says not,
except you shall eat this bread and drink this wine, you cannot have salvation,
but he says: as often as you shall do, in deed signifiyng yt the church ought
in deed to use this sa crame^t even until his last coming, but not y^ the use
of it is so great, y^ except a man take it he may not tho row faith in
Christ, get salvation. Infantes at this time use not this sacrament. Shall they
the^ if they die in their infa^cie, ^e al damned although they be graffed into
Christ through baptism? What can more unjustly or more cruelly be thought of
these infa^ts. And what if one of a good age Baptized into Christ should be led
of his enemies into Turkye, or ever he received the Supper of the Lord, and
being yet even in the mids of Turkye, kept still his fayeth toward
Christ, and yet could never use this sacrament, should we judge him to hell?

Certaynely if the use of this sacrament were necessary symply to saltion, it
could not be yt he that never used it, should have life. And true health is set
in Christ him self, and in fayeth that is had in him, not in the outward
receauyng of the lords supper. There is (says Peter) health in none other:
Neither is there any other name given under heaven among men, in the which we
must be saved. For although in the supper of the Lord, the body of Christ
and his blud is distributed, yet has not Christ so bound him self with his
body and blood to his supper, that he cannot be taken, but in supper: for he is
received also in the preaching of his Gospel, yea except the preaching of
the gospel be joined to the supper, there should be no distribucion of the
body, and blood of Christ. He is received also in ba^tisme. For who soever as
Paul says, be baptized in Christ, ye have put on Christ. These things be
spoken not for this intent that we should not often and obedientelye use the
supper of the Lord. For unto a good man and that is troubled with diverse
calamities, as it is much pleasant so is it also very profitable to comfort
and hold up his conscience by the use of this Supper: but therefore they be
rehearsed, that we may know the saying of Christ that he rehearses in the
sermon of this syxte Chapter of the eating of his flesh and drynckyng of his
blood, not to be understand of the taking of the Supper of the Lord, and that
we may know that there is a great dyfference, betwixt Christ him self,
which only i^ our health, and his Supper, which is in deed a profitable,
but not an only mean whereby we may receive Christ. And as touching
Infauntes although it be manifest, that in the time of Ciprian and Augustine
the supper of the Lord The Supper of the lord (...) ^o (...)
was given unto Infantes and that this deed of holy fathers ought not rashly to
be condemned, yet we ought not to think yt it is necessary that the supper
of the lord should be given to infantes. For it was chieflye instituted to
acknoweledge the love of Christ toward us and to strengthen our faith in
tentacions, But infantes which be graffed into Christ through Baptism,
although they have faith after their certain manner, and so also after their
fashion eat the flesh of Christ, and ^ryncke his blood, that is even after
that manner, which Christ requires in this sermon, yet neither do they
understand fayeth, nor the tentacions of fayeth. Wherefore the in^an* although
^ey have ^yeth, do
the use of the supper of the Lord is not necessary to them. But now to
return again to our purpose: the words of Christ which in this not yet
^derstande the fayeth
place be spoken of eating of his flesh and drinckynge of his blood, must not
be understand of any out ward eating, and drynckyng, but of the very fayeth
in Christ, which in this sermon Metaphorically, or by a translacion, is
called eating, and drynckynge. For when Christ had take in hand this sermon,
by occasion of that bread wherewyth he fed more then five thousand men in
deserte, and such as they sought for which came to him into Capernaum, he
uses also the name of bread for his flesh, and the name of drink for his
blood.

So by occasion of this Metaphore or translacion, he uses the word of
eating, and drynckynge for the word of beleuynge, as wh^ he says: except
ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blud, you have not
life in you. This is his true meaning: except you believe in me which will give
my Ceshe for the life of the world, and will shede my blood to put away the
sins thereof, you shall not get true health: and in very deed Christ by
this Metaphore, does understand playnelye the same thing, that before he
said simplye: All men that se the son, and believes in him, have life
everlasting. And after wards.

Uerylye verylye, I say unto you, he that trusts to me, has life
everlasting. For it is manyfeste that Christ thinks this eating and this
drinkinge, which he requires in this place, to be necessary to life and
salvation, saying: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have not life in you. But if we should say as truth is, none
other thing is symplye necessary to us for our health then fayeth in
Christ. Good worckes also after their manner be necessary. But we now speak
of that thing by the which we are justified, and be saved before God. But we
be justified by Christ only, and by faith only: by the which we receive
Christ, yea rather we be received of him, and as I might say be our selfs in
corporate unto him. The just man says the Prophet, lives by his faith. And
Paul says: we think that man is justified by faith without the worckes of
the law. And again. We know that man is not iustyfyed by the worckes of y^
law but by faith of Jesus christ. Wherefore it is also manifest that Christ by
the eating of his flesh and drynckynge of his blood, in this place
understands none other thing, than faith which is to be had of his flesh,
and his, blood, yt is, yt we believe his flesh to be given to death for us,
that we may have life, and his blood to be shed to y^ remission of our sins.
For so to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood, yt is to believe
in Christ, is plainly necessa ry to our health, and salvation. And there was
never man without this eatinge, and drinking which either has gotten before or
ever shall get salvation. Ada^ him self the first man although in y^ time of
his life christ was not yet come, yet eat he his flesh, and drank his
blood, because he believed that Christ should come, which by his flesh and
blood, yt is by his death put ged our sins. Noe, also Abraham and the other
patriarckes and prophets did eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood,
because they believed that the^ should get salvation by Christ which should
suffer in flesh for their sines and put away their iniquities by his blood. So
also al good me^ which after Christ's coming live here in this world,
although they do not always take ye supper of ye lord, yet always they eat
the flesh of christ and drink his blood, because they believe yt Christ has
put away their sins by his blood, and death. But let us here now for what
cause this eating, and drinckyng, which is faith in Christ does bring unto us,
or if you list so to say, receives life and salvation. It follows.

For my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. He that eats
my flesh and dryncketh my blood, he tarieth in me, and I in him.

This is the comparacion of meat, and drink with the flesh, and blood of
Christ. And the comparacion is made partelye by a dyssimilitude, and partly by
a lykelyhode. The dyssimilitude is, that although corporal meat, and drink
noryshe the man, and substayne his life, yet are they not the meat and drink
which keep man for ever, but for a while in this corporal, and fadyng life.
But the flesh and blood of Christ, if they be received in faith, that is, if
ye believe the flesh of Christ to have been given to death for our sins, and
his blood to have been shed for the remission of sins, are meat and drink
in deed: because they keep man in life perpetual. For he that believes in
Christ, he seems in deed to dye as other men, but his death is no death, but a
sleep, because that his life is hyd with Christ, and kept of Christ, until
he be raised again in the last day. And the similitude is, that as the juice
of corporal meat and drink is sent into all the parts of man, and turns
the hauioure of his body into his nature: as if a man use to moist mea^*
the body also is made moist, if he use could meat the body is also made
could, so also the flesh and blood of Christ turn him that takes them,
that is the beleuer, into their nature. He that eats (says he) my flesh,
and dryncketh my What manner of mea^ the flesh of Christ (...).
blood, abides in me, and I in him: that is, we be made one flesh one
blood. And the same nature that my flesh, and my blood has, the same also
gets he, that eats me. And the flesh of Christ is life. I will give my
flesh (says he) for the life of the world. The flesh also of Christ
could not peryshe in death, but rose again from death. And the blood of
Christ puts away sins, because it is just, and innocent blood. Wherefore
he that eats this meat, and drink, as he is counted just before God* so
al so is he made alive, that he dye not in death, but rise again, and have
life everlasting. And what can come to man, either more profitable or more
wholesome, tha^ this meat and drink, which is Christ him self received by
faith? But I pray the whence has the flesh and blood of Christ so much
strength that they make the eater alive, and keep him in perpetual life? Of
this thing christ himself preaches thus.

As the linynge father has sent me, and I five for my father: so he that shall
eat me, he also shall live through me.

A saying worthy to be marked, by the which Christ not only shows the
cause, for the which his flesh and blood does bring to him that does eat,
that is does believe in him, true life and salvation, but also does show, how
great the majesty is of them that believe in him. My father (says he) has
sent me into this world, and therefore am I made the son of man, and very
man, having flesh, and blood. And my father has not only sent me, but I live
also for my father, y^ is, not only am I the son of man and man, but I am
also the son of God, and very God, having the nature of the diuinitye. I am
^ome Christ is very man (...) ve^ God.
in deed into this world as man, as a servant, as a Messenger, yet
nevertheless I live for my father. I have God my father of whom I am begoten,
very GOD from everlasting. After the same manner he that eats me* or believes
in me, he also lives for me. For as I, because I am borne from everlasting of
GOD my father, live for my father, and am the very Son of GOD, and GOD him
self so: they* also that believe in me, because they be boorne again in me
through says, they ly^e also for me: and (...) not men (...), but they be made
also the sons of god and gods in deed them ^es. What shall we say then to
these Men be made gods
things. Does he that believes in Christ so live for Christ, that he him
self also through Christ is made a god? Than shall there be as many gods as
there be beleuers. We accuse the Ethnikes for y^ wyckednes because they have
feigned many gods, and now we make many more. But it is well: we follow not y^
wickedness of y^ heathen, but christian godliness. For they that believe in
Christ be made such gods, as is their state and condition. They are not
made natural gods, which have been from everlasting (for so there be three
persons and but one God) but they be gods by choice and adopcion. For as in
the order of princes, some be princes by natiuitye and birth, and some by
thosynge, which a man may call made gods, so among the sons of God there
is but one natural son of God from everlasting, and the other be made the
sons of God by ^synge, and by adopcion: whom also thou may call the made
sons of God. As many (says he) as Men b^ made gods by adopcio^
have received him, he has given unto them that they may be made the sons
of God, to them which had believed in his name. And he that is the son of
God certes is God. For as he that is the son of a man must needs be man, so
must he needs be God that is the son of God. That y^ is borne of the flesh is
flesh. The^ that y^ is borne of god is God. Was not man made-euen so from the
beginning, that he should be God, not in deed* uncreate, but ^reate. For God
said, let us make man to our image, and similitude. This verily is to
deliberate of making or creating of god. And if man Man is a God (...).
had continued in obedience still, and in goodness in the which he was made you
should have seen him gone in y^ earth as a god. But now this may stie is lost
through sin and disobedience: But it is recovered to me^ through Christ, y^ as
many as believe in him should receive a divine majesty, and be made the sons
of god, y^ is gods them selves. I said (says the Psalm), ye be gods and al y^
children of y^ hie one. What should we do the^. Are the beleuynge garnyshed with
so great majesty and nobilitye, that carnallye puffed with pride they should
dysdayne al other men despightfully in comparison of the^, selves* Uerelye
nothing less. But that they should learn to use that excellencye against
the dyuell, and sin, and keep the health that is given them in Christ. For
first we must use the consideracion of this majesty, to put away the
assautes of the dyuel in all our most grievous tentacions. For we acknoweledge in
our conscience that we have done many, and great sins, and we feel in
very deed that sin stycketh fast still to our flesh: and therefore the
judgment of GOD opened in us, we se our damnacion, we se the fire of hell
redye kyndelynge to devour us, and the dyuyl moves us to dyspaire of our
salvation.

Whyther shall we turn us then in such straightnes? Our may stye must be
considered through ^ayeth, that through Christ we be chosen in to Gods. And
gods have no sin: And the fire of hell has no power upon Gods.

The contrary in deed appears in* us. And therefore must we judge rather
after the truth of our adopcion, than after our outward and sensible syghte of
things. And the truth is, that the true and eternal God* knoweledgeth us for
his sons through Christ, that is gods our self. Wherefore although the
judgment of sins be grievous unto us* yet can it bring no hurt^ unto us,
because of Christ. There be some whom pouertye greueth or sycknes, or some
other calamitye in this world. They are wont to think that these calamities
shall be* ever hurteful unto them, and therefore are maruaylouslye troubled.

What should they do than? Let them consider their majesty, that they be
made gods through Christ: And gods cannot in any wise be hurt, by these
bodily calamities* Wherefore let them be of good chere whatsoever shall happen,
it shall rather b^ an help tha^ an hurt. Some so quake at death, that they
thynck^ hy death they should go into eternal darcknes and torments. When there
should they than run for succoure? The surest sa^ctuary is, if they run to
the consideracion of their own majesty. For through Christ they are chosen
into gods. And death has no power upon god ds. For they be immortal, and
lead a life that is blessed for ever. We must trust therefore, that death in
those men, which believe in Christ, is not the way to dystruccio^, but rather
the way to life, which with Christ we must lead blessedlye for ever.

And further we must use the consideracion of this majesty to stir up, and
keep in us, the obedience to ward God, and to lead an honest^ life. For if we
be made the sons of God through Christ, we ought not to lead our life as
the sons of Satan, or as Satan him self: but ^s it becomes the sons of
god, or gods. For as it is a shame, if the Prince do those things that be
unmeet for a Prince, so it is much more shame, if being the son of God he
do these things, that be unmeet for the son of god to do. But what need
many words? Se, what God has forbid by his word. To use dyspighte toward
God, to judge God a liar, to hate thy* neighbor, to envy thy neighbor, to
study to begyle, to be aglotten, and many other such things. Those things in
deed be unmeet for the Sons of god, and he that folowethe these things,
leads not his life as the Son of GOD, or GOD, but as the son of the
dyuyll, or the dyuyll him self.

For these be the works of the devil which he that does, he must needs ^e of
the dyuel his father. Wh^ ^ore the worckes of the dyuell must be eschewed, and
the works of god must be followed, that the majesty wyche we have gotten in
Christ through fayeth, the same also we may keep still, finallye yt Christ ad
death. (This is the bread which descended from heaven, not as pour fathers have
eaten Man na and be dead. He that shall eat this bread shall spue for ever).
is the conclusyon of this sermon. In the which conclusyon Christ repeteth the
principal state of his sermon almost eue^ with the same words, with, the
which he set it out before. For seeing Christ is the very meat and drink,
and is not only the son of man, but also of God, which lives for his
father, and is life it self, it is manifest that this bread is far more
excellent, then Manna in deserte, the which although the fathers did eat,
yet died they: but this Jesus Christ is such bread, that he that eats of
it, or in him believes, never should dye, but live for ever. These things,
seeing they be largelye enough declared before, it is but in vain to speak
longer of them: wherefore let us regard nothing more, then in this most
miserable honger of goodness of our life, we receive through faith this bread,
which is Jesus our life gyuer, GOD, even with the father, and the holy ghost
blessed for ever

Amen.
The tenthe Homilye.
THe Sermon that christ has made of the eating of his flesh, and drincking of
his blod, as much as per tayneth to our purpose, I thyncke we have made
plain by our interpretacion. For the principal state or point of this sermon
is, that not Moses, but Jesus Christ is our true savior, and that he that
believes in Jesus Christ (for that is to eat his flesh and drink his
blood) does get true and everlasting life. This is the sum of all Christ's
Gospel, which seeing it is often times, and vereli much repeted in other places
of this Evangelist, who^ we have taken upon us to expound, we will not tarry any
longer in this part, but we will run over those things, which John discribed
after the Sermon, saying.

These things Jesus s^yde in the (...)* teaching in ^apernaum.

The Evangelist not only described the sermon of Christ, but he adds also
the place in the which this sermon was made, that is in Capernaum, the
chiefeste city of Galilea, and in the sinagoge, that is in the most freque^ted
place, of the city. By which dyscripcion the Euangeliste not only signifies
this sermon to be spoken in deed, but sets forth al so the verity of
Christ's doctrine. For those things y^ Christ taught, he did not with a few
only in secret places, which heretics and sedicious persons are wont to
do, which when they perceive them selves that their teaching is false they hate
the light: but he taught those things openly in the schools, and in the
temple. Let us se then how the hearers of Christ took this sermon. And in
this place is set forth a great dyfference of hearers, and they are divided
into two parts: For some, and they very few, that is to ^ete, twelve only,
take the sermon with a contented mind, and tarry still in hearing his doctrine
as it follows a little after. But other, and those the greatest part of his
chief hearers, abhor his sermon, and fall from Christ.

Many (says the Evangelist) of his dysciples when they had heard these
things said: This is an hard saying, who is able to hear him?

The things that they were offended wythall that were rehearsed before by them
self, now are rehearsed together. For there be two things wherewyth the
hearers were offended in this sermon. The one is, that Jesus had said that he
was come down from heaven, whereby he sygnified, that he was the son of god
and very god him self. In other is, that he had said: his ^eshe should be
eaten, and his blood dronken. Those things there fore at which seuerallye the
hearers had murmured before with them selfs, now they repete together, and
say. These be hard words he bosteth him self to become down from heaven, that
is, that he is god but we se and know him to be a man of me^, what should then
become of us if we should follow him teaching so blasphemous things? Uerelye
we should bring our selves into parel and ieopardye not only of our corporal
life, but also of everlasting health. For there is a law: If there rise
among you a prophet, and do show before of a sign or wo^derous token, and it
come to pass that he has spoken: and he say unto the, let us go and follow
strange gods, which thou know not, and let us serve them, thou shall not
hear the words of that Prophet, but let the Prophet be killed. Seeing there
fore that this Jesus has showed in deed many, and great miracles, and
thrusts forth him self to us for a God, which knowledge not but one god the
maker of heaven and earth, go to now frindes, let us ^tie far from this
teacher, that not on lie we hear not so blasphemous things, but also that we
be not kill led of our nacio^ even together with him. This also is hard, that
he re quyreth of us the eating of his flesh, and drynckyng of his blood.
What? Goes he about, our laws being abrogated, to ordain the manners of the
Scithians or of the Indians in our common wealth? They say there be people not
far from Schithia, which of eating man's flesh, be called Anthropophagi,
that is deuourers of men. And in Inde they say there is a nation, in the which
it is a common used thing that the children should kill their The Indin^ eat
^eyr paren (...).
fathers, and sl^a them as it were for sacrifice, and after wards eat their
flesh, which is counted among the not crueltye, but godliness. Seeing therefore
that Jesus does bid us eat his flesh, will he make us of the Jews Indians,
and Scit^ia^s of the Israelites? And that he reher seth of the drynckyng of his
blood is nolesse to be abhorred, than very perilous. For say they as far as
we can judge he signifies by this drin king, y^ he requires of us a covenant
of co^iuracion: for in diverse na cions, there be diverse facions of making a
couenaunte. Among the Arabians one is set in the mids amongst them, that
will make the leage, which first does cut with a sharp stone the palm of the
hand that is next the thombe, than taking a shred of either of their
garments, he anoyntethe with the blood stones that be set in the mids
before them. By the which custom you may se that couenauntes, and bonds were
not made suar without the blood of those y^ were confederate or joined
together. In some other countries, it was a common manner in making
couenauntes, not only to shede blood, but also to drink it. For they that
came into yt fellowship together, be wont to bind their right hands and
their thombs together with a knot, and tha^ to let out with a little stroke and
to lick the blood, that was ga thered at the later end of the rybbes. That
bond was counted a secreate, and very sure bond, because it was consecrated,
and hallowed with each others blood. The Romayne hystorye does testifye in the
sedicion of Cateline, how yt it was used: that Cateline the begynner of the
sedicion, bare about in great boles the blood of ma^s body, ming led with
wine, and did to drink of it all that knew of y^ conspiracye: that by this
drink, the oath made amongeste them should be confyrmed, and to be more
fayethfull among them selves. You have now that the drynckynge of man's blood
was used in making bonds or couenauntes, and in doing treason. Wherefore when
the Capernaites heard Jesus preach of the drynckynge of his blood, I doubt
not but they thought upon such a custom, and thought that Jesus required of
them such a bond, whereby they should so bind them selves with him, that
only they should healpe him to get a worldely dominion through out all the
world, not only by venturyng all their goods but their lives also. And
although the Jews were very desirous, and sought principallye for this
thing in their Messiah, that they should bear rule in this world, yet
because they thought that Jesus did this thing, not that they living in rest
and without the arrowe shot, he would get worldly felicitye, they abhorred
his sermon, and took council to go away. What? Say they, we thought that
seeing he prophesied him self to be Messiah, he would have made us happy in
this world, with out all our loss or hurt. But now because we perceive
that he goes about a conspiracye, to make us sworn to him by drynckynge his
blood, and that he will cause unto us most extreme ieoperdi, who ca^ be his
scholar or follow him? For he says: He that eats my flesh and dryncketh my
blood, dwells in me and I in him. What other thing is this than if he said,
that we ought so to bind our self with him, that we should stick unto
him, and never go away but follow him, whyther soever be it through sword or
fyarre he shall lead us, whither it be to the besigeynge of the city of
Jerusalem, or the city of Rome. Let us fly therefore, and let us leave him
and his blood to, least even with him as it has chau^sed to other sedicious
persons, we lose also our own blood and our life. You se here a great
prudence in deed of the Capernaites but a naughty and carnal wit. For prudence
is not to be partaker of an other man's wyckednes, and not to make any bond
with sedicious persons, but it is wyckednes that whom they did know to have
the wytnes of John Baptiste, a very holy man, and whom they saw to have the
authority of his doctrine confyrmed with so many miracles, they did not give
so great credence unto him, to believe that his Sermon was true, although they
understood it not: and would not vouchesafe to give him so much honor to
axe reuerentelye of the meaning of this Sermon. Wherefore they are worthy not
only of a very great rebuke, but also of a sore punyshemente. And yet
Christ according to his Gentilnes, handles them Gentilye.

For Jesus knowing with him self that his Dysciples murmured for this thing:
^e said unto them. Does this offend you. If then you se the son of man
ascendyng up thither, where he was before, we must understand, you shall
perceive in deed y^ I have said truth. In this pla^e first is signified that
the secrets of men be known to Christ our Lord. For although his
hea^ers did not obiecte unto him manifestlye the absurditye of his sermon, but
priuilye murmured within them selves, yet he sees, and hereth their thoughts
and their murmurynges. We are warned therefore, that before the majesty of
Christ, wherewith now heaven and earth is filled not only we do nothing, but
not once thyncke any thing fylthilye and synfullye. Also Christ sygnifieth
that he will prove in deed his sermon to be true. He said, that he was come
down from heaven. Why (says he) does that offend you so greatelye that you
will fall from me? But be content: That that I have spoken in words I will
prove in deed For there is no man that ascends into heaven, but he that
dyscended from heaven, as it is said before: But I will ascend into heaven.

Wherefore if you shall se me ascendynge into heaven, than you shall prove in
deed that I dyscended from heaven. But that we may rightly understand that
that is said of coming down from heaven, and going up to heaven, we must
marcke, that in this sermon to come down from heaven, is t^ ^aue of his own
nature, an hea^enlye, and divine beginning, that is, to be very God. For
except this were the meaning of the com mynge down from heaven, how should
the Jews have been offended? They would not have been offended if they had
understand that Jesus had so come down from heaven, that he had an
heavenly vocacion as was the vocacion of Moses or Elias, or of the other
Prophets. And when by this speech they were so greatelye offended, yea they
fell away from Jesus, there is no doubt, but that they un derstode Jesus by
these words, to attribute unto him self a divinity, which thing when they
judged to be ungodly and blasphemous, they thought nothing to be more for
their saftye, than to forsake Christ even with his doctrine. And to ascend
into heaven in this place, is not to be understand of such a go To ascend
into heaven that it is.
yng up as Elias went into heaven, nor of that ascencion only of Christ which
was made in the mount O liuete the. xl. day after his resurreccion, but this
assencion of the which we speak now, comprehends al things, wherewyth
Christ did prove his diuynitye: that is, that he rose the third day from the
dead, that he ascended the xl. day after his resureccion into heaven, that he
sent the holy spirit, that he showed in his name many and great miracles
by his Apostles, y^ he has spread by the ministrye of his Apostles his Gospel
into the whole world, and has defended it in the mids of the pe^sequutors
as well Jews as gentiles, and in deed that he sytteth on the right hand of
GOD, and hears rul^ in the mids of his enemies, and justifies, and makes
alive all that believe in him.

For these be certain and suar arguments, by which the divine majesty of
Christ has been showed and proved. Therefore when he says: When you shall
se the son of man ascendynge thither, where he was before, this is the
meaning: I said unto you, that I was descended from heaven.

Be not therefore so offended with this word to fall away from me. For that that
I said in word, I will prove in deed. I will ascend again thither, where I
was before, and I will reuele mine heavenly, and dyuyne majesty, that you
may playnelye know, that my learning is true, and that I verelye am descended
from heaven, that is, have taken man upon me in deed, and to be God in deed. To
this also appertains, y^ Jesus in an other place when he was axed by Caiphas
before the Council whether he was Christ the son of GOD, he answered:
hereafter (says, he) you shall se the son of man sittyng on the right of
the mighty and coming in the clouds of heaven: y^ is, I seem in deed now
in your syghte to be an abiecte and captive, but after this time I will so
show my majesty, that I will plainly prove, that I am not only true
Messiah or Christ, but also very God, even of the same being, and power with
God. And of this in deed that Jesus said that he was come down from heaven,
thus much have we said. Let us hear now al so of y^ he said, his fl^she
should be eaten, and his blood should be droncken. This (says he) offends
you, because I have bydde you eat my flesh, and drink my blood. You
thyncke peradventure that I by this doctrine do ordain an eating of man, or a
tearing of man's flesh, or a mutual conspiracye to invade the empires of this
world. And therefore ye are afearde least by raysynge of sedicion, I cast you
by my doctrine into extreme ieoperdies of your life. But be of good chere. If
you se me ascending thither where I was before* you shall prove in deed that my
doctrine will do you no hu^te. For I will declare by my going up into heaven,
that my kingdom is not worldelye but an heavenly kingedome. Wherefore ye need
not to fear sedicion, whereby I will invade worldelye kingdoms. Nor it is not
to be feared, least my doctrine should bring any distruccion to you. Do no
more but stand and abide still, you shall feel in deed, that you by my
doctrine shall receive life, and salvation. Let us se than how Jesus proves
his doctrine to be more healthful than hu^tfull, and that he is rather the
author of life than of death.

It is the spirit (says he) that gives life: The flesh profits nothing.
The words that I speak, are spirit and life*

This place some understand one ways some an other, but we will follow the
very plain sentence, and that the thing it self declares. For if we will
consider in what estate this controversy does stand, which is risen bewixt
Christ and the Jews, it is manifest that this contencion is of the doctrine of
Christ, wherewyth the Jews in deed be of ^ended, and the which they reprove:
but Christ defended it. But Christ also him self when he says: The words
which I speak unto you are spirit, plainly sygnifieth, that here he
speaks of his doctryne^, and expounds what his doctrine is. For the Jews
did fear, least if they continued to be hearers, and folowers of Christ, they
should by his doctrine be cast into all kind of troubles, yea into death it
self. But this f^ar Christ refuteth, and he teaches his doctrine not to
bring death, but to bring life: not to bring destrucci on, but salvation.

For the spirit in this manner of speaking is taken for spiritual, heavenly
and divine doctrine.

Therefore the manner of reasonyng is short in deed, but worthy to be marked,
saying: the spirit, that is, the spiritual and heavenly doctrine, gives
life. But the flesh that is carnal and humayne doctrine, as is the doctrine
of the Phariseis, or of sedicious persons, profits no thing, because it
brings distruccion and death. But my words be spirit, that is, be spiritual
doctrine, and not carnal: wherefore they be life and bring not death or
destruction as you judge. You have the reasonynge of Christ. Let us now run
over his parts: spiritual and heavenly learning (says he) gives life, and
brings salvation. But carnal and humayne doctrine, brings dysstruccion, and
death. What shall we say than of the law of the Lord? which although it be
spiritual, and heavenly doctrine, yet brings it death, or, as Paul says,
kylleth. What shall we say also of doctrines of men, of conscience Ma
thematicall, of Physic, and other arts, which partelye be profitable for
man's life, yea and partly after their facion, necessary also.

Shall we say that they also profit nothing, but rather bring men to
destruction? Of the law of god therefore, thus must we think, that it
mortifieth in deed, and kylleth man, but that is not through the faut of the
law but of the man. For if we should speak of the self nature of gods
law, verelye because it is a spiritual, and heavenly doctrine, it has also
the nature of giving life, and bringing salvation. Keep (says he) my laws,
and judgments, which the man that does, shall live in them. They bring
therefore of their own nature, life. And when Moses had made an end of the
ministerye of making a law, he said: Consider that now I have set in thy
syghte, life, and good. Christ also says: If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments of God. And Paulle: the law is holy, and the
precepte is holy, just, and good. Stephen also says: Moses (says he)
took the lyuelye words, to give them to us. Wherefore as much as pertayneth
to his nature, as it is spiritual and heavenly doctrine, so it brings also
spiritual, and heavenly life. But because men be carnal, soulde under sin,
therefore it comes to pass that the doctrine of the law brings rather
death than life, and rather damnacyon, than salvation: which thing, since it
is not imputed to the law, but unto manne and unto his sin, it does yet
remain suer, and steadfast, that spiritual learning does give life.

And as touching man's sciences, which be profitable in this world to keep the
life of man, here we speak not. For this earthelye, and corporal health, is
one, and the spiritual, and heavenly health is an other. If we should
speak of this bodily, and worldelye health, there be many and diverse
doctrynes, which profit very much. Physic profitteth to conserve and
recover the good health of y^ body. Mathematical profits to know the
marvelous mocions of the bodies celestial, and to measure the yearthe.
Housbandrye profitteth to the tyllynge of the ground: and who can in few
words rehearse up the profit of all the sciences of men?

But if we should speak of true spiritual, heavenly, and everlasting health,
verelye none other doctrine does profit, save spiritual, and hea uenlye. Al
carnal doctrynes be they never so profitable, are pernicious and deadely, if
they be judged to be a perfect way, to get heavenly health. Among carnal
teachinge most of all be deadelye the* teachynges of y^ Pharasies, and of
sedicious men.

The Pharisees do teach that men may satisfye the law of God by outward
worckes, and that they do deserve by their obedience, justice and life
everlasting before God. This is in deed a carnal doctrine, which leads men
into perpetual distruccion. The sedicious men do teach that tributes must not
be given to the Emperor of Rome, and that we must make batell against the
Romans: that the Jews, the Romans being cast out of their country, may
bryuge them selves into liberty, and also subdue unto the^ other kingdoms of
the world. This is very carnal doctrine which leads men into the ieoperdye
of al their riches and goods. Since there is therefore two manner of teach ynges,
one spiritual, that gives life, and saves, an other carnal, that brings
death, and dystroyeth: I pray you, in what kind is the doctrine of Christ
comprehended? My words (says he) that I speak unto you are spirit. My
doctrine is not flesh, nor is not carnal, but it is spirit, it is spiritual. It
is manifest therefore y^ it is also life. I said s^ply he y^ believes in me,
has life euerla stinge. This is spiritual doctrine, heavenly, and divine.
Wherefore he that receives it, receives also life. I spoke Metaphorically but
in the same sense: I am the living bread which am come down from heaven. If
any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. And again: Except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in you.
This doctrine also is spiritual and divine. It remains therefore, that it is
life, and that it gives life, that it saves me^ that receive it, that they
may get everlasting salvation. But why do we not rehearse, though in few
words, the kinds of the doctrine of Christ, that we may know the true use
of it. For first Christ did sometimes expound the law of GOD as in Mathe,
the. v. and the. vi. and as it is written in other places of the Eua^gelists. To
this branch or kind do pertayne, the threteninges the re bukinges, and the
prophesies of the euyls that are to come. This doctrine is not in deed the
proper doctrine of Christ, but of Moses: yet is it said that it does give
life, be cause that showing the greatenes and greuousnes of sin, it styreth
men up, to seek for justice, and life in Christ, our only savior. Also it
has taught that salvation does not depend upon man's merits, but by
gods elec^ion. No man (says he) can come unto me except my father that has
sent me, shall draw him. And again: you have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you.

This learning also gives life if a man can understand it well: for it
does strengthen their fayeth which believe in Christ, that they may have
their salvation certain and thorowlye known. For if our salvation should
stand upon man's merits, we could never be in a suer mind: because that the
merits of man, as they are imperfect, so are they unsure.

And in the Psalm it is spoken playnelye. In thy syghte shall not be justified
all living creatures. But now because it depends of the only and free
mercy of God which in his lonne Christ not only is opened, but also confyrmed,
his salvation cannot be uncertain that believes in Christ. The mountains
says he, shall be moved, and the hills shall tremble, but my mercy shall not go
from you, and the covenant of my peace shall not be moved, said thy merciful
lord. Wherefore seeing this doctrine takes out y^ dou^yng of his salvation,
from the heart of the beleuer, it is manifest, that it quyke neth him with a
spiritual recreacio^, and saves him, that he despair not, and dye
euerlastyngly. Finally Christ taught his Gospel, that he was come into this
world to reconcile men with God the father, that all that believe in him
should not perish, but have life everlasting.

This is the doctrine that properly The gospel is properly y^ do^ triu^ of
Christ.
belongs unto Christ. And this is the doctrine that gives life in deed. There
be diverse kinds of affliccions and death among men. One is vexed, and almost
dies, for his great need, poverty, but if he have taken this doctrine of the
gospel, and know ledgeth that God is merciful unto him through Christ, it cannot
be but he must be so made alive, yt he may manifestlye perceive that he is in
y^ number of the^ that Paul speaks of: as pore men, yet enrichinge many: as
having nothing, and yet possessyng althing. An other is trobled with the
knoweledge of sin, and in manner dies for the greatness of the judgment of
it. But if he give credit to the gospel of Christ and knows his sin to be
forgyuen through Christ, he go^th so from death to life, yt he which before as
one yt was dead durst not because of his sin lift up his eyes to heaven, now
dare boldly, and cherefully come to the throne of gods majesty. An other is
stricken with the fear of death, and hell, and thinks he shall be damned for
ever. But if he will harcke to the Gospel of Christ, and believe in Christ,
that he is the victor of death, and hell, and the redemer of all that trust in
him, not only is he saved in death, but he shall be ^aysed in the last day,
that he may receive even with Christ the hereditaunce of alheauenly joy and
felicitye. Wherefore let us bestow all our cares, and thoughts upon this
thing, to receive with obediente fayeth the doctrine of the gospel of Christ*
Whereby in all kind of tribulacion and death, we may be made quick, and alive.
And although Christ do plainly show that his doctrine is not hurtefull ne
deadely, as they judged: but to be spiritual, and wholesome, yet sees he that
it takes no place among^ y^ greatest of his hear^ts, and therefore says
further. There be some of you that do not believe. For Jesus knew from yt
begynuing who were yt unbelievers, and who should betr^ye him. And said:
Therefore have I ^ould you that no man can come unto me, excerte it be given
him of my father.

Christ does prophecy of the falling away of his hearers, and of the treason
also of Judas Ischariot: Of y^ whi che thing because Jesus will warn his
dysciples again in the end of this Chap. we will let alone till that place,
what soever shall be thought mete to be spoken of this thing. And here he
repeteth again y^ cause of vnbelife, which he rrehersed before. No man (says
he) can come unto me yt is, believe in me, except it be given him of my father.
Thou will say then: If the matter be so, the faut of vnbelife in me^ is
rather of god yt fa there yt will not give it, nor yt will not draw unto Christ,
than of men.

God forbid. The father which will have all men, saved offreth fayeth unto all
men, and draws al men as touching him self to Christ, but all men
receive not fayeth, neither do they obaye unto the will and drawing of the
father. I know that no man can resist the omnipotent power of God, but the
most part of men wythstand the will of God which he him self opens by his
word. How often (says he) would I gather together thy children, and thou
would not? And a gain: you have always wythstand the holy ghost, as your
fathers have done so do you also. Were not in the parable of the king which
made a marriage for his son, and of y^ man that had prepared a great supper,
many bydden to come? And the rest that were not bydde^, yet are called, yea and
some of them were compelled. But behold the sluggyshnes, and leudnes of man.
Some despised, and go about their business, some did vilainie and killed his
servants, that bad the^ to the marriage. Other although they come, yet bring
they not with them their mariyng garmente. Wherefore the fault of unbelief
must not be ascribed to god, but to the wicked will of man: which furiously
rejects that good thing, that god mercifullye offers. For where Christ
says, no man can come unto me except it be given him of my father, he sig
nifieth not that god is the author of ungodliness in men, but he sygni fieth
that in deed he will obaye the will of his father, neither that he will take upon
him any outward regimente, whereby he may compel me^ violently to receive
him: and that god the father is no regarder of per sons, but that he brings
to his son, and gives unto his son those, which receive the gospel of
his son through fayeth, yea what so ever they ^eme to be in their per^o^s. For
God looks not upon the multitude, not the power, not the wisdom, not the
outward holiness and honestye of life, but he looks only upon his own mercy:
wherewyth he choseth them, which will receive their eleccion, and obey their
vocacion, whether they be few or abiectes, or dyspised of all other men. I
thank the father (says he) O lord of heaven, and earth, that thou have hyd
these things from wise men, and prudent men (for they will not receive these
things) and have showed them to little ones. Uerely fa there so has it pleased
the. No man therefore ought to be moved either with the multitude or with the
power, ei there with the wisdom or holiness, of unbelievers and naughtye men, to
cast away the gospel of Christ, and follow eue^ together with the unbelievers an
other doctrine: but must knowledge y^ gospel of Christ through faith, and
still continue in that with co^ stant faith. If he do this, there is no dout,
but god the father will so give him to his son Christ, yt he shall ne uer lose
his salvation for ever. But for as much as we have expounded this saying of
Christ before also, let us now go forth and run over the rest. From that time
forth many of his Disciples forsook him, and went away, nor walked any longer
with him.

That yt Christ saw should come, and did prophecy of, yt thing came now to
pass in deed. The greatest part of the hearers and Disciples fell from
Christ: The twelve only abode still. Here therefore consider me partly y^
wickedness of man, partly their ingratitude. It was wickedness, that they believed
him not, which had so many witnesses of his authority. But this was a common
fortune to Christ and his gospel, y^ men fell from him, when they saw y^ by
him there came no comfort of worldly felicity. And it is ingratitude that for
one word, a little as they judged to hard they did despise and forsake their
benefactor. For a little before they had received of Christ a great been fite in
the deserte. And I doubt not but there were many in this company which
obtained health by him. For or ever Christ showed the miracle of the five
loves, and two fyshes in deserte, and made this ser mon he had healed all those
that were sick, which were come unto him, and that were dyseased with diverse
syckenesses and ^ore pains and such as were possessed of dyuyls lunaticke,
and y^ had the paulsy. Yet lo all these were so unkind, and froward that they
could not bear in their benefactoure, not so much as one hard, and sharp
word. And put case (I say let us put case) for in deed no such thing can be
spoken, no nor thought nether of Christ, that Christ in his words had a
litel swarued from the truth, or that he had been somewhat to vehemente or
hard, other then i^ had been mete, ought they not to have pardoned so litel a
fault, for so great and so many benefits?

But the unkindness of man is very great. Except you always conti^ue to heap
benefits upon benefits, and still to increase them, they will not knoweledge
and confess the^, no, nor they will not knowledge the^ although you do so in
deed. And the proverb that is used in our co^trei is veritrue, yt the
ingratitude of men is so great, that if you would carry a man to Rome upon
your ^hulders, and lay him down sumwhat vngoodlye or hardelye, you should
lose al your benefit. W ha shu^d we do then? Should the ingra titude of man be
so much regarded of us, y^ we should therefore do good to no man? God forbid. Let
us do our duty, y^ God has commanded us. For although man be unkind yet God
is very kind with whom a great reward is laid up for all me^ that do good
deeds. And now let us se, what Christ takes upon him to do against these that
fall from him. Peradventure he will strike them with lightening, or will kill
them with his sword. Uerely nothing so. For where the Lord says in Moses: He
that will not hear y^ words which he shall speak in my name, I will be the
reu^nger, Christ gives the reuengement to his father. And tourneth him self
to his twelve Apostels, which only of all the number ber of his disciples ^aried
s^yll, and said unto them.

Will you also go yo^ way.

And he axed the^ not that he was ignoraunte of the purpose of their mind, but
that by this occasion they should show unto him their faith, and they should be
strengthened in it.

^imon Peter therefore answered him: Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou haste the
words of eternal* life. And we do believe, and have known, that tho^ art
Christ the son of the living God.

This is an excellent confession of Jesus Christ, of the which the like is in
Math. in the. xvi. Chapt. And first that Peter only answers unto Christ, he
signifies not that he should be a chief ruler in the church of Christ, but he
signifies that he shall be the mouth of his other fellows, and as they call it
the proctor. For that, that he speaks, he speaks not in his own name only,
but in the name of his felows. Also he commends, and sets for ward by his
confession, as well Christ's person as his doctrine.

Of his doctrine he says: Thou haste y^ words of eternal life. This is a
great commendacio^ of Christ's gospel, and worthy to be marked.

Whither shall we go says he? Unto the Phari^es? But they beat in to our
heads nothing else b^t trifles of garments s^irtes, of wash inge of hands,
of the tithing anise seed and cumyne, and such other things. And their
doctrine, although they take in hand any thing to be taught by the law,
does nether make us hot nor cold, yea they so teach the works of the law,
that if a man would follow their opinions, he should be destroyed for ever.
Shall we go to Moses, he in deed teaches godly and heavenly things, but we
are so weke, that we can not perfitlye obaye the doctrine of his law, and
therefore he appoynteth us to death and everlasting dampnacion.

Wherefore we will not seek any other teacher, but we will remain with the, for
thy doctrine brings true and everlasting life. For the doctrine of other men,
either is profitable only for this corporal life, or it leads the hearers to
death. But thy learning only leads to everlasting life. With this confession
of the gospel of Christ, agrees this also that Christ in an other place
says: Preach the gospel to all creatures. He y^ believes and shall be
baptized, shall be saved. And Paul. The gospel, says he, is the power of God
to health, unto al y^ believe. Let us therefore tarry in the doctrine of Christ,
that being delivered from death we may get life and health. Of the person of
Jesus Peter spea ^eth: Thou art Christ the son of the lyuinge God. In these
very few words, Peter gave unto the person of Jesus double maiesti: that is
to say, the hiest of all. The one that Jesus is the very Messiah or. Christ
of the which the prophets prophecy. This is a majesty which The majesty of
Mes sias.
passes the glory of all the Princes of this world. An other that Jesus is the
son of the living God: that is, that he is true and eternal God. For there
be two sons: One natural, an other by adoption or chosen. But Christ is not
the chosen son of God, but begotten of god. I have begotten the, says he,
this time. Wherefore he is the natural son of God. If he be the natural
Christ is the natural son of God.
son, it rests, that saying of God nothing is gotten but God, as of man
nothing is gotten but man, Christ is the true and eternal God. This is the
majesty which passes not only the glory of this worldly kingdom, but the
glory also of all creatures as well in heaven as in earth. What should we do
then? This is the confession, and the doc trine, upon the which the church of
Christ is founded, and the which properlye is called the Apostolic church.
Let us therefore hold this confession with such a su^etie, that we suffer it
not to be stricken out of our heart and belief, by no tirannie of persecutors,
by no deceites of heretics, by no vaniti^ of Jews, by no crudelitye of
Mahumete and Turks, nor finallly by no lies of the Devil.

But here mark we the maruey lous state of christianity. Among so many
thousand men, only twelve keep the true doctrine of Christ. And yet not
these twelve are all sincere and pure. But one of them as Christ him self
says, is a Devil, for so it follows.

Jesus answered them. ^aue I not chosen you twelve, and one of yo^ is a Deu^*
And he spoke of Judas Iscarioth, for the was about to betray him, being one of
yt. xii.

Christ before, monyshed his disci ples of y^ falling away of the multi tude,
now he warns them that amongst a few al would not be sincere, and he
prophecieth of the treason of Judas. And think not that Christ without great
aduisemente, both did speak of this before, and now speaks of it again.
For first. Christ preaches of these things, partlye to declare, that
things to come be known unto him, by the which miracle he would confirm al
so the authority of his doctrine, part ly, that when he prophecieth of Judas,
he would signify, that he was not compelled by man's treason, but that of his
own will, and godly purpose, he would take his passion and death.

Also he makes mention of his ^allinge away, that they also which believe,
should learn the fear of god, and beware that they sleep not care les, and be
prevented by the Devil: for not only amongst many, many do fall from their
salvation, but also among a few, yea and those also cho sen. They arewonte to
fall away, which keep not diligently the health they have received.

Wherefore good men with all di ligence ought to apply them selves to this
study, that they walk in the fea^e of the Lord, and sadly obey the vocacion
of God: lest if they lead a careless life, they lose through their sluggyshenes,
the health that they have received. Furthermore Christ monysheth good men that
whether many, among many, or the chief among few, do fall from the gospel,
they should not be offended: but co^inewe still, and stand in knowledging, and
confessing the truth of the gospel.

For although the greatest part of the disciples was gone away, yet for those
does he not reiecte the twelve which tarried still, but he loved them so much
the more, because many were gone away. And although among the twelve also,
one was a dyuell, not by nature in deed, but by wyckednes, whereby he should
become a traitor, yet the other eleven be so much the more loved of Christ,
how much the worsse the twelfth was. Let us not therefore be moved with the
multitude of evil men, but let us thyncke if we follow the gospel of Christ,
that we be very well taken and well-beloved of God, whyther they be many that
believe or few. Furthermore this example also does teach* a modestye. For it
is a solemyne thing among vnskylful men, that for one or two evil persons
they will condem^ne all men which be either of the same howsholde (...)
craft. As in example: if there were a merchaunt or two, a tailor, a baker, or
a Myller, that were a craftye deceiuer, they are wont to say that all other
of the same craft are deceyuers. But I say than, if we should judge generally
after this rule, I pray the who might be counted honest* Yea I must needs
count the also in the number of deceitful persons. For what kind of life is
there, or what order and state of men, in the which naughty men may not be
found? Finally Christ prophecieth of the falling away of the unbelievers, and of
the treason of Judas, to warn in time the unbelievers, and Judas him self his
Apostle to repent, and avoid the punish meant for his wickedness. For Christ made
this sermon, as I think almost two year before he was betrayed of Judas, and
crucified.

He signifies therefore in this communicacion that one of his twelve Apostles
should be a traytoure, that Judas which was noted by y^ name of the devil, should
have space of repentance, and beware that he did not fulfill by his myscheife
in deed, that which he was called by word. This example is very worthy to be
marked. For the scripture which is the reuelacio^ of the holy gooste, pro
phecieth of y^ last times, in y^ which we now live, that many shall fall from
Christ, and follow wickedness. The son of man says he, when he shall come,
shall he find faith in the world? And again. The gate is broad and very
wide, which leads into myscheife, and there be many that go in by that.

And again: Many false prophets shall rise, and deceive many. And in an other
place: Many which were first shall be last. These and like to these, were she^
before to our adm^nicion, that by all diligence, and obedience that we may,
we learn that we ^e not deceived with these many, and led into destruction:
but that we tarry in the true faith of the gospel, and with good men, whether
they be many or few, we may get the heavenly heredi^aunce, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, which together with the father, and the holy gooste, is
God blessed for ever.

Ame^.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, and Wylliam Seres
dwelling in Peter College.

The yer^ of our Lord God M. D. L. the ^th day of Apryll.

^um priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


