A TREATISE Of JUSTIFICATION.

Tending to prove that a Sinner is justified before God, only by CHRIST'S
Righteousness imputed.

By William Bradshaw.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed, for William Bladon, and are to be sold at
his shop, near the great North-dore of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the
Bible. 1615.

IMMANUEL

(...) Reverendiss (...) Patri^ Will. Sanc^ A.C.

Coll Emman. Cant^^

blazon or coat of arms

The Method.
Of Justification. In general: of the Word; signifying to make just: which is,
Either by Infusion, Or Plea.
Thing -- 1. What it is. 2. The Ground. The degrees, in respect Of matter 1
Complete. Incomplete.
2 Universal. Particular.

Of form. 1 By Assertion only. By demo^stration also.
2 In Color, In truth.


The kinds. Of persons inherently just. Otherwise. Means by satisfaction. by
Doing. suffering.
by A man's self. Another.

The Effect, pardon, which is 1 Plenary. In part.
2 Merely Merited.






More specially. Of Justification before GOD; That it is not By our own
righteousness. By Satisfaction made -- By our selves. By any other Creature.

That it is by Satisfaction made, By Christ his Fulfilling the Law. Suffering.
For the Faithful.

Man. By Man. By God; In this life. At the day of Doom.




To the Reader.
THou can not be ignorant (good Reader,) what special differences have been,
(and yet are) amongst our selves in some points, about the Justification of a
Sinner before GOD. Whence many weak minds have been somewhat perplexed, and
some strong ones (at least in their own conceits) exceedingly distempered; as
though there were amongst us which ouer-turned Foundations, teaching
blasphemous Heresies about this matter: whereas all of us with one mouth
profess this, That a Sinner is Justified, not by any Formal inherent
Righteousness in himself, but only by the free and mere grace and mercy of
GOD, through the meritorious Satisfaction of our SAVIOVR CHRIST, the only
Mediator between God and a Sinner. Wherein we all give all the glory of our
Justification and Salvation to God in Christ Jesus, and therein hold the maine
Foundation. We differ only in certain Circumstances, wherein nothing is
derogated, either from the mercy of God, or merits of Christ, or arrogated to
our own works.

Some of us hold, that a Sinner is justified by the virtue and merits both of
Christ's active and passive Obedience imputed. Othersome, by the merits of his
passive obedience imputed, but not of his Active. A third sort, by the merits
both of his active and passive, but not imputed.

The first, gives all to Christ, but equally diuides the virtue, between his
active and passive righteousness. The second gives no less to him: only that
which it takes from the active, it gives superabundantly to the passive.

The third, gives as much to Christ, as either of the other, derogating
nothing from the virtue, either of the active or passive, but denying only a
special manner of Application.

The first of these opinions has bin, and (for ought I know) is most generally
received, and is that which seems most Orthodoxall, and which in this Treatise
I desire to maintain. If in some few passages, I go out of that beaten
tracke, which they have kept, who before me have maintained this truth, it is
not from any affectation of singularity; For I never held it safe, nor any
credit to walk alone, in any matter of Religion, any further then mere
necessity, and just Apology requires: but because some parts of the way,
which they go, lies over such hills, as I am not able to climb, I therefore
have been forced sometimes to go somewhat aside, that I might the better come
again into the way, where it lies in the plain.

For the other two opinions, (with due reverence, reserved to the maintainers
of them; whom I acknowledge to be great learned and worthy Divines) I think
them somewhat erroneous; but withal, to have risen from two positions (to my
seeming) as erroneous, held or granted by some (if not all) who have maintained
the first.

1 That Christ by the merits of his Passive obedience only, has freed us
from the guilt of all sin, both actual and, original, of Omission and
Commission.

2 That in the imputation of Christ's Obedience both Active and Passive, God
does so behold and consider a Sinner in Christ, as if the Sinner himself had
done and suffered, those very Particulars which Christ did, and suffered for
him.

The first of these, is the very ground and Foundation of the second opinion:
which being granted, I cannot (as yet) s^e how it can be avoided, but that
we must hold the same. For what more can be required, to the Justification of
a sinner, the^ to be freed, and expiated of all sins whatsoever, not only of
Commission, but Omission?

Can a man possibly be more justified, then so to be freed from all sin and
fault, as to be esteemed and judged as one that never committed any evil
forbidden, and never omitted any good required? Does Christ's active
Righteousness according to the Law consist in any thing else, but in the
leaving undone of whatsoever evil forbidden, and in the doing of all good
things commanded? What then avails the imputation of this, when so much is
granted to be obtained by the other? If therefore we will firmly maintain the
first Opinion, I cannot see, but we must needs forgo this first Position, and
hold

That to the very Expiation of sin, and the Freeing from the guilte hereof,
the imputattion both of the Active and Passive righteousness of Christ are
necessary, and that the ^ne is not to be separated from the ^her.

The second Position takes ^mputation in such a strict sense ^s seems not
necessary; For both the Active and Passive righteousness of Christ, may be said
^o be imputed to a sinner, if God (without any further consideration) but
accept that which Christ has done and suffered, as ^ full satisfaction, for that
which a sinner should have done, or suffted in his own person: besides that it
seems to take away all necessity of the imputation of Christ's Sufferings. For if
God repute Christ's fulfilling of the Law, to be every sinners fulfilling of
the Law, then in his fulfilling thereof, is every such sinner (to whom it is in
such a manner imputed) perfectly righteous. If perfectly righteous, perfectly
Justifiable, what needs then Christ moreover, either to Suffer for the
Justification of a sinner, or a sinner to be reputed to Suffer in Christ, to
any such end?

This other position, (as I conceive) has given occasion of the third Opinion.
The Author thereof, (a very Learned, Reverend, and Judicious Divine) denying
all Imputation, both of the Active and Passive righteousness of Christ (as
far as I can learn,) only in the strict sense aforesaid, and that (as it
seems to me,) upon good ground, as may appear further somewhat in this
Treatise.

Our differences then (blessed be God,) are not so great, but there is both
possibility, and hope of Reconciliation, and no such cause of any fiery
Opposisitions one against an other; especially, seeing that they who herein
are out of the way, may seem to have been put out thereof, only by the
blocks, that our selves have laid therein. I take not upon me to be a
Moderator between so many Learned men of all sides, or to see further then
they, into so great a Mystery.

If in some pety Circumstances I have discovered that which they have
ouerseene, it is not so much for want of any sharpnes of sight in them, as for
that they have not stouped so low as I have done: It being not strange for
them that look high est, and see furthest, to ouer-see much; and not unusual
for those who are standers by, (though simple in comparison) to see some
things, which the cunningest Gamesters sometimes ouersee.

I first penned this Treatise to teach my self, and have herein opposed my
self as much as any man else, as may well be known to some, who know what I
have formerly held.

After, for my further Satisfaction and information, I caused diverse Copies
thereof to be written forth, and communicated them to sundry Reverend and
learned Divines, submitting the same to their censures; from whom I received
(out of their love) diverse material Animaduersions, and doubts: which though
they have not bin of force to move me to change my mind in any material point,
yet have made me explane mat^^rs more fully, then otherwise should have thought
had bin ^^edfull. Yet if herein I have ^ot satisfied them, or any else, ^hey
shall bind me unto them, (...) they will be pleased further ^o animaduert,
and object against such Particulars, where ^hey shall rest unsatisfied.

That it dares thus boldly ^ome forth in public, it is ^ot so much from any
hearte^ing it has had from me, as through some private encou^agements from
others, far more Learned and Judicious then my self; whom thou must blame,
if it prove of no use to the Church of God.

The world I know has long ^roaned under the multitude of Books, and yet still
it desires and calls for for more; The best is, this Book is of so little
b^den, that it can have no m^ sense of it, then an Elepha^ though never so
loaded, (...) have of a Fly, that sits up it.

I have said no more of Fai^ then was needful for the v^derstanding of the
nature of Justification, and of that force a^ use that it has therein; and
(...) rather, for that it deserue^ Treatise of it self, which (b^ for some
distractions) I had a^tempted before now: yet I ^ther desire that some other
more sufficient, would take out of my hand, and take the also from my hand, and
poli^ it, as the excellency of the A^gument requires, then whi^^ certainly
there is not (among all the heads of Divinity) a^^ one more necessary,
profitabl^ or comfortable, especially, to afflicted and humbled Sinners.

Thus praying thee to pardon my great boldness, and to take in good part this
poor Essay, and where I may seem to err, to help me by thy prayers, and
other means into the way; I bid thee Farewell in Christ. New-hall, April. 8.
1615.

Thine, W. B.

THE ARGVMENTS of the several Chapters.
1. Of the Signification of the Word. 2. What Justification is. 3. Of the
degrees of Justification. 4. Of Justification, by inherent Righteousness. 5. Of
the Justification of those, who are not inherently Righteous. 6. Of
Satisfaction in General. 7. Of Satisfaction in special. 8. Of Pardon. 9. Of
Justification before God. 10. That no man is Righteous or justifiable in Gods
sight, by the righteousness of the Law, or by his own inherent righteousness.
11. That no man can make satisfaction for his own, or an other man's sin. 12.
That no other mere Creature, can make satisfaction for the sin of Man. 13.
That the Son of God has made Satisfaction for the sins of all them that
shall be justified. 14. Of the pardon of sin, and our Adoption. 15. Of
Justifying Faith. 16. Of Justification before men.
OF JUSTIFICATION.
THE I. CHAPTER. Of the signification of the Word.
1 THE Latin Iustifice (of which our English word To justify is derived) is
not to be found in Tully, Caesar, Terence, or any other the ancient and
purest Authors of the Latin tongue* but was made since by Latin Divines, to
express that which ^s universally meant by the Hebrew (...), and the Greek
(...). All which, especially the Hebrew and Latin (according to the Notation
of the words) do sign^fie to make just: As, to purify, signifies to make
pure: to sanctify, to make holy, etc.

2 One may be said in ordinary form of speech To be made just, two manner of
ways: by Infusion or Plea.

3 By infusion, when the quality, habit, or virtue of Justice is by any kind
of means, really put into, procured or effected in any person, whether by his
own act, or by another, whether in whole, or in any part or degree, whether
immediately ingenerated, or created in that subject, in which it subsisteth, or
powered into it, as wine into an empty vessel; or whether mediatly gotten, as
learning by the precept of the Master, or health by the potion of the
Physician; strength, actiuitie, or any other habit of body or mind by
exercise, etc.

4 After this manner was Adam made just in the first Creation. In the same
manner are they in some degree made just, who are regenerated and sanctified,
and who by the Word and Sacraments, and other means and exercises of Religion,
do grow and increase in holiness and righteousness. And in this sense the
Wiseman speaks, Eccle. 7.29. Lo, this only have I found, that God made man
just; but they have sought many inventions.

5 They who are in any such manner made just, are (as the Schools use to
speak) formally just, or just by righteousness inherent.

6 Though to make just, in the sense aforesaid be most properly to make just:
yet to Justify, either in our English, or the Latin tongue, (either in common
use, or any approved Author) does not signify, to make just in any such
sense: no more (for ought yet has been showed to the contrary) does the
Hebrew or the Greek word aforesaid.

7 To be made just by Plea, is, when the Justice of any person, any ways
questioned, is manifested and discovered, by words or other means equivalent
thereunto. Hence, as we say of those, who charge and accuse a man of any act of
villainy, he makes him a knave or a villain: So contrarily we say of him,
who has pleaded a persons innocence, that is accused or charged, he has
made him an honest man. Hence in like manner, as they are said, To take away
the righteousness of the righteous, which accuse or condemn the innocent, Esa.
5.23: So may they by the same form of speech be said I^ 9.2^
to give righteousness, which plead for, and excuse those which are any ways
charged or accused, whether justly or unjustly.

8 Though to be made just in this sense, be not so properly to be made just,
as in the former; yet in this sense usually and properly, is the I^stifica^
Latin, and our English word to Justify used, so also are the Greek and
Hebrew words aforesaid. Therefore Grammarians interpret (...), by (...). i.
To esteem and judge one to be righteous. See Hesychius and Suidas on this
word.

9 Though therefore the Notation aforesaid, do indifferently favor either, and
more the former; yet for the true meaning and signification of words, the
common use is more to be regarded then that which sounds from the Notation.

10 The Hebrew (...) (which properly signifies Laws or statutes) the old
Interpreter usually translates (though barbarously) Iustificationes, ^on^r.
ell. de ^ustif. ^. 1. ^p. 1. ^ct. 2.
Iustifications, Psalm. 119.4.8. etc. But it cannot be proved, that therefore
they are so called, in respect that they make the obseruers of the^ just in the
first sense; but rather because, after that a man is made just by them in the
first sense, they are means to defend, and maintain and warrant that Justice,
and so are a means to make them just in this latter sense; It being a good
Plea, that a man is just, when it may be avouched against any that takes
exception, that that which he has done is according to Gods Statutes.

11 Hence also the Law in general is said to justify those who are or shall
be righteous, according thereunto: not in this respect, that in and through
the observance thereof, a man is formally, or inherently righteous; but when
being formally just and righteous thereby, he is by the same acquitted and
freede from injustice: As when a Judge shall execute a Malefactor according to
the Laws of the State, the said Laws make him not just, in the first sense;
but they only justify the Judge, and so make him just in the second sense,
when they shall warrant and discharge him against the charge and imputation of
injustice in that action.

12 Though by teaching and instructing, Contr. Bell. de Just. li. 2. cap. 3.
Sect. 9.
Ministers may be said, to be instruments and means of making men formally
and inherently just in some degree: yet it follows not, that in that respect
they are said to Justify, Dan. 12.3. But they may be said rather to justify,
as they are means and instruments to bring men to believe in Christ, whereby
they are justified, and so made righteous in the other sense. In the same
respect Ministers are said to save, and to bind and loose: 1. Tim. 4.16. Mat.
18.18. Ioh. 20.23.

Contr. Bell. ibid. Sect. 16.
13 Where it is said, Reu. 22. Let him that is just, be justified still; We are
not necessarily to understand thereby, Let him still be made just, or still
proceed to be made just by inherent righteousness. But let him still, more and
more continue, to declare and show himself just, which is to make just in this
latter sense.

14 That may be granted therefore which Augustine says; Contr. Bell. ibid.
S^ct. 19.
That he that iustifies a wicked man, makes him of a wicked man, a just man. In
Psalm. 3O. That by the grace of GOD we are justified. i. Made just: Lib. 2. de
peccatorum meritis and remiss. cap. 33. That to be justified, is nothing else
but to be made just: Lib. de spirit. and lit. cap. 26. etc. And yet it will not
follow thence, that he held, that to justify signifies to make just, by
formal and inherent righteousness.

THE II. CHAP. Of Justification in general what it is.
1 Justification therefore (according to the universal use of the word) is the
declaring of a person that is accused or suspected of a fault, and in that
regard obnoxious to blame or punishment, to be righteous and just: and
consequently unworthy either the one or the other; Deuteronomy. 25.1. Esa. 43.9. Mat.
11.19. 2 Samuel 15.4. Pro. 17.15. Esa. 5.23. and 50.8 Romans 8.3.

2 Where one is not questioned for, nor so much as suspected of any fault,
there Justification has no place: yea, in such a case to justify a person, is
commonly reputed, a secret accusation and condemnation of him. And if the party
charged or suspected, be no way liable to blame or punishment in that respect,
the justification of such a one seems needless and endless.

3 Though therefore out of these cases, there may be a declaration of Justice:
yet we never use to call any such declaration by the name of Justification, but
by the general name of praise or commendation.

4 Hence, if Adam had not sinned, and if there had been no Devils to have
charged him with sin, nor any ground or color to suspect him of sin,
th^ugh he might in this case, to his praise and commendation, have been
declared and pronounced to be just and innocent: yet he could not therein
properly be said to be justified. When a father declares the virtue and goodness
of his child to a stranger, who neither knows good, nor suspects evil by
him, we use to say, he praises and commends his child: but we never say,
he iustifies him, but in case of accusation and charge. Though therefore there
can be no Justification without a declaration of righteousness: yet that may be,
where there neither is, nor needs to be any Justification.

5 Hence also God and Wisdom are said to be justified, not as often as they
are praised and extolled, or their righteousness merely declared; but so far
forth only as their ways and works are declared to be just and free from
blame, against the conceits and charges of wicked men, who use by some means
or other, to make them unjust, and when by means of such a declaration, they
are vindicated from dishonor. Rom: 3.3.4. Matthew: 11.19. Luk: 7.35.

6 Justification therefore, in substance, is the same with Apology or defense.

7 So to declare ones Justice, as to declare not only that he is free from
blame, but also worthy of a reward, is more then to justify.

8 It is not of the essence of Justification, that it be done in public
judgment, but it may be indifferently, either in private or public, and may
be performed, either by the party himself, that is questioned or suspected,
or by another, whether Friend, Witness, Advocate, or Judge.

9 The immediate end of justification, is so far forth to remove the blot and
aspersion of Injustice from a person, that he may be freed (as much as in the
power of the Iustifier lies) from blame, punishment, or reproach.

10 The proper matter of Justification, is Justice or Innocence, not caused or
produced by the act of Justification, but existing some way or other before.
For a person is not therefore just, because he is justified; but he is
therefore justified, because he is just: the justice of the party justified,
being the cause of his just fication, and not his justification the cause of
his Iust^ce.

11 The Form is the pleading of the said righteousness or innocence in the
cases aforespoken.

12 One usual and special effect thereof, is Reconciliation; which is a
pacification of that party, who is, or may be (upon conceit of fault done)
provoked to dislike, blame, or punish. And in this respect (according to the
judgment of reverend and learned Divines) may Justification be said to be a
part of Reconciliation, though not so properly; onsidering that there may be
Justification, where there is no Reconciliation, and Reconciliation, where
there is no Justification. And therefore Justification cannot be any such
member or part thereof, as does constitute the same, except it be taken in a
larger sense, then the common use of the word extends unto.

13 Contrary to Justification, is Pro: 17.5. Esa: 5.23. and 50.8. Rom: 8.33.
Condemnation, Accusation, Slander, Calumniation, Crimination, and such like;
against one or other of which, Justification always fights; and in the
remoueall of which, the special use thereof consists,

CHAP. III. Of the Degrees of Justification in general.
1 IN Justification we are to consider, First, the Degrees, then the kinds.

2 The Degrees be diverse. Some, in regard of the matter of Justification;
Other some in regard of the Form.

3 In regard of the Matter, First, Justification is either complete, or
incomplete.

4 Complete, when thereby a party is declared to be thoroughly and fully
freed, from the fault that is charged upon him, and all the degrees thereof.

5 Incomplete, when the party is not fully cleared, but when by Circumstances
the fault is only in some degree, lessened, mitigated, and excused.

6 Hereunto may be reduced Justification, by comparison; which is, when a
person is not simply declared, to be righteour, but only in comparison of
others, who have had more means, to make them righteous. Thus is Samaria said
to be justified by Jerusalem, Ezekiel: 16.51.

7 Such a comparatiue Justification, is after a sort, Metaphorical only. For
as in perfect and true Justification, a man that before might seem faulty,
appears then free from fault: So those who are in truth guilty, when they are
compared with those, who are worse, by means thereof, their faults either
appear the less, or not at all; As great lights so darken and obscure the
lesser, that they seem to extinguish them; and are commonly said to
extinguish them. But yet tropically; because during that time, they are as
lights extinguished.

8 Secondly, Justification in respect of the matter may be universal or
particular.

9 Universal, when a party is declared, to be free from all sorts, and
degrees of faults whatsoever. Rom: 8.33.

10 Particular, when one is declared to be free, from such ^^rticular faults
only, as he is ^^arged with, or suspected for, now guilty soever he may both
be, and be known to be, of other faults not questioned. Psalm. 7.3.4.5. Luke
20.14.15.

11 The first of these is called by our Divines, the Justification of the
person; the other the Justification of the cause, though in truth the person is
justified in both; in the one absolutely, in the other respectively. And to
speak properly, that only is the Justification of the cause, whereby a
Particular cause, that is accused, or thought to be naught, is pleaded to be
good and just. And the maine end of such a justification also, does not so
much respect the cause it self, as the person whose it is; The cause being
justified, that thereby the pa^ especially, whose cause it may be justified,
who is iud^^ faulty, till the particular ca^ be freed from fault.

12 Justification in respec^ the Form, may be either Assertion only, or by
Dem^^stration also.

13 By Assertion only, w^^ a party is only nakedly p^^nounced, or with
Asseuerat^^^ or oath also, affirmed to be f^^ from fault.

14 Either of these is suffi^^ent, where the credit of h^^ that justifies is
without i^^ exception. Otherwise, thog^ have the name, yet is it as go^ as no
justification.

15 Justification by Demo^stration also, is, when by suffi^^ent proofs and
other argume^^^ the innocence of any person eui^^nced, and thereby the accu^^
or surmisers convicted of ^or or malice.

16 This degree of Iustifica^^on is sufficient, be the party ^t justifies
never so subject exception, or (as we say) racked in credit.

17 Furthermore, Iustifica^^on also in respect of Form, ^ay be either in
color only, in truth.

18. In color only, when by ^ophistication, collusion, aequi^^cation, etc.
faults are excu^^, lessened, or made no faults. ^o: 17.15. and 24.24. Esa.
23.20.

^9 This manner or degree of ^^stification, (unworthily so cal^^d) is of no
force, but with such ^^nde of persons, as may be de^^ded. And therefore it is
called ^^stification, because with such ^^nde of persons, it usually produces
the same effects the Justification does, at least t^^ the fraud and error be
discou^^red.

20 Justification in truth, when that which is done, a^^ said herein, is in
truth and sy^ceritie.

CHAP. IIII. Of Justification by inherent righteousness.
1 HItherto of the degree of Justification; the kin^^ follow. And it is either
of persons inherently just, or o^therwise.

2 The Justification of a person inherently just, is when the Non-commission of
a fault that (...) charged, is directly pleaded.

3 This is done by showing either that he did not that fault which he is
charged with, or that that which he is charged with as a fault, is no fault; 1 Samuel 24.10.12. Ier. 26.15.16.

4 They who are justified after this manner, are justified by their own works
and merits. For they who are found innocent, and free from commission of
fault, according to the degree thereof, have a righteousness of their own: and
righteousness meriteth justification.

5 This kind of Justification is not a making just by inherent righteousness,
but a declaring just, for inherent righteousness.

CHAP. V. Of the Justification of those who are not inherently righteous.
1 THe Justification of such as are not inherently righteous, is when the fault
that is charged, is acknowledged, and satisfaction pleaded.

2 No mortal man can devise any other means by which such a person should be
justified.

3 Where a fault committed is not acknowledged, but concealed or denied, there
the party cannot be said to be justified whatsoever else may be pleaded for
him.

4 Though the fault be acknowledged, and confessed: yet it is not sufficient
to Justification, except satisfaction also can be pleaded.

CHAP. VI. Of Satisfaction in general.
1 SAtisfaction is, when sufficient amends is made to the party offended for
the fault done, by means whereof, freedom from punishment is merited, and the
fault thereby after a sort extinguished.

2 Sufficient amends is then made, when the offended party, or his Substitute,
reapeath as much benefit, at least, as he should have done if the fault had
not been committed.

3 This Satisfaction, being of the same merit with righteousness, must needs
be esteemed for righteousness. Hence he that can plead such an amends, is to
be reputed as if he had not committed the fault, and by consequent, after a
sort just or righteous.

4 Sometimes the party offended may accept for satisfaction that which does
not make either full amends, or any amends for the fault done: yea, he may
sometimes accept of a bare acknowledgement of a fault, or of promise of
amendment for the time present or to come, as satisfaction: but the pleading of
such a reputed satisfaction is not to justify.

5 Hence, where a fault is of that nature, and has done a hurt of that kind,
that no sufficient amends can be made, there the party guilty has no means
to be justified.

6 Such a satisfaction once made, the party is to be esteemed as blameless,
as if he had not trespassed at all: for, having made full amends, he is free
in that regard from desert of evil. And he that is free from desert of evil,
is in the same regard (and that deservedly) to be reputed blameless.

CHAP. VII. Of Satisfaction in special.
1 SAtisfaction may be made either by doing or suffering; or by both.

2 That doing or suffering is of no force to satisfy which is due by bond,
though the party offending had committed no fault at all; it being ridiculous
to account the payment of one debt for the discharge of another.

3 Satisfaction also may be made either by the party himself, or by another;
or partly by himself, and partly by another.

4 So far forth as any are justified by satisfaction made by themselves,
they are no less justified by their own merits and works, then they who never
offended: those satisfactory acts of theirs being aequiualent in merit to that
Justice which by the fault committed they were deprived of.

5 He may be said after a sort to satisfy in his own person by suffering, who
can plead that the party offended has committed the same, or an equal, or
greater fault against him.

6 Satisfaction made by another is, when that which is done, or suffered by
another, is accepted for that which ought to have been done or suffered by the
offender himself.

7 This may be either by doing or suffering the same kind of things that the
offender ought to have done; or such things as are of another kind, if of the
same worth and value.

8 Some things done by another may satisfy for the offender, which if they
were done by the offender himself, would add offense to offense: for some
things done by some may be satisfactorie and meritorious, which done by
othersome are unlawful and impious.

9 Some things done by the offender himself may be vnsufficie^t to satisfy,
which done by another may abundantly satisfy. And some also done by the
offender may more then satisfy, which done by some other, either do not, or
do but satisfy.

10 That satisfaction which is made by another does the more justify, the
more willing, and the less able the offender is to satisfy for himself.

11 It is all one to be justified by the satisfaction, or merits, or
righteousness of another; seeing nothing satisfies, but that which meriteth;
and nothing meriteth, but righteousness.

12 To be justified in this manner, is not to be justified by any works,
merits, or righteousness of a man's own, but by another.

13 So fair forth then as a man is justified by satisfaction made by another,
he is also made just by the Justice of another.

14 To be made just by the Justice of another, is to be just by Imputation; it
being not possible for any to be just, by another Justice, but by Imputation.

15 This imputation is the accounting and accepting of another man's Justice,
for that Justice which should be in the party himself.

16 It is not necessary, that that which is imputed to the justification of
another, should be reputed as done by him that is justified. But it suffices
to imputation, if that which is done be esteemed, and in regard of that
estimation, be accepted of, as equal in worth, and merit, to that which the
justified person should have done in his own person.

17. The satisfaction of another, cannot be imputed, to the Justification of an
offender; except the trespass of the offender, be after a sort imputed to him:
As he that discharges another man's debt, is in that regard accounted and
esteemed, to be the debtor.

18 Hence, as he that satisfies for another is righteous in himself, but
unrighteous by imputation only: So he that by this means is justified, is
unrighteous in himself, and righteous by imputation only; he being in the same
manner just, as he that satisfies is evil.

19 To hold therefore, that a man can in no sort, or sense, be just, by
another man's Justice; is to hold, That one cannot have any benefit, by
another satisaction, or that one cannot merit for an other: which well
considered, will be found to overthrow the maine foundation of all
Christianity.

CHAPT. VIII. Of Pardon.
1 THe special fruit of that Justification, which is by Satisfaction, if it be
effectual, is Pardon.

2 Pardon is the remitting of an evil, or punishment, deserved by an offense.

3 That Pardon is ridiculous, wherein the fault is forgiven, but not the
punishment; even as ridiculous, as one should say; He forgiues the debt, but
not the payment of the debt, there being no other means to forgive and pardon
a fault, but by remitting the punishment due thereunto.

4 There may be satisfaction, where there is no pardon, and pardon where there
is neither satisfaction, nor any manner of Justification. Psalm: 7.8. and 17. 1.
and 26.1. and 139.2^. and Gen: 50.17-22.

5 Pardon therefore is neither the whole, nor any essential part of
Justification, but only a contingent effect thereof.

6 Pardon may be either plenarie, or in part.

7 Plenarie, when all parts and degrees of punishment are remitted.

8 That is, when the offender is in no worse estate or condition, then he
should have bin in, if he had not offended. For so long as he lies under any
degree of evil, whether damage or pain, which he had bin free from, if he
had not offended, he cannot be said, to be fully pardoned.

9 He is reputed, to be in no worse condition, then he was before; who though
he remain under some degree of evil, which he should have bin free from, if
he had not offended, and shall never be restored again, to the same estate
he was in before; yet has that evil recompensed, either with greater
certainty of that good, which he presently enjoys, though not so great as
the former: or with sure titles and undoubted possibilities of better things to
come.

10 Pardon in part, is when some degrees only, and not the entier punishment is
remitted. As when he that has deserved death, has his life restored unto him,
but not his liberty, or his goods, or his former Offices and dignities.

11 Pardon also, is either free, or merited.

12 Free pardon is, when the punishment of an offense is remitted of mere
grace, without any satisfaction at all.

13 The more freely a man is pardoned, the less he is justified: And the more
a man is justified, the less freely is he pardoned.

14 Some offenses are of that nature, and do in such a manner wrong the party
offended, that without wrong done to himself, and disparagement to Justice,
he cannot merely pardon the same.

15 Pardon merited is, when in stead of the special evil or punishment due to
the offense, other satisfaction is made.

16 If that satisfaction which is made, be in it self as great an evil, or
punishment to the offender, as that special evil or punishment that he should
have sustained; Or if the offender be as willing, to undergo the special
punishment, as to make other satisfaction; there to urge such a satisfaction,
is not to pardon.

17 If by Law it be left to the Offenders choice, whether he will undergo such
a special punishment, or redeem the same, with such or such special
satisfaction; there the offended in accepting of other satisfaction, does not
pardon.

18 If that satisfaction which is made, how full so ever, be in it self a
less evil, to the party offending, then the special punishment, that he
should have sustained; If it be in his choice who is offended, whether he wi^
accept the one or the other, there to accept of the satisfaction, is in some
degree to pardon.

19 He who is urged to make satisfaction in his own person, is less pardoned
then he who is suffered to satisfy by another.

20 If one cannot make Satisfaction for himself, and if none else can, or will
make satisfaction for him, but he that is most dear to the party offended;
And where the offense is of that nature, that nothing can satisfy for the
same, but extreme punishment; And that it is a blot, to the justice of the
party offended, not to punish the same, and in his free choice, whether he
will punish the offender, in his own person, or admit of that Satisfaction
tendered by the other; There in this case to admit of the others satisfaction,
and to release the party offending, from punishment, is, if not more, yet as
graciously and mercifully to pardon the offender, as if he had done it merely,
without any satisfaction at all.

21 Where there are diverse persons equally guilty, and such a Satisfaction
aforesaid, is accepted for some, and nor for other some, and that without any
respect of worth in the one, more then in the other, but of the mere and free
good will, and pleasure of him that pardons; there in this respect, the
pardon (though purchased) may be said, to be after a sort, a free pardon.

CHAP. IX. Of Justification before GOD.
1 HItherto of the Doctrine of Justification in general. Justification (yet
more specially) is either before God or man.

2 GOD being infinite in Truth and Knowledge, cannot deceive or be deceived.
Those therefore, who are justified before him, so far forth as they are
justified, they must needs be some way or other, truly just and righteous; It
being equally an abomination to him, to justify the unrighteous, as to
condemn the righteous. Prou: 17.15. Esa: 5.23.

3 To be justified before GOD, is to be cleared in his sight, and before his
judgment seat, from the guilt of Sin; And thereby absolved from punishment,
in divine Justice due unto the same.

4 Sin is a transgression of Gods revealed will. For nothing else can be
Sin, in his sight, but that which is done against his will, sufficiently by
some means or other, made known.

5 GOD is infinitely and essentially just. And therefore of necessity, his
will must needs be the absolute rule of Justice. Whence these and such like
consequences, are infallibly true; God wills this or that, therefore it is
just: This or that is repugnant to his will, therefore it is unjust: This or
that, he neither wills, nor nilleth, therefore it is indifferent. i. Neither
just nor unjust.

6 Justification before God, is either by pleading the ^ulfilling of the Law,
or that which is proportionable thereunto.

7 Those who have fulfilled the Law, are just in Gods sight, by their own
inherent righteousness, and accordingly, if need require, in that regard,
justifiable.

8 In vain it is, for any man to be accused, or charged before God, either
for his doing those things, which are according to his Law; or for his not
doing at all, those things which he has done. Neither is there in that regard,
any danger or cause to fear any Judgment or punishment from God, upon any
such charge or accusation. And therefore, there is no use of any such
Justification before God, by formal righteousness, or the Law.

9 The Law is an exact and perfect rule of Justice, given by God, not in jest,
as though he cared not whether it were observed, or no; But in the greatest
earnest that ever Laws were given.

10 The Law of God, and every parcel thereof, is so equal and just, and
grounded upon that equity, that he who shall break the least jot and title
thereof, must needs in himself be unjust in the eyes of God.

11 He that keeps the whole Law exactly, does no more in equity, reason,
and justice, then he is bound to do; and he that transgresses the Law but in
one jot, does therein more wrong and dishonor to God, then in observing all the
rest, he does honor him.

12 The several parts of this Law do so conspire, and are in that manner so
linked together, and are of that affinity and dependa^ce, that he who
transgresses any one part thereof, does therein in some degree or other
tra^sgresse the whole law.

13 The Law is broken as often as a man does any thing that is forbidden, leaves
undone any thing that is commanded, or does any thing commanded in any other
manner, or to any other end then it requires.

14 The more that a man by the power and freedom of his own will and nature
keeps the Law, the more just he is according to the Law; and the more he
keeps it by supernatural help and assistance, the less just he is,
according to the the same Law.

15 That outward observance of such and such parts of the law, as arises from
the restrayning power of Gods Spirit only, or through want of power, means,
occasions, or opportunities to the contrary; or upon sinister ends and
respects, is no part of of that Justice, which is according to the Law.

16 The punishment due to the least breach of the law (and that according to
God his most just and righteous judgment) is everlasting torment in Hell.

17 None therefore can be esteemed inherently just in his sight, who are
guilty of any such act, whereby he is judged (...) commanded in the Law;
yet their ends and purposes therein, are sinister and wicked, and tend some way
or other, to the furtherance of some other impiety that is in them. So that
their righteousness, such as it is, (being well scanned) will be found to be,
but weapons and instruments, of some unrighteousness or other.

5 All men by nature are disquieted, and grieved for nothing so much, as that
they want power, means, and opportunities, to commit some sin or other.

6 He which makes most conscience of obedience to Gods Law, does not that
which he does, by the power and strength of his own Nature, but by the
powerful help and assistance of Gods Spirit, regenerating him, and making him
a new creature.

7 The best, and most righteous man that is, does in more things transgress,
then keep the law of God. Neither do any keep it, in so many things, or in
that degree that they have power to do.

8 Those particular actions, which the best men do in obedience to the law,
are defective, and not in all points answerable to the Law; but have Sin in
that manner cleaving unto them that God in that r^gard, may ^ustly reject the
best works, that are or can be done, by any man in this life.

9 No mortal m^n therefore, can be iu^tified before God, by pleading the
fulfilling of the Law, or any formal inherent righteousness of his own; But
the more he shall stand thereupon, the more unjust, and unrighteous, he shall
show himself.

CHAP. XI. That no man can make Satisfaction for his own sin, or an others.
1 SEeing no man can be justified by pleading the fulfilling of the Law; It
follows, that they who are justified before God, are justified by some other
proportionable means.

2 Those proportionable meane^ must needs be, some special Satisfaction,
made for those sins which they have committed. Rom: 3.23.26 24.

3 It is a special blemish, to the justice of God, to free a sinner from the
punishment of the Law, except his Justice be by some means or other satisfied.

4 The guilt of sin meriting at Gods hand, in his just Judgment, eternal
torments; that satisfaction by which a sinner is truly justified, must needs
be such as may fully and sufficiently, merit freedom from the same punishment.

5 He that sins but once, though afterward by his own strength, he should
in all things fulfill the law of God; yet seeing in so doing, he does no more
then he was bound to do Luk: 17.10. Deu: 5.29. and 6.25. and 12.32.
though he had not sinned at all he cannot by that means be said to make any
part of satisfaction; much less if he shall fulfill the same, not by his own
power, but by special grace and st^ength from God. For the more that God
helps us, the more does he merit of us, and the less we do merit of him.

2. Cor: 3.5. Phil: 2.15. Heb: 13.21. Ioh: 15.5.
6 There is no one good work required by the Law, that any man since the fall,
is able to do, answerable in all respects to the Law. And Esai: 64.6. Job
9.2.3.15.20.21. Rom 7.18.22.
therefore the best works required by the law as they be done by man, cannot
justify himself, much less make Satisfaction for any sin.

7 The Law of God binds all men, to Deu: 6.5. Matt: 22.31.
love the Lord with all their heart, soul, and strength; And therefore also to
the uttermost of their power, to glorify him. There cannot then be devised,
any work so great, tending to Col: 1.11. Phil. 4.8.
Gods glory, but the Law by some circumstance or other binds men thereunto

8 Therefore, there can be no works of supererogation, greater or worthier,
then those which are required in the Law, by which a man can, either in whole
or in part, make any Satisfaction to God for sin. Yea, there is nothing that a
man can do, in honor and worship unto him, which is so much as acceptable unto
him, except himself require it in his word.

9 Seeing every sin, in the most just and righteous judgment of God,
deserves everlasting torment in Hellfire; there is nothing that any man can
suffer, either in this life, or afterward, which may be measured by time, which
can either in whole or in part, make Satisfaction for sin; there being no
proportion, between that which is Everlasting, and the longest time that can
be imagined. Rom: 3.9. and 6 23. Gal: 3.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Mat: 25.46.

10 No man ca^ plead he has suffered any wrong, (much less any (...)) at Gods
hand, whereby he deserves to be acquitted for the least sin.

10 No man therefore, neither by any deeds, or sufferings of his own, can
possibly, either in whole or in part, make Satisfaction for the least of his
sins. And therefore, such as are justified before God, must needs be accounted
righteous, by that which is formally in some other.

CHAP. XII. That no other mere Creature, can make Satisfaction for sin.
1 SEeing no Sinner can satisfy the justice of God for his sin, by any
righteousness or suffering of his own, either he must (though guilty but of
one sin) according to the just Judgment of God, be eternally damned; or he
must needs make Satisfaction by some other person.

2 Though there were but one sinner in the world, and all the rest were just
and righteous persons; yet there is nothing that all they either severally or
jointly, or with the help of all the Saints and Angels in heaven could do or
suffer, that can satisfy the Justice of God for that sinner, though he were
guilty but of the least sin; It being not possible that creatures being finite,
should satisfy so infinite a wrath and Justice.

3 He therefore, that will be found able indeed to make any such satisfaction,
as shall truly justify a sinner, in that manner that he shall seem in the
eyes of God, as a righteous person, and unworthy of the condemnation
aforesaid, must needs not only be perfitly righteous himself, but Infinite
also, and Almighty, and by consequent true God. Esa: 63. Heb: 1.2.6.

4 God being but one, cannot properly be satisfied merely by himself, or by any
act, that is merely and absolutely a divine act: for in such a manner to
satisfy himself, is in effect merely to forgive without satisfaction, and to
pardon without any Justification at all.

5 The person then who is to make such a Satisfaction, must not only be God,
but some way or other also different from God, and To: 1.3. Gal: 4.1.
therefore, and in that respect Ioh: 14.28.
inferior to God.

6 It passes the wit of men or Angels to find out such a person: so that if
an humbled sinner should be left to himself to search out this mystery, the
further he should wade therein, the more he should plunge himself into a
bottomless gulf of horror and despair.

CHAP. 13. That the Son of God is he that has made Satisfaction for the
Sins of all them that shall be Justified.
1 GOD in the Gospel has revealed such a person, as is both willing and able
to make full Satisfaction for sin, and thereby to procure the justification of
a sinner before God, and a perfect Reconciliation.

2. This person is Christ Jesus the 1. Tim: 2.5. Rom: 3, 24.25.
only begotten Son of God, John. 1.14.18.3.16.18.
the second person in Trinity.

3 Those therefore who are justified by Satisfaction made by him, must of
necessity be righteous before God, by that righteousness, which is formally in
Christ only. Romans 3.20.24. and 4.5. and 10.3.4.5.6.9. Phil. 3.8.9. 2. Cor.
5.21.

4. The Son of God, to the end that he might make full satisfaction for the
sins of some men, did take upon himself the guilt of their Sins. 2. Cor.
5.21. Esa. 53.12. and 1. Cor. 15.3. 1. Pet. 2.24. Typed, Leu. 4. 4.24.29.33.
with 5.5.16. Exodus 29.10.9. Leu. 8.14.22. and 16.1.

5. Having taken upon himself the guilt of Sin, and being. not fit as he was
God, to perform any true Satisfactory work he becam John. 1.14. Phil. 2.7.
Gal. 4.4.
man, also, assuming Heb. 2.14.16.
into the person of his diety, the nature of man, and so became Mat. 16.13.16.
John. 3.13.
in one and the same Person true God, and true man, and thereby a fit mediator
Romans 9.5. Tit. 2.13. Phil. ^.5.
between God and 1. Tim. 2.5. Heb. 9.13.
man, that so by the Power Heb. 9.14. and 10.5.15.
of his divine nature he might make full Satisfaction, in and by the humane
Nature.

6 By this means he became in respect of his humane Nature assumed, inferior
unto God, and a Servant bound unto that law, which (by their Creation) all
other men are bound unto, and owing in that regard, both unto God and man, the
very same services and duties that are therein universally required of all men,
and subject to the very same curses and judgments, that upon the not
performing of them, all other men are subject unto.

7 The Hypostaticall union of the humane nature of Christ, into the person of
the Deity, does no more free him from the bond of the aforesaid law, whilst he
conuerst upon Earth, then it makes him cease to be true man. And as
notwithstanding the said union, the body of CHRIST, being a true humane
body, was subject to corruption, and needed for it self, meat, drink, etc:
So his Soul, being a humane soul, and so (notwithstanding the said union)
remaining; that union cannot be said to free it from the necessary observance
of that law, wherein the true formal natural and essential righteousness of a
humane soul does consist.

8. And as he was strictly and absolutely bound unto the aforesaid law even as
much as any other man, so he did most accurately and precisely fulfill the
same, denying no obedience unto God, which the said law did require, but
performing al things commanded; and that not only (as the Schools use to
speak) materially, but formally also, by means whereof he was (as man, truly
and perfectly righteous in all things according to the law of Creation.

9. This observing of the Moral law being the work Esa: 42.1.53.11.
of a Servant, Phil: 2.7.
a part of his humiliation, a means whereby he declared himself inferior to
his father, and Luk: 2.20.
which he did to please his father, and by which he was the more accepted of
God; Some part thereof being directly Gal: 4.4.
a part of his mediation, as his earnest prayers, Every part thereof being of
that nature, Esa: 53.9.10.11. 1. Corint: 5.21. Hebr: 7.26. 1. Pet: 2.22.24. and
18.9. and 3.18. and 1. Ioh: 3.5.
that without the same no other satisfaction could have been available, or
effectual, and all proceeding from such an estate and condition as he needd
not have undergone (nor had not) if he had not taken upon him, to satisfy for
sinners; some part of the satisfaction which he made must needs consist
therein, and therefore it must in some degree or other be imputed to them to
their Justification.

10 As he who to satisfy for another, becomes a Slave to men; does in and by
all those acts, which the Laws bind a Slave unto, make satisfaction, yea
though they be such acts, as he be coming a slave, is bound upon pain of death
to undergo: So seeing CHRIST, only that he might satisfy for Sinners, did
become Man, which is a greater debasement to him (being GOD, equal to the
FATHER,) then if the Son of a Prince should become a slave, it must needs be,
that in and by those acts which he was bound unto by Gods Law, as a man,
(though being man, he was bound unto them, under pain of eternal damnation)
he made some degree of Satisfaction or other: and therefore, it must needs be
also in some measure or other, a part of that righte^usnes, in and by the
imputation whereof, a sinner is justified; and in this case, the greater the
bond was that he did undergo for the doing of them, the greater was his merit.

11 Therefore his very assuming of our humane Nature, and all the obedience he
yielded thereupon, and by reason thereof, whilst he was upon earth, at least
in the state of humiliation, even during the time of his private life, seem to
be some part and beginning of the actual execution of his Priestly Office, by
means whereof, in part he pacified GOD, and consequently, in part satisfied
for sin.

12 Though at his Baptism he was solemnly declared to be that Messiah, and
though after that he did more specially manifest himself to be the Messiah by
his public Ministry: yet it appears not by any probable reason, that then
(and not till then) he began actually to do the works of a Mediator.

13 As Christ was borne of a Woman, not for his own sake, but for theirs whose
Savior and Redeemer he is: So being born of a Woman, he was made under the
Law also, not for his own cause, but for ours; yea, therefore he was borne of
a woman, that so for our sake he might be under the Law. Also as he became a
Servant for our sake; So in that very regard he came under the Law of a
Seruan^, it being all one to become a Servant, and to be made under the Law of
a Servant; the being under the Law of a Servant, being that which makes him
become a Servant.

14 Christ might have been a pure, holy, harmless, and undefiled High Priest,
though he had performed no other obedience to the Moral Law, nor had been
no otherwise (in regard of his obedience to the said Law) a Servant, then he
is now being glorified: So much therefore of his conformity to the said Law
as concerns his humiliation, must either be unnecessary, or part of his
satisfaction.

15 Though this obedience of Christ to the Law be a part of that righteousness
whereby a sinner is justified; yet it follows not thence that a sinner is
justified by the works of the Law, in any such sense, as they are Romans 3.20.28.
and 4.2. Gal. 2.16. and 10.11.12.
excluded by the Apostle, Seeing the Law binds every man to do the works
required therein, in Deuteronomy. 27.26. Ezech. 8.14. Leu. 18.5. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.
his own person and not by a Deputy. And the Apostle directly disputes only
against such a justification by the Law, whereby a man Romans 4.2.4. and 10.3.
fancieth by his own deeds done in his own person to be justified: For,
though Christ himself, who in his own person fulfilled the Law, may be
justified by the same Law; yet it follows not that they to whom this
righteousness is imputed, are justified thereby, Gal. 2.21. Romans 3.27.
but rather the contrary:

16. This l^gall righteousness of our Savior Christ cannot truly be said to be
totally imputed to every sinner that is justified: for then there needed no
other or further satisfaction to be made; seeing by means thereof alone every
such sinner must needs be as it were perfectly righteous; and where a man is
so reputed, there needs no satisfaction to be made: neither can any one
special or distinct part be said to be imputed to one, and another part
thereof to another: but it is as a Diamond or Jewel, paid for the satisfaction
of many men's debts, which cannot be said that it is either totally paid, for
every debtor, or one part for one, and another for another; but generally, the
whole is paid for all, and every one has his part in the whole; and not one in
this part of it, and another in that.

17 Christ yielded full obedience, not only to the Moral Law, by means
whereof he was perfectly righteous, and as man needed no other or further
degree of righteousness: but he submitted himself also to those Laws which
were Gal 4.4.
peculiar to Gods people, and prescribed to them by occasion of sin, and in
conforming whereunto they professed themselves to be sinners; and which, had
they not been sinners, they should never have been subject unto; as if by
this careful and strict conforming thereunto, he Esa. 53.12.
had acknowledged himself the chief of sinners: hence he was Luke 2.21.
Circumcized, Luke 2.24.
Offered Oblations, Ioh. 7.2.10. Mat. 26.17.18.19.20.
performed all other Ceremonial Obseruances. Hence he was also Mat. 3.13. Luke
3.21.
Baptized, Mat. 26.26.
and received the Sacrament of his own Body and Blood: and Mat. 3.10.
this also he makes expressly a part of his righteousness.

18 He being without any sin of his own, he could not as man be bound
unto these kind of Laws: his obedience therefore unto them must needs be
either of no use, or else must be performed in regard of our sins imputed
unto him. And therefore whatsoever he did herein, it was principally for the
expiation of them, and consequently for our justification.

19 Our Savior took not only our Nature upon him, and subjected himself to
the Laws before said, but together with our Nature all the common Romans 8.3.
Heb. 2.17.18. and 4.15.
frailties and infirmities thereof. He framed not therefore unto himself at
the first a glorious body like unto Absolons, or unto Adams in the first
Creation; but he was (though Mat. 1.18. Luke 1.34.35.
miraculously by the power of the holy Ghost, without the help of man)
conceived in the womb of a weak and sinful woman. After ten months he was
brought into the World, after the manner of other children, and with all the
common weaknesses and infirmities of other children. And he was subject unto,
and endured in his flesh before he was glorified, Mat. 4.2. Ioh. 4.6.7.
hunger, thirst, heat, cold, wearisomnesse, etc.

Luke ^.6.
20 Though notwithstanding the aforesaid assuming of the humane Nature, and the
frailties thereof, he continued still to be God, equal with his Father, yet
he was in this Humane nature of his further content, so to debase himself, as
to endure whilst he was upon earth, for sundry years, many miseries and
calamities, and to bear, and put up at the hands of men, Ioh: ^3.8. Mar.
14.45, Luke 22.34. Matthew: 26.74. M^^. 14.27.
even of those which were his own special Officers and Servants, many
horrible intolerable in dignities and contumelies, as though he had been the
most unworthy, base, and conte^ptible person, that ever the earth bore. More
particularly, he was content to the end aforesaid, amongst other abuses, to
be most, wrongfully Mat. 26.60.61.65. Mar. 1.14.64. Lu. 2^.65. and 23. (...)
accused, arraigned, and condemned, of high blasphemy and Treason, and in that
judgment, not only most Mar: 14.65: Luke 2^ 65.64. Mar: 15.15. Ioh. 19.^
inhumanely, and barbarously, to be buffeted, spet upon, whipped, Crowned with
Thorns, but also to be put unto the Ioh: 19.18. Gal. ^.13. Phil: 2.8.
most shameful and accursed death of the Cross; A death ^h^^ none were put
unto, but the basest and most odious malefactors, such a^ were reputed the most
notorious villains in a State: yea, such as were after a sort, in some special
manner accursed of God himself.

21 All this was not sufficient for (...) Redemption and (...) of sinners, bu^
bell^^es (...) most patient enduring of all these indignities from men; (...)
he hanged upon the accursed Tree) had such a deep sense of the
^^comprehensible wrath of God his F^ther, and of his dreadful justice against
those sins, the Satisfaction whereof he had taken upon himself, that the
very aphension thereof (before it seized upon him) made him sweat drops of
blood. And the sense thereof when it was upon his Soul, made him most
fearfully to cry out and say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And
all this he Esa. 53.7 (...). Tim. 2.7. Hebr. ^.3. and 9.^6.2^. Romans (...)
endured, till the justice of God was fully satisfied for their sins, the
guilt whereof he had taken upon himself,

22 In th^se things thus none and suffered jointly consists that Righteousness,
or Satisfaction of Christian^ and by which a sinner is justified before God;
Though the Scripture principally attributes the Salvation, Redemption, and
Justification of a sinner, to his sufferings on the Cross, and his
Bloud-shedding, because in them consisted the Consummation of his Priestly
Office, and the maine, and principal, and most effectual part of his
Satisfaction.

23 These things aforesaid being done and suffered by such a person, must
needs be of 1. Cor: 6.^0. and 7.23. 1. Pet: 1.19.
inestimable price, and in that regard as much (if not more) glorify the
Justice Rom: 3.26.
of God, as if the Sinners themselves either had never sinned, or had made full
Satisfaction in their own persons.

24 They may be sufficient for the Justification of a Sinner, and may be said
to be imputed thereunto, though every particular Sinner be not esteemed and
reputed to have done and suffered those very particulars, which Christ herein
both did, and suffered, it being sufficient that they were undertaken for Rom:
5.8.9.10. 1. Cor: 5.7. Gal. 2.20.
a sinner, and accepted of God, either for that righteousness which should have
inhered in a Sinner, or for that Satisfaction that the sinner should have made
in his own person

25 Those for whom Christ Jesus has in manner aforesaid satisfied, are
esteemed in Gods eyes, in regard of that Satisfaction made, as if they were
free from 1. Ioh. 1.9. Apo: 1.5


26 No Sinner can be esteemed free from all sin in manner aforesaid; but he
must therein of necessity he esteemed, as Rom: 4.5.6.8. and. 5.19. Phil: 3.9.
2. Cor: 5.21.
perfectly righteous, the least defect of righteousness, being a degree of Sin.

27 It is therefore all one, to (...) from all sin, and to be perfectly
righteous; That (therefore) by Christ's suffering^ we are fre^d from all sins,
and by his Active obedience, we are made righteous, (as though these were two
diverse effects of those diverse acts) seems to have no warrant from Scripture,
and to be repugnant to reason; It being not possible to devise a medium between
him that is no Sinner, and a righteous person, no more then between the Air
free from degree of darkness and fully light, or a man in no measure blind,
and perfectly seeing.

28 He that is free from all sin, is thereby freede from all degrees of
eternal death: and whatsoever does effectually and meritoriously free a man
from all degrees of death, does also thereby in title a man to euerlalasting
life, Christ's sufferings therefore, and his righteousness must either jointly
do both, or one of them must be utterly excluded from both; for that which
effects the one, effects the other also of necessity.

29 Though it be said, That Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: yet it does not follow thence, that by his death and suffering
only our sins are expiated, and by his fulfilling the Law, we ar^ moreover
made righteous, and entitled to everlasting life: for by his resurrection in
that place we cannot understand his fulfilling the Law, it being no part
thereof, and his dying for sin, was for our justification also: so that the
meaning of the Apostle seems to be this only: That Christ both dyed for our
sins, and rose again to this end; that we might be justified, implying also,
that though Christ dyed for our sins, yet if he had not risen again, we
should not have bin justified.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Pardon of our sins, and our Adoption.
1 THe satisfaction aforesaid being made by Christ, it must needs be
effectual, and not in vain, and therefore the plenary pardon of all their
sins, for whom he satisfied, must necessarily follow thereupon; for if but one
sin be unpardoned, eternal death and misery must necessarily succeed.

2 It had been a stain and blot to the justice of GOD, to have merely
pardoned the sins of any without due satisfaction made; else we must hold,
that either the sufferings of our Savior were not such as they appeared, but
only delusions, which is blasphemy for any to imagine, or that GOD would
never have suffered his Son to have endured that which he did.

3 Though the pardon of sin was bought with a more valuable price then ever any
thing else was, or can be bought; yet in that God accepted of such a price as
this at the hands of his only begotten Son, in whom he was well pleased, for
them that were his enemies, and in whose eternal confusion he might have
glorified himself, he does therein as graciously and mercifully pardon us,
as if he had done it freely, without any price at all: yea, the greater the
satisfaction was, the more was his mercy and grace, in pardoning by such a
means.

4 There is not the least merit and desert in those for whom God accepts the
aforesaid satisfaction, why they should be pardoned any more then the damned,
unto whom God denies this pardon. God therefore (when he might, with honor
and glory have damned all) so freely accepting such a satisfaction for some,
without any cause in themselves, may be said in that respect most freely to
pardon them.

5 Though the estate of a sinner that is justified, and consequently pardoned,
in it self considered, be for the present in this life many degrees worse
then it should have been, if he had not sinned at all; yet, in respect of the
certain possibility to the inheritance of heaven, and the eternal glory
thereof at the 8.17. and 18.19.29.30. 2. Cor. 4.17.18. and 5.1. and 1. Pet.
1.2.4.
end of this short life, it far excels the other:

6 The Romans 8.15.17. 1. Pet. 1.4.
inheritance of heaven, and our special title to be the Ioh. 1.12. 1. Ioh. 3.1.
Sons of God, being a condition in it self many degrees greater then that
which we lost by sin, we cannot be so properly said to receive all the
degrees thereof by virtue of any act, either of justification or pardon; it
being in the nature of the one, to f^ee only from fault, and of the other, to
free from punishment deserved by the fault: in which regard, as the party by
virtue of them must needs be placed, either in the same, or as good an estate
as he was in before: so more then this cannot be required by virtue of either.

7 Though we cannot be said to be entitled to that special Adoption of
Sons, and all the degrees of glory in heaven by the merits and satisfaction
of Christ aforesaid, so far forth as they are applied to our justification:
yet seeing Christ's merits may be greater, and of more force then for the
satisfaction for sin, and the mere justification of sinners thereby, we may
notwithstanding be said to be both adopted and glorified by his merits; It
being clear, That all the grace and glory which we shall enjoy 1. Cor.
3.21-24. Ephesians. 1.5, 6. Col. 1.13. Ioh. 1.12.
is given for Christ's sake, and by Gal. 3.26. with 4.4, 5. Luke 22.29.
virtue of his mediation, and consequently of his merits.

CHAP. XV. Of Justifying Faith.
1 THose sinners only are justified before God, in manner aforesaid, who
(living till they come to years of discretion) do by a sound and lively faith
lay hold of and rely upon the aforesaid satisfaction only, and the merits
thereof, and not upon any merits and works of their own.

2 Hence this faith is called by Divines, Justifying Faith, in which regard
also men are said to be Romans 3.24.25.30. and 10.10. Gal. 3.8.24. Ephesians. 2.8.
Justified by faith; and faith is said to Romans 4.3, 5, 6, 9.11.22, 23, 24. Gal.
3.6. Iam. 2.22. Genesis 5.6.
be accounted for righteousness, and to be Romans 3.27, 28. Gal. 2.16.
that which only justifies.

3 This Faith is a special Ephesians: 2.8. Phil: 1.19. Tit. 1.1.
gift of God, given only to the Elect: and therefore the greater it is, the
more it binds us to God, and cannot merit at Gods hand any thing for us:
whence it cannot satisfy the justice of God, or merit pardon for the least
sin, and therefore in proper speech it cannot be said to justify a sinner, or
add, in it self any true force or efficacy thereunto, it being no meritorious
cause thereof.

4 For this cause then Faith is said to justify, and only to justify,
because it alone is the instrument, which apprehends and applies that
righteousness, for and by the imputation whereof a Sinner is justified Rom:
3.25.24. and 4.24.25. and 5.1.


5 Hence it is that the Covenant of grace in steed of that righteousness of the
Law, which is wanting in us by reason of our sin, requires no other thing
inher^^t in us in the ^la^e thereof, whereby we may be declared to be
justified, but Faith only Romans 10.5.6.9.10. Ioh. 3.14.15.16.18.36. and 5.24.
and 6.40. Marc: 16.16. Act. 10.43. and 16.31.


6. It is all one in truth to say, that a sinner is justified only by the
righteousness of Christ imputed, and that he is justified by Faith: For he only
can say, he is justified by Christ's righteousness, who has Faith: and he who
has Faith, is therefore said to be justified by Faith alone, because Faith
alone apprehends and applies the said righteousness: so that the one ever
implies or presupposes the other.

7 Repentance and good works do necessarily follow Faith, and according to
the degrees of their soundnes and sincerity, they may be of force to justify
either themselves, or that faith, from which they proceed, but they can have
no force by any merit to justify a Sinner, in regard of any sin that he
has committed, though they may serve as seals and pledges, and so many
testimonies of that justification which is by Faith in Christ alone.

CHAP. XVI. Of Justification before Man.
1 HItherto of Justification before God. Justification before Man is, when in
any of the forms before spoken of, in general, a person is justified before
Man.

2 A man may after a sort be justified before men, who in the knowledge of me^
is most unjust, and he may be condemned before me^, who is known to be (in
respect of that matter, for which he is condemned) most righteous. Also a man
may be justified before men, for that for which he shall be condemned before
God: and he may be justified before God, for that, for which he is condemned of
men.

3 He is universally justified before the strictest Tribunalls of men, who
cannot be proved to have done any fault, or who is proved to be guilty of
such faults only as all men universally are guilty of; This being a
sufficient Plea, at any humane bar (to free from all blame and punishment
amongst men) that he is therein, no more, nor in no greater degree guilty,
then his Judges and Accusers, or the best, or all the men in the world. It
being inhumane, and consequently unjust for any man, either to accuse or
condemn his Neighbor, for that which all, and therefore himself, and those
who care better then himself, are known to be guilty of.

4 A man even in that estate which he is now in, may so live amongst men, as he
may merit to be (as is aforesaid) universally justified in their Courts, and
that either by his formal and inherent righteousness, or otherwise: Luke 1.6.
1. Tim. 3.2. Phil. 2.15.

5 A man may so trespass against a man, that he can never by any means make
him full satisfaction, for the fault done, in which case he must necessarily
live and dye unjustified before man.

6 The extremest satisfaction that man is to exact of man for the greatest
fault, is Temporary death: and to wish, much more to attempt his eternal
death, though for the greatest trespass that can be offered, is greater, and
more barbarous cruelty, then is to be found amongst the Caniballs: and is a
greater trespass against his neighbor, then any that his neighbor can commit
against him in another kind.

7 Man may be justified before Man, not by Man only, but by God also.

8 God also may justify us before Man by our formal and inherent
righteousness. Thus by sundry means here upon earth he sometimes iustifies his
children against the sundry calumniations and flaunders of wicked men: But more
specially he will do it at the day of Judgment, in the face of the whole world;
manifesting, not only that righteousness of theirs, which they have in and by
Christ; but the inherent innocence, integrity, and synceritie of their hearts
and ways, so much belied and traduced by the wicked enemies of sanctify and
Religion.

The Sum of all.
1 ALl Men are sinners. 2 The least sin in the just Judgment of God merits
eternal death. 3 No sinner can in Gods justice be freede from the same, but
he that is truly justified before God. 4 No sinner can be justified before
God, but by Satisfaction. 5 No sinner (...) himself, or any other (...)
^^tisfaction. 6 When (...) ^^re could, Christ ^he (...) God did make
Satis^^ction. 7 Christ, that (...) ^ight make satisfaction became Man. 8 Christ
being Man, made satisfaction by fulfilling the Law and dying. 9 Christ having
made this satisfaction, the Father imputes it, the holy Ghost seals and
ratifieth it to the party justified. 10 In ratifying and sealing it, faith is
given to believe, and apprehend it. 11 Faith being given to believe and
apprehend it, it brings forth good works in testification of thankfulness
for it. 1 -- God the Father Justifies by imputation. 2 -- God the Son, by
Satisfying and Meriting. 3 -- God the Holy Ghost, by Sealing and Confirming it.
5 -- All three by gracious pardoning and absoluing. ^ -- Faith, by apprehending
and applying. 6 -- Good works, by manifesting and decl^ring.
1. The whole Trinity are the principal and Efficie^t cause of justification.
2. Faith the Isntrumental. 3. Christ's Satisfactory Righteousness the Material.
4. The Importation thereof, the Formal. 5. The Salvation of a Sinner, the
Final. 6. Good works the effect and necessary Consequent.
Ergo,
1. All that are justified, are justified only by the free grace of God, and
merits of Christ. 2. None are justified for, or by, their own works. 3. None
are justified without works.
FINIS.

