TIMES CVRTAINE DRAWN, OR THE ANATOMY OF VANITY. WITH OTHER CHOICE POEMS,
Entitled; Health from HELICON.

BY RICHARD BRATHVVAYTH Oxonian.

Ille ego qui quondam.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at the
South entrance of the Royall-Exchange. 1621.

TO THE FAMOVS SEMINARY OF ALL ACCOMPLISHED KNOWLedge, his dear foster-Mother,
the University of OXFORD; the happy supply of judicious wits, with the
increase of all succeeding HONOR.
TO thee) dear Mother) in whose learned lap,
I once reposed, and from whose batt'ning papp
I sucked the milk of knowledge, send I these
Which if they please, as I could wish then please
I Am honored by them, and will still renew
My love to them, because they are liked by you.
But these are feeble, scarce Penfeathered,
And like young Lapwings run with shell on head;
Nor can I blame them: for belike they'ue heard,
How I was young when I to you repaired:
Growing in some sort riper; and these do
Expect the like, that they shall thrive so too:
Which I confess lies only in your power,
For if you smile they live, die if you loure;
Nor need I fear, for I did never know
Any dark Cloud sit on your smoother brow.
Yours in all endeared observance, R. B.

A GRIEF: PERSONATED IN THE AVTHOR, AND Dedicated to Time, of whom he
Borrowes the Subject of his PASSION.
CAre charming sleep, thou son of sable Night,
That cheares our drowping spirits with delight;
Making us forget care, as if kept under
By some sweet spell, or some Lethean slumber,
Away and leave me: Thee I brook not well,
" Sorrow best fitteth with a Cloudie cell.
And what more cloudy, then where Sun nere shone,
Where naught keeps Concord but continued moan,
Where sighs of Lovers, Passions of the mind,
Are all the Guests, that you are like to find?
Poor blubberd Soul, is grief in her extent?
Or is your source of tears already spent?
Afliction works distraction! aye me then,
That feels the most, yet shows the least of men.
Yet if thou have the memory to relate
The poor remainder of thy forlorn state,
Express it boldly: Men are pleased to hear
Those griefs discourst, that once were hard to bear.
O then attend, and when my speech does leave,
Say, If ere any had more cause to grieve!
You idle hours, our Calenders of ruth,
And time ill spent, the prejudice of youth,
Are first presented to my grieved heart,
Come then (as first presented) act your part,
Come, for you can, and well I know you will,
Tell me what I have done or good or ill.
Good; that is recken'd soon: but the ill I Have done,
Much do I fear will not be summed so soon.
You keep the score, and chalk from day to day,
While I run on in debt, and will not pay;
Yet I must pay, my Creditor will call,
Where I must pay both use and principal.
First for the hour: or for the least of time,
Minute or instant, for that is only mine,
What instant is there, or has ever been
Since I knew sin, wherein I did not sin:
What moment did I good, or if I did,
Was not vainglory in the action hid?
I know it, O I know it but too well,
And much it grieves my pensive soul to tell
What she has done, and gladly would I leave
My tale, and say, I know not how to grieve;
But I must speak, what Time does press me too,
" For it is less shame to speak then shame to do.
Why did I know, if that my knowledge were
The only cause why I so far did err?
As sure it was: since sacred discipline
Should make our minds eternally divine;
Not darkened with Earths substance, but in love
Of her own Image, seek for things above,
From whence her Image came! blessed had I bin;
If, as I knew this, so I had but seen
Into the real glory of my soul,
O that had then been fair, that now is soul.
Unhappy I to care more for the rind
Then for the pith, the body then the mind,
Unhappy I to make my wit a bait
Unto my self: my knowledge a conceit
Too ouer-weening; O I did not well,
Knowing for this, the brightest Angel fell
Conceit is like a shaft shot from a Bow,
Which flies a while aloft, but lights low.
Low did my judgment light, when I did aim,
By self renown to purchase me a Name:
Whereas (God-wot) that worth which was in me,
Scarce could redeem my Name from infamy.
For what is humane Eminence, estate,
Honor, demerit, an auspicious Fate,
Conquest, renown, Trophies of lasting worth,
When they that got them, lie in Bed of earth?
Nothing. alas nothing: there is no good in them,
For these yield small perfection unto men;
Save what the world gives, and that is given
Often times on earth, is never found in heaven.
I mean of merit, where men popular,
In their affections usually do err,
In counting that desert, which has a show
Of goodness in it: but is nothing so.
For I have seen, even in these fewer years
Which I have lived, how many one appears
In show and outward luster to be that
Which he is not, if you observe his state.
Now virtues are pretenses, where we owe
Less far to substance, then we do to show.
And good we call him (so the Vulgar deem)
Who though he be not good, yet good does seem.
O time for thee I grieve (thou grieves for me)
And mutual love should I express to thee:
Thou see our Errors, wherewith we abuse
Thy self, that art of all most precious.
Thou see our vainest pomp, and how we tie,
Our admiration only to the eye
Of our Beholder: thou art he, that sees
Our Times expense, those great arrerages
Which are against us: and it well appears,
Thou pitties us, sending out brinie tears
In pure remorce, which we, thrown on the shelues
Of Desolation, shed not for our selves.
Here rides Poppea, Neroes Concubine,
In her gilt Chariot; there rash Catiline,
Unbounded in's desire; here Claudius
Pressed to affections most incestuous;
Here Messalyna, an insatiate whore;
There Danae wrestling with a golden shower;
Here covetous Midas sold to avarice;
There old Hermocrates with his four eyes;
Poring on's Almanacke, cursing the earth,
And blessing's Fate when there ensues a dearth.
I Will be revenged, ere many days be done,
And't shall be said nere mother censured son,
With more extended rigor: thus shalt'be.
Now in these young days of thy iollitie,
When pleasures mansion in thee, now when youth
Ryots in vain delight, I with my Sith
(For I can use Times-Syth) will cut thee down,
And then (my Son) where is all thy pomp become?
Frolic a while, like Summer-Butterflies,
I am the chest where all thy honor lies;
Nor can thou pass deaths verdict, nor my doom,
I was thy Cradle, I must be thy Tomb.
See see ( unhappy youth) the utmost date
Of all thy time, see what thou leuellst at?
A shroud, a grave; where then is thy glory seen?
Of where those shows of honor that have been
Eminent in thee? 'lasse they'ue lost their breath,
And are extinguished in the stroke of death.
What is the hight of honor pruned so soon?
Is our youths May Game with such quicknes done?
O then ( poor soul) why staiest thou here so long,
Or Tuttle-like throbbs not thy doleful song
To Express thy Pilgrimage? Is here a place
Ever to dwell in? No; so short's the pace
Of humane frailty, that the strong'st of all,
Stands not so firm, but he may fear to fall.
And is this world such a precious dish,
Where few have what they need, none what they wish,
As it deserves our Admiration? No,
What ere the worldling think, it is not so.
Honors, preferments, riches, and estate
Are but as Fuel, which engender hate
To the possessour, for who ere was seen
Rich, and had none that ever enu^ed him?
Why should I crave to please an outward sense,
When reason seeks no more then competence?
And that is a very little: as some food
To sustain Nature, and some clothes, not proud
Nor gairish, but such fitting weeds as should
Save us from Summers heat and Winters cold.
For who (remembering th'cause why cloths were made)
Even then, when Adam fled unto his shade
For covert of his Nakedness, will not blame
Himself to glory in his Parents shame?
Weep, weep ( Phantasticke Minion) for to thee
My grieved passion turns: O may I be
Cause of Conversion to thy self, that art
Composed of Man, and therefore I bear part
In thy distracted Habit: (ougly piece,
For so I term thee) Woman-monster cease,
Cease to corrupt the excellence of mind,
By soyling it with such an odious rind,
Or shameless Cover? waining, wavering Moon,
That spends the morn, in decking thee till noone;
Have thou no other Ornaments to wear
Save such wherein thy lightest thoughts appear?
Have thou no other honor, other Fame,
Save roabes, which make thee glory in thy shame?
Lascivious Idol, that with painted cheek,
Sinne-drawing eye, thy sacred vow do break
With thy Creator: hence thy sin is more,
Adoring that which thou should not adore.
What? No conversion yet? Do yet persist
In thy deprau'd condition? Pray thee desist
From thy deformed Fashion: let that time
Which thou have vainly spent to become fine,
Be now redeemed, that aftertimes may say,
Thy Night of pride is turned to virtues Day.
Alas what auailes this sleeking of thy sin,
When the cold womb of earth shall take thee in.
To lodge with her? where for delicious sweetes,
Corruption shall embrace thee, and those sheets
Wherein thy lustful Body took delight,
Shall shroud thy corpse in deaths eternal Night,
Yet thou replies: I must observe the Time:
Must I look dark, when all my sex does shine
In beauty and perfection? Pray thee hear,
If it be darkness to be grave in wear,
Modest in gesture, womanlike in all,
Choose thee that Habit, what so ere befall.
It Is Virtues liverie, and will more express
Of true perfection, native excellence
In beauty, luster, comeliness, and show,
Then all our light-tail'd huswiues ere shall do.
These are the Devils Lures, made to ensnare
Unwary youth, with their dissembled fair.
These are those spotted Lepers that defile,
The flowrie bosom of this fruitful I Will.
These are those smiling Hyenes that confound
The spacioust kingdoms, and make cursed the ground.
These are those Panthers, which with smiling chere,
Prove there the worst, where thy the best appear.
These are Niles Crocodyles, which having power,
Oppress the people, and the State devour.
These are those Babells strumpets, with false forms
Deceiving men, yet are surpised by Worms,
The Worm of Conscience, which shall ere abide,
And be a Corasiue for lust and pride.
Injurious stains, if I could but impart
The secret hate I bear you in my heart,
And had but power to will, not one I swear
Of that adulterate sex should nestle here:
Or if they did, they should such Penance have,
As they might go true Conuerts to their Grave.
For silks should saccloth, and for powdered hair,
Should ashes be their penitential wear:
So might my doom authenticke be and just,
" Sackcloth on pride, and ashes strow'd on lust.
Here Scilla, then whom none could ever be,
More friend to's friend, or foe to's enemy.
Lastly, here is all that is (...) etc. (...) EPHA KAI HMEPAI.
ill: but what is good,
Is not at all, or is not understood.
Here is no Phocion, Cato Vtican,
No trusty Brutus, nor no African,
No Thales, Solon, nor no Pistacus,
No Periander, nor Cleobulus;
No Bias, Chylo, now the Senate's done,
The Laert: in vit, Philos.
Tripod's stolen, and all the sages gone.
What my perplexed soul, whither so fast,
More fairly on, the fair will not be past:
Tutch not Abuses, but with modest lipp,
For One whom I admire, being no less happy for his native invention, then
exquisite for his proper and clegant dimension.
some I know were whipped, that thought to whip;
Unto thine own: thy errors are enough,
And full too many for one page to show.
Where in discourse mix passion with thy line,
And hold thy course till that the Sun decline,
That now thy passions waking, now asleep,
May weep and laugh at Time, may laugh and weep.
For often we see, men troubled with annoy,
Do laugh for anger, and do weep for joy.
Time is portrayed bald, yet my young mind,
Letting occasion pass, caught Time behind,
I caught indeed, but could not apprehend,
Which made me sigh for my deplored end.
Unhappy youth (quoth I) thus I began,
That art endew'd with reason, best of man,
Yet arms the best of man, to man's offense,
Making thy reason Bond-slaue unto sense.
Thou can distinguish well of every Time,
And knows by the air when the Sunne' gins to decline,
Whether fair weather's like for to ensue,
This thou obseru'st, and thy coniecture's true.
But alas how simple art, when thou would find,
The native temper of thy sin-sicke mind,
How far's thy knowledge off? so far, God wot,
That tho thou seem to know it, thou know it not.
Nor can thy Ignorance plead for defense,
For knowledge has informed thy Conscience,
Which so afflicts thee, there is no hope of peace,
For Conscience is a thousand witnesses.
See thou thy shame, and can thou love the name
Of ougly sin, that brought thee to that shame?
See thou thy form made glorious at the first,
By the pollution of thy sin accursed?
See thou thy self and do not blush to see,
The best of Creatures made the worst by thee:
See thou the Sun spher'd in his royal course,
How upon Plants, fruits, mettalls he has force,
And with his Beams reflects on every place,
Adorning the Heaven with his transpierciue grace?
See thou this glorious light, and does thy soul
Think it will shine on any thing so foul,
As thy corruption? O no: such art thou,
In thy enormious actions, as to show
The horror of thy sins, would crave more Time
Then hours thou have to live: unhappy clyme
Whose birth does shame his Country, and I see
That verdict now to be pronounced on me,
And that on due desert: for where I might
Have made my Country happy: through delight
Of vain affections, wherewith I was taken,
My self was to my self my Countries shame.
Unhappy I to frustrate the desire
Of my dear Country, which did plant me higher
Then my demerits were, yet such was I
In my succeeding course, as vanity
Conceited, 'bou^ desert, made me so proud
As that became worst ill, that seemed most good.
And can presumption yet restrain my pace?
Or is my shame so hardened, as my face
Dare view the light? O impudence in sin,
When in our End, we do afresh begin
To multiply offenses! Can yon light
(Yon splendent body) which shows true delight
To every Blossom, can it seeing thee
Abide to express her former putitie,
Whilst thou art in presence? no, I know it will
Seeing thy shame, glade in some shadie Hill,
And quite obscure her luster, that thy crime
Might see it self in the absence of her shine.
Alas I do labor of a fruitless birth.
And viper-like, makes my poor mother earth,
Curse th'time she bore me: did I not says she,
Foster thy youth, brought up too tenderly?
Did I not suffer mine own Breast be pierced,
The secret cranies of my Bosom searched,
That thou might be refresht? Did not my love,
Bear up thy weak lims, when thou could not move
From mine own Center? Did not I produce
Store in abundance for thy private use,
Of which thou can not say, thou ere had skant,
Possessing that which many better want?
Am not I she that cheares thee, when alone,
Yet as contemned I am trod upon?
Am not I she supports thy feeble stand,
And like a nursing mother, with my hand
dandles thee on my knee? yet for all this,
Thou kills thy Mother with a Judas kiss.
Affliction to my Age, shall my wronged breast
Be furrowed for thy good? when I Am oppressed
More by such Bratts, to whom I favor show,
Then by such strangers, as I never knew:
No, no, depraved Issue, for thy name,
I hate to tell't: ^ith it augments my shame.
But what (my Muse) art thou so lusty grown,
As censuring others, thou forgets thine own?
Come, come express thy grief, make thy complaint
And to sad notes tune thy souls dreriment.
Let not one line, one accent, or one word
Run from thy Pen, that may delight afford
Unto the Reader: but such Notes as force
Passion in men, and in thy self remorce;
Make those thy best of concord: if ere I
Could portray sorrow with a teare-dimd eye,
Affliction in her color, or distress
In native Feature, O may I express
That Image now, and when it is fully shown,
May I enstile't an Image of mine own.
Dissolve thy self, and as thou art a man
Nere swallowed up of sin, let the Ocean
Of thy distreaming eyes assoyle that sin,
Which thou ( poor soul) art thus emplunged in.
What; no teeres? sorrow art thou gone from me,
As if I stood not any need of thee?
Is due compassion thrown on shipwrackes shelfe,
So ruth-lesse grown, it will not wail it self?
Perfidious and accursed that issue is,
Whose headlong course conuerts the Parents bliss,
Unto a curse, and am not I that birth
Of Desolation that remains on earth
Daring Heauens-maker? as if he that made
Me to his glorious Image, were afraid
To enter plea against me; sinful wretch
Thinks thou that God, who does the heavens stretch
Like to a Curtain, He whose sovereign might
Produced out of pitchie darkness, light;
Composed the Ball of Earth, bounded with shores
The raging Ocean, that it should no more
Second her Inundation: who began
A little world, in a little man.
He who each plant, each blossom, fruit, and spray,
cheareth and cherishes from day to day.
He whose transpierciue eyes each thing beholds,
And with his eye of knowledge pure, unfolds
The secret of our thoughts, He whose power can
Subdue the Lion, and Leviathan;
He whose exhaled breath convert'd to Ire
Throws down the wicked to eternal fire;
He whose advanced signal does retain
A milke-white color; like a Tamburlaine,
Implying mercy, which if it do no good,
Next he advances, signifies Blood,
Ruin, subversion: He who is the King
Of the whole Earth, and swayeth every thing
By line of his direction: He whose seat
Is in the Clouds, and's ea^ie to entreat,
If he find true contrition: He whose power
Can crop our huma^e Glory like a flower.
He who has ever been, is now, shall be.
What is it, that he cannot do with thee?
Were thou a Giant, yet such is his force.
Who like a Giant's pressed to run his course;
That thy aspiring thoughts should soon decline,
Like to those Giants were in form^r time.
Were thou of such great power, as some have been,
Whose populous Armies dried the Rivers clean,
Yet would that God of hosts, thy power confound,
And strew thy slaughterd corpse upon the ground.
Were thou in strength of body eminent,
Yet less how soon is that consumed and spent
With one days sickness? Were thy beauty rare,
Thy golden Tresses like the Sun-beam'd hair
Of grace less Absolon: perchance't might be
Thy hair would work thy baine, as well as he.
Were thou as rich as Cresus, yet would Time
Interre thee, and that Goulden calfe of thine;
Whilst Miser-like thou might thy richesse curse,
'Sith th'Deuils mouth is termed a Mis^rspurse.
Were thou as royal, as Agrippa was,
Who seemed in pomp and glory to surpass
Humane condition, whilst applauses than
Should crown thy state: The voice of God not man.
Yet for that luster decked with varied forms,
Wretched thou art, when all co^sum'd with worms?
Alas distracted soul, What Is fine array,
Or Fare deliciously for every day:
Yea, I do think, if I were forced by want,
I could in time learn the Trade of Sycophant:
And profit by it, for there is very few,
" But they live poor that labor to write true;
Yet can I not if I should burst my gall,
Gain me that good opinion of all.
Nor do I care for it: for come what can come,
I am resolved how ere I find their doom:
Let this serve for the Proaeme, and now see
Your pictures drawn in Times Anatomy:
Which seen, you cannot but admire the more,
To read me smooth that was so harsh before.
TIMES ANATOMY, DISPLAYED In six distinct Subjects. 1. Riches. 2. Poverty. 3.
Justice. 4. Injustice. 5. Fate. 6. Death.

BY RICHARD BRATHVVAYTE. Oxonian.
-- Sic Tempora slemus.

Of Richesse.
TO thee the Worldlings Idol, do I make,
These harsh^tund Poems for my countries sake,
Which thou have wronged too long, alas for woe,
That we should see it and suffer't to be so.
It Is thou that fosters enmity, debate,
Sedition, faction, and do ruinate
The Noblest states, in haling down the rod
Of Vengeance on thee, that thou art made a God
On earth: For who, I pray thee do but show
Deserves a Cap, or bended knee but thou?
Who merits honor, who can's credit stretch
So far as thou, that art esteemed rich?
Nay, let me step yet further, I shall find,
The worlds trash held sovereign of the mind.
For who are wise but Rich-men, or who can
Find th'Golden mean, but in a Golden man?
He is Earths darling; and in time will be,
Hells darling too, for who is so fit as he,
Indeed if Riches were sincerely used,
And not so much by Cormorants abused;
That make their Chest their Christ, then might we find,
In richest States, a charitable mind:
Who like good Stewards of what they possess,
Would distribute to th'poore or more of less:
If not the silks of Sydon, or of Tire,
Yet is their bounty shown by their desire;
For not the gift, but th'mind of him that gives,
Accepted is, and his Reward receives.
But alas how far off many Rich-men be,
From th'bond of love, or lincke of charity?
Where Rich-men give to th'rich, thinking it vain,
To give to them that cannot give again,
These will not do as we in Scripture read,
That bids v^ on the waters throw our bread.
" For then be sure, how ere we seem to others,
" We would regard our poor distressed brothers.
And make his tears which he poor soul sends forth
As ^egisters whence we produced our birth.
For alas when we shall from this house of Clay,
Be clean dissolved, as we must one day;
How heavy will our doom at that time be,
That pitied not our Brothers penury?
Where shall our po^pe and majesty be then,
Where all those honors we receiu'd' among men?
Where Is our Attendance, where is our noble birth?
Or where is our wealth we gloried in on earth?
Alas we shall then be stripped of all we have,
Naught left us but a Coffin and a Grave:
And happy we if so it might befall,
The Grave might end our grief, but this's not all;
Lower the wretched must of force descend,
To that same place where sorrows have no end.
And do thou yet (fond rich-man) hugg thy pelf,
Which makes thee an Arch-traytor to thy self?
Do thou consume thy days, adorning it,
That damns thy soul, infatuates thy wit;
Makes thee a Rebel, forcing thee to swerue,
From thy Creator, whom thou ought to serve?
Tortures thy guilty Conscience (simple fool)
To have thy state to witnesse' against thy soul.
But thou'l object, why should I be so rough
Against thee, that art resolved to do enough
Before thou die: For I do hear thee still
Harp on a good, and charitable Will.
Which shall express what thou in life time meant,
By thy last will, and final Testament.
Good-wills be good indeed, and worthily
Do they deserve our best of memory:
But much I fear, this good is mixed with ill,
And that good wills proceed not from Good will:
For if they did methinkes it should not grieve them,
To give them freely, before they are forced to leave them.
And sure methinkes None can be said to give,
But such as do it franckly while they live.
" For when they are dead (as't shall be after shown)
" That which they give cannot be called their own.
And why should we our Rich-men so commend
That give fair Legacies before their end;
Since Iudus well we know, of all men worst
Gave dying, all he had, yet died accursed:
Yet these men give but part, Judas gave all,
(May English- Jews be warned by Judas fall.)
O then let Time, whose ripe occasion brings
A blessed success unto the best of Kings.
Excite you Rich-men, both in life and death,
But most in life, to cheer such with your breath;
The breath of life, food, raiment, and the like,
As at your doors send out their rufull shrike,
Shutnot your Ears, for be you sure of this,
Shutting from them, you shall be shut from bliss;
Take them into your houses, for we reed,
Some have received Prophet in their weed.
For if you open not unto the poor,
How shall you enter when you knock at door^
Of Sions Palace? For, approved we see
Saints minister to Saints necessity.
Be then your selves, and with Zacheus give,
Not on your Deathbeds, but now whilst you live,
And are in health, for such shall have reward,
Though not on Earth, yet surely afterward;
And their reward shall be so much the more
As they were open-hearted to the poor.
But'las how many Spunges now there be
Which soake the needy, and with cruelty
Oppress the silly Orphane? It is true,
Too many be there of this wicked crew,
That pester this sweet Island, with the cries
Of poor distressed souls, whence vengeance hies
With fethered speed, to make these great-ones know
" There is a God above that sees below;
And can discu^se each secret, and has power
To punish the rich when they the poor devour.
Dear Noboth cries, and none do pity him,
While Ahab sleeps securely in his sin;
Naboth must loose his Vineyard, true he must
" For what is unjust, by Greatness is made just.
His ground lies ^itly for him, and he will
Either obtain it, or his Neighbor kill:
For if the poore-man chance but to deny it,
He means with some forged Title to come by it?
So as by force he is stripped of land and all,
'For the Proverb holds, the weakest goes to th'wall.
But hear me rich-man whom so ere thou be
That triumphs thus in others misery:
When thou have purchased what thou did desire,
Be sure Oppression must not loose her hire;
For there is a Judgment, and a sharp one too,
Will startle thee, though thou art careless now.
Then will poor Naboth, whom thou here did wrong
Witness against thee, while thy faltering tongue
Without defense, with silence charmed shall be,
Yielding to all that is obiect'd against thee.
How fearful will that sentence then appear.
When death and horror shall be every where?
When ghastly spirits summon thee to hell,
And thou art forct to bid thy joys farewell:
" Where cruel worms shall eat thy hart-strings out
" Where groans and grieves, sighs, shrikes sound all about.
What is the fruit then of Oppression? Sure
That Vale of Tophet which shall ere endure.
And make him draw an euer-loathing breath,
Dying in life, and living in a death.
O then how happy he that so does live
As the one hand knows not, what the other give.
Dispencing freely, what he does possess
Of all his substance, which does well express
His love to God, whose Mansion is above,
Bearing his Image such especial love;
For God has promised such to live for ever,
" Since he himself does love a cheerful Giver.
O that this flowrie I Will, whose sacred name
Makes her recorded in the Book of fame;
Where Times- illustrate Trophies show her glory,
" So well displayed in many ancient story;
Would scourge these Gold-adorers for exemple,
" All Symmoniacke patrone^ out ath Temple:
So should the Gospel, Ophyrs purest gold,
Be more esteemed then to be bought or sold;
So should we have in Sion Shepherds store,
Which come not in at window, but at door:
So should our Church resume her golden Age;
And learning freely get a Parsonage.
So should good Shepherds make their flocks increase
And know their office not to flea nor fleece.
So should our Church be as it ought to be,
Not subject to smooth-faced Symonie.
So should our Churchmen gain them more esteem,
" Seem what they be, and be the same they seem.
So should th'Donation of 'a Benefice
Aim at a man of Merit, not of price;
So should Gods house be honored more then now,
Having such Pastors as might tell us how.
O Patrones if you knew how ill it were,
To make the Church a Mart, or public fair:
Where Magus- like you sell the Churches good,
If this I say you rightly understood;
You would accurse the Riches you have got
By such synister means: and wish your lot
Had been Employment in the Commonweal,
(Though on the mean condition) then to steal,
Purloyne, embezle what the Church does owe,
Which you on lust and riot do bestow.
Much better were it to beg from door to door,
Then being Rich, to make Gods Temple poor.
For well I wot the Fathers Symonie,
Lays heavy curse on his posterity.
And that foundation which is so begun,
Seldom succeedes from Father to the Son.
For this we know approved by sacred writ,
Which comprehends the mysteries of wit;
Not humane but divine, where Treasures store
Are locked up from the proud, and open to the poor.
That though the Rich seem in abundance blessed,
And now Secure says, Now soul take thy rest.
Yet all this Bliss continues but a day,
For Night will come and take his soul away.
Yea, though the Rich-men of the world do seem,
Like a Bay Tree, whose leaves be ever green;
Yet their foundations stand not on firm ground,
" For coming back their place shall not be found.
But for the Righteous and his hopeful seed,
Who ever saw them forced to beg their bread.
Sure David did not (as himself has told)
Though he was young and lived till he was old.
O how the best of Blessings are abused,
Good in themselves and if discreetly used.
Natures indowments, but deprau'd we see,
And count them worst of any things that be.
For it is the best of Fortunes complement,
To aim in Riches at the souls content;
Which planted on the sovereign of bliss,
Makes what is ours in Essence one with his.
But such as aim at honor, and by art
Of smooth insinuation, make their heart
A stranger to their Language, to obtain
A little earthly profit; What is their gain
But th'Guerdon of Ambition? Which aspires
Too high, to reach the port of her desires.
Yea, I may say, if ere we could epsy
A Cammell haled through a Needles eye;
Or any work how difficult so ere,
Accomplished by a Pigmey: we may here
Produce the like, nay, I may say far more,
For like to this was nere produced before.
" For it is a Sentence that is already given,
It Is hard for Rich-men to inherit heaven.
Such men indeed as are by wealth inricht.
To make their gold their God, their Chest their Christ.
Gold make not rich, whence is that Proverb grown
So common now: Content is worth a Crown.
For many poore-men richer far we see,
Through their content, then such as Richest be.
Old Chremes in the Poet rakes for pelf,
And to enrich his heir torments himself.
Which when his Son has got (mark th'misers care)
He spends as fast on lust and luscious Fare.
Bare were his Fathers dishes, Bedding mean,
Homespun his Coat, his chop-falne cheeks as lean;
Hunger his Sauce, his Recreation pain,
To tell his Gold and put it up again.
Yet see the fruit of's labor, and his end,
What th'Father could not use, the Son can spend.
For true it is which was auerr'd by one,
" A scraping Father makes a sporting Son.
Well known that maxim is (tho th'instance evil,
Happie's that son whose Father goes to th'Deuill.
Many we read of, that were like to these,
As Hermon, Phaedon, and Hermocrates:
The first whereof was so enthralled to wealth,
As he contemned the Benefit of health;
And seeing that there was no remedy,
But he must yield to fraylemortalitie:
To show that Love he bore to wealth before,
He made himself his own Executour.
Next Phaedon was, who seeing death at hand,
Commanded such as did about him stand;
That when he was departed, straight they should,
Stitch in his winding sheet pieces of gold,
For sure (quoth he) I am, those Judges three
Which be in hell, will soon corrupted be;
If they but see this Gold, and so shall I
By bribing Hell obtain my liberty.
But of all others that Hermocrates
May be esteemed for the vain'st of these,
Who when he saw that fatal time was come,
That he must die, command'd them build a Tomb
Of purest Gold, and that there should be laid
Three bags of Gold as Pillowes for his head*
For if (quoth he) our death as it is expressed,
Be but a sleep, in which we seem to rest,
Till that our souls such privilege obtain,
To reassume their Bodies once again.
Small is the rest which I am like to have,
Without this blessed companion in my Grave.
And hear me friends, good cause I have to doubt it,
Since while I lived, sleep could I nere without it.
O if we knew what wealth were in content,
And how a very little's competent
To Nature, we would learn what Scriptures teach,
Desiring rather to be good than rich.
For goodness is a lasting Epithyte,
And gives us knowledge of that Infinite
Which is transcendent, if then understood
" It is the best of Richesse to be good.
And sure methinkes three causes there should be,
Might move us hate all super fluitie
In these respects: First, they inconstant are
And subject to mutation; next, the care
They bring to their possessour: last of all
They force us from Gods Providence to fall,
Which violation slaueth some we see,
Falling from God unto Idolatry.
For though this Golden Calfe of Horeb stand,
Not open to the World, yet this Land
Has many private Baalites, I fear,
Which more affection to their Idol bear,
Then to their Maker: and though they have art
To hide their Guilt, they worshiped with their heart,
And has not then this Island cause to mourn,
To see her people thus to Baals turn,
And leave their God? Yes, she has cause to show
At no time more effects of Grief then now:
Where this Souls-dropsie, thirsty Avarice
Enforces Rich-men to Idolatrise;
Who, when they have crammed up their Chests with store,
The more they have, they covet still the more.
And whereto tends all this? If we might stay,
Or going hence bear our estate away:
There were some reason of our care to get,
And yet no cause of our adoring it.
But neither borne to stay, nor bear it hence,
Thus to admire it, it is foolishness.
For know Rich-man a shroud shall be thy store,
" This poor men have, and Rich-men have no more.
" But haste the Muse to what is known of thee,
" As thou wast borne to it, write of Poverty.
FINIS.
Of Poverty.
NOw unto thee that art contemned of all,
Derided, spurned, forced from the wall
Unto the kennell, do I frame my speech,
That I thy self some patience might teach.
And move withal such as do hear thee cry,
" But stop their Ears, to some more charity.
Take comfort then, for thou shall see on earth,
Most of thy coat to be of greatest worth.
Though not in state, for who ere saw but merit,
Was rather borne to beg than to inherit;
Yet in the Gifts of Nature, we shall find,
A ragged Coat often have a Royal mind.
For to descend to each distinct degree,
By due Experience we the same shall see.
If to Pernassus where the Muses are,
There shall we find their Diet very bare:
Their houses ruined, and their well springs dry,
Admired for naught so much as Poverty.
Here shall we see poor Aeschylus maintain
His Nighterne studies with his Daily pain;
Pulling up Buckets (but 'twas never known)
That filling others, he could fill his own.
Here many more discern we may of these,
As Lamachus, and poor Antisthenes;
Both which the sweetes of Poesy did sipp,
Yet were Rewarded with a staff and scripp:
For I nere knew, nor (much I fear) shall know it,
Any die rich, that lived to die a Poet.
If to Profession of the Law we go,
We find the best Practisioners prove so;
For such we count the best, as will not be
(For Conscience Sake) corrupted with a fee;
Whilst others of less Conscience far, than wit,
Think him not wise, cannot dispense with it.
If to the Plowman, who does till the Land,
And gets himself a living by his hand:
Often we shall find for all his early care,
Continual labor, and his slender fare;
His hopeful crop has not his wished success,
Or something else mis-carries, more or less;
Which questionless, is to the Plowman sent,
To try him with, and make him patient.
Yea, we shall see that Fortune bears a hate,
In every order, rank, degree, and state:
To men of most demerit: th'cause may be,
Fortune is blind and cannot merit see:
Or for because her self is ignorant,
She gives the wittall, lets the witty want,
Desiring only such men to advance,
As honor her and favor ignorance.
And sure me thinks, an instance may be given,
Even in these sacred Ministers of Heaven;
Such I do mean who honor much the Lord*
In Reverent dispensing of his Word,
Breaking the Bread of life with due respect,
Yet are Rewarded with a mere Neglect:
Reaping for their deserts no other Grace,
Then some poor stipend, or a Curates place.
This is their hyre, while others less deserving
In Conversation, Grave respect and learning
Eat of the fat, Non-residence must serve,
Feeding themselves, while their poor flocks do sterue:
Such were those Abby-lubbers who could sleep,
And fleece their Flocks, but seldom feed their sheep.
These like to Drones (for so they seem to me)
Live on the Labors of The Industrious Be:
For while the Be (to make her honey-combe)
Romes here and there: these dronelike stay at home,
And eat the fruit (so be these Lubbars fed)
For which the Be so truly labored.
Call up thy spirits then, who ere thou be
That are distressed by means of Poverty.
For this thou see descends in a Blood,
And claymes possession only of the Good.
It Is not our Virtues, nor the worth of men
^ow rare so ever, can exempt us then
From this Affliction, but it is in our will
(Disposed by God) to take it well or ill.
For he that takes it as from Heaven sent,
For's better Trial and Experiment,
" Makes a right use of what he does sustain,
" And for his want, shall have a treble gain.
Some we have read of Rich, and others poor,
Yet being dead, we find of them no more
Then that they were, and being now both gone,
Twixt rich and poor the difference is none.
And therefore was it shaddow'd well at these,
By that same Cynick-doggd Diogenes,
Who on a time to make a special use
Of humane state, went to a Charnell house,
Where store of skulls, and bones he gathered,
Of Princes, Peers, and Beggars that were dead.
Which being done, he laid them in the way
Where Alexander was to pass that day;
Who in Victorious manner passing by,
Asked him the reason, why those Bones did lie
In such a frequent place? Quoth he, I know
Here be the Bones of Swaynes and Princes too,
And I have sought (but all I did is vain)
To know which is the Princes from the Swayne.
It Is true indeed that Virtue only gives
Life to our Name, by which it only lives:
For outward States how glorious so ere,
Make us but honored only while we are here,
For when the hour-glasse of our life is run,
That admiration which we had is done,
And all that pomp and beauty of our day
By Sith of Fate is taken clean away.
We read of in the Stories of fore time,
How that Redow^ted Sultane Saladine,
After exployts and sundry Victories,
With which be had enlarged his Seignories;
Bravely at^hieu'd, he fell extremely sick,
And feeling now the sting of death to prick,
He called his Chieftaine to him, who at hand,
Drew near and asked him what was his command.
To thee (quoth Saladine) as General
Of my Victorious Army do I call,
For thou have seen me with my Persian darts
To force a terror in the Eastern parts.
Yea well thou know I never lost the day
But still departed Conquer our away:
Yet now behold how I am captive led,
And in my Conquests now a^ conquered;
For I am forced by Deaths assault to yield,
And Coward-like to leave thee in the feeld.
Hie to Damascus, where in the open street,
In stead of Ensigns rea^e this winding sheet;
And say, Behold great Saladine's berest
Of all he had, naught but this sheet is left.
Even he whose Temples, wreaths of Fame adornes,
Prayed to by Kings, becomes a prey to Worms.
Is this the end of Great ones? 'I as what then
Is th'difference twixt them and meaner men?
Little or none, to say I may be bold,
Since both had their Creation of one mould,
Both have one form, one feature, yet we see
In Forms alike, what different honors be.
So as we cannot well resemble it
To any one similitude more fit
Then to some fair Brick-building, where we know
Some Brickes are placed above, and some below:
These on the Spires and Turrets, whose high seat
Implie those men we spoke of, that are Great.
These on the Eue^, or near the Pent-house placed,
Shadow those Men which live by Time disgras't.
Yet when this Building shall be pulled down,
And her aspiring Turrets overthrown;
Gazing upon those Ruins with our eye,
We cannot judge which Brickes were low, which hie:
Yea those same Brickes perchance at next remove,
Which were below, shall then be placed above.
Others there be, these diffrent states express,
By a Resemblance to a Game at Chesse;
Where some are Kings, some made to guard on the^.
Some Peers and Bishops, others meaner men;
Yet shall you hardly know them which is whether,
When they are put up in a Bag together.
Some have compared these states unto a Stage,
Where each have roabes that fit their personage:
Some Princely Monarcks, others Vassayles be,
The Meane-men slau'd to Great-mens liberty.
Yet is their play no sooner end'd and done,
But they are vnstript of th'Garments they put on.
And being disrobed, they are no Princes more,
But those same persons which they were before.
Though some I know, that will not with their will
Put off their Suites, but love to wear them still;
That they (belike) of people might be known,
Or rather this, cause they have pawnd their own;
" But there is no hope of such in any age,
Who make their stew their Tyre-house, street their stage.
But hear me (starueling) now to thee I come,
That begg'st all day, yet hardly gets a crum,
How ere thou seem afflicted and forlorn,
" Thou live not half so poor, as thou was borne,
Now thou have rags, tho mean God-wot they be,
But at thy Birth thou had naught to cover thee:
Then, if thou had want succor and relief,
Thou had no tongue to manifest thy grief,
But now thou have a tongue, and tho none hear thee
" Yet there is one above that will be near thee:
And can avenge thee, for it is he that hears
Thy ruthful cries, and bottles up thy tears.
Besides I see The Advantage thou may have
Ore Richer men, in going to thy Grave:
For well I know, when they approach their end,
They must take leave of kinsman and of friend;
Which puling come with finger in the eye,
And makes them far vnwillinger to die.
Whiles thou in Death feels sovereign remedy
To all thy Griefs, and through thy Poverty,
Importunes Death when she does seem to stay,
And coming meets him, better half the way:
For now at last thou thinks the Time is come
Wherein thou may be equal unto some
That here dispis'd thee; and indeed thou may
" For thou have less to answer for, than they.
Be this thy Recluse then, and here repose
Thy self a while to descant of thy woes,
And tell me when th'haste read this Poaeme ore,
If thou find not more solace then before.
FINIS.
Of Justice.
NOw unto thee who like the Evening star,
Sends forth the rays of native glory far;
Do I address my Muse: o that she might
Have so much power as to describe thee right!
This is a virtue that does comprehend
All virtues in her, and indeed's the end
Whereat all good men aim, wherein they trust,
For him we count a perfect man that is Just.
So that of all those Virtues which we call
(For their transcendent Natures) Cardinal,
Then this same Virtue ampler there is none,
Including one in all, and all in one,
But first, that I may make her better known.
I will describe her Mansion and her Throne,
What she admires, who her attendance be,
Which shown, her worth the sooner you may see*
First, for her Throne it is neither high nor low,
But in an Equal or a middle row.
For high she will not by no means abide,
Least by her height she should be taxt of pride;
Nor so dejected, as her humble seat,
Might cause contempt of Justice to the Great.
Therefore as she is of Virtues sovereign Queen,
She sits enthroned in a Golden mean.
Those she admires be no Magnificoes,
No Fliers, no Flirts, nor no Ardelioes,
No sly Informers that insinuates,
No sharking Lawyers, shifting Advocates;
No bribed Atturneys that take dooble fees:
No, she is too good to brook the best of these.
But rather such as Students are in Laws,
To heart their Clients in a righteous cause,
Such as when they before her Throne appear,
Neither are bribed with gold, nor curbed with fear;
These be her Darlings, these will she desire
To consort with, these only she will admire.
Those which attend her are deserving men,
And will do Justice, right, in spite of them
That dare oppose her, for withouten these
We should see Justice often on her knees,
Since Justice though she speak with resolution,
Her speech is vain, not put in Execution:
But when her followers ready are at hand,
To put in Execution her command,
Then Justice bears a far more gracious show,
For what she wills, they willing are to do.
Of all the Acts which King Cambyses did,
There was no one that better merited;
Then when he (for abuse of Justice) made
The skin of Judge Sysambris to be fleade,
And to deter all others from like wrong
Caused it near the Iudgement-seate be hong.
So pure's the Throne of Justice, and her eye
So piercing, as there is no obliquitie,
How small so ere, which seems to daze her light,
But quickly it is discerned by her sight.
Her eyes be ever open, for she knows
That there be many which to the world shows
No less then Saints, yet being tried they are nothing,
Yea worse then so, they are wolves in a sheeps clothing.
Well may we think then, Justice had not need
To sleep, when Foxes amongst her Lambkins feed.
And subtle Sconces shrouded often we see
Under pretenses of simplicity.
But to the end I rightly may define
The professor of a Virtue so divine,
Methinkes he should be one that knowledge had,
And awful power to terrify the bad;
A grave aspect, mixed with austeritie,
Which should be tempered so with lenity
That in them both he might be understood,
A scourge to the ill, a chearer of the good.
Nor is he bound to the Letter of the Law,
For-Summum ius, Summ' est iniuria.
But with a modest exposition may
Sweeten his censure, and the sense allay.
Nor should he (as that Judge we read of) be,
Who heard the Widow not for equity
But for she was still knocking at his gate,
And in her suite was so importunate
As he was forced by her entreaties than,
To do her right, yet feared not God nor man.
But such an one, as in his Makers sight
Desires to do to every one what is right,
And with even Balance weighs the poor'st that arre
As well as those men that be Richer far;
Deserves to be professor in this time
Of such a virtue, noble, and divine.
For if there were respect of persons had,
Much do I fear there is many would be bad,
Who now restrained are and kept in awe,
" Not so much for their God, as for the Law.
" For wicked men if ere they find restraint
" Of working ill, it is fear of punishment.
But stay, me thinks I hear a Supplicant,
Whose cause is good, yet for he is in want,
His fee-lesse Lawyers never are prepared
To open his case, and so he is never heard.
True there be such, but why does Justice sit,
But to reform such grieuances as it?
Is his cause good? the first in plea is his,
And though he come in Forma Pauperis;
Though some for Dives plead, some shall not choose
But shall be forced to plead for Lazarus.
It Is true there shall: but it is so slightly done,
As the poor man's case being opened, he is gone,
The Lawer I mean, for long he will not stay
To plead his cause that has no fees to pay;
Or if he plead he does so post it ore
As having done, he does respect no more,
Whether his threed-bare Client loose or win,
Then the Libertine to act a sensual sin.
But in this place now when I come so near,
I will insert a story I did hear;
Which being related, though not half so well
As it was told, may please the Client well.
In that last Age when Rome 'gan to decline
From her first height, and that there was a time
For vicious men to follow their own will,
Where none were great but such as would be ill.
That Hydra -headed Snake the Multitude,
In public Court unto the Synod sude,
That such corruptions as by Law were bred
Might by their Censures now be punished:
The discreet Senate Ioath for to offend
Such factious Members, did attention lend
Unto their suite, and granted them free use
To apprehend such as did Law abuse:
Which being done, their rage brookt no denial,
But brought these corrupt Lawyers to their trial:
Where such as were found guilty, and had done
Such odious crimes, as made poore-men undone
Were liable to the Censure of the Court,
Which (as I read) proceeded in this sort.
Gracchus hold up thy haud, here art thou tried
And guilty found (which cannot be denide)
Of many foul abuses, such as these,
Brocage in suites, Demurrers, dooble fees,
Corruption, Subornation, nay, what is worse
To leave the Devil in thy Clyents purse,
Dancing and capring, for the which and more
By thee in like sort acted heretofore:
Hear what the censure of the Court has done
To thee, that have so many overthrown;
Thou and Catastes thy false Scriuiner
Shall in the public Marketplace appear,
Where for example to Posterity,
You both shall stand upon the Pillorie.
Where on your backs shall be endorsed these
Three words, - Pro Euertendo Pauperes.
Which done, that Jove may grant you absolution,
You shall be forced to make a restitution,
For every bribe, shift, trick, devise, or cheat,
Bill, Bond, Release, Indenture counterfeite,
Done, to be done, or caused to be done
By you, or yours, for friend, foe, father, son:
Which penance past for Errors heretofore,
The Court awards you nere to practice more,
This Judgment after past on two or three,
But still the people prone to mutiny;
Haled out more, nor would they be restraind
Till all their Lawyers were (well near) arraind:
Good God how many diffrent minds were then,
Where there were far more censures then were men!
For Faction (is so strange a Natured Elfe)
As it agrees but seldom with it self.
Some cried let us whip them, others cried far louder,
Let Us burn these Vipers of our Realm to powder:
Others dislikt of that, and thought not fit,
Least as the Phaenyx does a Phaenyx get
By her own Ashes; or as we do read,
The Beetles ordure does the Beetle breed;
So the Ashes of these Lawyers (which were pity)
Might raise a dampe to poison all the City.
For if they living such corruption breed,
How corrupt will they be when they are dead?
While they were scaning thus, one amongst the rest,
Starting upright, said, he did think it best,
Since that their Crimes extended but to state
Not life, their Substance should be consiscate;
But how, quoth one? Unto the Treasorie;
No (quoth another) to the Commonaltie:
Since well I know (and manifest it is)
The Commons purses paid well for this.
Debating thus, one of the Grauer sort
Of Law-professours stood up in the Court,
And after due obeisance (as was fit)
To such high Peers as did in Council sit,
He thus began: You Conscript Fathers, you
That sit in Judgment to give each their due.
Thus far have heard, what we could speak, what they,
Now will it please you hear what I can say;
Diverse be the Censures which be given on us,
And rightly too, for great is our abuse,
Yet well your Honors know no fault's so great
Which easy Glosses may not mitigate;
Yea, it is known, some Natures be so bent,
Kindness does more with them then punishment.
For such to lenity will often submit,
When rougher terms can never manage it.
Know then Grave Senators we do allot
An ample portion of all we have got
By fraud, collusion, or by any way
To special uses, but not such as they
Seem to inioyne us: (no my Lords) it is fit
That we, who have encreasd our state by wit,
Advice, wise providence, and policy,
Should not have such fond Caruers as these be
To share our Fortunes, for it may be known,
They Will ill keep ours, that could not save their own.
Fond Caruers (quoth the Rabble)? Yes, said he;
With that through the Court, there rose a mutiny;
But being represd, he took the better heed
To move the Rout: and thus he did proceed.
We are content (therefore) to give to the use
Since we to give can neither will nor choose)
Of such as be deprived of Native sense,
Reason and Government a competence
For to relieve them, and that there-withall
There may provided be an Hospital
Or house for their abode, we do agree
A Bed-Iem house b'erected speedily.
This is our will, and we do freely give it,
By the mad we got it, and to the mad we leave it.
This was no sooner by the Lawyer said,
Then all approved it, and were well appaid;
Where the Monster-headed Vulgar ope'd her jaws
And did confirm this doom with one applause.
This good they did that nere did good before,
Nor as it is like, will ere do any more.
But this's a Tale which I have heard with more,
And I would have it to be taken so:
For all of no Profession's good we see,
Nor all of Lawyers, nor shall ever be:
Yet if ere Justice shined, may she shine here,
And make our Albion her Hemyspheere.
That as we have a Steward of our own,
Who justly weld's and bears up her Crown;
So we may have Dispencers under him,
Who through their Justice may discomfit sin.
FINIS.
Of Injustice.
NOw unto thee, to speak I must be bold,
Who sets the Throne of Justice to be sold,
Who to the Orphans cry, and Widows tear,
Void of remorse of Conscience, stops thine ear;
Who shines in purple, and in it do show,
Far worse then that, a Purple Conscience too:
Thou that do veil to Great ones and do seek
To gratify their Lordships, I must speak,
For if I should be silent, whisht, or doumbe,
The stones 'ith stree^es I know would have a tongue.
Thou crams thy Coffers with a suites delay,
And like an Epicure from day to day
Feeds on delicious cates, which thou do carne
To fill thy Maw, while the poor for Justice sterue.
Thou Philip -like sleeps, when the widow cries
For Justice at thy hands, and rubb'st thine eyes,
And rashly do pronounce ere well prepared,
Thy Judgment in that cause thou never heard:
" For which the Widow her appeal does make
From Philip sleeping, to Philip awake.
Thou Laetharge, thou that for promotion sake,
Contemnes thy soul, ruins that sovereign state,
Which gives us perfect Essence, thou that sleeps
When poor men's causes come to plea, but keeps
Thine eyes, thine ears, and every faculty,
That thou in them might Rich-men gratify.
For well thou know that wretches of this sort,
Either have done, or will annoint thee for it.
And yet thou snorts on still, making that Th^one
Where Justice used to sit, a place unknown
To any that professes her, whose sight
Eclipsed is, when right's put down by might;
And lo, how right's suppressed by thee proud whoor,
That make the rich to triumph ore the poor.
Thou that contemns the weak and desolate,
Making them call for vengeance at thy gate:
Thou that hoords ire against the day of ire,
And shall sustain that soul consuming fire,
Endless in her consumption: it is thou
Which ruins ample Provinces, where grew
Trophies of honor once, but through thy shame,
Have lost their greatness, honor, worth, and fame.
For whence is the Proverb spoke so commonly,
" Iustice's a Relic of Idolatry:
But as in ancient time when Idols were
So much adored and reuerenc'd every where;
And Oracles, predictions of each state,
Told foolish people what should be their fate;
These Pagan Gods (or Devils) would not tell
Ought good to them, that did not please them well,
No more will Justice (or Injustice rather)
(For this by times observance may gather)
Approve of any cause, how firm or just
So ere it be, till she be bribed first.
Or this same Proverb may produce good sense,
If it be not mis construed from hence;
As simple men thought none could happy be,
But such as reuerene'd their Idolatry;
Offering their Jewels, ornaments, and store,
To make their Idols rich, themselves as poor:
Supposing them thrice blessed, that could come
To hear good tidings from Apolloes tongue;
Whereas in deed if they the truth could seek,
It was their Gifts which made Apollo speak.
So may we see men labor to this end,
To get, Sir Reverence, Justice, for their friend,
Which when they have attained, they set no more
By all those doubts which they were in before,
Then does the Sea-bit Mariner esteem,
When he' sa-land, those dangers he has seen,
For why he knows, he has a Patron got,
Who what his cause is, greatly stands not;
For well he sees the Law is in his will,
To make the ill seem good, the good seem ill.
These be those Spiders that obscure the shine
of Justice, which 's depraved through the time
Wherein they live, while Cripple Justice halts,
Entituling the Servant to the Masters faults,
For it is not the fault of Justice, but of Time,
To tax the Servant for the Masters crime.
But from Injustice now must I descend,
To others Subjects, wishing that an end
Of their depraved Reign may soon appear,
Who stain with purple sins the Robes they wear;
Thus from thy foul infection I Will remove me,
Meaning to leave thee, since I cannot love thee.
FINIS.
Of Fate.
FAte, says the Ethnicke, is a firm decree,
Which, though foreseen, may not prevented be
Whereby (poor snakes) by pur-blind fate they are se
Like Bedlam fools, to dance in Errors net.
Others have grounded this opinion too,
Which some approve, and others disallow,
That in this vale of anguish, every Man
Has some one Angel for his Guardian;
And that our Fortune good or bad shall be
As those same Angels keep us company;
If Good-ones be our Guardians, O then
By their attendance we are happy men:
If Evil, ruin shall attend our State,
So by these two we may collect our Fate;
And from that God to whom all Angels sing,
These Angels have their power, as from their king:
For the good do naught unless he perfect it,
Nor ought the ill, unless he them permit.
But late Divines seem to expound this place,
That this same Angel is the saving Grace,
Which does assist such as in Faith do call,
And leaves others to themselves to fall
By his just Judgment, who in's Palm contains
This globe of Earth, and tries the hearts and reins:
Amongst other Passengers were ferried over,
Chanced to resort a Peddler and a Drouer,
Both at one time; the Drouer he did bring
Sheep to the Fair, which he was carrying,
Of Ewes good store (right Butcher-ware) there came
And amongst the rest a bonnie butting Ram,
Whose awful front the rest securely kept,
And all this while the Cup-shot Peddler slept.
With many a nod drawn from his drowsy brain,
Which the Ram observes, and butts at him again;
The Peddler now, ^eeling belike some smart,
With such like words as these began to thwart
The careless Ram, Sir I am at a word,
Butt you at me, I Will butt you ouer-boord.
And not one word the Peddler could speak more,
Till he began to nod just as before;
Where with the in censed Ram thinking he meant
To push at him, so fierce a stroke him lent
As his distempered Noddle seemed dismayed,
With violent assault his horns had made:
Yet part through grief and anguish which he felt,
He now resolved to wash the Rams white pelt,
Which he performed, his fury to discover,
And roundly takes the Ram and throws him over;
The loving Ewes seeing their Sweet-hart swim,
Resolved with one consent to follow him;
Which the Lawyer in his pleadings noting than,
" Brother (quoth he) this was a lusty Ram,
For much I doubt whether our wives or no,
If we should be thus vs'de would follow so.
But to be brief, not any one was found,
Of all the Drouers flock, which was not drowned,
So as a Suite's commenced betwixt these twain,
Wherein the Plaintiff seems to complain,
And by petition humbly does crave
That for his loss he some relief may have;
Which how it was determined by the Laws,
Being (me thinks) a Presidentall cause,
I will not now insist on, but discuss
What Fate decreed herein, and briefly thus.
When the Peddler met the Drouer, his intent
Concurred not, questionless, with this event,
Nor meant he any harm unto his sheep,
When he exempt from care fell fast a sleep;
Nor gave he the occasion, but the Ram,
Who with his furious force awaked the man,
Nor was he to be blamed when he did aim
To take Revenge, The worm will turn again.
Where was the fault then? you will say in Fate;
No, not in her but in the Pedlers pate:
Or to ascribe more properly the fault
Nor Fate nor Pate were cause of this but Malt.
One other instance I will here produce,
Which I by way of Supposition use,
A form which I approve so much the rather,
'Cause from Supposes none offense can gather.
A friend inuites another to his house.
Whose presence after grows injurious
Unto his Reputation, for he grows
More inward with his wife then each man known
And this continues, yet who can descrie
The sly effects of Lovers priuacie,
Observing such a watch, as neither wit,
Art, or Suspicion may discover it.
Now unto whom should we impute the blame,
To him that caused him come, or him that came,
(...) unto Fate, since he by accident
Unto the house as one invited went?
If we should skan whence the first effect did spring,
We properly may lay the fault on him
Who through the too much confidence he had,
Gave way unto his wife, and made her bad,
So as my Judgment is, the case so stands,
As he may take his horns in his own hands;
For nere had he run on Dishonors shelfe,
Or gained him infamy, but through himself.
Or else we may ascribe't to Woman's will,
Which has a Native pronenesse unto ill;
So as what will be will be, and what man
May force a woman do more than she can?
And my opinion's this, it is no boot
To curb a Wench, that is inclind'd vnto't,
For be she in restraint or liberty,
Her eye still waits for opportunity;
Which got, she is so resolved as she will venture
To taste delight should thousand eyes prevent her.
Yea, on my conscience, though I nere have tried it,
I durst protest the more they are denide it,
The liker are they when fit time they find,
To serve their jealous husbands in their kind:
For though we force them ever to obey,
And to make sure work, use both Lock and Key,
Italian-like, yet when the time shall come,
Be sure we may that they will hitt us home;
For this my firm Position still shall be,
" Horns can we not prevent, though we foresee.
But all too long our Pen seems to dilate,
Upon this pur-blind Goddess, Pangan Nisi cor tuum esset fatuum, non crederes
Fatum: Aug.
Fate:
If we do good, as few are our good deeds,
Let us conclude that good from God proceeds:
If ill, as many ills do we commit,
Upon our selves let us lay the cause of it;
So like true Christians we will ever hate,
To take from God that we may add to Fate.
" Thus Fate's a Panim Idol; only He
" Disposes us, by whom we only be.
FINIS.
Of Death.
DEath is a passage, and if understood,
A grateful messenger unto the good,
By which they pass from this same house of clay
To Syons Court, where they shall live for aye.
Why should Death then a terror be, since it
Is made the Means, by which we freedom get?
Here are we Pilgrims, and though store I have,
Yet for all this I am but Fortunes slave;
Subject to every hazard, and am feign
To keep with care, what I have got with pain.
Yea, tell me thou that in all honor lives,
And want nothing, had thou never grieves
To discontent thee? Or if thou were free
From discontents; did nere mortality
Urge thee to Dissolution? Thou will say,
Thou had in deed, but soon they went away;
And gone, thou have forgot those griefs as clean
As if thou nere had felt, what they had been.
Unhappy wretch, this is thy too-much pride
To vaunt of those, should make thee mortifide,
For griefs be Passions, which may caution thee,
To think thou art not where thou ought to be;
Which thou may hence collect: A traveler
Having through many a desert wandered far,
And now returning home, he is at rest
From the care with which he was before oppressed.
But thou will say: thou once was of that mind,
When thou had no estate to leave behind,
When thy attendance was of reckoning small,
Thy fare but mean, thy honor none at all:
When thou in the eye of worldly men did seem
Of that contempt as if thou had not been;
But now the case is altered, and do hate
To think on death, since thou have raisd thy state.
What argument this is, thou straight shall see,
Scanning those things which seem to hinder thee.
Me thinks a Pilgrim far from his abode,
And in his travail pressed with a load,
Should much desire (having been wearied
With that he bore) to be disburdened:
And so should thou, if thou could feel thy self,
Desire to be disburdened of thy pelf,
Which as a load, to many men is given,
And makes the way seem tedious toward heaven.
Yea, sure I am, there is no man draws breath,
If he have hope in after-Time, but death
Will seem as pleasant, and as well accepted,
As if he had obtayn'd what he expected.
For well he see's, his Labors have an end,
His foes are quelled, and he shall have a friend,
Which will receive him, where such joys appear,
As far surpass these comforts he had here.
It Is true indeed, that many are dismayed,
When they do see death on a wall portrayed,
They like not his proportion, for he breeds
Diverse distractions in their troubled heads:
Whence is it we see so many souls depart
With eyes dejected, and with heavy heart.
For why, Distrust they have ere to entreat
Pardon of God. because their sinn's so great.
Wretched these, in that they entertain,
That hideous sin hatched first by odious Caine,
Crying with him, and with him I must leave them,
" So great's our sins, the Lord can nere forgive them.
More could I speak, for subject had I more,
But some perchance will say I spoke before
Of Death in Fate, but these as seems to me,
Should not confounded but distinguishd' be;
" For this twixt Fate and Death's the difference,
" Fate does ordain, Death is the ordinance.
FINIS.
TO HIM WHOM TRVE MERIT HAS ENNOBLED; THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN EARL OF
BRIDGE WATER, VICOVNT Brackley, the accomplishment of his selectedst wishes.
Hatched in the nest of Honor, you are blessed,
In having virtues to support your nest*
For though you are graced by birth, and great by Blood,
I more admire this Title, you are good.
For this (as it true greatness does express)
Shall Crown your Honor with all Happiness.)
But native virtue needs no Artfull Bays;
" Virtue her selfe's her prize, her self her praise.
Your HONORS humbly devoted; RICH: BRATHVVAYTE.

THE AVTHOR CONTINVES HIS FORMER DISCOVRSE, Anatomizing Man more fully in these
four Subjects. 1. Preparation. 2. Security. 3. Court-ship. 4. Hospitality.

Of Preparation. Qui se minus parat, periet.
WEll was it spoken by the Orator,
That in each work we should prepare before
We did attempt, least too much rashness breed
A strange event, for want of good ^ake heed.
It Is true indeed, for if we should dilate
On every Fortune, rank, degree, and state,
We should find out by due experience,
Naught fits success so well as Providence.
For as in Armies, Chiefetaines do prepare,
To rank their Soldiers, and have special care
That every Troop be rightly ordered,
To the end their Hopes may be accomplished.
Or as in Builders, ere they will assay
To rear the walls, they first will make a way
For the foundation, that the groundwork laid,
What they intend may better be assayd.
Or as in Plow-men, let this instance be,
Though last, yet first for their antiquity;
First till the ground, as they do think it need,
Before they sow in it their hopeful seed;
So should each man before he do depart,
Till and manure the furrows of his heart,
That the Earthly seed of his corruption may
Put incorruption on another day.
And like that holy Father; whom we read,
That sleeping, waking or what ere he did,
He heard this Summons sounding in his ear,
" Ariseye Dead to Judgment come appear.
Or that Denout and Blessed Anachorite,
Who thought himself still in his Saviors sight;
And therefore feared to act ought that was ill,
Seeing his Judge was present with him still.
But alas how few now in the world be,
That think the Lord their secret sins can see,
Whilst working what is ill, they think it no shame
To violate the glorious style or name
Of their profession, (and it seems no less)
By seeming goodness, seeming holiness.
" Many we have can till the fruitful ground,
" But for mind-tillage few or none are found.
How foolish, and how careless then are we,
To spoil our souls for want of husbandry?
I know not how some others think of it,
But sure to me, it were a matter fit,
That we should make our preparation here,
Now whilst we live, least when we shall appear
Before that Throne (as we of force must come)
Hearing our crimes, we stand (as men are dumb)
Nothing to speak, whence shall ensue our hyre,
Depart ye hence into eternal fire.
Many there be, preparing still we see,
To raise a state to their Posterity;
Which with as prodigal a hand is spent,
(For many times they know not how it went)
As ere their Dunghill Fathers scraped it,
" For what is ill got should go as ill, it is fit.
Others there be to gain their pleasures, will
Prepare themselves 't attempt the worst of ill,
No worke's too great, no instrument too foul,
(Though It raze their name, and damn their precious soul,)
Is vn-affa^'d, till they their pleasure get,
Which once obtained, Repentance vshers it.
Others, for Honors, with ambitious wings,
Soar to the Crowns, and Diadems of Kings:
These will prepare their Engines to attain,
What they expect, and what they make their aim
Must be atchieu'd: there is no other way,
Hence is it they care by night, and carke by day.
And yet behold what fruit Ambition gives,
Her care's her curse, her-selfe of life depriues;
" For of all others, seldom seen I have,
" Ambition go gray headed to her grave.
Others I see, which I am loath to see,
For it includes Albyons misery:
Prepare themselves, not as those Virgins did,
To have their Lamps with oil replenished:
But with adulterate Beauties, to ensnare
Our yongling Gallants, and with brayded hair
In Azur'd breasts laid open, painted cheek,
Loose wandering eyes, their lustful objects seek,
Which sought and found, that object which they spi^,
Makes seeming fancy sparkle in their eye.
These with as varied forms (as we do read
Proteus ere had) change their phantasticke weed
From day to day (o Heaven suppress this sin)
For blessed were we, if it had never bin.
But yet, for all this garish Vanity,
Read but a Lecture of Mortality
To these She-Sainted Idols, you shall find,
Some small impressions of a Virtuous mind;
As such as have their eyes upon the Book
Of sacred Writ, yet how ere they look
Upon the Text, the Preacher's busied in,
This Text's a Pretext, but to hide their sin:
" For how so ere their eyes may seem to stay,
" Fixed on the Text, their heart's another way.
But know (fair pictures) though with many forms
You deceive men, you cannot deceive worms.
Nor will the account (that great account) you owe,
For all your trimnes be dispen'st with so.
Prepare you better Garments then be these,
For these I think will not your Maker please:
Making you such strange Monsters, as I doubt
His doom will be: Away I know you not.
Some more I see, which full as busy are
How to sow difference, and therefore care
Only to gain themselves a fair estate,
By others wrong, oppression, and debate.
These too prepare (but not as I could wish)
Their Nets, that they in others States may fish,
And slily too, lay their pretended Suites,
Filling their Clients heads with thousand doubt^*
Protesting (God forgive them) it would please
Them very well, their Client were at peace:
When privately, with a dissembling heart,
They vow as much unto the adverse part.
Yet this's a sin which craves a liberty,
Because our Laws give it impunitie;
And reason good (so's Conscience tide to pelf)
As the best I know, may punished in himself.
Many more of this sort I know there is,
Which make their preparation, but amiss;
Few so exactly do it, as they should,
Which makes me speak more boldly then I would;
But he that curbs Me for it, I Will answer him,
I know not how to blush in taxing sin,
Nor will I spare him though his spleen should burst,
" But curse those vices which my God has cursed.
Yet with compassion, for I know I am
My self that writes, as subject to the same
As they to whom I write: Yea I do know
Till I have paid to Nature what I owe,
There is no fact how great so ere it be
Committ'd by one, but may be done by me,
If he who in the heavens has sovereigns place,
Should not prevent me by his special grace.
Yet I do wish, and I am sure of this,
That Charitie's producer of my wish,
Each would prepare for one, that when we go
From this same Vale of tears, and Sea of woe
To the judicious trial of Gods Throne,
Each might be fit to give account for one.
So every soul might with affiance say
Unto her God, in that same dreadful day,
Thou bad and I obeyed, and being tried,
Like ^o fine Gold my soul was purifide:
" Thou wil'd, I went, thy love was my delight,
" I sought, thy Grace did crown me in the fight.
If this indeed were weighed, as it should be,
Men would depart from hence more willingly;
Knowing how Death would be a means to give
Life to our souls, and make us ever live.
Some have I known, who for the same intent
Have in their life time reared their Monument,
That when so ere they looked upon their Tomb,
They might conceive what would of them become.
Which Sheb^a did, (as we in Scripture read)
Who built his Tomb before that he was dead;
And this proceeds from doubt in many one,
Of the heirs neglect when that the Father's gone;
But see what Fate poor Shebna had, for he
Having prepared a Tomb so gorgeously,
As Art and Nature could not both invent
A more exact or curious Monument,
Enforced was (vain man) through times disgrace,
To take his Burial in another place.
This speak I not for to deter such men,
(Since such praise-worthie rites I honor them)
From their Endeavors, as desire to have
Themselves and theirs successors in one grave:
For, it is a custom which may seem to be,
Authorized by divine authority;
Since ancient Patriarchs, and those which came
From Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham,
Were (as in sacred Writ is often times red)
With their deceased Fathers buried.
Yea, there is naught I of my friends do crave
More, then to lie within my Fathers grave:
That whom I living loved, taking my breath
From him, I may renew my love in death.
But herein I do tax their vanity,
Who do prepare them Tombs where they may lie
In State like Princes, and do glory in
Those monumentall couers of their sin;
Yet are respectlesse where their souls shall dwell,
This Preparation does not like me well.
For it is preposterous, this cover should,
(Being composed of nothing else then mould)
Have such exceeding honors to attend it,
While the Soul has not one virtue to defend it.
Pure is the Bodies shrine, but filthy foul
Is that same shroud, which does enfold the soul.
This is the cause that makes me to deplore
These times so ill, that were so good before:
Where virtue reigned, and as a soueraignesse,
Made the Soul glory in her happiness.
Where pure Devotion, as an heavenly light,
Directed man to do those things were right:
Where the soul was precious held, and whose chief care
Was against the day of Vengeance to prepare.
Least vnprepar'd to answer for their sin,
They knock at gate, but may not be let in.
Well did that holy Father think of this,
(Which to observe each of us I could wish)
Who every night before he went to bed,
To make this due account was 'customed,
Go to my Soul, use not a slight delay,
But answer me, What have thou done to day?
What have committed of those works are ill,
Or what omitted that thou shoul'dst fulfill?
Whom have thou wronged, whom have thou injured,
Where be those hungry, which thou shuld'st have fed?
Who^ have oppressed? whence comes the orphans tere,
The Widows prayer? Soul, I must judge thee here,
Least by deferring Judgment to the last,
I pay more dear, for the Actions which be last.
Thrice happy soul, that is so well provided,
Before his soul from body be divided:
With cheerful spirit may he hence depart,
With eyes erected, and with light some heart:
With soule-renewing comforts, and with peace,
With hope, with health, with Saints complete increase;
With zeal, with joy, with hope of liberty,
To rest in him who ends our misery.
O may we so live in united love,
That ones example may another move;
So by Examples we at last shall come,
With joy and triumph to the marriage-roome.
FINIS.
Of Security. Si securus, vres.
NO vice I think, that ever was, or is,
End^gers the soul of man, so much as this.
Which that I may define, it seems to be
The sleep of sin, or the souls Lethargy,
Sencel^e^^e, and careless of what ere befall,
Secure then, when she should most of all
Stand on her guard, nor is she' fraid a whit
Of any harm, till she encounter it.
This Vice consorts with such as love to feed,
And cram themselves: where she does use to breed
These perturbations in the mind of Man,
Whence the Source of our Corruption first began.
Lust, riot, sloth, contempt of Godliness,
Pride, dissolution, and forgetfulness
Of what we are, exposing (O most foul)
The glorious substance of an heavenly soul,
Unto the basest servitude, that is,
To wit, the delights of Earthly vanities.
Yea, I may say there is no Vice at all
That makes the Souls motion so unnatural
Unto her self, as does Security:
Since the Soul, which should in action ever be,
Becomes by her, slothful, remiss, and dull,
Pressed by a Belly that is ever full.
Many we have that labor of this vice,
Yea, of this sin our Great-men have a spice;
Who with the Rich-man fare deliciously,
Are clad in purple, and neglectfully
Look on the poor, while lulled in sins lapp,
They never mind what afterward may happ:
These give no ear unto the pitious mones,
Nor doleful shrikings of distressed ones;
These are secure of their poor Brothers grieves,
" For they have some sow pillows to their sleeves.
Even Prelates which should pierce the ears of Kings
But they do worse in speaking pleasant things;
For well they find more profit's to be got
By smeering vice, as if they knew it not,
Then by displaying vices that are bred,
For this has caused some to be silenced.
O age! When men that are the mouths of God,
And should not spare to shake the fearful rod
Of his displeasure, will for some light matter,
Revolt from God, and be induced to flatter:
But of all other, there is none so secure,
Or prone unto it, as the Epicure.
For we may hear him ever bent to cry
Let Us eat and drink, to morrow we shall die.
A strange persuasion, and an Argument
As't seems to me, from Reason different,
That shortness of our Time should make's forget
Our selves so much, as to be given to eat
When we should die: if this approved might be,
" There were some cause of man's Security.
When after Death, and that our Time is gone,
There were no farther matter to be done.
But there is something in us, that does show,
And tell us plain, our End must not be so,
Which may be proved by our Experience,
If we have felt the sting of Conscience.
^ra, what soere our Atheist object,
against that high and supreme Archi-tect,
though now he feel it not, he must confess,
and that with Gall of inward bitterness,
^here is a power (and that a divine power)
Who will avenge him of the wicked doer.
^ut some I hear to argue in this sort,
And with my soul I am much sorry for it:)
This day we may enjoy our pleasures; true
^^And then you will, what, begin next day anew
To use those pleasures which you did before,
And so from day to day treasure up store
Of Vengeance; O how fearful is this path,
To trace you on unto the day of wrath?
Hence you presume of God: but do not think,
" That God does sleep, tho he may seem to wink.
For like as in the old World we do read,
When they had sported, feasted, married,
And now became as those that care-lesse were,
Through riot, and excessive belly-cheere:
The Flood came on them, so as we may see,
They were cut off in their Security:
Even so may you, that seem to make delay
Of your Conversion thus, from day to day,
Be taken napping in your height of sin,
How fearful then is the case that you are in?
I know delight in Sin, does Custom bring,
And Custom to Securitie's the Spring
Which makes us hardened (adding to Sins store)
Which more in number, seem less then before.
But that we may, against this Hydra fight,
'First head we cut off must be sins Delight,
Which when we have lopt off, we may begin
To take away the Custom of this sin.
And so through want of Custom, we may free
Our selves in time of this Security
O that we would consider but our days,
How short they are, and with how many ways
We are enclosed with Foes on every side,
With inward motions, as with lust and pride:
With outward motions, as with bayts of sin,
Where every Sense does let a Traitor in.
O then we would be wise, and stand in doubt,
Least these foes should get in, that now are out.
Nor can we be too wary of our foes,
Since we are pestered with some of those
Which are within our Bosom nourished,
And as our life's more dearly tendered:
These be our household friends, which sting to death,
Depriving them of life, which gave them breath.
" And of all others none annoy men so,
" As does a private or domesticke foe.
For he by subtle unsuspected guile,
(Pretending naught but amity the while)
Enters the Fort (and like a cunning Elfe)
Becomes a very Traitor to himself.
Yet so, as when his practices have end,
This seeming friend, becomes an hellish fiend.
Yea, we shall find his saying true, who says,
Securenesse brings Apostacy of Faith,
Which is approved in many a wretched man,
As for example in that Julian,
Who through Security despised the rod
Of Justice, and turned Rebel unto God.
Yea, many such even in this Age we know,
Who start a side, like to a broken Bow:
And are forgetful (as before was said)
For what especial purpose they were made.
Hence may I justly tax the Libertine,
Who idly spends the most part of his Time,
In profanation of the Sabbath day,
And in the Streets neglectfully does stay,
As if there were no Vineyard where he might
Labor one hour at least, before't be night:
And yet I do not grieve for them so much,
As I in due compassion, do for such,
Who have been idling, both in youth and age,
And now nereth' End of their frail Pilgrimage:
Are now as far from God, when they have done,
Nay, farther too, then when they first begun.
O misery I that men who reason have,
And now through age, have one foot in the grave,
Should through a wilful blindness, thus bewray
Such mad green thoughts, now when their heads be gray.
^e thinks those furrows which be in their face,
Should as a Mirror tell them here is no place
Long to dwell in, or if they would but see
Gray hayres, those Heralds of Mortality,
Which as predictions, Age is wont to send,
Me thinks they might remember now their end.
But this they will not: they will endure no Glass,
Lest they should see how soon their time does pass.
Sure I do think, what the Moral said of old,
Of all that be nought's viler to behold,
Then such a man, who many years has spent,
Yet of his years can show no Argument,
Save his Gray-haires: for he does Nature wrong,
That shows no fruits how he has lived long.
Yea, we should know great difference appears
Twixt our expense of hours, and of years,
For many may be aged in the one,
Who leave no Name behind when they are gone:
Such is the Expense of years, but happy they,
Who by their ^oures do measure out their day;
For when they die, the virtues of their mind,
Like a sweet Ointment leave their smell behind.
Thus much in brief of the Vice: now't does remain
To speak, where this Security does reign.
FINIS.
Of Court-ship. Et tacuisse nocet.
BEfore I enter this secure repose,
There comes such store of per^umes to my nose,
I am nere sti^led: but I have a trick,
By means of Art will tutch them to the quick;
And so disperse these sweetly Aiming only at such, whose sense consists in
sent with reservation of his best thoughts to the Noble affected Courtier:
sented men,
As hardly there will one appear amongst ten,
And this it is: I Will canvase up their Vices.
Their brain sick humors, and their strange de^ices;
Their Courting, Congeing, and their Coniuring,
Their Culling, Clipping, C^inging, Capering;
Their garish wears, and apish complement,
And so I hope, I shall disperse this sent:
Which, if my footing were not all more speedy,
Might have infected well my Brai^e already.
Rouse then thy self (my Muse) and sprightly on
Unto these men are made of Cinnam^n.
Which Similee can hardly be denide.
Their rind being better then all the bulk beside.
Me thinks I see a ne^ invented State,
Of four Coach-horses standing at the gate,
With distinct Furniture accordingly,
To show his Lordships honors livery:
Next this I see two Irish Lackyes stand,
With either one a horse rod in his hand,
Where with they often times make the Beggars feel
The lash, for following their Lords Coach wheel.
Close ^e their Breeches made unto their thighs,
Guarded like two Pie-collor'd Butterflies;
So as to see these Iack-a lents come after,
Would make a man half dead, burst out with laughter.
There straight I see a Prisoner through a grate,
Desire their Lord to be compassionate;
While Court like, he, stops his relentlesse ear,
And either cannot hear, or scorns to hear.
Thus in all State goes this Magnifico,
With 4 Coach-horse, one Coachman Pages two,
Which ^euen without him make the Number even
With Romes 7 Mounts, for they make likewise seven.
Then must his Train be great, it cannot choose,
Being in attendance grown so mountainous:
But let him pass, this Error is but small,
To other-some, that I must cope withal.
Next thing I see, is one that is like a man,
Yet so disguised, discern him not I can,
Nor well distinguish him, by outward shape
From some strange Monkey-fac't Arabian Ape.
Faces he makes of such a se^erall sort,
I cannot show them* to be hanged for it:
But sure I am (for ought I understand)
He found not such strange faces in our Land,
For civil Albion is, and cannot brook
To look, but as her Maker bids her look.
Yet this same strange proportioned Caualliere,
Or new-Italianated Courtier,
Draws Admiration to him in each place,
And by disguises gets especial grace*
For while he has the garb of foreign Courts,
And all the morn he spends in distinct sorts
Of French, Italian, German Complement,
Zwelan, Ven^tian, Dutch accoutrement:
Where he will speak of the state of every Court,
Yet knows not but only by report.
Yet would it do ones heart good to hear,
His strange discourse, though he was never there.
Up must his fashions go, which though they seem
The ill fauouredst ones, that ever yet were seen.
They are in most request, and he is an Ass,
That hates the fashion, or will let it pass.
And now, because there comes to my mind
An ancient Story, which I chanced to find,
Amongst other works of serious consequence,
I mean to write it, as I tooke't from thence.
The Scythians a people stout and bold,
Though much annoyed by violence of cold;
Were ever held (as by their Acts is shown)
The truest heirs of honor and renown:
Yet in their height of Triumph and Estate,
They fell becoming too esseminate.
For when the prosperous gailes of Victory,
Had made them proud of their prosperity,
And good success had so blown up their mind,
As Fortune like, their Fortune made them blind.
They straight begun to cast away their Arms,
As if they were secure of after^harmes;
And like new-fangle Humorists, desire
To mould themselves into some quaint attire.
Which to perform, they presently intend
Some odd conceited fellow for to send,
To foreign Coasts, that he thereby might come
To gain some fashions, and so bring them home.
Straight one addressed was* who forthwith went
And compast round the Northern Continent,
Where though he saw strange fashions, yet was he
Not so contented but would farther see.
At last, inclining Southward, there he stay de
Within an Island: and so long survayde
The Customs, Natures, and the strange attire
Of th'people there, as he did much admire
(So sottish was this Scythian Traveler)
The phrenticke habit of the Ilander.
Who wore no garment, but from foot to head
With plumes of Birds vs'de to be fethered,
So as he seemed (says Story) in a word,
In form a man, but clothed like a Bird.
This when the curious Scythian had seen,
To travel any farther did not mean;
But with glad heart determined to return,
And show his Country th'fashions that were worn.
Yet thought, ere he his journey would begin,
To take some of those feathers 'long with him.
And there-withall to take advice, had care,
Of one of the best experienst Tailors there,
How to dispose the feathers, as they lay,
Which having learned, he posted on his way*
After long Travail he at last arrived
In his own Country, which no less revived
His long-expecting Countrymen, then when
There comes repriuall to condemned men.
And as we see Birds flock against ill wether,
So all in troops they crowded in together.
Vowing withal, what Country, or what Nation
So ere it were, they would observe the fashion.
Forth comes his feathers plucked from Peacocks, Owls,
Wood-cockes, and Phesants, and all fethred Fowls,
Directing them how ordered they should be,
(And that of all the Countries he did see)
Though many in strange fashions did excel,
Yet none like this did please him half so well.
No sooner had the barbarous Multitude,
Seen these strange nisles, but they forthwith sewed,
That this might be authorized, through the Court,
That who so ere (being of the better sort)
For none save such admitted were to wear
This Bird like weed, should from that time appear
In public place, until they had put on
This newfound Roabe, which was agreed upon.
Then might you see the Garments which of old
Were Furrs of Beasts to keep them from the cold;
Clear thrown away, and none of rank there were
But did discard their ancient Country-weare.
But long they had not used this foreign fashion,
But each was troubled with a sundry passion:
One with a Sowing-humour in his head,
Another was as much distempered
With collicke: he, with shortness of his breath,
This man through cold had nerely caught his death,
For why; this wear fitt'd not the Scythians,
But those tan-skinned Aethiopians,
Whose sulphurous heat might better far allow
Of such light weeds, then their sharp air could do.
One of the wisest of this Barbarous crew,
Now seeing, what was likely to ensue,
Command'd forthwith (experience maks men witty)
Certain chief men to fire a part of the City:
Which done, an Uproar presently arose
Through all the streets, and to the Court-gate goes:
The chill-cold Courtiers knew not what it meant,
Yet all amazed thought for to prevent
This dangerous fire, in have therefore they came
Forth of the Court, to quench this threatening flame:
All fethred as they were: but (see mad Souls)
The flame caught hold on these tame-fethred Fowls,
And th'more they sought by labor to appease it,
The more they did by their soft Plumes increase it:
Long had they not about these Fire-workes been,
But there was not a fether to be seen;
Which cing'd and gone, the fire increased no more,
But was suppressed, that grew so great before.
After which time no fashions they would retain,
But thought it meet to take their own again.
I might be taxed for a knavish wit,
If I in brief should seem to moral it.
And therefore have Resolved to let it pass,
And be reputed for some Braine-sicke Ass,
That spent his oil and labor for delight,
Then to be forced to answer what I write.
For other slight abuses in the Court,
Doubting I might be brought in question for it.
If I should tax the greatest; I Am prepared,
Here to deblaze them briefly afterward.
FINIS.
Of Hospitality. Non eadem est aetas.
THou thing out of Request, for unto thee,
That was an honor to our Auncestrie,
The poore-mans Supportresse, Travelers Repose,
To thee will I my sorrows now disclose;
For well I know (if any good there be)
Their very hearts do bleed with grief for thee.
Where be those many Officers thou had,
Alas they are discarded and may run stark mad,
But nere be pitied, a flout or mock
Is their Salute, their stoue a whipping stock;
Their wages lashes, their repast bare Platters,
Their wine, pure Conduit-Renish, garments, tatters.
O thou that once (by ^imes eternal Story)
Was clept our Islands port, our Englands glory:
Thou that by thy strong ^amily kept out,
Jack Straw, Wat Tylor, and that rabble rout
Of factious Noualists who sought t'infest,
By their distempred heads, our Countries rest;
Thou that suppressed such tumults by thy hand,
As menaced the quiet of our Land;
How art thou vanished, or where art become,
That thou do keep so seldom times at home?
Wayfaring men, when they but chanced to look,
Were glad at heart, to see thy Chymneys smooke.
When now as I and many more suppose,
Thy Chymney smoke is turned to thy Nose.
Yea, such as used by thee to take repast,
May sooner break their neck then break their fast.
B^t whence proceeds this threatening misery?
From thee (thou curse of Albion) ^surse;
Soule-ranking Poison, State-deuouring sin,
That makes dice on men's bones, and fleas their skin.
Thou lay'st vn^allowed fist on each estate,
And makes the poor come cursing to thy gate;
Thou ruins walled towns, and thee't does please
To turn great houses into cottages.
There Is none (for thee) can reap content in life
Not from the Prince unto the Oyster wife.
It Is thou lays hold upon each family,
Seazing on persons of all qualities.
For where is the May game, and the Morice dance,
The ancient Blew-coate, and his cognizance;
Where Is those Black-iacks which used were at first
For the wayfaring man to quench his thirst?
Vanished, they are vanished: where? to the Court,
Believe me (poore-men) I am sorry for it.
For pity is it, that a place so great,
Should (of Relief) our needy people cheat.
Thus Hospitality is banished clear,
Betwixt the Court, and th'damned Usurer;
It Is rare to see a man of Worship ride,
With more then one poor Lackie at his side;
Or if he have a man or two at most,
He covenants for fear of too much cost,
That each of them (so niggardly's the Else)
Should be at charges to maintain himself.
And sure me thinks, these Great-men that retire,
As I may say, unto an other's fire;
Shutting up house, and all, that who should look
That way, should scarcely see a Chymney smooke:
Might become rich: for why, they naught bestow,
Their means be great, the rate they (...) at, low;
Small's their attendance, slender is their port,
And shut their Buttery-hatch to bar resort.
But why should I think so? as they from th'poore
Hold back their hand, the Lord holds back his store.
That Widow of Sarepta (as we read)
Had still her Arc with meal replenished;
And th'more she gave, she still received the more,
For God increased her much-decreased store.
But Naball that rich Churl, who denide
To give to David, seeming to deride
This zealous King, with who is David say,
That I should give my coin and meat away?
What end had he? He was deprived of all,
His state, his store, his life, his Abigall.
And he, whom Naball did deride before,
Became the sole possessour of his store.
" For he that living will not the poor reward,
" Shall be enforced to give it afterward.
But unto theo my Muse addresseth first,
(And heaven forbid I bless what God has cursed)
Who do consume the Sunshine of thy days
In damned Oppression, and all works delays
Of Charity, and Alms works till death
And desolation choke thy corrupt breath.
Thou Earth-mould thou, who a^ it seems to me,
Had thy beginning from that Family
Of th'Braucadori, which in Florence are,
Extorting Bankers, and so Named were,
(Because the Word if rightly understood)
Signifies scrape Gold (or in brief) scrape-Good.
It Is thou my Muse shall freely reprehend,
Beginning fresh, when seeming at an end;
And heaven I wish, that it were put to me,
What punishment should be infflict on thee.
For then (be sure) of what degree or sort,
So ere thou were, that I would plague thee for it.
Yea in an ancient Cannon read we shall,
This rank denied Christian Burial.
So as their Bones were never to be found,
Interred in any part of holy Ground.
And true it is (for th'Reason is allowed)
That the confused rout and multitude
Of Lawyers and Physicians, which are bred,
(Like Horse flies) from a State distempered,
Are signs of ill-disposed Bodies, sure,
And long's that State not likely to endure.
Yea, of these two, I know not whether's worse,
To purge the body, or to purge the purse:
Both strange distempers breed: whence it is meant
A Clyent is his Lawyers Patient.
But th'Number of our grating Usurers,
Their Factors, and those eare-markt Scriuiners;
While they within our Country are remaining
Show a disease that is fatal amongst us reigning.
But have I must, and pass from Usury,
The greatest foe to Hospitality:
And speak a word or two unto the Court,
Showing those wrongs she does the poorer sort.
Thou Princely Seat, whose bounty like a stream
Should water each dry corner of our Realm;
Harbor not such, as should themselves express
By giving harbor to the harborlesse.
Let them not there have any residence,
But banish them (thou star of honor) thence:
That in their Country they may once appear.,
Such good Housekeepers as their Fathers were.
This done, thou shall bring glory to thy Court,
And needful Souls relieved shall bless thee for it.
FINIS.
(...) And tell thee too when I had made them known,
Thy vices were not worthy of a Crown.
I have no Rhetoric but bluntness I,
Nor knew I ever how to face a lie;
As many can, yea, and some great ones too,
As our Court-Apple-Squires, and fauns can do:
I do cashiere all private Parasites,
Lad^e-fied Monkyes, lustful Catomytes,
Painting, and pursting, sleeking of the skin,
Poudring of hair, to let temptation in;
Light-fether-dressings, Fardinggalls avaunt,
That makes a wench backed like an Elephant;
Open displayed breasts, Sin-tempting eyes,
Crocodyles tears, and faithless periuries:
Vermillion cheeks, bought beauties, I do shun you,
For I am madd when I do look upon you:
But first to thee will I address my way,
Who in a Loue-sicke passion thus do say;
" Love brooks no sharers, I Will not suffer Jove
" To be a Rival in the Wench I love.
You will not Sir; why, what a Wood-cocke art,
To think thy-selfe a man of such desert:
That any Wench will so her love confine,
To make her-selfe in Essence none but thine?
Herein thou show'st thy own simplicity,
To think a Woman will imprisoned be;
Since it is true which has been often times sed,
Nor love, nor lust can ere be limited.
Why, I will tell thee man I had a Wench,
Some thirteen days ago no longer since, Aninstance produced by way of
personal allusion.

And she did vow (as well I know she can)
Of all she loved I was the only man:
^f I but frowned, so straitely I did keep
My Wench in aw, she would begin to weep;
(...) I but laughed, it cler'd her raynie day,
She would laugh too, and wipe her tears away;
In brief what ere I did (so kind was she)
One note kept Measure't wixt my love and me:
Yet to there day (I pray thee louex hear me)
She that was mine by vow, does now cashere me,
Calling me fool that had so little sense,
To think that she with faith could not dispense;
Adding withal, that there was naught more common
Then breach of faith, and promise with a woman.
Yet know (quoth she) tho th'greatest Prince assault,
" If woman yield it is the woman's fault.
Thus by experience ( Lover) I was crossed,
Thus did I love, thus was my labor lost.
If thine be constant, thou have that reward,
Which I few lovers ever yet have heard;
But if she be, of thus much sure I am,
She is a Milke-white Crow, a cole-blacke Swan.
Next unto thee, whose gaudie vanity,
Makes thee forgetful of mortality;
Thy glory is not placed in thy mind,
For who the least of beauty there can find,
Since Virtue has no place, which ever gives
Life to the soul, by which it ever lives;
But odious vice, which blemisheth the eye
Of understanding with obscurity;
Thy glory is in Clothing, yet behold
What that diuinest Solomon has told;
Naught is more vain then this? at least thou'l yield
In Beauty to the L^^lies of the field,
Which neither spin, nor labor, yet they be
" Fairer then Solomon in his royalty.
Yea, this Observance tells me, which by some
Has been reputed for an Axiom.
" The greatest Princes that are clad in Ermine,
" Take them at best, they are but food for vermin.
" And why should shapeles forms be so much loathed,
Since Bodies they are but, as they are clothed?
This comes not nere the Beauty of the soul,
Since th'fairest Bodies are often times most foul
In th'constitution of the inward man,
Which is the best of beauty, sure I am.
Virtue adorns her best, nor can she find
Any Complexion purer then the mind:
Here, not improperly may I make use,
Of th'Nuptiall song of witty Claudius,
Which was composed for the marriage bed
Of good Honorius to Maria wed.
" Tender Honorius, in the purple room
" Borne, to his Fathers glory now shall come,
" And give that hope to such as see him reign,
" As if that Saturn were returned again;
" For little can Porphyras Palace do,
" If that with Birth we have not virtues too.
" He shall conclude my task, no more I Will say,
" Pleased or displeased, this's my Placentia.
FINIS.
A CONCLVSIVE EPIGRAM, ENTITVLED The Great-mans Alphabet.
Come hither Great-man that triumphs to see,
So many men of lower rank to thee;
That swells with honors, and erects thy state,
As high as if thou were Earths Potentate.
Thou whose aspiring buildings raise thy Name,
As if thou were Sole son and heir of fame;
Thou whose ambition does on dainties feast,
Aiming to be some petty King at least;
Thou whom oppression has by wrong made great,
Priding thy self of thy usurped seat;
Thou that do think it sign of Noble blood,
Rather to aim at great then to be good;
Thou whose demerits, though thou bear a port,
And can look big, are but of th'meanest sort.
Thou whose patcht honor, take away thy land
Will for an Ordinary scarce current stand;
Thou whose best qualities derived be,
Only from thy command, and not from thee:
Hear me (thou Worlds Atlas) and discern
What Is best of honor, Greatest men may learn.
I have sought far, and yet I cannot find,
To what set place their glory stands confin'de:
Who once were famous, and had tongues enough,
To ring their Noble acts the World throw.
Methinkes that Agamemnon whose renown,
Even to the ears of sacred Powers did come,
To make his fame more lasting, should not be
So soon obscured in his posterity;
Nor that same Mirror of the Myrmidons,
Nor brave Thalestris of the Amazons;
Nor Cretan Minos, Ilus, Atreus,,
The Persian Cyrus, Trojane Dardanus.
Yet see, where be these Heroes? Now they seem
Through times disgrace as if they had not been:
So short's our memory, that if we have
Naught to preserve our honor in the grave,
Save th'tongs of men to blaze what we have done,
Scarce will our Names be heard in time to come.
Yet you will say those Monuments we leave,
Will to our dying Fame true honor give:
As Marble shrines, statues of Iuory,
Porphyrite Columns graven curiously,
Arches of lasting metals, these will show
What we were once: and though men would not know
Our actious, yet our monuments infuse
Knowledge in them, they cannot will nor choose.
Alas how weake's his fame, that does repose
His confidence in any one of those:
Soon fading is his Name, and short's his time
That Is shut within circumference of a shrine:
Yea, frayle's his glory fitting with his nature,
Who hopes to rear his fame by such a matter.
For where should we find Tombs now ouergrowne
With grass and rubbish, yea, where-fields are sown,
Vineyards are planted, as it may appear,
It is not known where they interred were?
Some say the Cave of Minos, King of Crete,
Who afterward had his Judicial seat
In Hell, as Sovereign vmpire, founded was
On Idas Mount, where though by store of grass
And mouldred ashes, which are haled forth,
By the combustiue matter of the earth:
His aged memorial was extinguished clean,
Yet some appearance there is to be seen,
Which does express that Minos Sepulcher,
United was with th'Tombe of Jupiter:
And that fair Ida, which so fruitful grew
With every pleasant Plant (as Poets show)
Would deck his flowery Monument with Thyme,
With Bays his Tomb, with luniper his shrine;
So as no Virgin Votaresse there was,
Who had that way occasion for to pass,
But would (for so the Cretans did allow it)
" Tender her best of adoration to it.
Of such Relations we have Subjects store,
As Ajax Tomb upon the Rhetian shore,
In Oeta great Alcydes, Mytilene
A place where many worthies laid have been,
As Pythacus an ancient Sage of Greece,
Alcaus, valiant Antemenydes,
Yea though a Statist subtle as a Fox,
They will display thy errors with a pox;
If a vaine-humorous Lording, whose creation
Came up the to-ther day along with fashion,
Whose only graceful neat accoutrement
Stands on a little broken complement;
Then some will say, while ore thy grave they pass,
" Here lies a Widgin-lord, a foot-cloth Ass.
If an imperious Beggar that can suit
For such ones land, and put the true owner out;
Thou shall be taxt and censured in thy grave,
And termed withal a base collouging slave.
If a spruce Pension-Gallant, that have naught,
(Save a phantasticke cringe) that is worthy ought,
Receive this Brand (nor care they if thou scowle)
Of a vainglorious, idle, formal fool.
If an ambicious Green wit, thou do clime,
Hoping to scale the seat of Jove in time:
If thou repine that any one should check
Thy soaring flight, till pride shall break thy neck,
Rest well assured, they will be bold to tell
That Pride did Lackey thee post-hast to hell.
Thus then thou see, how great so-ere thou be,
(If ill) thou subject art to infamy;
Nor can the Greatness of thy worth or place,
Exempt thee from the censure of disgrace,
For those who whilst thou lived durst hardly mew,
(Now being dead) will give thy crimes their due.
O then let Virtue be thy monument,
For it will keep thee, when thy life is spent,
In a perpetual Memory! for alas
What Is Marble, Iron, Iuory, or Brass
To make thee glorious in the eyes of men,
Since of all those, there is scantly one amongst ten,
Who placed their Names in shrines, but were forgot
Before the sheet they lay in was half rott.
Yea such as these, who like the sons of Earth,
Triumphed living, in their noble Birth,
Boasting of their descent, yet could make known,
Not any one good action of their own
To glory in, might well resembled be,
In each respect and native property,
Unto a Lamp, which when the oil is spent,
Sends from her steeming snuff, a noisome sent;
" Living they shone like Lamps, at least they seemed,
(But all things are not so as they are deemed)
But dying they do show what filthy stuff
They were made of, by sending forth their snuff.
But when true Virtue is commixt with blood,
Then Nobleness must needs be rightly good:
For blood and virtue being joined together,
Makes what agrees with one, accord with either.
There is no Balm so precious upon Earth,
As Virtue is* for it preserues our worth
From times mutation; no corruption can
Enter the Coffin of a Virtuous man;
For though the Sith of Fate have cut him down,
Yet in his death he is far better known
Then in his life, because when men do miss him,
Seeing his works they 'gin afresh to bliss him.
O may thy Great-nesse (then,) who ere thou art,
Be grounded first upon a sincere heart,
For that will last, when that same gilded honor
Will fail her self, and all that trust upon her.
Short is our time, our sorrows they are long,
Fickle our State, our Soule-assailants strong;
Weake's our defense, rude is our Discipline,
Rustie our Arms, our Courage feminine:
What Recluse then? Whereto may we repair,
To be secure from imminent despair?
It Is not our Greatness, nor descent of blood,
How high so ere can do us any good:
No; It Is our goodness, not our greatness shall
In that same day give privilege to all,
Which heavens I wish, that it might once be set
On Great-mens breasts, and made their Alphabet.
FINIS.
TO THE HIGH AND ILLUSTRIOUS MONARCH, CHRISTIAN KING of Denmark a PANEGYRICKE
OR Gratulatorie Emblem, with the Successiue continuance of his MAJESTY.
The Emblem.
GReat Christian king sovereign of many hearts,
Royal supporting-ATLAS of all arts;
Bellonas Chieftaine, and Minerv^es friend,
True worths aduancer: please thee to attend,
To one of Albyons Swainelins, who would be
Blessed in himself, writing ought worthy thee.
Long may our Whitecliffs, which gave Albion name,
Prepare themselves such friends to entertain;
Long may ou^ far-fam'd Court her luster show,
Made glorious by such royal Friends as thou.
Long may our Halcyon days crown Albyons King,
While prosperous gailes such Friends a shore do bring.
Long may our Co^merce free to both remain,
The Dane with English, English with the Dane.
Happy united powers confirmed by love,
And nere-Alliance, as those quires above.
May you keep blessed concord, and renew
Your years by Times success: O may that dew
Destill'd on Hermon, fructify your Land,
S^ielded and shored by the sovereign hand
Of the Almighty: that no foreign Foe,
Nor homebred Innouatour, may undo
That sacred Union, so bequeathed to either,
As hand in hand, you may march on together.
And thou Triumphant Queen, that dissipates
The spacioust Provinces, and raisest states
By unexpected means, ( Great Victory)
Smile (O attend my Prayer) auspiciously,
On two religious Kingdoms! May thy wings
Shadow the atchieuments of two royal Kings:
That their propitious Fates enstil'd may be,
As Faiths-De^endors, so true heirs to thee^
O may those ancient monuments of Time,
Stuck on their predecessors Hears^s, shine
More now then ever, that' ith age to come
The Father may relate unto his Son
What conquests and what glory has been got,
And such renown as they expected not!
Shine out fair Lamp of honor, and give way,
It Is ^ot the morn, but evening Crowns the day;
May peaceful morning, and victorious Even,
Bless them on earth, eternize them in Heaven.
Nor can I doubt in such apparent sweetes
Of real Goodness, where perfection meets,
And makes a well-tuned Concord, but the earth
Will glory much to have so great a birth
Planted within her Bosom: For the bliss
Of earths inhabitants, consists in this,
When Princes govern with religious eye,
And Justice lodges in a Monarchy.
There Is no complaint, but with harmonious sound,
(Like heavenly dwellers) they make blessed the ground
Where they inhabit: there united peace
Makes their Barnes full, gives to their flocks increase.
There sacred Temples are erect'd on high,
And praises sung to heavens pure Majesty:
There Is no repining at an-others weal^,
All like Sareptahs Widow have their meal
Renewed, and re-encreas'd, which still we see,
Succeedes to such gives Hospitality.
For virtues have their Guerdon, and appear
Bright in heavens eye, to such as soiourne here.
O happy then where Majesty does shine,
If virtues keep a Tune, or keep a time:
There Is a terrestrial Hierarchy, which does show
Fair in such men, as do such virtues owe!
In thee (Rich Mirror) I have heard and sen,
What merits admiration in mean men,
Much more in Princes, nor can I express
Imagination freely: yet I guess
Then yet thou art possessed of: and it is
The best (Inferiors can do) to wish
Successiue days, continuance of Friends,
Renowned lives, and Time-eternis'd ends:
To those we are obliged to: and to thee*
Much are we tied, accepting Poesy,
With such a graceful aspect, as thy breath,
Infuseth life in us, when meager death
Seemed to surprise us: should we then forget
The best revivour of our vncheer'd wit,
The Mirror of affected Clemency?
O no, for then ungrateful we should be,
And make our works contemptuous to such men
As have vouch sat'd some time to harbor them:
Indeed, if labors could a promise give,
To such as patronize them, ere to live
With fames light-sayles displayed, I know we might
Have far more Patrons, then have works to write:
But what can Hyble promise that is there,
Worthy th'attention of a Princes ear;
Some scattred spraies perchance, which cropped might be.
From Adons Garden. or Apolloes tree.
Some sweetened dropps drawn from that sacred spring
Where all the warbl^ng Nine were wont to sing.
For never Garden yet was half so sweet,
As where Apollo, and the Muses meet.
Yet what are these? And what are we that write,
Since Kings be choice and must have choice delight.
To cheer their pure affections? It is true;
Albyons Pernassus has but little new,
Or store of pure varieties: yet there be
Some that have sung in the Ear of Majesty;
And with acceptance (though with homely strain)
Which is the cause that now they sing again.
Nor does the tune, but tenure of the mind
Make the best Concord: Which if Princes find,
They cherish it, to make the Consort more,
(For so the royall'st Princes did before)
And to continue what the Ancients did,
Our Modern ages have authorized
What they confirmed: nor can we glory less,
Since we have such that can as well express,
Their Countries Fame, the honor of their King,
As well in lofty strains, as Sonnetting,
As ever former Bards, and with less toil,
For our's more free, their's was a forced soil.
And what esteem have Authors of this kind
Been amongst Potentst Monarchs, we shall find
In times bent Mirror, ancient History,
Where they reserve dew wreaths for Poesy.
The worlds great Viceroy slept not as we read,
Without the works of Homer vnder's head;
Augustus loved his Maro, Martial
Had a Domitian, and tart Iuuenall
No worse Protector, aged Soph^cles,
Sweet-breathing Hesiod, grave Euripide^
Passion-affecting Aeschylus, all these
Had places to retire to, and could please
With smooth, quick, pithie, various passionate,
Choice, native, modest, and elaborate,
Passions, affections, measures, and delights
For men, maids, Matrons, loue-admiring Knights,
Campe-royall planters, where no act did pass,
Which they engraued (...) in leaves of Brass.
Their monumentall Tablets: these were they
That could distinguish 'twixt the cheerful day
Of Resolution, where is true virtues light,
And recreant spirits clouded with the Night.
Of a depressed mind: naught could be done
Under heavens glorious Cresset, but was shown
By an impartial pen, and did remain
For after^ Ages to look ore again.
And were not these works for a Princely ear
To descant on: when virtue did appear
In naked feature, and (...) Name
To be in Nature and in essence same
What she was molded for? And she it is
That never had another Mott but this.
If spotless Reputation be away,
Men are but gilded lime, or painted clay.
And what Apelles ever could portray,
And pure substance, or so well display
The perfect form of being, as this Art,
Or divine Influence, can describe each part
Of honors fair proportion; this is she
That gives a living soul to Majesty,
Records the acts of Princes, and sets down,
What Is worth record fr^ the plow-share to the Crown.
Renewing life in death, for by her breath,
Selfsame may live, that is surpised by death:
Making his actions breathing: nor can time
Impose a period to an Art divine;
For it is transparant in obscurity,
Clear in the silent shade, and loves to be,
As virtue is in Action: this being true,
What can we do, but give this Art (...) due,
More to her Grace, but as she is Princely bred,
So by a Prince to have her sheltered.
It will erect her spirits, cheer her wings,
And make her perch even on the crest of Kings:
Admiring her own Beauty: and who can
Amongst a world of Princes, find a man
Who might her Patronage better beseem,
Then thou great Prince, brother to Albyons This Pae negyrick Poem was wri
during the life of our late Queen: whose Princely virtues (like precious
odours) will ever preserve her sacred Memory.
Queen,
Whose ripened judgment aims at some great end,
In reading naught, but it does apprehend.
And what more precious ornament can be
Worn by a Prince, then such a Theorie?
But alas how weake's my Muse to set thee forth,
That bears within thy self the marks of worth,
As Honors native Characters? And best
Is Honor shown, when graven on the breast
Of the possessour? Like adorns thy heart,
For speaking thee, who knows not what thou art?
O may it be (I pray) the supreme will
Of heaven, to add more glory to thee still,
That each succeeding day may give increase
To a succeeding honor: may sweet peace
Smile on thy fruitful Empire, and extend,
Her large Commission to the worlds end.
So shall Minerua flourish, and make great
The fair foundation of thy Royal seat.
Mean time (Victorious Prince) gain the renow^e*
And in thy Christian Title, overcome.
FINIS.
AN EMBLEM UPON THE ROYAL MASQVE PRESENted in the King of Denmarkes last
being here. Personated regally, shadowed really, and alluded rarely.
THrice glorious Spirits, royal in your state,
Albyons -fair lusters highly consecrate.
To him whom you on Earth do represent,
May you be ever in this Element
Of perfect Joy: that the full height of time
May (as you were presented Masculine)
Cheer up your man like thoughts, that your great birth
(Being enstil'd no less then Gods on earth)
May when your Time's expired (and long may't be
Ere that time come) put on eternity.
Your Masque presents a life (silent you came,
So Maskers do) and we express the same
In our Birth-entrie, nothing can we speak
Articulate; only sends out a shreque,
To show our misery; the next you bear
'S a vizard, which implies these robes we wear,
Of Flesh, and of Mortality; which when
Time shall dissolve, we are no longer men,
But Angels: Your disguise may shadow at,
That strange desire we have to immitate
Foreign disguised habits, when it is known,
We have more comely habits of our own.
Those Feminine-Mirrors (Ladies) you brought in,
Shows Adams happiness, and Adams sin;
His happiness, when God to make his state
Perfect-delightfull, gave to him a mate,
^lesh of his own flesh, and bone of his bone,
Thinking't not good that man should be alone.
His sin, when is mate, wherein he seemed to be
Happy, did hapless taste th'forbidden tree.
Lively was this expressed, when th'Ladies bore
From you those Gemms and Jewels which you wore*
Implying that pure Gemme of Innocence,
Adam was robbed of by Eues negligence.
Taking from the Ladies: thus much did impart,
" Men spous'd to women, ^ob them of their heart,
For it is no longer theirs, for theirs is gone,
One heart in two, or two reduced to one.
This is my Emblem for the Masculine,
Now must our woman-Pen turn Feminine.
Delicious moulds of Nature, whose pure form
Was formed by Nature, chiefly to adorn
And beautify her-selfe: which she did show,
First in her-selfe, examplified by you.
You masked, thus much implies, that modesty
Innate to Woman-hood, ought most to be
Where sexes are immixt: those Princely men,
Which you deprived and robbed of their Gemmes,
Includes your true humility: being forced
To take from that Sex, Eve took of at first:
And that perfection which you have began,
Not from your selves, but from the worth of Man.
These ornaments (are virtues Emblemes) where
Beauty by honor graced do'es appear
More cheerful, and assumeth to it more
Of divine Essence, then it had before.
You spoy^'d, portrayes your modest* Princely shame,
Scorning to take and not to give again*
Here is a great mind shown: whose placed delight,
Is nere to take, more then it will requite.
Those Virgin-lamps of yours, with oil sustained,
Express those Virgins, that were entertained
Into the Bride-chamber: hence you are
Compared to those wise-virgins that had care
To have their oil prepared, and might come,
With Virgin-glory to the Nuptial room.
Your Oyle's the splendor of a virtuous life,
And she is a Virgin, that is a Virgin-wife;
Making her husband (linkt by sacred right
Unto her self) sole mate of her delight.
The place where you present this Masque of yours,
May seem an Emblem, to those heavenly powers
Which shine in Syons-Court: pure mirrors here,
And glorious Daughters of perfection there.
Your Masque expired, includes our frail lifes-taske,
Whence was it that Prince compared it to a mask,
Wherein men were disguised, nor could one then
Discover right the phisnomie of men,
Having their face obscured: and such be now
Those, who are nothing less then what they show,
Having appearance to the out-ward eye,
Of seeming that they are not inwardly.
But when our Masque of Flesh is stripped off clean,
Then is it clearly shown, what we have been.
Your d^nce (Times measure) may be thus expressed,
Lifes-action is a dance, which craves rest;
Your selves the Ideas of true Excellence,
Show what you shall be when you go from hence.
FINIS.
TO THE JUDICIOUS And general approved, HVMFREY DAVMP ORT, Esquire:
Practitioner in the Common Laws; Whose Subject, is the goodness of the cause;
and whose aim is to redress wrong: The accomplishment of his virtuous
desires, with the perusal of this Encomiastick POEM.
Upon the worthy and sincere Pro^icients and Professants of the Common Law: an
Encomiastick POEM.
Law is the line, whose level is dispatch,
A Lamp, whose light shows Justice what is right,
A Lark, whose vnseal'd eyes keep early watch,
A Loome, whose frame cannot be swayed by might,
A List, where truth puts injury to flight; (choice list,
Straight line, bright Lamp, sweet lark, strong Loome*
Guide, shine, shield, guard, and live Truths Martialist.
Law is the Stern, which steres the Ship of State,
The glorious Stem, whence Justice, Science spring,
The cheerful Star, which early shines and late,
The Staff, whose stay supports the languishing,
The Stream, whose spring is ever cherishing;
Rare Stern, rich Stem, clear Star, firm Staff, pure steram,
Stere, cheer, direct, support, refresh the ^ene.
Blessed then are you, who labor to redress
The poor man's case, and measure your contents
By shielding the weak from awful mightiness,
Like grave Professants, good Proficients,
Clozing with equity your joint consents;
It Is you, it is you, who in this blemished time,
Send out your lights, while other Stars decline.
When Greece in glory flourished, she did rear
Some Images near Justice sacred throne,
Which to be l^me and blind portraid were,
As proper Objects to be looked upon,
Implying what in Justice should be done;
Blind to distinguish friend or foe, and lame
From taking bribes to stain Astraenas name.
Clear lights, pure lamps, rare stems, rich streams of life,
who shine, beam, spring, and draine your Crystal course
From Justice throne, to cool the heat of strife
By curbing aw with Law, with censure force,
To chastise with restraint, cheer with remorce;
Long may you live, since by your life you give
Justice new breath, and make her ever live.
Salus ciuitatis sita est in legibus* A PRAYER TO THE HIGH COURT OF HEAVEN, FOR
the high Court of Parliament now assembled: that their Counsels and
Consultations may be so directed, As Gods glory may be advanced, and unity in
Church and Commonwealth established.
LORD what am I that I should speak to thee,
Or what art thou to bow thine ear to me
That am but dust? Lord hear not as I am,
A sinne-conceived and polluted man,
But for thy Christ, who to redeem his sheep,
Did seeking find, and till He found did seek
His wandering Lambkins; hear what I do pray,
" Who art the Pilgrims staff, the Shepherds stay.
Give Lord* O give to all that do profess
Thy glorious name and Gospel, quietness,
Defeat the malice of thy Syons foes,
But specially (good God) the attempts of those
Who wish with all their heart to prey upon
This little Eden, flowrie Albion;
It is thy hedged garden, water it, Cant. 4.. 1^.

As to thy sacred wisdom shall seem ^it;
It is thy fruitful vine, Psalm. 80. ^.
may it increase
Unto thy glory (Lord) and Syon^ peace, Isa. 5. 4.

That ravenous Wolf or subtle Fox nere may Ioh. 15. 1.

Break in by force and steal her Grapes away.
And for as much Confusion needs must breed
Where members do subsist without a head,
Bless our Drad Sovereign, Lord, bless him, that He
Both in himself and his Posterity,
May stere, support, and guide the stern of State,
That Others eying us, may wonder at
The blessed peace and freedom we obtain
Under so wise and good a Sovereign.
And may He ever have one of his own
(if' t be thy pleasure) to sit on this Throne,
This peaceful I Will to solace and secure,
So long as Sun or Moon shall ere endure.
^lesse the most prudent Council of this Land,
Lord in their Consultations have a hand;
May Thou and they in Judgment still consent,
But specially the High house of Parliament,
Which by thy will and providence divine,
To right the State,'s assembled at this time.
Lord be amongst them, that whats'ere they doom,
May be to th'Weale and Peace of Christendom.
May popular Opinion never draw them,
May love to God and Good-men over^aw them:
May all their Acts be a continued Story,
To further and advance thy sacred glory:
May Prince be pleased, State eased, and men with men
Live here in Love, and rest in peace: Amen*
FINIS.
PANEDONE: OR HEALTH FROM HELICON: CONTAINING Emblemes, Epigrams, Elegies, With
other continuate Poems, full of all generous delight;

By RICHARD BRATHVVAYTE Esquire.

Licet toto nunc Helicone frui.

Mart. Do not look on me with a careless eye,
First read and judge, then buy or else go by.
LONDON Printed by John Dawson for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at the
South entrance of the Royall-Exchange. 1621.

The Number and Order of these EPIGRAMS, As they are to follow in this Tract,
ENTITVLED PANEDONE.
Divided into two parts.

The first, dilating it self to these Subjects. 1. To the World. 2. Cares
cure; or, a figg for care. 3. An Elegy entitled, Bound, yet free. 4. Free,
yet Bound. 5. A Dialogue of Hobbinoll, etc. 6. A Pastoral Eglogue between
Cuddie and Rowie. 7. The Parrets Spring. 8. Narcissus Emblem.


The second Part.
1. Ebrius experiens; or, the Drunkards humor. 2. The Old-mans Hearse; or, the
Young man's Iubile. 3. The eye. 4. Upon Fortune. 5. Upon Mya. 6. The sign in
Cancer. 7. Hymen's Eglogue. 8. Hymen's Choice. 9. Loves Description. 10. A
Nuptial Hymn. 11. An Elegiack Sonnet. 12. The Widdow-bride. 13. Coridon, or,
the Western Huntsman.
TO MY TRVELY WORTHY AND MVCH RESPECTED Friend, Sr THOMAS GAINSFORD Knight:
his best wishes.
ONce Sr* to lash the World ^made't a sport,
And many thought I should be lashed for it,
So as some nere-ones did me much importune
To shrowed my self and shield me from misfortune
But I (resolved to justify my Writ)
Did not as others did, recant from it,
But still avouch'd unto that vicious crew,
That I would stand to it, what I wrote was true.
Whence every brain his rackt construction had,
While one supposed me to be surely madd;
(...) For tell me, thou large Continent of vice,
What may be now esteemed of most price,
Amongst thy Worldlings? Honor, honor, thou
Art she to whom they Sacrifices do;
Thou art that painted Idol, whose esteem
Some value more then souls, how^ere they seem:
While with ambitious wings they mount so high,
As like Icarian fools they tutch the sky,
To make them heirs of ruin; For we know
(...) ^ates are most secure, which are most low,
So this vn^ounded Greatness does express it
Best in depressing him who does possess it.
Next this (for what is it Greatness may not do)
Is a Grand crime which I Will deblazon too, cries;
And it is Oppression, which does still arise
From Widows tears, and from poor^ Orphans
Here does a poor (...) crave he may have right,
But' las his Title is kept down by Might,
Good is his cause and yet he fares worse,
Because l^ane fees do issue from his Purse.
Then what relief may to the poor be given,
Save to refer him and his cause to heaven!
For shrubbs by these high Pines are so kept under,
That if they rise they are surely broke asunder.
Now ye fat Bulls of Basan (I must speak)
Why do ye feed and prey upon the weak,
Why do ye grind the faces of the poor,
To squize their state, their substance to devour,
As if exempt from Vengeance* Do ye think
God's so indulgent He will ever wink
At your oppression, violence, and wrong!
No, he will strike though he has spared long,
And in his fury will estrange your Land
From you and yours, in turning of a hand.
Next partiall-guilt Corruption, I must make
Thy stain my Subject for pure Justice sake,
Whose sacred Shrine polluted by thy means,
Repines to see those time-eternis'd streams
Of Themis, troubled with that puddle stench,
Where bribed fists have sole pre-eminence:
Here comes a Plaintiff with a cause as good
As truth can make it if rightly understood,
Yet' cause he knows not whom or when to fee,
He Is overthrown against all equity;
So as this Justice was compared by one,
Aptly unto the Celedoni^ stone,
Which Stone, as by Historians we are told,
Retains her virtue being rubbed with gold,
So as the Nature of the Stone is such,
As gold preserues her virtue with her tutch,
For ceasing but with Gold to rub this Stone
The secret virtue is extinct and gone.
Thrice blessed have those days esteemed bin,
Which the renowned Basil lived in,
When during the time he sat upon his Throne,
Neither were Plaintiff nor Defendant known,
But like Critolaus scale, with such even weight
Were all things poised, as equity and right
Still gained the Conquest, and injurious wrong
Was censured too, were the Client nere so strong.
Dem^sthenes being asked, what Men had
That most resembled God, he answered,
" Be charitable and embrace the truth,
It Is this that God affects, and this he does.
It is reported that at Athens, there
Certain Grave Images erected were,
Which Images had neither hands nor eyes,
Implying thence that Judges should despise
Bribes or affection, or divert from right
For friends respect to darken Justice light.
O let these Mirrors (I will say no more)
Which have divulged their fame so long before,
Be Annalls or Records for us to read,
That as we imitate them, so our seed,
Careful preservers of our Memory,
May stamp like forms in their posterity.
Next unto thee thou Ulcer of this Land,
Which hales down Vengeance from the Almighties hand,
Upon thy impious Contracts, Usury,
Thou hideous horror, forge of injury,
Fraud and collusion, thou prodigious pile,
Menacing desolation to this I Will,
And to her flourie borders, do I come,
To give thee notice of that fearful doom,
Which shall, (as sure as Heaven) pronounced be,
Upon those odious Imps that usher thee*
This Canker-worme, as it is registered,
Was by Licurgus, Sparta banished;
In Egypt Amasis did punish it,
With such severitie as did befit;
Cato did banished out of Sicilie,
Solon condemned it in that Nurcerie
Of fame-eternis'd Athens, which did heal
Many Distractions in the commonweal.
If we from Pagans such examples gather,
Who had but light of Nature, how much rather
Ought we such horrid crimes to chase away,
Who have bin taught far better things then they!
For we are Christians, and should rather give
Ethnickes example how they ought to live,
Then by a course depraved to express
That we are least what we by faith profess.
Of more (my Patron) could I censure thee,
As Incest, Sacrilege, Church-symonie,
Eare-marked perjury, which in each Coast
Swears men out of their state by knights of the Post;
With thousand more, but I must now prepare
To sing my Canto, styled, A fig for care,
Wherein I Will prove (nor care I if thou scoule)
The greatest Worldling is the greatest fool.
FINIS.
Cares Cure, OR A figg for Care.
Happy is that stat^ of his,
Takes the World as it is,
Loose he honor, friendship, wealth,
Loose he liberty or health,
Loose he all that Earth can give,
Having naught whereon to live;
So prepared a mind's in him,
He Is resolved to sink or swim.
Some will pule if they but hear,
How next Summer will be dear,
As the Engrosser who does heap
Grain, laments when it is cheap:
Gallants who have run their race
In all riot, fear the Mace;
Punkes whose trunkes of lucre smell,
Fear the Bridewell more then Hell.
But when I remember these,
Hermon, and Hermocrates,
Lesser flies are quickly taken
While the Great break out again;
Or so many Schisms and Sects
Which foul Heresy detects,
To suppress the fire of zeal
Both in Church and Commonweal!
Should I weep to see some write
To add fuel to delight
But no Task to undertake
Any time for Conscience sake;
Or to mourn to see the Dove
Ever censured for her love,
While the Puttock flies away
Priuiledg'd what ere he say!
Should I grieve when I Am in place
That my foe should be in grace,
Or in silent woe lament
At my friends his discontent,
Or repine that Men of worth
Should want means to set them forth.
Or disdain my Wench should be
kind to any one but me!
Should I blind my eyes with tears,
Or oppress my heart with fears,
When nor tears nor fears avail
Such whose choicest comforts fail,
By converting that sweet air
Of delight unto despair,
For I know no enter-breath
Limits these save only Death!
Should I sigh for that I see
World goes not well with me,
Or inveigh against envious Fate
Still to lowre on my estate,
Or reprove such as express
Nothing save unthankfulness.
Or expose my self to grief,
Cause my woes are past relief!
Should I grieve because I give
No contentment where I live,
Though my best endeavors prove
That my actions merit love;
Or repine at others aim
Gaining more then I can gain,
When their vain mis-guided course
Shows their humor to be worse!
Should I pine away and die
Or my childish tears descrie
'Cause my Neighbors are untoward
Wilful wife, and servants froward,
Or exclaim against destenie
Who so crossely matched me,
Or desire no more to live
Since I live the more to grie^e!
Should I mourn, repine, or mo^^
To be left distressed alone,
Or wish Death approaching nie
With a bleered blubb'red eye,
Cause my Means I scarce can find
Of proportion with my Mind,
Or breath sadly 'cause my breath
Draws each minute nearer Death!
No there is naught on Earth I fear
That may force from me one tear,
Loss of Honor, Fredome, Health,
Or that Mortal Idol, Wealth;
With These Babes may grieved be
But they have no power ore me;
Less my substance less my share
In my fear and in my care.
Fear he must that does possess
Least his substance should grow less,
Which often drives him to extremes
Both in broken sleeps and dreams;
But so little do I care
For these Feathers in the air,
As I laugh while others grieve
Loving these which they must leave.
Wretched Moles who pore on earth
And conceive no taste of mirth,
But in hoording heap on heap
What Is the fruit in end they reap
Save returning to that slime
Which they tugged for all their time?
Sure I am, reduced to clay
Poorest are as rich as they.
Care I would but not for this
'Cause it lessens care of Bliss;
Yet not so as not to care
What we spend or what we spare,
For this careless course we call
Merely vain and prodigal;
But that Golden mean to keep
As no Care may break our sleep.
Thus to love and thus to live,
Thus to take and thus to give,
Thus to laugh and thus to sing,
Thus to mount on pleasures wing,
Thus to sport and thus to speed,
Thus to flourish, nourish, feed,
Thus to spend and thus to spare
Is to bid, A figg for Care.
FINIS.
An Elegy, Entitled Bound yet free, speaking of the benefit of Imprisonment.
THou whom we call lives death, Captivity,
Yet can contemplate in the darkest cell*
Of thingst above the reach of vanity,
Do in my judgment Liberty excel,
In that thou teach Man to mortify
His indisposed passions, and can well
Direct him how to manage his estate,
Confined to th'narrow Prospect of thy grate.
He sees the passage of this Globe of earth,
And makes right use of what his sight partakes;
Some he observes express a kind of mirth,
Of which he this dew application makes;
If they did know the misery of Birth,
With Deaths approach, they would not hazard stak^
Of souls eternal glory for a day
Of present Joy, which one hour takes away.
Others he hears, bemoning of the loss
Of some dear friend, or't may be not so well,
Decrease of Aduersis et pro^eris boni ad perfectionem virtu^is acced^^^. Aug.
Fortune, or some other cross,
Which to forgo they deem a second Hell,
(So firmly fixed be their minds on dross)
As naught smells well, but what of gain does (...)
These He^ condemns, and proves that every way
The Captiu'st wretch's in better state then they.
Others he notes observing of the time.
Mere fashion-mongers, shadow of the great,
And these attendance give where the Sun does shine,
And like to Isis Ass admire the Hi stupen^ in utilis and imaginibus. Annulo
magis quam animo credentes.
seat,
More then the Person, 'cause the robes be fine
That hang about it: and he does entreat
Their Absence; for these cannot well (says he)
By living, leave name to Posterity.
Others as base and far more dangerous
Notes he as Politician Machauells,
Who 'count that Alexander Severus would have smoked such sellers of
smoake-Xerxes would have pu^led their skin over their ears.
gain which is commodious,
Adhering to themselves and to none else,
For These make ancient houses ruinous,
And Charity from out the Realm expells;
Reducing th 'Orphanes tear and Widows curse,
To the damned Elixir of their well-cramm'd purse.
Others he notes and they would noted be,
For Quid facit infacie Christianae purpurissus etc. Hierom: ad Furiam de
viduit: Servand; Tom. 1 ^ampla sati^ forma pudicitia. Proper*
painting, pur^ling, smoothing, cerusing,
Show they would be observed for vanity,
Starving their Souls by Bodies cherishing;
And these he laughs at for their fool erie,
For while They put the Case to garnishing,
That Shell of frailty, They Are indifferent
What shall become of th'Soule the Instrument.
Others there be which seem least what they are,
Pretending truth in falsehood, and do gull
The world with shadows; yet does He compare
The passage of Events and finds at full
Their end's attended with an endless care,
And pregnant wit which seemed so smooth proves dull,
When Fugiet ab agro ad ciuitatem, a publico ad domu^, a domo in cubiculum etc.
Aug. in E^ar: Sup. 45. Psalm.
thousand Testates shall produced be,
For to disclose his close Nil interest habere ostiu^ apertu^, vultume clausu^.
Cic.
hypocrisy.
Others he sees and taxes, for they hold
Proportion with the world, and being made
After a better Image, yet are sold
To all Collusion, making in their trade
This vile Position; Who Will be rich when old
Must cheat being young: but see how they are displaid,
So often have they The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but his mouth shall
be filled with gravel Pro. 20. 17.
deceived, as now they must
Perforce deceive themselves by men's distrust.
Others as Prollers of the time he sees,
But scorns to take acquaintance, for their Regitur fatis Mortale genus. Sen^.
on Trag.
Fate
Presageth worst of ills, whose best increase
Proceeds from good men's fall; yet mark their state
As indirectly got, so little peace
Accrewes in state to any, for the hate
Of God and Man attends them; and how then
Should there be peace, where is war with God and men?
More he beholds, and he observes them too.
And numbers their dimensions as they pass
The compass of his Prospect to and fro,
For this same Grate he makes his Looking glass.
In which he sees more then the world can show,
Conferring what is present with what was;
Extracting this from times experienced School,
" The Captiue's freer then the Worlds fool. Vbi pars diuina in homine mersa
est.

For by the first, we show but what we are,
And moralize our selves, in being pent
Close from the worlds eye, which we compare
Unto a Omnis vita seruitium est. Seen: de tranq: anim.
Prison; since the Infranchisement
We haue's in Inquilins in terris, in col^ in coelis.
heaven: then howsoere we fare,
Though bound, yet free in mind, th'Imprisonment
We suffer cannot so our spirits depresse,
That the freedom of our Minds should seem ought less.
Ought less; nay more: for we approve as true,
What the divine Moral taught, That one may have
A fuller and more perfect enteruiew
Of the Stars beauty in a hollow Cave
Then on the Superfici^s: for the show
Of pomp distracts our passions, and does slave
Our Ancillan^ dominari and domina^ ancillari magna abusio est. Bern. Let Senes
become subject to the soueraig^tie of Reason.
reason to our sense; whence we may know
" The dangers of high States are seen below.
Below; and what more low then to be shut
From open air, Ae si hismanae so(...) tati penitas alicnus esset.
strang'd from the sight of men,
Closed in Oblivion, linked hand and foot
Least their escape gain liberty? What then,
Shall this enthrall my soul! it cannot do it;
It does aspire above the thoughts of them
Who shed their Afranius hearing his effeminate Son cry out, alas, me
wretched; replied as severely: If one part grieve thee, would to God all parts
did smart alike. 4. ^useul^


childish tears when they are sent
By higher powers to take them to restraint.
There is no giddie-headed Want-wit there,
Who makes profuser meetings all his bliss;
For such (for sooth) must change their Solum coe ^umque mutant, more^ tamen
eosde retinent vid. Senec. de tranq Et Lips. de constan. Hoc fuco prodire
licet, lucemque tueri quae mihi vitae frui, quae caeruisse mori.
Country air
Because they are sick, yet know not whence it is:
Here are no mincing Dames who long to go
To Rumford, Hoggsdon, or to Pimlico.
Lastly, amongst many thousands which my Pen
Might here produce, should't be a Tune Poaetae dignum nomen habes? habeas
cognomen et I^i.
Poets fate
(As no one fate more ominous amongst men)
To be accused for glancing at the State,
Here they are exempt from such as censure them,
For worst of Hinc leges (inquit So ^ou) aranearum tel^s si milimas esse; ^
quibus parum difficile est, potentio^ibus elabi: ^^nuoribus ^utem Mustis
exceder^, nagis ar^^uum. La. ^rt. in vit. Solon.
Fortune has expressed her hate
To their obscured glory; so as they
May chant high strains, yet none notes what they say.
Their tunes are tones and accents of delight,
Which pearce the air, when most bereft of air,
And with soule-cheering beams disperse the Night
Of their consuming cares: for all their care
Is to erect their thoughts unto that Light
Which cannot be eclyps'd but still shines fair:
Where glory's endless, boundless in content,
Sitanta delect abilia contintat Car^er, qua^ta, qu^so, continere poterit
patria? Aug. Soliloq cap. 21.
Prison a Palace, freed from restraint.
If Hoc nobis adsert longius vitae spatium, quod plura mala partim videmus,
partim sustinemus, partim perpetramus. Nazien. in Funeb: Orat. pro Caesarto.
life indeed were such a Iubile,
That every hour, day, year did promise us
Continuate health, and wealth, and liberty,
Then had we better reason to excuse
The love we have to our Mortality;
But since we see, we cannot will nor choose
But must be reft of these, why should we grieve
To leave as Men, what Men are forced to Non mag number est sua sed se relinquere.
leave?
Nor skills it much where we be reft of these,
Whether in Thrall or Freedom; but of the two
I Would rather loose my Fortune where I cease
To make resort to any, and must know
No more of World or the Worlds prease,
But am retired from the Public show
Of this frail Vniversus Mundus es ercet his(...) nem. In quo Mimum vitae
agimus.
Theater, and am confined
In flesh, to taste true liberty of Animi in perio, corpo ris Seruit^ magis
vtimur. Salus Seruitute corporis, o^ tim^ libert^ t^ mentis fruimur.
mind.
A mind as free as is the Body thrall,
Transcendent in her being, taking Wings
Of Morning to ascend, and make that all
Of hers immortal; sphering it with Kings
Whose glory is so firm it cannot fall;
Where every Saint in their reposure sings
Triumphant Quae (...) tica? quae organa? qu^ cantilenae? quae ^elodi* tbi sine
fine decama^tur etc. Aug. in M^ nu: cap. vi.
Peans of eternity
To him whose sight gives perfect liberty.
Then whether my restraint enforce or no,
I Will be my-selfe, but more in my restraint;
Because through it I see the end of woe,
Tasting in grief the essence of content:
That when from this same In causa, in qua Deo pla cere cupio, homines non
sormido. Greg in indict: 2. Ep* 78.
dooble ward I go,
This same entangled Prison, the Continent
Of heavenly Freedom may receive my soul
Which Flesh imprison might but not controwle.
Rest then (retired Muse) and be thy Caelum So^que mu^, teipsum nmutans: et: de
cons: ^ilosop.
own,
Though all thy own forsake thee; that when friends,
Fortune, and freedom are but small or none,
Thy hopes may aim at more transcendent ends;
So by thy The body ^ll chasti^d, the soul ^comes ^eared; ^aking Af^ction her
tercise to ^y her con^ancy, her ^trance to ^r Native Country, ^er assurace ^a
the state of glory.
Body in strait Durance thrown,
Thy vnconfined Soul may make amends;
For that which she had in her freedom lost,
In that most blessed wherein she seemed most crossed.
FINIS.
Free, yet Bound. An Epigram Upon Marriage, dilating upon the servile Freedom,
or free Servitude of such as are Married.
Non sum qui fueram.
MARRIED; what means that title? Servitude;
Who would embrace it then? He that desires
To loose his freedom, which so soon expires
As he ioynes hand in hand to her he su'de:
Which firm affiance often times most is ru'd,
Where wanton folly scorched with youthful fires,
Plants all content on earth in the Marriage Bed,
And what delight's to loose a Maidenhead.
Poor hair brained Lover, little do thou think
How thou art fledged in Birdlime, and ensnared
With thousand mazes; little have thou cared
What should ensue hereafter, till the brinke
Of thy transformed estate did make thee sink
Into the Verge of care, where thou have shared
For an vncaptiu'd mind, a mind in cage,
With griefs well suting such a Pilgrimage.
Once might thou sing, and though thou little had,
Knew well to tune thy Pipe unto thy ear;
But now how strange those strains of mirth appear,
It Is featured in thy look, for it is sad;
And yet we know thee for the selfsame lad
That thou was once when as thou soiorn'd here:
And in a happier case then thou wast then,
" For lads are far inferior unto men.
True, in conceit and growth of years they are,
If those alone conferred to happiness,
But alas conceit often adds to wretchedness
Where Men conceive the extremities of care,
Which change their minds as years do change their hair,
And makes them know that Earth affords no Bless
Like to a mind enfranchised, whose free life
Takes Contemplation for his wedded wife.
A happy wife, whose portion is her-selfe,
Not garish in her habit, for her mind
Is to a purer subject still inclined,
Then admiration of soule-clogging pe^fe;
She steeres her well-rigg'd ship from every shelfe,
And fails with easy tide and happy wind:
Her aim is heavenly, and hows'ere on earth,
She merry seem, it is but a fained mirth.
But what a difference there is 'twixt these,
A wife Contemplative which we do take,
When we for wife our Contemplation make,
And such a wife as we must seek to please,
Studies her own content, delight, and ease;
Whose vanities we must of force partake,
And slave our selves, which is the worst of ill,
Unto a boundless and a bendlesse will.
And hence the pregnantst wits are so deprest
As their aspiring greatness must decline,
And loose their worth by giving way to time,
Which, if they were themselves, they would detest;
But as worse Fo^tune still pursues the best,
So sad events such wits are most divine:
Where Mind made weak by want or discontent
Is spent with woe which should in worth be spent.
And yet, me thinks, I might object against this,
How love combined in one should rather add,
And give a grace unto the worth we had,
Then any way obscure so choice a Bliss;
For one we know may sooner do amiss,
Having no firm direction, but is glad
To follow his own motion, then that man
" Who has one to advise him all she can.
And thanks to heaven, I have got such an one,
Who though she be no professed Monitor,
Shall as she merits, be my Counselor;
For she is firm above comparison,
And loves all Music save Division:
Nor yet assumes she to her self that power
As her Instructions were so absolute,
That first with Reason she should not dispute.
But alas how many have not cast their lot
In such a hopeful field, where every hour
Their wives shrude tongue like Satan's Parretour
Summons their spleen to vengeance, which made hot
With wrath and fury has oft-times begot
Children unjustly fathered; for the power
Of women's such, and so it has been still,
" The husbands badge is in the Woman's will.
And rather then they will vnrevenged be,
They will incur the shame of Prostitute,
Least that their husbands should be destitute
Of some fit crest for want of Heraldrie,
Where both partakers are of infamy,
For one with other equally do suit;
She to bestow and he for to receive
That which may make men stumble on his grave.
On Grave; no, no, that cannot cover shame;
It Is but the bodies cover, fraylties shrine,
Which may remain as Monument of time,
But little adds to the honor of our name,
For some thing else perpetuates our fame
Then stone or varnish, for they soon decline;
Where Solae est atque vnic^ virtus; neque datur dono, neque accipitur* Salust.
virtues, (Odor-like) perfume the Dead,
And make them live when they are buried.
What freedom then to Marriage, if that rite
Have right solemnization; which to adorn
With seemly state consists not in form
Only, but in the Minds affected right,
Where either takes from other mutual light,
Neither with spite nor spirit ouer-borne,
Pure from deprau'd affection, which is bred
Forth of a Lust unto a Marriage Bed.
Where Pro^idence makes her to study wife
Ere she attain that Title, and does sit
Considering what may that state befit
Ere she betake her to a married life,
Resolving nere to make domesticke strife,
Caring for them be got, more then to git;
Briefly, to solemnize this Nuptial rite,
As being ever in her Makers sight.
Yea, this were freedom, and so blessed a state
As Single life were but a painted bliss
To such an Essence; but to instance this
Is rare on earth, so hard is humane Fate
Which by our wills is grown prevaricate,
Training us sooner far to do amiss
Then to walk justly in the way that is right,
" So weake's our will, so feeble is our might.
Yet if in one this freedom may be found,
Each man's to hope the best, not to despair,
Because they are sown in every place so rare,
But rather thus his confidence to ground,
Though good decrease and ill-ones do abound,
Yet there are ill and foul and good and fair;
Of which, thy fate is ill, if she thou choose
Be so transformed, as she be none of those.
If worst of these, as foul and ill together,
Yet of that foul and ill thou may make use
To better thy defects by her abuse;
And for her lothed foulness staying with her
May thus resolve, that vice nor blemish neither
Can force thee from her whom thou once did choose;
And this's the benefit thou shall reap hence,
Thou shall (tho dubbed) be crowned with patience.
" Wives let such marry then as seem to need 'em,
" And in their bondage make a show of freedom.
Sic perit experiens, experiendo perit. FINIS.
A DIALOGVE BETVVEENE HOBBINOLL the Ploughman, and Nathaniell Spruce the
Gentleman; WHEREIN It is proved, how Rusticitie has advantage upon Gentry in
the Liberty of Living.
Hobb: MAny good morrows to my Landlords heir;

Nath: The like to Hobbinoll, but pray thee tell well.
What makes my Chuff to look so fat and fair,

Thy plump-cheekes ( Hobb) mine look not half so well.
Hobb: Not yours (young-maister)! there is no cause they should,
Care kills a Cat, there is not a day you live
But you have cares, I warrant, twenty fold
More then we feel: for first, before you wiue
You mun go^ common with your nearest kin,
And if they think it fit her portion be,
With other things amang well equalling,
Pe^chance they will (if they be bribed) agree.

Nath: Bribed Hobb! why can none without bribing have her

Hobb: Not fitly Master; something has some savor*
And council well deserves to have his fee,
For it is their living, and they must live by it;

Nath: Friends counsell's free;

Hobb: Nay, whosoere they be
This you shall find probatum, if you will try it,
Brains are as good demaines where there be brains
And certain too, as any on our Down.

Nath: Indeed where friends make of their friends again.

Hobb: And pray you say, is that but seldom known?
Yes, Master, there is one and one I know,
For he is my doore-neighbour, and indeed
A very Cricket, but of late did grow
So very rich, that now for store of breed
There is no Heardsman like him; yet his wealth
Grew to this height by the benefit he made
Of his entirest friends: though, since his health
'Gan to decay, he sorrows as it is said,
And well he may, for nere did any Swain
In such short time so great revenues gain.

Nath: Sorrow, good Hobbinoll, what causes it!

Hobb: Why his estate Man, indirectly got;
And he may thank his overweening wit
For all his grief.

Nath: I took him for a Sot,
A very Goseling, one that could do naught
But prate of Sheepskins, or a breeding Ewe*

Hobb: Yea, Master, but if he could profit ought,
He would soon make a Goseling-bird of you,
So quaint he is, for I have thoroughly tried him,
^s scarce a man can keep his own beside him.

Nath: It makes me wonder; but good Hobb: proceed,
And prove what Liberty you have above us
That are your Lands-lords.

Hob: Shall I Sr indeed?

Nath: Yes pray thee Hobb;

Hob: Then I will prove it thus:
We may go woo ilke week a sundry Wench,
And none talk on it; but when you go to woo^
There Is such a stir as there is no defense
Against report, for all must know it too.
And than a thousand things are to be done,
As Iointures, f^offments, ere the match be made,
Which (well I wot) we never think upon,
But lock and like, and then are bargained.
And is it not, I pray you Master say,
A shrude vexation to be barred our sport,
By being crossed by such a long delay,
And kept from that when we came thither for't^

Nath: Why man, our state requires mature advice,
And better is that Match like to succeed,
Where rashness has no sway nor getts no prize
Then such as yours that is finished with such speed.

Hob: Nay, Master, for success amongst such as you,
If Truth were known, we should but find a few;
But I may safely swear ere I were crossed
Of her I loved, if she did fancy me
I would loose whatsoere I prized most,
And never stand upon it so curiously:
Roundly to work we go without ere spech
Of any feoffments* and we think we are sped
Of state enough if we a Marriage reach,
Though four bare legs are not enough in bed.

Nath: No by my Faith Hob: there is more to do
Then name of Marriage, which is such a state
As th'knot we tie we never can undo,
Till it be loosed by the ordinance of Fate.

Hob: Yes Master, such as you knows to dispense
With such good haly things, for if there be
Betwixt the married pair a difference,
Then straight divorce is sewed and presently
A Separation made; in which respect
Hob must confess you have more freedom far
Then such as he; for where we once affect,
Without remoouing we are ever there.

Nath: Hob you are knavish growne^ but let that pass*
Proceed to show wherein our liberty
Is less then yours.

Hob: I Will tell you Sr; time was*
But that was clep'd a golden time, when we
(As Sheepherds used) might sport us on the Plain,
Where Phyllis danced with Coridon the Swain;
Each Sheepherd culld his dear and colld her too,
And in dispite of Fate possessed that bliss
Where they had time to chat, to sport, to woo,
Where she did call him hers, and he her his:
Then (o thrice happy then) naught was more loved
Nor worthier loving then a virtuous life;
Where sweet experience only that approved
Was free from difference and exempt from strife*
Then were our feelds so free we needed not
Merestones or Buttells, for none durst approach
With violent hands to seize on that we got,
Or by deceit upon our Bounds incroch.
But afterward (as aftertimes prove worse)
A greedy kind of humor did possess
The minds of Sheepherds, altring quite the course
Which they before held: being conscionlesse,
Betrothed to no especial One, but all
In a Community; where small distasts
Made them remove their love, and so to sall
To lavish their affections on Outcasts,
Stale-mercenaries that their honor prize
No more then Hacknies that are put to hire;
Or l^ ke our Neighbor Eliots, who devise
How to fulfill the height of their desire,
How sinful ere the practice be they make
Which for their lust they only undertake.
Thus Sheepherds grew, but for their low estat^
Being inferior to the better sort,
Their vices were scarce taxed or pointed at,
Till by report (what is swifter then report)
The sundry mischiefs done upon the Plains,
As by eyewitness daily did appear,
Committed by the practice of those Swains,
Came at the last to great Pandoxus ear.
He, as a graceful Guardian, tendering still
The state of Sheepherds, yet much discontent
His whilome honest Swains should grow so ill,
Sent some choice men to give them chastisement;
Which they received and kindly entertained,
Admitting them to dwell amongst them too,
And so they did, where they not long remained
Till as the Swains did, they began to do;
So as these goodly Tutors grew in time
As ill, or worse then ere the Sheepherds were;
Vice h^gging-hanting Minions, who in prime
And thus Pandoxus argued, nor could he
For all his Princely virtues (as who ere
Possessed more) waine his Nobility
From th'vicious life wherein they nuzled were.
Yet what they did (as well Pandoxus said)
Was quickly bruted; but what we committed
The meaner Swains I mean, was silenced:
For we, whose actions our conditions fitted,
Were never noted whatsoere we did;
Yea, what is more, none were more prone to speak
Of great-mens errors, which were seldom hid,
Then we, whose lives did like affections seek.
For every day we drunk our Sheepherds health
In Wassell Cupps, not caring for our Herds,
How well or ill they fared, a figg for wealth,
We made our chopps wagg, and our grisled beards,
(Our Maister-Sheepherds) still discharged our score,
And would have done't, if it had bin ten times more.

Nath: Why, this was excellent, but pray thee say
Were you nere chastis'd for it?

Hob: No, never We;
We plide our merriments from day to day,
And past our iollie lives as pleasantly
As if we had been Lords, and they our slaves
Whom we in duty served; yea, I may swear
I nere received from Thyrsus any braues,
But was esteemed of him and his so dear,
That some have asked, seeing him use me so
Whether I was his own, or that he meant
On Hobbinol some daughter to bestow,
And that, I Am half perswad'd was his intent,
For we were half agreed.

Nath: Pray thee tell true;

Hob: Yes marie Master, it may well appear
That we were halse agreed, I Will say to you,
For I was well agreed to marry her.

Nath: What Hob conceited grown! but I will yield
To thy Discourse, for I have often times found
By due experience, that the private field,
Where the careful husbandman manures his ground,
Makes her poor farmer in a better state
Then the Prime Lord: for he may merry be,
Yet shall his actions nere be glanced at,
For his low rank makes him from Rumor froe.

Hob: Yea Master, I Will ensure you, if he should
(As when the drink i^ in the wit is out)
Throw house quite out at Windows, yet he would
Be little talked of: but if you should do it
Your name would soon be rumord, for your place
Would make men note you.

Nath: Most certain Hobbinol,
Which should induce men of more generous race
Choice and select socitie to cull,
Since the veriest slave that makes of time abuse,
With us compared, advantage has of us.

FINIS.
A Pastoral Eglogue between Cuddie and Rowie.
Rowie. WELL met is Cuddie man of ^ickle la'er,
And mare he leaves may he have ^ver mare,
For he is a bonnie ging.

Cuddie. Rowie for shame
Why do thou ruse me, Thou art far to blame;
Smaw is my la'er, my knawledge lile worth,
When sike an ane as Rowie bouteth forth.

Rowie. Ha Cuddie, but if any did but mell
And tanke sae barely on thee but the sell,
Well siker I'se that thou would pout full sour,
And ought or laug there would be capps ath floor.

Cuddie. Thou's far misled; if I were sike an ane
I reed thee Rowie, I cudd have a Swain
A buxom Hussie, that for tougher and good
There Is nane her fallow, and I her ha woed,
And many laikings has she taken frame,
Yet when we sud be yoked it will not be.

Rowie. Why, it is an and sain sa, sike men as thou
That knaws the maste, knawes lile how to woo;
For I have ane a Neibour wonning here
wha has a son that nere this dozen year
Has been at farran Scules, and now his Dad
Crankie and worn wad have this Clarkly lad
To boun him to a Wife, and sooth to say
My daughter Tibb is she that he wad ha.
But sike a wooing ( Cuddie) seld was seen,
He will not tell my Less what he does mean,
But taukes of Stars, and clipses of the Sun,
An on a Man stands sta^ing ith the Moon,
Of wether-gaws and many sike as these;

Cuddie. But well I wate these will not Tibbie please.

Rowie. Na Cuddie na, she is but an ingrant thing,
An lile recks for aw his coniuring:
Ya I may sa thus lang he sought the wance,
And I nere saw him busse her mare than ance.

Cuddie. The mickle Lummer's swaimish;

Rowie. He Is indede,
But twill be lang ere sike a Milk-sopp speed:
He that wull woo and win wha he does woo,
Mun faune on her he makes his suite unto,
^^ke Morn and Even he mun his service do,
And be right blithe, an she wull tak it too;
Bukes make not Lovers wise, for he that can
Put himself forwardst is the speeding man.

Cuddie. Now is I well avis'd, and sees how lang
I Have gan^ astray and wooed my Love a-wrang*
For aw the chat I used when I dud woo her,
Was to make knawn my learning ever to her,
And aye I thought that was the way to git her,
Whereas I fu^ that there was nane unfitter,
For th'S^affish Carri^ wad not cum nere hand me;

Rowie. The cause was this, She cud not understand thee.

Cuddie. Rowie it is true, and I may rue the day,
That I so fondly learned the woers way,
But well I trow'd, but se how ill I sped,
Wha ere I wooed, I mut as frelie wed.

Rowie. A fault well knawn 'mang th'trimmer gang of men
Wha think whare they get an^ they may get ten,
But we sall find, though they are na chip the wiser,
These elvish Harlottries are often the nicer.

Cuddie. Alesse for wae, I nere knew any fair,
But trow'd themsels far fairer than they were;
For this's a true said Saw 'mang womanhood,
" She knaws but lile that knaws not to be proud.

Rowie. Ruse women Cuddie, if thou mean to speed,
For kindly words wull stand thee in good stead;
They are the weaker ging, and yet we see
They oft-time prove to be as strange as we.

Cuddie. In will they are.

Rowie. Then Cuddie buckle still
Sin^ they are strangst in wull, to do their will.

THE PARROTTS SPRING.
Psittacus vt vocem rapuit Prometheus ignem.
Stolen waters be the sweet'st, may the Parrot say,
Whose borrowed note and Coat his truth bewray:
But it is prodigious for Fowls to sing
Of Wood-cocks caught within a Parrotts spring.
UPON THE OTHER BANK directly opposite, stood Pan the Arcadian God in
Porphyrite, curiously featured: who ^namoured of the beauteous Nymph Syrinx,
had her in eager pursuit: upon the fringe of the Border was this Motto
engraven.
Vt vidi vt perij.
Pan deus Arcadiae correptus amore, Syringem
insequitur, fugit illa, Syrinx hinc fistula dicta est.
Englished,

The Sheepheards God with Inter (...) irgines quae D^s petuntius solitabantur,
aphnidem, assandram ^ Syringemrum votis nice obsti^sse tradi^^ est.
Syrinx beauty taken,
Had her in chase, whence pipes from Syrinx came.
If pipes proceeded from restraint of ill,
Play pipe, mount May-poule, we will be frolic still.
FINIS.
The second part.
EBRIVS EXPERIENS; OR The Drunkards humor.
SOme say I drink too much to write good lines;
T^ssoes Apollogie transcribe wherein a Drunkard Humor (...) to life described.
Indeed I drink, more to observe the Times,
And for the love I bear unto my friend
To hold him chat, then any other end:
Yea, my Observance tells me I have got
More by discoursing sometimes ore a Pot,
Then if I had good-fellowship forsook,
And spent that hour in poring on a book.
And this's the cause (we see it now and then)
" The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men:
Which is confirmed by Times-experienc'd School,
" The meerest Scholar proves the meerest fool.
But can thou love? to satisfy his choice,
I told him Yes, faining a Woman's voice:
For I had so much sense left in my brain,
As I resolved to try his Cupping vain;
Then up he counts (tho wine of wit had reft him)
How many farms his Father now had left him,
All which (quoth he) must to our heirs succeed,
Which I found true, for All came up indeed:
Beside, and happy may that word betide,
" For of that All came up, some fell beside,
Which, if it had not had a speedy vent,
Had gone well niet'haue drowned his beauteous Saint.
Thus lay we long like Images of death,
Whilst the fat Lubber pressed me underneath;
Stir could I not, so motionlesse was I,
Whilst he did coll and kiss melouingly;
Yea, I am perswad'd, if the Drawer had not come,
As good hap was, into our forlorn room,
By kisses store (so kind a heart had he)
He had gone nere in time to stifle me,
For breathless I could neither speak nor move me,
So heavy was the Block that lay above me.
At last released, and both upon our feet,
To quench the passion of our Loue-sicke heat,
On terms of friendship, now to make an end,
I was coniured by my Kissing friend
To pledge him but one Health, and then depart,
Which if I did Is' de ever have his heart,
I gave assent; the Health, five senses were,
(Though scarce ^ne sense did 'twixt us both appear)
Which as he drunk I pledged; both pledged and drunk,
Seeing him now full-charg'd, behind I shrunk,
Whilst he his meaning copiously displaide,
And in the Chimney all his senses laid.
Nay, then goodnight (quoth I) I will not stay
With him that casts his senses so away,
For this in me Experience begitts,
" He cannot love his friend that loathes his wits.
Yet as a friend I caused him to be led,
In a magestick sort unto his bed,
For having left his senses there behind him,
I placed him there, that they next Morn might find him.
" Thus much for Humors which so diverse be,
" As in each Subject there is variety,
" All which observed with apprehensiue eyes,
" May add unto the knowledge of the wise;
For weake's his judgment or deprau'd's his will,
" Cannot extract good from apparent ill.
FINIS.
The Old-mans Hearse; OR The Yong-mans Iubile.
Joy appears in midst of tears.
HEars't thou not Vitulino, who is dead!
Thy father man; nay, hang not down thy head
Like to a Bull-rush: there is no cause at all
That thou so childishly should moan his fall
Whose falls thy rising; for He wished to die.
Yea, and to put his Soul in ieopardie,
With his injurious course to make thee rich,
Or thy wrong Fathered Imps he cared not which:
But what is that to thee, thou need'st not care,
How his sin-pricked-pressed soul does fare;
The Proverb is, how ere the effect seem evil,
" Happie's that Son, whose Father goes to the Devil.
Yet shed some fained tears; but I do fear,
The art not so tender-harted, therefore hear
What thou shall do; put on a Vergis-looke,
And tie an Onion in thy Napkins nooke,
Which will enforce thee weep, (right sure I am)
And make thee seem a tender-harted man?
But many things it is fitting thou should have,
To bring Him honestly unto his Grave;
As first, though He was first that ere expressed,
His Gentry by his Coat or by his Crest,
Thou must provide some Herald that may draw
His late-vnknowne descent, and by the Law
Of Arms may Gentilize the Pesant so,
As you for Gentlemen may after go.
Which, that each thing may be in order done,
Let the Herald rank the Mourners one by one,
Where some poor snakes that cottage on thy Land
May carry each a Scutchion in their hand,
And seem to mourn, tho they were much to blame
To mourn his death that sought to beggar them.
But some Divine thou must have to commend
His zealous life, and his Religious end;
Which task, as it thy bounty does require,
" For the Labourer is worthy of his hyre,
Clapp me a brace of Angels in his fist,
And that will make him say, Thy Father's blist,
Though his corrupted Conscience say no,
For what is it good Angels will not do?
O how he will make the Church ring with his praise,
Entitling Him, the Mirror of his days,
A Patron of pure Justice, one, whose door
Was thronged still with crowding of the poor,
(Without least crum of comfort) being known,
To be the Almes-basket of the Town.
And then He 'le feign a tear, and wish to see
The happy end of many such as He;
And he has cause to wish it, for their death
Might guild in time his mercenarie breath.
Then He 'le descend to man's Mortality,
Which He 'le dilate on as historically;
" Where Is good Aeneas, Tellus, Ancus he
" That was so rich? as other Mortals be,
" Consumed to dust, so as that supreme bless
" They placed in Wealth,'s reduced to rottenness.
And will not this do bravely? when a Swine
That nere did one good deed in all his time,
But grunting in his Stye, or in his Stall,
Nere fed Mi^^m pe^it Lazarus and (...) non datur, guttam Dives postulat and
non ^uditur.
starved soul but at his Funeral,
Must be canonized Saint! thrice blessed gold,
That art so sovereign to eternize mould,
And make corruption glorious, whose esteem
Can make our foulest vices virtues seem!
Where an Incarnate Devil that did shon
The sight of God is made an Angel on,
Transposed from earth to heaven; yet ten to seven
In all his life He scarce once thought on Heaven.
Now when he has thy Fathers virtues showed,
Will thou not think thy Angels well bestowed?
Yes Vitulino, and will make this use
Of his depraved Doctrine: Times abuse
Drawn from oppression, injury, and wrong,
May purchase praises from a hyrelings tongue,
Sooner then best deseruings; which may be
A motive to thy own Security,
Observing how Opinion oft-times gives
" Best name to him that most securely lives.
This done, and now the s^ope-sleu'd mourning gown^
Is from his sable Pulpit coming down,
And thy worme-breeding Father's to be laid
In his last home, there must a Tomb be made
Of Porphyrite Marble, or the Thracian stone,
To memorise his Worship being gone;
Whereon t'engraue some verse, were not amiss,
To Express his worth, as such an one as this.
" Demas did rich they say, but it is not so, Upon the late deceased Pinchgut
Demas.

" For he did poor, and was indebted too;
" How should that be? observe me and I Will tell ye
" He did indebted both to back and belly,
" For all He scraped from his Atturneyes fees,
" Served but starve his maw with bread and cheese:
" So as amongst those we rightly may him call.
" Whose life spent less then did his Funeral.
" For all his life his house scarce eat one beast,
" Yet dead, his Son makes up the Churles feast.
This Monument when thou erected have,
And on the front a Plate of Brass have plas't,
With this Inscription, or one of like sort,
(But Epitaphs indeed should be more short)
Let this same Tomb where thou thy Father lay
Be th'place of payment on each festival day;
For It would delight the old Chrone but to hear
His Son and heir to make his Checker there:
Besides chinke, chinke's a Misers heaven on earth,
And therefore now when He is in the dearth
Of comfort, it were good t'allay his pain
With sight of that would raise him up again.
But now to thee, who like Stericyd^s
Can draw Sun, Moon, and Stars what way thou please
With thy guilt Jacobs staff, me thinks I see,
By calculating thy nativity
In thee (yet I Am no Wizard) Midas Fat^
" That starved himself to better his estate.
Yet thou wilt descend to the Lapp of Danae,
Mall, Besse, coy Kate, or bashful Barbary,
In showers of gold, and then will wish and woo,
But still with gold, for else thou know not how;
And promise all content, as curious fare,
Gorgeous attire, and pleasures above compare,
Destilled ambers, pearled broaths, and the fruit
Which wretched Adam tasted; for no doubt
" Women do love that fruit which is denide them
" More then all profferd fruit that grows beside them.
But what is this Vitulino? Do not know,
A wanton Wench will not be pleased so?
A toothlesse Hagg perchance, whose only Bliss
Consists in hoording, will like well of this,
And will adore thy Golden-calfe, for she
In other joys has no felicity*
But such, whose prime of years, and pride of youth,
Graced with a smile as blithe, a skin as smooth,
Charmed with Loue-whispring tales, Loue-piercing eyes,
Rapt with delight of dreaming fantasies,
Wedded to love, not wealth, content, not gold,
Being so free as riches cannot hold,
Nor power restrain, scorn with their heels to have
Their vncontroul'd affections made a slave
To dunge or dross, where love is oft-times crossed,
The most in that where it possesses most.
And yet how sovereign is it to see a chest
Ramm'd with whole heaps of gold; O she is blessed
That may possess so glorious a Saint!
Indeed she were if there were no content
But in possessing; but alas we find
There is another Secret in the mind,
That passes earth, such difference do we feel,
'Twixt Plutoes Court, and Platoes Commonweal.
Yet boast thou may, that thou art one of those
That have to guild thy friends, to gall thy foes;
For who will not attend thee and bestow
Their best observance on thy t^encher too,
And cappe and knee this Isis Ass of wealth,
^and cry,-The Lord preserve your worships health?
But if thou'de look into the inner man,
And the treasure He enioyes, I doubt me than,
Thou would complain, and thy estate deplore,
To see thy Soil so rich, thy Soul so poor,
Indeed I must confess the have wealth at will,
Store of possessions, and increasest still
Thy large-inhanced rents; but (pray thee) can
These (of themselves) make thee a happy man*
No Vitulino, for when Time shall come,
Thy pomp must be reduced to a Tomb,
A shrowding sheet, a silly clott of clay,
And all those Summer-gnats are flowne away,
(Thy fained friends I mean) wealth cannot bail thee
From those tormenting pangs that shall assail thee.
Where Is then thy Aurum e^si volueris, forte non h^bebis: Deu^ cum volueris,
habebis. Aug.
Gold, those Lands lay here and there,
Perchance possessed by another Heir
Then He for whom thou aimed them; yea 'tmay be
That He thou hated most (as often we see)
Claims to be thy Successor! and can this
That adds grace to our foes, include our bliss*
It cannot; therefore hear me ere I leave thee,
My lines shall say, I love thee, though I grieve thee.
Take an Sit filiu^ ipse p^renti in patris ex^^iplum.
example by that faithless Jew,
Whose soul I fear (and o I doubt too true
Is my religious fear) who had the name
Of an Oppressor: though from him thou came,
Trace not his stepps; let charitable deeds
Be those renewing and reviving seeds
Which blossom in thy soul; remember hence
" No grief like to a wounded Conscience.
Make not the Widow weep, the Orphane cry,
Since every tear that falls from her eye,
Is botteld by the Lord; relieve the poor
Out of the great abundance of thy store;
Make Non remittitur peccatum, donec restituitur ablatum.
restitution with good Zebedee
Of what thy Father got injuriously;
" So Fame acknowledging her self thy Debtor,
" Shall say, ^^nce proved the Son the Fathers better.
FINIS.
The Eye.
Clear is my eye and yet my eye is dim,
Because the Object of my sight is sin.
Menippus and Mercator. Menip. Help (Reverend Chremes) help what shall I do?
Mine eyes, mine eyes.

Mer. How now, what is matter now?

Menip. Oh Chremes help me with your Spectacles,
I have such pain and dimnesse in mine eyes.

Mer. Dimnesse my Son, some cloud, some pannickle,
Some Cataract, perhapps it is but some pearl.
Puluis Benedictus, the Collirium
I cleped Ierosollimitanum
Were excellent; Oculus Christi's sure.

Menip. True, but my sickness has indeed no cure.

Mer. Why thine eyes well.

Menip. No, there is before mine eye
A webb, a mist, so rank, I cannot spy
A Thief, that takes my Purse before my face;
A Letcher may from's friend get special grace,
A wink, a nodd, a foot, a wringe, a kiss,
Sent by some Child, yet I see none of this.
The price of Pepper, Cloves and Mace this year
And what is like either to be cheap or dear,
In each place of the habitable world,
Such wondrous help these spectacles afford.
Thou see what store of Sables there shall come
From Rhezan, spotted Armines from the Donn.
Thou see when wars betwixt the Turk shall rise
And Sophie, then, then brass will bear good prize.
Thou see the sugar Canes in Chyna too,
Silk rank as grass, which makes thee hunt out so
The North-West passage to preser^e the men
That thither may return, but two of ten
From this loved Golgatha. A hundred weight
Of Sugar six pence! why, who would not freight
With all the elements to get to Iapon,
A March-pane three times cheaper then a Capon.
Oh happy Eyes, which certainly will soon
Discover next new nations in the Moon,
And what commodity, what quintessence
Of newer traffic may be had from thenc^.

Mer. What do thou mock me now? Thou meagre spy*
Got by consent of some Anatomy,
I Will teach ye jest at a Magnifico. This is ^poken as (...) i^ going ^way in a
^hafe: ^xpressing ^he testie Nature of Age. ^mprecatio.

Exit.
Menip. What are ye gone? stay, let my blessing go along with thee; may, may
thy graceless son,
Of all that thou dishonestly have won,
Not leave a groat: let him make duckes and drakes
Too of thy money, that their flight may take
Into the coffers of safe-keeping Thames,
Then let him lavish out all that remains
It is here to be understood, the reason why the Satyrist directs his
imprecatio^ not to himself, but to his son; ^t is because nothing can be
said to an old man, that will so soon move hi^ patience concerning himself,
being upon the point of going hence; as the malediction of his son, in whom
are laid up all his hopes, and resemblance of a new life in his posterity: in
whom he may be said to live after death, as he derived from him naturally,
breath.
To lull his senses in a Lethargy
Of pleasure curelesse, until beggary,
Nip him by th'sleeue and make him try a friend
In vain for sixpence; (for, but few will lend
Great sums to desperate debtors): last of all,
Let him die leprous in an Hospital.

I. H.

FINIS.
Upon Fortune.
FOrtune, who calls thee blind is not to blame,
For so much is imported by thy name;
Worth thou respects not: he that does inherit
Thy blind estate is one of least demerit;
Who knows not worth, but's wont to derogate
From style of Man, to better his estate.
Fondling that fawnes on greatness, I detest
To be by thee or thy vain favors blessed;
For if I should, who live in Wisdoms School,
Would gather hence I were some brain-sicke fool
That had no means (for so they would report me)
But just as purblinde Fortune did support me.
And what were I then but a garish Ass,
That casts a perfume where he is wont to pass;
protesting (vain protests) he has betraide,
A Ladies honor by her Chambermaide;
Swears by his silken sins, he can dispense
With faith, friend, promise, soul, and Conscience;
To make his way more clear, more eminent,
Unto his Courtly Puppet, his fair Saint;
Whose only glory is to vaunt of sin,
" And as he boasts of her, she feeds on him!
O World, how vain is he that does r^ly
Upon thy fained, forged flattery;
When best deserts (so thin is merit sown)
Are to degrees of worst opinion grown?
When Time affords no joy but unto such,
As are esteemed for having overmuch;
And younger Brothers, only heirs of wit
For want of means, are forced to silence it!
" Farewell imperious Mole, I do defy thee,
" Since none but wittalls can be favored by thee.
FINIS.
Upon Mya.
IF Mya live, as she is said to live,
Why does she dye? nay, that is her least of care,
If you mean Death; no, I do mean her hair,
Far from that dye which Nature did it give;
For It was of Iettie hew, which if you note
Is colored now as white as any Goat.
Wonder of ages; be there any such,
As in contempt of Nature garnish art?
Sure such a changelings hair must have a heart
As changing! true, but this does little touch
Your lustful sensual Dame, whose only aim,
Is to gain pleasure with the loss of shame.
Thou purple-purfled^powdred Idol thou,
Whose Beauty is lusts booty, and whose skin
Is honors stain, whose soul is sold to sin,
Exposed to shame; thou that erects a stew
To brothell in: why will thou be aray'd
So Strumpet-like, yet would be styled a Maid?
Thou that do woe man with a wandering eye,
Bare-bathed breast, which to enforce delight,
Is no true native but adulterate white,
That daily dies, yet hopes thou nere shall die;
Sum up thy follies, and try all alone
If thou can answer of a thousand one.
But what is this to thee, whose impudence
(So dangerous are habits) makes thee now,
Secure of worlds shame and vengeance too;
For Letharg-like the sensual loose all sense,
Drenched in the source of pleasures, wch't does grieve them,
Ere to forgo till they be forced to leave them.
And so art Thou; yet Mya thou have time,
Which used, redeemes the time that thou have lost,
Reformed in that wherein thou erred most.
Which will revive that drooping soul of thine:
Who in her self dejected seems to be,
Because thy Body's more esteemed then she.
FINIS.
The Sign in Cancer.
ACrabbed Shrow through sickness weakly brought,
Wished by all means a Doctor might be sought,
Who by his Art that he her grief might know,
Felt both her pulse, and cast her water too;
Which done, He to her Husband turned again,
And wished him be content, all was in vain:
For when the Signe's in Cancer she should die;
To whom her Husband answered presently;
" If that my learned Doctor had been so,
She had been dead believe it long ago:
For these ten years and odd she has been mine,
And I never knew yet out of that Sign.
FINIS.
Hymen's Eglogue betwixt Admetus and Menalchas.
Menal. WHat makes Admetus sad, what ere it be,
Some cause there is that thus has altered thee;
Is it the loss of substance or of friends,
Or thy content in coffeehouse ends:
Is it some scruple in thy conscience,
Which vnresolu'd does leave thee in suspense;
Is it that thou thy long^wish'd Love should leese?

Admet. No no, Menalchas it is none of these.

Menal. Thou art not sick;

Admet. Nor sick, nor greatly well.

Menal. Where lies thy grief?

Admet. My countenance will tell;

Menal. Smooth is thy brow, thy count'nanc'e fresh enough:

Admet. But cares have made my wreakefull mind as rough;

Menal. Of cares Admetus!

Admet. Yes I have my share:

Menal. Yet hope of cure;

Admet. No hope of cure to care.

Menal. Nay then I se it is love that thee does wring:

Admet. Thou errs Menalchas, it is no such thing.

Menal. If therefore loss of friends, nor loss of wealth,
Want to enjoy thy love, nor want of health,
If neither discontent nor grief do show
Care in thy face, nor sorrow in thy brow,
If thou be free, as we all know thee free,
Engaged to none, what is it grieueth thee?

Admet. Would know Menalchas?

Menal. Yes;

Admet. I Will tell thee than;
" The case is altered, I Am a married man.

FINIS.
Hymen's Choice.
Fair may she be, but not opinion'd so,
For that opinion ever lackies pride;
Loving to all, yet so, as Man may know,
She can reserve the proper name of Bride:
For weak's that fort, and easy is it to win,
That makes a Breach for all to enter in.
I Would have her face and blush to be her own,
For th'blush which Art makes is adulterate,
Spleen may she have, yet wise to keep it down,
Passion, yet Reason too to moderate:
Comely not gaudy, she and none but she
Wears the best clothes, that wears to her degree.
FINIS.
Loves Description.
Love, what is thy name? a frenzy; whenc'e thy birth?
From heaven; how comes it then thou lives on earth?
I live not there; yet each vsurps thy name:
It Is true indeed, but hence redounds their shame!
I live not there, my Nature's pure and just,
But lust lives there, and love's a foe to lust.
FINIS.
An HYMN THALASSICALL, OR NVPTIALL; implying Two worths included in one Name,
Paradoxally intimating the true happy State of contented LOVE.
WHat I have, that I crave,
Frank I lost, yet Frank I have;
Happy am I in possessing
Of her that gives Love a blessing:
Blessed love above earthly rank,
Stated in my style of Frank,
Happy style that thinks no shame
In respect of nature, name,
Form, affection, and in all
To be Frank, as we her call.
Yet so frank, that though she be
Free, it is in such modesty,
As no Creatures are, have bin,
Can, or may tax her of sin.
Pure in Love, sincere in heart,
Fair by Nature, not by Art,
Crimson blushes which display*
Reddest even makes cleerest day;
Cleerest, where like Ida's snow
Lillies on her cheeks do grow;
Yet so mixed with true delight,
As the red contends with white;
Yet ore'comm'd with Modesty,
red ore white gets victory.
Thus two Franks in beauty one,
Yields enough to dote upon;
Equal both in favor, feature,
Honor, order, name and nature;
Both inclining to one stature,
Equaled by no earthly creature.
For if I should paint them out,
From the head unto the foot,
I should make you then confess
They were earthly Goddesses:
And that Nature made these two,
As those Mirrors which might show
Her perfection and her store,
Challenging, who could give more!
Thus both equal in one letter,
One to either, neither better;
Twin-like seem as Time had fixed them,
As two Spheres not one betwixt them;
Yet if needs one the best do crave,
In my thoughts it is she I have:
She, whose virtues do excel
As they seem imparalell;
Modest, yet not too precise,
Wise, yet not conceited wise;
Still in action, yet her will
Is so pure it never acts ill;
Virgin-modest, yet delights
To discourse of Hymen's rights;
Yet she blushes when she hears,
Ought that is light sound in her ears;
And with skarlet-die displaies,
What to Women yields most praise:
For praiseworthy it is in women,
To blush at that Act is common;
Since in speech those actions show
Ill, which modest are to do;
For a Maid should be afraid,
Hearing th'losse of Maidenhead.
With this Poem, and a Pearl
Sent to Frank my faithful Girl;
I conclude with friendly vow,
To my Frank her neigbour too.
FINIS.
An Elegiack Sonnet.
IF I only had been he,
That had stood so far aloof,
Or had been such Armor proof,
Did I had not as you see
Shot by Woman's Jealousy.
Wretched Woman why should Thou
Dote so much on Idoll-beautie,
Deeming only fit to suit thee,
When it is not one nor two,
Nor a thousand more will do?
Yet Love loves not these exchanges,
Love is constant, firm, and pure,
Drawn by no eye-charming lure;
It is lust that only ra^nges,
Where new love old love estraunges.
What is life then but a farm,
And the best a farmer is
Of this life he counts a Bliss,
Where true love sustaines no harm,
Ne^e engag't to Fancies charm!
FINIS.
THE VVIDDOVV BRIDE.
To the accomplished Lady of his thoughts M. E. T. exquisite receite of all
divine virtues; The complete issue of her selectedst desires.
Feeding I famish, fired by thy eye,
Which makes me dying live, and living die.

Fair shall I name thee, to express thy worth!
Nay, thou have something else to se^ thee forth,
Then thy external beauty, which no time
Shall ere deface, and that is truly thine.
Though outward white graced with an inward fair,
Unite in one, exceeds all compare.
For what may glorious Saints, whose divine feature
Immortalized above an humane Creature,
Appropriate unto themselves save this,
Though they are invested with the roabe of bliss!
Pure is their Stole, the State of innocence,
Full be their Lamps of divine influence,
Complete's their Armor, and their order too,
" Thus they attend the Lamb where ere he go.
And thou terrestrial Angel, who can give,
(Though young) example to the old to live,
Divines what thou shall be: for I do see,
All sacred Gr^ces treasured in thee;
As in some curious artfull Cabbinet,
Where Patience shines as a rich Iewellet
Set in a precious Tablet, which may best
Allusion have to thy unspotted breast,
Where virtues have their Mansion: should I speak
More freely of thy Merits? I will seek
No modern Model to conform the State
Of my affections, or will imitate
Any with affectation, but that grace
Which thou reserues in action, speech, and pace.
Honor of ages, what a Sympathy
Of soule-enthroning virtues works in thee,
To make thee more affected^ Where desire
Of Moderation tempers the heat of ire;
Content all selfe-repining, and delight
To see another prosper, that base spite
Which worldly Moles express from day to day,
In seeing others flourish more then they.
No, thou art Earthly Sainted, and can taste
What fruit's in Mundane pleasure being past,
When this same Circle of our humane bless
Qui^e run about, shall end with wretchedness
And is not this above th'conceit of Man,
That thou the weaker sex should seem to span,
This abstract of thy life with such respect
Unto thy soul formed by that Architect,
Whose glory is thy aim? Nay, that thy prime
Scarcely arrived at the freshness of her time,
Should so disvalue Earth, as to bestow
Thy heart on Heaven, thy frayler part below.
Where life like to a shade, whose vading glory
Sums up our discontents as in a Story,
Gets disesteeme with thee, fixing thine eye
Upon a more transcendent Emp^rie.
But that which shall extend thy days more long
Then time can limit, is thy suffering wrong,
Smiling at injuries, as if thy breast
Were of that temper, griefs could not molest,
Nor soil her glorious Mansion, but appears
More eminent by the Injuries she bears.
I Have heard indeed, some Woman's Nature's such
As they can hardly ever bear too much;
The sense whereof, hows'ere our Critics take it,
May be confirmed in thee; for thou do make it
The Trophie of thy Triumph, and the Crown
Of all thy Conquest, to be only known
Thy self in thy affliction, where relief
" In Souls sole solace gives receipt to grief.
" For Palms pressd down do ever rise the more,
" And Spices bruised smell sweeter then before.
So as this Sentence verifide may be,
Thou tyres affliction, not affliction thee.
Mirror of Women, what a triumph's this,
When there is naught how great soere it is
That can depresse thy Mind below the Sphere
Where it is fixed! For it is this I swear,
And only this, which moves me to affect
Thy self far more then any light respect,
Drawn from the tincture of a moving fair,
Which to minds Beautie's short above compare.
For I have known the smoothest sleekest skin,
Soild with the blemish of so foul a sin
As Beauty lost her luster by that stain,
Which once made black could nere be white again.
But Thou in both complete, art such an one
As without assentation there is none
May glory more of what she does possess,
Though on my knowledge none does glory less.
And happy he if he had known his happ,
Who might repose in such a Ladies lapp,
Secure from censure: but how weak is sense
When Reason's darkened through Concupiscence!
Alas of Error; that our humane eye,
Exposed to lust and boundless liberty,
Should derogate from Man: where if we knew
How Woman's to expect from Man her dew*
As Man from Woman; we should straight infer
" To think of a strange beauty, is to err.
He who did till those flowrie fields, which lay
Like Adons grove nere to the Mllkie Way,
If he had known what happiness it is
In mutual love t'enioy a mutual bliss,
Where two diuiduate Souls do selfely move
By one united Sympathy in love;
He would have thus concluded sure I am,
" Who dotes on more then is own is less then Man.
But now to thee my lines their love extend,
Making thy self their Center where they end.
" Thou mildest mould of Matron Modesty,
" Live as Thou live and gain eternity;
Patience shall give thee convoy, fame renown,
Both which contend to reach thee triumphs Crown.
FINIS.
TO HIS MVCH ESTEEMED FRIEND Sr G. D. Knight; The accomplished issue of his
best wishes.
IF promise be, as it is said to be
A Debt, you may expect the like of me;
Which tho it be not pai'd, it shall be don
And then your quittance for my Corydon.
Receive him Sr. for trust me he is your own,
And one that will be known where you are known;
Whom if you cherish (as I hope you will)
From year to year he will better's running still,
And grow in time to be a Dog of prize,
And scorn to spend his mouth in common cries;
For time will come (as I persuaded am)
When he will be heard and hallowed too of Pan.
Yours assured, R. B.

CORYDON, OR The Western-Huntsman.
THe game's a-foot: see how the Huntsmen run,
Each capps his Hound, but chiefly Corydon;
Still goes the voice on him, nor does it rest,
Till it disperse it self from East to West:
To it Western-Huntsman to it,
Prize is thine, great Pan does know it,
Who vouchsafed to lend his eye,
And his Ear unto the Cry.
Blaze not the fame-spred chase of Marathon,
Of hilly Oeta, heathie Calidon,
For the cheerful coasts of peaceful Albion,
May show New Market, Roiston, Mar^bon;
And boast as much upon their game
As any one could do of them,
And amongst their Dogs not one
Could match matchless Corydon.
Cease Poets cease, so much to dote upon
The strains of Linus, Orpheus, Amphyon;
What could they do our Huntsmen cannot do,
move rocks, tame Tygres, make woods harken too*
This they can do, and more if need
Make our herds surcease to feed,
Hills to answer to the Plain
Woods to ecco them again.
Nay, what is more, succeeding times may sing,
That these delights were followed by a King,
And such a King whose knowledge did descry
That he was nursed by winged Mercury:
Great must this pleasure needs be then,
That is esteemed by such men,
Whose opinion ought to stand
For a Maxim in the Land.
And if we should make choice of any sense
To give content, none has like excellence
Unto the ear, for it instructs us how
What Is fit know, to hear, to speak, to do:
And yet we have both eye and ear
As equally confined there;
As if Nature these did cull
For to make our sport more full.
And for their habit, as it seems to me,
They wear their Mothers earths own livery,
Most comely and least gaudy; as before
Our fig-leau'd Parents in the Garden wore.
Thus may we see, if we will see,
There Is none has like antiquity,
When the first, as forced with shame
weau'd them green, and wore the same.
To prove of what esteem these Woodmen were
It Is said that Jove became a Forrester,
And thought no color could more moving be,
To gain the love of flame-scorch'd Semele;
Then in a youthful green araid
To sue for love unto the Maid,
Though (fond Girl) this would not do
Till he came in glory too.
The Delian Votresse with her Nimph-like train
Follow their Hounds till that the game be slain,
Where speckled Ibis, mennal'd Dorcas lead,
And bloody Rugg with Rhesus coupled;
Make hot pursuit and hold the chase
Treble, Mean, countertenure, base,
Different size and different note
Some cold-sented others hot.
Thus eye, ear, habit, color, and esteem
Makes this delight, as it has ever been
Princely, where Pan himself daigns to descend
To cheer his care, and for no other end.
Happy you Siluanes that abide,
Where such true royal Huntsmen ride,
Who awhile do leave the Court
In the Lawns to have some sport.
(...) (...) make the whole Subject of their Discourse, invection, or which is
worse, personal aspersion. But such, whose inbred love to goodness, has
implanted in them such affection to good men, and such zealous hate to the
vicious: that if they were removed from the All-seeing eye of Heaven, and the
suspicious search of earth; yet they would express their love to Goodness, in
the lowest vault of darkness. For these I am, and may I ever be their
Corriuals: for aspiring to be great in the Court of virtue, is a glorious
ambition. Now for such, whose conceits grounded on error, judge whatsoever we
write to have no other aim then popular: I Would have them know, I Am none of
these that seem
To build their hopes on other men's esteem.


As my Object is good in general, so my subject is free and generous; far from
such mercenarie Factors, or hireling Brokers, who set at sale the stale
commodity of their Labors: for these must taste of vulgar froth, or they are
not vendible* yet they will profess (how odious soere be their profession)
that they have drunk deep of the juice of Helicon, and by unutterable raptures
can extract the life and Elixir of Poesy. Such as these (for these were they
who formerly blemished the glory of so divine an Art) caused one of the Fathers
in great indignation to term Poetry the Diuells-wine; venting whatsoever the
love of gain, or their distempred brains had invented. Excellently might those
punishments be moralized, which were inflicted on Stesichorus inveying against
Helen, on Aristophanes against Cleon, Eupolus against Alcibiades, Calisthenes
against Alexander: where the Satyr pronounced on himself a censure; But I
will address my Pen to such, whose meriting Labors have gained them deserved
esteem. And these, (Aristippus-like) have ever grounded their Subject on
virtue; preferring the minds luster, before the Bodies cover. Neither affection
nor affectation had power to remove these from their Anchor: for as Passions
were the Billows they bickred with, and did encounter; so virtue was their
Landmarke, where, after long Sail, they expected Harbor. Here shows Homer
himself an heroic Sophocles; and there Sophocles a tragic Homer: where the
wide world was their Theater, vice their Subject of reproof, virtue their
Trophie of renown. These deserved memorialls above the date of time; Monuments
more lasting then Age. Mettalls are of short perpetuity; These, because
eternized by virtue, succeed to eternity. My wish is, that my oil may be so
employed, that you ( Gentlemen) whose judgments are unblemished, conceits
refined, and from vulgar opinion far divided; may in perusal of my Works rest
pleased. Times broad-spred Curtain I have drawn in part,
Next draught shall shadow it with far more art.
Mean time, receive this, which promises a greater, when opportunity shall
afford more leisure.

FINIS.
Upon Censure.
WEll, ill, or neither, but indifferent,
How ere your censure be I am content;
For he is a fauning fool, the Worlds minion,
That only writes to gain himself opinion.
Sacra Poaesis Musica mentis. FINIS.
ERRATA'ES are grown so familiar with Books, as they become their Appendices;
Correct only such as corrupt the sense* for Literal errors, they march in
such ranks and squadrons, as they seem incorrigible.

ERRATA.
IN Charact. of Grief, page 3* for skin, sin. for banish, vanish* ibid in
Riches, Page 2. for adoring, adorning: for but, nor* ibid in Fate, Page vlt.
for Pagan, Pangan. ^lacentia, page vlt. for He, We* Masque Emblem, Page 2.
lin. 5. For Bridall-chamber, Bride-chamber. Encomiastick. Page 1. for Astrea,
Astrena* Bound, yet free, Page 2. in marg. for, in titulis, in vtilis.

Upon his name, to whom his Encomiastick upon the Common Law was Dedicated.
Astreas name and yours do both agree,
And both I hit, yet both mistaken be. ASTREA DAVINPORTA. Anagram. veni, porta
ad astra.


