A PLAIN CONFVTATION OF A TREATISE OF BROVVNISME, Published by some of that
Faction, Entitled: A description of the visible Church.

In the confutation whereof, is showed, that the Author has neither described
a true government of the Church, nor yet proved, that outward discipline is the
life of the Church.

Whereunto is annexed an answer unto two other Pamphlets, by the said
Factioners lately dispersed, of certain conferences had with some of them in
prison.

Wherein is made known the inconstancy of this Sect, what the Articles are
which they still maintain: as also a short confutation of them.

There is also added a short answer unto such arguments as they have used to
prove the Church of England not to be the Church of God.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Scarlet for William Wright. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Sir Thomas Henedge Knight, Vize Chamberlain to her
Highness, Treasurer of her Majesty's chamber, Chanceller of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and one of her Highness most honorable privy Council, the comforts
of this life and of the life to come.
COnsidring that (right Honorable) the making of many books does breeda
wearisomnesse with small! profit, the council of Solomon is to be regarded,
who wills us to receive admonition by his holy writings. In regard whereof,
though heretical pamphlets are daily dispersed, yet the wise are loath to
answer the^: as also lest that in answring the fool according to his follies,
they might seem like unto him: yet when silence has hardened the factious, and
emboldned them to add new supplies, we learn that the fool is to be answered
unto his follies, lest he seem wise in his own conceit. This burden I have
taken upon me, perhaps presumptuouslie; but finding on the one side the learned
unwilling to deal with so sottish a schism, and on the other side, that small
learning will be sufficient to overthrow so ignorant a sect, I have bin the more
bold in this mine attempt: for I prejudice not the wise herein, who refuse this
labor, nor yet give cause of disconte^tment to the simple, for whose sake only
I have done it: if those with whom I deal find themselves grieved, I regard it
not; only if I may escape the censure of rash presumption in publishing this
rude treatise under your honorable title, I shall obtain my desire. I have
presumed to present it to your H. not for that I am able to bring forth any
thing worthy your H. acceptance, but that I might obtain a defense for my
self, and your H. might be moved to go on in furthering the Lords building. So
shall God by your means be glorified, his church comforted, and every member
thereof shall have just cause to continue their hearty prayers unto God for
your H. prosperity, with the increase of all heavenly gifts and graces of
his spirit in this life, and for the assurance of your everlasting joy in the
life to come.

Your Honors most humble in the Lord to command, R. Alison.

TO THE READER.
Howsoever earthly kingdoms do prosper best, when peace is had, yet the church
of Christ which is his throne, Cassi. in Psa. 1.
receives good even by dissension, Inde crescit Ecclesia, vnde mundus deficit.
Therefore although a good agreement in all affairs ought to be regarded, yet a
dissent in religion does sometime profit, inasmuch as thereby the faith of some
is exercised, the inconstancy of others is made manifest, and the diligence of
all those whom deep security has not overwhelmed, is much quickened unto the
serching of the truth. The rent that is made by some, has confirmed this unto
us by experience, whiles that the constancy of such as are wise hearted, is
made manifest; the vanity of those that are vnstedfastly minded is laid open;
and the godly are made acquainted with those ancient heresies, whereof in times
past they were both ignorant and careless. The disturbances of our Church are
many, proceeding from one fountain, though they be not all of one nature;
Satan has sent them, they are like unto him, disagreeing one with another, and
at jar in themselves, and yet are all opposite unto the truth. For the
Atheists and Papists are at as great defiance one with another, as ever was
Herod and Pilate. Luke 23. 12
And the Anabaptists and Donatists condemn each the other for matters of
religion, as much as the Pharesies did the Saduces; and yet as they could be
reconciled, Math. 22.
rather then the Church should enjoy her peace; so these will sooner justify
one another, than they will submit themselves unto the truth. But the bush
which Msoses saw perished not, though it was compassed with a flame: and the
Church of God through his gracious providence does stand fast, though the
security of Atheists, the Idolatry of Papists, and the impiety of the rest,
have threatened an overthrow: yea, it is now come to pass, that although no
heresy is without some favorers, yet the devises even of the most skillful
deceivers, have been so laid upon, that not one of those is thought upon of
sober minds, but with detestation. I grant that men void of reason may think
reverently of them, because we see the Donatist condemning Donatisme, a
schism which he himself vpholdeth, which is a very dronkennes, though it
be without wine; Aug. contra Cresco. lib. 5
but wisdom is justified of her children.

The Donatists in the year of our Lord 290. or as some write 353. by their
preposterous dealings disturbed the churches in all those parts where they
remained. August. Bonif. Epist. 50.
With vain impudency they condemned all the Churches of God, Aug. ad quod
vult deum, de haer. cat.
and affirmed that the Church was in the parts of Donatus only. Also in
upholding that the Church of Christ is without spot or wrinkle, or gross
pollution; they did falsely charge Coecilianus the Bishop of Carthage with
certain crimes, taking occasion thereupon to separate themselves from the
Church; They did account the Sacraments to be no Sacraments, Aug. in Psa. 10.
Retrac. lib. 1. cap. 21. Victoriano. Epist. 21. Contra Epist. Parmeniani, lib.
1. cap 7 Aug. Donat. Epist. 204 Cont. Epist. Parmi. li. 1. ca. 7 Aug Epist. 152
Daneus de Donat. cap. 67. And by the council are latin. August. contra Parmi.
lib. 1. cap. 6
if they were delivered by one that approved not their schism; And thereupon,
though Donatus did not institute rebaptization, yet his successors rebaptised
those that came unto them. They taught that it was unlawful to seek unto the
magistrate for aid in causes of the church, because they were the Lords free
people. To be short, that men are not to be compelled unto good duties, that
they are to vow a constancy in their schism, that they were ready to provoke
the sword of the magistrate against themselves, that they might brag of
sufferings: these and such like were the fruits of Donatisme. Now Donatus the
first author of this schism, was condemned for an heretic, and his doctrine
for heretical, in the days of Constantine, by the council of Carthage; and
from time to time ever since it has been so accounted of, not only of the
Church of God, but also of such as abhor the name, but maintain the doctrine
of this schism.

This is it that the malcontents of our age do greedily hunt after the
annoiance of our church; condemn it and all other Churches that are not
partakers of their faction; cry out that the true church is without spot or
wrinkle, or gross pollution, take liberty to slander those that are in
authority, so to free themselves from all submission: affirm that the
Sacraments are no Sacraments. (Whereupon though the renuer of this schism,
Brown I mean, Some of their own company have confessed it.
did not in plain words require a baptising again, yet their succossors in
their established Church attempted it) have taught, that they being the Lords
free people, the magistrate is not to deal in causes ecclesiastical: hold
that men are not to be compelled to good duties, bind one another with a vow
to persist in this faction, boast of sufferings, etc. and yet detest the name of
Donatisme, though Donatus was the first deviser, and of Brownisme, though Brown
was the only restorer of these fancies. The forerunners it should seem, were
gross, when their Disciples are ashamed to be accounted their scholars: yet
if any grossness as yet unnamed, either in matters of faith, or manner of
dealing be found in them, it will appear in these also; for it is no new
fancy but an ancient heresy, neither is there hope that they will be
restrained but by an old remedy: For as the Donanists when councels were
called conference was had, and they were convicted, yet gave it out with great
glory, that they had put to silence all the learned, August. ret. li. 2 cap.
26. and Bonifacio. epi. 50
and remained wilful, until that by the sharp laws of Honorius, they were
restrained, yea and many of them by that means were brought again to the
Church: so with our men all gentle means have been used: in conference hard
speeches have only helped them, yet remain they obstinate, and brag of
victory: if the laws of our christian Honorius do them no good, they are
incurable. No doubt the Physician is irke some to a frantique person, and a
father to an unruly child, the one in binding, the other in striking, and both
in loving. The duty of a physician, and the nature of a father must appear in
the magistrate, not in satisfieng the desires of the froward to content them,
but in restraining their frenzy to profit them. It may be to the
coffeehouse of some, that any punishment should be inflicted upon them for
their disordered stubburnnes, I would not be mistaken, In his conference with
m. Cooper, pa. 49
I wish it not, howsoever m. Greenwood affirms that the magistrate ought to
compel unto the hearing of the word. Only this I say, that the less these
matters are considered of, the better may the men be conceived of, but view
their writings, examine their doctrine, and mark their dealings, and they will
appear the open enemies of Gods truth: for in pretending to establish a
church, they overthrow the church, and under the color of setting up the
discipline of Christ, they seek to plague themselves and others with their
own dreams, which in this their treatise of discipline, and in their two other
treatises, of certain conferences lately by them published, shall be made
manifest to the indifferent reader. In answering of them al (only the
calumniations in the conferences excepted, which concern some particular
persons, whose cause I leave to themselves, who best know how far they are
abused, and in regorde thereof can best answer the same) I have followed the
authors method, leaving the man, and seeing into the matter, not regarding who
wrote it, but what is the doctrine that is maintained by him. As for the
treatise of the visible Church, it will appear not tolerable, inasmuch as it
is impious, abusing the Scripture, injurious to the Church in describing a
false government, and dangerous to the simple, who are ready to be deceived
with every blast of vain doctrine. The other discourses are not only like
unto it, but have in them many bitter speeches and ungodly slanders both of
Church, Magistracy, Ministry, and all: whereby it seems that the author
has not learned to rule his pen. In this mine attempt I have small hope to
satisfy those that are wedded to their will, when Gaudentius was answered
sufficiently to his follies, he would notwithstanding return his answer
though he did the same, Aug. ret. lib. 2 cap. 59.
nulla ratione respondens, sed magis se nec respondere, nec tacere potuisse
declarans. If our author will reply, let him labor to be unlike to Gaudentius
and his company, who with words and bitter speeches sought to uphold their
cause, and if he use the Scriptures, let him apply them faithfully, and then
if he prevail the controversy will be at end. In the mean while if these
poor labors of mine might satisfy these discontented persons; or failing
hereof, might stay the ignorant from being seduced, or else might provoke
them that are better able to deal more substantially in these matters, I shall
be glad. Finally, I am to entreat the reader both to accept in good part that
which in desire of his good is delivered. And also before he begin to read
this treatise, to amend such faults as by default in the printing were
committed.

R. A.

Faults escaped in the printing.
The 2. page line 21. This read Thus. page 5. li. 5. read the sentence page 9.
line 24. read preaching. page 13. in the margent Judge. 4 read Jude. 4. page
23. line 12. read Veliphnei Jehovah ijshpok. etc. page 30. line 14. duty read
unity. page 40. in the margent, read Bale in Apoc. 2. Iraeneus, etc. page 65.
line 25. read were not in the primitive, etc. page 99. Tit. 3. is to be
placed, line. 11. and line 19. should be Deuteronomy. 13. page 108. line 28. read for
instruction only, etc. page 110. line 23. read Inst. lib. 4. etc. page 117.
line 2. read ignorantiam.

A PLAIN CONFVTATION OF A TREATISE OF Brownisme, published by one of that
Faction; the Title whereof is this. A true Description out of the word of God
of the visible Church.
The Answer to the Title.
THE departure out of the Church is rightly called the badge of an heretic, to
whom in his going out the Goats do fly for succor, when the sheep of Christ
do seek their food in the Church of Christ. But because it is a lesser
burden to bear the mark, then to have the name of an heretic, it falls
out that men in all ages when they forsake the fellowshippe of the saints of
GOD, they do profess a betaking themselves unto the true Church of God.

Heerevppon it comes that such as have been nourished with the milk of
coffeehouse, strengthened with the spirit of unquietness, and clothed
with the profession of a godly conscience, do now trouble and molest us,
refuse to continue with us, and make a nullitie of our Church. Their eyes (they
say) are now opened, who lived until now in blindness, they have found out
the true Church, whereof they labor to be members: in seeking our good, they
publish and set sorth unto us a true description thereof; and this shall be
confirmed out of the word of God.

This their knowledge, their love, and their faithful dealings, are warranted
unto us in the Title of this their treatise, which matters if we can find
therein, we will acquit them from schism and heresy: but if the discourse be
not answerable unto the Title, they must return unto us, or else we must
acknowledge them to be, not as they pretend, but as they are.

Brownist.
As there is but Genesis 1. 1. Exodus 20. 3.
one God, and father of all, one Lord over all, and one Spirit, so is there
but 1. Timoth. 2. 4. Phil. 2. 25. Ephesians. 2. 18. John 8. 41.
one truth, one faith, one salvation, one Church, called in one hope, joined in
one profession, guided by one Deuteronomy. 6. 25. Romans 10. 8. 2. Timoth. 3. 15. John
8. 51. John. 2. 3. 4. etc.
rule, even the word of the most high.

The answer.
In this first sentence which here is set down, we are given to
understand, what there is to be hoped for in that which follows, both for
the matter and also for the manner of handling the matter, if we do but
regard the end and scope thereof, being altogether false, yet packed up with
evident truths, that the certainty of these might free the other of
suspicion. The manner of dealing is to pester the margent with a cloud of
witnesses to small purpose, only they make the ignorant believe, that he which
gain-saith this book, does speak against the word of God. But how vainly this
is done, it will appear by the examination of the particulars. Seeing the
nature and government of the church (say they) is like unto the Lord thereof,
it must be granted, that as God is ever one and the same: so is his church
which professes one truth, holds one faith, and is guided by that order
which God has revealed in his word. Our answer is, that we do acknowledge one
God the father, son, and holy ghost, his truth our faith, and the means of
our salvation to be unchangeable; we confess likewise one catholic church,
which is the communion of saints, which jointly and severally do confess that
salvation is obtained in and through Jesus Christ alone. This church
comprehends in it both angels and men, Col. 1. 18. 19. 20.
the one sort continuing in, the other sort restored unto that estate wherein
they stand; and all obtaining this sentence of being perfitly righteous, in and
thorough the head of that church, whereof they are members, even Jesus Christ
our Lord. This is the church which they say must be guided by one rule, even
the word of the most high. Now we desire to know in what sense the word of the
most high is taken; for if they mean thereby the providence of God, in which
sense it is sometimes taken, as Deuteronomy. 8. 3. and Heb. 1. 3. we do agree in this
clause also. But the places quoted in the margent, do show that it is meant of
the revealed will of God contained in his word; For Deuteronomy. 6. 25. Moses tells
the Israelites that the observing of all the commandments of the Lord their
God, will be their righteousness. Paul Romans 10. 8. says, that the word of God
was in their mouth, and in their heart even the word of faith which was
preached. Again 2. Tim. 3. 15. he shows Timothy that the scriptures are
able to make him wise unto salvation, thorough the faith that is in Christ
Jesus. Christ in the eight Chapter of John and the one and fiftith verse,
affirms that if a man keep his word, he shall never see death. Lastly John
says, 1. John. 2. 3. By this we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. It is evident that these places do speak of the word of God,
which is given unto us to be our guide in this life, for the gathering together
of the saints during their abode in this world: but when life cease, the use
of this word of God does cease in the Church of God, as appears in the first
to the Corinthians the thirteenth chapter and eight verse, Colossians the first
chapter and the three and twentieth verse, etc. Therefore to say that the whole
church, that is, both angels in heaven, the faithful departed out of this
life, and the godly remaining upon the earth are all alike governed by this
rule, does bewray either a foul ignorance, or a foolish rashness. Which rash
ignorance if in this one matter it had showed it self only, it had been more
tolerable, then it can be when it alleges many scriptures to prove the
truth, so vnseasonablie as here it does about the unity of the Godhead etc.
For the two first places, the first chapter of Genisis and the first verse, So
they speak in the treatise of the church apparent.
the twentieth Chapter of Exodus and the third verse, do mention God in regard
of his sovereignty over all things, but they speak of him as the inheritour
of mount Sion his Church: wherefore that of saint Paul in the first to
Timothy, the second chapter and fourth verse, might have been sufficient both
for the proof of this, and also that there is but one truth, one faith, etc:
Unto the knowledge whereof it is the will of God that men should come and be
saved. In a pamphlet, the question being of the best preachers in England*
(By the way observe that this place of Paul does cross that negative of
theirs, We deny, say they, that you are able to justify that faith which they
beget: their reason is, because our worshipping of God is not joined with their
discipline, for we hold that faith which Paul approves.) As for the testimony
which Paul gives of Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 25.
that he is his brother, companion in labor, and fellow soldier, It is a weak
proof of that whereunto it is referred, so is that of the Jews, John. 8. 41
saying that they have all one father, even God, which Christ denies unto them
in the verse next following. These things are spoken, not to call that into
question which in it self is true, but to show what discretion has been used
in the choice, and alleging these scriptures. But we will go forward.

Brownist.
This Church as it is universally understood, contains in it all Genesis 17. 1.
Pet. 1. 2. Reave. 7. 9 1. Cor. 10. 3. John. ^7. 20
the elect of God that have been, are, or shall be.

The answer.
Most certain it is that the invisible Church of God extends it self unto
all the beloved of God, that have been, are or shall be, men and Angels,
being complete in him who is the head of all principalities and powers, to
wit, Jesus Christ. We do agree herein, yet it has his warrant, such as it is,
for it is here proved by the covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. and by the
vision of John, Revel. 7. 9. Which places do not prove the matter, in as much
as they speak of the restoring and preservation of man only, and not of the
whole body of the church. The other three places alleged are less to
purpose. Peter 1. Pet. 1. 2. writes unto the church, which was scattered over
the face of the earth; so that he speaks not of the universal church of God,
but of that which was in his age. Paul says, 1. Cor. 10. 3. that the fathers
did eat one spiritual meat: But they were not the universal church of God,
he speaks only of those that were before him. Christ prays for his
Apostles, Ioh. 17. 20. and not for them only, but for those which should
believe in him thorough their pearching: he prays not for the universal
church, viz. all that have been, are, or shall be, but for those which being
alive, should enjoy the ministry of his Apostles. But it may be the authors
meaning is not out of every of these severally, but from them al jointly to
conclude this universal church, for as much as Paul speaks of those which
have been, Peter speaks of those that are, and Christ mentions those that
shall be. Which though we should grant, yet they all mention but mankind only,
and thereof not all the elect of God: for the infants which are under the
covenant, and departing this life before they are capable of the ministry of
the word, are not comprehended within the number of those which Christ in that
place prayed for, Peter did write unto, etc. so that these places jointly
taken, do not contain so much of the universal church as the two first
places: and though they did, yet they do not comprehend the whole as has been
said. Thus a good dish may be marred by an unskillful cook, and a good matter
spoiled by an unlearned clearke.

Brownist.
But being considered more particularly, as it is seen in this present world:
it consists of a company and fellowship of Psa. 111. 1 and 149. 1. Esa. 62.
12. Ephesians. 1. 1. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 14. 2.
faithful and Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Ioh. 6. 37. and 3. 14. and 12. 32. Luke 17. 3.
holy people, gathered together in the name of Christ Jesus their only Ge. 44.
10. Psalm. 45. 6. Zac. 9. 9. Heb. 1. 8.
king, Romans 8. 34* John. 17. Heb. 5. 9. and 8 1. and 4. 14.
priest, and Deuteronomy. 18. 15 Matt. 17. 15. Heb. 1. 1. Genesis 14. 18.
prophet, Exo. 20. 7. Leu. 10. 5. Ioh. 4. 23.
worshipping him aright, being Matt. 11. 29 1. Cor. 11. 16. Mar. 13. 34. Revel.
22. 9.
peaceably governed by his officers and laws, Ephesians. 4. 3. 1. Cor. 1. 13. Mark.
9. 50.
keeping the unity of faith in the bond of peace, and Ioh. 13. 34. 1. Cor. 13.
4. 1. Pet. 1. 22. 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
love unfeigned.

Answer.
Leaving the invisible church of God, we are to keep in remembrance, that this
discourse is of the visible church, as it is seen in this world: and it
sets before our eyes the matter whereof it is framed; the glory wherewith it
is crowned, the discipline whereby it is governed, and the estate which it
enjoys, even in this life. All which matters are here set down so necessary
unto the esse or being of the church, that the want of these or of any of
these, presently causes a nullitie thereof: but how substantiallie these
matters are proved, the particulars shall make manifest. The matter whereof
this church is framed, Treatise of the church apparent.
is a company of people which is faithful, etc. The Authors meaning is
expressed more plainly in the arguments used against the church of England,
Argument. 6. The church of Christ is sanctified and made glorious, without spot
or wrincle, or gross pollution. Again, Argument. 8. The people shall be all
righteous. Again, One wicked man disanulleth the covenant unto all. And in the
latter end of this book it is concluded, that in this visible church is no
unclean person. Genesis 4. 1.
But was not the house of Adam the visible church of God, and Cain a member of
it? he was unfaithful. Was not the Arc of Noah the visible church of God,
Genesis 7. 7.
and Cham preserved in it? he was unfaithful. Genesis 17. 23.
Was not Ismael being circumcised in Abraham's house of the visible church?
Genesis 25. 1. Reg. 16. 29. 30.
he was unfaithful. Was not Esau in the family of Isaac, Achab in his reign
over Israel, Matthew. 10. 4
and Judas Ischariot of the visible church? all these were unfaithful. In the
visible church of God there will be tares, yea until the harvest: chafe among
the wheat, Matthew. 13. 30. and 3. 12. and 25. 32.
goats among the sheep, hypocrites among the true professors: nay to go
further, Antichrist for a time sitting in the temple of God, and other
monstrous men abiding in the church, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Judge. 4. Treatise of the
church apparent.
turning the grace of God into wantonness. But they do confess that there may
be pollutions in the manners of men being secret, which they leave unto God:
but if they be such spots and wrinkles, as declare the church not to be
glorious, then no apparent church. What spots they can find greater than
those before mentioned I know not: yet this I add, that the church at
Jerusalem was not greatly glorious in the days of Herod's tyranny, when also
the office of the high Priest was divided to two: Nor from the days of Malachy
until the coming of Christ, during all which time there was a deep silence
of the word. Nor in the captivity of Babylon, as appears by the prophecy of
Zachary. Zach. 3. and 5. Esa. 1. 6.
Nor in the days of Hussia, Iothan, Achaz, and Hezechia, when Esaias complained
that there was no whole part from the sole of the foot to the head, but wounds
and swellings, and sores full of corruption. Nor in the time of David, 2. Sam.
13.
when the incest of one of his sons, 2. Sam. 15.
the traitorous attempts of another, 2. Sam. 11.
yea the sins committed by David himself were most abominable. And yet I
hope the Author will acknowledge these to have been the apparent church of God,
even in the midst of gross pollutions. Therefore it is not necessary for the
esse or being of the church apparent, that every member thereof be faithful,
etc. How is this therefore proved? here is quoted Psalm. 111. 1. I will praise
the Lord with my whole heart in the secret meetings of the just, and in their
congregation, that is, both publicly and privately, wheresoever the just do
meet. Also Psalm. 149. 1. where he calls the said meetings, the congregation
of the godly. But in these places David neither says, that it is impossible
for a wicked man to join with the faithful in outward duties; nor yet that
the presence of the ungodly man can cause the assembly not to be the
congregation of the just or godly, which is the matter that should have bin
concluded. Now whereas the church is called an holy people, Esa. 62. 12. and
Deuteronomy. 14. 2. it is in regard that they were the seed of him, with whom the
covenant was made: Romans 9. 4, etc.
but howsoever in respect hereof the adoption pertained to them, and the glory,
and the covenant, and the giving of the Law and the service of God, and the
promises, of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ
came, and therefore were called an holy people: yet neither are all they Israel
that are of Israel, verse. 6.
neither yet is the true Israel clean until the fountain be opened to wash
away their filthiness: zacha. 13. 1.
as for the church of Ephesus, Ephesians. 1. 1. and of Corinth, Cor. 1. 2. they are
indeed called saints: but can we truly say that there was no pollution known
among them? the matter is plain, that eue^ at that instant, as appears by
both the Epistles, al things were not so well in these churches as were to be
wished. Therefore, notwithstanding these churches are called saints, Israel
holy, and the assembly of such as worship God, a congregation of the just: yet
there may be a visible church of God though some member thereof be not
faithful. This people, says our Author, must be also holy: for proof whereof
is brought Deuteronomy. 12. 5. where the people are commanded to worship in the place
which the Lord should choose. But I pray you, when some of them obeyed not, ^.
Reg. 12. 28. and 1. Reg. 16* 32.
as Jeroboam, who caused the people to worship in Bethel and Dan: Achab, 2.
Chro. 33.
who worshipped in the house of Baal, Manasses, and others, did the people of
God cease to be the church of God? in no wise. We grant that Gods ordinances
ought to be regarded, especially in matters concerning his worship: but this is
not the matter in question; but whether the breaking of them by some one man,
can make the people of God to be no people unto him? for this is it, that
should have been concluded. Next to this is alleged John. 6. 37. which place,
that it may the better be understood, we are to remember, that in the verse
immediately going before, Christ had said, Ye have seen me and believe not: the
he adds, All that my father gives me, shall come unto me: whereby he shows
that the gift of faith is the free election of the father in Christ: so that
faith is a certain testimony of election to the faithful. The argument
stands thus. No man can come unto Christ and believe in him, except it be
given him of the father: therefore every member of the visible church is holy.
In a treatise which they have scattered abroad.
Surely it is no marvel that the knowledge of the liberal sciences is
condemned as an exercise of curious arts; but if they knew these Arts, no doubt
they would be ashamed to abuse themselves and others with such senseless kind
of reasoning. Besides, what means this, that to prove the people of God
faithful, are alleged scriptures that speak of holiness? as Esa. 62. 12. and
Deuteronomy. 14. 2. And now to prove their holiness, faith is mentioned? If faith and
holiness be all one, why are they noted as diverse with e and f? if they be not
all one, why is the handling of them thus confounded? in one of these must be
acknowledged a foul oversight. Then follows to prove the holiness of the
church aforesaid, John. 3. 14. and 12. 32. both which places do show, that
Christ will draw his elect unto him: the first does show the means whereby
this shall be done, namely, by the ministry of his word, which is signified by
his lifting up; the other place noting the time, viz. after his death. Now this
is the force of this argument: Christ brings men to believe in him, therefore
every member of the visible church is holy. I need not stay in showing how
well this proof is made; we will come to the last place for this matter cited,
which is that of Christ, Luke 17. 3. Look to your selves, and so proceeds in
showing how reprehensions are to be used; I cannot perceive what moved the
Author to allege this place which pertains not to the matter; except it were
to make a show in the margent amongst his other frivolous and vain quotacions.
To proceed, This faithful and holy people is gathered in the name of Christ
Jesus, their only king, priest, and prophet, etc. That Christ Jesus is our
only king, priest, and prophet, and that the servants of God in all their
assemblies, both public and private, do meet in his name, is confessed: but
the manner of dealing with the scripture, is not here greatly to be commended.
For how is the kingdom of Christ proved? for it is cited, Genesis 44. and the
tenth verse, where Joseph speaking to his brethren of the cup, says thus.
Now then, let it be according to your words, he with whom it is found shall be
my servant, and ye shall be blameless. Truly, if a written coppie of this
treatise, being more ancient then the printed book had not come unto my
hands, wherein I see the same place quoted, I should have laid this fault
upon the Printer, for I should never have suspected a church builder to have
been such a senseless prophaner of the word of God. The other testimonies,
viz. Psalm. 45. 6. Zac. 9. 9. Heb. 1. 8. are more plain. So for his priesthood,
the making intercession for his, Romans 8. 34. and Ioh. 17. which is a part of
that function; and Heb. 5. 9. and 8. 1. and 4. 14. speaking of the whole
office, are to be accepted. Now to come to his prophetical function, for which
is alleged Deuteronomy. 18. 15. which is not to be restrained unto Christ; for it
promises unto the church a continual succession of teachers in all ages. It
is more to purpose, which is alleged out of Matthew. 17. 5. and Heb. 1. 1. but
as touching Genesis 14. 18. though it speaks of Melchisedek, who was king of
Salem, and a Priest, and was a figure of Christ, Heb. 7. 1. yet the place that
is quoted has small force in it self, to prove that, for the which it is
brought. In his pamphlet against read prayers, and Treatise of the church
apparent.


This church also worshippeth him aright; that is, neither in a set form of
prayer, nor yet in that place where discipline is not established; for we
gather the Authors mind out of his own writings. So that he allows that for
true worship, which is by the direction of Gods spirit, our only help, and
under the established government of Pastors, etc. Indeed, John. 4.
God is a spirit, and is to be worshipped in spirit and truth, which cannot
be done without his direction: yet are there certain outward helps which God
has sanctified for the furthering of the weak, in their special serving of
God, as reading, etc. And if true worship cannot be performed without this
government, then may not we justify, even their own serving of God, for they
themselves do want this discipline. Three places of scripture are here abused,
Exodus 20. 7. Leuit. 10. 5.
Exo. 20. 7. 8. Leuit. 10. 5. Ioh. 4. 23. for not one of them condemns read
prayers in any man, much less whole churches, either for them, or for want of
this discipline. True it is, that the name of God must not be abused, neither
must his worship be profaned, as is evident to be seen in Nadab and Abihu,
who for their strange fire were consumed of the Lord; not that he regards so
much a cole of fire, only he warns men to take heed, that they worship God
according to his own appointment. But to the matter. Did the sin of Nadab and
Abihu cause Moses and his people to be no church unto God? we may not so
think. The offenders received just recompense for their sin, the rest
continued the servants and worshippers of God. These proofs therefore fail in
these points: First they prove not that the false worship of one makes a
nullity before God of the whole congregation, but show the contrary; secondly,
they prove not a set form of prayer to be a taking of Gods name in vain, a
profanation of the sabbath, or a carnal worship: but we say that this kind of
worship is unlike to that of Nadab and Abihu, because it is warranted in the
word of God, wherein I will not urge Nu. 6. 23. or Matthew. 6. 9. which having bin
aledged heretofore, are turned aside with expounding the Hebrew coh, and the
greek houtos, after this manner, or thus: as if the place in Numery were the
sum of al blessings, and the other in Matthew. were only given for a direction in
our prayers; the vanity of which cauil, together with the whole discourse
hereof, I leave to him who has already dealt with this matter: and yet in the
mean season, we may note that the 102. Ps. was not given for a pattern of
prayer, but to be used for a prayer, as appears by the title thereof. Tepillah
legnanei kiiagne toph beliphne Jehovah jishpek shicho. A prayer for the poor
when he is distressed, pouring out his meditation before the Lord. Also Psa. 9.
Mizmor shir leiom hashabath; A Psalm and song for the sabbath day. So that as
the former was a set prayer for the afflicted, so this latter was a
thanksgiving for the blessings of God, and both of them used in his holy
worship. Of the like sort are Psalm. 42. 44. 22. 80. 39. and many other Psalms
which were not helps only to meditation, but set prayers in the church of
God. Thirdly, these places prove not the want of this discipline to make a
false worship, but we say that God cannot be truly served, where the discipline
described in this treatise is established, which shall appear by that which
follows. Being peaceably governed by his officers and laws. The Author
expresses what his meaning is, in the other part of this book: for he
describes these officers and these laws, what they are: Concerning all which,
this I say in general, that here is nothing but palpable ignorance to be
found, for first these governing officers, Officers.
pastors, doctors, Elders, Deacons and relieuers, being five in number, are so
necessarily required, that the want of these or any of these in a congregation,
causes it to be no Church apparent. Against the which assertion, for to make
their madness more manifest, we do here by the way of supposition grant unto
the^, that there are such functions, and yet these exceptions may be taken:
first, if the author has described the relieuer and the Deacon faithfully,
then are they no governing officers, but servants unto the church. Secondly,
that the want of Elders takes not away the esse or being of the church,
considering that Christ and his disciples which joined with him were the
apparent church, and yet during the time of his humiliation these officers were
not erected. And when many revolted, as is to be seen John. 6. Christ asking
the twelve if they also would go away, Peter answered in the name of the rest,
Master to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life? so that Peter
accounts the word a sufficient warrant for his continuing with Christ,
howsoever these men though they confess that the word of God is to be heard,
yet deny the hearing of it at their mouths, which have not ordained Elders
among them. But this may seem no sufficient proof, which is taken from Christ
and his disciples, forasmuch as this discipline was not then commanded, I
answer, that if there were a time when the church of Christ was without this
government, and forasmuch as it received not the government of the Jews, it is
not a perpetual rule, that outward government should be the life of the
Church, but I will not hold them in this straight: they ask where we can
find a church without this government, after that Christ had sent his spirit
upon the disciples. I answer, that as Timothy was left at Ephesus, so was
Titus in Crete, I mean in the house of God, which is the church of the living
God. And yet at that time Elders were not appointed in that church before Titus
had ordained them, not to speak of the church of Jerusalem, which made choice
of Deacons, but not of Elders. Also it is plain that the Elders which were
appointed in the churches by the Apostles, were for the most part such as dealt
in the word, and not in government only, as hereafter shall be made more
manifest in his due place. Thirdly, that the Doctor is not necessary in every
congregation, nor yet to execute his office in the public assemblies. For
whereas they themselves affirm that the word and sacraments must go together,
for which they allege that saying of Christ, Math. 28. 19.
Go preach, haptising: by which saying we are drawn to the mislike of
unpreaching ministers: so by the same we may conclude against an vnministering
Doctorship, the word and Sacraments, the mysteries of God are not to be
divorced, yet do we acknowledge the office of a Doctor, a distinct matter from
the pastors function, who is to feed his sheep with the mysteries of God, both
word and Sacraments in the asse^blies, which are for Gods worship; the Doctor
attending upon his duty in a place by the church appointed, instructing men in
the true sense of the scriptures, whereby the church may have able men always
in readiness, to supply such romes as shall be void in the church by death or
otherwise, Pastor in ecclesijs, Doctor in scholis. In annota. Bez. Ephesians. 4.
Lastly, I say, that though it were granted, that this platform drawn out in
this treatise, were warranted by the word, yet cannot they ascribe to it an
ability to make the church of God perfect thereby in this life, for the^ should
that prayer be needless, Matthew. 6. 12.
forgive us our sins. Neither will they say, that these offices can at al
times be had, especially when there are not men sufficiently qualified for
them: for they confess that Gods ordinances are not to be profaned, and to
have no Elders is better then to have ignorant and insufficient Elders, and in
this respect do they clear the church in the days of Christ's humiliation, and
acquit it from sin in the want of this established government; nor yet will
they grant, that if there were men meet for these offices, that yet they
should be set in these rooms before the church does elect them, In this
treatise.
for here is no intrusion, etc. So that the most that by their own doctrine is
to be yielded unto, is this; that when men are able, in respect of their gifts,
to undertake this burden, if it be thought a matter expedient by every member
of the church, then is this government necessary, In the treatise of the
apparent church
but this is far wide from that conclusion which is made against the church
of England, that it should not be a church, because it did not receive this
government. I omit to speak any further of the particular offices, until we
come to the several handling of them. And as touching the laws which here are
required, either they are not at all described in this book, which were
gross, or else we must confess that the laws of Christ are imperfect, which
is impious. For the laws that in the end of this book are set down, are such
as may seem to be sufficient for the ordering of the common sort, but if the
Elder be disordered, here is no law for his reformation, or if the whole
seignory do fail either in judgment or in proceeding (as general councels,
much more a private eldership may feel their wants) there is no manner of
proceeding declared in this evil. Well the church of Christ must be guided by
his officers and laws. How is this proved? Here is alleged Matthew. 11. 29.
where Christ wills us to take his yoke on us. Mark. 13. 34. where is showed
that he has committed to every man his work: in both these, he speaks not
of discipline, only he wills men in all meeknes to walk in their callings.
Whereunto is fitly joined that of Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 16. If any man lust to be
contentious, we have no such custom nor the churches of God. And I wish with
all my heart that he which quoted these places, had the grace to practice that
doctrine which in them is contained. That of John, Reave. 22. 9. where the Angel
does forbid John to worship him. I acknowledge my ignorance in not conceiving
how it is applied to the matter in hand, Keeping the duty of faith. This
keeping of faith in the bond of peace and love, being required in the
foresaid officers (as the words seem to import) cannot be concluded by the
places of Scripture, which are cited for that purpose, Ephesians. 4. 3. 1. Cor. 1.
13. Mark. 9. 50. John. 13. 34. 1. Cor. 13. 4. 1. Pet. 1. 22. 1. John. 3. 18.
for all these (one of them only excepted, viz. 1. Co. 13. 4. which describes
the properties of love) are general exhortations unto all men, not particular
to these officers, to keep the unity of the spirit in the bo^d of peace and
love. Thus far of the matter whereof this visible church is framed. Now
follows the dignity and glory thereof.

Brownist.
Most Ps. 87. 2
joyful, excellent and glorious things are euerywhere in the Scriptures spoken
of this church, it is called the Ps. 87. 2
city, 1. Ti. 3. 15 Heb. 3. 6
house, 1. Co. 3. 17
temple, and Esa. 2. 2 Micha. 4. 1
mountain of the eternal God, the chosen generation, the zach. 8. 3 1. Pet.
2. 9.
holy nation, the peculiar people, the Isa. 51 and 27. 11.
vineyard, the Can. 4. 12. Isa. 51. 3
garden enclosed, the spring shut up, the sealed fountain, the orchard of
pomgranads with sweet fruits, the Isa. 9. 25
heritage, the Mic. 3. 2 John. 3. 3
kingdom of Christ: yea his Cant. 5. 2
sister, his love, his spouse, his Psa. 45. 9
queen, and his 1. Cor. 12. 17 Ephe. 1. 23
body, the joy of the whole earth. To this society is the Gal. 4. 28
covenant, and all the promises made of Ps. 147. 14 2. These. 3. 16
peace, of love, and of Isa. 46. 13. Zac. 14. 17
salvation, of the Esa. 60 Ezec. 47 Zach. 4. 12
presence of God, of his graces, of his power, and of his protection.

Answer.
The excellency of the visible church of God is commended unto us by the names
and titles given unto it, and also by this, that the covenant and promises of
peace are made unto it, Ez. 48. 35 Math. 8. 20 Esa. 62
both which we acknoledge with them, both jointly, and in every particular
title and promise. Only I would have obferued that some of these quotations
are not made in the wisest sort: for Heb. 3. 6. and 1. Cor. 3. 17. do not
speak of the whole visible church, which is a company of both good and bad,
which join in one profession, but of the faithful only, which are members of
the same. VVheras the church is called, a holy people Zach. 8. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 9.
(as upon the like allegation has bin said) it is partly in regard of Gods
covenant, and partly to put them in remembrance of that holiness, whereunto
they are called, and wherein they ought to walk, and not as if they were void
of pollution, as our author fantastically dreameth. This church is called a
vineyard Esaias. 5. 1. but not in the place cited for this purpose. It is
compared unto a garden enclosed, but not so called Cant. 4. 12. and Esa. 51. 3.
It is called the kingdom of heaven Matthew. 11. 12. but in the third of Michah
alleged is no such thing. In deed in a written copy I find Math. 3. 2.
quoted, where the kingdom of God is mentioned, not for the visible Church, but
for that happiness which is assured in newness of life. In which sense that
of Christ is to be understood John. 3. 3. whereas the Church is called the body
of Christ. Ephesians. 1. 23. It is not meant by the visible, but the universal
church of God. Thus under hope to get credit by folding up a multitude of
scriptures in a narrow room, ignorance has unfolded and laid it self open
to the broad world. But why are these titles of the church brought into this
treatise? Surely that from the excellency of them might be enforced a
perfection. But who knows not wherefore these titles were given, and those
promises were made unto the Church, viz. that it and every member there of
might be assured of Gods love, whereby they might be comforted in the midst
of the reproaches of men, knowing that the temporal miseries which they endure,
and the despightfull dealings whereunto they are subject, shall not be able to
ouerwhelme them seeing they are so precious in the eyes of God. Also that the
remembrance of this excellency, might stir the^ up to look unto their
conversation, that as God has begu^ to deal graciously with the^, so they
should labor for the co^tinua^ce of his love in a daily mortifieng of their
corrupt affections, and putting on the Lord Jesus, in who^ only stands the
glory, comfort, and saftie of the church.

And surely if this Church be considered in her parts, Brownist
it shall appear most beautiful, yea most wonderful, and Can. 6. 4. 9.
rauishing the senses to conceive, much more to behold, what then to enjoy so
blessed a communion? For behold her Isa. 62. 11. Io. 12. 15 Heb. 7. 8
king and Lord is the king of peace, and Lord himself of all glory. She
enjoys most holy and heavenly Mat. 11. 30 1. John. 5. 3.
laws, most faithful and vigilant Act. 20
pastors, most sincere and pure Romans 12. 7
teachers, most careful and upright Romans 12. 8
governors, most diligent and Act. 6
trusty deacons, most loving and sober Romans 12. 8 John. 13. 17 Deuteronomy. 13. 17
releeuers, and a most Math. 5. 5. Deuteronomy. 18. 10 Eze. 36. 38. Esa. 60. 8
humble, meek, obedient, faithful and loving people, every 1. Reg. 7. 9. Zach.
14. ^1. 1 Pet. 2. 5
stone living, elect and precious, every stone has his beutie, his Gal. 6. 2
burden and his 1. Co. 12 Romans 12. 3
order, al bound to Heb. 10. 24
edify one another, exhort, reprove and comfort one another Leui. 15. 17 1.
These. 4. 9
lovingly, as to their own members, Col. 3. 23 1. Ioh. 3. 20
faithfully as in the eyes of God.

No 2. Col. 2. 17 3. John. 9
office here is ambitiously affected, no 1. Ti. 4. 2. 3 Gal. 6. 12
law wrongfully wrested, or 1. Cor. 5
wilfully neglected, no Iere. 23. 28 1. Tim. 3. 15
truth hid or perverted, 1. Cor. 6. and 14. 30.
every one here has fredom and power not disturbi^g the peaceable order of the
church, to utter his complaints and griefs, and freely to reprove the
tra^sgressio^s and errors of any, without exception of persons.

Here is no John. 10. 1.
intrusio^ or climbing up another way into the sheepfold, the^ Act. 1. 23. and
6. 3. and 14. 23
by the holy and free election of the Lords holy and free people, and that
according to the Lords ordinance, hu^bling themselves by fasting and prayer
before the Lord, craving the direction of his holy spirit for the trial and
approving of his gifts.

Here is a third matter set down to commend the church unto us, Answer.
viz. the glory, excellency and sincerity of every part thereof being severally
considered. Which matter if it could be as soundly proved, as it is
co^fidently spoken, the^ were this church in itself without Christ most
beutiful, yea most wonderful, and even rauishing the senses to conceive, much
more to behold: what then to enjoy so blessed a communion? But to begin
withal, the place of Solomon, Cant. 5.
Can. 6. 4. 9. is much abused by the author, whilst that it is applied to
co^me^d the beutie of the church, which is nothing else but blackness, as the
church her self acknowledges. For whereas in the former chapter the church
has accused her self of negligence, in not perfourming her duties unto her
spouse. And (the daughters of Jerusalem comforting her) she declared his nature
and disposition, the place of his abode, etc. whereby she does aggreuate her
former fault. For (quem beneficia accepta meliorem non reddunt, Chrisost. de
sacerd. li. 4.
is certe etiam grauius suppliuum commeretur. He whom benefits received make
not better, does deserve the more grievous punishment. And surely the greater
the love of Christ is to the church, the greater is the sin of the church in
not performing duty.) Now in the former part of this sixth chapter, her
beloved does comfort her, and does assure her that she is as dear unto him
now, as ever before she had been. So then it is not the excellency of the
church that commends her, but her spouse through his gracious favor does
accept of her, notvvithstanding her defects, which she acknowledges. The
several parts of the church.
To let this pass, let us consider the several parts of this visible church.
Her king.
Her King and Lord is the king of peace, and Lord himself of al glory, the
savior of Sion. Esa. 62. 11. a king, John. 12. 15. and one, whose sovereignty
was figured in Melchizedek, Heb. 7. 8. So that in regard of this her king, we
also do confess the church to be glorious; She enjoys most holy and heavenly
laws. Her laws.
Most true it is, that the commandments of Christ are such, that it cannot
justly be counted a servitude to be obedient unto them; yrksome they are no
doubt to a carnal man, but not to him that loves God: this is it that is
witnessed in the places alleged, viz. Matt. 11. 30. and 1. John. 5. 3. but
what are these Laws and commandments? Our Savior Christ, say they, was
forty days after his resurrection conversant with his Apostles, teaching them
those things which concern the building of the church and kingdom, and the
Apostles according as they have received instruction of him, so they builded,
and left us a pattern now. So that these most holy laws were given by
Christ to his Apostles, betvveene the times of his resurrection and ascension.

Whereunto I say, that although the discipline of Christ being his own
ordinance is most holy, yet this is to put it in the number of unwritten
verities, when men would prove it by such arguments as this is. And as for the
saying of Christ by them produced, it does not speak of discipline, for he
only wills his Disciples to take his yoke upon them.

I know that they take this Yoke for discipline, but the circumstaunces of
the place do bewraie their ignorance in so thinking. For in bearing this yoke,
CHRIST wills that his example be followed, Learn of me, says Christ. Now
I would understand of these men, what was that Church, wherein Christ found
this discipline established, and submitted himself unto the same, leaving this
his deed for an example to be followed: if they cannot tell me this, as it is
hard to show that which never was, I wonder what has moved them to wring out
discipline from hence, seeing that Christ only exhorts to submission,
meeknes, etc. by his example. The Philosopher was not so gross in his
Panspermia, as they are in making quidlibet ex quolibet so commonly. Yet I say
again, the laws of Christ are most holy, and that discipline which he
approves most necessary, which is not the government which here is
decyphered, for it shall appear to be the device of man, without the
approbation of the word of God, but the rule of his word, wherein we are
taught to emploie our selves in our several callings, to perform those
duties which in our callings God requires at our hands. As for the
vigilancie of Pastors, Her members.
the sincerity of Doctors, the carfulness of Governors, the trustiness of
those unto whom the care of the poor is committed, the sobriety of relieuers,
the humility, obedience and meekness of the people; these are required in
the word of God, and all the testimonies in this cause cited (one or two
excepted) are admonitions, and exhortations, that men would be careful of these
things, as they do concern them in their callings. But do these proofs here
used justify that the visible church enjoys such a people, qualified in this
sort? Nay, those that come nearest the matter, as Romans 12. 7. 8. Act. 20. 28.
Matthew. 5. 5. Deuteronomy. 18. 10. are but exhortations unto this fidelity, vigilance,
etc. but no promises that the church shall enjoy such men always. Bulling. and
Ioh. Bale in Act. 2. Freneus contra valent. li. 1. cap. 27. Tertul. in
prescrip. Heret.
Some of these scriptures do flatly show the contrary. Read Act. 20. verse. 29.
30. I know, says Paul, there shall enter in among you grievous wolves, not
sparing the flock, etc. It is also the judgment of some, that one of the
deacons spoken of Act. 6. was the first of the Nicholaitans mentioned Revel. 2.
6. Other places alleged are nothing to the purpose as Ioh. 13. 7. which is not
spoken of the widows, that here are called releuers, but to the disciples of
their duties in helping one an other. Likewise Esaias. 60. which is a prophecy
of the calling of the Gentiles, and and Eze. 36. 38. which promises a blessing
upon Israel, are far from proving that every member of the visible church
is meek, obedient, etc. thus has our author told us of many good things,
without due proof of any one.

When this describer of the church, had showed us the sincerity of every
member particularly, he gives his judge meant of them all jointly, saying:
Every stone is living elect and precious, which is confirmed with three
testimonies: the first is, 1. Reg. 7. 9. where the building of Solomon being
showed in order, that he built one house to dwell in, an other called the
forest of Libanon, a porch for the throne where he judged, and a house also
for Pharaos daughter, it is said, All these were of costly stones. And how
then? did every of these buildinges to what use soever they were appointed,
represent the visible church of God? The only sight of this place is
sufficient to show what force it has to prove the matter in question. The
second place is Zach. 14. 21. Every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holy
unto the Lord of hosts, and all they that sacrfice shall come, and take of
them, and sees therein: by this ceremony the people were put in mind, that
every of them do worship the Lord with holy affections, but this does not
prove that all the people did thus behave themselves in Gods worship; the
contrary is plain. Agg. 2. 11. 12. etc. The last place which is 1. Pet. 2. 5.
comes more near the mark: for the Apostle says that as lively stones they
were made a spiritual house; yet he says not that every one among them was
so, and those that were, he declares from whence it came: to wit, Jesus
Christ. In which matter (if no further purity be meant by the author) we do
agree: as also that every one has his burden and his order, being bound to
edify one an other, exhort, reprove, and comfort one an other lovingly as
being members of one body, and faithfully, as in Gods sight. The neglect of
these duties has bred, nourished, and continued this late and pestilent
schism amongst us.

That the affecting of offices, the wresting or neglecting of laws, and
perverting of truth are not incident to the church, is news too good to be
true, as shall appear even by the self same places of scripture which here are
set in the margent as good proofs of the authors follies, whiles that they do
so flatly gainesay that which they should justify. For many make merchandise
of the word. 2. Cor. 2. 17. And Diotrephes loves to have the pre-eminence 3.
John. 9. then is there affecting of offices. In the latter times some shall
speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot
iron 1. Timoth. 4. 2. And some desiring to make a fair show in the flesh
constrain men to be circumcised Galat. 6. 12. then is there perverting of
truth. The Corinthians were negligent in proceeding against the incestuous
person 1. Cor. 5. then is there neglecting of laws. What shall we then say to
this man, who would make the world believe, that the scriptures do confirm
that, which they do so directly and plainly deny? Let him pronounce the
sentence upon him self. He says, The prophet that has a dream let him tell
a dream, and he that has Gods word let him speak Gods word faithfully. Ier.
23. 28. and so say I: for it is a vile abuse, that is offered to God and man,
when a dream or fancy is countenaunced with the scriptures, which do
overthrow it. What is the chafe to the wheat. Timothy durst not thus behave
himself in Gods house 1. timoth. 3. 15. Every member of the church (say they)
ought to have freedom to utter his complaints and griefs, yea and not
disturbing the peaceable order of the church (by passing the bounds of his
calling) to reprove transgressions and errors: this we grant of our own
accord, not being urged hereunto by any thing mentioned. 1. Corinthians. 6. or 14.
30. which prove it not; but that the estate of the visible church is such, that
every member has always this freedom, we deny it. Also, we say, that as
there may be intrusion or climing up an other way into the sheepefold through
men's corruptions, then by the election of those to whom election does belong:
so would it be a horrible confusion if the election of offices were left in
the hands of the people, as in this platform of discipline they do teach us,
but that the people should have their interest in ordination, also is more then
gross. For proof whereof, I will not stand upon those places of Paul 1.
Tim. 5. 22. lay not thy hand rashly on any man, and Tit 15. for this cause
left I thee at Creete, that thou might appoint Elders in every city,
because that although they flatly gainesay the ordination of Elders by the
people; yet they seem not sufficient unto some, to infringe the liberty of
the people in election also; Calvin Inst. lib. 4. cap. 3 Sect. 15.
because that Luke showing how Paul and Barnabas appointed Elders in the
churches, Act. 14. 23.
says that they did it by consent. And it is not to be thought says Calvin
that Paul did grant a greater liberty to Timothy and Titus then he took unto
himself: for which purpose is also alleged Ciprian who would, Cipr. lib. 1.
vt sacerdos plebe present sub omnium oculis deligatur atque dignus atque
idoneus publico iudicio co^probetur; Epist. 3.
that the priest, when the people are present, be chosen in the sight of all
and be approved to be sufficient and meet by common consent. Unto all which I
say, that even these authorities of Luke, Calvin, and Ciprian do flatly deny
that election should be made by the people: for Praeesse electioni debere alios
pastores nequid vel per leuitate^, Calu. Ibid.
vel per mala studia, vel per tumultu^ a multitudine peccetur. Other pastors
ought to rule the election, lest the multitude fail either through lightness or
by evil practices, or tumult: so that howsoever it be granted by these places
cited, that a wise people ought to have their consent in election, yet if they
be tumultuous, ill co^ditioned, or void of gravity (as generally the common
sort are fautie in one of these) then ought other pastors to rule, yea and
ouerrule the^. Those churches also which by the judgment of our author
himself are most reformed, who admit not any thing of weight to be don, inscia
vel inuita ecclesia, yet whatsoever pertains to the state of the church, they
have the same disposed by the common counsel of the Elder ship, so that
election is in their power, the people consenting unto them. And therefore (not
to press the authority of Chrisostom, writing about the year of our lord 500.
says flatly that neither people nor Elders were to elect a bishop, Chrisost.
in Phil. hom. 2.
or a minister but the bishop only) neither election, much less ordination
ought to be at any time in the hands of the multitude, further then in giving
consent unto the pastors, nor at all to be regarded if they be such as before
have bin mentioned; and therefore as these men are vain in arrogating more then
this, so are they vain in censuring the church of England, for that it
leaves not this election unto the people, whose ignorance is generally great
for want of instruction, and whose heads are generally very tumultuous by the
means of such as this our author is. Why are not they a holy and free
people? Number. 16. 3.
Indeed when Corah and his company had gathered them selves together against
Moses and Aaron, they said, Ye take too much upon you seeing all the
congregation is holy every one of them and the Lord is among them. But I
doubt I should injury Corah by comparing these men unto him; for he under the
pretense of holiness and freedom, sought only to be privileged from
submission; but these our men under the same veil, content not themselves
herewith, but in their aspiring minds do seek to bring not the government of
the church only, but of the weal public also into their hands; for
obtaining where of they lay this platform: first that priuatmen are to erect
and establish this government of theirs, and then it being erected that all
matters both civil and ecclesiastical are to be ordered by the same. The later
of these two points will be manifest hereafter in their description of an
Elder, who (as they say) must discern between plea and plea, etc. And as
touching the former point, although in one of their writings which they have
dispersed they have made this protestation; We purpose not to meddle with the
reformation of the state, otherwise then by our prayers unto God; yet as
forgetting them selves, immediately after in the same discourse they affirm,
that Christ has left but one form of government in his last will and
Testament unto his church, which he has sealed with his blood: and therefore
not left it arbitrable at the plesures of princes, or policies of times to be
done or undone, but made it by a double right inviolable, both by his word and
his Testament: so that the church of God can neither be governed by any other
laws or government, neither ought it to be without this; for God holds them
all in the state of enemies, which have not his son to reign over them. Now
then the faithful are comanded to gather together in Christ's name, with
promise of direction and protection, and authority not only to establish his
laws and ordinances among the^ but faithfully to govern his church thereby; for
the kingdom of God consists not in word but in power. Now this assembly of
the faithful before they be planted and established in this order, consists
hitherto but of private persons, none as yet being called unto office, and
function. Therefore we may well conclude that God co^ma^deth his faithful
servants being as yet private men, together to build his church, according to
the true pattern of Christ's Testament: thus far they. But here is no word of
God to prove any of these assertions: we read of Asa, Iehosaphat, Iehoiada the
priest, Hezekia, Iosia and others, some of them pulling down the abominations
of Judah, others setting up the priests and Leuits in their places in the house
of God disposing the^ as in the feere of God, seemed good in their eyes; but in
the whole book of God is not to be found either precept or example to warrant a
private man in purging, much less in erecting the church of God. Who then
required these things at the hands of these men? will they tell us of
extraordinary procedings in matters of extremity? Let them show herein some
extraordinary testimony from God to warrant us in regarding them, otherwise
here is in trusion. For howsoever Zerubbabel and Iehosuah, Ezra and Nehemia did
daily pray for the restoring of the people out of captivity, and were most
willing and ready to go before the^, and to bring them to Jerusalem, yet until
they had authority committed to the^ so to do by the kings of Persia, Cirus,
Darius and others, Ezra. 1.
they never durst attempt the matter; Ezra. 7.
and yet we may truly say that these were no common persons, Neh. 1. 4. and 2.
5.
Iehosua being the high priest, Zerubbabel a chief man of the people, Ezra a
scribe of the law, and Nehemia a great man, yea in the court of Artashast: but
they al knew full well that Moses and Aaron the prince and the priest must join
together in all such actions.

Likewise in this church they have holy Brownist
Math. 5. 17 1. Tim. 1. 18
laws as limits and bounds, which it is lavvfull at no hand to transgress,
they have laws to direct them in the choice of every officer, what kiude of
them the Lord will have.

Brownist.
This tautologie of the holy laws of the church, it is not so unwisely
iterated and repeated, but it is as foolishly also and fondly proved. For
Christ Matthew. 5. 17. saying, that he came not to destroy the law and the
prophets but to fulfill them; and Paul 1. Tim. 1. 18. giving a commandment to
Timothy, which commandment is expressed what it is in the third, fourth, and
fifth verses of the same chapter, do not once speak of the churches laws for
outward direction* as may appear evidently to every one that has but a mean
judgment in the scriptures.

Answer.
Their pastor must be apt to Leu. 21. 17 Matthew. 2. 6. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
teach, no young scholar 2. Tim. 2. 15.
able to divide the word aright, Tit. 1. 9. 2. Tim. 4.
holding fast the faithful word according to doctrine, that he may be able
also to exhort, rebuke improve with wholesome doctrine, and to convince them
that say against it: he must be a man that loves goodness, he must be wise,
righteoue, holy, temperate: he must be of life Tit. 1. 7. 8
unreprovable as Gods steward: he must be generally well reported of, and one
that rules his own householde under obedience with all honesty: he must be
modest, humble, meek, gentle and loving: he must be a man of Number. 12. 3 Esa.
50. 4 Iere. 3. 15 Eze. 34. 18. Zach. 7. 11 Act. 20 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4 1.
Tim. 2. 20
great patience, compassion, labor and diligence: he must always be careful
and watchful over the flock, whereof the Lord has made him ouerseer, with all
willingness and cheerefulnes, not holding his office in respect of persons, but
doing his duty to every soul, as he will answer before the chief
shepherd, etc.

Answer.
In this description of the pastors office, as the author has set down some
things therein required, so has he left other matters pertaining (by his own
doctrine) thereunto, altogether untouched: for whereas he tells us of an
Eldershippe, wherein the pastor is the chief, here is nothing mentioned of
this matter, as if the ecclesiastical censure remained as peculiar unto the
Elders. Again, forasmuch as he requires in a pastor, that he exhort, rebuke,
and convince the gayne-sayers of wholesome doctrine: he does confirm herein
that which has been said concerning the Doctor, for either this function is not
in the publik place of Gods worship, or else it does intrude into the
pastoral charge, and so these offices would not be severed and diverse.
Thirdly, seeing modesty, humility, meeknes, etc. are necessary in a Pastor,
Doctor, Elder, and all, we seee how unfit these men are to bear any office
in the Church of God, considering how far they are from modesty, meeknes, or
civil honesty, when they call the ministry of England traitors to Christ,
In the treatise of the church apparent.
the Popes bastardes, wicked guides, Antichrists, etc. When the book of
common prayer is termed a piece of swines flesh, In another pamphlet of theirs.
and the people of England generally are accounted persecutors of the church
of God, and no Christians. Lastly, we may observe, that some of these
testimonies of Scripture in the margent are not so fit as might be to prove
the office of a pastor. For Nu. 12. 3. does speak of the meeknes of Moses, but
his was not a pastoral charge. Esa. 50. 4. sets forth the Prophets
diligence, Zach. 7. 11. complains of the peoples obstinacy: but what are
these to prove the office of a pastor? The place that is quoted 1. Tim. 2. 20.
because it is somewhat after the end of the chapter, it shall be answered when
that verse is found.

Brownist.
Their Doctor or teacher must be a man apt to teach, 1. Tim. 3 Tit. 1.
able to divide the word of God aright, and to deliver sound and wholesome
doctrine from the same, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
still bulding upon the same ground work, 1. Cor. 1. 17 and 2. 4
he must be mighty in the Scriptures, able to convince the gainsaiers, and
carefully to deliver his doctrine pure, sound and plain, not with curiosity
or affection, but so that it may edify the most simple, approving it to every
man's conscience, he must be of life unreprovable, one that can govern his
own household, he must be of manners sober, temperate, modest, gentle and
loving, etc.

Answer.
In this description of a doctor here is nothing differing from that which has
bin in the description of a pastor. For as there, no mention was made of any
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, so here it is also passed over in silence, as if
he had never said that the pastor and doctor were governing officers. And as
there he requires of a pastor the dividing of the word of God aright, and the
approving of it to every man's conscience, so does he here require the same in
a doctor: and both alike in the judgment of our author are to execute their
office without any difference either of the place or of the matter, or of the
manner of dealing, then the which what can be more fond, if he speaks the
truth in saying that these offices are limited, severed and diverse. And
lastly, as in the description of a pastor, the scriptures were abused, so in
this of a doctor they are not friendly handled. For these-places, 1. Tim. 3.
Tit. 1. and 2. Tim. 2. 15. have been alleged before for the pastor, who being
an ouerseer of Christ's flock, has not been denied the use of the Scriptures
to decypher out his calling, but in bringing the same in again for a Doctor, it
appears that the store is now spent, whereof there was no spare in the
beginning of this Treatise. Also these 1. Cor. 1. 17. and 2. 4. do show what
Paul did in his Apostleship: but the office of a Doctor is a distinct matter
from the office of an Apostle, Ephe. 4. 11
and therefore altogether impertinent unto this matter, are these testimonies
used by the author.

Their Elders must be of wisdom and judgment, Brownist
endued with the spirit of God, Number. 11. 24
able to discern between cause and cause, 2. Chr. 19. 8
between plea and plea, Act. 15
and accordingly to prevent and redress evils, 1. Tim. 5
always vigilant, and intending to see the statutes, ordinances and laws of
God kept in the church, and that not only by the people in obedience, but to
see the officers do their duties. These men must be of life likewise
unreprovable, governing their own families orderly, they must be also of
manners sober, gentle, modest, loving, temperate, etc.

Answer.
The third sort of governing officers in the Church, are by our author called
Elders, concerning which name, howsoever Calvin reports, Call. Inst. lib 4.
cap. 4. se. 1
that in churches of former times some had this title given unto them, who
only were conversant in the censure of the church, yet is it generally in the
Scriptures ascribed unto them that labored in the word and sacraments; as
appears Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 12. and 20. 17. and in other places. And thereupon
Calvin says, Call. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8.
Quod Episcopos and presbyteros, and pastores, and ministros promiscue vocaui,
qui ecclesias regunt, idfeciex scripturae vsu, quae vocabulaista co^fundit. In
that I have without making difference named Bishops and Elders, and Pastors and
Ministers, I have done it according to the practice of the Scripture which
confounds these words. Ier. in tit. and Euagrio. Epist. 58
And Jerome says, Veteribus eos omnino fuisse presbyteros, quos Episcopos.
With those of ancient times the same men were Elders which were Bishops.
Therefore it is not so directly from the word of God, (as in the title of this
book is promised) but from the practice of some churches that he has taken
this name Elder, to give it unto those which bear office without any further
dealing in the ministry of the word. As the name Elder in this place is not
usual in the word, so the office of an Elder, as it is here described, has
neither warrant of the word, nor yet of any church, whether ancient or of
latter days. I grant that certain churches have made choice of men which
should deal only in the censures of the church, whom they have called
Presbyteros, Elders. But the most that they have ever required in such an Elder
was, that he should be sound in faith, in life unreprovable, able to discern
of the dealings of every calling in the church, careful to see rightly into
the same, and ready to join in correcting with ecclesiastical censure, those
that are undutiful, being helpful unto the rest. But that it should belong
unto them to discern between cause and cause, between plea and plea, etc. It
is a plain pulling of the svvorde out of the magistrates hand. They mean no
such matter (they say) for they grant the magistrate his authority over the
persons, though not over the causes of men. This it is, whereas her Majesty
has appointed Judges in the land to end causes, decide controversies, and to
give sentence upon malefactors, and shirifes to see the execution of that
which the Judges have determined: the seat of judgment must be brought into
the consistory of these Elders, and the office of the Shirife must be only
left in the hand of the magistrate, to see the decrees of these ancients put
in execution. Now tell me if these men do not go beyond Corah and his
company, Number. 26. 3.
as before was said? yet I will leave the further consideration of these
matters unto those whom they do concern, only let us see what warrants they
have out of the word of God for the largeness of this their commission. Number.
11. 24. makes mention of three score and ten men which were chosen by the
appointment of God to be assistants unto Moses, but these were temporal
magistrates, and not ecclesiastical. Again, it says not that Moses was
discharged, and the authority of judging between plea and plea, remained in
the power of these men only. As like to purpose is Act. 15. where there is
neither any such authority mentioned as aforesaid, nor yet such an office as
an vnministering Elder spoken of. For the word Elders in that place, does
signify those that labor in word and doctrine, as has been noted before.
As touching that of Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 17. An Elder is worthy of double honor,
especially such as labor in the word and doctrine. From whence is collected
that there were some Elders, which did not labor in the word and doctrine. I
answer, that there was a time (as before was said) when such Elders were in
the church, but when they had their beginning, how long they continued, and how
far their office exte^ded: The author has neither in this place nor else where
showed. At the first they were not, as by that has been showed may appear.
Afterward it should seem that some such were appointed for the secret meetings
of the faithful, whiles they were under persecution, but when the church
increased and was dispersed into nations, as now it is in England, we read not
that such were continued in the Church, nay the contrary is flatly testified.
For as Jerome says, Idem est Presbyter qui est Episcopus: and antequam
diaboli instinctu, studia in religione fieret, and diceretur in populis, ego
sum Pauli, ego Appollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum concilio,
ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam vero vnusquisque eos quos baptizauerat, suos
putabat esse non Christi, in toto orb decretumest, vt vnus de Praesbyteris
electus supponeretur ceteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret. An Elder
is the same that a Bishop is, and before that through the instigation of the
devil affection bare swaie in matters of religion, and that it was said
amongst the people, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, the churches
were governed by the common council of the elders, but after that every one
thought, that those whom he baptized were his own, and not Christ's, it was
deereed throughout the world, that one of the elders should be set in the place
of the rest, to whom might pertain the whole state of the Church. If there be
any help, it must be had from the 2. Chro. 19. 8. for there it is thus written.
Moreover in Jerusalem Iehosaphat did appoint of the Levites and of the priests
and of the chief of the families of Israel for the judgments of the Lord, and
for strifes, when they returned to Jerusalem. By the judgments of the Lord
are understood those holy causes, the knowledge whereof was committed to the
priests and Levites; by strifes are noted civil contentions: the ending whereof
pertained to the chief of the families of Israel. This self same matter is
expressed also Deuteronomy. 17. 9. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in
judgment between blood and blood, plea and plea, between plague and plague
in the matters of controversy within thy gates, thou shall then arise and go
up unto the place which Iehoua thy God shall choose; and thou shall come unto
the priests of the Levites, or unto the judge that shall be in those days,
etc. So that this disjunctive (or) does express a plain difference between
the office of the priest, and the matters belonging to the judge. For although
ve al hashpat be red in some translations and to the judge, yet the twelft
verse of this chapter does end this controversy, where the disjunctive (or) is
set down by an other word; That man that will do presumptuously not harkning
unto the priest (that stands before the Lord thy God to minister there) o al
hashpat, or to the judge shall dye. For it is evident that bloodshed pertained
to the judge, the descrying of plagues unto the priest. Likewise contentions
being about diverse matters, those that concerned civil affairs pertained to
the te^porall judge, other matters of faith, were to be decided by the
ecclesiastical ce^sure: so that although we should grant the^ a seignorie, yet
all causes are not to be brought into their consistory. In the mean time we
see that these men being at defiance with popery, have here showed us a reason
of it, because the both of them would judge all, and would be judged by none,
both would privilege their own deeds, and have the handling of the causes of
all others: and therefore as in the Papist, so in these we may see, a sottish
ignorance with an arrogant and presumptuous spirit.

Brownist.
Their Deacont must be men of honest report, Act. 6. 2^
having the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience, 1. Tim. 3. 8. 9
endued with the holy Ghost, they must be grave, temperate, not given to
excess, nor to filthy lucre.

Answer.
Whereas the office of a Deacon is here mentioned, as distinct from the
former, it had been requisite for the author more fully to have expressed his
mind: for as touching Deacons, it is generally granted of all writers, that
they were in the primitive Church, such as our author does here speak of. One
says, that Presbyteri, Episcopi, and Diaconi, hoc est ministri Christi,
Elders, Bishops and deacons, that is to say, the ministers of Christ: were
names given generally to those that had to instruct the people. And for proof
thereof he alleges that of Paul to Timothy, Chri. hom. 2 in Philip.
Ten diaconian sou plerophoreson, Fulfilling thy ministry: and yet he was the
disposer of Gods mysteries at Ephesus. Annother says, Primum omnes docebant,
and omnes baptizabant, Ambros. in Ephe. cap. 4
quibuscunque diebus vel temporibus fuisset occasio, nec enim Philippus tempus
quaesiuit, aut diem quo Eunuchum baptizaret. At the first all taught and al
baptized, when and wheresoever occasion was offered, neither did Philip stay
for a time nor a day wherein to baptize the Eunuch. De decret. Nice. sinod.
contra Eus.
Athanasius expounds that of Paul, 1. Tim. 3. 8. where the Deacon is willed
not to be double tongued, as if the deacon were a teacher in the word: and he
himself in describing how he fled for^ the Arrians, says thus: Monui Diaconum
vt recitaret Psalmum, populum item vt auscultaret, etc. I willed the Deacon to
read a Psalm, and the people also to give ear.

Therefore although master Calvin says, that Diaconi sub Episcopo pauperum
essent oeconumi: Call. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 5.
Deacons should under the Bishops be prouiders for the poor. Yet seeing
they dealte in other matters also, and were called Diaconi, because they were
ministers of the word also; our author should have showed us when it was that
these Deacons ceased to deal in other matters then in provision for the poor
only, or else he should have told us that there are two sorts of Deacons,
Diaconoi tou logou, minister of the word, and ministers or disposers of the
goods of the poor. And these things he must have proved by Gods word, and
then in this point he had performed his promise made in the Title of his
book, and shevved himself to be so good as his own word, but now by what
authority he has affirmed, by the same authority may be denied such an
office as is here spoken of, to be that Deacon which is mentioned in the places
cited. Act. 6. For Philip who was one of the Deacons, did both teach and
baptize, Act. 8. which matter although we should grant that he did it, not as
a deacon, but being an Evangelist, as some with this distinction would shifte
off the matter, yet must it be confessed, that the Deacons mentioned in the
Acts, were not discharged from dealing in the word, only to take upon them
the care of the poor. Neither does Paul 1. Tit. 3. 8. speak any thing to
gainesaie this. Yet I grant that in the Church of God a care of the poor must
be had, and that there be faithful men appointed for the same, of whom the
Apostle speaks, Romans 12. 8. which place cannot be referred unto the
liberality of al Christians in general, as some have taught. For this is
handled in the thirtenth verse of the same chapter, which should have been
done if there were not a difference between the matter required in the eight
verse, which speaks of the public officer, and the thirteenth verse, which
extends it self to all Christians: for vain repetitions are not used by the
Apostle. But to go forward.

Brownist.
Their releeuers or widows must be women of sixty years of age at the
least, 1. Tim. 9. 10
for avoiding of inconveniences; they must be well reported of for good works:
such as have nourished their children, such as have been harberous to
strangers, dilligent and serviceable to the saints, compassionate and helpful
to them in adversity, given to every good work, continuing in prayers and
supplications night and day.

These must first be truly proved, then if they be found blameless,
administer, etc.

Answer.
As concerning widows, we grant that they may be helpful to the sick, but
yet so burdensome unto the rest, that the relief of the poor whiles they are
to bce maintained thereby, shall be diminished, so that they may more truly be
called the relieved, then relieuers. Now for the necessity of such in the
church, it is not proved out of Tim. 3. 10. nor yet out of any place of
Scripture else; and why? For the L. knows the impossibility in having such in
every congregation, and in maintaining them, the most that can be granted is,
that were the church possessed of such, and therwithall able to maintain both
them and these whom they were to attend upon, then would it be a great comfort
to them all. I spare to speak further of these, only it may be observed that
the place cited to prove such an office in the church, 1. Tim. 5. makes
nothing for it. For Paul as the circumstanstances of the place do show
speaks of such as are to be succored by the church* Honor widows, which are
widows indeed, that is, which have need of help, and so proceeds in showing
what they are which especially are to have the relief of the church, vz. such
as by reason of their age and want of friends are not able to help themselves,
although in a godly affection they hate idleness: but as for the younger
widows they are not to live by the maintenance of the church, least that
idleness be maintained, the mouths of the enemies be opened against the truth
and the church be abused, whiles the goods of the church be spent upon those
who make protestation, that they have no other comfort (for to such only is the
relief of the church to be given) and yet through the lust of youth do betake
themselves to marriage again; which though it be a matter lawful in it self, yet
is it unlawful to those that before God and his church have vowed the contrary:
and thus is this place expounded by Theophilact, Ambrose, Bullinger, Claudius
Guilliaud and others. Thus have we at the last the offices and officers of a
reformed church described, so well as our author could, of whom together with his
co^plices we may truly say (as Adrianus spoke on his death bed of his
physicians, that they brought him to his end) these reformers in their
platform here prescribed have offered us such a medicin that if the Church
should be void of sense and receive it, she might in short time complain,
that these her Physicians had brought her to her end: yet we must believe upon
pain of damnation, that it is a good receipt: wherein they deal like unskillful
and unconscionable Physicians, who promise a wonderful cure, rauishing the
senses to conceive, much more to behold, what then to enjoy so blessed a
comfort? and yet will minister that which will be the bane of the patient.
Christ indeed has showed an outward government unto his church, whereof
although we are not capable, partly by reason of men's insufficiency to order
it, and partly by means of the crookednes of the common sort, who will not
abide to be ordered by it, but especially for that a whole nation cannot so
easily be brought to that uniform order, as some one private congregation, yet
assuredly the nearer we come to this his ordinance, the more heavenly is that
harmony and consent of ours. And herein I will not stay in showing how the
laws of our Church of England have provided, that in the congregations we
should have Pastors: In the Universities such as execute the office of doctors
in bringing up those in the knoledge of Gods word, which may supply the places
that are void of teachers in the Churches: and in all places, some to observe
the behauiors of men, others to collect the relief of the poor, etc. because
that I write not an Apology for the Church of England, only I would have men
to see the government of Brownisme, what it is, viz so far disagreing from the
discipline of Christ, that neither the frame of their building, nor the
builders themselves have the approbation of Gods word, whereof they spoke; but
in this their dealing are like unto the Cuthits and the rest, who inhabiting
Samaria, falsely bragged that they were the children of Jacob, and blindly
deceived themselves with a false worship, as may appear by one of them, I
mean the woman of Samaria, John. 4. For as the Lord had established his
worship upon mount Sion: so one Manasses to advance himself, erected a temple
upon mount Gerazin, the Jews according to Gods appointment worshipped at
Sion, the Samaritans at Gerazin. A controversy rose between them which of
these people did best. John. 42. 2.
Christ says to the Samaritanes, Ye worship ye wot not what; yet they had a
temple, a Priesthood, and other ordinances, which were kept at Jerusalem. But
who gave Manasses authority to erect a temple, assemble a people, ordain, etc.
These men came not so near the discipline of Christ, as the Samaritans did
resemble the discipline at Jerusalem: and Manasses being the son of the high
Priest had as good a warrant for his proceedings, as a private man might have,
and yet his dealings were accursed. Now when these me^ fail both in this,
that they have not authority to erect discipline, and also if this were
granted, in that they have described a false government, we may not pronounce
a blessing upon them.

Brownist.
Now as the persons gifts, 1. Co. 12. 12. 8
conditions, manners, life and proof of these officers, is set down by the
holy Ghost, so are their offices limited, severed and diverse.

Answer.
We have already heard both of the gifts and of the offices also of these
several callings, for so our author does confess afterward. Concerning
which it is apparent, that the Pastor and Doctor are so described, as if there
were no difference between them. The Elder indeed is severed from them both,
as if government were peculiar unto him alone, and his commission is set
down so large, as if it were not limited. The Deacons office may be diverse
from the rest, but as yet we cannot find it in that which he has hitherto set
down. We will therefore consider that which follows. For either to make his
volume greater, or to amend that which has been said, he fetches the
matter about again, and notwithstanding he has told us (as he acknowledges)
what these offices are, yet a good lesson cannot be told too often, we must
be content to hear it again. Therefore it follows.

Brownist.
The pastors office is to feed the sheep of Christ in green and wholesome
pastors of his word, Leu. 10. 10. 11
and lead them to the still waters, even to the pure fountain and river of
life, Number. 18. 2.
he must guide and keep those sheep by that heavenly shephooke and pastor all
staff of the word, Ezec. 44. 23. and 34. 33.
thereby drawing them to him, Psalm. 23
thereby looking into their souls, John. 21. 15
even into their most secret thoughts, thereby discerning their diseases,
Act. 20.
and thereby euring them, 1. Pet. 5. 12
applying to every disease a fit and convenient medicine, Zach. 11. 7
according to the quality and malady of the disease, Reave. 22. 2
and give warning to the church, Luke 12. 42
that they may orderly proccede to excommunication. 2. Co. 10. 4. 5
Further, he must by this his sheephooke watch over and defend his flock from
ravenous beasts, Heb. 8. 12
and the wolf, and take the little foxes, etc.

Answer.
It belongs to the Pastor to feed the sheep, to draw the^ from evil by the
power of the word, both in matters of faith and manners of life, to preserve
them from schisms and heresies, schismatikes and heretics, and to give notice
of the wilful and obstinate persons, that ecclesiastical censure may proceed
against them. For proof whereof the places alleged must have a gentle
construction before they may be accounted indifferent. For though Leuit 10.
Number. 18. and Ezech. 44. do speak of the Priest: Likewise Psalm 23. and Zach.
11. of Christ: yet can they not properly be applied unto the Pastor, except we
add this, that the Pastor must walk in the steps of the Priest, and in the
matters aforesaid be a follower of Christ. And that also Reave. 22. 2.
forasmuch as it speaks of the Church triumphant (as the whole discourse does
show) it can hardly be brought to pertain unto the Pastor, except we say
that it is in regard that the end of his ministry is to bring the people of
God unto the assurance of this estate. So that to fill the quotations unto the
matter, we have great need of a friendly expositor. Now in the office of a
pastor here is an addition, to that which in the former place was mentioned,
that he is to look into the most secret thoughts, thereby discerning the
diseases of his people; which should seem a heavy burden, for a man would
think that the heart of man is a bottomless deep: and that no man could know
the heart of man, but the spirit that is in man, and that God only tries the
heart and the raines; Iere. 17. 9.
yet this is not so impossible as it does appear at the first sight. For there
are diverse means which may be be used for the ready attaining unto the
matter: as the Papists for the same purpose had their auricular confession. And
yet there is a surer way, namely, to persuade the people (as some have been
taught it publikelie for sound doctrine) that they may not come unto the table
of the Lord, before they have examined ned themselves of their secret sins,
and also do declare the same unto the church, that is, not to the Priest, as
it was in popery, but to the Elders and people also, and this is not a secret
butcherie of men's souls as that was, but an open tyrannising over the
conscience.

Brownist.
The Doctors office is already set down in this description, Eze. 33. 1.
his especial care must be to build upon the only true groundwork, 1. Cor.
11. 19
gold, silver and precious stones, Ioh. 10. 11. 12
that his work may endure the trial of the fire, Leui. 10. 10
and by the light of the same fire reveal the timber, Eze. 44. 24.
haie and stubble of false teachers: Mal. 2. 6.
he must take diligent heed to keep the church from errors. 1. Cor. 3. 11
And further, 2. Cor. 1. 7. and. 24.
he must aeliuer his doctrine so plainly, 1. Tim. 4. 16 and 6. 20
simply and purelie, Ephe. 2. 20
that the church may increase with the increasing of God, Heb. 6. 1
and grow up into him which is the head Christ Jesus. 1. Pet. 2. 2


Answer.
Our authors meaning is, that the doctor do teach the truth, and convince the
gainsayer. All this we heard of before in the description of a doctor, here
then is no addition to supply the wants of that discourse, only it is
countenanced with a greater number of Scriptures then it had at the first, and
therein bewraieth a greater folly, for the margent is pestered to no purpose:
For what do these places cited tell us? Ezech. 33. 1. sets out the duty of
a watchman. 1. Cor. 11. 19. shows the necessity of heresies. Ioh. 10 11.
speaks of the shepherd Christ, Leuit. 10. 11. (which also was alleged for
the pastor) was spoken of the Priest, as was Eze. 44. 24. and Mal. 2. 6. Paul.
1. Cor. 1. 7. says that the Corinths were not destitute of any gifts. Also
in the 1. Cor. 2. 4. he speaks of himself being an Apostle. The two places
of his Epistle to Timothy, do show his duty in the Church of Ephesus, where
(as these men say) he had the function of an Euanglist. Paul Ephe. 2. 20.
tells them that they are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Heb. 6. and 1. Peter. 2. 2. do declare how Gods people ought to
grow up more and more in the knowledge of Gods mysteries. I see not how any
one of these places can directly prove the office of a Doctor in the Church:
for either they do testify the duty of other callinges, or else they show
what matters are effected in the people by the ministry of the pastor. Now
that place of Paul the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the third Chapter and
the eleventh vearse, I have kept it until the last place, for that I find it
most of all abused, not so much because it is restrained here to a Doctor, and
yet the Apostle spoke it generally of all sorts of builders: but for that the
latter part of this Scripture is here expounded of false Prophets, which is to
be understood of such teachers as always keep the foundation, and build in
Christ, howsoever thorough their frailty and weakness they be far from
that exact purity which is required in handling the word of God.

Brownist.
The office of the ancients is expressed in their description: Number. 11. 16
their especial care must be to see the ordinances of God truly taught and
practiced as well by the officers in doing their duty uprightly, Deuteronomy. 16. 18
as to see that the people obey willingly and readily. Deuteronomy. 10. 16
It is their duty to see the congregation holilie and quietly ordered, 2.
Chr. 19. 8
and no man disturbed, Exodus 39. 42
by the contentious and disobedient, 1. Tim. 3. 15
froward and obstinate, 2. Tim. 1. 13.
not taking away the liberty of the least, 1. Cor. 11. 16. and 14. 33.
but upholding the right of all, Gal. 2. 4. 5.
wisely judging of times and circumstances: Col. 1. 16.
they must be ready assistantes to the pastor and teachers, Act. 20.
helping to bear their burden, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
but not intruding into their office. Romans 12. 8.


Answer.
It should seem that the drawer of this government would have the
ecclesiastical censures only to proceed from the ancients (or else he would in
one place or other have showed that they without the rest were not to
determine) and also that supreme authority should be in them to control both
teacher and people, being themselves privileged from the ce^sures of other.
The office of the Ancients (says he) is expressed in the description: and in
deed the matters here spoken if, and some of the quotations, as Numb. 11. and
2. Chron. 19. are but repeated again: I will therefore pass them over now.
Meat twife sodden has little sweetenes in it. And as for the other places of
Scripture I will not severally handle them, because they have so small force in
them to prove the matter whereunto they are applied. That in the twe^tith of
the Acts, and 1. Pet. 5 have served for the pastor once or twice; wherein as I
would have him consider, that a man may weary his friends by using them too
often, so he is to remember, that therein he makes no difference between a
pastor and an elder. The residue of the Scriptures are these, Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
where the appointing of Judges, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. where the circumcision of the
heart is commanded. The Apostle shows Timothy his duty 1. Tim. 3. 15. and 2.
Tim. 1. 13. he reproves contention 1. Cor. 11. 16. and 14. 33. shows his
affection to the Galathians, Gal. 2. 4. and the creation of all things to be by
Jesus Christ Colos 1. 16. but what are all these for an Elder? If it were not
that Romans 12. 8. were a friend at all assaies, we should have had just occasion
to complain that all these places were abused: whereas now we say, that one
among a dossen is reasonably well applied, although it can not be proved that
even this place speaks of such rulers as now are in question.

Brownist.
The Deacons office is faithfully to gather and collect by the ordinance of
the church, Act. 6.
the goods and boneuolence of the faithful, and by the same direction
diligently and trustilie to distribute them according to the necessity of the
Saints. Further they must enquire and consider of the proportion of the wantes
both of the officers, Romans 12. 8.
and other poor, and accordingly relate unto the church, that provision may
be made.

The releuers and widows office is to minister unto the sick, ^. Tim. 5. 9.
lame, weary and diseased such helpful comfortes as they need, by watching,
Romans 12. 8.
tending and helping them. Further, they must show good example to the younger
women in sober, modest and godly conversation, avoiding idleness, vain talk
and light behavior.

Answer.
These offices with their marginal quotations have been already considered of,
and therefore avoiding so many vain rehearsals, I refer the reader to that
which had bin said of them before.

Brownist.
These officers though they be diverse and several, Luke 9. 46.
yet are they not severed, John. 13. 12.
least there should be a division in the body, 1. Co. 12. 12. 25. 28.
but they are as members of the body, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. 16.
having the same care one of an other jointly doing their several duties to
the service of the Saints, and to the edification of the body of Christ, till
we all meet together in the perfect measure of the fullness of Christ, by
whom all the body being in the mean while thus coupled and knit together by
every joint for the furniture thereof, according to the effectual power,
which is in the measure of every part, receaueth increase of the body unto
the edifyinge of it self in love. Neither can any of these Offices be
wanting, without grievous lamenesse, and apparent deformity of the body, yea
violent injury to the head, Christ Jesus.

Answer.
In these words are set down these principal points, first that in Gods
church every member is to seek the good one of an other, and also to further
the good of the whole body, Secondly, that a jar in the members, causes a
confusion of the body. In both these we agree and do allow the ninth of Luke
verse. 46. etc. and Ioh 13. 12. etc. as good proofs for them; although it is to
be observed that neither of these places do speak of these officers, for such
there were not among the disciples. Thirdly we are told that as every member
is to perform the duties of his calling, so is he not to intrude into the
function of others, unto this I also condescend, not for that our author says
it, inasmuch as he will not frame his actions according unto it; Chrysostom, in
Act. hom. 1.
for doctore nihil frigidius, Romans 12. 6.
qui verbis tantum philosophatur. 1. Cor. 7. 20
He which teaches in word only is a simple instructor: 1. These. 5. 14.
but therefore we believe it, because we are willed to walk in our callings,
and to admonish those that are unruly, such as will not abide in that place
wherein the Lord has set them.

Fourthly he says that the necessity of these officers is such, that whereas
one of them is wanting, there is a grievous lamenesse, and apparent deformity
of the bobodie, etc. and this is proved by 1. Cor. 12 and Ephesians 4. In both
which places as other gifts and offices are set down to have been in the
church, as 1. Cor. 12. Apostles, prophets, gifts of healing, diversities of
tongues, etc. And Ephesians. 4. Apostles, prophets and evangelists, so are not all
these officers required by our author in those places spoken of, but in the
place to the Ephesians, the pastor and doctor only, and in the Corinthes,
though he would endeavor to wring out elders and deacons from thense, yet must
he acknowledge that his widows are not mentioned. Our author therefore may
as well say that the want of the Apostles, Evangelists, gifts of healing and
the rest do cause deformity of the body (and that by these places by himself
alleged) as does the want of Elders, Deacons and releeuers. Nay it has been
already proved that this government was never to be imposed upon all sorts
of people alike, and that the want of some of these offices have neither been
deformity in the body, nor injury unto the head. This rather is an injury
offered unto Christ Jesus, if either a private man should thrust himself into a
public calling of the magistracy or ministry, without his warrant (as these
Brownists do both) or if a public magistrate should profane Gods
ordinances, by placing insufficient men in so high a room, as is the
government of the church; which must be done, if this be true which these men
speak. And thus much of the discipline whereby the visible Church (as they
say) should be governed; for we are now once again come to the conclusion of
this part.

Brownist.
Thus this holy army of Saints is marshalled here in earth by those officers,
Re. 19. 11. etc
under the conduct of their glorious Emperor Christ, Reu. 14. 12
that victorious Michael. Cant. 6. 3
Thus it marches in that most heavenly and gracious araie, Reave. 12. 11
against all enemies both bodily and ghostly. Luke. 10. 18. 19.
Peaceable in it self as Jerusalem, Math. 16. 18
terrible unto them as an army with banners, To. 8. 38. 39
triumphing over their tyranny with patience, and over death it self with
dying. Thus thorough the blood of that spotless lamb, and that word of their
testimony, they are more then conquerours, brusing the head of the serpent:
yea thorough the power of his word, they have power to cast down satan like
lightning, to tread upon serpents and scorpions, to cast down strong holds,
and every thing that exalts it self against God. The gates of hell and all
the principalities and powers of the world shall not prevail against it.

Brownist.
The muster master has viewed the world, chosen his soldiers, appointed the
victuallers, selected out the sergeants of the bands, has brought them to
their captain, and they are ready to march on under his conduct in the face
of their enemies bodily and ghostly to the confusion of satan, sin, hell and
all. What wages he exspected for this his piece of service is best known unto
him self; but what faithfulness he has used in his dealing it is apparent unto
all: for in these three things his packing is notorious. First, Matt. 16. 18.
that the victory of the church, which she is assured of in and through the
power of Christ, is here restrained and limited: for our author does
acknowledge it so far only as it enjoys this foresaid government of
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, etc. Secondly, that the power of the word of God,
Luke 10. 18.
and the ministry thereof (which is the sanctified means for satan's
overthrow, and the building up of Christ his church, is here granted no
otherwise, then this word is preached under this outward government. Romans 8.
38. 39.
Lastly that the certainetie of victory which is by faith, is here applied to
the whole visible church* as if all the members thereof were truly faithful. By
this his practice he would conclude that which as yet remains unproven, viz.
that the necessity of this government is such, that the enioyning of it is
sufficient to make the church without spot or wrinckle, and that where this is
wanting there is no fight against fathan, no strife against sin, no victory,
no church apparent. The testimonies of Scripture that should help him herein
(and are for the same cause noted in the margent) do cut the throat of these
his follies. For though he tells us that this army of Saints is martialled
here on earth by these officers, Reu. 19. 11. 14.
yet the holy ghost describes the warrior and his train, to be the warriors
which were in heaven. Though this man says that triumph is made by virtue of
this government, yet the holy ghost says it is in patience and constancy of
faith, Reave. 14. 12
and obedience. And in a word though he affirms that discipline is all in
all, yet the places noted by him speaking of the power of Christ in his
sernants ouercomming satan, do not once mention any outward government, much
less this discipline here prescribed.

Brownist.
Further, Math. 16. 19
he has given them the keys of the kingdom of heaven, John. 20. 23
that whatsoever they bind on the earth by his word, Math. 18. 18
shall be bound in heaven, John. 20. 23
and whatsoever they loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Math. 16. 19 and
18. 18


Now this power which Christ has given unto his Church, and to every member
of his church, to keep it in order, he has not left it to their discretions
and lusts to be used or neglected as they will, but in his last will and
testament he has set down both an order of proceeding, and an end to which it
is used.

Answer.
God has in deed committed authority unto his church of binding and loosing,
and has also showed an order of proceeding: which assertions are to be
collected out of these three places of Scriptures, which are twice noted in the
margent, that the number of testimonies which they used might seem greater
then it is. But here we have to mark, that Christ is said to have given this
power aforesaid to every member of the church, so that here is no difference
made between the people, and the governors; or at the lest, i^ he supposes a
difference to be between them: he has not set down how far the authority
of the people is extended. Again, if the people be granted so great an
interest in the matters of the church, we must think that the officers
themselves, I mean the Deacons and releeuers were not to be secluded: which
being granted, and seems here to be concluded, not only women have to dele
in the censures of the Church, but also the description of every office, (the
Elder only excepted) has been imperfect, seeing no such matter has been
mentioned in any of them. Secondly, we are to note, that he says, that this
order is not left to the descretion of the church, for if his meaning be, that
the censures of the church ought to be used with all fidelity, we do not
gainesaie him, but if he mean that when they are not duly executed, there
the church does cease to be the church apparent (according to that doctrine
which in another place they have set down) then do they agree with the
Anabaptists and Donatists herein, In the treatise of the church apparent.
Aduersus Anabapt. lib. 6. cap. 10 Co^tra Parmenianum. lib. 3. cap. 2.
who being sufficiently answered the one by Bullinger, the other by Augustine,
I marvel that these men should not be satisfied and contented to revoke this
error. The sum of whose answers tend to this, that the end of excommunication
(for the question is not of the officers, but of the church censures in this
place) is, that the party punished might be amended, that the credit of the
church might be furthered, that others be not offended and made worse, and
that the church might be preserved in peace. Therefore edification and the
welfare of the Church are especially to be regarded: for better it were that
wicked men should go unpunished, if the punishing of them should damnify the
Church. 1. Cor. 5.
Again, the church of Corinth was the church of God, when they neglected to
proceed against the incestuous person. Also the last supper of the Lord was
rightly administered, yet Judas was not excommunicate: the Prophets complained
of the sins of the church in their times, yet contemned they not the
sacrifices, sacraments, and worship of God. Christ and his Apostles blamed the
Church for gross corruptions, yet was he circumcised therein etc. By which
reasons as by others by the^ produced, we are urged to acknowledge that it may
be the Church of God, which does not always proceed against the wicked
according to their deserts. Thirdly, we are to mark that he ascribes the
keys of the kingdom of heaven to the officers before named, whereas Christ
committed this power, not to the Elders, for none were established, but unto
the ministers of the word, for in Peter they all are represented, as by
considering the places alleged out of Matthew and John, will plainly appear.

Brownist.
And if the fault be private, Leuit. 19 17. 18.
private, holy and loving admonition and reproof, Math. 18. 15
with an inward desire and earnest care to win their brother, Deuteronomy. 19. 15
but if he will not hear thee, Math. 18. 16.
yet to take two or three other brethren with him, whom he knows most meet
to that purpose, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may
be confirmed. And if he refuse to hear them, then to declare the matter unto
the church, which ought severely and sharply to reprehend, gravely to
admonish, and lovingly to persuade the party offending, showing him the
heinousness of his offense, and the danger of his obstinacy, and the fearful
judgments of the Lord.

If this prevail not to draw him to repentance, Matthew. 18. 16
then are they in the name of the Lord Jesus, with the whole congregation,
reverently in prayer to proceed to excommunication, casting him out of their
congregation and fellowship, that is, out of the covenant and protection of the
Lord, 2. The. 5. 15
for his disobedience and obstinacy, and committing him to satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, if such be his goodwill and pleasure.

Further, 2. Cor. 10. 8 and 13. 10.
they are to warn the whole congregation, and all other faithful, 1. Tim. 5.
20
to hold him as a heathen and a publican, Gal. 2. 14.
and to abstain them selves from his society, as not to eat or drink with
him, etc. unless it be such as of necessity must needs, as his wife, his
children and family, yet these if they be members of the church, are not to
join with him in any spiritual exercise.

All this notwithstanding, the church is not to hold him as an enemy, but to
admonish and pray for him as a brother, proving if at any time the Lord will
give him repentance: for this power is not given them to the destruction of
any, but to the edification and preservation of all.

If the offense be public, the party is publicly to be reproved and
admonished, if he then repent not to proceed to excommunication. Ios. 7. 19.
Vt supra. 2. Co. 7. 9.


The repentance of the party must be proportionable to the offense, Leuit.
19. 18.
viz. if the offense be public, Prou. 10. 12
public, Romans 12. 19. and 13. 10. and 14. 1.
if private, private, humbled, submissiue, sorrowful, unfeigned, giving glory
to the Lord. Gal. 6. 1. 2.


There must great care be had of admonitions, 1. Tim. 2. 24
that they be not captious or curious, Mark. 9. 50.
finding fault where none is, Ephesians. 4. 25
neither yet in bitterness or reproach, Iam. 5. 5. 19. 20.
for they were to destroy, and not to save our brother, but they must be
carefully done, with prayer going before; they must be seasoned with truth,
gravity, love, and peace.

Moreover in this church is an especial care had by every member thereof,
Luke 17. 1.
of offenses, Pro. 10. 12.
the strong ought not to offend the weak, Romans 14. 13 19.
nor the weak to judge the strong, Gal. 6. 2.
but all graces here are given to the service and edification of each other in
love, and long suffering.

Answer.
I thought it convenient to join all this together, being but one matter, viz.
the proceeding of the church, and of every member thereof: Concerning the
which I say, with them that God has not only given a charge to every member
of the church to look unto his steps, that he refrain from offending his
fellow members, least thorough his own default the church be provoked to
proceed against him, but also has prescribed unto the Church her order of
proceeding; which order I grant to be here set down in part; namely, so long
as the conuersations of men are in question; but in matters of faith these
rules will fail: for although it be the nature of man to err, and in his
errors we may not deprive him of admonitions, yet if his error do prove an
heresy, after once or twice admonition at the utmost he is to be rejected. For
a simple error may be healed, but perverseness is incurable: and the manner of
his reiection is not in a bare forsaking of him, but in restraining him, least
that by his false doctrine the simple sort be seduced. I speak not now of the
Magistrates authority, Tit. 3. i0.
who was commanded by the Lord to cut off the false prophet; but I speak of
the ecclesiastical power, which has his wara^t for the suppressing of such:
the order of whose proceeding is first admonition, then excommunication,
afterward to make the magistrate acquainted both with this evil, and with his
duty in proceeding against it, (for I will not urge that of master Bullinger,
who seems to go farther in asking this question) viz. if the church had only
authority to fly from, and not to chastise an heretic, how came it to pass
that the Apostle Paul by the power of God deprived Elimas of his sight, Act.
13. 8. 9.
because he did stubbernly maintain falsehood, and withstand the truth? But
this point of discipline has in wisdom been passed over, least that our
author should therein have blamed both our teachers and our Magistrates for their
to much lenity in this schism and heresy. Now as touching the flourish that
is made with a great show of scriptures in the margent, it is more then
childish; not in regard of applying them, though one or two of them might be
amended, but in respect of the vain alleging of one scripture often, as
Matthew. 18. 15. 16. Leuiticus 19. 17. 18. Prou. 10. 12. etc. but he would have
us to think that he is read in the scriptures, and therefore busieth himself
with iterating so many quotations. Genesis 17.


Brownist. Leui. 16* 11

In this church is the truth purely taught, Esa. 44. 3.
and surely kept, Gal. 4. 24. and 6. 16.
here is the covenant of the sacraments and promises, Isa. 60. 15.
the graces, Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
the glory, the presence, Esa. 56. 7.
the worship of God. 1. Tim. 3. 15.


Into this Temple enters no unclean thing, Esa. 52. 8.
neither whatsoever works abominations, Esa. 52. 1.
or lies, Eze. 44. 9.
but they which are written in the Lambs book of life. Esa. 35. 8.


But without this church shall be dogs and enchanters, and whoremongers, Zac.
14. 21.
and murderers, Reu. 21. 27.
and Idolaters, Romans 2. 9.
and whosoever loves and makes lies. Reu. 22. 27.


Answer.
Here we have described unto us the state wherein this visible church does
stand, both in regard of the conenant between God and it; and also in respect
of the sanctimonie thereof in the sight of men. As for the former of these, it
is to be granted: but howsoever the promises are made unto the church, and the
worship approved of God, is kept and retained therein, yet may it fall out
that some one member thereof may have no interest in the promises, as Matthew.
22. 13. nor yet be a true worshipper of God, as Eccles. 4. 17* And although the
church has this dignity given unto it through an especial grace, yet some one
man, who is not of the visible church may be partaker of the promises, and a
true worshipper of God; as Naaman the Syrian, and Job in the land of Hus; the
visible church then being among the people of Israel. As touching the other
matter; viz. that this church apparent is commended unto us both for the
purity thereof in it self, and also for the uncleanness of all those which
are not members of the same. It is a palpable grosnes to conceive, and a
sottish folly to publish such a dream. For, are al they clean which enter
into the visible church? these men themselves have confessed the contrary.
Genesis 4. 21.
Are all the members of the visible church written in the lambs book of life?
Heb. 12. 16.
who then blotted out Cain, Number. 16. 33*
Esau, Romans 9. 30. etc.
Corah, yea and Israel it self? Again, is it true that all those which are
not under this government are dogs, etc. I will not ask what shall become of
these men themselves, but what is become of Peter and the rest that remained
with Christ; and of all the churches of Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, and the
rest, which had not this government and all these offices at any time among
them? for some wanted Deacons, some widows, some vnministring Elders, some
Doctors. To draw to an end. The scriptures that are alleged to prove these
matters are either promises of that full redemption, which is obtained and
shall be perfited unto the church in the day of Christ's appearing, as Esa. 52.
1. and 35. 8. and Revelation 28. 27. or else are they types thereof, as Eze.
44. and the ninth verse, and Zachary 14. 21. Wherefore they cannot prove the
truth hereof in the visible church of God. Also Revel. 22. 15. shows the
estate of the ungodly, which in the day of that general search shall be thrust
out of the presence of God. Which matter Paul does plainly show. Romans 2. 9.
for he threatens oppression and anguishe unto every soul that does evil,
whether Jew or Greek, that is, whether of the visible Church or not. In this
one thing these men may be commended, that seeing their assertions cannot be
warranted by the word of of God, they will do the best they can to make
their sayings true in themselves. For surely they could not possibly give
over themselves unto a doggish disposition, as they do, if they were not
persuaded, that in so doing the conditions of men which have cast off
government should in the^ be made manifest unto the world. We are therefore
to desire for them, that discipline may be put in practice, if happily they may
be brought to some good order.

Thus have we seen how the Author of this Treatise has failed in the
perfourmance of his promise made in the title thereof.

A MANIFESTATION OF THE INCONSTANCY of Brownisme; grathered out of two
Treatises lately dispersed throughout the land.
AThanasius speaking of the Eusebian heretic says that if once he taste the
Arrian schism, Adserap. Epist. 2. de spirit. san.
he will never refrain his tongue from ungodliness: He notes it also as a
common disease in all heretics, that they will be constant in a peevish
wilfulness, least they should be condemned of those whom they have seduced; De
decretis Nic. sincci.
yet in all other things inconstant. Nunc probantes quod dicunt, mox vero
vitupera^tes quod dixerunt ac rursum approbantes, quod paulo ante
calumniabantur. It is no marvel therefore though the factioners of our age
having avouched their own dreams to be the truth of God, do now cry out, yt
they are blasphemed, abused, and sla^dered, if the same be laid to their
charge; and yet in discoursing upon the self-same matters, they will not stick
to justify their first conceits* al which may appear to him that reads the
two pamphlets lately by them published; the one entitled A collection of
certain slanderous Articles, and the other, A collection of certain articles
and conferences, etc. For in these books we shall find the certainty of
doctrine what it is amongst conceited divines. And that the truth may be more
evident, I will set down first their Articles, which sometimes they did hold,
and now are charged with. Secondly, the sore complaints that they make of being
slandered with them by our Bishops. Thirdly, what small cause they have to
complain, considering that they are now resolute to defend the same Articles
unto the death. And lastly the fondness of their assertions; which (for the
avoiding of tediousnes) shall be done either by referring the Reader unto those
places, where these matters are handled elsewhere, or else by plain and
evident proofs.

The Articles which are so injuriously imputed unto them (as they themselves
have published) are these.

1 THat it is not lavvfull to use the Lords prayer publikelie in the church,
The Articles of Brownisme.
for a set form of prayer.

2 Secondly that all set and stinted prayers are mere babbling in the sight of
the Lord, not to be used in public Christian assemblies.

3 Thirdly, that the public prayers and worship of God in England, as it is
by law in the church of England established, is false, superstitious, popish,
and not to be used in any Christian congregation.

4 That the Church of England as it is now established is no entire member of
the church of Christ.

5 That the government of the church of England, as it is now established, is
no lavvfull government, nor christian, but antichristian and popish.

6 That the Sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper, as they are
administered in the church of England, be not true sacraments.

7 That infants ought not to be baptized, according to the form of baptism
ministered now in the church of England, but are rather to be kept unbaptized.

8 Many of them make scruple to affirm, that the Queens majesty has
supreme authority to govern the church of England in cases ecclesiastical
and to make laws ecclesiastical, not contrary to Christ's laws.

9 That the laws ecclesiastical already established by the authority of
the queen and realm, be not lavvfull

10 That if the Prince, or magistrate under her, do refuse or defer to reform
such faults as are amiss in the church, the people may take the reforming of
them into their own hands, before or without her authority.

11 That the presbiterie, or eldership, may for some causes after admonition,
if there ensue not reformation excommunicate the Queen.

12 That the Church of England, as it now stands by law established,
professes not a true Christ, nor true religion, that it has no ministers in
deed, nor Sacraments in deed. Their complaints of being slandred.


Now they complain that they are much abused in being charged with these
matters, for the title of one of the Treatises is, A collection of certain
slanderous articles given out by the bishops, against such faithful Christians,
as they now unjustly detain in their prisons, etc. The Epistle says, that
there are spersed abroad throughout the land, certain articles of the bishops
own devising against these men to bring them into hatred with the whole
land. The Author in answering the said Articles terms them forged positions.
Again, God forbid (says he) that our Magistrates should be guilty of our
innocent blood by such slanderous reports. To be short, master Barrow (as he
himself reports) complained to Doctor Androwes, that he has been
greeuouslie slandred, blasphemed, and accused by spearsed articles, etc.
therefore a great fault there is in those, which offer these persecuted
Christians (for so they term themselves) this great injury; or else in them
who, if the Black-amore could change his hue, would deny their own opinions:
but if they give the lie unto us without just cause, as it shall appear that
they do, by that which follows, and maintain these things, which thus
confide^tly they have denied, in crying out, they are slandered* then will it
also be confessed, that they are not persecuted Christians, but unbridled
factioners. For these are no slanderous positions, as they say, forged against
them by the bishops; but fantastical assertions first devised, and now again
confirmed by themselves, as by their several handling of the several Articles
they do show.

To the first Article therefore they say, That they are not slandered.
that neither the Lords Prayer, nor any other prayer in the scriptures may be
used but by explication; Also, that they serve only for instruction. Again,
That the very form of words as they are in these petitions was given and
instituted as a set and stinted prayer () we find not in the scriptures. Also,
to use it for a set prayer, is (say they) a stinting of the holy Ghost. Now if
these assertions do not agree with the Article, and testify that they do hold
it, they have the greater cause to complain; but I see no difference between
the one and the other.

Now the folly of this Article is manifest in this; that the Lords prayer was
given for the same end, ye other prayers were in the canonical scripture; but
other prayers were not for instruction, as has bin showed before, page 23. I
need not make the conclusion.

And as touching their denying the form of prayer which Christ gave to his
disciples to be his prayer, because we read not that he ever used it: And
their accusing us to be falsifiers of the text, when we call it the Lords
Prayer, If it were not a strife about words, I would say more; whereas now I
will only put them in mind, that we have learned this phrase of the holy
Ghost, who calls the prayers which God has taught, and does approve his
prayers, as Esa. 56. 7. I vvil make them glad (bebeth tepillati) in the house
of my prayer, for there it is called the Lords prayer, not for that he used it,
but because he prescribed it. And why then may not we in like sort call this the
Lords prayer, in as much as he has taught it: Porphirius.
but of this enough, lest it be said of us, para men gar hemin esti logoma
chia, etc

To the 2. article they say, that the canonical prayers commended to us by
Gods spirit, have this only use, that they serve for instruction. And that
our morning and evening prayers are not only a babbling, but apocriphall and
idolatrous, etc. So that neither canonical nor other prayers that are
prescribed, are deemed lawful to be used for prayers in the sight of the Lord.
Whereby it is made manifest, that they are not unjustly charged with this
Article. Which notwithstanding is but a false assertion, considering that set
prayers were used under the law, are not forbidden in the gospel, and are
also used in all reformed churches until this day.

To the 3. article they say, that our liturgy is drawn out of the Popes
portuise, is not only idolatrous, superstious, and a devised worship, but a
bundle of infinite, gross, and blasphemous errors, a Pseudodiathesis, a
counterfeit gospel, an idol, and huge Chaos of long, gathered, and patched
absurdities, a new gospel, a mass book, and what not? How then are they
slandered, when it is said that they account our worship of God, as it is now
established, to be false, superstitious, and popish? But the best is, these
calumniations are not greatly to be regarded: for if they need not to be
ashamed of learning the truth of Donatus, who was a schismatical heretic, we
have as small cause to cast away good things, though it could be proved, as it
is not, that we had taken them from an heretic. And though no work of man,
and so not our book of public prayer can be free from all blemishes, the Lord
reserving this glory to himself, that he will be acknowledged perfectly
wise, and his works only void of imperfection: yet so far is this book
from deserving these great reproaches, that it being compared with the best
treatise that these disturbers have brought forth, the most gross and
blasphemous error which they ca^ prove therein, may be justified in comparison
of many that are delivered for sound doctrine in their pamphlets, if both of
the^ be right understood.

To the 4. they say, that it being subject to the worship aforesaid, and
consisting of al sorts of vnclen spirits, atheists, papists, heretics, etc. it
is not a true member of the body of Christ. It is not the^ blasphemy to charge
the^ with this 4. article. And whether they have cause to hold it upon this
ground or not, shall be evident hereafter.

To the fifth article, It is evident to al men (say they) and confessed of our
enemies, that the ministers, laws, and other ordinances, whereby the parish
assemblies are governed, are not such as Christ appointed to his church, of
pastor, etc. but by such officers, courts, and canons as are hatched from Rome.
Do they not then justify this article, wherein, as in others, they complain
they are slandered? yet in as much as they are constant in it, let the^ prove
by the word of God both their discipline to be good, and also our government to
be Antichristian, which they will hardly afford, considering that before the
time of papacy there were these offices in the church which these men term
Antichrististian, as M. Calvin testifies* Inst. li. 5. ca. 4. se. 4. whose
authority I use with these men, because I find that they themselves have
alleged the same.

To the 6. article they say, that we neither having a lavvfull ministry,
nor faithful holy free people, etc. the sacraments in our assemblies
delivered, are no true sacraments, nor seals with promise. How the^ can these
men without blushing, put this article in the number of forged positio^s, for
considering that they make their judgments known concerning this point, I
marvel more they are not ashamed to deny it, then I do that some of them
Donatist like, have desired to be baptized again. The answer to this will be
easy by that which follows in the answer to the 3 bra^ch of the 5. argument.

To the seventh, they say that no godly Christians separate from the false
church, ought to bring their infants to these parish assemblies, to be
baptized into that fellowship and profession, etc. These words do justify
our Bishops in charging these men with this article. The substance whereof
seeing it does depend upon the former article, the follies of it being
perceived the want of wisdom in this will soon be descried.

To the eight they say that all true christians within her majesty dominions,
acknovvledge her Majesty to be the supreme magistrate and gouernes over all
persons, within the church and without the church, yea, over all causes
ecclesiastical and civil. Which assertion if it had been received of the
whole sect, then it had been a slander in deed, but in as much as in an
assembly of above twenty persons, it was concluded, that her Majesty is not
supreme head of the church, neither has authority to make laws
ecclesiastical in the church: they must acknowledge a dissent of judgment
amongst themselves, or else confess that there was a time when they were of
another opinion, but now they have learned to be more wise, yet the caveat that
is given has a secret meaning, viz. a granting of the latter part of this
article, that her majesty has no authority to make any laws
ecclesiastical. But this being so closely covered, I mind not to see it, I
conceive the best, namely, that as they yield more to her majesty then of
former times they have done, so will they in time grant her that right which is
due unto her royal authority.

Of the ninth article they say, that the laws ecclesiastical vvherevvith
our assemblies are guided, are not derived from the book of God, but culled
out from that great Antichrists canons, orders, and deuillish policies, etc.
that they are the execrable wares of Antichrist statuts of Omry, and not to be
received or obeyed of any that love the Lord Jesus. This article then is
maintained by these men, and not unjustly imputed to them. But as touching this
grievous accusation, we are here also to call to mind, that the laws of God
are only perfect, the decrees and statutes of men, though holy, yet have their
wants. In regard whereof I do acknowledge a want of perfection, but the
deformity of these laws does seem greater, partly by the means of such as
should dispose them more uprightly, and partly by reason of others, who have a
malicious eye in beholding, and an envious tongue in reproching them.

Unto the tenth article, they answer, that they neither look for the
reformation of Babel, our false Church, for so they term it, nor take upon
them to intermeddle with the magistrates sword: but all that will be saved,
must forsake the false church, and by repentance come under Christ's obedience
to serve God aright in his true church, etc. Neither may they neglect the
service of GOD, nor the practice of any part thereof, etc. Though the Prince
should inhibite, etc. So that they affirm, that of their own authority they
are not only to separate themselves from us, but also to prctaise the
discipline which they have fansied, though her majesty should inhibite the
one or command the other: so that this article is not wrongfully fathered
upon them. But before this article be granted unto them as a true position,
they must not only convince our church, as out of the which there ought to be
a departure, but also they must prove that a private man may attempt
reformation in the church, contrary to that which has been spoken.

To the eleventh article they say, first that the presbytery may not
excommunicate any person by their sole power, seeing Christ has given this
power to the whole church. This is made more plain in an other place, where
one of them says, that the least member of the church that is a communicant
has as much interest in all the censures of the church, as the pastor.
Secondly, they affirm that the prince if he will be a member of the church,
must be subject to the censure in the church. The which two positions being
considered, it shall be needless to open what these men would have: but of the
authority of a private man has been spoken sufficiently heretofore.

To the twelfth they answer roundly in this sort, as for your religion, church,
sacraments, etc. we have before shevved the forgerie of them, unto the which
former articles I refer the reader. Even so do I, for I purpose not
palinodiam can^re: only I say that amongst these twelve articles there is not
one, wherewith they are abused or unjustly charged, and therefore are their
exclamations before mentioned vain.

There are in the end of the foresaid pamphlet other twelve articles, not
unlike to the former, which they term slanderous articles also forged against
them, as if they did not hold them, which are these.
1 THey hold that the Lords prayer or any set prayer is blasphemy, and they
never use any prayer for the Queen, as supreme head under Christ of the
church of England.

2 That all set prayers or stinted prays, or read service are but mere
babbling in Gods sight, and plain Idolatry.

3 They teach there is no head or supreme governor of the church of Christ:
and that the Queen has none authority in the church to make laws
ecclesiastical.

4 They teach that a lay man may beget faith; and that we have no need of
public administration.

5 They condemn all coming to Church, al preaching all institution of
Sacraments, and say that all the ministers were sent by God in his anger to
deceive the people.

6 They affirm that the people must reform the church and not tarry for the
magistrate, and that the Primitive church sued not to courts and parliaments,
nor vvaited upon princes pleasures: but we make Christ to attend upon
princes, and to be subject to their laws and government.

7 That the book of common prayer is a pregnant Idol and full of
abominations, a piece of svvines flesh, and abomination to the Lord.

8 They say it is a greater sin to go to the church to publik prayers, then
for a man to lie with his fathers wife

9 Those that vvil not refrain from our churches, preaching or service, they
give unto the devil and exco^municat.

10 They hold it not lavvfull to baptize children among us: they never have
any sacrament among them.

11 They refuse to take an oath to be examined.

12 They will not marry amongst us in our churches, but resort to the Fleet
and to other places to be married by one Greenwood and Barrow.

All which, whether these men are unjustly blamed with them, or do hold them as
firm as they do the former Articles, I leave unto the consideration of all
men. Their judgment concerning the two first articles has been set down
alredie; for they do little differ from those two positions set down in the
former place: Likewise concerning the third article, we have had their mind in
the eight article, so that it shall be needless either to show again that
those are by their desert imputed unto them, or that in maintaining the^ their
warrants be of small force. And the fourth article is so far from being an
ungodly calumniation against the^, yt they hold it not only a possible thing
for a private man to beget faith, but also lawful for him to preach the word
and interpret the scriptures in public assemblies. Wherein a question might be
moved, what is the difference between him yt is Leitourgos, a minister of
Christ in their public function; and every private man in the congregation,
both having equal authority, as well in preaching, as in the censures of the
church? Also, what these private men are to be esteemed in preaching, whether
ministers, or no ministers unto the people whom they teach? mutual
exhortations I grant to be necessary amongst the people of God, whereby the
faith of the godly may be increased; whereof is mention made, Act. 18. 26. 1.
Pet. 4. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. And the evils in others might be restrained;
whereof James speaks, Cap. 5. 19. 20. And Paul 1. Cor. 7. 16. For as I yield
unto the author of this discourse, that these five places of scripture do prove
one and the same matter, so I hope he will call home his wits, and grant unto
me that they prove not a preaching in the public assembly, considering that
the woman, of whom this duty of exhorting is required, 1. Cor. 7. 16. is not
allowed to speak in the congregation. The other places of scriptures alleged,
viz. Luke 10. and 1. Cor. 14. do mention a public dealing with the word, but
neither were the 70. (when Christ sent forth private men) nor yet the others
spoken of in the Corinthes, where he speaks not of all the faithful, but of
all the Prophets; as master Calvin also notes upon that place, that in Luke 8.
39. Act. 8. 4. and 11. 19. can make nothing for this matter until it be proved
that the men there mentioned, first were private men, 2. executed a ministry
in the public assembly, and lastly had no extraordinary sending forth. The
place of Paul Philip. 2. verse 15. and 16. speaks not of preaching, but of
the conversation which should be such in the midst of a froward people, as
might be a means to win them without the word, who had no care of the word.
The other place, 1. Pet. 3. 2. pertains nothing to the matter in question; so
that as yet it remains unproven, that a private man may preach in the
congregation. Of which matter Master Calvin speaks, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3.
sect. 10. and if they may not preach, then can they not beget faith; for none
can be called to the true faith without the preaching of the gospel, as they
themselves have affirmed in their last conference with Doctor Andrews.
Therefore this is not a slanderous article to bring them into hatred unjustly,
but a blind devise to bring confusion into the church.

The fifth article here set down and the seventh, are the same with that, which
was set in the third place in the beginning.

The sixth article, being all one with the tenth of the former sort, has also
been considered of.

To the 8. article they say, that to go to the church to public prayers, is a
high sin against the first table; which being but a begging of the question,
they must first prove our worship to be idolatry, before their calumniation is
to be harkened unto.

To the ninth they say, that they judge not them that are without, but those
that having left all false assemblies, etc. have joined with them, etc. And if
among them any fall into error, them do they excommunicate. As here is no
slander, so may we see the confusion of their doctrine, and their practices to
be accordingly. First, the private man has as much authority in the censures
of their church, as Pastor, Elder, or any other. Secondly, that their church
has authority over those that have joined with them: from these sweet
positions have sprung this excellent harmony, that every man presumes
amongst them to excommunicate one another, as has bin seen, and is daily
manifest, both in the Clinke and other prisons; for as Theodoret says* De fide.
ex ipsa ignora^tiam pestem superbie contraxerunt. Ignorance has brought them
to pride: which he compares unto the plague, because as it infecteth the
body, so pride peruerteth the mind; for from it do spring a stubborn
disobedience toward others, hypocrisy seeking glory in outward appearance,
wilfulness in defending the evil, least their error should appear, discord,
each man laboring to be singular, devise of novelties, etc. And therefore it is
no wonder, to behold the readiness of every of them in casting off
submission; boasting of godliness, and maintaining falsehood: yet whiles every
man affects glory by new devises; the dissension is such, that one sort
excommunicateth another, and the excommunicated do the like for the other, that
even the Papists who behold the same in their prisons, laugh at such confusion.

The tenth article is all one with the sixth in the former number.

To the 11* they say, that they refuse not an oath by the holy name of God, 2.
before a lawful Magistrate, 3. upon just occasion, according to the word: but
our oaths they say, are rash and ungodly. First, by or with a book. Secondly
offered and enforced by the Bishops. Thirdly at their pleasure upon every
occasion, contrary to the word of God, the laws of the land, and derogatorie
to her Majesty's prerogative royal: so that if we say that these men refuse to
take an oath according to the laws of our land, it will appear no slander.

Now concerning their judgment, we agree with them that the Lord condemns all
false, rash, and ungodly oaths: that is, such oaths as are in matters of
untruth, in things of small importance; and by taking any other to witness,
but God only: for the which may be alleged, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Ierem. 4. 2. Heb. 6.
16. and many others. Herein we dissent, first that they seem to allow an oath
before a magistrate only, wherein they condemn the deed of Jacob and Laban,
Genesis 31. 53. and of ^oos to Ruth, Ruth. 3. 13. and of Obadia to Eliah, 1. Reg.
18. 10. who being all but private persons, yet do confirm with an oath the
matters in question between them. Secondly, that they will not acknowledge
those to have authority to take an oath, to whom her majesty has committed
the same. Thirdly, that they condemn the form of swearing before the
magistrate, which by the laws of Englang is used; for as Abraham in urging his
servant Eleazar to swear Genesis 24. 2. and Jacob taking an oath of Joseph Genesis
47. 29. said. Put thine hand under my thigh (a ceremony used among the
Ethiopians and Indians until this day) can not be charged to have used an
idolatrous rite, inasmuch as the oath was not taken by the thigh, but by the
God of heaven and the creator of the earth: so likewise the hand is laid upon
the book, the oath is not urged to be taken by the book, but by him, whom the
doctrine of that book makes known unto us; of both which rites we need not
fear to say: Prophanos ritus non esse, qui Dei gloriae quicquam detraherent;
quia interponitur Dei nomen, etc. Neither do the places of Scripture cited
infringe this: for Amo. 5. 4. is not at all spoken of an oath, but generally
that men should seek out that which is good and not evil. The other three
places, viz. Zoph. 1. 5. Matthew. 5. 34. and 23. 16. disprove not an outward
ceremony in an oath; only Zephanie tells that God condemns those which do
outwardly worship Idols though they keep the heart unto God; and Christ
shows that God is only to be our witness in all our asseuerations: our manner
of taking an oath is not against it. The other calumniations are not worth the
answering.

To the twelfth they say, that the action of matrimony is ^^erely civil,
therefore lawful in all places and at all times to marry in the Lord by the
consent of parents; denying that they have married any, but together with
other faithful, have been witnesses of the same. It is plain therefore that
some have been contracted in the prison, and married, and they have had their
part in the action. But I would have these men to consider: First, that every
soul inciuill and indifferent matters is to submit himself unto the higher
powers; for this lesson we learn of Saint Paul unto the Romans the
thirteenth chapter and the first verse. Secondly, that marriage is a matter
altogether civil: for this these men acknowledge. Thirdly, that her majesty
for the avoiding of inconveniences, has commanded that matrimony should not
be celebrated but in the public assemblies; as by the laws of our land is
manifest.

And then let them speak, and show us what warrant they have from God, or
comfort to their consciences in these ungodly and disordered marriages.

Now therefore we may conclude that neither the twelve positions in the
beginning, nor the twelve articles in the end of this first treatise, are
forged positions, slanderous articles and ungodly calumniations considering
that these men do maintain them: but so wicked assertions, that it may be
truly said of the teachers of them. Thou do love evil more then good, lies
more then to speak the truth, etc. the two and fiftith Psalm and the third
verse.

There is a thirteenth article, whereof they greatly glory, that it has been
passed over with silence, that neither tithes, nor set livings are a matter
warrantable in the word of God; the one being Leuiticall and therefore
abrogated, the other without stay to lean upon in the Scriptures, and
therefore to be taken away, and that Christ and his apostles persuaded (...)
^^fficiencie, but did not condition for any certainty. To whom I answer,
that if a sufficient maintenance is to be had for the ministry, it is
requisite some order be taken for them how they may come by it: for if it be
left to the discretion of men, it will be short enough, in regard whereof the
Lord ordained a set living for the Levites, not in the example of Michah his
Leuit, with whom these men do sport themselves, but in his ordinance of tithes,
etc. which as they were ceremonial to them that paid them, being instructed
thereby that the increase of al thing is of God to whom praise is due for the
same: so to them that received the same it was a means, whereby the certainty
of their maintenance might be had. And this was not left to the discretion of
the people, but every man was appointed what to pay. 1. Cor. 9. 13.
Do ye not know (says Paul) that they which minister about the holy things,
eat of the things of the temple, and they which wait at the altar are
partakers of the altar? He proceeds in applying this unto the ministry of
the Gospel: ver. 14.
So also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel. Therefore as under the law there was a set maintenance
for the priest: so under the Gospel there may be the like for the ministers
thereof, except we could find the people better affected now, then they were
at that time unto the ministry. They are to rest upon the good will of the
breethren, say they. But how is this proved? For to speak without warrant of
the word in teaching innovation is fondness. But I know that it will be
sooner granted to the minister to have a certain stay of living, then that he
should have the same in tithes, for that was ceremonial, and therefore to
continue it, is to deny Christ to be come in the flesh. I answer that the
paying of tiths was ceremonial, but there was an other use of them also: so
was the temple ceremonial, wherein the people assembled together unto the
worship of God. Now if any man should use the temples (I mean the places of
prayer) or the paying of tithes as ceremonial, it were a denial of the
abrogation of the ceremonial law, but the temple having an other use, namely,
that it might be a convenient place for the people to meet in for the exercise
of the word, etc. which is not ceremonial, it is no denying that Christ is
come in the flesh, though in this respect we do continue this use of them, so
the tithes being not only ceremonial, but having this use also that the
ministry might be maintained, no such injury is offered unto Christ in the
retaining of them for this end only. And thus this glorious article may go
together with his fellows, all of them deserving glory alike.

A SHORT ANSWER UNTO CERTAIN ARGVMENTS WHICH are used by the Brownists, to
prove the Church of England not to be the true Church of God.
IN the end of the second book of their conferences, there is added a short
treatise, as the sum of those matters, which in the conferences are said to
have been handled: the manner of which discourse is this. In the top of the
page this scripture is prefixed.

Brownist.
The righteous men they shall judge the^ after the manner of harlots, and after
the manner of murderers, for that they are harlots, and blood is in their
hands. Ezec. 23. 45.

Answer.
For as much as it not expressed wherefore this place of Scripture is here
placed, I will add this unto it: leaving the application of it unto them, that
understand the meaning of the former.

Thus says the Lord God, because that Moab and Seir do say, behold the
house of Judah is like unto all the heathen, therefore behold I will open the
side of Moab, even of the cities of his cities; I say, in his frontiers, with
the pleasant country Beth-ieshimoth Baalmeon and Kariathaim. I will call the
men of the East against the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, so
that the Ammonites shall no more be remembered among the nations, and will
execute judgments upon Moab, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Ezech.
25. verse. 8. 9. 10. 11.

Brownist.
Before we can judge of the false church, it is expedient, that we discern the
true church, etc.

Answer.
Here is confirmed that which was spoken page 11. viz. that the matters
mentioned in that treatise are so necessarily required, that the want of any
of them takes away the esse of the church: for here in a few lines is knit
up, that which more at large was then delivered: yet some things at the first
not thought upon, are here added. And both the old and new matters jointly and
severally are propounded, as having strength sufficient to overthrow not our
church only, but all others also that are not framed, according to their rule.
I will answer them therefore in that order, which the author has used in
drawing these matters into arguments. The first argument of theirs is this.

Brownist.
Their church consists not of a company of faithful people, Ier. 31. 34.
but of multitude of profane people, Act. 10 43. and 15. 9.
therefore they are not the true church.

Answer.
Seeing the propositions both of this and the arguments following are set down
before it should seem that of purpose they are now omitted; yet to make the
matter plain, the argument is after this manner.

The true planted and right established church of Christ is a company of
faithful people, but the church of England is not a company of faithful
people. Therefore not a true planted and rightly established church.

Whereunto I answer, that the assumption is with great insolency set down, as
if magistrates, ministers and people were without exception of any, a flock of
goats, a company of hell hounds. Likewise the proposition sauoreth of
Anabaptistry, whiles it admits none to be members of the visible church, but
faithful people only. But concerning the assumption, I grant, that some of
Cain his brood, of Cham his conditions and of Esau his qualities, are in our
church, even as there are amongst these persecuted Christians some of the
scholars of Shimei, some of Corah his company, some Ismaels, etc. Herein is
the difference between their church and ours, that we account of such beasts
as they are, though we labor by the word and other means to bring them unto
repentance; but if their Atheists can but say that discipline is good (though
they know not what it means) if they will heave at magistracy, and rail upon
the established government, they must be presently canonized and registered in
the book of the faithful, whatsoever their conditions are otherwise. In the
proposition I see nothing which has not been answered page 12. etc. only here
are certain scriptures cited in the margent, so far from proouing the matter
in question, that if they be understood of every member of the visible church,
to prove them faithful, we may with as good reason from the same places
conclude, that neither the public ministry, nor private admonitions are to be
used in the visible church, for these are the words of Jeremy: And they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother saying,
know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them to the
greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, etc.

Brownist.
They have made no separation from the heathen of the land, but all are
received and retained in the bosom of their churches, therefore, etc.

Answer.
This is the argument. The true church is a company of people separated from
the unbelievers, and heathen of the land, but the church of England has made
no separatlon, etc. therefore, etc.

The proposition is denied, if such a separation be understood as is spoken of
Matthew. 25. 32. as has bin proved page 11. 12. etc. but if they take it, as it
is in the place by them selves alleged, Leuit. 20. 24. we do grant it: for
Israel is there said to be separated from that heathen, yet was it not
separated from all unbelievers, only it was in respect of their outward
profession. The assumption in the former sense is granted, but otherwise it is
evident to be a mere slander, for neither are any received into our church,
except they join with us in outward profession, neither are their children
baptized, except the parents, or some for the parents do promise to see the^
brought up in the knowledge of God, and faith in Christ Jesus.

But they prove this assumption after this sort: They were all (say they) by
the blowing of her majesty's trumpet at her coronation, In their first and
third conference with M. Hutchinson.
in one day received without conversion of life by faith and repentance, and
they and their seed ever since generally received to your sacraments,
without any separation from the world.

Before I make answer unto this assertion, I would learn (if I might) how
these men would have the people to come unto an established church at the
first. For they tell us, 1. That there can be no true church, until every
member thereof has by faith and repentance separated himself from the
unbelievers. In their first conference with master Hutchinson.
But how shall they come unto this faith? for they tell us also, 2. That none
can have true faith and repentance, but such as are called thereunto by the
preaching of the gospel. And how shall they have this Gospel preached unto
them? 3. There must be sheep before there can be a flock; there must be a
flock before there can be a shepherd, because the people must choose their
Pastor: Ibidem.
so that they affirm that the people must be brought to the faith, before they
can have a Pastor, and yet they cannot have faith without preaching. Which way
then shall this preaching be had, for the attaining unto faith?

The Magistrate (say they) ought to compel the Infidels to hear the doctrine
of the church, Conference with master Cooper. pa. 59.
and also with the approbation of the church to send forth meet men, with
gifts and graces to instruct the Infidels, being yet no ministers, or officers
unto them: but in the time of Popery, they affirm that the people could not
be the church; and therefore I would be resolved in these two points: First
where the magistrate in such a case should have a church to give consent unto
his sending forth of such teachers to instruct infidels? And thus have they led
us about, and have brought us to the same place where we were at the first. And
secondly what they are, which thus are sent by the magistrate and the church,
if not ministers of the word unto those infidels whom they teach? and herein we
require an answer by the word.

Now to our assertion, concerning our turning from Popery at the blowing of
her majesty's trumpet. I doubt not but this will be granted, that some of Q.
Mary's subjects believed, and made a bold confession of their faith, who to the
joy of all christian hearts in the land, remain in our church until this
day. Others there were like unto Nichodemus in his coming to Christ by night,
and in his faint defending of the truth (who if the Lord should for our
unthankfulness send a scourge) would with Nichodemus make a bold confession of
their love to Christ Jesus. So that all were not Pagans that embraced the
Gospel at the sounding of her majesty's trumpet, Ioh. 32. and 7. 50.
and being faithful, Ioh. 19. 39.
the seals of the covenant did pertain unto their seed. But some (it may be)
joined for fear in the outward profession (who these were, the searcher of
man's heart does know:) Ios. 5. 3.
So did Ismael in Abraham's house, Caine in Adams house, and these unfaithful
Israelites under Joshua, when at his only commandment they were all
circumcised. There was therefore such a separation at her majesty's entrance
unto the Crown, as the visible Church in all ages from the beginning has
afforded.

Brownist.
They are not gathered in the name of Christ, but in the name of Antichrist
whom they obey, as shall afterward appear, Therefore, etc.

Answer.
The Argument is this.

The true church is gathered in the name of Christ, but the church of England
is not, etc.

Therefore not the true church.

The proposition is granted; the Assumption is denied, in as much as we do
renounce the doctrine, government, and worship of Antichrist; as shall be showed
in the places where they labor to prove the contrary.

Brownist.
They worship not God truly, but after a false and idolatrus manner, as
witnesses their Popish liturgy, their stinted book of common prayers,
Therefore, etc.

The Argument stands this.

The true church worshipeth God truly, Answer.
but the church of England does not,

Therefore it is no true church.

I grant the proposition, and yet with this caveat, that not every member of
the visible church performs this duty, and that the true worship of God,
offered unto him by man, thorough the frailty of man is not without great
wants. The matter of the assumption has been dealt in, Brownist.
page 21.

And they receive not, nor obey not Christ as their king, priest, and prophet,
Therefore, etc.

This argument is divided into three several parts in this manner.

Not as their king, rejecting his government, and receiving and standing under
the antichristian yoke of their Popish gruernment, Therefore, etc.

The force of the reason is this. Answer.


The true church obeys Christ as her king, and reteineth his government; but
the church of England does not, Therefore no true church.

We are to remember that the question is of outward government, which has been
showed page 25. not to be the life of the church, but the word only: Hereunto
we ad their own confession, that the true church may be without sacraments,
which we hold as necessary as outward government. But we are here charged with
a double crime, viz. with the casting of Christ's government, and with the
receiving the yoke of Antichrist. To the first whereof, I answer, that if
pastors, Doctors and Elders, and Deacons be the government of Christ, we have
it; in as much as the matter required in all these offices is retained with us;
if these be abused by men, it is not sufficient to prove that we have them not
at all, if strife be about the changing of the names, wise men will condemn it
for folly. To the second I answer, that her majesty is supreme gouernesse
over us in all causes both ecclesiastical and civil; and therefore has
authority to appoint such governors, to confirm that government, which (being
not contrary unto Gods word) shall seem meet unto her. Now this government
which we have, else where is showed to have been for the preservation of
discipline and avoiding confusion, before the time that Antichrist bare sway in
the church. I grant that afterward he abused it, so did he many other matters:
and yet they are not to be counted Antichristian (having not their beginning of
him) when they are restored unto their first use. But this one calumniation
brings forth these fruits: First, in teaching that every private man has
authority in the election of ecclesiastical governors, or else the government
is Antichristian, the private man is taught to intrude into her highness right,
to whom this matter was granted by Act of Parliament, 1. Eliz. 1. Again, in
dissuading from the obedience of this authority, the commandment of God is
made no commandment. To. 13. 1. which wills that every soul be subject unto
the higher powers. And as Absolon with David, so do these men deal with her
majesty, in seeking to alienate the hearts of good subjects from her, by crying
out against her government, promising better things if they be harkned unto,
that me^ might be brought to join in their rebellions. We shun the Jesuits,
who from house to house do labor to draw the people into a loathing of their
present estate, this native schism is so much the more to be looked unto, as
it comes with a greater show of godliness, and yet indeuoreth to work
confusion, by these Jesuitical proceedings.

Brownist.
Not as their Priest, sacrilegiously profaning his name with their idolatry,
prostituting his blood, and making him a Priest and sacrifice to infidels, and
the most wicked offenders.

Answer.
The Argument is thus.

The true church receives Christ as their Priest, but the church of England
does not, because it prophaneth his name, etc. Therefore no true church.

The assumtion is false, for the doctrine of our church is, that Christ is the
only Priest, who by his own blood entered in once into the holy place, and
obtained eternal redemption for us? and therefore that men should walk worthy
of so holy a calling as Christ has vouchsafed to set them in; neither in their
worshipping of God, profaning his name; not by their ungodliness abusing his
sacraments, wherein the practice by our church commanded is, that profane and
ungodly men be repelled from the same. It is not therefore a matter to be
generally laid unto the charge of the whole church, that they profane his
name, etc. I grant indeed that the Pastor may through ignorance, negligence, or
some other evil occasion deliver the sactament to an unworthy man, which as it
is a sin in the receiver, so may it be as great a sin in the deliverer, yet
will this be a weak reason to convince the whole church of prostituting the
blood of Christ, denying his priesthood, profaning his name, etc. seeing that
Judas was partaker of the supper of the Lord, and yet the whole company were
not polluted thereby.

Brownist.
Not as their prophet, giving no obedience to his word, using it as a mantell
to cover their sin, rather then as a rule vvherby to direct their lives, not
seeking a true ministry, but maintaining a false; of which sort the whole
ministererie of the land is, which are permitted to teach in their public
places, to whom they give ear.

Answer.
The Argument is this.

The true church receives Christ as her prophet, but the church of England
does not, etc.

Therefore, etc.

The assumption of which argument they prove thus. First, because the church of
England gives no obedience to his word. Secondly, because they use it as a
mantle to cover their sin: and thirdly because they seek not a true
ministry but maintain a false.

It has heretofore been granted, that the best churches have had some bad
members in them, whereof some in Athiesme despised the word, and others in
hypocrisy made it a cloak to cover their ungodliness, wherein the church of
England goes not scotfree; but for the wickedness of some to condeme the whole
were very hard; and so sharply to censure all, were intolerable. Yet these
men do it, when they affirm that no obedience is given to the word: as if all
from the highest to the lowest were infidels and pagans, without God, without
the knowledge of his word, without conscience in any thing, without the fear
of God. This is the meekness of an arrogant spirit. The bull sent by Pope Pius
the fifth to curse her Maieiestie and the land, was not unlike unto it; the
calumniation is the same in both, and therefore master Jewel has framed an
answer meet for both.

Now as touching our ministry which is set as the third argument of our
disobedience; the defects thereof are noted to be either in their election, or
in their subjection to a false government. Their election and ordination (say
they) are not by the Lords holy and free people. This has been answered page
45. Also they are made in nubibus (say they) but if these factioners had not
made their own ministers in tenebris, they might with less impudency have
blamed the making of ours. Confer. with Spering.
Besides they say, that at her majesty's entrance unto the crown our ministers
were set over the people without an outvvard calling. Wherein I will not oppose
the ministry of Luther and Calvin, whose ministry they cannot deny to be
warrantable, page 53. of their book, and yet they had not a better calling
then our men had; but I dare avouch the calling of our men unto the ministry
at the entering in of her majesty unto the crown, to be the self same that
even our adversaries have warranted, page 59. of the aforesaid treatise, viz.
the magistrate did send them to instruct the unbelievers: but (say they) they
were no ministers unto them. Then let them tell us what other ministry this
might be, and what warrant they have for it in the word, or else they give us
just cause to complain that they are filled with conceits.

Now the government under the which they execute their ministry is such,
Instit. lib. 4. sect. 4.
that master Calvin acknowledges the antiquity thereof to be great, and says
that it was in use before the time of Papacy, and the use thereof to be good,
viz. ad disciplinae conseruationem, for the upholding of discipline, and for
the avoiding of confusion. Conf. with Sper. page 10.
But master Barrow says, that the Queen and Parliament do wickedly in giving
this authority unto the Bishops, which they have committed unto them: the
same is published by his own procurement unto the view of all men, who reading
it, and considering of it, may see the dealings of master Barrow, I say no
more. But to make an end with this Argument, notwithstanding all the exceptions
before said, the Church of England acknowledges Christ as their Prophet, and
for conscience sake does reverence gods word taught by the ministry thereof,
from the which who so turns away his ear, even his prayers are abominable,
Pro. 28. 9. And also the sacraments delivered by them, considering that God
has joined them as seals unto his word; whereof has been spoken, page 27.

Brownist.
Their people are not knit together as members each of other in one
congregation, but both roue, and go, assemble and depart at their pleasure
when they will, whether they will, and as they vvil themselves, as also live
in continual disorder.

Answer.
The Argument is this.

The true church is joined together as members of one body, but the church of
England is not, but does roue and go, etc. Therefore, etc.

In the proposition I find these absurdlties, first that the visible church is
tied to be all of one assembly or congregation, in which respect the division
of our church into several parishes, is an eyesore unto them. Secondly, that
the inordinate proceedings of some in the church, should prove a nullitie of
the church; as if the loss or unsoundness of a member could take away the
esse from the body. Thirdly, that the spiritual union of the member in the
whole church is so required in every several assembly, as if it were as
great a sin for a man to depart from one assembly unto another, as to
dismember himself altogether from the whole body, which is the church. Al
which are so gross, that a censurer does better become them, then a confuter.

As for our church the disorders therein are too many, yet were they exceeding
and intolerable if they were so general, as this accuser thereof has
avouched, viz. amongst all men, at all times and in all their actions: but an
Orator can do much in persuading, and a slanderer will do more in abusing.

Brownist.
Their parishes are not ordered and governed by such officers as Christ has
appointed to his church, have no true pastors, teachers, elders, deacons,
releeuers, but in stead of these they remain most seruilely subject to the
Antichristian government of their Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors,
Archdeacons, Deacons, Commissaries, Doctors, proctors, aduocats, notaries,
registers, pursuiuants, cursitors, summoners, etc. and from the Apostolical
seat of the Bishops, they receive an Antichristian and a false ministry, as
their parsons, vicars, curats, hirelings, lecturers, mercenary preachers, etc.
which together with this people stand bound and subject to these bishops,
and their popish courts, of high commission, of faculties, of arches, of
prerogative, of delegates, of their commissaries, etc. Therefore etc.

Answer.
The argument is this.

The true church is ordered by such officers and and laws, as Christ in his
last will and testament has thereunto ordained. But the church of England is
not ordered thus, Therefore etc.

The first argument has been infringed page 25. where it was proved that
outward discipline is not the life of the church, also page 26. and 70. where
it was showed that doctors and widows were not necessary in every
congregation. Whereunto I add this, that although a government by elders, etc.
was established in some churches in the Apostles times, yet as page 62. has
been said, it remains as yet unproven, that this government is to remain
unchangeable in all ages: they tell us that Christ was as faithful in his
house as Moses was, I grant it, yea and more faithful. Therefore (say they) he
has set down an outward government as well as Moses did. This also will I
grant the^, yet remains a third matter, viz. that the Brownistes cast their
heads together again, and describe this government better then as yet they
have done, and prove out of Gods word not only what it is, but that it is
necessarily to be had in all ages alike, yea and that the want of it does
convince a people to be no true church unto God. All which being once
performed, their proposition shall be granted.

The second part of this argument is confirmed by these four circumstances
that we have no true pastors, whereof has been spoken very often.

Secondly, that the government by Archbishops etc. is antichristian. A matter
answered page 110. but in affirming our government to be in the power of
proctors, advocates, notaries, registers, pursuiuants, summoners, etc. whom
these evil tongued men, do know to have no authority in hearing of causes and
giving sentence, bewraieth the corruption of their hearts.

Thirdly, that our ministry is antichristian a matter handled, page 125. the
scurrilitie in calling them hirelings, mercenary preachers, etc. deserves no
answer; the names of parson, vicar, etc. does not make a difference in the
ministry, but in their maintenance.

Fourthly, we are subject to the popish courts, as high commission etc.
whereunto I answer that al these courts have their authority from her majesty,
though some of the^ more directly then the other. In consideration whereof, to
call the lest antichristian is arrogant, but to join the^ all in one sentence,
and to dissuade her majesty's subjects from yielding obedience unto any of
the^, it will be found an act of no good subject: yet for mine own part I
purpose not to give judgment in the matter, I leave it to such as are
acquainted with the law, only I will propound the case, which is this.

The high court of Parliament has agreed that the queen, her hignes and
successors, kings and queens of this realm, shall have full power by letters
pattents under the great seal, to name and authorize when, as often, and for
so long time as her highness, her heirs or successors shall think meet such
person or persons as she or they shall think meet to execute under her, etc.
all manner jurisdictions, privileges, and preheminences in any wise concerning
any spiritual jurisdiction within England and Ireland, etc. 1. Eliz. 1.

Now her majesty by the authority aforesaid has granted her letters
pattentes under the great seal for the two courts of high commission and
delegates. And by the said authority first from the Parliament, and then from
her majesty these two courts do stand, and not by any other right or
authority whatsoever: yet these two courts of high commission and of delegates
are here termed popish and antichristian courts, and the people are condemned
to be antichristian, which yield obedience unto them. This therefore is the
case.

Whether it touches her majesty or not, that libels railing upon, and calling
her highness authority (which is warranted by her broad seal) popish,
antichristian, etc.

Brownist.
These assemblies are not ruled by the old and new testament, but by the
canons, injunctions and decrees of those antichristian and popish courts:
therefore etc.

Answer.
The Argument is this.

The true church is ruled by the old and new testament, but the church of
England is not etc. Therefore etc.

If Christ has in his last will set down a perfect government for his church
(as they say he has) there is little use of the old Testament for direction
of discipline under the Gospel. But this Argument being in effect the same
with the former, needs no other answer then it had.

Brownist.
These people stand not in and for their Christian liberty, but all of them
remain in bondage to these Egyptian and Babylonishe yoakes, yielding
obedience unto these courts, and their canons. Therefore, etc.

Answer.
The Argument is this.

All and every of the true Church stand in and for their christian liberty,
to practice whatsoever God has commanded them, etc. But in the church of
England they stand not for their christian liberty, Therefore, etc.

Answer.
We have seen page 49. and 50. that the private man does pass the bonds of
his calling in presuming to deal with public reformation. Again, it was
said page 45. that in the visible church it does not always fall out, that
every member has that freedom which is requisite in the performance of their
christian duties, of his calling. The proposition therefore is false. As for
the assumption in differing nothing from the three former, it does commend the
great facility of the author, who in resoning in so small variety of matter
is able to frame so great a change of arguments which yet being considered
of, do appear all one in effect.

Brownist.
These assemblies have not the power which Christ has given unto his church
unto the worlds end, and all the powers of earth and hell cannot take from
them, viz. to bind and loose, and to reform things that are amiss, but are
driven to the Commissarie courts, Therefore, etc.

Answer.
The Argument is this.

The true church has power to execute the censures of the church, but the
church of England has not, Therefore etc.

The proposition fails, for the true church is sometimes without outward
government, whereof read page 25. and so consequently without the power which
this man speaks off, for I know he will not restrain this power of binding
and loosing though he might, unto the ministry of the word, whereof
notwithstanding Christ speaks, Ioh. 20. 23. saying Whose sins soever ye
remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are retained.

As for the assumption it is most untrue; for we have not only the power of
Gods word, which he has given unto his ministry to bind and to loose thereby,
but also the censures of the church in respect of outward government. I grant
that every several congregation has not this power: and I dare affirm that
in no age it can be proved that every several congregation had this
authority, but even in those churches which had an Eldership, the same was not
in every assembly, but diverse congregations were ordered by one senyorie,
therefore to say that because every private congregation has not this power,
therefore it is not at all in the church, is a childish kind of reasoning.

Brownist.
These assemblies cast out satan by the power of satan, namely, by these Imps
of Antichrist the Bishops, commissaries and priests: Therefore they are not, and
for all their reasons several and joined, cannot be held in any Christian
judgment the true church of Christ.

Answer.
In this last Argument is granted unto us that which before was denied, viz.
that our church has power of casting out; but it fails in the manner; for
(if they say true) this power is not from Christ, but from the imps of
Antichrist, etc. unto which accusation I answer: the end wherefore men are
cast out from amongst us by the doctrine of our church should be, that the
offender by being deprived of the seals of the covenant, might be brought unto
repentance. Now for the ordering hereof, the people are not in the weighty
matters of the church to have their voice, page 47. etc.

And a presbytery in every congregation cannot be had, page ^8. therefore
neither election, ordination, excommunication nor other censures of the Church
are to be committed to every particular congregation. As for this unchristian
dealing in condemning for Antichristian whatsoever is not according to their
humor, it has been often answered. Some defectes there are in our government,
we challenge no perfection; some corruption there is oftentimes in such as have
the ordering of it, I defend not all. But in this I would be resolved, if we
by the power of Satan cast out Satan, by what power do they cast out Satan,
that are themselves by your children committed to Satan? For the most corrupt
excommunication in our church should be wronged, if it should be compared with
the excommunications that come from the^, who by their fellows were before
excommunicated in their persons. Nay, they are to be justified in comparison
of the best proceedings that have been amongst these rash censurers.

Brownist.
Infinite were the reasons which from these several heads, as likevise from
these particular transgressions and defaults might be drawn: but the best
argument to comfort and cut up this trumperie at once, is according to the
commandments of God, to preserve our bodies and souls free from these
abominations, by a speedy separation and wvithdravving our selves from
amongst them, and to confute their last and only argument whereby they
uphold their ruinous kingdom, namely, their penal law, by Christian
patience, and an upright and godly life.

The conclusion is, that much more might be said against our Church: and I
believe it if the matter had not failed, for the author was willing unto it, as
may appear by his making many arguments of that which with as great credit
might have been knit up in one: and also by his bitterness from the first to
the last. Well, his modesty is great in that he staieth here, and his dealing
is as commendable in arming himself with patience against the penal law, which
he calls our only argument. But what is the reason that he so speaks? It
should seem, it is because he had sent these foresaid arguments to some
learned men, who would not vouchsafe to answer them; but his challenging of
the learned is ridiculous, they are ashamed to deal with so sottish a schism
as this is. In deed the civil law is the fittest argument to be used with
these unreasonable men. Yet other arguments are used both against the treatise
of their Church, and against their other follies, if they will persevere, lest
their disciples do condemn them for seducers, I wish them to lay aside their
former bitterness, and to deal strictly with the matter in question. Many that
are far inferior to those who have been challenged, will be found able (I doubt
not) to overthrow their buildings, and to prove them deceitful workmen.

FINIS.

