Whimzies: OR, A NEW CAST OF CHARACTERS.

Nova, non nota delectant.

LONDON, Printed by F. K. and are to be sold by Ambrose Rithirdon at the sign
of the Bullshead in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FRIEND, Sir Alexander Radcliffe, the accomplishment of his
noblest Wishes.
SIR, SOme have I heard affirm, (but more tarily, I hope, then truly) that to
be a Knight and a Scholar, was the Mirror of Knighthood: howsoever the Tenet
hold, sure I am, that you are this Mirror. Being as you are ennobled by
des^ent, so enabled by desert; a patron to the le^rned professant, and in all
le^ing a ^ich proficient. This i^ was, and this only, which first induced me,
contrary to that native di^position everbred in me, so freely to tender my
self to the knowledge of you; and which has ever since stamped in me so
deep an impression of you. Let others affect your Title, while I live to
honor your self. The generous and free goodness of your mind, is my object,
than which it is not possible to treat of a more attractive subject. This is
to be incomparably valued above any outward good. Let this serve for the
prelude, not to delude you, for you are wiser; but to express my self really
unto you, whose noble s^ccesse I do intimately tender. You may be pleased to
remember that at my last intercourse with you, it was my promise upon a
precedent purpose to address some small memorial to public view under your
Name, in lieu of those many respects which I bear you. Which promises, I must
ingenuously conf^sse, (as in this kind, so in all others justly grounded) it
has been ever my course religiously to observe. For in coming short of
performance in what we promise, argues either a precipitate rashness in the
promiser, or inconstancy in his resolves, or forgetfulness in what he
undertakes. It is recommended unto us by authenticke story, that it was the
usual observation both of a Roman Emperor, and of an English Monarch, never to
promise any thing but what they registered and set down with their own hands:
which rule requires imitation even of in^eriours. An Expression whereof I have
here made in the tender of this Alphabeticall gradation of Characters, to your
generous and ingenious veiw. Neither (indeed) without a preceding ground of
reason did I make choice of this Subject. For howsoever the argument may seem
much bet: yet in my opinion may it be much bettered both in style and
substance. Many Characters (I confess) have been published both in former
times, when the ignorance of the age could scarcely render the ambiguitie of
the word: as likewise in these more refined times of ours, wherein, as in habit
and attire, so in discourses of this nature, nothing but rarities (be they
never so light) can afford delight. But to give them their true and native
Character, they relished more of Aphorism. than Character. For to suite them
with their approvedst and retentivest title, what else are Characters but
stampes or impressures, noting such an especial place, person, or office; and
leaving such a mark or cognizance upon it, as the conceit may neither taste of
too much lightness; nor the cloze of so witty an observance leave too much
bitterness, nor the whole passage or series incline to too much dullness?
Truth is, he that should strive in each particular, either for Style or
Subject, to please the various palats of all men, would prove an excellent
Taylour to fashion this age; and might in time make a Coat for the Moon.
Strong lines have been inrequest; but they grew disrelishing, because they
smelled too much of the Lamp and opinionate singularity. Clinchings likewise
were held nimble fl^shes; but affect^tion spoiled all, and discovered their
levitie.

Characterisme holds good concurrence, and runn^s with the smoothest current in
this age; so it be not wrapped up in too much ambiguitie. He writes best,
that affects least; and effects most. For such as labor too intentively to
please themselves, they for most part make it their labor to please none but
themselves. This has been ever my maxim, that singularity and affectation
are Antypodes to Iudgem^nt and Discre^ion. Selfe-opinion mak's a man's self his
own Minion. He is the true Emblem of Narcissus, and doates more on his own
shadow, then an others substance. But I will not look too much on these
Glo-wormes; they are soiles to the purest paper: leaving their spongie Labors
to the worst of censure. For these few digested papers, (wherein you shall too
highly prize me, if at vacant and retired hours you daigne only to peruse
me) I dare confidently avouch, you shall find me to have preferred the pi^h
before the rind, and caused the Maid to attend upon her Mistrisse. My
provision was how to furnish the maine building: for other ornaments or
imbellishments of art, they tendered themselves; they were not much sought
after. Now it rests that this Character or token (for so the word may import)
of my true zeal, unto your Noble self, retain that impression in you, which
he retains that honors you. These are more lasting memorialls than material
jewels, and to the judicious more imcomparably precious. The richest Cabinet is
the mind; the treasures thereof purer than the Oar of any Mine. which when
we communicate to our friend, we make him really ours, we enfeoffe him in
ours; yea, we incorporate him in us, and make him individually ours. So may we
ever be, till I surcease to be

Clitus-Alexandrinus.

To the equal Reader.
CHaracters in this age, may be properly resembled to Squibbs or Crackers; they
give a Crack and a Flash, and so dye: Or to passing fair faces, but
ill-fauoured; at which the more we look, the (...) we like. Or to raw and
ill-drest meat, which procures in the longing appetite a loathing; being to be
egested long before it come to be digested, Or to the growth of Mushrom's, who
no sooner flourish than perish: Or to the first flourishes of trees, whose
bloomes and blossoms are so tende^, as they cannot repel the violent
distemper of any Weather. Thus ev^ry post displaies their post^re. But here be
fruits ( Equal Reader, for so I would have thee) of former setting, deeper
rooting and longer promising. If thou be ignorant, here is an A. B. C. for
thee, in this Table Alphabeticall. If solid, here are plenty of passages,
moving and material. What is wanting then but thy equal acceptance? In
confidence whereof, CLITVS will retire, to call forth this Jury, which consists
of four and twenty; but neither so good men nor true as the State would have
them.

WHIMZIES: OR, A NEW CAST OF CHARACTERS.
1. An Almanack-maker
IS an annual Author, no less constant in his M^thod then ma^r; enlarging his
yearly Edition with a figure or cipher. He cites as familiarly, as if they
were his familiars, Euclid, Ptolomi^, Ticho-Brache, etc. But* believe it, many
have spoke of Robin Hood, that never shot in his bow. He scrapes acquaintance
of a fortu^ate gentleman, one (...), whom he erron^ously takes for brother of
that feigned knight Parismus; whose name he interprets to be, Bo^i ominis
captatio, whereof he himself for his part, was never capable. Horizons,
Hemisphear^s, Horoscopes, Apogaeum's, Hypogaeum's, Perigaeum's, Astrolabes,
Cycles, Epicycles are his usual dialect; yet I am pe^swaded they may be
something to eat, for ought he knows. His frequent repetition of Mazzaroth,
(...), Orion, and the Pleiades* proclaim him highly versed in the
astrologicall (...) of Io^, whom he resembles in a Parallel line of Poverty,
rather than patience. He has the true situation and just proportion of the
p^incipall Angles or houses of the Heaven or Firmament: yet can hardly pay
house rent for his ow^e. Forty shillings is his yearly pension upon every
impression: but his vailes are meaner, unless he have the Art for stolen goods
to cast a figure: wherein, trust me, he h^'s a pretty smattering. He walks in
the Clouds, and prates as familiarly of the in^luence of the Moon, as if h^e
had b^ene the man that was in her. He would make you believe he^ had a smacke
of Poetry, by the verses which he ^ixeth above every month, but do not
credit him, he is guiltless of that art: only some stolen shreads he has
^aked out from the kenn^ll of other Authors, which most (...) he assumes to
himself, and makes an additament to his Labors. Whole Summer nights long he
lies on his back, as if he were melldew'd or Planet-strucke, gazing on the
starrie gallerie: and would make you believe that he knew the names and marks
of all the Oxen that draw Charles waine. He talks much of the 12. Signs, yet
I am confident, that one might persuade him that the Cardinals hat, or Sarazens
head were one of them. He keeps a terrible quarter with his Jacobs staff,
which he conjectures was first found at Jacobs Well; as his erring Erra pater
informs him: for other Cabals he disclaimes them. The Memorable work of
co^veying the N^w River from Ware to London* was the issue of his brain, if
you may believe him: yea, he will tell you, the state is much engaged to his
notions. He ha'^ some small scruple of Physician in him, and can most
Empyrically discourse of the s^ate of your Body: but had he st^re of Patients,
he would slaughter more than a Pest^lence. He has a little judgment in your
Christ: and which is best season for (...): yet he knows not, whether
Phlebotomie be a man or a woman. Not a highw^y m^n in Europe can direct you
better in the Road: all which he has by instira^ion, for he scarce ever (...)
out of smoke o'^h City. He has excellent observations for planting, plo^ng,
setting, sowing* with other ^xperimentall rule^ of (...), yet never was Master
of ^ Plough in all his ti^e. Ce^taine (but most (...)) g^erall Notions he
(...) of the seas^ns of weathers, which he express^th in such strange and
unbaptized language, as like the Delph^an sword, it may cut either way. About
four a clock at night (says he) which may as soon fall out at four a clock
in the morning for ought he know's, there will fall some mizling, drizling drops,
with some whistling, rustling winds, etc. all which he finds out of the depth
of Art. He professes some skill in palmistry; wherein trust me, the Gip^ies do
far out-strippe him: poring on the table of your hand, he fetches a deep
sigh, thinking of his own unfurnished Table at home, than which none can be
barer. And examining the lines of your Table, he always finds his own to be
most ominous. He shows himself deeply read in antiquity, by the artlesse
draught of his threed-bare Chronology; and imps his illiterate work, for want
of better s^uffe, with a trite discourse of weights and measures: most
ponderously dividing them into Troy and Aver depois: where he finds his own
gold still too light by many grains for either scale. His Cage (or Study if
you please) is hung about with Moath-eaten Mappes, Orbs, Globes, Perspectives;
with which he can work wonders. His shelves for want of authors, are subully
inter-woven with Spiders Ca^les, which he makes the stupid vulgar believe, are
pure Elixirs extracted from the influence of the Moon. It is the height of his
ambition to aspire to the credit of a Blanke Almanac.; upon which election he
holds himself a (...) Author. If famous, he seldom dies; for some ^iour
Artist will assume to himself his name. But if he die, an other Phoenix-like,
will be forth with raked out of his ashes. His death makes him in this
infinitely happy; It is not b^tter to him in respect of his su^stance: And in
this only he expresses hi^e a Scholar; He d^es poor. In a word, this may be
his comfort, he leaves his kindred in a settled and composed peace: for they
need not fall by the ears together for his goods. That which he long
discoursed of but understood not (I mean his Clymactericall year) has now
attached hi^: And so ends his perpetual A^nack.

2. A Ballad-monger
IS the ignominious ni^kname of a penu^ious poet of whom he partakes in no^g
but in poverty. His strain (in my opinion) would sort best with a ^unerall
Elegy, for he writes most pitifully. He has a singular gift of
imagination, for he can descant on a man's exec^ long before his confession.
Nor comes his Invention far short of his Imagination; for want of truer
r^lations, for a need he can find you out a Sussex Dragon, some Sea or Inland
monster, drawn out by some Shoelane man in a Go^nlike feature, to enforce more
horror in the beholder. He has an excellent faculty in this; He has one
tune in store that will indifferently serve for any ditty. H^ (...) your only
man in request ^or Christmas Carols. His works are lasting-pasted monuments
upon the insides of Country Alehouses, w^ they may (...) without expense of a
fa^ing: which makes their thirsty Author cry out in this manner, if he have
so much Latin:

Quo licuit chartis, no^ licet ire mihi. He stands much upon Stanza's, which
halt and hobble as l^mely as that one legged Ca^tor that sings them: It would
do a man's heart good to see how twinne-like he and his songman couple. Wits
of equal size, though more holding vailes befall the voice. Now you shall see
them (if both their stocks aspire to that strength) drop into some blind
Alehouse, where these two naked Uirginians will call for a great pot, a
toast, and a pipe. Where you may imagine the first and last to be only called
for out of an humor; but the midst out of mere necessity, to allay hunger.
Yet to see how they will hug, hook, and shrugge over these materials in a
Chimney corner (O Polyhymnia) it would make the Muses wonder! But now they are
parted: and Ste^tor has fitted his Batillus with a Subject: whereon he vows
to bestow better Lines than ever stuck in the Garland of good will. By this
time with botches and old ends, this BalladBard has expressed the Quintessence
of his Genius, extracted from the muddie spirit of Bottle-Ale and froth. But
all is one for that; his 'rinkilo must have it, if he will come to his price,
yet before he have it, it must suffer the Press. By this, N^ck Ballad has
got him a Quarterne of this new Impression; with which he mounts Holborne as
merry as a Carter; and takes his stand against some eminent Bay-win^ow; where
he ven^s his stuff. He needs not dance attendance; for in a trice you shall
see him guarded with a Ianizarie of Cost rmongers, and Countr^y Gooselings:
while his Nipps, I^s, Bungs and `Prina^o's, of whom he hol^s in fee, oft-times
prevent the Lan yer, by diving too deep into his Clients pocket; while h^e
gives too deep attention to this wonderful Bal^d. B^t stale Balla^-newes,
like s^ale fish, when it begins to smell of the Pa^yer, are not for queas^e
stomachs. You must therefore imagine, that by this time they are cashiered the
Cit^e and mu^ now ride poast for the Country: where they are no less admired
than a Giant in a pageant: till at last they grow so common there too, as every
poor Milk maid can chant and chirpe it under her Cow; which she uses as an
harmless charm to make her let down her milk. Now therefore you must
suppose our facetious Ballad-monger, as one nectar-infused with some poetical
Liquor, re-ascending the horsehoof'd mount, and with a cup of six (for his
token-pledge will be taken for no more) he presum's to represent unto the
world a new conceit, entitled; A proper new Ball^d, to the tune of Bragadeery
round. Which his Chant^leere sings with variety of airs (having as you may
suppose, an ins^rume^tall Polyphon in the cra^e of his nose.) Now he (...) a
n^urall Base, then a perpet^all Treble, and ends with a Countert^nure. You
shall hear him feign an artfull strain through the Nose, purposely to (...)
uate into the attention of the purer brotherhood: But all in vain; They blush
at the (...) of this knave, and demurely passing by him, call him the lost
child. Now, for his Author, you must not take him for one of those pregnant
critic Suburbane wits, who make work for the fiddlers of the City. For those
are more knaves, than fools, but these quite contrary. In those you shall
find salt, sense, and verse; but in these none of all three. What then is ^o
be expected from so sterile a Pernassian, where impudence is his best
conductor, Ignorance his best Instructor, and Indigence his best Proctor? Shall
we then close with him thus? He is constant in nothing but in his Clothes. He
(...) casts his slough but against B^tholomew Fair: where he may ^asually
e^danger the purchase of a cast suite: Else, trust me, he is no shifter. In a
word, ^et his poo^e corpse a sheet to s^rowd them in at his dying, they (...)
more than his ^use could ever make him worth while he was living.

3. A Corranto-coiner.
IS a State-Newes-monger; and his own Genius is his intelligencer. His Mint
goes weekly, and he coins money by it. Howsoever, the more intelligent
merchants do jeere him, the vulgar do admire him, holding his Novels
oracular. And these are usually sent for Tokens or (...) Curtsies betwixt City
and Country. He hol^s most constantly o^e fo^me or me^hod of disc^urse. He
^etaines some military words of art, which he shoot^s at random; no matt^r
where they h^t, they cannot wound any. He ever leaves some passages doubtful,
as if they were some more intimate secrecies of state, clozing his sentence
abruptly, -- With hereafter you shall hear more. Which words, I conceive, he
only uses as baits, to make the appetite of the Reader more eager in his
next weeks pursuit for a more satisfying labor. Some generall-erring relations
he pick^s up, as Crummes or fragments, from a frequented Ordinario: Of which
shreads he shapes a Cote to fit any credulous fool that will wear it. You
shall never observe him make any reply in places of public concourse; he
ingenuously acknowledges himself to be more bounden to the happiness of a
retentive me^ory, than either ability (...). or pregnancy of conceit. He
carries his Table-booke ^ill about with him, but dares not pull it out
publicly: yet no sooner is the Table drawn, than he turns Notarie; by which
means he recovers the charge of his ordinary. Paul's is his Walk in Winter;
Moorfi^lds in Summer. Where the whole discipline, designs, projects, and
exploits of the St^tes, Netherlands, Poland, Switzer, Crim chan and all, are
within the Compass of one Quadrangle walk most judiciously and punctually
discovered. But long he must not walk, lest he make his N^wes-presse stand.
Thanks to his good invention, he can collect much out of a very little: no
matter thou^h more experienced judgments disprove him; he is Anonymo^, and
that will secure him. To make his reports more credible (or which he and his
Stationer only aims at) more vendible, in the relation of every occurrent: he
renders you the day of the Month; and to approve himself a Scholar, he
annexeth these Latin parcells, or parcellgilt sentences, veteri Stylo, novo
Stylo. Palisado's, Parapets, Counterscarfes, Forts, Fortresses, Rampires,
Bulwark's are his usual dialect. He writes as if he would do some mischief;
yet the charge of his shot is but paper. He will sometimes start i^ his
sleep, as one affrighted with v^sions; which I can imp^te to no other cause
but to the terrible skirmishes which h^ discoursed of, in the day time. He has
now tied himself Apprentice to the trade of minting: and must weekly perform
his task, or (beside the loss which accrues to himself) he disappoi^ts a
number of no small fools, whose discourse, discipline, and discretion is
drilled from his State service. These you shall know by their Mondai's morning
Question, a little before Exchange time; Stationer have you any news. Which
they no sooner purchase than peruse; and early by next morning (lest their
Country friend should be deprived of the benefit of so rich a prize) they
freely vent the substance of it, with some illustrations, if their
understanding can furn sh them that way. He would make you believe that he
were known to some foreign intelligence, but I hold him the wisest man that
has the least faith to believe him. For his relations he stands resolute,
whether they become approved or evinced for untruths; which if they be, he
has contr^cted with his face never to blush for the matter. He holds
especial concurrence with two philosophical sects, though he be ignorant of
the T^nets of either: in the collection of his observations he is
Pe^ipateticull, for he walks circularly: in the dig^stion of his relations he
is Stoicall, and sits regularly. He has an Alph^beticall Table of all the
chief Commanders, Generals, Leaders, provincial Towns, Rivers, Ports,
Creekes, with other fitting materials to furnish his imaginary building.
Whisperings, mu^trings, and bare suppositions are suffici^nt grounds for the
authority of his relat^ons. It is strange to see with what greediness this
ayrie Chameleon being all lungs and wind, will swallow a receite of News, as
i^ it ^ere physical: yea, with ^at frontlesse insinuation he will scrue
himself i^to the acquaintance of some knowing Intelligencers, who trying the
Cask by his hollow sound, do familiarly g^ll him. I am of opinion, were all his
voluminous centuries of fabulo^s relations compiled, ^hey ^ould vye in number
with the (...) of many fo^erunning ages. You shall many ti^es find in his
(...), Pasquils* and Corranto's miserable di^ractions; here a City taken by
force, long before it be besieged; there a Country laid wa^e before ever the
enemy ent^red. He many times tortures his R^ader with impertinencies: yet are
these the tolerablest p^ssages throughout all his discourse. He is the very
Landscape of our age. He is all air; his ear always open to all r^ports;
which how incredible soever, must pass for current, and find vent, purpos^ly
to get him current money, and delude the vulgar. Yet our best comfort is, his
Chymera's live not long; a week is the longest in the City, and after their
arrival, little longer in the Country. Which past, they melt like Butter, or
m^tch a pipe and so Burn. But ind^ede, most commonly it is the height of their
ambition, to aspire to the employment of stopping mu^tard-pots, or wrapping up
pepper, powder, s^aves-aker, etc. which done, they ^xpire. Now for his habit,
Wapping and Longlane will give him his Character. He honors nothing with a
more indeered observance, nor hugges ought with more intimacie than antiquity,
which he expresses even in his (...). I have known some love fish best that
smelled of the panyer; and the like humor reigns in him, for he loves that
apparel best that has a taste o^ the Brok^r. Some have held hi^ for a
Scholar, but trust m^e such are in a palpable error, for he never yet
understood so much Latin, as to construe Gallob^lgicus. For his Library, (his
own continuations excepted) it consists of very few or no Books: he holds
himself highly engaged to his in^, if it can purchase him victuals, for
Authors he never converseth with them, unless they walk in P^les. For his
discourse it is ordinari^: yet he will make you a terrible repetition of
desperate Commanders, unheard of exployts; intermixing with all his own
personal service. But this is not in all companies: for his experience has
sufficiently informed him in this principle: That as nothing works more on the
simple than things strange and incredibly rare; so nothing discovers his
weakness more among the knowing and judicious, than to insist by way of
discourse, on reports above conceit. (...) th^se therefore, he is as mute as
a fish. But now imagine his Lamp (if he be worth one) to be neer^ly burnt out;
his inventing Genius, wear^d and surfoote with raunging over so many unk^owne
Regions; and himsel^e wasted with the ^ruitlesse expense of much paper,
resig^ing his place of weekly Collecti^ns to an other: whom in hope of some
little share, h^e has to his Station^r recommended, while he lives either
poorly respected, or dies mis^rably ^uspended. The rest I end with his own
cloze; next week you shall hear more.

4 A Decoy
IS a brave metall'd Blade, as apt to take as to give. H^s morni^g preparative
is, What sconce shall we build? Though he never bare office in the Ward where
he lives, he has the word of a Constable, and can bid stand. He is a witty
Hypocrit; for sometimes i^ occasion serve, he can play the civil Div^ll, and
cou^terfeite a demure (...). He will cloze with you in any ^rgument out of a
pregnant-prese^t conceit: s^ as he would make one (...) he had the Elements
of all Learning: Bu^ hold him to it, and he will ^all ^ff, a^ he does in his
whole cour^e from the practice of goodness. To (...) his frie^ or rather
befriend (...), h^e will turn true Asi^n knight, and swear for you most
pragmatically. A more affable or sociable companion the world cannot afford
you: for he will mould himself to your humor, be it in the quest of
busi^esse or pleasure: your own shadow cannot be more attendant, nor more
obsequiously observant. His only desire is but to know where you lodge (and
for want of his high-road revenewes) he will be your incessant visitant.
Having by this wrought o^ your easy temper, and in your bosom purchased him a
friendly harbor: He pretends occasions abroad; and complains his horse is
lame, and what injury the base F^rrier had done him. This in Civility you
cannot choose but take notice of, especialy to so intimate a friend, who has so
many times vowed to engage his person for your honor. By this he mounts your
Palfrey, and makes for the Country; where if he do not speed himself of a
fortune by the way; next friday in Smithfield you s^all find your Demilance in
the Fair. Whom if you should chance to own, yet were you never a whit nearer
your own: for your sweete-bosome friend will not stick to face you and swear
you out of him. Nay, he will tax you of impudence and countenanced by some of
his own Co^rades, vow revenge for this undigested imputation. Now, i^ your
discretion will not be thus outbrav'd no^ baffelt, he will show himself tru^
spark of valor, and encounter you where you will or dare. But set up this for
your rest, if you adjorne time, you shall as soon meet with your horse as
^im. But these a^e but pe^ty assayes to other of his master-peeces. By th^s he
has taken upon him the title of a great Heir; which is seconded by the
approvement of his (...) F^ye. All Cubs of one Lit^er, and equally fur^ished
^or a cheating Lecture. This some rich Mercer. Milliner, or Taylour, or some
other necessary appendice of a gentleman is presently pos^est of; who become
humble Supplicants for his Custom, and by corrupting the Groom of his
Chamb^r, (who was corrupt enough already) purposely cheat^ themselves with
expense of some ^w Crowns. Along goes ou^ De^oy* as a^ imaginary H^ire, well
accoutred and attended, toward his (...) of Cust^me. (...), as o^e borne to
more m^anes than bra^nes, he be^aves himself like a very Gandergoose, which
strengthens his credu^ous Creditors gainefull expectance, hoping to make an
Essex Calfe of him. But his acquaintance begets a good effect in them, for it
ever ends with repentance. But these are but his civil City cheats, for want
of employment abroad. For howsoever his Name, in its own proper signification
seem to render him, his profession has proclaimed him an universal (...).
Public faires are his revenewes; and there is nothing which he keeps better
in heart tha^ their time. He has his variety of Led suites: and can (if need
require) counterfeate the habit of Grazier, Gallant, or Citizen all in one day.
With which habits he plays the cunning Impostor, and deludes those whose
cond^n he (...): He had need be one of Volpon^'s truebred Cubbes that shall
smell him out. Private alleyes and by-lanes are his Sanctuaryes in the City:
but places of public frequent in the Country. H^e has more D^xes than a
Gypsy, which he makes use of, either for receiving his purchase, or for
informing him of a prey. If at any time he shall be accused or attached by
some simple Count^ey Officer: ^ee affronts him with such biggswolne words of
points of reputa^on* g^ntile, estimation, detraction, derogation; as holding
all these to be several Titles of his honor, he not only releases him, but
most humbly complaining, invites him to a dinner; lest his too rash attach of a
Gentleman of ^rship, (for (...) his ignorance holds him) should bring him in
danger. Which simplicity of his our Decoy observes, and works upon it. He
must have his reputation salv'd with some (...) album, or he will not sit
down with this disgrace. Which (to prevent all ensuing harm, taking him bound
withal that he shall stir up no powerful friend against him, whereof our
cheat pretends a myriad) this official Offall applies, to cure the ulcer of
his impostum'd reputation; and so they part, a fool and a foist. You shall
find him now and then betting with some of his rooking consorts in
Bowl-alleyes; where if a young Novice come, he stands confident of a purchase.
you shall see him presently (yet with a reserved counterfeit civility) cloze
with him. His own (...) shall not seem more intimate. But our young Mast^r
still goes by weeping-^rosse; He leaves as few Crummes of Comfort in his Purse,
as hair on his Chinne, or wit in his Pate. It is above the reach of conceit,
to observe him, how understandingly he will converse with a Country Farmer,
after he has saluted him at the (...) door. His tale is of a Tur^e, his
matter a Mattocke, his plea a Pl^ugh. But the Catastrophe is a piece of plate,
which he ever leaves the Countryman in pledge for. To display him by his
garb, or describe him by his garment, were a task of some difficulty* he
sorts and suites himself purposely to fool the world, i^ such variety.
Sometimes you shall see him n^ate and b^ske, and accoutred bravely: next day,
like one at Odds with himself, nitty a^ na^y. Which inde^d, is his tru^
natural garb, that best become him: and may be best preserv'^ in regard of
those uncertain veils which befall him. He may for most part compare with
those brave Roman Emperors for the manner of his death; for he seldom dies
in his bed. He hopes one day to be advanced above the residue of his fellows,
which I conjecture must either be on the Pillorie or the Gallows: where I
leave him.

5. An Exchange* man
IS the peremptory br^nch of an Intergatorie; What do (...)? He would make you
b^eve, that he will furnish you (...); but such profuse boun^y (...) ^ot pay
Scot and lot; your money therefore must be your p^edge, before you have his
^inket. It is a wonder to s^e what var^ety of Knick-k^acks he has in so small
a Compass. His quest of i^quiry is, ^at is most in request: so as, (...)
Shop co^sists as much of fa^n as (...)* form as (...). It would make one
muse how ^ver so many G^w-gawes should find vent in a wise state; And yet the
l^bouring invention of the Brain is ^ver teeming and produci^g so^ eye-temp^g
Bab^e or other, to allure the Ne^fangle passenger. The hurrii^ of a Coach is as
pleasi^g me^ to (...) in his expe^tance, ^ the last sound before a Newplay is
to an i^ching audience. When the Simp^e go to market, (...) the (...) get
money. By (...) ^y L^dy with he^ D^apred (...)* have as many poakes as (...),
are mounted the stairs; and (...) now the long Pe^patetick gallery; they a^e
encountered with volleyes of more questions, then they know how to resolve.
Gladly would this Salique train buy all they see, if their revenues would
mount to the price. But they must in civil curtsy leave some few Commodities
for others. Mean time they buy more then they know how to employ. "That is a
pretty conceited toy (says my Ladies gentle woman) I will buy it whatsoever it
cost me: which discreet spe^ch delivered in the hearing of our Exchangeman, it
must want no praise, and consequently no p^ice. H^e ^ll usually demand the
three (...) value for any commod^ty; but far be it from me to (...) him to
have the Consce^ce ^o ^ake it if they would give it. It is his only drift
without any other policy to make trial of (...) judgment: his equal and
conscionable moderation is such (at least he will pretend so much) in these
trivial^ subjects of gain, as he hates to wo^ke on any ones weaken^sse, being
the expressivest argum^nt of mercinarie ^asenesse. But were all that traffic
with him as well-li^'d in pate as purse, we should find many empty shoops
before the next vacation. By this, a new troop of ruffling pl^m'd Myrmidons
are arrived; and these will swoope up all before them; Not so much us a (...)
ty^e, be it never so ougly, shall es^ape their encounter. Now out with your
lures, baits, and lime-twiggs, my nimble D^dapper. Your harvest is not all the
year. See how he s^ruggs; and with what downeright reverence he entertaines
them! If oaths, civil complements, demure looks have any hope to prevail
with raw and vnexperienc'd credulity, he is in a notable thriving way: for he
has set his Partridg^ al^eady; there is no doubt of ^pringing them till his
Not be spread over them: By which means he ha*s a trick to catch the Old one.
S^lence, and you shall hea^e his project. The Ancient Matron which strikes the
stroke, and directs her young charge in their merchand^ze, is by this time as
firmly retained by ou^ Exchange-man, as ever was Lawyer by his Client. What
great matter is it, though it cost him a Muffe, a wrought Wastcoate, or some
curious Border? He may pay himself in his price: for they are too generous
(so their Direc^sse approve it) to stand upon tea^mes. Let this suffice; it is
a good market, where all are pleased, and so are these. They joy no less in
his Commodity, than he in their money. Yet are the Savages, in my opinion,
much more to be approved in their Commerce than these. Indeed they exchange
precious stuff for tri^es: Bevers and Ermi^s for knifes, hatchets,
kettle-drums and hobby-horses. But this they do out of their Superfluity;
whereas our nicer D^mes bestow that upon trifles, which might support a
needful family. But the Age labors of this Epidemicall Error; too universal
therefore is the Crime to admit of Censure. Now you must suppose that Invention
is the Exchange-mans most useful A^tizan. Therefore, for his better return,
he keeps his weekly Synodall with his Girdler, Perfumer, Tyrewoman and
Sempster: who bray their brains in a mortar, to produce some useful renew,
some gainefull issue for their ^hriving Master. Never was poor ^ade more
troubled with fashions than these are. By this time, (...) something invented;
which, wh^st it is now in his Embrio, re^ives admittance to his shop, and to
take the curious passenger, appears in his full shape. He needs not use any
Exchange-(...) to set it forward; Novelties will ve^d themselves. A vacation is
his vexation; and a Michaelmas term the sole hope of his (...). H^ has by
the ti^, served all offices in hi^ (...)* (...) now draws* homeward. (...)
portion he had ^f the World, he has bequeathed to his Executors,
Adm^istrators, and Assigns. The Birds are ^low (...); his Customers gone; It
is hig^ time to shut up shop.

6. A Forrester
IS a Wood-man; but by all likelihood he shall lose that t^tle, if he live to
another age; for there will be little or no Wood left in all his Forest. He
proves by his W^ndfals, it is an ill wind that blows no man profit. His
Commo^-weale is his Chase, his People Dear. Though his Subjects be wild, he
can tame them with a Powder. Though he make no Porters of them, he draws a
part of his main^enance from their (...). ^he judgment which i^ most requis^te
to a man of his (...), c^nsists in singling out a go^d De^re. He is an
excellent (...)-man, and will serve your warrant daintily, if you Fee him. He
wears by his side, what he would not for a world have fixed on his front:
though he have many times deserved it, by playing the Rascal Dear, leaving
his own Do, breaking over his own Pale, and ranging in another Purlew. But
for all that she is impaled, when fitly tappised, she may prove one of Swetnams
brood, He Act^s bird, if Calysto's egg be rightly hatched. One would take
him for the Living sign of Robin Hood with a Forest bill in his hand. He
has a warren to turn Co^e-catcher; where he erects a place of Ex^cution for
his ver^in. You would think him a co^templative man by his solitary Walks;
and no question b^t he might benefit himself much that way; but his m^nde
stands not so affected. He wears his Mothers Livery, and domineeres like a
petty king in his own Liberty. He k^epes a choice consort of Musicians; with
which he is not at so much charge as to the value of a Lut^-string. Amorous
and attractive is his color, else Semele had never so much affected it in her
Iuppiter. His very Habit includes an Emble^e. He attires himself to the
Color of the Forest to deceive his game; and our Spiritual enemy attyres
himself in the Color we most affect and least suspect, to receive his prey.
Were he a Scholl^r, he might infinitely improve his knowledge by the Objects
which he daily sees. He i^ as the A^podes to us; for our Day is his N^ght, his
Night our Day. He^ is one of L^tona's se^vants; and is so conversant with her,
as he knows certainly whether the Moon be made of green chees^ or no. He
is a proper man of his hands; but most courageous when he is impaled. Yet if
his friend come for a piece of flesh, he will not walk that Night, but sl^pe
as soundly as a Constable. But visit any other his Chase, he will ferret them.
He can do miracles with his Linehound; who by his good Education has more
Sophistry than his Master. He were a brave man, had he the World as he has
his dog in a string. For Venison, h^ is generally better provided than the
Commander of the game: and give the Blade his dew, he is no niggard of his
flesh: for he will c^ large tho^gs out of another leather. If his Game thrive
not, the cause must be imputed to a murraine or a stormy Winter; but his
generous, if not m^rcenary bounty, was the occasion rather. His body proclaims
him apt for any employment, but his breeding has accommodated him better for a
Pale than a Pike, a Chase than a Camp. For discourse, expect no such matter at
his hands; A very small quantity of reason will su^fice the Creatures he
converse^h with. A natural bluntness does best beseem him; for Rhetoric
becomes not the Woods. If we be companions to Ostridges, we shall be sure to
savor of the wilderness. He knows whether the Poets conc^te of Fa^nes and
S^lvanes be true or no; for they walk in his raunge At Wakes and Maygames he
(...) a brave (...): for our wenches of ^e green hold him a mavelous proper
man. For the rest of our Hobbinols, they retai^e such an opinion of his valor,
they dare scarc^ly say their sou^es are their own^. For his revenew's, be^ they
more or less, he makes ^ven work at every years end. He has no land but
Leases; and th^se will wear out in time. The (...) which ^ost dignifie him,
are these; he can hallow, give a gibbet, wi^d a horn* cut up a piece of flesh,
and laugh at an ignorant Animal that takes saime between the frontl^s. When he
is to present some ne^ghbouring Gentleman in his Masters n^me, with a side or a
fouch he has an excellent art in improving his venison to the best; and in
aggravat^ng the d^fficulties he suffered before h^e could come to his purpose;
And whereto tends all this, but to bind a greater courtesy upon the receiver*
and to purchase a better reward for hims^fe? For memory, he may vye with
X^xes; he knows all his wild regiment by head. For religion, he cannot be
justly taxed in his tenets, either of (...) or error; for he is yet to choose.
The Lawnd is his Templ^, the bi^ds his quirresters. His employment for the
winter quart^r is a con^nuate imposture; laying Spring^ for Woodcockes, (...),
(...), etc. His condition of all (...) is most mutable; his (...) Count^nance
variable; and his place to many overtures ^vable. It were necessary therefor
that he took ^at fees while he is in office; that he may have something to
build on in his vacancie from s^rvice. But in this particular he is so well
cautioned, as his pr^decessors Lecture has made him completely armed. If he
live till he be old, he incurs the the ge^erall fate of an ancient discarded
Servingman; clozing the Evening of his life with contempt or neglect. Those
materials or appendices of his place, Horn, Lease and Bill he resignes (if not
pawned already) to his successor; ^ho keeps a mig^ty racket the first
q^arter, but af^rwards falls off, imitating Endym^on, his predecessors steps,
in conniving at his friends, and compounding with his (...). The green L^very,
that Emblem of frailty, which h^e wore living, must now be the Carp^t t^
cover him dying. Out of all hi^ spacious raunge, he has rese^ved so much
ground a^ may afford him a Grave. More he n^edes not, and to be debarr^d
t^is, even in humanity he cannot. What rests then, but that he rest after his
long Walk? While (...) a^fixe his own Epitaph upon his own naked monument,
to make his memory more perp^tuate; Defessus sum ambulando. Pity were it then
to disquiet him.

7. A Gamester
IS a Merch^t-venturer, for his stock ru^nes always upon hazard. H^e has a
perp^tuall Pals^y in his Elbow; which never leaves shaking till his fortunes
be shaken. He remembers God more in Oaths than Orison^. And if he pray at
any time, it is not premeditate but extemporall. The sum of his devotion
consists not in the expression or conf^ssion of himself like a penitent
sinner, but that he may come off at next meeting a competent winner. But where
finds he any such in all our Collect^? H^e so over-braves and abuses the
poor dice, that if they were his equals, they would, questionless, call him
to account for it. The Ordinary is his Oratorie, where h^e pr^yes upon the
Countrey-gull to feed himself. He was a great Heir, and entered the world
full-handed; but falling to Game purposely to make him more complete, his Long
acre has past the Alienation offi^e, and made him a stranger to his fathers
Mansion House: And now he is fitter for a Gamester than ever he was; Let
fortune do her worst, his estate cannot be much worse. In his minority, he
played ever upon disadvantage; but Experience has now sufficiently informed him
in his maturity; though his dice seem square, he seldom plays so. Advantage
is his advancement; wherein if you prevent him and bring him to square, he is
ever seconded with sinister fortune. Sundry pretty passages and conveiances h^
has in his pockets, sleeves, and other private places ^or his little
familiars; and these furnish him at a dead lift. You fear ^gging, and to make
sure work, you bring him a Box; but all this will not serve your turn; he
has a Be in a Box to sting you. It is his care to creep into a good suite of
Clothes; lest the Ordinary should bar him by and maine. Which having
purchased, by translating and accommodating it to the fashion most i^ request,
it seems quarterly new. He feeds well, howsoever he fare. Hope and fear
make his recreation an affliction. He has no time to refresh his mind, being
equally divided betwixt hope of g^ine, and fear of loss. For his loss of
patience, it is so familiar with him, as he holds it no loss. Money is of too
dear and tender an estimate to let it slip from him, and he like a Stoicall
Stock to say nothing. T^llus Hostilius put FEAR and PALENESSE in the number
of his gods: and it is pity (says Lactantius) that ever his gods should go
from him. These two are our Gamsters Furies, which startle him in midst of his
Iubilee. He is poor, yet miserably covetous; Envy like Ivy, is ever
wreathing about his heart: Others success is his eyesore. He seldom has
time to take air, unless it be to a Play; where if his pockets will give
leave, you shall see him aspire to a Box: or like the ^ilent Woman, sit
demurely upon the stage. Where, at the end of every Act, while the encurtain'd
Music sounds, to give Enter-breath to the Actors, and more grace to their
Action, casting his Cloak carelessly on his left shoulder, he enters into some
complementall d^scourse with one of his ordinary Gallants. The argument of
their learned conference is this; Where shall we suppe, or how shall we trifle
away this night? Where shall we meet to morrow; or how bestow our selves? He
takes no course how to live, nor knows any way how to thrive but in this
high-bet-path of idleness. Any other employment were his torment. It were the
wisest part to deal with such lewd and inordinate walkers, time-triflers,
standers, sitters in the ways of idleness, and incendiaries to a Civil
state, as Philip of Macedon dealt with two of his Subjects, in whom there was
little hope of grace, or redemption of time: He made one of them run out of
the Country, and the other d^ive him: So his people was rid of both. The
longer he lives, more arguments of his baseness he leaves. Whom he consorts
with he depraves, and those that believe him he deceives. It were a strange
account that he would make, if he were called to it; since his first imitation
in this profession. Surely, he would express himself a second Marg^tes, of
whom it is said, that h^e never plowed, nor dug, nor addressed himself to
ought all his life long that might tend unto goodness, being wholly
unprofitable to the World. To dissuade him then from this habitu^te Course of
perverted Liberty, might sceme a fruitless task: ^or ^eates must be ^is
revenues or he (...). Howbeit to such as are but freshmen, and are not
thoroughly salted with his rudiments, these Caut^ons will not prove altog^ther
useless. This complete Gallant, which you see every way thus accoutred, is
master of nothing but what he wears; and that in Lavender ere long. He is
famous in nothing but in being the last of his house. He is only used by the
Master of the Ordinary, as men use Cumminseede, to replenish their
Culverhouse; his employment is the draught of Customers. Have your ^yes about
you, if you play with him: for want of a L^underer he can set your ruff
n^atly by help of a glass behind you, or a dammaske pummell to discover your
gam^. This he will do so ^imbly, as you shall scarce know who hurt you. In a
word, be our young Novices affected to play? Let them remember Plato's golden
rule: Parvum est al^a luder^, and non parvum est assuescere: It is no great
matter to play at dice, but it is a great error to make dice their dayes-taske.
Let it be their pastime, not their practice. Let them know further, that
Gamest^rs are but as Rivolets, but the Box that maine Ocean into which they
descend. By this time you may suppose our cunning Gamester to be now fallen to
his very last stake; his wit in the waine; and his fortune in the eb^e. He
cannot hold out long, for infamy has marked him for a Cheat; and the more
generous professants have by this discarded him for a Bum-card. He is out of
Credit with the Ordinary; and entertained with a scornful look by his own
familiars. He resolves therefore to turn penitentiarie, now when he ha'^
naught el^e to do. Suppose him then walking l^ke a second Malevolo with a
dejected eye, a broad-brim'd hat or'e-pentising his discontented look, an
e^wreathed arm like a dispassionate Lover, a weak yingling spur guiltless
of gold, with a wint^r suite, which must of necessity suite him all Summer;
till drawing n^re some Cooks shop, he takes occasion to mend his
spurre-leather, purposely to a^lay hi^ hunger with a comfortabl^ savor. Happy
were he, if he, ^ho in his time had been so boun^ifull to the Gamesters box^
might now receive any benefit or competent rele^f from the Pooremans box: but
misery no so^ner found him, tha^ pity left (...): it is high time then for us
to l^ave him.

8. An Hospitall-man
IS the (...) of a greater work; b^ing all that is left of a decay^d G^ntleman,
a maimed Souldi^r, or a discarded Servingman. He is now ta^ked to that in his
age, which he was little acquainted with in his youth. He must now betake
himself to prayer and devotion; remember the Found^r, Benefactors, H^ad and
members of that ^amous foundation: all which he performs with as much z^ale,
as as Actor aster the end of a Play, when he prays for his Majesty, the
Lords of his most honorable pri^ie Counc^ll, and all that love the King. He
has scarce fully ended his Orisons, till he looks back at the Buttry hatch,
to see whether it be open or no. The sorrow he conceives for his sins has
made him dry: The Proselyte therefore had n^ede of some refresh^ent. His gown
and retired walks would argue him a S^holler: but it is not the hood that
makes the Monk; he can be no such man unless he have it by inspiration.
But admit he were, he is at the best but a lame Scholar. A great part of a
long winter night is past over by him and the rest of his devout Circumcellions
in discoursing of what they have been and seen. While sometimes they fall at
variance in the relation and comparison of their actions. But all their
differences are soon rinsed down in Lambs-wooll. Which done, with a friendly
and brotherly regreete one of another, as loving members of one soci^tie, they
betake themselv's to their rest. Before the first Cock at the longest awakes
o^r Hospitall-man; ^or aches and crampes will not suffer his sleeps to be
long: which is a great motive to make his prayers more frequent. The morning
Bell summons him early to his devotions, whereto, howso^ver his inward man
stand affected, his outward is with due reverence addressed. No sooner has he
got repast for his soul, than he prepares r^leefe for his belly. He cannot
endure to chastise it so long as he may cherish it. Austeritie he can embrace,
so it restrain him neither in his repast nor rest. For other bodily exercises,
he stands indifferent: for he finds his body unable to use them. To speak
of the condition of his life, he might conceive an high m^asure of
Contemplative sweetness in it, if the Sun of hi^ Soul (too long e^clipsed
by the interpos^ion of earth) could clearly apprehend it. It is strange to see
with what tenderness he embrace^h this life, which in all reason should be
rather by him loathed than loved. His head i^ a recep^acle of Catarrhs, his
eyes (...) of sluxes and (...), his breast a Conduit of rhumatick^
distillations; the Sciatica has seized on his hippes, aches and convulsions
rack his back and reins; in a word, his whole body is a very Magazen of
diseases; and diseases, you k^ow, are the Suburbs of death. Yet he hopes to put
the Hospital to the charge of another Livery gown, and a whole years Com^ons;
whence he seems to verify the proverb: There is none so desperately old,
but he hopes to live one year longer. Yet for all this, he ca^ never be (...)
merry: being enjoined to a task, which he cannot i^ure (...) to without
irksomeness or (...). For to bring an old ^axter ^o the exercise of Devotion,
is ^o bring an old Bird to sing pricksong in a Cage. The rules of his house he
observes most punctually; but for Clancular hours of private prayer and
devotion, he absolu^ely holds them works of Supererogation. His Camp is now
translated into a Cloister; yet his zeal as much then as now: for a^
Hospitall-fire, and too liberal (...) has cooled his fervor. He conc^ives as
much delight in discoursi^g ^t the G^te, as (...) in (...) C^l; yet h^ demu^e
(...), ag^d reve^ence, an^ (...) more (...) to (...) expect^ce. Ho^ly in (...)
he (...) o^ ^is (...), and guides he has to waft him to the port of
felicity; wherein it were to be wished, that as he is retentive of the one,
so he would not be unmindefull of the other. There is no Provision he need
take care for, but how to dye, and that he will do at leisure, when necessity
calls him to it. The world is well changed with him, if he could make right use
on it. In stead of the cold ground for his pallat, Arms and Alarmes, and
volleyes of shot; he may now lie softly, sleep sweetly, repose safely, and if
he look well to the regiment of ^is soul, discampe securely. Fears and Foes
he may have within him, but neither Foes nor Fears without him. Armor he has
as well as before, and that more complete: this is spiritual, that corporal.
Methinks it should not grieve him to remember he was a man in his time. That
condition is the best, which makes him best. Admit he had means, yet being a
means to corrupt his mind, they were better lost than possessed. In his Summer
Arbor of prosperiti^ he was d^sperately sick, for he had no sense of his
sin. Sycophants he had to dandle him in the lap of security, and belull
him in his sensual Lethargy. These tame beasts are gone; These
Summer-swallowes flowne; the fuel of his loose-expended hours consumed; the
veil which kept him from discovery of himself, removed. What remains now,
but that he alien himself from the world, seeing what he had in the world is
aliened from him? His soules-tillage is all the husbandry he need intend.
This neglected, his case is desperate; This resp^cted, all is fortunate. Every
day then, as his body is nearer E^rth, let his soul be nearer Heaven. He
feeds but a languishing-lingring life, while he lives here: It is but a
^abernacle at the best, so long as he is encloistered; upon his manumission
hence, he is truly enfranchised. While he had means, he might leave an estate
to his successor; and so much means he has now, as will cause some
Hospitall-Brother thank God for his departure. The thirsty Earth gapes not
more greedily for his Corp^e, than some Beadsm^n or other does for his place.
He has by this got his pasport; he has ^id the World a d^w, by paying Nature
^r de^: Dry eyes att^nd him; his (...) Brothers follow him, a^ bring hi^ to ^is
long home. A shor^ (...) up hi^ (...); more state he needs not, and less he
cannot have.

9. A Iayler
IS a Surly host, who entertaines his Guests with harsh language, and hard
usage. He will neither allow them what is sufficient for them, nor give them
Liberty to seek an other I^ne. He is the Phy^itian, and they are his
Patients; to whom he p^escribes such a strict die^, that if they would, they
cannot surfeit. If at any time they grow irregular, he allayes their distemper
(...) cold iron. He receives the first fruits o^ the A^m svasket, and leaves
them the (...). He holds nothing more unprofitable to one of his place than
(...), (...) more dissorting than compassion; so as it little moves him to see
his famished family in affliction. His Mency cannot be more impious than he is
imperious: he domineeres bravely; bears himself toward his ragged regiment
bravingly; and makes himself Almner of their poor treasury. He is in fee
with the Constables of all the Wards to send him Nightwalkers to be his
Pay-masters. He turns not his key but he will have his fee of every Inmate.
If he would turn them out, he deserved it better; but he both stays and
starves them together. If he provide any cheer for them, it must be
Whipping-cheere. His Ornaments are fetters, boults, and mannacl^s. These are
his Bracelets, yingles, and Caparisous: Thus must his enthralled Crickets live
ever in an Iron age. Yet according to a proportionable weight in starling, he
will abate a proportionable weight in Iron. He so doubles and redoubles his
wards, as one would think he had some infinite treasure; but he that should
seek for any such within his precincts, should lose his labor. He has a
rough hoarse voice ever menacing fire and faggot: for he has contracted with
his tongue never to utter one syllable of comfort: And concludes, that the
Iayler in the Acts, was o^ too mild temper to supply the place of a Iayler If
his Prisoner have revenew's, and desire to breathe the air of liberty; he may
purchase an artificial days freedom and a Keeper to boot, by his bounty. But
his Exhibition must be good, otherwise he sleights his quality. For those poor
Snakes who feed on reversions, a glimpse through the keyhole, or a light
through the Grate, m^st be all their prospect. He ha'^ many times troubled and
broken sleeps; and starts out a bed, crying, The prison is broken: So
incessant are his fears, so impressive his cares. Which to prevent, he
redoubles his Wards, reburdens his irons; and if all this will not do, but
that the fury of fear still dogs him: he fortifies his thoughts against
suspicion with strength of liquor. Which (...) him as insensible of fear, if
occasion were offered, as he was before app^ehensive of fear, ere any (...) of
suspicion was ministered. Hence it appears, that nothing amates him so much as
fear of a Prisoners escape. For his ^innes, they never so much as break hi^
sleep, trouble his head, or (...) his mind. When the Sessions draw near, how
officio^sly obsequious he is to any o^ his well-lin'd Prisoners? Now he must
(...) how to mince his guilt, and (...) his own gain. He has already
comp^unded with him ^or the Sum: the project must be (...) his brain. (...),
if it hit, he has vowed to be ^runke that night; but if it ^il'd, pu^posely
to be revenged of himself, he will quench his hydropicke thirst with six
shillings bear, and so dye of a male-tympanie. If any of his more happy
Prisoners be admitted to his Clergy, and by help of a compassionate Prompter,
hacke out his Necke-verse, he has a cold iron in store if he be hot, but an
hot iron if he be cold. Where there be many Irons in the fire, some must
cool. If his pulse (I mean his purse) be hot, his fist may cry fizze, but
want his impression: but if his pulse be cold, the poor beggarly knave must
(...) his literal expression. He hears more ghostly instruction at the
Ordinaries funeral Sermon before an Execution, than all the year after: Yet
is his attention as far distant from that Sermon as Newgate from Tyburne. And
yet say not but he is a most constant friend to his convicted Inmates, for he
seldom ever leaves them till he see them hanged. Now some again will object
that he is a subtle Macchiauel, and loves to walk in the Clouds, because he
never resolves those with whom he deals, but fills them full of doubts, and in
the end ever leaves them in suspense. But this is a badge of his profession,
and consequently pleades exemption. Do you hear yo^ Newgate bird? How
sweetly the pilfring Siren sings! Well warbled Chuck. The C^im Tartar with the
bunch of keys at his belt will requite thee. Thou know he expects a
masters share, or no release. One Note higher then, as thou hopes for relief.
He has Collectors too with basins to improve his rents: which consist of
vailes and bribes: but he is more beholden to the later. It is just contrary
with his Oeconomie and with others; the greater his theevish family is, the
richer is his fare. He can do sometimes very good offices (if he please) by
discovery of Cacus cave. But it is not the public which he must prefer
before his particular: anoint him, and he will come on like an oy^d glove.
Notable intelligence he receives daily from his ancient Inmates: who for the
good entertainment they have already received, and what they may expect
hereafter, pr^sent him now and then ^ith a remembrance of their love; and so
they may afford it very good cheap, for it cost them naught. But now what with
Surfets, colds, fears, frights. supose him dra^ing near his Goale-delivery.
Though he had about him Emblemes of man's life daily; though he saw continual
Objects of humane misery; though he encountered with nothing but Specta^les of
infelicity: yet his security imprisoned his understanding, so as he made no
use of them. He is now roming, he knows not whither; and must of necessity
grapple with that which he scarce ever thought of before this instant of his
departure. Death has entered one Ward already; No churlish affront can possibly
amate him; no humane power repel him. Now he has a poor prisoner within
him, that suffers more anguish than ever any sick Captive did without him. He
gropes under his head, and he finds his keys gone; he looks inward, and he
finds foes many, but friends few or none. Cold are those comforts which are in
him; many those discomforts which enthrall him. Yet two beame-lines of comfort
dart upon him in this hour of terror; from him he expects succor who
received the penitent thief, and converted the layler.

10. A Keeper
IS an equivocall officer; for if by a Keeper you intend a raunger or
forrester, he is a Wild-man, or a Woodman, as we have formerly given him his
character. If by him you intend a Iayler, he is an Iron-monger, whose Iron
sides will suffer no compassion to enter. If an Alehouse-keeper, his house is
the Devils Booth, and himself the recetter. If a Keeper of horses at Livery,
he is a knave without a Livery; he will put in your hand a lame Palfrey, who
will lay your honor in the dust. If a fi^ld-Keeper, he is a Night walker, who
though he have store of near Inmates ever about him, they ever backbite him.
He imitates the Bellman in his ^ogge, but wants his bell. If the world do not
belly him, he will sooner share with a Night-catcher than descry him. If a
Doore-keeper a frequent third day at a taking New play, will make this
Collector a Colloguer. If a Shop keeper, deep oaths, dark shoppes, base
wares, false weights have al^eady proclaimed him a civil cunning Impostor. If
a Booke-keeper, he may get him frien^s, if his Master be not all the wiser;
and improve his own means by change of a figure. But leaving these, give me a
good Housekeeper, who only of all these merits a deserving Character. He
preserves that relic of Gentry, the honor of hospitality, and will rather
fall, than it should fail. He revives the Black Jack, puts beef in his pot,
makes poor passengers pray for him, his followers to stick near him, his
Country to honor him, his friends to love him, his foes to praise him. He
wonders how any one should be so void of pity as to leave his smoaklesse
house in the Country, where he has his means, to riot in the City, and
estrange himself to his ^riends. He conceives for what end he was borne, and
keeps hi^ dayes-account ^o discharge the old score. He affects nothing so
much as discr^t and well-tempered bounty; he admits no injurious thought to
lodge within him. How it (...) him to see a full table* Men to eat^ his meat,
(...) to feed thos^ m^n! He (...) so low, as to ac^ (...) with those bas^
(...), who prefer (...) pub^ ^ate, (...) his ^oy to become a Liberal
dispencer, and to releeve the needy with the fattest portion of his trencher.
Competence he holds the best fortune; and herein he strives to confine his
own desires. The Sun of his aims tends rather to the relief of others
want, than his own weal; yea he holds the relief of their want his supreme
weal. The Court seldom takes him, but if it do, he is never taken by it. He
has set up his rest, that the place which gave him first being, with means to
support that being, shall receive what with conveniencie he may bestow while
he lives in it; with some lasting remembrance of his love when he departs
from it. He is generally the pooremans friend* and will suffer no oppressor to
nes^le near him. (...) is he altoge^her so pre^ise as to admit of no
pl^asure. Wherefore he keeps Horses, Hawks, Hounds, or whatsoever the most
free and generous dispositions usually affect: yet shall not his recreations so
seize on him, as to fore-slow any useful Offices in him. He divides his day
into distinct hours, his hours into devout ta^kes. His affability ^ixt with
sweetness of bounty, his bounty with alacrity, has so won his family, as no
earthly state ca^ promise more felicity. It is like a well-rigg'd ship; every
one knows their peculiar charge or office: their love unto their mast^r makes
it no eye service. His Garner is his C^untryes Mag^zin. If a famine threaten
that Coast, hi^ provision must be brought forth, purposely to (...) down the
Market. His heart bleeds to see a famished soul languish; he will therefore by
timely relief succor him lest he per^h. He sets not his aims on
purchasing: it contents him well to preserve what his Ancestors l^ him. He
makes even with the World, as he would with his own Soul. One principal
care counterpoizeth the rest: yea, the more s^riously to address himself to
this only one, h^ disvalues all the rest. Neither is there o^ght which
conferres more true glory on these deserving actions, than his disesteeme of
worl^ly praise or popular applause. He shuts his ea^e when he hears himself
approved, and rejoices most within himself when his deservingest actions are
least observed. The Beggar or distressed Traveller, he holds to be his most
(...) benefactors, rather than he theirs. He^ holds it better to give than
ta^e* wherefore he acknowledges himself their debtor, who petition his alms
in this nature. Knock at his gate, and you shall find it not surely but
civilly guarded; e^ter his Court, and you shall see the poor and needy
charitably rewarded; Ascend up higher and step into his Hall, and you shall
read this posie in Capital Letters inscribed; A PILGRIMS SOLACE IS A
CHRISTIANS OFFICE. Suppose Christmas now approaching, the ever-green Ivy
trimming and adorning the portalls and partcloses of so frequented a building;
the usual Carolls, to observe antiquity, cheerfully sounding; and that which
is the complement of his inferior comforts, his Neighbors whom he tenders as
members of his own family, join with him in this Consort of mirth and melody.
Bu^ see! The poor man's comfort is now declining with the old year; which
fi^ls their eyes as full of water, as he is of sickness through infirmity of
nature. This Mirror of hospitality now breathes sh^rt; it is to be ^eared he
will breath his last. He may leave an Heir to inherit his means, but never
his mind. Well, funeral blacks are now to be worn as well inward as outward;
his Son mournes least, though he be at most cost. It is thought erelong, he
will mourn in Scarlet, for vanity has seaz'd on him already, and got him to
forsake his Country, and forswear Hospitality.

11. A Launderer
IS a Linen Barber, and a mere Sa^urnine; for you shall ever fi^de her in the
Sudds. Used she Clipping as much as washing, sh^e were an egregious
Counterfeite, and might quickly come within compass of the Statute. She is an
Epicene, and of the doubtful g^nder: for a L^nderer may be asw^ll a Male as a
Female, by course of nature. But for her, there would be no ^hifter; with whom
qu^rterly she becomes a Sharer. She is in principal request with Collegiat
Vnderbutlers, Pu^ie Clarks in Innes of Cha^y, with other officers of inferior
qu^litie; unless higher gra^uates will deigne to show her their humility, In
Progress time (being f^llen into Contempt) she follows the Court; and
consorts familiarly with the Black-guard. B^t she scorns the motion (I mean
to be so poorly employed) during the flourishing Spring of her youth: for she
has good vailes, besides her standing wages: and now and then gets good bits
which neither the Principal nor Seniours know of. Her young Masters, whom she
serves with all diligence, need no Cock but her: she will come to their
Chambers, and wake them early; and if they have the Spirit to rise, may at
their pleasure use her help to make them ready. She is a notable witty,
ta^ing Titmouse; and can make twenty sleevelesse ar^ in hope of a good turn.
By her frequent recourse and familiar concourse with professors of Law, she
knows by this how to put a Case: and amongst her ignorant Neighbors can argue
it when she has done. In some ByAlley is her dwelling generally: where she
keeps a quarter, as if she were She-Constable of the Ward. If she demean
herself wisely, and pretend only a car^ of preserving her honesty, she may
come in time to some unexpected advancement. But truth is (as it fares commonly
with the easiest and tractablest natures) she is of that yielding temper as she
cannot endure to be long wooed before she be won. Her Fort may be sacked by
paper pellets of promises and assumpsits, if she be credulous; or by silver
shot of plates and p^eces, if she be covetous. Whence it is, that in very
short time, the dropping fruit of this Launderer, becomes like a Medlar; no
sooner ripe than rotten; yea many times rotten before it b^e ripe. Now for the
Stock which should support her trade: a very little will set her up, and f^rre
less will bring her down. She will find friends, if her parts be thereafter.
Neither shall she need much curiosity in her (...): only she must indent
with her breast to be secret, with her (...) to be silent, and with her (...)
to be constant. She must not tell what she sees; dictate on what she
hears; nor blush at what she enjoyes. She must be modestly seeming strange,
where she most affects, and relish nothing more than what she inwardly
rejects. To salve the credit of the Punie Clerk her young-Master, she turns
honest woman, and matcheth herself to the Houses Botcher. The necessity of
the time is such, as these hopeful Nuptials must not stay for a License,
admit they could purchase it. Delay breeds danger; and so pregnant the wench
is grown, as she doubts lest before she be honored with the style of Bride,
she become a Mother. But her long experience in law-quirks has sufficiently
informed her; a Child borne within marriage is freed from bastardy, and may
inherit all their hereditarie lands, if they had a^y. She by this has aspi^'d
to the purchase of a gown and a f^lt: so as she now wives it, as if she were
Head-Marsh^ls wife of the Ward. She has got a neat gilded book too, to make
her Neighbors conceit her to be a Scholar: but happy were she if she were
as guiltless of lightn^sse as of learning: for the Cover, she may handle it,
and upon alleging of a text of Scripture toss it, but for the C^nt ^ts, as
she knows them not, so she greatly cares not. She now scorns to be so meanly
employed in her own person, as she has formerly been; she has got her
therefore a brace of VnderLa^ndresses to supply her place, perform her charge,
and go through-stitch with her trade. The sweat is theirs; but the sweet is
hers. These must be accomptants weekly of their commings in; and return a
just particular of all such vailes, profits, or emoluments, as usually or
accidentally have any way accrued. She now stands upon her pantofles forsooth;
and will not wet her hand, lest she spoil the grain of her skin: Mistress
Joan has quite forgot that she was once Judge. Yet she keeps ^ome ancient
records of her former youthful profession. When a Horse grows old, he loses
the mark in his mouth: but it is not so with her, for she in her age retains
the mark of the beast in her nose, that is flat. Several ways she has to
advance her inconstant means in several places: If her continuance in Court
purchase ^er the least scruple of esteem, by petitionarie course she labors
her preferment: but her request ^ust not be great, because her repute is but
small. Which upon procurement, must suffer many divisions, subdivisions, and
subtractions, before she be admitt^d to a share. If her abode in the City,
has poss^st her mistress^s with an opinion of her secrecy: she is made an
useful agent that way. Nothing ca^ be too dear for her: she becomes a
gainefull factor, and though she neither do nor suffer, yet receives she with
both hands from agent and patient. If her residence in any incorporate society
has got her esteem, her age r^ceives for her long service a pencionary
recompense: mean time exchange of broomes for old shoes, and other vailes of
decayed Linen raise her a maintenance. But like a Barbers-ball, with much
rinsing and rubbing she now grows quite washed away. She dies neither very
rich nor contemptibly poor; neither with much love, no^ great hate. So much
she has reserved out of all the labors of her life, as will buy some small
portion of diet bread, Comfits, and burnt Claret to welcome in her Neighbors
now ^t her departing, of whose cost they never so freely tasted while she was
living.

12 A Metall-man
IS nothing less than what his name imports. He has a beetle head, and a
leaden heel. The Emblem of him is expressed in the hollow-chamell voice of that
walking Trunkhos'd goblin, any ends of gold or silver? The Archartist in this
Mineral is the Alchymist; for the rest are all sublunarie unto him, he only
Mercury sublimate unto them. His Stoves, Limbecks, and materials are already
provided: his longacres have been measured out to m^ke his provisions come in.
He hold^ himself nothing inferior to Kelley in art, he only wishes but
himself like fate. Seven years are now expired, since his Promethean fire
received first light; and yet the Philosophers stone may be in Sysip^s pocket,
for ought that he knows. The^e is no Artist that has more (...) than he,
upon less grounds. He doubts not but before the sign enter Aries, hee-shall
like another Jason, purchase a golden fl^ece. It is the highest employment
wherein he ingageth his most intimate friends, to furnish him with sufficiency
of Brass, Copper, Pewter, etc. He will make the state rich enough, if he
have enough to do withal. By this, he thinks he sees a corner of the
Philosophers Stone, yet he cannot discern the color. Hope of profit bereaves
him of sleep; but the cost of his art deprives him of profit. It is a wonder
to observe what rare crotchets and ^evices he retains purposely to guli
himself! What choice structures (...) intends to erect out of his pure
Elixirs! Yea, so far deluded is he with the strength of a transported
imagination, as one might easily make him believe that the reparation of Paul's
was only reserved to be his Master-p^ece; and that many of our Duke Humfreys
knights expected when he should perfect it. The flourishing Citiewalkes of
Moorfields, though delightful, yet not so precious or beautiful as he will
make them. Those sallow-coloured El^s, must be turned into yellow-H^sperian
Plants: where every Bankerupt Merchant may pluck a branch at his pleasure, to
resu^nish his decayed treasure. O the transcendencie of Art! He looks back
at the hour of his Nativitie, and by a prob^ble argument of the Constellation
wherein he was borne, he gathers that the Crucible of his brain must be the
Indies of this State. Not a morning shines upon him, wherein he expects not
before the West receive him, but that his hopes shall enrich him, and those
many jeering Mountebanks that attend him. Every days experience, becom^s now a
precious observance: which makes him think he draws near the shore; and so
he does, for now the ship of his fortune rides at low water. Yet i^ he as rich
in mountains of golden conceits and ayrie imaginations as ever he was: His
Speculation in time will make him as rich as a new-shorne-sheepe; but this his
wisdom believes not. Heyday; what a racket he keeps? Elevate that tripode;
sublimate that pipkin; Elixate your antimonie; intenerate your Chrysocoll;
accelerate our Crucible. Quick, quick, the Mint stays for our metal. Let
our materials be infused. Our Art requires your diligence; your diligence
ample recompense. How much may one hours remissness prejudice this consequent
business? Frustrate the States expectance? And perpetually estrange the
richest discovery that ever age brought forth, from our Successors. Dear
Democritus, hold thy sides or they will crack else! This diving Paracelsian
seeks Amalthea, but finds Amalga. His metalls have more Moon than Sun in
them. How he tyres himself in a wilde-goosechase? As near he was yesterday
as to day, yet poorer to day than yesterday. His Art ha^s arrived her secretst
port, attained her highest pitch. Which makes him now convert his Speculation
into admiration: wondering that this Stone should be so long concealed from
him. By this time he encounters with a nimble Quackesalver, who forgeth new
(...) to delude him. He encourages (...) i^ his attempt, seconds him with his
advice and assistance; purposely to extract out of ^he decreasing Limbecke of
his fortunes a monthly allowance. H^e limits him a time, which expired, his
hopes are arrived: but before the time come, this nimble Doctor is flowne. But
what more powerfully prevalent than error? All these rubbes shall not draw him
from his byas. He will not desist till he see an end of something; and so he
may quickly, for his fortunes now he a bleeding But now his expense becomes
more easy and temperate: for though his device be delicious, yet the ebb of
his fortunes makes him in his disbursements more parcimonious, and in
distillations less precious. Before the next Month end, his art has wrought
out the end of his state: so as this Alchymist becomes All-A-Mist, and
Theogenes-like ends in smoak^. A Bill must be now erected, a Chemical Schedule
pasted, where his hopeful Utensils were lately reared; and if any m^tall'd
Spark will spend some Crowns in the same Science, the Pupil may have a
Tutor: whose judgment and precious experiments he may use for boord-wages.
Now will any one buy a kettle, a Caldron, or a Limbeck? How much is the State
deceived in this greatmans masterpeece? How his hopes are thawed? His fortunes
distilled? And his aims miserably cloz'd? How this threede-bare Philosophe^
shruggs, shifts, and shuf^les for a cup of six, whose thirsty desires were
once for aurum potabil^? Few or none compassionate his infelicitie, save only
the Metallmen of Lo^hburie, who expected for their grosser metalls ready vent
by means of his philosophy. His sumptuous fires are now extinguished, the oil
of his life's lamp consumed, his hopes into impossibilities resolved, and he
in his last Scene on earth, to earth returned.

13. A Neuter
IS an Hedg^hog; Who ha^h two holes or portalls in his siege; one toward the
South, another toward the North. Now when the Southern wind blows, he stoppes
up that hole, and turns him Northward: Again, when the Northerne^ Wind
blows, he stoppes up that hole likewise, and turns him Southward. Such an
Vrchin is this Neuter, who will suite himself with the habit of any profession
for lucre. Gregory Nazianzen called Iuli^n the Apostata a Cham^leon; for he
could change himself into all shapes and colors. Such a Cha^ is the lukewarm
Laodicean. What abundance of zeal he will pretend among the zealous? What
indifferency among our Timists? How hot he is in palate, but how cold at heart?
He has procured a dispensation with his Conscience, that he may the warilier
and wiselier run with the tide. He holds him a simple Christian that will
profess publicly. what he holds to be Orthodoxall privately. It is his Art
to put the wrongside outward; and to dazzle the eye of the World with fair
shows, and golden shadows. What Cringes he will make to a rising favorite?
How he will mould him to his temper? And scrue himself into his knowledge in
servilest manner? His own shadow cannot be more inseparably attendant, nor
more officiously observant. It is the bent of his studies to dive into his
disposition; and then to apply fuel of his own provision to feed it. He
desires to be nothing less than what he seems: for he fears by wearing
himself too familiarly in the world, he might in short time wear himself
out. A formal Moral zeal calls him to the Church; where he has one
Pharisaicall eye to look up, and an other Publican eye to look down. For the
Notes which he gathers, they are either worldlypoliticall, or none at all. He
will resolve of nothing definitely without some reservation; but of all others,
what religion he will be of, must be his last resolution. He were a wiseman
that could catch him in any Tenet that he holds. He admires the d^ ^ipline of
our Church; but is not (...) resolved as yet to be a member of her. He grounds
his says on what the bravest, not on what the best hold. Preferment is a
tender object to his eye; he affects naught with more fervor; receives naught
with more honor; forgoes naught with more displeasure. A Conscience (says he)
I profess; but yet I would not have it so nicely scrupulous, as to reject
opportunity of profit; that conscience is too regular, that maks her master a
beggar; He is too Stoicall that is wholly for his Cell, and nothing for the
World. Thus he labors to take off the fire-edge from his Conscience, and to
cool it; to the end he may be l^sse limited or restrained by it. By which
means, he begins to be more secure; since liberty of Conscience took
from him all grounds of a religious fear. Propose now the way, so it direct
him to profit, which he will not tread with delight. One minutes Task in the
School of virtue tastes of more strictness, than Iliads of years in the
Temple of Mammon. He has now taken a course with his Consci^ce for quietness
sake, never to call it to an Evening account: that might trouble his sleep,
and distemper his next days projects. He ha^h enough to do, that has to do
wi^h the World. (...) Contemplations might hinder his practice that way.
Whatsoever therefore he (...) himse^fe to be, he has made a covenant with his
heart to cl^ave to the world, as the Remora to the ship: He has conceived
such infinite (...) in it, as he can relish (...) ^t what savou^ of it. (...)
(...) therefore are those M^morials which inform him in this thriving course
of godless policy: and which he holds as Maxims in each society. He will
seem to love the Church, but live by sacrilege. Honor his L^ra, but creep
c^nningly into h^s (...). Hold the middle path betwixt Baal and B^thel. Hear
much, and observe it, speak little that may be obs^rved; and lastly remain in
such s^spence in matters of religion, as to be as far from resolving at the
day of his death, as the hour of his entering. Excell^nt conclusions, drained
from a dangerous sconce, but a far more dangerous soul. What will this
Puffin come to in time? Long has he walked in the Clouds; and hung his
conscience in so even a balance b^twixt Atheism and Religion as one grain
would cast him. How s^rious an Instrum^nt of Justice he will show himself
toward Recusants, upon (...) tou^ the execution of Penal Statutes? Again,
how remiss and conniving, if he perceive no such thing intended? It is a
singular argument of his wisdom not to fish in troubled waters, nor swim
against the stream. He makes that use of religion, which men make of upright
shoes; to wear them with indifferency on either foot. Upon perusal of
ancient Martyrologies (but seldom is he so well employed) he wonders at men's
constancy, how they could find in their heart, by insisting on scruples, to
deprive themselves of life and liberty. The pains of compiling so large a
volume might have been saved, had all those constant professors b^ene
possessed of his spirit. Thus has he lived to deceive all the World, and
himself the most. For he, who tendered the welfare of no friend; nor relied
on any virtuous ground; nor reserved one poor minute to meditate of the
Supreme good; nor valued ought worthy esteem, but what the world brought
forth; nor ever en^ered into consideration of his own estate; nor accounted
otherwise of reli^ion, than as a Cloak; nor of Christianity, than as a
dream; nor of the whole practice of Piety, than of ^umane policy. Behold how
his fr^ends discard him; hypocrisy arraignes him; his long belull'd Conscienc^
awakes him; Atheism condemns him; and his desperate contempt of verity
hopelesly torments him! See how this grand Politician has deluded himself!
How this co^terfeite picture, who was neither masculine nor feminine Christian,
but a Neuter, has caught himself in his own ^rror! His discourse of Heaven,
was as of a matter of complement; his treaty of Earth, as of his choicest
continent. But now ^is mouth is fill^d with gravel; and that which once
che^r'd him, has now choaks him. To his outward friends he walked in a mist,
but to his inward he c^uld ^ot; by the former as he was discarded, so by the
latter is h^e discovered. Long time he d^spenc'd with Con^cience: who (...)
h^th vowed no longer (...).

14. An Ostler
IS a ^ottleman; not a Ba^ber in Europe can set a better edge on his razor,
than he can set on horses teeth, to save hi^ provender. The proverb is; The
masters eye (...) his horse; but the Ostlers starves him. Now, if you desire to
h^ve your Palfrey make quick dispatch of his provender, m^ke your Ostler his
Supervisor, and by nimble co^veyance he will quickly make an empty Manger. What
a rubbi^g and scrubbing he will make in hope of a small reward at cloze of a
reckoning? What humble Obeisance may you expect at his hand, when he prostrates
himself in such low service to the heels of your Horse? Thus labors he by
currying your beast, to curry favor with your self. He has no Litter^re,
though he trade something ^are it. He^ profits out of measure; his Ostrie must
not be tide to Winchester. If Oats seem dear, he will tell you how much
their price quickened at every quarter last Ma^ket day: and he has one close
at his elbow that will second him. He will justify it, that no Host on all
the Road got his hay so sweetly or seasonably as his Master. Though th^re be
Ostlers of all Countries, yet generally are they Northern men; and those you
shall find the simplest, but diligent'st, and consequently the honestest; for
industry and simplicity are antidotes against knavery. But it is twenty to
one, he will be as near your Co^ntreyman as he can inform himself,
purposely to procure your better respect, and purchase the larger reward. He
will tell you, if he find you credulous, that your horse hurts at W^thers, or
he is hoofe-bound; but refer all unto him, and you shall be sure to pay
both Sadl^r and Farrier for nothing. He can direct you to a pot of the
nappiest Ale in all the street, and conduct you too, so the Tapster know not.
He has sundry petty-officers, as Vnder-Ostlers, Litter-strowers,
Boot-catchers, to whom little accrues after his deductions. He pro^esseth some
skill in horses, and knows how to cure diverse maladies with Oil of Oats; but
he will never cure so many as he has diseased, nor fat so many as he has
starved. To a bare stranger that promises but small profit to the Stable, he
will be as peremptory as a Beadle. He will feed his horse with delays and
demurres, and cause him stay greater guests leisure. But how officious the
Snake will be, where he smells benefit? He speaks in his Ostrie (the chief
seat of his Hypparchie) like a Frog in a Well, or a Cricket in a Wall. When
Guests horses stand at Livery, he sleeps very little, fearing lest they should
eat too much; but at bottle, he is more secure; howsoever, he has a dainty
Deutifrice that will charm them. He is a constant stable man; and herein
only commendable; consta^cy in respect of his place, and humility in respect
of his person, makes him both known and k^avish. He has a notable glib vein
in vain discourse: No Country can you name, but it is in his verge; his long
acquaintance with people of all conditions and Countrie^, is become so
Mathematically useful unto him, as he has the Geographicall M^ppe of the
whole Co^tinent (so far as this lland extends) i^ his illiterate pericranium;
which he vents by way of description, upon every occasion; and this he makes
his weekly StableLecture. He is at very little charge with his (...) but for
his ^alse sh^rt and nightcap; which he wears as Ornaments to his p^ofession,
and in them acts his daily penance: for it is his use to encounter your Pal^ry
in a shirt of male, be he male or female. If he rise to any preferment, he may
say, Gramercy horse; yet will he hardly confess so much. He aspires sometimes
to Tapster, holding it the more beneficial place; but howsoever, better for
him, for he may now duke of free cost. Long-Winter nights watching, and early
rising (for he must be either the Guests Cock, or they his) have much
foreslow'd his diligence: for now he will endure a call or two before he
rise. But this is no fault of his, but the diversity of his occasions: for his
desire is naturally to rise early, and to be officious to his guests before
they be stirring, in giving their horses provender, which they may dispatch in
a trice, before ever their Masters come out of their chambers. When he finds
convenient time and leisure, he will toss a pot sociably with his Neighbor.
But none are so familiar with him as the Smith and Sadler, whom he is bound to
present (upon some private composition) to any Gentleman or other, that shall
have occasion to use them. If he may make so much bold with you, he will send
his commends sweetened with a Nutmeg, by you to the Ostler of your next I^ne;
and this bege^s reciprocal courtesies betwixt them, with titles too, which
they are wholly guiltless off; as honest Boy; true Blade, etc. But these
styles are but given them by their fellow Ostlers, whose desertlesse
commendations exact as much at their hands. If he be but indifferently honest
(as I would have no superlative degrees of honesty in that profession) he
improves the benefit of the In^ above comparison: All desire to harbor where
there is an honest Ostler. Which opinion once purchased, he retains for ever;
and by it strengthens him with his Masters favor. He begins now to be a
Landed man by means of his honesty and usury. If he^ have the grace to stay
the good hour, he may succeed his Master, and by matching with his M^stresse
rise to Inne-keeper. But this is very rare, for he is not by half so neat a
Youth as the Chamberlain. Long and sore did he labor in the Spring of his
youth, before he came to reap any crop in the (...) of his age. He is now
grown resty. P^ofit is an alluring bai^e, but it cannot make him do that
which he did. Now he loves to s^ort under the Manger, and sleep out his time
before his departure: yet he cannot endure that any should succeed him in his
place, though he cannot supply it himself. Well, suppose him now drawing on to
his last Quarter; some graspes or gripes of mortality he feels, which makes
him conclude in his own Element; Grass and Hay, we are all mortal. He could
for all this, find in his heart to live one year longer; to compare his last
years vailes and this together; and perchance, redeem his arrerages too with
better measure. But his Ostrie is shut up; the Guests gone; their reckoning
paid; only a poor Guest of his own stays yet in her I^e. and has not
discharged. But now I see the I^e dissolved; the Sign of her being fallen to
Earth, and de^aced and his Inmate lodged, where the great Inne-keeper has
appointed.

15 A Postmaster
IS a Chequerman: who though he gallop ^euer so fast, yet can he hardly with
his post overtake his ^ay; for that is always before hand with him. The first
question he asks you, (for else he has none material) Where is your
Commission? Though you know the length of his stage, and price of his miles,
yet his Post-boy has horses of all prices: to whom if you be not liberally
minded, look for no other but to be lamely mounted. One would verily think
that he had some charm in the blast of his horn, for he makes Passengers
leave their high-road and give way in the midst of winter, to foundred Hackneys
inevitable danger. He rides as securely as if he were in fee with Highway
men, before whom he may whistle as merrily as an empty. Traveller, without
lea^t fear of encounter. Our Night is his artificial day, as he makes it.
There is nothing that gives so terrible a report in his ear as a packet of
Letters, for that posts away at free cost. To save weight he seldom rides
with a band, unless it be upon affairs of highest consequence, and then this
hopeful sprig holds it no small honor to pride himself in the wear of an
halter. He is generally more peremptory than other guides; for you may have
them as you two can agree; and they will usually abate of their demands; but
two pence half penny a mile is his price, and he will not abate a denere of
it through out all his stage. He will discourse with you most cursorily,
touching what he heare^ of matters of state: and to gain him more esteem in
the opinion of the ignorant, will not stick to belly his knowledge. He is
valiant, not by natural instinct, but by virtue of his Commission, which
authorizeth him to take way of his betters. He can retur^e a surly answer, or
resolve a waggish question, and this is wit enough for one of his profession.
He is familiarly versed with oaths of all natures; and these he blusters out
as frequently, as if they were his natural Rhetoric. He quarters out his
life into four Cantons, Eating, drinking, sleeping and riding; but the second
and last are two principal ones. H^e trusseth up your Port^antua wi^h all
(...) and alacrity, to (...) your good opi^ion, but most of all i^ hope of your
bounty. H^s (...) a^e merely voluntaries, which (so prevalent is custom) he
as constantly expects, as if they were his (...): your liberality makes him
register your name; enroule you among his Benefactors; and take notice of you
upon your retur^e: yet must you continue your munificence, or former Bounties
will dive deep into the Lethe of forgetfulness. He will be your servile
servant so long as he tast^s of your benevol^ce; your pampered lade shall not
be foundred of all four, your palfrey loosely saddled, or budget carelessly
trussed. Besides, to expr^sse a kind of moral remembrance of curtsies
received, like a grateful Gnat, he will recommend your bounty to his
succeeding Post-boy, who will accurately furnish you with a dreami^g Drom^dary,
to accelerate your journey. He rides altogether upon spur, and no less is
(...) for his dull supporter; who is ^s familiarly acquainted with a
^anterbury, as he who makes Chaucer his Author, is with his Tale; and who by
sore expe^ence and spur-ga^'d diligence is grown well-neare as intelligible as
his M^ster, in the distance of his stage; further than which it is impossible
to hale him. He rides most commonly with on^ spur; and to him that is so
inquisitive, as he will demand the reason of it, he can readily shape him
this waggish answer; He holds two superfluous, for if the one ^ide of his lad^
go forward, he thinks he will not leave the other behind. He becomes in
short time an excellent Farrier; which knowledge he attaines out of his own
proper but bitter experience: for his Stable is a very shop of all diseases;
Glanders, Yellowes, Fashions, Maladers, Curbs, Scratches, Staggers, Strangles,
Ringbones, Windgalls, Navelgalls, Bogspavings, with a Myriad more of practical
contingents become his familiar acquaintance. On these he daily practices,
but rarely cures. A Pack of Dogs he usually keeps, which he feeds with the
provision of his own Stable: For he that used to carry one, in short space
becomes Carrion. He holds shoes usel^sse implements, for he seldom rides a
bootl^sse ^rrand. And now drawing near the end of his stage, he is neither
much wiser nor richer, then when he first entered the world. His life as it
properly resembles a post, (for it cannot have relation to an apter comparison)
is now very nearely run out a breath. And yet observe the miserable condition
of this Horse-fly! Though he never gained farther experience in the whole
course of his life than the practice of some curelesse cures, the distance of
his own stage, to give a windy summons with his horn, and to hoise a pot of
ale at the door, yet nothing is so bitter to him as the remembrance of his
dissolution. His life was a Labor, his age a Pilgrimage, his service servitude.
No rest, no repose, poor repast tasted he on earth: yet preferres he this
Labor before a quiet and reposed harbor. Many years has he spent to small
purpose; his hours are useless; his endeavors fr^itlesse; and now after such
a quotidian fever of an Hectick^ labor, being fallen from his horse, and out
of request (by a writ of ea^e) with that science he becomes worms provender:
for his Legac^es, they are to be discharged out of arrerages from the
Exchequer.

16. A Quest-man
IS a man of account for this year: yet of (...) such honor i^ NewTroy, as he
was in Old-Rome. He never goes without his Notebooke, which. (...) ^ee have so
much Lati^e, he (...) ^is VADE MECVM. Where i^ he ha'^ the names of all the
(...), middle. sizemen, and (...), within his whole Ward. And this is all the
m^thod (...) is r^quired in his Commonplace book. He is a sworn man; which
Oa^h serves an ^njunction upon his Conscience to be honest Howsoever, he must
be brought to account for it. The day of his Election is ^ot more ready for
him, than h^ for it. He assumes upon him a parcel of illb^seeming gravit^e;
strokes his beard, as if it were the Dew-lap of his conce^te; fetches an
imperti^ent (...), purpo^ely to pump for more wit; and co^cludes with a set
punctual gesture, laying his soape-besmeared hand upon his reverend breast: God
make me an honest man. Whence he most ingenuously implies, that he is not as
yet, made that man he should be: but much may be done in time. He keep^s an
^speciall Register of all such ^nmates a^ nestle within his Ward: whose
poverty must be squeezd to eas^ the richer; yet slighted with neglect for
their labor. These he visits qua^terly, which visitation they (poor Gnats)
may properly term a plague; which in time they recover of, for it leaves not
a token. Some treasure he has under his hand, which he must return; he can
convert very little to his own use, nor defeat the Parish of any house rent:
for he has as wise men as himself in the Ward, who now in his lifetime are
made his Supervisors, to look to his fingers, that the pretended gravitie or
reverence of his person authorize him not to abuse his place. This makes many
more unwilling to be so dignified; because much labor but small profit is to
accrue it. Yet his wifes Pew in the Church is a mighty motive: for by this
means she becomes exalted according to the dignity of his office, which with
a most supercilious zeal she accepts; and doub^s not but some of her
neighbors will envy it. This place has not put on more reverence in him,
than state on her. Eye but her postures, and you will confess it. Her eye is
wandering, wooing observance. Her f^ote most gingerly paced, for more
state-reservance. Her tougue too civ^cally mincing, for vulgar attention. Mean
time, this Questman he^ husband, the better to enable him for his place,
becomes frequently versed in sundry ancient Presidents. He casts his eye
behi^de him, to see wh^t was done before him: and he smiles at the simplicity
of his preceding Officers; and turning to himself, most Sagely concl^des:
The^e wanted thy sconce Boy. He is now a^mitted (by (...) of the reverence of
his hairs) to the Learned Counsel of the Ward. Where he shoots his bolt with
the foremost. Some Orders or Parochial constitutions, he has been long
studying, which he purposes the next Revestrie day to present to the rest of
his worshipful Brethren, to the end they may be put in speedy execution. But
l^ke good purposes, (the more is the pity) they seldom take. After Evening
prayer time, he descends immediately into the low Gallery, which he with the
rest of the wise masters make their Consistory. Where (like good Parishioners,
studious of the public good) they treat of all such abuses as are crept into
the body of their Ward. While their censures become as ^ifferent, as their
persons; their voices as their places. One shows ^imselfe a Paracelsian, and
he professes the cure of these maladies by mineralls and incisions; another a
Dioscoridan, and he holds them more curable by leniments, emplasters, and
unctions; the third a mere Mountebanke Florentine, who wraps up his receipts in
a remnant of Rhetorical bombast, but never returns one healthful patient. So
long, and as fruitless as long, debate they the cause and cure of these
^normities, till an aged nod or two dissolve their Council: and summon them to
a new (...) upon expense of half pints a piece. Where they fall in, till some
argument, whereof they are ignorant, make them fall out. All which time our
(...) scorns to be silent; as one desirous rather to speak to no purpose,
^han not to speak at all. Some quaint words has he got, which he u^derstands
not; and these he uses upon all occasions. Neither are they more ignorantly
delivered by him, than they are pitifully ad^ired by them. It is a strange
thing to observe how much he^ is improved since the last year: Neither is it
possible to dive into the reason of it. For ^ither is there some admirable
secret faculty concealed from the judgment of man, in the Lining of a furred
gown, or else it is to be wondered at, whence this late-bred sufficiency of
his should proceed. But in this surely h^e shows himself most wise, in that
he communicates not his knowledge to any but the ignorant: for it is that
makes his judgment pass for current. But his year is now upon expiration;
and his Account drawing to his preparation. Where Honesty and (...) m^ete,
there cannot choose but be a good account. And in him neither can b^e wanting;
for his b^ard shows the one, and his place proves the other. He cannot now
show himself so shallow nor appear so silly, but he will retain the opinion
of a deepehead-peece: For he is now o^e of the Seniours. A very small portion
of understandi^g, and less of wit, will serve him to spinne out the remainder
of his time. For a Cipher in some place stands in more account, than a figure
does in another. What rests now, but that he rest, since his rents are
collected, his account perfected, himself discharged, and another pewfellow,
equal to him both for worth and wit, by general vote and voice elected?

17. A Ruffian
IS a roaring Dam without a Ruff. None more valiant than he in tongue, less
resolute in heart. He has vowed to be ill-condition'd in all Companies; and
to press a quarrel rather than miss it. A white-liver'd Soldier and a
Gallant is the fittest patient he can practice on. One would think his very
language would fall at ods with it self, and out-brave the Speaker. He has a
dangerous eye, not to strike (for so I mean not) but to move ones patience to
strike him. For a kind of uncivile contempt does always attend his look, as
base provoking language accompanies his tongue. He has ranked himself with a
troop of shallow uncivile Shallops, like himself: whose chiefest valor
consists in braves, scru'd faces, desperate mouchato's, newminted Oaths; all
which molded together, make a terrible quarter in an Ordinary. He wears more
metal on his heel, than in his purse. He triumphs damnably on some stolen
favor, be it lighter than a feather, and threatens mischief to him that will
not pledge her. But it falls out many times, that he is bastinado'd out of this
humor. You shall best distinguish him by a nastie neglectfull carriage,
accoutred with disdain and contempt, so as his very countenance is a Letter of
Challenge to the beholder. Those which know him, rather jeere him, than fear
him: for they experimentally know, that a Pigmey would beat him. And with such
(forasmuch as his shoulders have felt their censure) he keeps a fair and
civil quarter. His Sovereignty is shown highest at May-games, Wakes,
Summerings, and Rushbearings: where it is twenty to one but he becomes
beneficial b^ore he part, to the Lord of the Man our by means of ^ bloody
nose or a broken pate. He will now and then for want of a better Subject to
practice on, squabble with the Minstrell, and most heroically break his Drone,
because the Drone cannot rore out his tune. The wenches poor souls, sh^ke in
their skins, fearing a mischief: and entreat their ^hearts to give him fair
language. All is out a square while he is there. But th^se are but his (...)
pagea^ts. He will i^trude most frontl^sly into any Company; and advance
himsel^e with the highest at an Ordinari^; yet many times he eats far more
than he can defray; yea, now and then he receives where he should disburse;
a kick, I mean, from some surly Naprie groom, which serves in full discharge
of his Commons. Never crept fardell of worser qualities into more choice and
select companies. But these he cannot consort with long. For their Purses are
too strong-string'd, their hearts too well-(...), their hands too truly-metal'd
to veil to his b^senesse. He must be discarded, and with disgrace, if he haste
not. Suppose him then with his restie regiment dropping out of a threepennie
Ordinary: where the last man's Cloak is sure to be seaz'd on for all the
reckoning. But when the Cook eyes it more precisely, and considers how
irreparably it is aged, he will not take it in full satisfaction of his hungry
Commons, without some other pawn: which for fear of Clubbes, they
submissively condescend to: by disroabing one of their Accomplices, who may best
spare it, of an ancient Buff-jerkin; whose lapps you may imagine, by long use,
so beliquor'd and belarded, as they have oil enough to fry themselves without
any other material. Yet they cannot pocket up this indignity with patience:
wherefore they vow to be revenged, which for most part, is as basely clozed.
Next night therefore, these nittie Ha^ters intend with strong hand to break
his glass^indow's, or at dead-time of night to pull down his Sign: and so
ends their fair quarrel. To a play they will hazard to go, though with never a
rag of mon^y: where after the second Act, when the D^ore is weakly guarded,
they will make sorcibl^ entry; a knock with a Cudgel is the worst; whereat
though they grumble, they rest pacified upon their admittance. Forthwith, by
violent assault and assent, they aspire to the two-pennie room; where being
furnished with Tinder, Match, and a portion of decayed Barmoodas, they smoke
it most terribly, applaud a profane jest unmeasurably, and in the end grow
distastefully rude to all the Company. At the Conclusion of all, they single
out their dainty Doxes, to clozeup a fruitless day with a sinful evening.
Whereto (truth is) they repair, rather for relief then to releeve: yea, their
house of sin becomes ofttimes their house of Correction: for when they will not
pay for what they call for, Lais and her Laundrie will return them their
payment by assistance of such familiar Inmates, as she will make bold to call
for. But suppose now this Ty^darian Tribe dispersed, out of all civil
societies discarded, and with no better entertainment than contempt,
wheresoever received. Our Ruffian has left his Mates, and they him. Poverty
has now seaz'd on him; for his brain, it is as barren of a shift, as his
back guiltless of a shirt. Those Iron tools of his, with which he
affrighted his Scar-crowes, hang now in Long-lane for a sign of the Sword and
Buckler. His slasht Suite, like L^bels or tart-papers hang peeee meal,
estranged both from substance and color. His yingling sp^rre has lost his
voice, his head his lock; yea, his decayed Lungs the puff of a R^rer. The wall
now must be no Subject of quarrel; nor his distended Mouch^to a Spectacle of
terror. The extremest effects of hunger, have taken him off from standing
upon points of honor. He would gladly encounter with death if he durst: But
there was such distance betwixt him and the rememberance of it, during the
whole progress of his unfruitful life, as now it startles him to entertain^
the least thought of death. Yet may this be one of his inferior comforts, he
leaves nothing behind him, that may be termed properly his own, that is worth
enjoying. In a word, he cannot be so weary of the World, as it was long since
of him. Never was Creature less useful or more unfruitful; Let it content
hi^, that he has prevented that contempt by dying, which he should have
i^curred daily by living.

18. A Sayler
IS an Otter; an Amphibium that lives both on Land and Water. He shows
himself above Hatches in shape like a male Meeremaid, visible to the half
body. He stands at his (...), and holds out his hand to you, as if he craved
your more acquaintance: where, though he tell you, that he is your first man,
do not believe him: for his founder Zabul^n was long after Adam. He never
shows himself nimbler, nor contests with his fellows with more active
vigor, than in shooting the Bridge at a Low water. He will hazard a life in a
whirlewind without fear, rather than lose the benefit o^ his Fare. The breadth
of an inch-boord is betwixt him and drowning, yet he^ swears and drinks as
deeply, as if he were a fathom from it. His familiarity with death and
danger, has armed him with a kind of dissolute security against any encounter.
The Sea cannot rore more abroad, than he within, fire him but with liquor. He
is as watchful as a Crane in a storm, and as secure as a Dormo^se in a calm.
In a tempest you shall hear him pray, but so amethodically, as it argues, that
he is seldom versed in that practice. Fear is the principal motive of his
devotion; yet I am persuaded, for form sake, he shows more than he feels.
He loves to fish in troubled waters, have an Oar in every man's boat, and to
break the tenth Commandment in the conclusion of his lukewarmeprayer; Hey,
for a rich prize. He^ lives in a tottri^g state, and he sits himself to it.
He is as constant as the Moon in his resolves. So he can have Sea-roome, no
coast holds it self to be of more firm Land. If he play the Sea-sharke, and
advance his fortunes by a precious prize: yet to spare his Executors that
labor, he intends a course to leave them few ends of gold or silver. He must
feed his valor with the liquid spirit of some piercing Elixer: and thus he
ducks and dives out his time like a true Didapper. He makes small or no choice
of his pallet; he can sleep as well on a Sack of Pumice as a pillow of down.
He was never acquainted much with civilitie: The Sea ha'^ taught him other
Rhetoric. Compassionate himself he could never much, and much less
another. He has conditioned with the Sea not to make him sick: and it is the
best of his conceit to jeere at a ^ueasie stomach. He is more active than
contemplati^e, unless h^ turn Ast^nomer, and that is only in cases of
extremity. He is most constant to his shirt, and other his seldome-wash'd
linen. He has been so long acquainted with the surges of the Sea, as too long
a calm distempers him. He cannot speak low, the Sea talks so lo^d. His
advice is seldom taken in navall affairs; though his hand be s^rong, his
head-peece is stupid. He is used therefore as a necessary instrument of action:
for he can spinne up a rope like a Spider, and down again like a lightning.
The rope is his road, and the topmast his Beac^n. One would think his body
were wounded, for he wears pitch cloth upon it: but that is invulnerable,
unless a bullet casually find out a Loope-hole, and that quite ripps up his
Sailecloath. He partakes much of the Chameleon, when he is mounted the
topmast: where the air is his Diet-bread. His visage is an unchangeable
var^ish; neither can wind pierce it, nor Sun parch it. He ever takes worst
rest when he goes to bed most sober. He will domineere furiously in the height
of his Potation, but he is quickly cudgelled out of that humor by the Master
of the house of Correction. He has coasted many Countries, arrived sundry
havens, sojourned in flourishing Cities, and conversed with various sorts of
people: yet call him to account, and you shall find him the unfruitfull'st
Navigatour that ere you conversed with. Deep drinkers have ever shallow
memories: He can remember nothing more precisely, than the great vessel at
Heidelberg; affairs of ^tate are above his sconce. It is his best Arithmetic
to remember his months pay: and if necessity urge him not, he would scarcely
think on that either. What a starveling he is in a frosty morning with his
Seafrocke, which seems as if it were shrunk from him, and grown too short,
but it will be long enough ere he get another? His Sign is always in
Aquarius, unless he be in his pots, and then it is in Aries. He is of a
Phlegmatic watery constitution; very little Sanguine, unless it be in a
Seafight; wherein, though he expect no honor, he expresses some dying sparks
of valor, in hope to become sharer in a pyraticall treasure. He has an
invincible stomach, which Ostridge-like could well-neare digest iron. He is
very seldom subject to surfeit, or shorten the days of his watery P^lgrimage
with excess: unless it fall out upon rifling of Wines, that he endanger his
Top-saile with an over-charge. He is many times so long on Sea, as he fo^gets
his friends by Land. Associats he has, and those so constantly cleaving, as
one voice commands all. Stares cannot be more faithful in their society, than
these Hanskins in their fraternity. They will brave it valiantly, when they are
ranked together, an^ relate their adventures with wonderful terror. Yet these
relations ever halt through want of Learning, which defect abridgeth the story
of their deserving. Necessary instruments they a^e, and Agents of maine
importance in that Hydrarchy wherein they live; for the walls of their state
could not subsist without them: but least useful they are to themselves, and
most needful of others supportance. They taste of all waters and all weathers:
only the gale of prosperity seldom breathes on their sails: neither care
they much for any such Companion. They ^epe without fear of loosing what they
enjoy; and in enjoying little, they share in the less burden of cares. Yet it
is much to be wondered at, that our Sayler should have such frequent occasion
to erect his eye upward, and retain such servile dejected thoughts inward. He
converseth with the Stars, observes their motions, and by them directs his
Compass* Singular notions derives he from them, mean time he is blind to
Him that made them. He sliceth the depths, and is ignorant of Him that confine^
them; he cutteth the surging swelling waves, and thinks not of Him that
restraines them; he coasteth by the shel^s, and forgets Him that secures him.
True is that Maxim; Custom takes away the apprehension of passion. In the
infancy of his Pro^ession, there appeared not a billow before his eyes, which
conveyed not a fear unto his heart. Numerous perils has he now passed,
hourly objects of approaching danger are presented, yet these as well as those
equally slighted. Death he has seen in so many shapes, as it cannot amate
him, appear it never so terrible unto him. Yet needs must that Enemy affright
him against whom he comes, for whom he was never provided before he came.
Well; suppose him now ^rawing toward the Port, where all mortality must land.
He has tugged long enough upon the Maine, he must now gather up his vessels
within the haven. He has drawn in his sails and taken adieu of the Sea:
unless she show him so much kindness, as to receive him into her briny
bosom, and intombe him dying, whom she entertained living: which courtesy if
she tender him, the worms are deceived by him, for he goes not the way of all
flesh, but the way of all fish, whose fry feeds on him, as their foref^thers
fed him.

19. A Traveller
IS a Iourneyman; but can never be freeman, till he be end^nized in his own
Country. He is troubled with a perpe^uall migrim; at Sea he wishes to be
on Land, and on Land at Sea. He makes his life a right Pilgrimage, for he
finde^ no place to abide in, but only to ^ojourne in: so as the wandering Jew
may be his Emblem. The whole World is his Inn, where savage beasts as well as
reasonable men are his Inmates. He converseth with all Nations, and p^rtakes
of their natures: wh^rein generally, ^ice becomes a more attractive object than
virtue. Whence it is, that he oftener i^proves his knowledge, than his (...);
his language, than carriage. He takes a survey of this universe, in the sites
of Cities, Countries and Provinces; and observes what s^emes most remarkable;
mean time he observes himself so slightly, as o^e can hardly distinguish
the substance from the sh^dow. Now he is for lanching i^to the deep^; to (...)
stat^s; (...), (...) himself all the (...) ^dy age wher^in (...) out some
(...) or other from (...) make his fruitles^ (...) ^lued, himself (...) his
re^urne more (...). (...) will usually lose (...) ^lated discourse of (...)
(...): and if his memory (...), ^mpe hi^ (...). (...), ye^, n^w and (...)
absurd (...) ^cipall Subject o^ (...) upon rare (...) ^ments, which he (...)
such ^ (...), as (...) his (...) (...) er ^han (...) blazons as if he were
their Herald: styling Constantinople the storehouse of Greece; Paris the regal
of France; Venice the eye of Italy; Florence the Seat of Beauty; Rome the Lady
City* with her imprese: ORBIS IN VRBE. In which, as in all things else, he is
merely titular. He can mould himself to all conditions, fashions and
religions. But in all these three he returns for most part, far worse than
before he went forth. In the first he has learned to be loose and lascivious;
in the ^econd, phantastically humorous; in the third, strangely superstitious.
Some things he observes worth remembering, if he lived in an other age: but
like an understanding Timist, he holds no concurrence with that fashion, which
ag^ees not with the humor of his Nation. Having now changed his air, and with
continuance, his h^ire, but not one of his ^onditions; he reviewes his own
Country with a kind of disdainefull loathing, as if there were nothing in it
worthy l^ving. He disvalues out rarities, disesteemes our beauties, j^eres at
our complement, slights our entertainem^nt, and clozeth up his u^seasoned
distaste with an interjection of admiration: O the rare objects that I have
seen in my days! Then he runs on in a mere verbal circuit of affected
discourse, which the ignorant only admire, and weaker than women affect. Mean
time, he introduces some conceits of his own, as fashions in r^quest: Which
he seconds with high approv^t, being his own (...). And that he might
represent in himselse this pattern of perfection, and move others to imitate
his postures: you may suppose him walking, like one ^ade up (...) (...); (...)
him, nor (...) ^ooke ^o (...), no^ (...) ^composed (...) accoutre him. With
that c^pt he (...) ^ com^* Co^gie? And as if it we^ (...), to a man of hi^ pl^,
(...) to observe his distance, (...) a (...) or ^od* as well as pace* (...) will
rectify that error too, to make those Co^orts with whom he deignes to
converse, or com^ate himsel^e* every way acc^d as himself. He^ hol^ (...)
(...) much engaged to his o^ces: so highly has (...) with him* (...) b^ught
(...) ^o (...). Now* should ^ee (...) ^p (...)* (...) collect the be^ (...) of
his Tra^* (...) expense of his (...); (...) ^ould (...) his (...) great, his
(...) ^ts small: his ^s (...) short of hi^ d^. He is (...), ind^d, in that
which this age calls co^t He is all for your Serv^ Serva^, and titles of
lowest observance. He overcomes his Mistresses stomach with this overlarded
protest; He lives not but by her, nor desires to live but for her; he plants
his love in an equal diameter between Bellon^ and Minerv^, reason and
courage; yet is he no less barraine of the one, than cool in the other. Or
else, he marries with his instrument his voice, matched with an Italian
Canto, and ayr'd with more (...), than he has pence in his Budget. This is
the vintage of his Pilgrimage. He has traced this The of earth, and made
himself the Emblem of what he is; much has he seen, with many has he
conversed, and a full view has he taken of this inferior globe. Div^rsity of
soiles, variety of fruits, multiplicity of creatures h^ve his eyes enjoyed, yet
rest not satisfied; through many Coasts and Countries has he travell^d, yet
his experience in those peoples natures little improved; In sundry Cities has
he sojorned, yet from their knowledge now estranged. Merchants of unvalued
fortunes has he seen splitted, while their factors sported; ruined while
they rioted. Cur^izans he has observed, their sumptuous state, the fuel of
their maintenance, and how their Comic Scenes ever clozed with tragic
Catastrophe^s. Foreign savorites has he marked, their projects, designs,
^vents: What fair flourishes their first admittance to their Princes p^esence
showed; how soon those fading blossoms of vading glory were nipped. Stately
and sumptuous statues of victorious Champions has he eyed, their inscriptions
perused, and trampled upon those scattred ashes (the remains of a greater
work) which sometimes were with the b^eath of fame enlivened. Thus great
stones are become great men's covers. No distinction betwixt the Noble and
Ignoble, save only that the higher Peer^ is crushed with the heavier pills.
High and goodly structures brought to rubbish, and flourishing states to ruin,
has he noted. And now drawing toward his own native so^le; he admireth
nothing more, than to see hospitality so much honored abroad, and so
contemp^ible at home. (...) Househol^ ^ (...). He goes to the (...) knocks, but
the Court ^a's swallowed up the hall; this complete Peregrine may sooner break
his nocke thun his fast; which makes him cry out most passionately, forth of a
sensible compassion of his own necessity: O the (...) of Hospitality which I
have seen! But by this time, his Carier^ through the world has made him
weary. He has a great desire for the benefit of his Country (as he
pretends) to communicate these lean scraps of his starved Travailes to the
world. Published he would have them (according to the Erata's of his life): in
folio: but so indigested are his collections, and so illaborate his style, as
the Stationer shunnes them like a Noli me tangere, fearing their sale. Well;
though the World will not receive them; long winter-nights and his Neighbors
credulous ears shall enter^aine them. Where having told his tale, he hopes
out of the wide Circumference of his Trav^iles, to find so much ground as will
afford him a grave.

20. An Vndersheriffe.
IS a master of fence; and by deputation, the Co^ntenance of of the County
wherein he lives* The Kings Letters he opens as familiarly, as if they were
but neighbourly commends: and bring^ more unwelcome salutes from the Prince, to
his Subject, than he has thanks for. Wai^es and straies he impounds in his
pocket: for Felo^s goods, he compounds for them at his own rate: all which
he does by virtue of his Office, if there be any virtue extant in it. A
terrible pudder he keeps with his repledges and distresses: the State could
hardly subsist without such a grave* Censor. He professes more execution than
judgment. A great portion of his discretion is incorporated in his While
staff: which is as terrible to a yealous debtor, as deaths head to an ^surer.
If he attemper his Office with the balm of con^ivence, it binds an ample
recompense. Next to whetting ones knife at the Counter-gate, I hold it the
(...) assay to affront him* If you would gratify him, a better turn you
cannot do him, than by turning Informer at the Sheriffs turn. Where,
presentiments of decayed ways, But^, Blood-sheds, with other enormities, are no
less beneficial to the public state in their redress, than to his private
stock upon the distress. Notable cunning Terriers he has besides, of all
sorts and sizes; some to rouse and raise his game; Others of lighter temper to
have it in hot pursuit: the last sort on whom he principally relyes, being
stronger and stiffer, to cloze and grapple with his prey, and bring it down.
Thus he sh^wes himself every way more active than (...). He is of an
excellent memory: for if you cannot remember your debts your self, he will
put you in mind of them. His head is many times full of Proclam^tions, which,
he cannot rest, till he vent. He would make a strange Secretary, for he
will not stick to cry at the Cross, what he hears. He tenders all
serviceable observance to his Superiors, a kind of slight acquaintance to his
equals, but a disdainful contempt to his inferiors. By help of some
Law-presidents, he retains the elements of that profession, which he makes
singular use of: though he^ be no sworn Att^rney, he can accept grat^ities
in lien of fees; and by means of his i^bred ingenuity, alter the propriety of
them. He is much conversant in the Statutes: employing a great part of his time
in an useful exposition, or rather inversion of them. He would gladlybring in
profit, and keep himself within compass of statute. This is the the highest
pitch of knowledge, which his vocation calls him to: and this he hopes
conference and experience in time will bring him to. Authority is his sole
Subterfuge in all his extremities: which (by abusing his Author) many times
leaves him in his own hand. In the Subject of wr^gs; he is oftener active than
passive. None can justly lay an aspersion on him, which he has not some
underhand (...) to take to. It is his constant Te^et; So long as the root holds
untainted, the inferior sprigs and si^ may be supported: but when it grows
shaken, the branches must needs suffer. So long as he holds up his head, his
Nits may find harbor: but squeaze him, and and they are starved for ever. He
yearly improves his place by some useful project or other, which he leaves
as a Memorial of his love, and argument of his wit to all succeeding
Professors in that Cra^t. He never served as Apprentice to Plasterer or Mason,
and yet he knows the craft of da^bing; and he will lay it on before he
suffer disgrace. Crimes require Curtains; Spiders their ^auls. Places of
Office must be unct^s if vici^s. But service is no inheritance; lest therefore
in process of time, either he should grow weary of his place, or his place
of him; like a provident Pismire, he begins now in his Summer, to store up
against wi^ter. Fi^ and amercia^ents must inhaunce his rents and hereditaments:
for which he contracts now and then with the Clerk of the Market, whom he
palpably guls, and consequently proves; All Clerks are not the wisest men.
Such a parcel of ground buts near him, and is an eyesore to him: gladly would
he have it, though the owner have neither mind nor need to sell it. His
brains must plot for this purchase; and his witty Genius, after long plodding,
has found a way to supple him. Contempts, which this simple Snake never
dreamed of, must be forth with levied. No interplea nor demurre will serve; he
must timely prevent the occasion, and remove the ground (which is the
ground-^ork of his disquiet) from him and his heirs for ever, by accepting a
low price to purchase his own peace, and make the Vn^ersheriffe his friend. Of
two extremes the less is to be chosen; thus s^rues he himsel^e i^to every
convenient bargain. By this time, so important are his affairs at home, as
they estrange him from employments abro^d. His nimble f^rrets must ^ow b^ome
Pioners for their (...); ^ho coupes them, lest they should grow too fat to
endure labor. Suppose him then, who was once a man in his time, and an
experienced professant; One, who had been acquanted with most ^rits except
holy writ; served Precepts many, but observed few; retired like a Cricket to
his Oven-mouth: where he warmes himself well without, having cold comfort to
warm him within. During the whole progress of his time he was for gathering,
the residue of his days he be^owes in disposing. Hopeful Cubbs he has to
confer his hopeless state on. No matter; their ^arth-resolving fathers fines
make them fine; his amerci^ents cause them div^ deep into the Mercers book.
Now the Web of his fading fortunes i^terwoven with the injurious warp of
dishonest practices, is to b^ divi^d (...) i^ sh^dds and (...). So much he
(...) ^d h^ire, wh^ (...) ^o (...) first and last of h^ (...), (...) to his
second; so much ^o his ^rd: with comp^ portion, to b^tter his daughters
proportion^. Mean time, (see the fatal overture of this wisemans providence!)
He is called to an account before his time, (yet all in due time) for ar^erages
to the High-sheriffe his Master, and abuse of his place. His whole estate will
hardly repay the st^. He would gladly come off fair, and I cannot blame him:
But his Pi^ce road still at Harbor till now: an unexpected ^mpest has
assailed him: And he ^ust make speedy restitution for all his pillage. He
could dispense well enough with Conscience, and gain by the C^ntract: but the
misery of it is, he finds himself now at last a prisoner and in bonds to the
Sheriff^; whereby he stands bound to keep him harmel^sse (but well had it
been for his Country if he had proved so:) which security is the argument of
his T^agedie. It w^e not amiss that he altered his Will, and (though much
against his will) made his Mast^r his sole Exec^tor. It must be so: Thus by
prolling to get all, he has fool d himself out of all: Only, he may go
with more peace to Earth, since he has made so clear account on Earth. It
were a si^ne to disq^iet him, since he (...) his Quie^us est with him.

21. A Wine-soaker
IS an ingenious Engine, that runs A (...).
on Wheels. If one of the wits, he is a m^rry Cricket, or a muddy Critic; a
witty waggish Brain^-worme, and can solely hug a pot, as if it were his
darling. He is mighty valiant, for he dare be drunk; And desperate if he be
challenged, for his weapons are pot-g^ns. By this time he has called the
Drawers rogues, with much facility, yet (as he is a true Northern Blade)
joys in their felicity. And now, for it grows late, he has had his Evening
lecture, and trenching home, suppor^ed by his friendly Impress^r, makes every
foot an Indenture. He calls the Scavingers wife familia^ly (...) ^ough (...)
be as (...) as o^ of (...) ^gher (...). (...), ^rough (...) of, long (...) f^ll
(if the Cell^ (...) be open) and unsealing hi^ eyes, seeing the consorts of
iniquity, cli^ging close to a pot in the nooke of a Chimney, he ^owes
himself thrice blessed to have fallen into so sweet and sociable a Company. By
this, he falls further; whence a P^danticall (...) starts up, and asks him;
What says the Pr^phet? And he answers; H^ bade (...) go^ seek my fath^rs
Asses, and having found them to (...) again. After him struts up a most
Thrasonicall Thraskite, and asks him; What says the Calydonia^ Po^: And he
answers, That the (...) ^f an Ass in the (...) of a Cella^, t^ an illiterate
gull is a d^licate (...). He loves sometimes ^o take the ay^, (...) strong b^th
the (...) ^ffords. Wh^re h^s (...) encounters with a (...) (...), which sa^kes
his ^all, make^ his (...) c^t (...) E^glish, his supporte^s (...) their
pos^ures, and (...) da^gerously. By this time his (...) is heard, and ^ow th^s
val-(...) grown (...), ^uld fig^t i^ he k^w how (...) his sally out a door^
if he^ (...) find it. Ye^ he will out^ (...) ^o rem^die, and stalk h^meward,
though it be la^e (...) ^he (...). (...) in (...) ^ay, (...) he u^happily ^ll
into ^ (...), he tax^h ^he (...) la^ do^res so (...) a^ (...) time a ^ight.
Yet (...) if he can (...), (...) (...) (...) i^ some bl^de, Alley, he terribly
affrights the Passenger if he meet any: For he coasts here and there, as if
it were Saint Anthonies fi^e, or some ignis fatu^s; whereas, his cressetflaming
nose is the sole incendiary of these Chymera's. He has a mighty desire to
squabble with the Watch; but the inarticulate motion of his tongue makes those
illiterate R^g-gownes think he speaks Heathen Greek. So as their compassion
to a stranger, which they gather by his strange language, moves them to
commiserate his case; This gets him a Lantern and a conducter; but for his
lodging, he is nere a whit the nearer, for he has quite forgot his plantation.
Thus th^n like Hyppocrates twins walk these two coupled together, but secure
from danger, for a watchmans Lantern is a Drunkards Supersedeas. Gladly would
this frozen Centinell return to his charge, and leave his luggage: but he
clings to him like the bark to the tree; he calls this goat-bearded Groom
his Amaryllis, and he will love her eternally. At last his A^aryllis (this
officer I mean) persuades him for want of a bed to take a nappe on a bench till
the morning: but he has so much wit as to scorn advice, preferring this walk
in his Gallery (for so he terms it) before the repose in his pall^t. It is a
wonder with what extravagancies he entertaines his conducter: who admires his
l^arning, if he were himself. By this, the blind Lantern grows surfoot,
sleepie, and thirsty; along therefore with his zame (like a night-roving
Lazarell^) he accoasts a Taphouse boldly, thumps stoutly, and by virtue of his
au^ ^ters courageously. (...) a dozen quenches the Officious Salamanders
thirst, and (...) ^andring (...) t^ (...); ^here he is left ^o the (...) c^re,
or Drawers cure; P^r the charge it is his, if hi^ coyn^ (...) a^swere:
howsoever, a good (...) never shamed his master. (...) ^ word, he i^ in the
Evening, what you shall not find him in the Morning. He takes leave of the
Draw^r* with a solemn^ salute (...) i^ ^e were dyi^g; and so he is, for h^e
(...) and dropp^s down d^ad at the and of a reckoning.

22. A Xantippean
IS a Scold in English. The wheel o^ her tongue goes with a perpetual motion:
yet she spits more than she speaks: and never spits but in spite. She is
never less at ease, than when she is quiet; nor better pleased, than when the
whole family is displeased. She makes every place where she comes, an (...),
and rayles it about at her own proper charge. She is never at quiet but when
she is at rest, nor at rest, but when she is sleeping, nor then neither; for
purposely she awakes the house with a terrible fit of snoring. A Burre about
the Moon is not half so certain a presage of a tempest, as her Brow is of a
storm. L^urell, hauthorne, and Seale-skinne are held preservatives against
th^nder; but no ^ceite can be found so sovereign as to still het clamor. She
makes such a pattring with her lips, as if she were pos^st; and so she (...),
with the spirit of cont^ntion. She is wormwood in bed, and a Chafingdish at
board. She cannot possibly take cold, for she is ever in a heat. She holds
no infirmit^ worse then to be tongue-^de. She loves a good bit but hates a
bridle. It is a wonder she fell not foul with the Priest, when she was
married. Many times since has she cursed him, but he fears no worfe.
Methinks I see the creeping Snaile her husband, bless him, as if there were
Light ning, when he comes in her presence. She has either quite forgot his
name, or else she likes it not, which makes her re-baptise him with names of
her own. She accoasts him with such fresh but furious encounters, as he
sneakes away from her like a Tr^ant from his Master. He is never more homely
used than at home: so as to comfort his cold stomach, and encourage him all the
better against his next encounter, he has challenged a pot of Ale to enter
lists with him in a single combat. The challenge is entertained, the field
pitched, the weapons provided. Where, though the pot lose more blood, yet the
Challenger gets the foil. Home he would go, if he could go, but he must
f^st learn to stand before he go* and so by holds till he crawll home.
M^netime, suppose him now (...) out his Indentures at length* obse^ving his
recoyles and r^treits, and spen^ing half the night and more in his short
Journey. Moone-light he needs not, for he has a nose in grain to guide him,
which, were his eyes matches, would quickly fire him. But see the strength of
imagination! While his crazie vessel is rolling homeward, a sudden panicke
fear suggests to his fantasy ever working, the apparition of a spirit now
approaching. Betwixt two ways, perplexed with two minds, he stands amazed;
fear bids him retire, and desire bids him go on. And so strange has his
resolution wrought with him, as he intends not only to go on his way, but to
expostulate the case with this imaginary Hoblin that bids him stay; and thus
he encounters it, having first blessed him, to make him more suc^ssive in the
conquest of it: If tho^ be a good spirit, thou will do m^e no harm, such
is my affiance; and if the Devil himself, thou have ^o reason to do me
harm, for I married thy sister, and claim thy alliance. But this Spirit in a
sheet, is presently transformed into some sheep, so as his fear (if he had
so much apprehension left him) is to reflect more on his Spirit at home, than
this in the way: for this was but seemingly visible, whereas that he goes to,
will prove personally sensible. He finds her asleep, but muttering words of
revenge: which upon her awaking (and long may it be first) she makes show of,
by grinding he^ teeth, b^ting her fist, and other outward tokens, fully to
execute. All this while, he sleeps soundly without rocking, till an
unseasonable correction awake him. Now the Waspe is raised; the horn^t roused.
Sure he is to be caperclawed; Cap a pe, he has ^o sense for it. He must
bear it off with he^d and shoulders, and arm himself with patience, against
all encounters. Every look she darts is a lash to sco^rge him; Every Word she
speaks is a wound to g^ll him.

-- Non vox hominem sona^, O Lea certe! Happy were he, if the World were rid
of him, or he of her. Gladly would he reclaim her without shame, or
disclaim in her his share: But as she hates ever to admit of the former, so
he despaires of the happi^es to partake of the later. Sundry distract^d
thoughts do perplexe him; sometimes he thinks verily, that this ill-agreme^t
betwixt them, proceds either from some ceremony in his marriage negle^ted* or
some circum^e or other om^tted, or that the ba^es of (...) were not dewly
published, or sure in some point or other they were not rightly married. So as,
gladly would he (if the orders of the Church would permit it) be remarried,
to try for once a conclusion, if he could prevent his former disquiet, by an
old ma^riage new solemnized: but his Pastor smell^ his drift, and will by no
means condescend to so irregular a motion: fearing (by all likelihood) that
when he commes to the giving of this woman to this man, he will not take her
but leave her in his own hand. But his indifferency little troubles her: her
only fear is, that she cannot pick quarrels enough to baste him: which
afflicts her above comparison. If a^y one reprove her for it, she twitts them
with ignorance, replying, she knows better than they what is good for him; and
she seconds her assertion with natural reading. If cudgelling be useful to
the Walnut tree, to make it fruitful, a little correction seasoned with
discretion, cannot do amiss to make her husband more dutiful. This causes
him to resolve some times of more violent conclusions: for he thinks with
himself, how desperate sores must have desperate cures. He vows therefore, to
bring her in all disgrace to the Cucking-stoole; and she vows again, to
bring him with all contempt to the stool of repentance. Thus, tread he never
so softly, this (...) will turn again. There is no humor (so strangely is
she humorous) can affect her; no conceit, how pregnant or present soever,
delight her; no company, how affable or sociable soever, content her. She is
apt to interpret what she hears, evermore to the worst sense. More captious
than capable of offense. Impatient of any ones praise. Attentive to the report
of their disgrace. Only ^trong in will, which she counterpoizeth with want of
worth. All her neighbors bless them from her: wishing this quotidian fever of
her tongue cured with a raz^r. She has lived to a fair hour; for wheresoever
she comes, she may have the room her self. She needs neither contend nor
contest for priority of place, nor precedencie at table, nor opinion in
argument; her self serves for a whole mess, for her Gossips have left her.
Well for all this, there is a meagre, rawbon'd shrimpe, that dare and will
accoast her. He is not one of many words, though she be. But his will is his
law; which none can oppose, much less prevent, with price, prayer, power, or
policy. Her unpeaceable tong^ must now be bound to good behavior; a lasting
silence must charm it. This her Neighbors hear, that she is laid
speechless, (which assures them she cannot live long:) to her therefore they
repair, to perform the last office of Christian charity, and commend her
(with all their hearts) to Earth, implying how weary they were of her company.
Her funeral solemnity is the first day of her husbands Iubile: for all the
wrongs she did him on Earth, she has made him sufficient amends now by her
death. Howbeit, he, on whom by general suffrage of the Gods, the golden
Tripode was first bestowed, and to whom our Zantipp^ was espoused, held that
currish opinion of Timon fit to be exploded; who wished all Women suspended,
blessing all such fruit, trees, as were so plentifully stored: to whose milder
judgment I appeal; clozing with the Poet.

Cursed be the Tree which Timon (...) procul^ ^strts Timonia ficus ab h^, (...)
ramis sacta se^cta (...).
blessed,
Cursed be his hateful vows,
Women were made in Bowers to hug.
And not to hang on Bow^s.
23. A Yealous Neighbor
IS an E^ve-dropper. He would make an excellent Ratcatcher, for he is creeping
and sneaking in every corner. Though he have no argument whereon to ground his
credulous suspicion, his imagination suggests to* him variety of matter, which
serves for fuel to feel his distemper. The sign with him is ever in Aries,
as he is strongly conceited. The next year he will be a high-flyer, for he
is this year a Brancher. He dare not for an empire go a hunting, lest his
dogs take him for Acteon, and so worry him. His blood is foulely infected,
which a^yes him desperately with the yellowes. The Bird Galgulus has first
eyed him, which makes him labor of an incurable Iaundise. He would pawn his
estate for those two rings of Giges and Hans Carvile, but the latter he holds
fitter for his purpose, though the former might make him an invisible Cuckold.
He looks with a meagre complexion, which discovers his inward infection. He
feels not a pimpl^ in his forehead, which publishes not his fat^. Sometimes
he will expostulate his wrongs himself, and say; Well; what remedy? I am
neither the first nor last; Patie^ shall be my plaster. M^ane time, he is as
patient as a Waspe or an Hornet. He will scarce credit his own eyes, when he
sees nothing but actions of modesty: all which he imagins m^re deceptions of
sight; purposely to gull his ignorance, and guild s^ with a Saintly holiness.
He hears all that neighbor near him, or resort unto him, say, They never saw
Children liker their father; and (...) (replies he) no^ one of them al is like
an other. He is a little Puritanically affected, the private conventicles he
affects not. He feeds his humor more with sh^dowes than substance. Travail
he would to the next market town, in hope of profit; but he turns back
before he come half way there, to take her napping to his own discredit. He
is sometimes resolved to proclaim his shame, but he fears by that means,
he shall increase his shame, and add to the number of her acquaintance. How
like a silly man he looks in the presence of his wife and a proper
attendant? Wha^ a dejected eye he casts upon himself, and how ^lous he is of
this strangers Countenance? He feels, whether his ears go not through his
Night-cappe; and if his forehead begin not to burgen. He bids his Apprentice
look to his foreman, and acquaint him with what he hears or sees. He calls
the Shoemaker impudent knave, for pulling on his wives shoe; and offering to
beat him, wishes it were his Last: and that, as he is ever working his own
ends, he may have a speedy end. He exclaimes grievously against her
Body-maker, and inverting his name, calls him directly Baud-maker: he vows to
strip his Corporation stark naked, and lash him with Whalebone. He buys his
wives gowns ready made, fearing (belike) some false measure from the Tailor.
In her presence he fetches a deep sigh, semi-brev'd in these words: Well;
she might be honest, if she had so much grace; I have been held a proper man
in my time. You shall find him by whole hours together eave-dropping under his
Lettice, or peeping through a Keyhole, purposely to take her napping. Never
man took more pains to add fresh fuel to his affliction. He could wish
with all his heart, that it were enacted by the whole house of Parliament for
fornication to be F^lony. He has solemnly vowed, never to take journey when
either the Sign is in Ari^s, (...), or Capric^. When the Lion banished all
hor^-beasts his Court, it was impossible for me (says he) to turn Co^rtier.
He had some smattering in the Elements of all Learning, but he has forgot
all, and now like a Tr^ must turn back to his Horne-book^. Thus he trifles out
his time in the discovery of his own sh^me. He hunts all the day long from
chamber to chamber: and lest Locks or boults might become a Supersedeas to
shield her dishonor, he resolves to keep open-^ouse to give more air to his
Larder, though he suffer pillage for his labor. He has la^ly created a new
Officer, who every evening cries, H^ng out your La^thorne and Candlelight
maids; The Night is dark, and the entry long; timely preventions is the life
of policy. With his wife sleeping and waking he keeps diapason; he wakes till
she sleep, lest she should give him the slip. His sleeps are shor^ and
troubled: and when he awakes, the first thing he does, is seeking whether
she be there or no. He looks sometimes as if he were affrighted; but it is
his own (...) that haunts him: yet were his wife all spirit and no substance,
he should be less affrighted. He dare not for a world look himsel^e ^*th
glass, lest he should eye his own (...). He holds that a wife may ^e her
husband o^e of the strangest (...) in Europe. He (...) he could sustain nature
without sle^p, that he might take full^r view of his wives nightwo^ks. He is
^ever less drunk with this distemper, th^n when he is distempered with
liquor: and then he gives best opportunity, but sees it not. He has but
lately stepped into an office, and that one of the lowest in all his Ward, yet
he verily thinks that the whole Ward holds him for one of the headmen of their
Parish. Store of Biscuit, W^fers and C^eawayes he bestows at his Child's
Christning, yet are his cares nothing lessned; he is persuaded, that he may
eat his part of this Babe, and never break his fast. H^e presents himself
for a Gentleman-Ush^r to his wife, when her humor is for taking the air:
before whom he walks most pedantically stoic^ll, yet with a r^cting eye, lest
some fiend should steal away his Proserpina. In a word, his yealous mind, and
his two suspicious eyes are the Hesperid^s, his Wife the golden grove; whose
fruit is so mellow, as he fears it will fall before the time. It is in vain
to apply any receites to cure his malady; no Unicorns horn can poss^bly help
this poisouous infection. Suspicion once grounded, and by continuance hardened,
can scarcely by force of any argument be removed. For all this, howsoever it
fare with him touching his r^ll estate, it thrives well with him in his
p^onall; for he has store o^ Cornucopia. He is by this time as weary of the
world, as his wife is of him. He would gladly leave it, but there is something
he so dotingly loves in it, as he cannot find in his heart to forgo it,
unless along with him he might carry it. He knows how to dispose of his
goods, but not of all his movables. He doubts another must possess, what he
enjoyed with so much care: and jeere at his follies, whilst his Successor
supplies his place. He would articulate with his wife, if he had so much hope
in her constancy; or opinion of his own deserts, to expect from her so much
loyalty; clozing his shortliv'd words with these passionate interbreaths; Nay
surely, I shall be s^one forgotten. Her protests cannot remove from him this
conceit; it were to no purpose therefore for her to promise what he neither
will believe, nor she intends to perform. His eyes now begin to shroud
themselves in their lodges. He has by this disposed of all things that are in
his power, even to that vessel of frailty, his earth-reverting body, which
(according to his mind) is to be buried in some Cell, Roach, or Vault, and in
no open place, lest Passengers (belike) might stu^ble on his grave. Meat for
his funeral pie is shred, some few ceremonial tears on his funeral pile are
shed; but the worms are scarce entered his shroud, his corpse-flowers not fully
dead, till this Yealous Earthworme is forgot, and another more (...), but less
yealous, mounted his bed.

24. A Zealous Brother
IS a sure stake t^ his Sist^r; He sets forth in an Amsterdam print his faith
and works in two several tomes, and in two different volumes; the first in
folio, the latter in Decimo Sexto. He is an Antip^s to all Church government;
When she feasts he fasts; when she fasts* he feasts; GoodFryday is his
Shrove-Tuesday; He commends this notable carnal caveat to his family; Eat
flesh upon day^s (...), it is good against Popery: He buys a Blank-Almanack,
to set down his conventi^le hours. Breach of promise with the (...), he
holds an indifferent err^r, but with his Sister it is piacular. T^ere is
nothing so far out of tun^ in his ^are as Church-musicke. He keeps a (...)
quarter in his sinful Syn^dalls, and denounces an heavy woe upon all
Wakes, Summerings, and Rush-bearings: preferri^g that Act, whereby Pipers were
mad^ (...) by Act of Parliament, before any in all the Acts and Monuments. His
Band is a Diminitive, but his chol^r a Su^erlative, if he be provok'^* He is
so (...) with i^spiration, as he holds it a disti^sting of the Spirit to use
pr^meditation. No spirit can affright him so much in any shape, as in the habit
of a Sirpecloath. He ever takes the Cross on his left hand, to avoid
superstition. He has bountiful Benefactours, from whom he receives weekly
presents; and they know his mind: Half Sacrifices are abominable; This
faithful Family is his Monopoly; he has engrossed them to himself; he
feeds on them, while he feeds them. His frequent preaching leaves him no
time to pray in; He can stand better than he ca^ (...). He loves mix^
societies, and he takes this from the Arc, where there was a Male and Female
of every kind. He avoucheth, that learned Lilie most orthodoxally proved the
undoubted necessity of matrimony in the presbytery, in his declination of hic
and h^c sacerd^s. He holds his Mother tongue to be the Original tongue; and
in that only he is constant, for he has none to change it withal. He wonders
how Babel should have such a confused variety of tongues, and he understand
but one. He never reads any Author, lest he should be held for an
Apocryphal P^stor. One would take him for an incessant Student by his pale
visage and enfeebled body; but the bent of his studies intends more the
practick than Theorick. He is seldom or never constant to those Tenets he
holds: which proving for most part scarce Orthodoxall, do usually convent him:
which makes him grow in great request with the purely-ignorant. He holds all
Bonds bearing date at Lammasse, Michaelmasse, Candlemasse, or any Mass
whatsoever, to be frustrate and of no effect; but by changing mass into tide,
they become of full force and virtue. Mattins and U^spers he holds two
dangerous words; he loves not to hear of the^. He maintains equality in
Presbytery; but if the necessity of time be such, as a Superintendent be
requisite, his zealous followers hold none si^ter to supply that place than
himself. For the decision of al doubts, difficulties, and differences he
makes a private family his revestry. Whatsoever tends to the doctrine of
mortification, he holds for Romish: abstinence therefore he avoucheth to be an
error newly crept into the Church; but if you put this Inter gatorie to him, in
what time it crept, this weaklyread Depone^t knows not. No season through all
the year accounts he more subject to abomination than Bartholomew fair:
Their Drums, Hobbihorses, Rattles, Babies, Ie^trumps, nay Pigs and all are
wholly I^daicall. The very Booths are Brothells of iniquity, and distinguished
by the stamp of the Beast. Yet under favor, he will authorize his Sister to
eat of that unclean and irruminating bea^t, a Pig, provided, that this Pig
be fat, and that himself or some other zealous Bro^her accompany her: and
all this is held for authentic and canonical. Though he seem all spirit,
yet during his being in this Tabernacle of clay, he holds it fitting to have a
little relish of the flesh. He preferres the union of bodies before the union
of minds; and he holds no unity worse than churchconformity. He conceives more
inveterate hate toward the Church of Rome, than the temple of Mecha: and could
find with all his heart rather to embrace the traditions of the latter, than
submit to the discipline of the former. His devotion consists rather in
elevation of the eye, than bending of the knee. In his extemporall Se^mons he
is a son of thunder, denouncing terror, but seldom hope of favor to the
^jected si^ner. This desperate (...) he continues, and holds them till night,
and then leaves them Children of darkness. He thumps a pulpit pitifully, as
if he were angry; but if he be, it is with those only that come short in
their oblations. He baptizeth his Children with Scripture-names; wherein only
he shows the depth of his reading. Yet in these he mistakes miserably, for
want of E^ymology; taking AMAN for AMON, DIANA for DINA. He holds one probable
Tenet constantly; That there are no walking Spirits on earth; and yet he finds
a terrible one at home: which all his Divinity cannot conjure. This has made
him sometimes, to have a months mind to go for Virginia, to save souls: till
he right wisely considered, how the enterprise was full of peril, and that
he wanted materials to defray the charge of his Travel. Of all Sects of
Philosophers, he cannot endure to hear of the Academicks; for he never came
amongst them. Of all metals, he hates Latin: for he has heard how it was
sometimes the Roman tongue; and that cannot choose but be Schismatic. He
fears no shot so much as that of the Canon; for it injoynes him to that which
he most hates, Conformity. He would beyond Sea, but his Duck will not swim
over with him: which makes him peremptorily conclude; She is better fed than
ta^ght. He was once in election to have been a Vice-verger in Amsterdam, but
he wanted an audible voice. Howsoever, he is holden a great Rabbi amongst his
Brethren, whose weakness he strengthens with perilous paradoxes: which when
he comes to explain, he as little understands as his amazed hearers. He was
pleased sometime to make so bold with affairs of State, Church Government,
with otherlike Subjects far above his verge, as a late asthma has taken him,
and restrained him to a perpetual silence. This makes his illiterate brutes to
double their pensions for his maintenance; and to idolize him the more, because
taken notice of by the State. And now he is altogether for his private
Lectures; where he vents such unauthenticke stuff, as it proves pregnantly
from what spirit it comes. He now takes time to intend controversies, which he
secretly commenceth amongst his own Familists, against the Communion Book and
Book of common Prayer. Anthems and Versicles he holds papisticall; sundry other
^xceptions he finds no less criminal. But these quarrels become Conv^ntuall,
and he must answer them. In the end, the contemptiblenesse of his person, with
the weakness of his fortunes, rid him out a briars: while now, after so many
alterations in matters of religion, he purposes to have some little bartring
with the world, before he go out of it, lest his poor progeny curse him that
ever he came in it. But truth is, he shows the necessity of his (...) in
nothing so much as in w^nt, which only makes him out of love with the world,
and gives him the true mark of a Schol^r. Some he has to provide for, if he
knew how: but he must leave them, being abj^cts through poverty, objects of
charity; yet has he no great reason to expect that his brood should partake
of those good works now after his death, which he could never endure to hear
so much as commended all his life. By this our C^rnelius is become Tacitus,
since he dropped into his bathing-tubbe, where he left his hair, and lost his
honor: since which time, he is quite fallen off from his zeal^us Br^threns
favor: for the dampe of his life has so darkened the light of his doctrine,
as now for want of audience, he may save himself a labor. Thus reft of
friends, fortune, health and liberty, he clozeth his Evening Lecture with a
senseless Lethargy. There is nothing now that troubles him so much in his
sickness, as that the Bells shall ring for him after his death. Which to
prevent, he has taken course with his Executour to give the Sexto^ nothing;
purposely to put the Bel^rey to ^ilence* Some (...) he has of his own, who
howl not so much that he should leave them, as that nothing is left them.

etc
IS the most notorious Knave 1. Almanack-maker.
picked out of all these: As 1. if under color of Astrology, he practice the
Art of Necr^ncy.

2. If Nick Ballader contract 2. Ballad-monger.
with Bully Purser, to get him a base booty from a Ninny new^om'd forth a
Country.

3. If he abuse foreign States, 3. Corranto-coiner.
and gull the Reader to cram his belly.

4. If he sharke where he has 4. Decoy.
^ngag'd his heart, and prove disloyal to his fraternity.

5. If he vent base ware with 5. Exchange-man.
oaths, and improve his Exchange by perjury.

6. If he ra^nge without his 6. Forrester.
Pale, and make the country fo^termother to his progeny.

7. If he profess himself honest, 7. Gamester.
and publish himself Cheat upon discovery.

8. If o^r H^spitall-man pretend 8. Hospitall-man.
but zeal, and prize piety as the Miser hospitality.

9. If our I^yler tyrannize over 9 Iayler.
his Ten^nt* and triumph in his misery.

10. If the Keeper neglect his 10. Keeper
soul, and prepare not for her deliverie.

11. If she wash her skin, but 11. Launderer.
(...) her s^ule, and so soil her inward beauty.

12. If he set too high a stamp 12. Metalman.
upon his meta^, and blanch his allegiance with color of Al^.

13. If our (...) halt betwixt 13. Neuter.
two, and slight his conscience for worldly policy.

14. If to save his provender, he 14. Ostler.
set a^ artificial edge on a strangers Palfrey.

15. If he furnish his Poster 15. Postmaster.
with a foundred Hackney.

16. If what he collects in the 16. Quest-man.
Ward, he convert to himself and his Meniey.

17. If he out-brave his best 17. Ruffian.
friends, and slave himself to any villainy.

18. If he row without fear to 18. Sailer.
gain him a f^re, and hazard a passengers safety.

19. If he travail to novellize 19. Traveller.
himself, and not to benefit his Country.

20. If to enrich his retchlesse 20. Vndersheriffe.
progeny, he care not much to beggar the whole County.

21. If he drink till he rore, 21. Wine-soaker.
and roaring uncivilly wrong himself and his company.

22. If he scold till she scare 22. Xantippean.
her husband, make him debauch himself, and abandon his family.

23. If he proclaim himself a 23. Yealous Neighbor.
Monster causelessly, and brand his posterity with the odious mark of bastardy.

24. If his hollow heart display 24. Zealous Brother.
him for a counterfeit, and his painted zeal tax him of hypocricy.

If so or so, know, that such an one is an A perse A for knavery; whose Comic
beginning shall cloze his dying Act with a Tragic Catastrophe.

So good night to all the four and twenty.
FINIS.
A CATERCHARACTER, thrown out of a Box By an Experienced Gamester.

-- Ova prognatus ab uno.

1. An Apparator. 2. A Painter. 3. A Peddler. 4. A Piper.
LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. and are to be sold by R. B.

1631.

DEDICATED AND DEVOTED BY CLITVS -- ALEXANDRINVS, TO HIS NO LESS HONORED THEN
ENDEARED, Sr. ALEXANDER RADCLIFFE, KNIGHT OF THE BATH.

A CATER-CHARACTER, THROWN OVT OF A BOX By AN EXPERIENCED Gamester.
An Apparator
IS the usher of a Gho^t in a white sh^ete. He tells you of that, which he
himself seldom or never rememberstill, his end, Summons. He can most
pragmatically discourse of the Subject of p^nnance, but finds no time to apply
the use unto himself. Honesty were a maine prejudice to his practice: which
makes him hold that acquaintance of most weight, whose conversation is most
light. Circumspect you must be in your words, howsoever you express your self
in your works: for his ear lies ever open for advantage: which he will
advance in a public Court, with a frontlesse impudence. His conscience is a
Delphian sword, and will cut both ways: yet anoint him; and you berust him,
and consequently charm him for being so glad in the sheath. He can tell you
of a way how to do^ you good, and it is in his hand, so he be capable of your
gold. He has a plaster in store for a debauched credit; and can mince a
penance with his familiar acquaintance. Protests he has, and store of them;
he will be your friend, and your fee shall bind him. He can wink as well as
see, and distinguish of your guilt by your guild. This makes him ever go
partiall-guilt, holding it an inseparable appendice to his place, to aim at
his own particular, and by it procure the peccants peace: His ordinary Dialect
is the thundering out of Canons to the vulgar, whose honest simplicity begets in
them wonder: which thawes and resolves it self into admiration, to observe the
fearful depth of the man. Yet so wise he is, as one truly conscious of his
own ignorance, he can cri^ge low to a knowing presence, and relish a
submissive reproof for his connivence. He carries still his Ephem^rides ab^ut
with him, which he daily enlarges with Scandals and defamations. The best
report that comes to his ear, is the ill report of his Neighbor: which he
seems sorry for; mea^e time out of his feigned sorrow, he really discovers his
neighbors shame. He usually takes more strict notice of Christenings than
burials, and is better versed in their filiations, than if he were Overseer for
the Parish. He might be Truth by his true search, for he lies lurking in
ev^ry corner. It were his breaking for the age to be virtuous; his vailes are
the vices of the time; which he vows to ferres, and so turns Conycatcher. A
pestilent head-peece he has to blow up Suburbane Traders: with whom he
trucks, if they fear to be fruitful: for others, their sterility has
procured them free license. He is the very scourge of the time, and were the
time better he would scourge himself. Revenues are good men's virtues; but his
stock h^*s no such dependence: light weights are his subsistence. An ignorant
Curat is his patient; whose purpose is the subject of his phlebotomie. Bleed
he must, or he dies. The neglect of his cure, is the object of his care; yet
cannot this poor Curat do him a greater injury, than labor reformation of
this malady. He domineers bravely in his place, as if it were his Chapel of
ease: mean time, he is as timorous as the ^are, lest his clandestnie contracts
breed him harm. In a word, he is the safest, that knows him laest; but if
knowing, he is securest that knows him best. Braves cannot affront, where
knowledge has already armed. Let him appear then, in that portriature or
posture he will, he cannot dismay where knowing resolution is forewarned of his
strength. His Reading is his practice; Nor of all others, needs he any
Choke; for want of ready pay is the generation of his Subpena. It were great
pity he should want friends, he is so obsequiously observant unto his owners:
yet those that are known to him most, are affectionately beholden to him
least. He complains of the iniquity of the age; but were it better, he were
worse. He has a Catalogue of abuses, which he makes his morning, meridian,
and evening orisons. If he can be so happy as to add to their score, it
inhanceth his state: which procures his seldom-(...) Heir an Apparators (...),
when he is gone. Long time has he been an instrument of discovery touching
abuses of the Church: yet none i^formes of him, whose President is the worst:
He has so choakt his accusers with shreads and parcels of broakt Civilian
latin, as they are gravelled, and he in the opinion of the illiterate,
graced. By this, he has performed his place with general approbatio^: and
now he is to be Apparator for himself. This he so much the more fears, as
he was the more unprovided for it before it came. It were well for him, that he
might find a proxi, to discharge his place: but his conscience summons him to
a personal appearance. Bequeath his goods he may, which his Executors enjoy;
but the occasion of their joy, is his grief. L^ve l^nger he would, but the
world says he ha'^ lived too long. ^rience has ta^ght him so much, as the
ripe^esse of his si^e has raised him to that height, as he can mount no
higher. He must of necessity then leave his place to a Novice to succeed him:
while he, poor man, becomes Apparator for himself. His summons are given, his
shrowde, the remainder of his conniving f^es, prepared; his Sexton stays at
the holemouth, and will not bouge a foot, till this old Fox be ea^thed.

A Painter
IS a face-maker; and the worst in all his shop is his own. He can never hold
his hand from the Table, which proves him a true Englishman; for he cannot
leave it when it is well. By a special privilege granted to his Art, he
^xerciseth Martial Law, and hangs and draws within himself: wherein he
observes a legal and lineall method in his form of ex^cution: he draws
first, and hangs afterward. Sometimes he will play the egregious flatterer,
and bestow more graceful beauty on your face, than ever nature gave you, and
so gull you. He looks on you as if he would look through you, when h^e
draw^s you: yet he shows you a kind of Barber-obeisance, being content to
stand* while you sit. He is a partial Artist: he will portray a man of note
for nothing; but b^ing obscure, a Cat of Mount shall receive more courtesy from
hi^ Pencile, than a nobler Creature. He is not entangled much in law; yet he
(...) now and then to Westminster, where he practices upon grave (...), and
makes faces, and this he liv^s by. He will not abate you an hair^, if he be
exquisite; having none, he will supply the want of that excrement with a
curious shadow, and so procure an artfull ornament. He observes small method in
the ranking or disposing of his painted creatures: A La^y and a Monkey may
stand cheek by joule one with the other. Nothing so much angers him, as to
have dirt thrown on his picture; and yet the m^terials of it are of no better
temper. He sometimes plays the witty Satyrist, and displayes light Tweakes in
loose roabes; bu^ draw them out with Po^kes on their h^ads, he will not, for
that would darken his Art. He has an a^tificiall veil for all his
d^formities; and can make the ugliest Hagge ^nlike her self, purpos^ly to make
her like her self. His judgment consists not in Pul^e but Phy^nomy. There is
nothing he undertakes, but he has some color for it. He has Pomatum and
other rare confections to allay the inflammation of a cind^rous face; and yet a
Saint Antoni^s fire constantly sparkles in his own. When he paints a shoulder
of mutton, his teeth water, wishing with all his heart, he could infuse
substance into the picture. He can Zeuxeslik^, though not like Ze^xes* paint
Grapes, but the foul that takes them for liv^ly, deserves (...) name. He can
accommodate his portraiture with a true garb; Hobs^n the Carrier must have his
picture, with his hand in his bag to design his Condition. He make^ the ^ye of
his feature, a light g^dding creature; for it reflects on every corner. He
miserably abuses the Nine Wor^hies, both in their postures, P^lfreys and
(...): but pres^ription pleades excuse beyond exception. The Nine Muses are
much misused; The ^ree Graces ungraciously handl^d. By all which it appears,
he assumes to himself a Po^ticall l^ence, alb^it he never attained to the
freedom of that Company. He holds a Paint^rs lib^rtie to b^e of equal
authority to the highest profess^nt of Poetry; but his pencile must veil to
their P^n. Ignorance, which originally hatched this conceit, being retained to
defend his cause, replies* The Painter knows not what the (...) mean.
Fantas^s are his features, and their ^ffigies the Embrio of his brain. Whence
it is, that ^ll those ancient Heroes become his Proteans. Neither is he only
familiar with these: for h^e will make no less bold in missh^ping the
Patriarchs, by reserving one beard in store for a whole Tribe. He receives
upon trust some Chronicle stories, both Divine and Humane; which (p^esupposing
him to be of eminent employment) he makes use of in Pageants, Chimney-peeces
and Bay-windowes. But if he be of no frequent custom, he trudgeth with a
trusse of colors on his back down to the Country; where most humbly
complaining, he prostrates his Art and industry at the feet of a most vigil^nt
Churchwarden: By whose wisdom if he be entertained, that the Church may be
beauti^ied, and his intolerable Art discovered; he belards the walls with
monstrous false English: for which, if at any time he receive reproof, he
returns this answer; He could paint better, but the Country will not be at
the charge of good English. And if you seriously ask him, where he had those
sentences, he will with no less impudence than profaneness tell you, they
are foolish conceits of his own. Now and then he is employed at Funerals,
which he performs most pi^ifully. His ^noyl'd colors fall off like other
mourners: his horse-gold displaies the integrity of the Artist. If he be so
ambitious, as to fix his lamentable Elegy on the Hearse, his lean lines fall
so slat, and cloze in such unjoynted cadencies, as they ever redound to his
shame. But in these, as they are a sphere too high for his employment, he is
r^rely versed. My Lord Majors day is his Iubile, if any such inferiou^ Artist
be admitted to so serious a solemnity: If not, Country presentiments are his
preferment; or else he bestows his pencile on an aged piece of decayed Canvas
in a sooty Alehouse, where M^ther Red cap must be set out in her colors. H^e
he and his barmyHostesse draw both together, but not in like nature; She in
ale, h^e in ^yle. But her commoditi^ goes better down, which he means to have
his full share of, when his work is done. If she aspire to the conceit of a
sign, and desire to have her birch-pole pulled down, he will supply her with
one; which he performs so poorly, as none that sees it but would take it for
a Sign he was drunk when he made it. A long consultation is had, before they
can agree what Sign must be reared. A Meere-m^ide, says she, for that will
sing Catches to the Youths of the Parish. A Lion, says he, for that is the
only Sign that he can make. And this he forms so artlesly, as it requires
his expression: This is ^ Lion. Which old E^lenor Rumming, his Tap dame,
de^ies, saying, It should have been a Meere-maid. Now and then he turns
Rover, and bestows the height of his Art on Archers stakes. Sundry Whimzi^s
he has in his head, but of all others there is none that puzzles him so much
as this one: He has a special handsome Masterpiece (for so he terms her)
and is so jealous of her, a^ when any one inquires for his picture, he simply
mistakes himself, and shows them Act^on. Gl^dly would he cure this in^red
malady with the secret receipt of an It^lian s^curitie, could (...) A^ contrive
it, or his state pro^ure it. Well, so it is, that he who took the d^aught of
others, and lived by it, must now leave that Trade, for Death has drawn him
out to the full body. His chief Master-Artists imprese was this: No day
without a line: but now the last line of his life is drawn. If he dye well,
it i^ more than he did all his life time. His memory seldom survive^ him:
being now the Image of Death, as he was before a living picture.

A Peddler
IS a m^n of Ware. A wandering St^rre; O^e, whose chiefest ^ommerce is with
Country Wen^es. The materials of their truck^ng are of his part, Pinnes,
Ribbons, and Laces; of theirs, Cony-skins, Lambe-skinnes, and Feathers; for
Marrow-bones, their honest si^plicity never knew the operation o^ them. What
do ye l^cke, is his ordinary Intergatory; yet you may lac^ many things, ere
he can supply you. Pepper do ye want, ^d he will p^pper it for you; He ^ill
sell you clots for Clov^s, course crumm^s for Currants, Orpine for Saffron, and
^ompound your pepper with his Earth-pouder, to gull you. It were a strange
disease, that his fardell cannot cure; blessed be his Genius! he has a
receipt to cure any one from breaking, but himself: and this is the least he
do^bts, for his P^pouder Court is his only te^ror. He is no ^choler, yet
turning Ropemaker, he draws stron^ lines; which draines more from C^rdener
than Philosopher. It is a pretty thing to observe how he carries his Trinkilo's
about him: which m^kes the Country Choughs esteem him a man of prize. A
Country Rush-bearing, or Morri^e Pastoral, is his festival: if ever he
aspire to plum* porridge, that i^ the day. Here ^he Guga-g^les gi^gle it ^ith
his (...) nifles: while he sculkes under a B^h, and shows his wit never till
then, in admiring their follie^. H^ has an obscene vei^e of Ballatry, which
m^kes the Wen^hes of the Green laugh; and this purchases him, upon better
acquaintance, a posset or a Sillibub. He is ever removing his tents: and might
be complained of for nonresidence, if his informer could gain ought by'^. The
Tinker of Turvie cannot put him down at long-staffe: Which he could find in
his heart to employ for highway receipts, if his white liver would give him
leave. Would you have a true survey of his family, and number them by the pole?
you shall fi^de them subsist of three heads: Himself, his Truck, and her
Misset. Where the last wears, commonly, the sleakest skin. He might be a
good man by the Philosophers reason: for Every place is his country: and
generally least trusted in his own. His Atlantick^ shoulder^ are his
supporters: if they fail, his revenues fall. His judgment consists
principally in the choice of his ware, and place of their vent. Saint Martins
Rings, and counterfeit Bracelets are commodities of i^finite consequence: these
will pass for current at a May Pole, and purchase a favor from their
MayMarian. One would take him for some appendice of a Soldier, by his Lether,
but you shall find as much valor in his Hamper. There is nothing so much
disheartens him as the report of a Pr^sse: this makes him stir his stumpes:
but if that will not serve, he turns Counterfeit Crippl^, and as one cut off
by the stumps, he cants his maimes most me^hodically: and this practice he
most constantly retains till the coast be clear. Sometimes he co^sorts wi^h
his Bungs: and these keep Centinell near his Booth, to take notice of a (...)
prey; which purchase makes the sile^t Evening in some blind A^ley, or place of
known (...), the divider of their prize. He (...) a certain Catalogue of al^
the principal Faires: where, though he have little to vend, he can find some
way or other to bring i^ a booty. He will not stick to pretend, for want of
better supply, an extraordinary skill in Physic: and so turns most impudent
dogmaticall Quacksalve^. What transnaturalized Elixers will this mercenarie
Mountebanke produce to delude the vulgar: All which he finds experiments of
useful consequence, till the whipstock waine him from his practice. It were
wonderful this general Artist should not thrive, having so many irons i'ch
fire. Yet he finds himself in nothing so constant as in matter of estate
being for all his endeavor neither worse nor better, but just as he was at
first, a direct beggar. Now, should you a^ke him the reason: he will tell you,
one of his calling cannot be honest and thrive too. If he could have faced
and outfac'd truth, set a deceitful gloss on his adulterate w^res, or
dispencd with oaths to beget Cu^tome, his Pack had been a storehouse of rich
commodities before this time: but making conscience of his de^ling, was his
maine undoing. Thus would he make you credulously believe that he were seaz'd
of what he never had, nor should he live longer, would ever have. Well,
something he would gladly leave the young Hamperman, his hopeful heir, whom
he fur^isheth, to express his love, for want of better fortunes, with the
improved example of his life. He shows him in a Landscape the whole Model of
his Peddler* p^grimage, with whom he may to his much benefit securely truck; and
on whose sun ^licity he may most usefully work. He tells him some mysterious
secrets, which he never durst till that hour discover, lest they should have
prevented him of a natural death. Now he is to leave the world, and to his
successors grie^e, to leave nothing unto him in all the world. His fathers
empty hamper is his sole patrimony. Truth is he sh^wd great improvi^ence i^ the
course of hi^ li^e, not to leave one poor knot o^ black ribbo^, to display
his tr^de, and beget a few seeming mourner^. B^t his comfort is, he dies cn^ven
board. His Ex^cutor (if any such minister be (...)) may thank God for his
wan^ of Credit, for it kept him out of debt. Well; now he is to trace no more
the mountains nor valleys; this merry mate is now turned grave man. His
funeral Obits are soon solen: nized. Next day at the longest, his
t^arefeigning widow cnters new commerce; and hopes to aspire to a ioynture e^e
she dye. His son, as one retentive of his fathers memento'^, t^aceth his
paths; lives in as honest name and fame as his Predecessor did: and that he
might resemble his father in fortune as well as same, he dies neither much
indebted by reason of credit, nor leaves much owing him by those with whom he
traded. And so for altogether have they jointly shut up their Hamper.

A Piper
IS a very droane, ever soaking and sucking from others labors. In Wakes, and
Rush-bearings he turns flat rorer. Yet the Youths without him can keep no true
measure. His head, pipe, and leg hold one consort. He cannot for his hanging
fit himself to any tune, but his active foot or great toe will keep time.
He is never sober, but when he is either sleeping, or piping: for his repast
partakes too much of the pot, to keep him sober in his feeding. He is generally
more careful how to get a coat for his Pipe than his child. And a ^ibband
hung in his Chamber draws him into an overweening humor and hono^r of ^o
musical a savor. He might be not altogether improperly charactred, An ill
wind that begins to blow upon Christ mass eve, and so continues very loud and
blustering all the twelve days: Or an airy Me^eor composd of flat^ous ma^ter,
that then appears and vanishes to the great peace of the whole family, the
thirt^enth day. His St^tors voice (...) it self to the expression of a largess
upon receipt of the least benevolence. He deserves not his wench, that ^ll not
p^y for her dance. He is ^ dangerous instrument in the Common wealth; for
drawing together routs and riotous assemblies: yet so long as they dance after
his pipe, there can be intended no great perilous project of state. Since h^
was enacted Rogue by Parliament, he has got hold of a shameless tunelesse
Shalme to be his consort, that the statute might take less hold of his single
quality. And to grace it the more, he has shrowde^ himself with the
inco^porate reverence of a pye-colour'd livery. Yet it is to be feared that the
Snake must ere long, lose his slough; for either his vailes fail him, or he
falls from his vailes. A continued practice of his prosession has brought him
to that perfection, as he can pipe when he cannot speak: so as, his C^anter
becomes his interpreter, and performs the thankful office of a true Servant,
in speaking for his mute Master, who cannot speak for himself. He is oftener
out of tune than his pipe; yet never plays better voluntari^s than when he is
drunk. In one respect, he may be compared to a downright Satyrist: he will
not stick to play upon his best friends. He infinitely preferres his art before
all other mecha^icks: yet all the means of his gettings is but from hand to
mouth. The most dissorting Comp^ion for his humor, is the Ti^r for he is a
metal man, which the Piper is not: Besides, they are so unsociably affected to
their liquor; as it is death to them to drink to one another; yet the nooze of
the law oft^imes reconciles them, when it injoynes them to hang both together.
He is of an invincible strong breath, whereof he leaves usually in the blast
of his pipe such a vaporous and vicious steeme, as it would go near to poison
any Creature but a Piper. He suites himself to the seasons of the yccre,
wherein if his honest Neighbor partake of any be^efit, h^e expects his
musical share. And to wind him the more in his love, without which he cannot
live, every distinct time must be accommodated to a several tune. He ha'sa
strain to inchant the shepherd in his shearing; an other for the husbandman
in his ^eaping; in all which he ha'sa peculiar privilege for gleaning. Sundry
corners he reserves in his k^apsack for these neighbourly bounties, which in
short time, by prescription, become customarie to him, and all his lineall
succcssor^ of the same Science, after him. I^ his bonny Blouze, or dai^ty
doxie, being commonly a collapsed Tinkers wife, or some high way commodity,
taken up upon trust, demand of him supply, after these numerous in-comes, he
bids her go pipe. For his bed, he leaves it the soonest, and goes to it the
latest. He is injoy^ed by his place, to rise early, rore highly, and ^ouze the
whole family. So as, his pipe may be properly termed the isntrumental cause
both of (...) dr^* ming
their rising and his own. He is Dro ^ne pl^ the grand i^postor; hi^ m^rry
chante^ ^ meer^ inc ban^r* ca^sing people to (...) in a r^ng, as if he bad r^sd
the div^ (...) a circl^.
no constant dweller, and yet he is no shifter. All he reeds, he puts into his
pipe: Which consisting of three notes, breaks out into a most vociferous
Syllogism. He will be heard at Ho^se-races; where it makes him infinitely
proud, if the Horse will but vouchsafe to lay his nose to his droane. This so
transports him, as it makes him think himself worthy to be recorded in those
musical aires or annals of Orpheu^ and Arion, who made beasts follow them.
Which he does daily, for his Doxy dogs him. Being weary of the Country, or
she rather weary of him, he dives into some Suburban or Citty-cellar, where
he rores like the Devil in a vault. Here he deeply inhanceth his
Cellar-rents, if he had grace to keep them: but truth is, whatsoever he
draines from the four corners of the City, goes in muddy taplash down
Gutter-lane, and so sinks down into P^ier alley. So he get his morning draught,
which ends about midday, at the soonest, he stands not much upon breakefast:
Neither indeed will his vailes find supply both for thirst and hunger. This
sauce-^eam'd Porcupi^, when his veins b^gin to warm, will b^e many times
monstrously mal^pert, which purchases him a beating with much patience. You
may break his head as good cheap, as any man's in Europe. If his Prugge aspire
to so much stock or so great trust, as to brew to sell; he will be sure to
drink up all the gai^es. He will not stick to run on score with a score,
so h^ may have credit: but when they come for their coin, he solicits some
longer time, and pays them home with a tune: It Is merri^ when malt-men meet.
But they may pipe small e're they mee^e with their money. By this, his holy
bush is pulled down, which proclaims him ba^kerupt: by which means, he may
most politickly compound upon i^fferent terms with his Malt-worms* Thus are
his fortunes no perpetu^tie: An ill wind bla^s them: being commonly, ligh^ly
got amongst nimble heel'd fools, and lewdly spent amongst heavy headed
knaves. His vocation is no peculiar station, but a roving r^creation. There is
no m^n will more sufficiently sit down to eat, nor more cheerfully rise up to
play than himself. To keep him company, and free him of that, which his
leaden conceit is seldom capable of, melancholy, he wishes no other associate
than a Iack^napes, or a Jolly (...): wherein it is his highe^t strain of
study to accommodate his Ape with a guarded Coat, and so fool his spectators
out of their coin. He dies a sound man and merrily, for he dies a Piper, but
no good death, for he has played away his time. He could find in his heart
to pipe longer, but his wind fails him, which makes him play his
lastgoodnight. His wealth may appear by his (...) which contains the over
worn remains of a Motley Livery, a decayed Pipe-bagge, and half a shirt; all
which, without his Neighbors chari^y, will scarce amount to the purchase of a
sheet.

FINIS.
CLITVS retire; Waste no more oil on these,
No care can cure a desperate disease:
Should write as much of every bas^ profession,
Europe would be too strait for that Impression.
Mean time, these Swaine^ may on the Plains go breath them,
For thou have left a Curious Piper with them.
CLITVS HIS GENETHLIA Na^ est xix. Feb A^ D^. 1630.
Upon the Birthday of his Son JOHN.
Vagi^ndo ^allem intramu^,
Suspirando relinquim^s.
With shreekes we live, and with a sigh we die;
Thus live we, die we, grief is ever die.
GOd bless thee JOHN and make thee such a^ one,
That I may joy in calling thee my Son.
Thou art my Ninth, and by it I divine
That thou shall live to love the Musa (...), Natura nov^m pul^ pr^lem
Muses nin^,
And live by loving them: for it were fit
A younger Brother had an Elder wit. Exhib^it, (...), (...).

Thou may be Gamester, or what trade thou'ls choose,
For much I shall not leave my Boy to loose;
And that is fit'st for a Gamest^r: but be sure
^ address thy care upon thin^ inwardcure.
"Be honest, and thou can not want a friend,
"Neither before thine end, nor in thine end.
Three things THREE VOVCHERS for thee undertake,
The WORLD, FLESH, DEVIL, thou must quite for sake;
And so I hope thou will: to the WORLD I show thee,
But thy poor fortune's such, she will not know thee.
And for the FLESH, even Nature must permit
That it be given t^ thee, e're thou to it.
Now for the DEVIL, he has so much to do
With roaring boys, he will sl^ght such Babes as tho^:
Yet be not too s^cure, but put him to'^,
For he will play at small game, e're he sit out.
The e^crease of thy Revenues is but small,
Look ^o thy Brains, poor JOHN, for that is all.
A better Legacy I have not for ^ee,
Unless thou dye, and I sing Di^ges over thee:
By which I should collect, thou were bu^ LENT me,
As thou wast near that time by Nature sent me:
B^ing only sh^wne on Earth, but to abst^e
From ^inne on Earth, and turn to earth again^*
And so should ^hou rise high, by vading hence
With a sweet smile, in state of innocence.
This is my cloze;
"Short be thou or long liver,
"Live well, my Boy,
"that thou may live for ever.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the Characters.
AN Almanack-maker. A Ballad-monger. A Corranto-coiner. A Decoy. An
Exchange-man. A Forrester. A Gamester. An Hospitall-man. A Iayler. A Keeper. A
Launderer. A Metall-man. A Neuter. An Ostler. A Postmaster. A Quest-man. A
Ruffian. A Sailer. A Traveller. An Vnder-sheriffe. A Wine-soaker. A Xantippean.
A Yealous Neighbor. A Zealous Brother.
etc.

Or The Egregious'st Pimpe of a^ this debauched order, with a brief but free
cens^re, of their nature, nurture, and number:

Closing With the Supply of a CuriousCountrey-Cater-Character, to supple the
rig^r of the roughest Censor.

Upon the Errata's.
As there ^ee Characters ^f Errors, so be ^rrors incident to Characters. These,
be they literal or material, it is in th^e, Reader, to make them venial.

In Epist. to Reader, lin. 25. for fo^r, ^lias (...), Ilium ^orum.
read firmer. p. 36. l. 11. f. shoope, r. shop. p. 53. l. ^0. f. imitation,
r. ^itiation. p. 55. l ^. f. and* r. at. p. 57. l* 6. f. as, r. an. p. 69* l.
11. f. failed, r. ^aile. p. 77. l. 6* f. ^unne, r. Sum. page 80. lin. 5. for
Surely, read Surly. p. 174. lin. 18* for fears no worse, r. fares no ^se. p.
188. l. 6. f. the, r. yet. p. 186. l 9 for feel, r feed. p. 205. l* 7. f.
alterations, ^* altercations. p. ^10. l 23. f. he, r. s^ee.

Second Part.

Page 5 lin. 16. f. clandestnie, r. cl^ndestine. In the Genethlia, l* 8. f.
die, r. ni^.


