A STRAPPADO for the Devil. EPIGRAMS AND Satyrs alluding to the time, with
diverse measures of no less Delight.

By (...), to his friend (...).

Nemo me impune lacessit.

At London printed by I. B. for Richard Redmer and are to be sold at the West
door of Paul's at the Star. 1615.

The Authors Anagram.
RICHARD BRATHWAITE.

Virtue has bar Credit.

This I Will auow, (for it is I that said it)
If Virtue have no coin, she has no Credit.
TO THE Worthily esteemed the true Character of a Generous disposition, Sir
THOMAS GAINSFORD Knight, his Virtues endeered Admiror, wishes fullness of
content in the Dedication of these his Anagrams extracted from his Name, and
concording with his Nature.
Thomas Gainsforde.

Anagram

So fame does reign.

SO Fame does reign with Anagram's so fit
As if that Nature had invented it:
For he that knows thy Virtues and thy Name,
Will say all reign in thee, all ring thy Fame.
Thomas Gainsford.

Anagram

Shade t'Honours game.

A pale for shelter of her game is made,
And thou to Honors game art made a shade,
Thy Huntsup's Virtue, and thy Beagle grace,
Which (well in wind) has still the game in chase.
To his much honored and endeered Mecoenas (the expressiu'st Character of a
generous Spirit) judicious approuer of best-meriting Poesy, Guerdoner of Arts,
cherisher of Wits, and serious Protector of all freeborn Studies, M r.
THOMAS POSTHVMVS DIGGS, the Author humbly dedicates himself, his Time-suting
Epigrams with the use of his divinely importing Anagram
Anagramma.

Thomas Posthumus Digges.

Though time pass, God sums.

In Anagramma Distichon.
HOw well thy Anagram with truth it runs,
Though time pas nere so fast, yet God still sums.
Or thus.

Hopes issu most dem' gag't.

Another Anagram.
Two verses including the Anagram.
PVblique and private men in young and ag't,
on whom most hope is, the^ we deem most gagt.
Annexed.
At you (fair mirror) aim I; you are my scope,
Much are you gag't unto your Contries hope.
To the gentle Reader.
IF I give thee a deserving Title (Gentle Reader) no question but thou will
express thy self in thy censure: thou art no wri-neck critic, politic
informer of States, deprauer of well intended lines, nor maligner of others
labors: Be thine own president in the surueigh of these distempered
Epigrammes; and therein thou may perform the part of an honest man: cancel
the bill of errors, or chalk them on, and they shall serve to make up a
greater volume for next impression. If thou be gentle (as I term thee) and
have sense, thou will supply many defects, committed in the Press by the
Authors absence. Be honest still and thou art out of the swing of this
strappado: if thou play Recreant (by consorting with the swartie miscreants of
Lucifer) the Author has vowed he will play Arch-Pyrate with thee, tie thee
like a Gallie slave to the Mast of his Malu-Sperauza, and ferrie thee over into
Tartarie.

Farewell.
To his BOOK.
Book whither goes thou, I had rather have thee
To stay still with me, for my Book may save me:
Save me, its true, and that is the cause I crave
Thou' de to the world, that thou the world might save;
But that is a task (my book) too hard for thee,
Bid hang the world so that thou will save me:
Yet pray thee be advised whom thou do check,
For speaking truth may chance to break thy neck.
Which to prevent, let this be understood,
Great men though ill they must be styled good,
Their black is white, their vice is virtue made:
But amongst the base call still a spade a spade;
If thou can thus dispense (my book) with crimes,
Thou shall be hugged and honored in these times.
The Epistle Dedicatorie.
To all Usurers, Broakers, and Promoters, Sergeants, Catch-poles, and
Regraters, Vshers, Panders, Suburbs Traders, Cockneies that have many fathers.

Ladies, Monkies, Parachitoes, Marmosites, and Catomitoes, Falls, hightires and
rebatoes, false-haires, periwigges, monchatoes: grave Gregorians, and
Sheepainters.

Send I greeting at adventures, and to all such as be evil, my strappado for
the Devil.

Upon the Errata.
GEntlemen ( humanum est errare) to confirm which position, this my book (as
many other are) has his share of errors; so as I run ad praelum tanquam ad
praelium, in typos quasi in scippos: but my comfort is if I be strappadoed by
the multiplicitie of my errors, it is but answerable to my title: so as I may
seem to divine by my style, what I was to endure by the press. Yet know
judicious disposed Gentlemen, that the intricacie of the copy, and the absence
of the Author from many important proofs were occasion of these errors, which
defects (if they be supplied by your generous co^niuence and curtuous
disposition, I do vow to satisfy your affectionate care with a more serious
surueigh in my next impression.

Errata.
PAge 2 line 23 for Pine read Vine. p. 10. l. 20 alone wanting p. 16 l. 13. for
senselessness read sensele^sse. p. 15. l. ^^ for vainelike, r. vainly p. 26 l.
11. for both fo^s^^th so (...), p. 35 l. 25. for wherefore, read wheresoere. p.
43. l. 22. for shirts r. sheets for weaues, r. woes infra p. l. 25. p. 48. l 4
r ^l^z^. ibid for back r. bark. p. 266. l. 23 for mist^ust, r. instruct. for
curse read scarce.

For other errors as the misplacing of commaes, colons, and periods (which as
they are in every page obuious, so many times they inuert the sense) I refer
to your discretion (judicious gentlemen) whose lenity may sooner supply them,
then all my iudustrie can portray them.

TO THE TRVE DIScouerer of secrets Mounsieur Bacchus, sole Sovereign of the
Iuy-bush, Master-gunner of the pottle-pot ordinance, prime founder of Red
lattices, cheerer of the hunger-staru'd Muses, and their thread bare followers,
singular Artist in pewter language, and an obseruant linguist for anon anon Sir.
His dere-Canary-Bird, wishes, red-eyes, dropsy legs, and all other
accoutrements befitting.
BOttle-nos'd Bacchus with thy bladder face,
To thee my Muse comes reeling for a place:
And craves thy Patronage; nor do I fear,
But my poor fragments shall be made of there,
For good reuersions by thy scrambling crew,
That belch, and read, and at each enteruiew
Of a sharp tempered line, commend the vain,
Digest it, and then rift it up again;
But know thou cup shot god, what is expressed,
Within these Pages do deserve the best
Of thy lightheaded Shamroes, nor's my tutch
For such as love to take a cup too-much.
No, no my lines (though I did seem to stand,
And beg a poor protection at thy hand,)
Shall live in spite of Time, for Time shall see
The curtain of her vices drawn by me;
And though portraide by a less art-full fist,
Yet he that limm'd them is a Satyrist,
For th'lines he writes (if ought he write at all)
Are drawn by ink that is mixed most with gall.
Yea, he was borne, even from his infancy,
To tell the world her shame, and bitterly
To tax those crimes which harbor now and then
Within the bosoms of the greatest men.
" Yea, naught I do but I again will do it,
" Nor ought will write, but I will answer to it:
Yet would I not, great Bacchus, have thee think
My Muse can into that oblivion sink,
As to become forgetful so of thee,
(For so she might unthankful seem to be)
As never to record thy worthy Name
Since I confess from thee that spirit came,
Which first inspired my Muse (by thee expressed)
For when she spoke the least, she wrote the best.
Yea, thou it was, (and so I Will ever hold,)
That quickened me and made me speak more bold;
By that rare quintessence drawn from the pine,
Or from those fluent Hogges-head pipes of thine.
And I do thank thee: yet thus much I Will say,
For any kindness shown me any way,
By thee, or thy attendants, I may swear
Not any one did ever yet appear:
Nay, I could say (and truly too) far more
I never ran ten shillings on thy skore,
Which may seem strange, that I which am so grown
Into acquaintance, and to thee well known:
"Should in thy book have such a diffidence,
As not be chalkt for want of ready pence;
Nay, there is an other reason I could show,
Which might infer that thou do duty owe
To men of our profession, and its this;
(If my conceit make me not think amiss.)
Tell me, Where had thou Iuie-bush, say where?
Which as thine ancient liv'rie thou do wear;
That garland-sure methinks that I should know it,
From th'Temples sure of some pot-hardy Poet;
Who, cause he had not wherewithal to pay,
Was forced to leave his Garland, or to stay
Till some of's Patrons pitied his estate:
But he, poor man, clear out of hope of that
Having discust it often in his mind,
Did think it more fit to leave his wreath behind,
Then into such apparent danger fall,
And so did unto one of th'Drawers call
To tell thee, if thou would be so content,
He would engage his Iuie-ornament;
Which thou being glad of, for thy private use
Wore it thy self and cheat'd the Poet thus.
Now do thou think, that we can brook to have
One of our sort thus injured by a slave,
Without all satisfaction: Bacchus no,
(...) thy ^ro^mes, we will not be baffelt so.
(...) of thy bush again,
(...) thy wreath about the Poets brain.
Or satisfy his damage in some sort,
"Or be thou sure that thou shall answer for it.
But thou will lightly weigh such threats as these,
And say thou can bring us upon our knees
By th'power of thy command: true thou can so,
Yet (bleere ey'de Bacchus) I would have thee know
That we do so esteem thy power and all
Thy followers, we will vent thee' against the wall:
Yea even the kennell shall a witness be,
Of the small respect which we do bear to thee.
Resign then what thou owe, or forbear,
To tax our credits when our skore's not clear.
For well may thou forbear both them and me,
Since thou do owe us more, then we owe thee.
Thou know it Bacchus (if so thou will know it)
That garland which thou wears, it was a Poet
That first empaund it, and thou like a Jew
VVilt not restore to him what is his due.
But thou will answer (as I know thou may)
Yea, I imagine what it is thou can say:
" Bacchus cares not for outward signs a rush,
" Good wine needs not the hanging of a bush.
Do not thou vizzard-fac't ungrateful Elfe?
Yes, for want of a bush thou would hang thy self.
And ^aper like a zuinglian (o my malice
Bursts out against thee) titted under the gallows.
For tell me how should men distinguish thee?
Thou Wilt say by thy fire-sparkling phisnomie,
Those wink-a pipes of thine, those ferret eyes,
Those bag-pipe cheeks, those special qualities
Thou art endew'd with true by th'first thou art known,
But for thy qualities thou have not one
To glory in: for speeches ornament
Anon, anon sit: -- peut or complement
Is all thou can, and this, thou know is such,
As th'Iay or Parrat they can do as much;
But I am loath to tax each crime of thine,
For I do know thou love the Muses nine,
And they love thee, yet it is fit their used
With more respect, then to be once abused
By any apron-prentice that thou have:
Yea, fit it is not they should be out-fac't
By such vnletterd Animals as these,
But reverence the Muses on their knees,
For what be these attend thee, such as lost
Their tongue to gain two or three words at most,
As for example neat and brisk, and then
Anon, anon sir, welcome gentlemen.
And is it fit that swads of such desert
Should stay the very quintessence of art
For a non-payment? or make Sergeants stand
In a crosse-lane to lay unhallowed hand
On Albions Mercuries? no, its not fit
That Hypocrenes pure riuelings of wit,
Should have their stream with honor doubled)
By such base tenter-hooks once troubled.
Let this be then amended (and with haste)
Lest some of these professors should be placed,
Before thy prohibition come to stay
Thy will-for in, they will hardly get away.
But if I hear thee Bacchus after this
That thou arrests but any one I wish
Thou should exempt I will revenged be
Ere many days, of some of thine or thee.
And thanks unto my Genius (as I crave it)
Without invention further now I have it.
And thus it is: I Will to the Peuterer
To make thy quart pots greater then they were;
And so condition with him, as't may be
Thou will confess one day I begar'd thee:
Or if I cannot by my means entreat
Thy pottle-pots for to be made more great
Then the order is, or th'Citties stamp allows,
I hope I shall prevail wih some of those
Who are appointed by their charge to know,
Whether thy pots be sealed yea or no,
That such as are not sealed they would reveal them,
And not take bribes in private to conceal them:
Or if this will not serve, I will devise
How to bring th'potts unto a larger size;
Which if they do neglect but to perform,
According to that Nature and that form
They are prescribed, then on default they shall
Make presently a forfeiture of all,
(Which goods confiscate for their great abuse,
May afterward redound unto the use
Of all such noble skinkers (by confession)
As were deceived by men of this profession;
But this's not all I Will do: Bacchus shall know
His naprie-drawers shall not end it so.
Surueighers shall be-gett (and well may be)
(For worser trades have sought monopolye;
And raised their state by it) which shall strictly take
Examination, whether you do make
Your pottles to be bruised, bough'd, crushed, and bent
Upon set purpose and for this intent,
That you thereby (which is a common crime)
Might fill your crazie pots with lesser wine,
For lesser will they hold, through your deceit,
Being drawn in and made by you more strait:
Yet have I left the Coopers all this while,
Which I do know have some art to beguile.
And therefore, if all will not serve; I Will seek
And bribe them too, to make your vessels leeke.
Yea, beside this (know Bacchus) I Have a mean,
Which put in practice will undo thee clean,
And thus I lay my project: I Will express
What motives there be of licentiousness.
Within thy brothel closures, and with-all
Complain of thy partitions, how the fall
Of many a simple Virgin (though she is loath,
To do it poore-wench) coms from a painted cloth*
A curtain, or some hanging of like sort,
Which done god-wot, they'ue cause to curse thee for it.
And that this might better prevented be,
I will prefer petition instantly,
That thou nor none of thine should suffer thence,
(for to avoid this inconvenience)
Any of different sexes being but payres,
To go in private manner up the stairs:
And this I know (if that my aim be right,
Will go well nie to overthrow thee quite.
If none of these will do, yet sure I am
There is a creature called the Puritan,
Who Will ferret thee, and by a strict surueigh
Fine thee for bouzing on the Sabboath day,
Which if they find, the Righteous they will curse
Though their example it be ten times worse.
But I would have thee to repress all this,
Which thou shall do by doing what I wish,
And that with reason, which (as I have said it)
Is but to give to our profession credit:
They Will pay the man, and if the world go hard,
With them at this time, yet they 'le afterward,
Regratulate thy love (paying the old sko^e)
Which paid they will make bold to run on more.
For tell me Bacchus, though the world appear
To learned men as if no learning were:
And that the golden age (not as it was)
Smiles on the silken fool, or golden Ass;
Yet time will come (yea now it does begin
To show it self (as former times have been)
When wise Minerua shall no honor lack.
For all the fool, whose honor's on his back.
But I shall stagger Bacchus if I stay
Longer with thee, therefore I Will pack away
Unto thy sister Ceres: -- I have said
-- Only look to thy plate, for a^l is paid.
To the Queen of Harvest, daughter and heir to Saturn, and Ops, Goddess of
the Cornethease, Lady Soueraignenesse of the three Vales, Esam, Beuar and
White-horse, Inuentres of the Since, Sickle, and weeding-Hooke: much honored by
the Reed, Corn Pipe, and Whistle; and with all observance attended by
Hobnaile and his company.
Her Deities admirer wishes many a seasonable Harvest.
Hail frui^full Lady, cheerer of our time,
Rare in thy beauty, in thy state divine,
Ripener of Harvest, thou it is whose birth
Yields full increase unto the fertile earth:
Thou art that cheering mother that renues
The Plow-mans hope, and gives their toil those dewes,
Which makes them happy, may my Poems please
Thy honored self, that glads us with increase*
Yet in my mirth I cannot but repine
At that unhappy ackward loss of thine,
That thou which ever have been debonaire,
Fair in thy self, making our fields as fair,
With thy ender'd respect, should be exilde,
Of due content, by loosing of thy child,
Thy heart, thy hope, thy love, and thy delight,
Thy dear Proserpiua, whose vow is plight
Unto, alas I cannot speak it well,
That black-blacht-blabber-lipt foul Prince of hell.
Yet be contented, many one there be,
Yea I know some which may lament with thee
For their straide daughters, who I much do fear
Are lodged now, or will be lodged there.
Less it is nothing for maids now adays
For which of them (though modest) has not straies,
In youth, in age, which straying I do call,
Dotage in maids, and that is worst of all.
How many have we in this error swerud,
Who in themselves have justly well deserud.
That punishment thy daughter first regainde,
Alas I have known them though they seem containd
In modest bounds, yet thus much I will say,
Thy daughter was unchaste* and so were they.
And (pray thee Ceres) credit me in this,
Though my proceeding was not to my wish,
Yet this to thy due comfort I must tell,
Thy daughter does not live in Hell
Without acquaintance, yea I know there are,
Though they in sumptuous raiment and in fare
Seem to excel the worthies of our Land,
Yet being justly poized under hand,
They are as near to Pluto and his heir,
As if those persons that less gorgeous were,
May I speak more, for I am in a vain,
To cull strange things out of a straggling brain,
That there is no wench truly ingenious,
Witty by nature, or ambitious
In her conceit, but that the time will come,
That she will wander full as far from home,
As ere thy dear Proserpina distraide,
Transformed from beauty of a lovely maid.
To be a drudge ('less I am forced to tell)
Unto the base-borne Skinkird bred in Hell.
Do I not know thee Ceres? yes, I know
Far more of thee, then I intend to show
In public eye: 'Lasse I do know thy worth,
To be the fruitful Mother of the earth,
Albions faire-Fostermother, yea that Queen,
That makes a hopeful Harvest to be seen.
Within our flourie Fields: if I might say,
What I in due respect am bound alwaie
For to express I might example thee,
To be the glory of our progeny;
Honor of ages, and success of time,
Errecting to thy self that noble shrine,
Which nere shall be defaced by time or age,
The best of labor in our Pilgrimage.
Then Ceres let thy daughter work, for one
Thou art in due respect admired alone
To be the soueraignesse of Albions I Will,
Who when retired brains do sleep the while,
Shall show thy self worthy a sacred power,
Though thy vain daughter play in hell the whore.
Yea fit it is, and suting to her birth,
She should play baud in hell played whore on earth.
To the Amarous Queen of Delights, Sole Empress of loue-sicke Bedlams*
profes'd patroness to all young Letchers, Foundresse of Midnight-Reuels,
Sentinel to many a cracked Maidenhead, an a sole Benefactor to all lascivious
Nouices; Best habilimented by her Coach drawn with four Turtles, bearing for
her arms a Prick in the midst of a Center, with this Motto;
Pungimur in Medio.

And on the other side a woman-captiue (instanced in Penthisilaea) with this
word,

Vincitur a victo, victor.

Her much Endered and affectionate Paliurus wishes many long delightful
night, Mars his presence. Vulcans absence, much good sport without discovery,
and many years yet to continue her husbands Livery.

Carp^t e^im vires paulatim vritque videndo. Femina. Virg.
Bacchus and Ceres if they be away,
Res vulgaris amor, semel insanimius omnes.
Small good do I look for, may Venus say.
CHerry-lipt Venus with thy dimpled Chin,
Who by our Letchers* honored still have bin:
For a brave trading damsel, though it may seem,
By my neglect of thee, that I have clean
Descarded thee and thine, yet thou shall know it*
Venus has some aliance with a Poet,
And that a near one too: for pray thee say,
Who can express thy bewty any way,
So well as they? and though they only write,
ha^ing nere hap to come to more delight;
Yet art thou much endeared to their Art,
Though they can say naught for the practick part:
Yet among our Albion Sibils that are more,
In number far, then merit, wit, or power.
Some I do know, even of the pregnant'st men,
That love to trade with Venus now and then.
And this the cause why they observe that use,
(As I have heard) for to inflame their Muse:
And some I could produce, had their desire;
For they, their Muse, and all were on a fire.
More could I write to touch thee neerer'th quick,
But as thou loves those strokes are short and thick.
So I desire the very same to be
In writing out that is concerning thee.
An Heroycke Emblem upon the Warrior called HONORA.
TAra, Tantara, Honors signal come,
Whose best of Music is the warlike Drum,
Come brave Tyndarian spirit, hear thy glory,
Shrouded too long in pitchie dark, whose story,
Shall shine and show it self more fair, more bright,
Then chaste La^ona on the sablest night.
Now art thou much admird by every eye,
Though lately vass^ld to captivity.
Now art thou shown to be a Monument,
Of former glory, and an ornament,
^it for the ear of Kings, now art thou one,
Highly esteemed, that was of late as none.
Now can thou show thy merit and desert,
To be derived from a royal heart.
Not chafd with perfumes, like a Carpet Knight,
That cannot fight but in his Ladies sight.
Not sick ofth fashions, (like this amorous fry
Of Nouice, who nere knew Enemy)
Save their disdainefull Mistres: not enthrald
To love, for love thou know not how its called.
What style it has, or what be lovers charms,
Save that pure love which thou do bear to Arms.
Not servile to each apish complement,
Save Honors service, and VVares mannagement.
Not slave to Fortune, nor engagd to fate,
But heir to resolution, an estate
More eminent and glorious to thy self,
Then all the raisers-Mammons mouldred-pelfe,
No^ vain like proud of ^itles, but have Art,
To make thy wa^^ to Honor by Desert.
Not ga^e to prostitution, for the name
Of Soldier hate such an ignoble slain.
Not lure to lucre, but do make thy blood,
An instrument unto thy countri^s good:
Not in appearance, or in outward show,
To seem to know what thou did never know,
Not humorous, occasioning offense,
But with pure valor mixing patience;
That two reduced to one, one drawn from two,
Might make thee apt to speak, and prompt to do.
Long have thou slept, and some did think it ill
To wake thee, but to let thee sleep on still.
But how can resolution lie interred
Alas how far have vulgar judgments er'd?
To think the senselesnes? No, thou did but wink,
For to observe what other men would think
Of thy retired silence, now thou have
Rubbed ore thy gummie eyes, and runs as fast
To thy intendements forct from coast to coast,
As willing to redeem what thou have lost.
Hallow amain, down by the flowrie vale
Of honor and renown display thy sail,
Trample on Bastard greatness, brute their shame,
That are esteemed only great in name,
Without demerit, tell them worth should be
Drawn from our selves, not from our family.
Bid them wipe of that painting from their cheek,
Its too effeminate and bid them seek,
Actions that seem them better, its not amber,
Sleeking, or chasing in a Ladies chamber,
Fantastic humors, amorous conceits,
Fashion inuentors sin seducing baits,
What such a Mounseyr wore, or what Tyres be
Of eminent request in Italy.
No, no, our perfumed Gallants now must look,
Like to the sons of Valor, smer'd with smoke,
Steeled with spirit, armed with best of youth,
Directly planted before a Cannons mouth.
Shake not (my dapper Courtier) though thou hear
Naught but the voice of thunder every where:
Or if the noise of arms breed in thee fear,
(No less then death) go on and stop thine ear?
Bouge not a foot (or if thou fear to kill)
Wink, and then say, thou murders against thy will.
How likest thou this? This is no camp for love,
Nor must thy wreath be here a Ladies glove,
Anticke and apish fashions will not serve,
In this enobled field, such as deserve,
By a peculiar merit shall receive
The Guerdon of their Valor, and in Grave
Shall find a living monument, which men
Admiring much, shall ever honor them.
And is not this a nobler monument,
Then spend our time in fruitless complements.
Spend a whole age in making of a leg,
Or seeking how some office we may beg.
Trading for undeserved Honor, got
By servile means, and by the simplest sot,
That knows not Honors essence, O may I
Rather then be so Honored wish to dye
In the obseurest manner, that when Time
Shall shroud my ashes in a homely shrine,
Some earthy vrne, yet may my memory
Live without reach of envy after me.
Sacred Bellona, valors choicest Saint,
For now by thee fly we unto our tent.
Infuse true resolution in the m^nde
Of thy professors, that their spirits may find
What difference there is in honors sight,
Twixt a good Soldier and a carpet-Knight.
His per^ume's powder, and his harmony
Reports of Cannons, for his bravery,
Barded with steel and Iron, for the voice,
Of amorous Ganimedes, the horrid noise
Of clattering armor, for a Downie bed
The chill cold ground, for pillow to their head,
Tincke with musk Roses, Target and their shield,
For gorgeous Rooms, the purprise of the field,
For nimble capring, Marching, for the tune
Of moving consorts, striking up a drum,
For dainties, hunger; thus is honor fed,
With labor got, and care continued.
Can this content my Courtier? yes, it may.
When his laciuious night and fruitles day,
His many idle hours employed worse,
(Though better deemed) then such whose vagrant course
Incurs a penal censure; shall be past,
And he with whip of conscience thoroughly lash't,
Shall bid a due to Lady vanity
To Coures applause, to humors fantasy,
To honors undeserved, to parasites,
To fashions-brocage, and to all delights.
Which reap no fruit, no guerdon, nor reward,
Save care on earth, repentance afterward:
Where Justice often is forced from her intent.
Goodness being only cause of punishment.
Where violence (so strong be great men grown)
Makes right supprest', and justice overthrown.
Where sins in cloth of Tissue fair descri'de,
Make that wise Sages Axiom verifi'de.
" A great man's foe often by experience proves,
" Of all that be, no thunder like to Jove's.
Here Magistrates are clad in violet,
Because pure Justice they do violate.
Here vice is mounted, virtue lives despised,
The worst esteemed, the better meanly prized.
Corruption rides on foote-cloth, (some auerre)
And upright dealing she does lackie her*
Honor's afraid of Sergeants, merits sad,
And lives as one without observance had.
VVisdom's out of request, for temperance,
She Is never known but in a Moris dance.
And purple Justice seldom's seen to pass,
To any Court, but riding one an Ass.
What then but valor should support the State,
And make a Realm by vice grown desolate.
See her own shame, and in her shame conceive,
The blessed memorial of an happy grave,
"On then with honor, let the usurer
Made stiff with plenty, feel the shock of war,
And tremble, fearing least' should be his lot,
To loose by war what his oppression got.
Let the profane contemner of Gods power
Be moved by terror, let the Paramour,
Glazed with a shameless fore head leave her sin.
They youthful Prodigal, those nets he is in.
Let the prodigious state-engrosser feel,
What harm h' as done unto the Commonweal.
Let ^h'aspiring birth of Dathan see,
The end of them, and their conspiracy.
Let all lascivious Minions hence reclaim,
Their odious lives, and put on robes of shame.
Let public Haxsters (now the most of all)
That in their hear, would quarrel for the wall,
Stand to their Tacklings, let both youth and age,
Show distinct worths in distant Equipage.
Lead on Honora, that in time report,
May make a Camp Knight gracious in the Court.
So noblest minds in best of Actions shown,
May challenge Honor when it is their own.
Upon the General Sciolists or Poettasters of Britannie. A Satyr.
COme Are^huse come, for nere had we,
At any time a greater need of thee.
No Laurel now, but Nettle's best to grace
Our Laureat Po^t* see his uncouth face,
Unapt for p^esie: his strange disguise,
Only addressed (in Verse) to Temporize:
Now Parasites prove Poets, and express
Their oily works: for what is more or less
Dilated on, is consecrate to men,
That are the greatest: O what need is then,
To thee (dear Arthuse) that did frame,
A Poet to the nature of his name?
No time-obseruing smooth faced sycophant,
No strange conceited Ass whose Element
Is to insinuate under the shade
Of a great Mounseyrs elbow, thour't proved Jade
To thy profession, not a saffron band,
But like a roaring boy, can make thee stand
And yield observance to him: silly fool,
That Artlesse idiots should bring to school,
The best of Muses, thou that once wast borne,
Not as our great Acteons, to the horn
Of their dishonor, (being of joy bereft)
Leaving to others what themselves have left.
(Worse by degrees then was that Phoebus Car,
Which Phaeton by rash attempts did mar:
And clear dissolues) less see thy Trophies torn,
Thy statues razed: and that Mount forlorn
Which first possessed the Muses: now no wreath
Can be hung up to memorize the death
Of any great man, why for virtues due,
Bids every Poet (in his verse) speak true
Of such as are deceased: its true, who then
Speaking no more then truth, can praise such men,
As rather were then lived? being, but not
In real essence, las what fame is got
By such as write of these (whose only good)
Is to auerre they were of Noble blood.
But so much disproportioned to their name,
As what they seemed, they seldom were the same.
The same; O noe, their garish ornament,
Their wanton guise, their Loue-sicke complement,
Their strange distractions, their deformed state,
Transformed from English to Italienate,
Express small comfort to a Poets pen,
Which only should delight in showing them
Unto the worlds eye, whose fame succeedes,
And makes them Noble by Heroicke deeds,
Drawn from the line of Honor: but how far
Seem Poets in these latter times to err?
Who write not for respect, or due esteem,
Had to their own profession, but to gain
The favor of a great one, this it is,
Gives privilege to men that do amiss:
Such be our rank of Poets now adays,
As they adorn th'Immerited with praise
Above desert. Hence is it that we bring
The Art of Poetry to Ballading.
Hence is it, that the Courtier may intend
A strange pretended pro^ect for no end,
Save to augment's expense, a suites begun,
Which makes a silly Farmer quite undone,
Without all hope of composition: Pass
That such transgressions should so freely pass,
Without controulement. Many we have here,
That can compose their Verse, but in a sphere
So different to the time, as they descry
Their want of brains to each judicious eye.
Yea some I know are Poets in this time
Who write of swains, might write as well of swine,
For th'profit of their labors is so small,
As it were far better not to write at all,
Then to consume such precious time in vain,
About a fruitless, and desertlesse strain:
Better indeed: when in their Makers sight,
They must accomptants be of what they write,
Whose eyes be purer, and extension bear,
Above th'Dimension of a common sphere.
Yet ^anke I not (as some men do suppose)
These worthless swains amongst the lays of those
Time-honour'd Shepherds (for they still shall be)
As well they merit) honored of me,
Who bear a part, like honest faithful swains,
On witty Wither neuer-withring plains,
For these (though seeming Shepherds) have deserved,
To have their names in lasting Marble carved:
Yea this I know I may be bold to say,
Thames never had swans that song more sweet than they.
It Is true I may auow't, that nere was song,
Chanted in any age by swains so young,
With more delight then was performed by them,
Pretily shadowed in a borrowed name.
And long may Englands Thespian springs be known
"By lovely Wither and by bonny Brown,
Whil^st solid Seldon, and their Cuddy too,
Sing what our (Swains of old) could never do.
Yea I do hope, since they so well can write,
Of Shep-heards sport, and of the fields delight.
That when they come to take a view of th'Court,
(As some have done) and have bin mewed up for it,
They Will tell her freely, (as full well they may)
That in their Judgments, after due suruay,
Of th'Court and th'Cottage, they may well maintain,
Vices in the Court, but virtues in the Swain;
And happy be those Authors which do give
Virtue and vice their titles, they shall live
In spite of Envy, when such men as teach
That such be only virtuous as be rich,
Shall lie interred where fame shall never find them*
For such do seldom leave a name behind them*
Less they must dye and perish, so must we,
Nor can we gain ought of eternity:
Save that we live, Oh then how blessed are they
That spend their life in weighing of their days*
But of professants, which compose their song
To a strange descant! this I Will say they wrong
Flowrie Parnassus, where such used to be,
As in themselves made one set company.
These sung not what they knew not, but in Verse,
What time had taught them they use to rehearse,
And to reduce it to one perfect form,
Striving by proper figures to adorn
Each work, each composition: but less now
How farre's that alteration? where we know
Le^t that we write, adding to our estate
(Begged merely) by a great man's Dedicate.
Here is no substance, but a simple piece
Of gaudy Rhetoric: Which if it please,
Yields The Author dear-contentment: thus we strain
The Muses Text for a peculiar gain
Unto our selves: hence is it vice abides,
(And lording-like in silken foot-cloath rides.)
Hence is it Landlords make their tenants slaves:
Hence is it waste-goods open their fathers graves:
Hence is it Mammonists adore their gold:
Hence is it the impious to perdition sold:
Hence Sacrilege a privilege obtaines:
Hence th'sneking Lawyer by his Clyent gains:
Hence th'Politician, what so ere befall,
Will to his trade and show a Machiuell.
Hence imposts rise extortions violence*
Graced by men that have most eminence.
Hence Sergeants walk vnfro^ted (though they know it)
No friend is worse then Sergeant to a Poet.
Hence painted faces (like ill wine in caske)
Shrowed their deformed complexions under mask*
Hence curious Courtiers, gorgeously arrayd,
Wear more upon their back then ere was paid:
Hence th'baudie Pandor, servile to his whore,
And hence the Baude that keeps the traders door;
Hence base informers take their borrowed light,
Living like Owls that use to fly by night:
Hence wanton Prodigals that spend their state,
And 'gin repentance when it is too late.
Hence young and old, hence each in their degree,
Challenge to them a due Monopoly.
O how Miueruas temple's now disgraced,
By th'skum of Poetry! she that was placed
Once like the Ephesian Queen in a pure shrine
Of honor and delight, now is forced to pine.
And languish in her bewty, being deprest,
By such men most, whom she suspecteth lest.
Vnpiniond Muses (such as nere could fly)
Further then vnplum'd birds now press as high
As Eagles; which by the Color you may know,
As eminent and clear as Flaccus Crow:
These steal selected flowers from others wit,
And yet protest their nature brooks not it,
They are (for both) so invented by their art.
Making their pen the displayer of their heart.
They brook no Brocage, yet has works in press,
Which they are guil^lesse of* but this were less,
Worthy reproof, if in their gleaned lines,
Like our age Critics they would curb these times
For pe^ulancie: but so vain be they,
As they run still in that high beaten way
Of error, by directing men amiss,
Penning whole volumes of licentiousness,
Descanting on my Ladies Rosy lip,
Her Cinthian eye, her bending front, her trip,
Her bodies motion, ^otion of her time,
All which they weaue up in a baudy Rhyme.
For since there is no observance, Accent neither
(Since sense and accent seldom go together.)
O what aspersions do these lay on her,
Who bears the only native character.
Of her dear issues merit* she I mean,
Without whose nourishment we had not been,
She without whose embrace, the solid earth,
Had quite interred the honor of our birth*
She without whom we have no biding place,
No mansion, no repose: she by whose grace
We are inhabitants, planted in rest,
Sucking pure milk out of her tender breast.
She whose our Guardian governing our state
Shoring our weakness, arming us against fate,
Guiding our path-lesse passage, brething life
Into our dullness: mid^ating strife,
Because (a peaceful mother) chering us
With folace, when deprest, tricking our Muse,
With seemly subjects (that whilst shepherds sing)
Of rural pastimes, midst their sonneting.
The grauer rank might compositions make,
Not for themselves but for their countries sake:
Alas poor country; where is all that store
Of divine wits that thou have bred before?
Where is that Quint-essence of poesy,
That in (fore-times) was wont to breath on thee:
Like a cool Zephirus? Hybles pure mount,
Renowm'd in former ages and that Fount,
Of sacred Castalie lie desolate.
For they with theirs have lost their former state
Of Greatness: no proportion nor no flower
Decks, with a dasie Border, that sweet Bower
Where Cinthia used to revel: but as th'port
Of housekeeping is now transport'd to Court,
" Leaving their Country-houses, which men look
" And gase at long ere they can see them smoke:
So fruitful Hesperie, which used to be
The Ren-de uou for sacred poesy
L^uing to be her self, shuts up her door?
Hence is the bankrout poet becom'd poor:
Hence is 't he 's forced to write not for the ease
Of his own mind (but as his Patrons please.)
Hence is it that errors must be Virtues deemed,
Because, poor Poet, its by Fate ordained,
That if he will not humor, he must sterue:
"For Great-men love not hear what they deserve.
How jealous be our times of their deserts,
When they suppress the eminence of arts?
Making them speechless whereas we do see,
If persons were disposed as they should be;
Their sincere conscience (like a brazen wall)
Might bear them up what ever should befall.
Then might our Satyr mix his ink with gal,
But with his mixture do no hurt at all.
Then might our skeptic give his judgment free,
yet do small harm to men's integrity.
Then might the Lawyer plead without offense;
Not fear his Conscience with a fair pretense
Of doing good, when his corrupted will
Under pretense of good, acts what is ill.
Then might the devils Factors live like men,
That have a god, nor for the hundred ten;
Receiving with advantage need'd they pay,
A greater sum at that same latter day,
When due accounts are had^ o usury
That art the Cities scourge, how much have we
Occasion to proseribe thee from our land,
Since by thy means have we felt heavens hand
More heavy and revenging then before,
Whose wrath has vialls ever laid in store
To punish impious men: its thou (foul sin)
Which have haled down the infection we have seen
Rage in this famous I Will: its thou whose hight
Ha^h turned our day of comfort to a night
Of great affliction: for who more can be
Afflicted in himself, then inwardly
Feeling the worm of Conscience gnawing him
Torment consorting with that birth of sin
Wherein he is nurtured: alas poor I Will!
That thou should foster such as do defile
Thy once renowned borders with the hate
Of a supernall power, making thy state
Pray to oppression, vassalling thy fame
(Which once was glorious) to thy odious name
Of misery: Great Albion now is grown
Poor in her self, because what is her own
She cannot use but in depraved wise,
Makes her self subject to all foreign eyes
As vices spectacle: o that the bliss
Which we enjoy by minds Synderysis
The refined part of man, should soyled be
By th'worst of ils the stain of usury?
And who will inueigh against it, few or none,
For miser Nature hardly leaves us one,
That can securely speak against this ill
So general is the poison of our will:
For (dear Pernassus now is so oppressed)
It dare not speak for fear that interest,
Should be demanded by the Usurer
To whom it stands engaged: this is the fate
That Poets have, to leave more wit then state
To their posterity: o impious time!
When worst of Fortune follows wits divine;
When noble actions motive in their spirit,
Can leave naught to their Issue to inherit:
Save their poor fathers papers, monuments
Scarce worth respect: how weakes the Element
Which Poets are composed of, when one frown
Sent from a great man's visage can keep down
Their best invention? silly poesy,
That (though free borne, art forced to slavery,
And undeserved subjection: pity it is,
That best of merit should shut up her wish;
And dew expectance in no other book^,
Save in a skrew'd face or a writhed look;
Unfit to entertain an Art divine
Which is expressed in that poor Muse of thine.
Come, come, great regent of that sacred quire,
Come in thy self and so our souls inspire
With Arts Elixir and with spirit toe,
That we may do with boldness what we do:
Erect our aged fortunes make them shine
(Not like the fool in's foot-cloath) but like Time,
Adorned with true experiments which may
Convert our odious night to glorious day.
Let not Ambition mounted in her state
Pass vncontrol'd: care not for getting hate:
" For honest minds are best approved still,
" By gaining hate in curbing what is ill.
Truncoque Simillimus Heroes. I^uenal.
Let not these painted blocks of Iuuenal,
Which for their clothes are most admired of al
Stand vnreproou'd: let not their dangling plume
So daunt thee, as thou dare not well presume
To blazon their defects, speak what thou see
And care not who be pleased, or who displeased*
Let not moth-eaten Avarice appear
In this dear I Will, without her Character:
Lash me the Symonist, who though precise
In show, can geld his Parsons Benifice.
^all me (our graine-engrossers) moulds of the earth,
That in their plenty laugh at others dearth.
Rouse me the Atheist, let us security
Hear th'iudgement of supernall majesty
Thundering against him: let th'lasciuious
Know their bed-broking sin, how odious
Their sensual meetings are to his pure eyes,
Who even the secrets of our hearts espies,
Searching our reins, examining our hearts,
Discussing each intention (and all parts)
That have a working faculty: Even he
That well approues of moral poesy,
He that confirms the motions of our mind*
And breath's upon them if to good inclinde.
Let not sin-tempting wanton Meremaids rest
Without due censure, who with naked breast,
Attractiue eye, and garish Complement
Ensnare our fond vn^ary Innocent:
These are those Babell public prostitutes,
Lures to damnation, Roman Catamites,
Inuentresses of pleasures, pensive still
To do what is good, but frolike to do ill.
O London how thy Vanity abounds,
Glorying in that which thy renown confounds.
Traduced fashions from the Dutch to French,
From French to Spanish, and not longer since,
Then yesterday, blush at thy sin for shame,
That Albion (by thy means) should ^ose her name,
And habit too: see, see, how far you are gone,
Beyond thy self, that therer's no fashion known,
In foreign Courts, deformed howsoere it be,
But by transportance it does come to thee.
Less how immodest art thou to express,
Thy self so much by others fashions less?
How strangely Metamorphis'd to partake,
For Angels form, the most deformed shape,
That Countries can bring out: o pity it is
That Albions much admired Metropolis,
Should make those which admired her now to hate
Her vain condition (introduced by state
Too plentiful: Here you Hesperian wits
May you have subject more then well befits
A modest pen: for nere was any time
More prone to ill: no Region, country, clime,
Province, Isle, Regiment so truly blessed
With all earths bounties, yet has less expressed,
Of gratitude: here Satirists resort,
And make an ample coment on the Court,
Where thou shall write, som's wanton, others vain,
Ambitious some, others do covet gain
By servile means: some beggars yet who dar^
Write in these days that any such there are.
Then (my sharp toothed Satire) frame thy ditty
In the same form, unrip the Crimes of'th City
With a stern brow: tell the purple Magistrate,
How he has raised himself to great estate
By others ruin: such as Mercers are,
Tell them dark shops have got away ill ware.
Such as be Goldsmiths, and are dangerous,
Call them the Siluer-smith of Ephesus.
Long live Diana, but no longer then
By their Diana they do reap a gain.
Such as be Brokers, tell them their profession,
Is not to be a knave o'th first edition.
But as those garments which are brought to them,
Use to be worn before by other men:
Even so they broke their vices and receive
Some crimes wrapped up in the garments which they have.
Tell them of Wapping, bid them thankful be,
That there is Justice had for Piracie:
For if that were not (it may well be said)
Many their shops would be unfurnished,
But in the Country now my Muse shall be,
For brook she will not a Brokers Company.
Here shall thou see th'picture of Avarice,
Thin-cheek'd, r^w-bon'd, faint-breath, and hollow-eye^.
Nose-dropping, rh^wme-destilling, driueling mouth
Hand-shaking, hair down-falling, th^misers cough,
Legs goutie, knees unwieldy, hand on cruch,
Eyes in his bosom, gasing on his pouch,
His labor torment, rest he cannot take,
When all are sleeping, he is forced to wake:
His Eyes are ever open, for riches keep
His eyes unclosed: The miser cannot sleep.
He Is his own anguish, such an impious elfe,
That's ill to all, but worst unto himself.
He has not books whereon to meditate,
Only a debt book and an Alminake.
The one's for forfeitures, where he will pore,
And day by day trauers them ore and ore:
Th'o^her's his Interlude that yields him mirth,
Seeing predictions of the next years dearth.
Hope of a deerer Summer then last was
Unseasoned harvest: O these hopes surpass
All others, Here the Miser sets his eye,
And when he does these strange prenotions spy,
He kisses th'booke, swears the profession's rare,
And wishes all he reads such subjects were.
This Cormorant engrosseth all his grain,
Makes his barnes greater by a secret train
Brings ore his neighbors son to set his hand,
Unto a sale, and so ioynes land to land.
This wicked ulcer that corrupts the state,
Nere thinks of death, till that it be too la^e.
His gold's his God, yet use it cannot he,
But in expression of his misery*
Which puts the poor Miser to a double pain.
By telling it and putting't up again.
But now (my nimble Satyr) for to thee
Tends this impolisht piece of poesy:
How will thou tax, or where will thou begin
With thy tart phrase, to stinge and nettle him?
Thou must be bitter (for in greatest grieves)
And festered wounds we use no lenitiues
To mollefie, but corrasiues to gall:
And of all griefs this is the great'st of all.
By it we are degenerate and live,
As such as can receive, but cannot give
To Nature competence: Come my dear Mate
I Will tell thee how to cure their desperate state;
Which in few words least that thy memory fail,
I Will speak my mind unto thee in a tale.
It chaunc't upon a time (and well might be
For such like chances fall-on misery,)
A pinch-gut Miser fell extremely sick,
So* as at last his Conscience began to prick,
And tell him of's oppression, wheresoere
He turned his eyes, he saw damnation there.
Sleep could he not, his sickness was too great,
Nor hope for ought, his conscience did so threate
And terrify his soul: thus lay this wretch
Poor in his spirit, though to the world rich;
Feign would he often desire himself confessed.
But cause he was fallen out with Parish priest
About a Tith-pigge, he deferred the time,
And would in no case suffer this Divine
To minister due comfort to his s^ate
All woe^ begone: so great was the Misers have*
For though he were afflicted, yet would he
Vp-braide the Parson full irreuerently,
Calling him hedge priest, belly-god (nay ^or^)
That like a Thief, he came not in at door,
But in at window to his Bene^ice;
And that he knew the practice and device
Of him and's Patron: who that the law might (...)
Dispensed with in case of Symonie,
Sold him a horse (that whatsoere should fa^^,)
The price might pay for the Benefice and all*
This would he say, concluding merrily,
Sir Priest you come more for my pigge then me*
Silent the Parson was, for well he knew,
The Miser spoke no more then what was true*
Only he wished such neighbors as he had
Present to pray for him, for he was mad,
And that by all appearance it was like
That his disease had made him lunatickes
Thus every day his sickness did increase*
Bere^t of comfort, conscienc^ sweetest peace
Without all hope of health or here or there,
(For th'worm of conscience follows every where.)
There Is no evasion left: where ere we go
She will attend us in our weal and woe.
You heard confessed he would, by as it is true.
A miser loves not him that craves his due:
So to such men this censure stands for just,
They love their Conscience rest less then their ru^t.
What should he do? the Pardon now is gone,
And he unto himself is left alone
T'expostulate with death: his sins did grieve hi^
But now the most when all his friends do leave him*
Torment below, judgment he sees above,
Witness within him, that will duly prove
What he has done on earth (thus all in one
Make up a consort in his dying moan:
Yet as a ship ore-burdend with her freight
Sinking before, sayls bravely, being made light;
Or as the Ocean beats from shelfe to shelfe,
(Sea-sicke god-wot) till she has purged herself.
So this sur-charged soul rowl's here and there,
And yet to comfort is no whit the near,
Till that same la^tage of corruption be
Exempted quite: then sleeps she quietly.
Confess he must, but to no Priest, that is vain:
But unto one clear of another strain;
Shall I tell Satire? yes, thou needs must know it,
And this he was; a thrid-bare neighboring Poet:
Who after dew confession made to him
Of every act, and each peculiar ^inne,
Extortion, Violence and Injury,
Pressing of Orphans, biting usury,
Forfeitures taken, forged bills, at last
He makes confession how a Poet past
His pikes: who once was of a fair estate,
But after had no prospect but a grate:
O, quoth the Poet, that was ill in you;
O (quoth the Miser) I do know its true:
But with remorce I now lament his fall.
Which amongst the rest afflict^ me most of all.
Wherefore good Sir, pour out your prayers for me,
That in distaste of my impiety
Languishing sore, I may be cheerd in state,
Dying in hope, that now lies desperate.
The fair conditio'nd Poet, though he had heard
How ill his own profession got reward,
By this hard-harted Miser; yet did he
Scorn his revenge should in affliction be:
Straight he retires himself a pretty space,
Choosing for's Orisons a private place,
Which being done, to cheer the drooping man,
With hands heau'd up, his prayers he thus began.
Powerful Jehovah, King of Heaven and Earth,
That give to all things living life and b^rth.
Thou that protects each thing which thou have made,
And so preseru's it* as it cannot fade.
Before the time prefin'd: thou that wilt have
Mercy on such as thou do mean to save.
Look in this wretch (that lies all woe begone)
If so thou think he is worthy looking on:
Great is thy mercy, so it needs must be,
If thou will save such Miser^ants as he.
But what thou means to do, he feign would know,
W^ether he must ascend, or fall below:
That he provision may according make,
And fit himself for th'Voyage he must take.
For if to heaven, he needs the less prepare,
Because he knows all needful things be there.
But much he feared, and so fear other some,
Among which my self, that there be nere shall come,
But if to hell (the likelier place o'th two)
He does desire, that thou would this allow.
He may have so much respite as prepare,
The Bonds of all such Prodigalls be there:
That what he could not cancel here so well
On earth, may there be cancelled in hell.
The cause is this (as it to me appears)
Lest that those spend-thrif^s fall about his ears,
When they shall see him, which that he may stay,
He Will cancel the Bonds, though it be long after day
Or this's the cause as he was impious here,
He means to prove an honest Devil there.
" That Time to Times-successors may bring forth,
" Hell made him better then he was on Earth.
Much more he praide, but I do rather choose,
(Satyr) to make of all his prayers an use,
That when the use shall well expressed be,
Thou may apply the Benefit to thee.
Sir [quoth the Poet] I my prayers have made,
Have you, (replied he,) as one dismayed,
Yes sir, and by them so my zeal enforced,
As I preuaild, though it was long time first,
For know an apparision came to me
With a shrill voice, which bad me say to thee.
If thou wile first a restitution make,
And render up what thou by Fraud did take,
From any man, but chiefly what thou took
From th'Poet: next, deliver up thy book
Of all Accounts, great'st cause of thy despair,
To thy Confessor, and make him thy heir.
Thou shall have health for this, it bad me tell,
But if thou will not, thou art marked for hell.
For Hell, no marry I^ take keys and state,
I will not buy wealth at so dear a rate.
If thou my pretty Satyr could reclayme,
A miser thus, I Would thank thee for the same.
But all too long I have enforced thee stay.
Vice calls thee, and Time draws me away.
An Epigramme called the Civil Deuell.
IT chanced one evening as I went abroad,
To cheer my cares, and take away my loads,
Of disagreeing passions, which were bred
By the distemper of a troubled head,
Midst of my walk, spying an Allye door,
(Which I protest I never spied before)
I entered in, and being entered in,
I found the entry was to the house of sin.
Yet much I wondered, how sin there could be.
Where th'sinnes protectresse showed most modest^*
A civil matron, lisping with sorsooth,
As one that had not heart to swear an oath,
In Grave attire, French hood, all Frencheside,
For she had something more of French beside,
Her outward raiment in a loose-gowne made.
Right after fashion, with a countnance staid,
And which is stranger (shamefast) her Iaboord
(Like a young nouice letcher) making each word
A protestation; she that knew'th device,
T'ensnare a green wit, seemed wondrous ^i^e,
Reproving of my error* Sir, I am
(For thus she took me up) wife to a man
Of due respect, one that has office borne,
Twice in the City, therefore pray forbear,
You do mistake your self, there is none such here
As you make sure for. I as one dismayed,
That durst not justify what I had said,
Began to slinke away; she seeing this,
Fearing least she should such a Gudgeon miss.
Recants what she had said, swearing though she
Were such a man's wife of the Marshalsie,
One that had never yet incurd ill name,
Or knew ought more then modesty or shame*
Though she nere was defamed in all her life*
Or loved more then as becom'd a wife,
Though her affection never yet was shown
(Save to her husband) unto any one,
Though she was grave in years, and therefore might
Tread rightly now, that had so long trod right,
She would pawn name, fame, modesty, and all
Affection, husband, yea what ere befall
Her grauer years should once dispense with time*
"She would, forsooth, remain entirely mine,
This alteration made me strangely doubt*
And though my feet were in, my mind was out.
Yet so was I embralld by tempting sin,
Though Virtue forced me out, Vice kept me in.
That did my tempting Genius, swear, protest,
That of all creatures she did love me best,
And with dissembling tears disguise her ill,
Fond is that man, and fonder is his will,
That Is thus deprau'd: how servile are men grown.
When these same Virtues we esteem our own
Are thus Eclipsed by Hyene faced whores,
That protestation make they will be ours,
When they prove nothing less, las I do know
And by experience, whatsoere they show.
Their painted^Vizards cover naked sin,
Which seeming fair, are ever foul within.
A whiten wall, a rotten odious tomb,
That prostitutes her self to all that come.
To all that come, hence then is affection crossed,
For love is pure, but lust for them bid most.
But to my Saint-like Devil: she thus precise
At first held credit dear, but now her eyes
Like wandering stars pressed to induce some sin
Makes me (the silly fish) caught by her gin.
Reason did tell me, and suggest her name,
Whispring me in the ear, it was a shame
To gage my reputation to a whore:
But las who knows it not, sense has more power
Then reason in these acts: I gave consent
To her inducements, thought her Innocent,
And a right modest matron: yet how far,
Did sense from reason in her Verdict err?
For how could she be modest that so soon,
Was gained ere craved, so quickly wood and worm?
Less that my simple strain should be so weak,
As to continue for a wantons sake,
So firm in my affection? she was grave,
Its true, she was so: but how many have
That form of gravity, the more their sin,
Being so grave without, so gay within,
But she protested; true, she swore an oath,
As any other tempting wanton does,
When she is in hope of gain, unhappy I,
To lean so much to harlots forgery.
Well my brave Curtizan, since I am won,
To do that act by which I am undone.
Since I am snared, and like a Bird that's caught,
Fledged in bird-lime, am of wit distraught,
And senses too: I will run headlong to it,
And do it with force, since I perforce must do it.
Down goes the silken Carpet all the while,
Showing those sheets, which lovers do be guile,
Those sheets of lust perfumed deliciously,
With rosy odours, where variety
Of objects made recourse: see wantons see,
How many motives now enuiron me?
Here my lasciuions Matron wooes with tears,
There a repose for lusts retrait appears.
Here a protesting whore (see whoredoms shelfe)
Rather then loose me, she will damme her self.
There Adons picture, clipping Venus round,
Here Jove Europa lying on the ground.
Here Mars disarmed in Beauties chariot drawn,
Where fair Eryca covered ore with lawne,
Bids him her best of welcome, and is led,
For want of rooms unto her Husbands bed.
Here Dan^e stood (admiring divine power)
Which did descend like to a goulden shoure,
Into her Virgin-lap, there straight I spide
The tempting Omphale, and on one side,
Her wanton sister, on the other, fair
Alcinous daughter, courted for her hair
By great Apollo: but below her foot,
Sat H^rcles spinning, she enioynd him to it.
Here I beheld the nimble Satyrs dance
The Druids sung, the water-Sea-nimphs praunce,
Ore the delicious Mede: there was the Queen
Of Amorous meetings pictured as sh'ad been
Taking a greene-gowne (many such there are)
Of Mars that Martial Enginer of war.
Here Vulcane lay, poor Cuckold as he was,
And saw them mating on the greeny grass,
Yet durst say naught, how many such there be,
That see enough, but dare not say they see?
Sweet heart (quoth she) and smild, seeing me eye
This picture more then any one was nie,
Leave me the shadow, to the substance go,
What thou now see, let lovers action know,
I Will be thy Venus, pretty Ducke I will,
And though less fair, yet I have far more skill,
In Loves affairs: for if I Adon had,
As Venus had: I could have taught the lad.
To have been far more forward then he was*
And not have dallied with so apt a less.
Come, come (my youngling) though I nere could be
Immodest yet, I Will s^ow my self to thee,
A less of metal: Come, in faith thou shall,
Thou^'t Mars, I Venus, he that limping halt,
My V^lean-husband, pox on it he is gone,
And I my self as desolate alone,
Will entertain thee: I in manlike shape,
Being a man, a man should imitate.
Protested I would do, yet had no power,
For who can deal so ably with a whore,
Or with so free-bred actions, since I know,
None can affection with election show,
Sincerely or entirely, but whose strife,
S'transform'd from wanton action to a wife
Of modest action: this is she can do,
And every night has new conceits to woo,
Though she be won, las what is wooing then,
Since wooing, winning, be small change in men?
Who knows not whores affection purch^s'd soon.
And that they are not sooner wooed then won?
Or as the world goes, for its more common,
Women woe men more often then men woe women.
Hence nature seems to have transformed us quite,
Co^uerting day unto a drerie night,
Virtue to vice, a good-names eminence,
Exposed to shame, and public impudence.
Once women knew a blushing shame-fastnesse,
But now a blush is least that they express;
Unless for shame of having done some ill
They fear is known, which they would shadow still,
Shine brightest heaven (if thou will deigne to shine.
And with thy beams dispell this hideous crime,
Which now (protection has): curb them, that call
Such sins as venial, Venereall.
Let not an I Will of an Angelicke name
Expose her glory to the house of shame:
Let not those many Tropheies of her worth
Loose their renown or honor in our birth.
Let not fair Albion, styled from cliffes so white,
Change Virtues day star to a vicious night.
Let not those many conquests she has got
Seem now deprest, as if remembered not.
Let not our peace (like Halcion days) be taken
From us and ours and given to other men:
Let not this sacred Vine which planted is
In Albion, shaken be by wantonness.
Let not our plenty and abundant store
Occasion be that we should sin the more:
Let not our Realm unite, divide that love
Which we should bear unto the King above:
Let not our want of wars invasion bring us
A lust-full war encountering within us.
Let not those many blessings we receive,
Make us interre our honor in our grave*
Let not our seasons yearly fruitfulness
Produce in us a loathed barrannesse.
Let not those many strange conspiracies
Which heaven prevented, close our thanklesse eyes.
Let not our being make us not to be,
For God is God and will avenged be.
He seems some time to sleep and suffer all*
But calls at last for use and principal.
Many, I know, there be of crimes that is ill,
Drawn from the source of our depraved will.
But of all crimes that ever were or be,
None in this I Will claims more impunity.
A purple sin (for who will not allow it)
Since purple-fathers oft-times go* unto it?
The Cities Elders (which though they reprove)
They do but chastise what themselves do love.
Statists have loved it too: but mark (my friend)
For all their state they had a loathsome end,
Like stinking Herod, loathed Hertogenes,
Crook't Damocles, lousy Pherecides;
All these experience had of this foul evil.
And could describe too-well a ciuell Devil.
The Authors Moral to his Ciuell Devil.
COme Nouice, come, see here the fall of youth,
Begun in pleasure, but wouen up in rueth:
See what occurrents meet the heirs of shame,
Where end is poverty, and cloz'd ill-name?
See what the fruits be of licentious sin
That end in woe as they in heat begin?
See painted Sodom-apples fair to the eye,
But being tutcht they perish instantly.
See, see a wanton Mere-mayd, that does sing,
To bring youths crazie back to ruining.
See Virtue in pretense, but vice in deed.
See Harlots action in a Matrons weed:
See damned Factors who their traffic make,
Not for their soul but for the devils sake.
See my coach't Lady hurried long the street,
Casting her lusts-eyes on whos'ere she mee^*
See, see her cerus cheek, made to delight
Her apple-squire, or wanton Marmosite.
See, see her braided hair, her paps laid out,
Which witness how she will do when she is put to 't,
O see she likes upon th'condition well,
So she may coached be she will go to hell,
And willingly: see* see adulterate gold,
In value worst, yet is the dearest sold.
See Albions curse, Youths gulf, Heirs misery,
Our Countries shame, souls stain earths vanity.
O Sun reflect thy gould on my pale Moon,
And let this Dathans branch be rooted soon,
Out of this flourie isle: O let not this
(So hideous a crime) eclipse the bliss
Which Britain now possesses, may my pen,
Be steeped now in wormwood, that such men
As have beene'erst delighted, now may be,
Wain'd from that land-oppressing misery.
And you (damned prostitutes) that pawn your name,
Making a triuiall may game of your shame;
Bed-broaking lechers, Broakers of ill ware,
For many such base factors now there are)
Hear me spit out my malice: May you live,
Till you have naught to take, nor none to give,
For your ore-iaded pleasure: may you stand
Banished for ever in this Fruitful land,
Which fares the worse (and that by Heavens high power)
For giving harbor to an odious whore.
May you detested live, intestate die,
And as I doubt not make your Tragedy
By death more woeful: may your vlcerous skin,
As it bears here the marks of your foul sin:
Like to the Jews as they did erst appear,
Who in their fore-parts circumcised were)
Be circumcised: that after times may show,
There was small difference twixt the whore and Jew.
And you poor hair brained youths that do begin
To nestle in these loathsome sinkes of sin;
You that spend substance, heritance and all,
Becoming subject to a doubtful fall:
You that are sent to practice studious arts,
But leaving them, betake to worser parts
Your vnfledg'd fancies: hear me, and you will say,
It seems he wished us well another day.
Fly the strange woman, let her wanton look,
Be unto you as some experientst book;
Prescribing cures for strange diseases be
As if you did not note, or did not see
Her sin-alluring motives: if she smile
Conster it thus: this wanton would beguile
With her affected seeming, if she play
With her light capring foot, or bid you stay
(So brazen faced is sin) away from thence.
Tax, but affect not, her loathed impudence.
If she show modesty (as well she may)
For whoores have change of faces every day
Vicing new fashions: you may conster thus,
It is a painted but no native blush.
If she protest (believe not what she says))
For there is no whore but can dispense with faith:
If she inuit you to some dainty feast
Be not entreated, least like Circes beast,
You be transformed from that same form divine
Unto the bestiall nature of a swine,
If she allure thee to some wanton sport
In that she moves you to it, care not for it
Let St. foot be (such follies lust afford)
" For fairest play is ever above board.
Redart not eyes with her: if she look red
Say its her guilt, if pale distempored
With some lascivious passion: if conceit
Be pregnant in her, swear its but deceit
To draw thee on: if sullen, it may be thought
Her weight of sin has that distraction wrought.
If she discourse, its but some whorish tale
That she perchance has purchas't by retaile;
If silent, 't may be thought she is plotting ill,
And that is the cause her oily tongue is still:
If seeming modest, virtuous or precise,
Its her dissembling, making her lusts eyes
Like Basilisks (who naturally have
Desire to kill, where they do seem to save.)
If hope of means: fie, let no Generous mind,
Stoop to so base a lure, as be inclin'de,
To buy a stipend at so dear a rate,
" As gage a soul, to get a little state.
If discontent: this is no remedy
Unto thy grief, but ads to misery:
For who (through discontent) goes to a Whore,
Must needs be more dejected then before.
If an enforced marriage (as who can)
Taste still the sweet of comforts, being man:
This is no way to ease thy troubled head,
To make thy self adulterize thy Bed.
If to spend time: how ill is that spent time,
Which adds unto that great account of thine
Thousands of accusations? where thy look
Shall bear record (if wanton) in that book,
Where all our actions duly written be
From youth to man, to Age from infancy:
If for acquaintance (as oftimes we hear)
The greatest men are most acquainted there;
Thou seeks amiss, for what is acquaintance worth,
By birth borne great, to bastardise their birth.
If to observe new fashions, tricks not known
Before of thee: 'lasse those must needs be grown
Quite out of fashion, when there is none that use the^
Save Pandors, Bawds, and whoors that still abuse them.
If to be deemed a Turne-ball roaring lad*
Of all the strains that be there is none so bad:
"These glory in deformed shapes, and thirst
After that guize which does beseem them worst:
But would thou know them? then attend to me,
(And I in few words will describe them thee.
Their peak't mouchatoes bodkin wise oppose
Each other, and stand brauing of their nose:
They Are blustering boys, and whatsoever befall,
If they be three to one they will have the wall.
They have a mint of oaths, yet when they swear,
Of death and murder, there is small danger there:
Buffe-yerkins say their soldiers, (but's not so,)
For they were pressed indeed but durst not go.
They wear a Cutlers-shop ever about them:
Yet for all that we need not greatly doubt them.
For take it from me by this you soon'st may know the^,
They wear the desperat'st blades, yet dare not draw them.
They Are Panders by profession, men that get
A slavish means out of a servile wit:
They Are ever soaking of a pipe, whose smoke
Makes them contort and wreath their wainskot look
To every fashion, they are monstrous proud,
And what-soere they speak they swear its good:
They never go to Church, unless it be
To man their whore, or for formalitie.
They are and are not: seeming men by sight,
But beasts, becoming slaves to appetite:
Their walk is not where Virtue has recourse,
(For to discourse of Virtue is a curse)
To Roring-boyes: their Rende-voue's Tibb Calls
Her shroud their shrine, their walk's in Garden-allies
Do see these (youngling)? pray thee see and mark,
A whore enticing, and a god-lesse sharke
Attending her, have a good eye to him,
Pray thee beware he is instrument of sin:
Go not along, let my advise enforce,
Least thou return (my boy) by weeping cross.
Let not, o let not moment of delight,
Deprive thy soul of her internal light,
Shame not thy eye of reason with expense
Of ill spent time, exposed to the use of sense.
Thy form's Divine, no fading, vading flower:
O let not then th'embraces of a whore
Captive thy judgment, but as thou do take
Thy Great Creators form, so for his sake,
Reserve thy Temple (if thou 'le live with him,
To be for Syon, not for place of Sin.
The occasion of this Epigram proceeded from the restraint of the Author, who
in the iustnes of his cause (like Zenophons Sparrow) fled for refuge: to the
worthily esteemed, the Right Worshipful RICH. HVTTON, Sergeant at Law: to
whose protection the retired Author commends his Epigramme entitled. HIS CATCH.
Singing my catch, if you be not my friend,
For all my catch, I shall be caught ith'end.
NOt in a durance suite remain I here,
Yet in a suite like durance hemmed with fear
Retired I am: confinement makes me thrall
Unto my self, which grieves me most of all:
If I but see the shadow of a man,
Or th'tinkling of a Braziers copper pan,
I fear a Sergeant, shadow says its he,
And th'Brazier says, such like his buttons be.
Where shall I fly to? 'lasse I know not where:
For Milford-lane is grown too monstrous dear.
No, there I must not go; for know you how
That place is styled? The Gallants Rand^-uou.
Well, some-where I must fly: O now I see it:
Philosophers say; heat is expelled by heat.
Moisture by moisture; Colds extremity
By cold, derived from passions natiuely
Concurring in us: if this then be true,
Who should I fly to (Sir?) but unto you
That are a Sergeant, and has power to place
Your God-sonne free from any Sergiants Mace?
To you i will fly pursu'de by impudence,
(A Courtiers garb) craving safe residence
Under your wings: and know (kind Sir) from me,
To do for Orphans its a charity.
Little I am possessed of well you know,
And of that little, little do I owe
To any man: yet for all this am I,
Made a fit object for a Sergeants eye.
I could not beg if that my cause were bad,
But to disburse for that I never had.
Nor any for me, 'lasse it seems to me,
The cause might plead it self without a fee.
Pray Sir (at least) if'th Courtier needs will crave it.
Let him pursue such, where 'has hope to have it:
For me there is none: but this his wit God wot
To sue his bond, where is nothing to be go.
Yet for the reputation which I bear
To my unblemished credit, I must fear
Not our just cause, nor any such pretense,
But brazen-face, and gilded conscience.
" For dangers felt are worse then others feared,
" Which makes me now conceald which once appeared.
'Lasse Sir, my studies cannot brook restraint,
" Since times observance gives me argument.
Of writing what I write: so smal's the store
Of La'er I have, that if I knew not more
By observation, then by reading, men
Might justly say, I knew not what I pen.
But Justice whose pure eye looks ever right,
And can admit of none that clouds her sight,
Will shield my cause: its trues I know she will,
Yet in mean time I am be-leagred still,
With th^se injurious burres, these tenterhookes,
That even afright me with their ghastly looks.
These engines of despair, agents of evil,
Factors for Mammon, Viceroyes for the devil
These that lay hold like bird lime: these be they,
That must be soundly bribed, or we must pay;
I have no hope then but your virtuous self
To save my crasie vessel from this shelfe,
Or shipwreck rather, and so sure am I
Of your best help, that I see safety
Appearing midst of danger: for my trust
So well reposed in one that is so just,
Cannot be frustrate, but must needs receive
What you may grant, and I may justly have.
And well I know that actions of this kind,
Keep best concordance with your generous mind,
Whose native virtues have been still expressed,
In giving breath to causes that are best.
A great prerogative, as't seems to me,
Have you ore such as only take their fee,
Witthout observance or discussion had,
Of what the cause is: whether good or bad.
These like to spiders, weaue ore justice throne
A web, to make their actions lie unknown,
But all in vain: their vices time descries:
For time has many ears and many eyes.
Ripe was his wit, and well he understood,
Who rous't Rufus finishing the stately building of Westminster hall, found
fault for being built too little, saying it was sitter for a chamber, then a
Hall for a King of England; taking a plot for one more spacious to be added
unto it.
Westminster Hal with Irish wood.
That Justice there profest', should like appear,
Suffering no venomous creature to come near
Her sacred throne: no This peculiar virtue the superstitious Irish have
ascribed to the power of Saint Patrick.
Spider, worm, nor moth,
But that like virtue should accrue to both.
Which makes me muse: since Irish wood can show,
Such pure effects, why Ireland does not see,
O no it were too much to be the same,
In title, temper nature, and in name.
But whit her wanders my confined Muse?
Lament thine own, care not for times ab^se,
It yields thee matter to express thy spleen,
Which otherwise would be extinguish't clean.
Thou mai'st retire, there is one will see thee pla'st
In safe repose, till all these storms be past:
Which past, may I my conning quite forget,
If better numbers do not defcant it.
From me and mine
to you and yours,
From time to time
our prayers like showers
Diffused be
incessantly.
Your worths obserue^ R.B. (...)

TO MY APPROVED FRIEND T. P. in the conduct of my arrest-fearing Epigram his
best of Wishes.
IF any Sergeant should my lines forestale,
Before they see my Patron enter bail.
Ibid. -- Where say, --
How Night by Night in several rooms I lie,
And that my lines have far more Aer then I.
An Epigramme called the Honest Lawyer.
SPrightly my muse, speak like the son of thunder
And with a full mouth, ring out Albions wonder:
No Sussex Dragon, no Virginian,
But of a Lawer that is an Honest man.
Whose definition if you wish to know,
Is a black Swan, fair Moore, or milke-white Crow.
He takes no fees, till he conceive the cause,
Nor with an Oily bribe annoints his jaws.
He wants the use of feeling, fears Heavens curse,
Strings not his conscience with his Clients purse.
Hee'^ not be tongue-tide, but for Justice sake,
He seeks to earne the money he does take.
He hates aequiuocation and delay,
Nor will he make his Threed-bare Client stay
For his dispatch: he will not have his fee,
Till he discuss the causes equity.
His Judgment will not veil to wind nor wether,
Nor is his conscience made of retching lether.
His eye's on Justice, nor will ever he
Banke-rupt his soul, to enrich posterity.
His tongue's no time-obseruer, made to please,
His fist is shut from taking double fees.
He will not forge a lie, nor wrest the sense,
Of law or right, for any fair pretense.
He will not back his Clyent, or maintain
An unjust suit, to reap a private gain.
He speaks and stands to it, nor is sorry for it,
Though he by speaking truth, incense the Court.
He hates corruption, nor has ever sold,
His peace of Conscience, for a piece of gold
He loves no perfumes, nor is one of those,
Whose peak't mouchatoes skirmish with their nose.
His beard's not starcht, he has no subtle sconce,
Nor Ianus-like looks he ten ways at once.
His Ear is never shut to poor men's mones,
His Coach-wheele is not made of Clients bones,
His Conscience nere did ought that needs relenting
Or For my pretty tooth-picker, the Critic Lawyer, who stands on the puntylio
of his honor, I am by Martialls means provided of armor. 505. Epig.

Carpere causi dicus fertur mea carmina qui sit
Nescio, sisciero ve tibi causidice.

ere made Clients pay for his wives painting.
His soul was never soild by corrupt dealing,
Nor stands he on a velvet gown at sealing.
His face was nere at Braziers, nor his skin
Sy-sambris-like was hung up to be seen.
His tongue speaks truth, makes peace where ere he can.
This Lawer must be needs an honest man.
It Is true, he must: but where now shall we find
This man: I fear there is none left of his kind.
Yes one I know, and more there be no doubt
But that my dull pate cannot find them out,
Who Is truly honest: Whom you may discern,
You Clients you, that visit this throng Term,
By no example in our Albion more,
Then by my Patron in my Catch before.
Ask you me why? Experience tells it me,
"None of's Profession honester then he.
Upon a Patron, who was at home, and yet abroad: in the City, and yet in the
Country: seen, and not to be seen: in any place, but where he was, and as
soon to be found where he was not, as where he was.
A good Patrons Anagram: is Patren. Anag. Parent. An evil ones Patron. Anag.
Ropean't. A Satyr.
THere is a Patron, to express his name,
I think it needless, for you may conjecture,
Who it is by dumb shows: yet I Will read a Lecture,
Vpon's Anatomy: "He thinks no shame
To be at home, yet to deny the same,
By one of's Pander porters: he is proud
Of a new Title given him, yet it is stale,
Knighthood I wish: for's speech he speaks a tale,
With a Beere-brewers Grace, as for his blood,
He says he can deriu't from Robin hood,
And his May-Marian, and I think he may,
For's Mother played May-Marian the other day.
If a rich country-Boore come to present him,
With Pigge or Goose, he shall no sooner come,
But the gate's open, and the Knight's at home,
Where the Dog-fawning Knight will question him,
Why he from's house has so long absent been?
Yet the other day, a Poet whom he loved,
At least protested so; knocking at's gate,
Was full two hours enforced there to wait,
And still he staid to find his love approved,
Till th'Brazen head spoke, through a casement moved,
(The Knight I mean) but seeing who it was,
I Am not at home (quoth he) good Poet pass.
An Epigram in Curium Lampetram: A Cashierd Courtier.
CVrius Lampetra, (as he does confess)
For he was t'ane in the nicke, o'th business,
Has done, soon done, God wot, a worthy deed,
Setting the Courts wreath on the Cities head:
But for his wreath, before one Terms demurre,
He was degraded of his Courtly spur.
(True badge of Honor) and from that time swore,
Nere to approach the Cities confines more.
What should he do? the City was his gain,
For poor Lampetra nere had courtly strain;
But apish imitation, whose small force
Made him admired, like an Hobby horse.
And yet they say, he had a wit at will:
Running like the rundell of a blind horse-mill.
Could swear an oath, could foam at mouth could set
His words in fustain, and could run in debt,
Could skrew his face, could moralize a fable,
Yet nere read Aesop, sit at Duke Humfreys Table,
Could walk a turn in Paul's, could talk of Spain,
Yet nere was there, and then come home again.
Why this is courtly, and this he could do,
Yea but Lampetra knew not how to woe.
Not woo? why he could kiss, and as they sing
In The ballad too, he could do the other thing.
"A Pox that's true: But shall I tell thee why
She told all out? he did so scuruily:
"As at the very instant when their ^aine,
She said (poor fool) put up thy pipe again,
For such a Fiddler is far worse then none,
That plays on still, yet has no stroke but one.
But prithee say, what shall Lampetra do?
(As other Courtiers) make a foolish show
Of what they have not: no, it is decreed,
Being boorish bred, he must with boores go feed
On husks and hawes; and that he may retain
Some courtly garb, his ruins to maintain
Ith Country must this rusticke swain be plast,
To purchase pardons, when the iudgement's past:
Or he may find a Vt in antiquissimis Monumentis in M^nasteri^ Saint. Bees,
ab inclyto eo generosiss viro, Qui in hunc diem jis operibus precipue
Alabastreis versatur, nuperrime compertus fuit: et prope Epistomium i^
Fleetstreet, public ostensum, etc.
Giant at S t Bees
And with his sight get money if he please.
An Emblem writ unto a Gentleman, who entreated the Author to distinguish
twixt Rome and room.
YOu moved me sir, next time I chanced to come,
For to distinguish betwixt Rome and room,
Which I have done: and to the full I hope,
Rome being as far^e from room, as Peter Pope.
For wheresoere I am, wheresoere I com^,
I must have room, yet that I hope's not Rome.
So whensoere I see Saint Peter's chair,
I do inf^rre, For we read that in the second year of Claudius reign, Peter
the Apostle came to Rome, and there remained 30* years after, yet some dissent
from this opinion, etc.
Saint Peter has been there.
But that Saint Peter's heir is now at Rome,
Though he be there, I Will say it is not his room.
Peter Romes pillar, Cater pillar he,
Whose room I love more then his company.
EN TRES EXCELlentissimo Phantasto Moriano del Castello, equiti tres
illustrissimo septentrionali.
Fades rare horned Dicke. An Anagram included in the Satyr.
FAdes my rare horned Dicke? o, out a cry,
His horns bud out, and gall him grievously,
What remedy? faith patience: which appears
In's w^fe, whose patience, many burden bears.
Th^n he may learn of her: it is true, you say,
And therefore plyes his hornebooke day by day.
Anagramma. How Riches freed'd adorn a gull? Epigram.
Wise is that Fool, that has his coffers full.
And Riches freed adorn the v^riest Gull.
Yet but uncase the Ass, and you shall see,
An Ass is still an Ass, and so is he.
An Epigram upon the Anagram, Dedicated to the Mirror of true Excellency, his
much admired (though unacquainted) friend, Don MORIANO DELL CASTELLO, To whom
the Author wishes many cheerful days, delightful nights with his late
espoused Mistress, whose imparalelld Virtues he has presumed to illustrate
in These his impolisht (yet affectionate) Poems.
MOri^s Augustus thou great man of sense,
That art enstil'd with best of Excellence.
To thee I write: yet do I not know how,
TO express thy worth, or with apparent show,
Of thy demerits blaze thee as thou should,
Yet know (brave northern spirit) that I would,
Do full as much as any, if my Art
Were but of equal value with my heart.
For thou art he amongst all other men,
That gives a subject to the freest pen,
And can define true honor by degree,
Drawn from the best, yet instanced in thee.
Mount thee (resolved Hero) that thy Fame,
May be a wreath to Morianos Name.
Shine bright, like Eos with his beamy face,
Whose precious Mantle, fringed with some gold lace,
Made all the passengers admire his worth,
Descending from Heavens Court, to lighten earth.
I know thou can do this, for I have seen
Even in a place, where many more have been,
And have observed thee, galloping thy round,
Making low Congees, till thou kiss the ground
With lip of thy humility, and then
Putting thy foot in stirrup once again,
Mounted thy barbed steed, then with thy hand,
Straking thy horses crest to make him stand.
Who proud on's burden, frolick'd in his stay,
And with a neighing stomach traced the way.
Fair fall thee formal Gallant that have force,
To tame the courage of a headstrong horse,
Displaying resolution in thy eye
Courtship in cloths, in speech propriety.
In gesture admiration, in thy look
An Orb of fashions, or a Table-booke.
Of new-inuented features* in thy form,
Such exquisite perfections as adorn
Natures best Mir^or, O but that I doubt,
By speaking of thy wor^h, I shall be out.
I could ep^t^mize each special thing,
Thy birth, thy worth, thy wooing, sonnetting.
Yet for thy loue-sake (wha^soere befall)
I will speak som^hing, though I speak not all.
Among which my Muse records that amorous sonnet
Which who will not admire, that looks upon it,
Writ to that fair Alicia now behight,
The chast-vow'd wife unto an honored Knight:
Where with loves passions, thou so well did show it.
That none could think thee lesser then a Poet.
Apt in thy words, in thy dimensions rare,
Thy Figures proper, and thy motions fair.
A^t could not show, or ever yet bring forth,
So far fetched strains invented so far North.
Now of her Beauty would thou Comment make,
And vow to take strange labors for her sake*
Then to induce her love (by means most fit)
Thou woul^st commend the promptnes of her wit,
Protesting by the ae^y powers above,
(As who ere loved would not protest they love?)
Noe speech ere Pallas spoke merits more praise,
Then what thy Mistress Dear Alicia says.
Then would thou descant of her rubie lip,
(Though thou had never luck to taste of it.)
Then of her pure complexion which did praise
It self, not as complexions now adays.
Then of her lovely quallities which might be
Styled the Eccoes of heavens harmony.
Then of her virtues so divine, so rare,
As they surpast the rest above compare.
All this thou did to show her eminence,
More graced by thee being styled his excellence,
And fair thy love had ended as begun,
If that a Web had not thy loves web spun.
Great Northern Atlas, what can I say more,
Then of thy merits has been said tofore.
At least observed? for many men do see,
And know it well I write but truth of thee.
O that times records should be so portraide,
In leaves of brass, that what was done or said,
In ancient ages, should so well display,
Their full events, as done but the other day.
Whilst thy renown great mirror of the North,
Shown in our time, wants one to set it forth,
"Whereas its no less glory to a Crown,
To have Authors then have Actors of renownes
Yet shall not virtue so obscured be,
Nor those accomplished parts appear in thee.
Lie raked in Ashes: No great Morios heir,
Thou shall not live as though there nothing were,
Worthy posterity? its I will write,
Though far unfitting for so great a light
My bent of thee, that art the best of man,
"He does not ill that does the best he can.
Accept it needs thou must, how er't be done,
Being thy Fathers God-sonne, thou his son.
But of all virtues tha^ attend on thee,
There Is none that equals thy humility.
Yet so as thou art generous with all,
A style that does adorn thee most of all.
Unto thy humble spirit annex't there is,
Another sovereign virtue, Patience;
Or the enduring of an injury:
Which of all others is observed in thee.
Thou will not snuff if one correct thee: no,
Not hardly ask him why he wronged thee so.
Thou will not answer to thine own disgrace,
Nor tax the man that turdefies thy face.
Thou will not grieve for every light offense,
Fear is thy guide, thy shield is Patience.
Thou like a christian walks (God wot) in fear,
And being boxt will turn the other ear.
Thou art Gods man, and whatsoever men say,
He is the best man at the later day.
Thou art no blustering boy that walks the street,
And binds a quarrel with who s'ere he meet.
Thou art no Haxtar that by nature's given,
To rage on Earth, but nere to reign in Heaven.
In brief, thou art the man that God will choose,
VVearing a blade for fashion more then use.
Nor do I flatter thee for never was I
Servile to any man: but if my eye
Impartial in her knowledge seem to show.
What by observance other men do know,
And have admired, pardon I need not crave,
Since I express but what thy merits have
Deserved: enough. Thy virtues are with best,
And little need they to be more expressed,
Then as they are? Go on (my honored friend)
And as thou have begun, so fairly end.
Be Fame thy Herald to blaze forth thy worth,
Making thee Morios, none such upon earth.
Be as thou art, and more thou can not be.
Since best of being is included in thee.
Be thou as he, to whom all may resort,
Muses I mean, and coming thank thee for it.
Be thou as Caesar in the Capital,
So thou of Morios Castle Centinell.
Be as thou art reported, great in wit,
And so discreet, as thou mai'st manage it.
Be as thou art, founder of iollitie,
Graven in the gold-cup of our Langanbie.
Be as thou would be, and I wish no more,
So time shall second what I write before.
But 'lasse poor Muse have thou no more to speak
Of such a subject, (pray thee dear awake)
And memorise his name in every page,
From this time forth unto a following age.
No? what is my wit drawn dry? or I am taken
With some amazement at a great man's name?
Why thou have writ of men as great before,
And have expressed their actions ore and ore.
Turn'th ore their best of glory, and in the end,
So won their hearts, as thou becamst their friend.
And art thou now grown s^ient? cannot he
That merits best, receive like praise of thee?
No, no: he cannot; so obscur'de he lives,
That though I write but truth, yet who belieues
A true relation, when we seem to show
A man to men whom they do hardly know?
O then (redoubted sir) let me now end
T^is home bred Sonnet (as a loving friend
That would persuade) if you perswad' would be
To show your self something more openly
Unto the world. O see how men repine,
That you so long concealed, should gull the time,
Having such parts, as much adorn your birth,
Yet has no willing mind to set them forth.
What is a Jewel worth if ever hid?
Or what is a cased Instrument in stead?
The luster of the former is not seen,
Nor can we know by the latter what't does mean.
For Gemmes and instruments are known by tutch,
And such as show them men, we know them such.
With like good will do I present thee these,
As Mopsus (that poor shepard) sent a cheese
Unto his Phillis: and it came to me
Once in my mind, to send the like to thee:
But for I feared (and I have cause to fear)
That you had better cheese then any here:
In steed of bride-cakes, cheesecakes I was tide
In love, to send this present to your Bride*
All hail to Himen and this marriage day:
Strew rushes, and quickly come away.
Bring in your flowers, and give of each of them
To such as loved and are forsaken men.
For well I know so loving is the Bride,
So courteous and so liberal beside
Of her discreet affection, I dare say
None must depart unsatisfied away.
Strew rushes maids, and ever as you strew,
Think one day maids, like will be done for you:
Strew you, I Will sing, or if you like nor choice;
Sing you, I Will strew: you have the better voice.
Crowned be thou Queen of love,
By those glorious powers above:
Love and Bewrie joined together
May they col and kiss each other,
And in midst of their delight,
Show thee pleasure in the night.
For where acts of love resort,
Long^st nights seem too too short;
May thou sleeping dream of that,
Which then waking dest partake,
That both sleep and watching may
Make the da^kest night seem day:
As a fort besieged rest,
Yielding most, when seeming lest:
Or in pleasures may thy smile
Burnish like the Camomile,
Which in verdure is encrest
Most, when it is most deprest.
Virtues as they do attend thee,
So may sovereign thoughts defend thee.
Acting in thy love with him,
Wedlocks actions are no sin:
Who in Hym^ns bands is joined,
And in sacred love combined,
To remain ever thine.
He thy Picture thou his shrine,
Thou the metal he the mint,
Thou the wax he the print,
He the Lant-horne, thou the lamp,
Thou the bulloine, he the stamp.
Thou the figure he the feature;
He thy former, thou his creature.
He the image, leg and limme,
Thou the mould to cast him in.
He the plummet thou the center.
Thou to shelter he to enter;
Thou the Park or shady vale,
"He the dog that freth's the pale.
Hammer he to strike alone,
Anuile thou to beat upon*
More I could, but more I will not,
Since to speak more much it skils not;
Only I will here extend
Th'period of my speech as friend;
And express what I protest
Comes from th'center of my breast,
That my protestations may
Bear record another day.
Io Hymen crown the night
Of these Nuptials with delight.
No more, no more: much honor aie betide,
The lofty Bridegroom, and the lovely Bride:
That their succeeding days and years may say,
Each day appears like to a marriage day.
But now retire, dark shades have lodged the sun,
Put up thy pipes for now thy lays are done.
Finis Epithalami.
To the hopeful young Gentleman, and his experienced friend, Mr. CHEATER.
ANAGRAMM. TEACHER.
Teacher you are, for you have taught me more,
Then I was taught in all my life before.

A GRATVLATORY Epigram.
TO thee (young youth) these youngling lines I write
Stored with my best of wishes: may delight
Crown that long-wisht for Nuptial bed of thine,
(Which should have been) if Fate had granted mine
With many happy nights: Blessed be my fate,
Since what one friend has is communicate
Unto an other, that my love should end,
And ending, give beginning to my friend.
But why say I its ended? since by thee,
A three-loues song bears descant merrily.
And thus it is: I loved her, where thou art,
She thee, thou me; thre^ lovers in one heart:
She thine, thou mine (if mine thou styled may be)
Makes her in being thine, espows'd to me.
An Emblem which the Author composed in honor of his Mistress, to whom he
rests ever devoted.
Allusiuely shadowing her name in the title of the Emblem, which he en^tiles:
His Frankes Anatomy.
Frank thy name does promise much,
I^ thy nature were but such:
But alas what difference grow
'Twixt those two, I only know?
I alas that to thy beauty
Am devoted in all dewtie;
I that once invented lays,
Singing them in Shepherds praise,
I that once from love was free
Till I fell in love with thee:
I that never yet began
Trade, to hold my mistress fan;
I that never yet could know,
Whether love was high or low:
I that never loved was,
Nor could court a looking-glass:
I that never knew loves law,
Nor loved longer then I saw;
I that knew not what is now common,
To throw sheep-eyes at a woman:
I that never yet could prove,
Or make show of hearty love:
I that never broke my sleep,
Nor did know what cha^ms did keep
Lovers eyes: now can tell
What would please a lover well.
Shall I tell thee? yes I will,
And being told: or save, or kill.
It would please him, if he might
Ever live in'^ Mistress sight:
It would please him to have the hap,
But to sleep in 's Mistress lap:
Or to have his Mistress fair,
With her hand to stroke his hair.
Or to play at foot-St. with him,
Or at barly-breake to breathe him:
Or to walk a turn or two,
Or to kiss, or coll, or woe;
Or in some retired Grove,
But to parley with his Love.
Or when none that is jealous spies,
To look babbies in his eyes:
Or when action ginnes to fail,
To supply it with a tale.
Venus unto Vulcane wedde,
Yet came Mars to Vulcanes bed:
He and she being both in one,
Whilst poor Vulcan lies alone;
Or if this will not afford
Joy enough: observe each bird
How she singles out her make
And to him does only take.
See their billing each with other,
(Love and dallying younc't together)
Mutual love inheres in either,
Being birds both of one feather;
Or if this yield no content.
To resort unto the plant,
Which being grafted skilfully,
Brings forth fruit abundantly:
Deeper that the plant's we see,
Sooner will it fruitful be,
Which (my frank) in modesty,
Thus I will apply to thee.
Deeper that thy love is set,
More impression may it get:
Riper fruits then such as grow,
And are planted scarce so low:
If you ask me what I seem,
By impression for to mean,
I will tell thee: such as these,
Impressions only women please.
"Coin for stamp sake we allow:
So for stamp sake do we you,
Weake's that Evidence you know
That has neither scale to show,
Stamp, impression: such (I ken)
Are you may de^, not stamped by m^n
Weak, God wot, for why you take
Your perfection from your make:
Then if thou desire to be
Perfect, have recours to me:
Or some other that may give,
What old Adam gave to Eve,
'Lasse its nothing: pray thee take it,
Many wish it that forsake it.
But when shameful dance is done,
They could wish they had begun
Many years before they learnt it,
(O how gladly would they earne it?)
But too long, I seem to stay,
Ere thy beauty I display:
Spare me sweetest for my Muse,
Seldom makes so fair a choose.
Choose it Lou^ what ere it be,
Read thy own Anatomy.
Purest of Ophyr-gold, let me prepare
First for the choice description of thy hair,
Which like the finest thrids of purple seem
Clear to outstrip those of the Paprian Queen;
Whose tender tresses were so neatly wrought,
As Cholcos fleece seemed to be thither brought,
And sure it was* what ere fond Poets say,
And this was the fleece which Jason took away.
Delicious Amber is the breath which flows
From those perfumed conduits of thy nose,
Thy smile, a snare, which tempts the way-ward boy
Adon the fair, and bids him leave to joy
I^ Forest pleasures, there is a fruitless mark,
Having more store of game within thy park.
Thy lips (two gates) where love makes entry in,
And yet so modest as nere taxt of sin:
Thy cheek, that rosy circlet of pure love,
Resembling nearest that Castalian grove;
Where such variety of flowers appear
That naught seems good, which is not beter'd there*
Thy b^ush (pure blush) Em^leme of Chastity
Blushing, yet guildesse of ought done by thee
Portends a maidens honest-spotlesse heart,
Having thy blush by nature not by Art.
Thy chin (that dimpled mount) which has last plac^
Yet gives no lesser bew^y to thy face:
Then th'greatest ornament: for it does show,
Like to a pleasant Vale seated below
Some steepy Mount: thy crystal eyes the fount,
Thy chin the Vale, thy lovely face the Mount.
O is not then this feature, boue compare,
Where breath is perfume, and pure gold is hair
Where smiles are snares, lips gates of Iuorie,
Cheeks roses, blushes types of chastity:
Where chin a vale, the browe the mount, the face
That Sovereign of the heart, that keeps loves place:
Where shall I look then, or how shall I move
These eyes of mine and teach them not to love?
For if my eyes should but thy hair behold,
I must be forced to love for it is gold:
If thy delicious breath I chance to sip,
Being the rosy verdure of thy lip;
I deem my self in that sweet perfume blessed
Much more, in that, worse breaths be in request:
If thou do smile, I love, and wish the while,
That I might only live to see thee smile.
If thou do speak (pure Orator) I Am dumb,
For why? thy admiration curbs my tongue.
If thou but blush (as maids are wont to do)
My passions are perplexed, I wot not how,
'Twixt fear and loue^ fear makes me wondrous pale,
Fearing thy blush came from some wanton tale.
Too too immodest spoken by my self,
Which to assoyle I Will reprehend my self;
If I but ^utch, to tutch 's a venial sin,
The pretty circle of thy dimpled chin:
I vow and in my vow gives Beauty thanks,
That chin was Venus, though it now be Franks.
Yet have I not spoke all that I dot see;
Or at least judge in thy Anatomy:
For true Anatomists being men of Art,
Know the exact description of each part,
Member and artery: so should my sight
Be in my Frank if I describe her right,
Which that I might reduce to some full end,
Though there is no end in love, I will descend
To the distinct relation of the rest,
And in my Franks discovery think me blessed.
Thy waste, (with^u^ waste) like a curious frame*
Aptly proportioned still reserues the same:
Or like some well composed Instrument
Exact in form, in accent excellent;
So is thy waste, and happy may he be,
That Is borne to make it strik^ true harmony.
Thy belly (if conjectures true may be)
For we must guess at that we cannot see,
Is like an orient Cordon pea^led fair,
With diverse feats of Nature here and there.
Where glides a crystal streameling to abate,
The heat of Nature often insatiate.
Pardon me Dear: Nature ordained first
That Fount of yours, to quench the place of thirst*
Thy thigh (imagination now must do)
For I must speak, though well I know not how,
Like the laborious and the laden Be.
That hastens to her hiue melodiously.
Nor is her freight more luscious (Dear) then thine,
For thine is full of pleasure, hers of Thyme:
Thy knee like to an orb that turns about,
Giving free passage to thy nimble foot,
Apt for each motion, active in loves sphere,
Moving her ioints to trip it every where.
Thy leg (like Delias) neither big nor small,
But so well framed and featured in all,
That Nature might seem envious to impart,
So great a good, and hide so good a part.
Thy foot the curioust module of the rest,
For Art and Nature there be both expressed:
Art in the motion, Nature in the frame,
Where action works and motion moves the same.
Nor can I credit what our Poets say,
Affirming Venus chanced upon a day
To prick her foot, so as from th'blood she shed.
The damaske-rose grew ever after red;
For if from blood such strange effects should be,
Stanger (ere this) had been derived from thee:
But Poets though they write, Painters portray,
It Is in our choice to credit what they say.
Yet credit me (for I would have thee know it)
I never yet durst challenge name of Poet:
Only thine own I am and still will be,
For whom I writ this poor Anatomy.
Upon his Mistress Nuptial, ENSTILED: His Frankes Farewell.
WHy whither Frank? to th'church? for what to pray?
O no: to say, what thou can nere unsay:
Alas poor Girl: I see thy quondam friend,
Has cause to say his hopes are at an end:
How vainly then be our affections plaste,
On women-kinde, that are so seeming chaste,
And privately so forward-well-be gone,
(If ere I marry) I Will find such an one,
As (in her modesty) will think 't disgrace
"Others to love when I am out of place.
But I do thank thee Frank, the have taught me more,
Then I could learn in twice seven year before;
For I did think your simple sex did hate
By double dealing to equivocate:
Where by experience now I find it common,
That fast and loose is usual with women.
Yet in these rites this line my love shall tell,
Fare well or ill, I wish my Frank farewell.
An Epigramme called the WOOER.
COme ye brave wooers of Penelope,
Do not repine that you should crossed be:
For pregnant wits, and ripest brains can show,
As much or more then ever you did know.
And that my story better may appear,
Attend to my discourse, and you shall hear.
It chanced upon a time (and then was'th time)
When the thigh-fraughted Be gathered her thyme,
Stored her platted Cell, her fragrant bower,
Crop't from each branch, each blossom and each flower
When'th pretty Lam-kin scarce a fortnight old,
Skipped and froliked before the neighboring fold,
When'the cheerful Robin, Lark and Lenaret,
Tun'de up their voices, and together met,
When'th fe^refull Hare to cheer her quaint delight,
Did make her self her own Hermaphrodite,
When'th lovely Turtle did her eyes awake,
And with swift flight followed her faithful make,
When every Beast prepared her wonted den,
For her own young, and shade to cover them,
When Flora with her mantle tucked up,
Gathred the dewie flowers, and them did put
In her embrodred skirts which were rank set,
With Prime-rose, Cow-slip, and the violet,
The dill, the dasie, sweet breathed Eglantine,
The Crowfoote, pausie, and the Columbine,
The pinke, the plantaine, milfoile, every one*
With Mari^gold that opens with the Sun;
Even then it was, (ill may I say it was)
When young Admetus woed a country less.
A country less whom he did woe indeed,
To be his Bride, but yet he could not speed.
Which forced him grieve: hear but his cause of woe,
And you will not wonder why he should do so?
Virtuous the maid was, and so graced by fate,
As she was wise, and did degenerate
From her weak witted father: modesty
Lodged on her cheek, and showd virginity
In a fair Rosy color, which was spread
By equal mixture both of white and red.
So as no white it seemed, but Idas snow,
No red, but such where Roses use to grow.
And though of Hero many one do write,
Styling her sovereign Goddess of delight,
So fair as she was taken for no other,
Of all that saw her, then Adonis mother.
So pure her skin, so motive to the eye*
As it did seem composed of Iuorie.
So high and broad her front, so smoth, so eue^,
As it did seem the Frontispice of Heanen.
So purely mixed her cheeks, as it might seem,
She was by nature made for natures Queen.
So pretty dinted was her dimpled chin,
As't seemed a gate to let affection in.
So sweet her breath, (as I have hard them tell)
That like to Cassia she did ever smell.
So lovely were those mounts of pure delight,
That Gods themselves were cheered with their sight*
So as great Jove (for so our Poets say)
Feigned himself sick for her upon a day.
Wise Aesculapius he was sent forthwith,
Who fel^ Jove's pulse, yet found no sign of death,
Or any great distemper: (yet to please Jove
For he perceived his malady was love)
Said; Sir, I'aue found your grief: what is it (quoth he?)
A mere consumption, yet be ruled by me,
And follow my directions (though with pain)
And then no doubt you shall be well again.
Five mornes must you to' Abidoes town repair,
And suck pure milk from the fairest virgin there.
Jove hearing what he wished, obeyed bis hest;
And war soon well by sucking Heroes breast.
Yet what was Hero, though the fairest that was
In all her time unto Admetus less?
Though Heroes beuty did allure all men,
The time is changed, now is now, and then was then.
Each milk-maide in fore time was thought a Queen.
So rare was perfect bewty to be seen.
But now, where is no Venus to be had?
Such store I wot there be, thet every lad
Can have his tricksie less, which wantonlie,
Scarce crept from shell, he dandles on his knee.
But to my story of such royal parts
Was she composed, that the very hearts
Of her attendants, as it did apeare,
Were spous'd to this pure virgin every where*
V^ith what resolved silence would her wit,
Op^ose ^er tongue, and seem to bridle it?
With what discretion would she speak^ her mind,
And nere transgesse those limits she assigned.
But with that decency of grace and speech,
As She might seem the elder sort to teach.
"What a blessed sex were woman if this song
Were only lea^nt them, for to hold their tongue,
And speak no more (O it were a lesson good)
Then that were fit, and what they understood?
But when will that be taught them! O (I fear)
Never; for women's tongues be every where.
So as at first if they had no tongue,
I^ may be thought they would not have been dumb.
Such is th'ternall motion that its said,
When women speechless lie they are nearly dead.
T^is virgin which Admetus sought to have,
Beside her virtues, then which who could crave,
A better portion had an ample dowre,
Which did enrich those gifts that were before
Expressed and dilated, and to tell
The very truth, she loved Admetus well.
And could have brook't all others to have denide,
So that she might have been Admetus bride.
But he a shamefast lad, though often he sought
Her love, yet durst not utter what he thought.
Nor to her parents could impart his mind,
How he affected was, and how inc^inde.
Yet still was he respected, and in grace,
Nor any sought to put him out of place.
Nor to withdraw the affection of the maid,
From that foundation where it once was laid
For three months space, hung it in this suspense,
Neither conceald nor sh^wne: till's Excellence,
For so was th'Title of a noble Squire,
Whose living bordered in th'adioyning shire,
By an intendment (as he thought upon 't)
Pu^ poor Admetus nose quite out of joint,
And thus it was: for I mean to repeat
By what deceit, what cunning slight and cheat,
He bobd this simple Swaineling; on a day,
When young Admetus had addressed his way
To Tr^inouant, where be occasion had,
"His Excellence in th'absence of the ladde,
Acquaints another with Bellinaes love,
(For so her name was:) he more prompt to move
Affection, then Admetus ere could be,
VVins me Bellina's fort courageously,
By new assaults, incursions, and displaid
His youngling Colors: when the breach was made.
O how methinks I see th'young Soldier sweat,
Till he has done, and perfected his fear.
How he assailes, assaults, ascends, inclines,
Inuades, inuirons, ruins, undermines,
Whilst she like to a Fort oppressed does lie,
Deprived all means of help, yet will not cry.
He like a stout victorious Hanniball,
Bidding her yield, or he will raze the wall.
She though made subject to his conquering hand,
Like Carthage Queen still at defiance stands.
He (with the Spirit of a Mirmido^,)
Makes her the Carpet which he lies upon.
She ( Deianira-like) will choose death first,
Ere she crave mercy, bids him do his worst*
He enters th'breach, and does his fignall rere,
And leaves some token that he has been there:
She glories in her conquest, and thrown down,
Says, I am low, yet am not overcome.
He does renew his battery, and stands to it,
And she Vyrago-like, yields not a foot.
He takes more firmer grounding, yet is she
Still as she was, lower she cannot be.
He plants his Engines deeper, labors more,
Yet she protests, its worse then it was before.
He enters parlye, and speaks ore the wall,
But she (as senseless) answers not at all.
He sounds retreat, and to his camp does creep,
Which makes her wake out of her pleasant sleep*
Then in a sweet entwining do they clippe,
And cull and kiss, and from the rosy lip
Of Hymen's chaste embraces do they taste,
The sweets above, when lower joys be past*
Here is the spell of sweet-charmd Morphus
Dissolved to nothing, by charms amorous.
For though men (after Labor) rest do seek,
Loves eyes be open still, and cannot sleep.
Judge what Admetus thought when he did hear*
Of this report, soon whispered in his ear,
How he did look? how strange perplexed he was,
Thus to be cheated of his lovely la^se?
Pipe could he not, his cheeks were grown so thin,
His pipe-bagge torn, no wind it could keep in,
His cloue-ear'd curre lay hanging down his head,
And for four days, would taste no kind of bread.
His Flocks did pine (all went contrary way)
Here lay Admetus, there his Sheep-crooke lay,
All wea-begane, thus lived the Shepherd long,
Till on a day inspired with a song,
(For so it seemed) to others more then me,
Which thus he sung to maid inconstancy.
Foolish I, why should I grieve,
To sustain what others feel?
What suppose, f^aile women leave,
Those they loved, should I conceal
Comforts rest,
From my breast.
For a fickle, brittle woman,
Noe, Noe, Noe,
Let her go,
Such as these be true to no man.
Long retired have thou been,
Sighing on these barren rocks,
Nor by sheep nor shepherd seeene,
Now return unto thy flocks*
Shame away,
Do not stay,
With these mouing-louing woman,
They remove
From their love:
Such as these do often undo men.
Tender-tinder of Affection,
If I harbor thee again,
I will do it by direction,
Of some grave experienced swain.
Nere will I,
Love by the eye,
But where judgment first has tried,
If I live,
Ere to love,
It is she, shall be my bride.
When this retired Swain had end'd his song,
He seemed as one that had forgot his wrong,
His Teres were dried up, his willow wreath,
Thrown quite away, and he began to breath,
More cheerful and more blithe then ere he was,
Forgetting th'Name and Nature of his less,
So as no Swain on all the plain could be,
For any May Game readier then he:
Now would he tune his pipe unto his Ear,
And play so sweet, as ioved the flocks to hear,
Yea I have heard, (Nor think I Fame did lie)
So skillful was this lad in M^nstrelsie,
That when he played (one st^oke) which often he would,
No Less that heard him could her water hold.
And now because I do remember't well,
I Will tell a tale which I have heard him tell,
On winter-nights full often unto my Sire,
While I sat rosting of a Crab by th'fire.
A Man there was wh'had lived a merry life,
Till in the end he took him to a wife,
One that no image was (for she could speak)
And now and then her husbands costrell break.
So fierce she was and furious* as in some
She was an arra^t Devil of her tongue.
This drove the poor man to a discontent,
And often and many times did he repent
That ere he changed his former quiet state,
But las repentance, then did come too late.
No cure he finds to heal this malady,
But makes a virtue of necessity.
The common cure for care to every man,
A pot of nappy Ale: where he began
To fortify his brain against all should come,
Amongst which the clamor of his wives loud tongue.
This habit graffed in him grew so strong,
"That when he was from ^le, an hour seemed long,
So well he liked th'profession: on a Time,
Having staid long at pot, (for rule nor line
Limits no drunkard) even from Morn to Night,
He hasted home apace, by the moone-light:
Where as he went, what fantasies were bred,
I do not know, in his distempered head.
But a strange Ghost appeared (and forced him stay)
With which perplexed, he thus began to say.
Good Spirit, if thou be, I need no charm,
For well I know, thou will not do me harm,
And if the Devil; sure, me thou should not hurt.
I wed'd thy sister, and am plagued for it.
The spirit well-approuing what he said,
Dissolved to air, and quickly vanished.
For Guido says, some spirits walk on earth,
That cheered are, and much delight with mirth,
Such do admire conceits and pregnant bray^es;
Others there are, which Melancholy chains,
And keeps in low Subjection, these are they
Affect the balefull night, frequent that way
That is obscure, silent and intricate,
Dark charnell-houses, where they keep their chat*
Of Tortures, Tragic ends and Funerals,
Which they solemnize for their Festiualls.
Thus would Admetus pass the winter-night,
Wherein he gave such neighbors great delight,
As came to hear him: and such store he had,
Of quaint conceits, as there was not a ladde,
That of discourse had more variety,
Or could express his mind more gracefully.
But lack for sorrow, how he is fallen away,
That was so trim a youth but the other day,
A mere Anatomy, but skin and bone,
One that it pitties me to look upon.
What should the cause be, sure I cannot say,
But his pale face, some sickness does bewray?
" For as our thoughts are legible in our eye,
" So does our face our bodies grief descry.
Yet I perchance, by the Sonnet which he made,
May find the cause for which he is dismaide
How ere it fall, it shall be sung by me,
Now when I want Admetus company.
Admetus Sonnet.
Neighbor Swains and Swainelius hear me,
"Its Admetus bids you hear,
Leave your Pastures, and come near me,
"Come away you need not fear,
By my soul, as I affect you,
I have naught that can infect you.
O then come,
Hear a tongue,
That in discord keeps a part,
With a Woe-surcharged heart.
Nere was Swain on plain more loved,
Or could do more feats then I,
Yet one grief has now removed,
All my whilome iollity.
All my Lays be quite forgotten,
Sheepe-hooke broken, pipe-bagge rotten,
O then come,
Hear a tongue.
That with flattering speech does call,
To take long farewell of all.
I am not as once I was,
When Eliza first did suite me,
Nor when that same red-hair'd less,
Fair Bellina did inuit me,
To a Garden there to play,
Cull, kiss, clip, and toy all day,
O then come,
Hear a tongue,
That in wooing terms was flowing,
But through Woe has spoiled his woing.
All I can or will desire ye
When my breath of life is spent,
That in love you would interre me,
(For it will my soul content,)
Near unto my Fathers hearse,
And bestow some comely verse
On my Tomb,
Then my tongue
Shall throb out this last adeu,
Nere were truer swains then you.
A verse Admetus? I will be the swain,
Though most unfit, to undertake that pain,
Which in fair letters shall engraven be,
Over thy hearse to express thy memory,
And thus it is: Here is a Shepherd laid,
Who loved, was loved, yet lived and died a Maid.
Yet against his will: pray then good spirits tell,
Whether he must or no lead Apes in Hell.
How Fancy is a Frenzy. An Epigram.
ANd thou In Euenum Flu^^n lubrico pr^grediens cursu, (...).
Euenus whose renowm's dispersed,
About chose fertile coasts which border thee,
Whose well-tuned Current runs so pretily,
That Fame her self, nor shall it be reuerst,
Has thus enacted: that thy liquid breast
Should make my consort up, for there appears
Even in thine eyes, continuing streams of tears.
Still may thy Sliding-foord, and spacious course,
Wash those adjoining vales encircle thee,
Which by thy means yield crops so fruitfully,
That thy pure sand may be of Ganges force,
Golds pure Elixir: for thou have remorse,
And pitties my hard hap to love a swain,
That hates my love, and makes my suit in vain,
Often by thy Sliding Channel have I stood,
Bathing my self in tears, tears were the drink,
That quenched my thirst, and when thou seemed to sink,
Into some hollow cauerne, straight my blood,
"(That little blood I had) made thy course good.
And sink into the Cesternes of mine eyes,
Filling thy streams with tears, thy banks with cries,
Straight fell I down upon thy floury shore,
As if the shore had been my mistress breast,
Where I a while conceau'd that sweetened rest,
As it expelled the care I felt before,
Seeming to make my comforts so much more,
Because so long delayed; but less the while,
My thoughts chekt me, I chekt my thoghts of guile.
For well I found, this was a goulden dream,
Yet but a Dream, that seemed to represent,
Unto mine eyes, that sacred Continent,
Which shadows my content: but this has been,
Ever most true, Dreams are not as they seem.
And if they were, I Am sure they mist in this,
Taking thy Bank for where my mistres is.
Often did I cull, and clip, and kiss, and do,
God wot, full madly, for reposing there,
I called the grass, the tresses of her hair:
And bound it up, yet well I knew not how,
Making a bracelet on it, which I would show
To every Shepherd, so distract'd was I,
And every rural Syluane that past by.
All this thou saw, and thou did pity me,
"For thy distreaming tears explan'd no less,
Surcharged breasts must needs their greefes express,
Which once expressed; suppressed seem to be:
"Tears unto grief, yield soueraignst remedy.
For Tears do silence grief, but where appears
Extent of grief, there griefs do silence tears.
And such were mine: sometimes I could not weep,
But like one sence-lesse, laughed at my distress,
Mixing a strain of Mirth with heaviness,
Or as one casten in a deadly sleep,
That neither sense nor faculty can keep,
Even such was I: but straight I changed my song,
Making my joys short, but my sorrows long.
Her fancy was the frenzy that surprisd
My idle brain with these distracted passions,
Ten thousand shapes I had, ten thousand fashions,
Despising, loving, love where I despisd'e,
Prising her most, where I was lowest pris'de.
Thus my affections to distractions turned,
Made me mourn more then lover ever morn'd,
And Reason too: for some I had, my Friends,
(At least they seemed so) which contemnd my grief
Nor sought to yield my silly heart relief,
With one poor comfort, but as diverse ends,
Occasion strange effects; so Love depends
(If I may call in constant Friendship Love,)
On Fortune here below, not truth above.
Let me vnrippe my sorrows, that my breast
May void such Scarabees, that use to sit
Upon each ulcer: whose contagious wit,
Is worse then Hellebore, for they infest
The purest Mansion, loving ever lest
Where they show most Affection, for their strain,
Is not for love but profit, and their gain.
Record them (sweet Euenus) for they hate,
Thy sacred streams: wash not their soyled sin
With thy pure liquor: for the Aethiops skin,
Will be black still: the doom of envious fate,
(Like Mammons heirs) sits skouling ore their state:
Their Summer-Swallows flourish, they make one,
But if thy state he blasted, they are gone.
And thou ( Blessed Hymen) that confirms the love,
Of Mortal souls, with thy diuinest rites,
Knows whom I mean by, for they quench thy lights
By their abuse: but there is a power above,
Will dash their gainefull tradings, and remove,
Their Bartring from the earth, to th'depth of hell.
That teach in Marriage how to buy and sell.
Yet dear Euenus, I have more to speak,
For I would have thee carry me commends,
To such as be my true approved friends,
(For some I have will neither bow nor break)
Midst my afflictions: but by all means seek
To re-infuse life in me pray the tell
When by their house thou go, that I am well,
And if they ask thee how I brook this place
Where I Am retired to: say, as lovers use,
Pent from their loves, they cannot will, nor choose,
But live an Hermits life, and in disgrace
Of beauty and her name, has made his face
Like times annatomie (poor Sceleton)
An object fit for Ruth to look upon.
Tell them the books I read, be such as treat,
Of Amadis de Gaul, and Pelmerin,
Furious Orlando, and Gerilion,
Where I observe each fashion and each feate,
Of amorous humors, which in my conceit,
Seem to to rare, That they that were so strong,
Should be so mad, and I be tame so long,
But presently I recollect my sense,
And finds a reason: questionles I Am mad
But who cares for it, or marks it? if I had
Land (like an elder brother) Eminence
Of some Court-Comet, would have presidence,
Over my braine^pan: and would beg my wit,
Though neither he nor I could manage it.
So though I loose my wits I cannot loose
My lands, they rest secure; where? can you tell?
Where? yes, where not? will it please thee buy, I Will sell:
What? wit? I have none; counsel? neither: house?
The arch of Heauen's my cover; pray excuse
My Error, I am pore: I'haue naught to sell
But tears and those I cannot part with well.
But (pray thee) spare thy speech to such as be,
And ever were professed foes to love,
And Bayne to marriage, for by them I prove
The depth of discontent: they love not me,
Nor do I care for'^: once I hope to see,
Envy without a sting, which still extends
Her hateful power unto depraved ends.
Yet if thou chance to slide by Enuies place,
(Which by this true description thou shall know)
Her structures ruined are, and there does grow,
A grove of fatal Elmes, wherein amaze,
Or labyrinth is framed: here Enuies race,
Had their beginning, For there is yet to see,
The very throne where Envy used to be.
Tell that (proud minion) that ambitious dame,
Whose meagre look and broad dissheaueld lock,
Whose dangling nose, shaped like an apricock,
Makes her desert-lesse proud, that I do blame
Her unjust dealing, though I scorn to name,
Th'uniustnesse of it: yet this vow i will make,
I Will nere trust long-nos'd Female for her sake.
Et ^u quae minio nardoque fulges, extende^s occulos alti^i prouectos, desi^^e
ceptis. -- Nasutam dicam, et sane dicerens,
Saiuxta nasum polle at ingenium.

Could she (hard hearted she) for private gain,
(Such lucring Mammonists the heavens displease,)
Sell both the love and liking of her Niece,
And where love showed her most, there to restrain,
Affection within bounds? sweet streams complain,
To Juno on it, I know she will pity me
And grant my suite -- That she may barrain be.
We have too many of that odious brood,
We need no more: it is a fruitless fruit,
That shames the Parents: -- Juno hear my suit,
For it will do both heaven and earth much good,
And be a caveat unto woman-hood;
"Rather in Marriage not to deal at all,
Then to set Marriage sacred rites at sale.
Farewell (Euenus) I have writ my mind,
Which I would have thy streamelings to convey
To Enuies house, by that frequented way,
Which as a Port or Haven is assigned
To every passenger: Sweet breathing wind
Breath on thy sails, that when thou do complain,
Remembering me, thy teare-swolne eyes may rain,
And fructefie the earth: That time may show,
This did Euenus for her Poet do.
Certain Select Epigrams, made good by observance, experience, and instance:
with an introduction to Time, including sundry conceipted passages, no less
pleasant then present.
It Is a mad world my Masters.
O Age what art thou made of? sure thou art,
Composed of other metal then thou were,
Once was thy glory by thy virtues showen,
But now alas thy virtues are unknown.
For who should show worth but great men? yet each day
Shows by experience, None more ill then they,
Where Honor on a foote-cloth's wont to pass,
Like Appians Land Lord on his trapped Ass.
'Lasse I have seen what I have grieved to see,
Honor with virtue nere keep company.
But if they do (as some observance make)
It Is not for Conscience, but for fashion sake.
O then how vain is time, to shower down good,
On such as are but great, only by blood;
Not true demerits which makes me contemn,
The idle passions of phantasticke men,
Which think it sufficient to be great in state,
Without least virtue fit to imitate:
This makes me hence conclude: vice puts on honor:
"For virtue, there is none will look upon her.
I in my time have seen an vpstart Lord,
Raised to sudden honor like a Gourd,
Whom in as small time I may chance to see,
As Ionah's gourd, so withered he may be,
And what is the cause? because its not demerit
Or true descent, by which he does inherit,
Such new stolen honors: for then might his name
Freely such estimation seem to claim:
But an insinuating humor drawn,
"From that same sorce of vice, that loathsome spawne
Of all distempered passions, which can be
Marked with no better name then flatterie^
And is this way to purchase honor trewly?
Can such a man be said to merit dewly?
When hows'ere we admire him for his seat.
"It was not worth, but baseness made him great.
O Time, how strangely art thou varied,
From what thou once appeared; how art thou led
By every fashion-monger that does stand
More on the egg fying of his band
His peak't munchattoes, his Venetian hose.
His Buskin-pace, how Gorgon-like he goes,
His crispled hair, his fixing of his eye,
His ceruss-cheeke, and such effemnacie:
"Then on tru-man-like Virtues: for its common,
Women are liker men, men liker women;
Since I no other difference can make,
'Twixt man and woman save the outward shape
Their mind's all one: nor does their shape appear
Much different: since women th'breeches wear:
Which fashion now to th'Countrey makes resort,
In imitation of their wear at Court;
Where it is said to shun the means of sinnen,
Came that use up to wear their breekes of linen;
And can we see this and not pity it*
When men that have more complement then wit,
Shine in the eye of popular respect,
And others of more worth droope in neglect?
We cannot: yet must we admire them still,
(That worthless are) though it be against our will,
What remedy? I Will tell thee, though thou dare not,
But congy when thou meets them: laugh and spare not
So 't be in private, burst thy sides with laughter,
And whilst thou art laughing, I Will come lashing after:
Mean time (with silence) I would have thee hear me,
That have composed these Epigrams to cheer thee.
Take them how ere they be: if ^owre in taste,
Reform thy errors which are former past:
If sweet, let th'relish of my poems move
That love in thee, to thank me for my love:
To the Precisian.
FOr the Precisian that dares hardly look,
(Because thou art pure forsooth) on any book
Save Homilies, and such as tend to th'good
Of thee, and of thy zealous brotherhood:
Know my Time-noting lines aim not at thee,
For thou art too too curious for me.
I will not tax that man that is wont to slay
"His Cat for killing mise on th'Sabboth day:
No; know my resolution it is thus,
I Would rather be thy foe then be thy pus:
And more should I gain by 't: for I see,
The daily fruits of thy fraternity.
Yea, I perceive why thou my book should shun,
"Because there is many faults thou art guilty on:
Therefore with-drawe by me thou art not called,
Yet do not winch (good jade) when thou art galled,
I to the better sort my lines display,
I pray thee then keep thou thy self away.
The Church-Knight.
A Churchman was there on a time I read,
Of great estate his father being dead,
Which got, his Syrpe-cloth he discarded quite,
Resolving fully now to be a Knight:
Up to the Court he goes with speed he can,
Where he encountered a North-britaine man,
With whom discoursing in his Evening walk,
He spoke of Knights amongst other idle talk,
How th'title it was worthy, and that he,
Could well endure entitled so to be;
For I do read (quoth he) of such as these
Within the Ecclesiasticke histories:
What fame and honor they obtained by war,
Which sir (believe me made me come thus far,
That I (if means or money could obtain it)
Might in respect to my prosession gain it.
The Britta^ne his profession did require:
A Curate once, quoth he, of Brecknocke-shire,
Held, I may say to you, a learned man;
But since my fathers death turned gentleman.
I joy me in the occasion the Brittan said,
(Doubt not sir Priest) you shall a Knight be made;
And you deserue't: for though Knights common are.
"Holy church-knights, such as you be, seem rare,
To Long-lane goes the Curate to provide,
An ancient suite, and other things beside;
As skarfe and roses all of different color,
Which bought, at White-friers stairs he takes a Sculler.
Prepared with resolution all the sooner,
To gain this privilege and Knightly honor;
Which having got by long petitioning suite,
And pai'd unto the Britain his first fruit,
To's Neighbors straight he hies-where they much grieve him
"For, swearing he is a knight, they will not believe him
Nor would they (such incredulous men were these)
Till he had showen discharge for all his fees.
An Epigramme alluding to the second Satyr of Ariosto, where he taxes the
Clergies pride and Ambition.
THe Church-mens doctrine is humility,
Yet but observe them, who more proud then they,
Whose Damask cassockes show their vanity.
How should we then believe them what they say.
"Since what they tax us in, themselves bewray:
Its too too true: so that oft-times the Temple,
(Though the house of God, gives laymen worst example.
Crucem and coniugem vno petimus fato,
Hanging and marrying go by destiny.
It is an axiom in Philosophy,
"Hanging and marrying go by destiny;
Both reference have unto the doom of fate,
Both do our birth and nature calculate:
Nor can we say these two be different far,
Since both have influence from one ominous star,
Which bodes our happiness or our mischance
According to the stars predominance;
This made Arminus Caerthage-Ruler say
"That with a wife he could not well away:
For being asked why he with others share not,
Good fortune in good wives (quoth he) I dare not,
For if I chance to light on one that is wise,
" She will be wilful, felfe-lov'd, or precise,
" If wealthy, wanton, vowing to her friend,
" I shall be Cocold ere a fortnight end:
" If poor then peevish, of condition shrewde:
" If bewtifull she will be monstrous proud;
" And if deformed, loathsome is she then,
" And th'least of these would kill a thousand men.
But now suppose, I could no longer tarry,
But that I might do either worse or marry,
And that I sought a wife to fit my turn,
(For better it is to marry then to burn)
Though many (they may thank their own good carriage)
Are all afire the first day of their marriage:
Why then as my position was at first,
This marriage-day is either best or worst
I ere was master of: for if my wife
Be loyal as she ought, then is my life
Made double blessed in her, where I may say,
"Each day looks cheerful like a mariage-day,
But if selfe-will'd untamed, headstrong, froward,
Immodest* indiscreete, peevish, untoward:
Why then through th'fury of her inbred malice,
In climing to her bed, I clime to the gallows.
Where every word that does proceed from her
Strangles me like an Executioner;
Her humor is my neck-verse, which to sort
I cannot, if I should be hanged for it,
Her tongue's my torture, and her frisking tail,
Flies up and down like to a wind mills sail,
Her hands like Fullers wheels, one up, one down,
Which still lie malling on my costrell crown:
Which ere I would endure to take her banging,
I would go round to work and take a hanging:
Since therefore Fate has doomed this to thee,
Hanging or wiuing patient thou must be.
An Epigramme called the Cambrian Alchymist.
THe Planet-stroken Albumazar,
Shaues the Muses like a razor;
Fayry-like we therefore shun them,
Cause there is no hair upon them,
Muses loose their ornament,
Cambria has their excrement.
Excrement? it is true indeed,
Hair grows from the excess of seed,
Which by instance small does vary
From th'peere-lesse Seminary;
Which to make her worth allowed,
Shrowdes her project in a cloud.
In a Cloud? its rather shown,
like the man that is in the Moon,
Where our Isles Ardelio,
Descants of Tom Trinkillo;
Formed like one that is all in mist,
Like a second Alchymist.
Strange the Project was I wish
Of this Metamorphosis;
Naught was (if I understood)
Good, but that it was deemed good
By the great: o worthy feate,
To be worthless deemed great.
Upon divine Roscius.
TWo famous Roscio's chanced I to epsy,
Acting a Metamorphosis, while I
Sleep under th'couert of a shady wood,
Where great Archyas for the vmpire stood,
Who did their several actions thus define,
"Art-full the one, the other most diuiuine.
Upon Roscius Hackney, in a Dialogue betwixt Expedition, and Endimion.
Exped. WHy-ho, Endimion; how th'Dormouse sleeps,
Awake for shame, open thy wink-a-peeps!

Endim. What stur you make, I come with speed I can
(and too much speed) for I have tired my man;

Exped. Who, Dulman?

Endim. Yes.

Exped. I thought the Jade would shame us.
And play us one horse-tricke for Ignoramus.

Upon TARBON the Country Gentleman.
TArbon they say is mellancholly grown,
Because his wife takes physic in the town:
Why, that is no cause; who would not hazard fair
To leave both land and name unto his heir?
Yea, but he doubts, (so jealous is the man)
That th'physicke works not but Physician.
Which if he find, he swears he means to call.
The child not Tarbon but young Vrinall.
O monstrous, by this thou'st truly show,
Thy wife a punke, thou needs not call her so:
Which with thy four eyes Talbon if thou find,
I Will never trust face, conscience, nor kind.
An Epigram called the Court-Attourney.
Who Is you, young Stephano? why sure you jest.
You Gallants ride with 4. coach-horse at least;
Besides there is even in his very eye,
A kind of Court-like formal majesty:
Its true; yet it is he: for you must know,
Young Stephano is turned a Courtier now
Which makes him complete, and whers'ere he go,
He has his ducke, or its not worth a straw:
But I do doubt, nor be my doubts in vain,
The Courtier must Attorney turn again.
And then he must be stripped of every ragge,
And fall again unto his buckram-bagge:
If this befall, I shall be sorry for it,
Since John astyles gets but small grace at Court.
An Epigramme called the Winde-fall.
SIr Sensual (a wanton Priest) there was
Who made appointment with a Country less,
That'gainst the time from market she 'st return,
He would keep tutch and do her a good turn.
The place where these two lovely mates should meet
Was a vast forest vnfrequent'd with feet
of any passenger, save such as were
Keepers of th'wood, amongst which a Forrester,
Upon occasion chaunc't to come that way,
And heard eue-dropper-like what they did say,
Their place of meeting, with the maids consent
Which he resolved as quickly to prevent.
And being under shade securely sconst,
Which place he had elected for the nonst,
He stays to see th'returne of this same Less,
(which as she wished) did quickly come to pass*
For Maids that know not what it is to consent
To a lost Maidenhead, nor what is meant
by giving of a green gown, sooner will
Assent to ill, because they know no ill,
Then such as have of active pleasures store,
For well were they experienst in it before.
Yea such will never deal unless they smell,
Some hope of gain, or like the trader well.
At last the maid having her market made,
(Perhaps far sooner then her Parents bade)
With clothes tuckt up returns with speedy pace,
Down by the Forest to't^ appointed place.
Where'th Priest Sir sensual lay all this while,
That he the Maid might of her gem beguile.
If you had seen what meeting there was then,
Betwixt these two, you would have you would no men
Of any rank or order were so good.
As Church-professors unto woman-hood.
So humble was the prelate, as to please.
The shamefast maid, he often fell on his knees.
While mumbling pater nosters on her lips,
Down fell his breeches from his naked hips.
And all this while poor soul she stood stock still,
Not thinking (on my conscience) good or ill.
At last the jolly Priest (when all was shown,
That he could show) wil'd th'maid to lay her down*
Upon a shadie bank, which with all sorts,
Of flowers was checkerd fit for Venus sports.
She (though she were resolved no ill could be
By lying down, yet in her modesty)
Would not unto his motion so assent,
Yet let him blow her down she was content.
The short-breathed Priest (for he was wondrous fat)
And stuffed withal, makes me no bones of that,
But Aeolus-like puf's up his cheeks well grown,
And he no sooner blows then she was down.
The Forrester who all this time had stood,
Under a shadie covert of the wood,
Steps in, when'th Priest his shriuing should begin,
Saying all wind-falls they are due to him.
Many such Priests ancient records do show,
And present times may show as many now.
Another Epigram called, A Cuckold with a witness.
A VVilie wench there was (as I have read)
Who used to capricorn her husbands head,
Which he suspecting, lay in private wait,
To catch the knave, and keep his wife more strait.
But all in vain: they day by day did mate it,
Yet could his four eyes never take them at it.
This subtle wench perceiving how they should
At last prevented be, do all they could:
For now Italian-like her hus^and grew,
Horne-mad I wish, and kept her in a Mew.
Inuent'd a trick, which to accomplish better,
Unto her friend she closely sent a letter,
And thus it was; Friend you shall know by me,
My husband keeps me far more narrowly,
Then he was wont, so as to tell you true,
You cannot come to me: nor I to you.
Yet spite of his eyes and as many more,
VVele use those pleasures which we vsd before:
Only be wise, and second what I wish:
Which to express (my friend) know this it is.
My husband as he hates the horn to wear,
Of all the Badges forth, so fears h^'th Bear,
Mo^e then all other Beasts which do frequent
The heathy Forests spacious continent.
If thou will right me then, and pepper him,
Cover thy servant in a false Bears skin.
And come to morrow, as thou used before.
Tying thy servant to my chamber door.
After this quaint direction he attirde
His man in beare-skin as she had desir'de
Entering the chamber he received is
With many a smile, back^fall* and sweetened kiss*
For they are secure, of all that was before,
Having a Bear that kept the Buffe from door.
The wittall fool no sooner i^ckling had,
Then up the staiers he ran as he were mad.
But seeing none but the Bear to entertain him,
Of Horns he never after did complain him.
In Romanum Mnestorem.
IT chanced two Roman Conuerts on a day,
For pater noster at the Cards to play;
She mop'd, he pop'd; his popping could not get her,
"For she thought popping elsewher had been fitter.
Thus he went home no wiser then he came,
Since popping was the Puppies chiefest game.
In Poetam Hippodramum. OR Post-riding Poet.
IT took a Poet once In The head to poast,
For what I know not, but I Am sure it cost
His purse far more (as I have heard soms say)
Then ere his Muse was able to repay.
In Numularium antiphylon.
CAsh-coind? its true; but he intends to be
The stamper of that Coin is due to me.
Pray thee (my friend) forbear to set it on,
(My stamp I mean) till I have thoroughly done:
And I protest to thee, when I have ended,
I Will yield to thee, if she say thou can mend it.
In Romanum Sacerdotem.
A Roman Priest came to absolve a Virgin by the way,
As he in his Procession went: where he resolved to stay
A night. For what? not to absolve the tender Virgin^ sin,
But as a Ghostly Fathers wont, to let more errors in:
The door was shut, the candle out, for I would have you mark,
A carnal Father best absolues a Virgin in the dark:
Which absolution so increasd, in zeal and purity,
As within six and forty we^kes it grew a Tympany,
A girl forsooth, baptized Joan, nor is it any shame,
For the wench in time may prove Pope Joan the second of that name.
In Phylaetum.
PHylaetus writing loue-lines on a day,
A Ratte came in and stole his lines away.
Phyletus slept on still, and minded ^ot
While th'hungry Ratte eat up the lines he wrote;
If I were to be Judge, as much may be,
The Rat should be in love, Phyletus free,
That seeing th'saucy Rat to love enthralled,
Loue-bayne hereafter might be Rats-baine called.
An Epigram called the Couriter.
NOW heaven preserve mine eyesight what is here?
A man made up in Wainscot? now I swear,
I took him for some Colosse; sure I err,
This is not he: yes: this's the Courtier,
Brau^ Pun-tevallo, for those arms he bears,
(An Ass head rampant) and that chain he wears,
By blessed Saint Martin, do descry it is he,
Well, i will observe his carriage narrowly.
What makes him go so stiff, has he the gout?
No, but a fire in's hams that went not out
These seven years to my knowledge: then it has
Begun (it seems bout time) when th'glasse-work wa^
Its true, it did so, I have heard some say,
He has a pleasant wit, he has one way
A pretty thriuing wit, can make a leg,
And harken out what office he may beg.
Can look as big and burly on such men,
(Poor Gnats) that come for to petition him,
As Giants in a Pagent, can protest,
For mere formality, laugh at a jest,
(Without conceiving ont) has wit enough,
To put good close on, bear his face in's ruff.
Like a brave sprightly Spaniard, will not let,
With some new minted oaths to pay his debt,
And can dispense with them, nor does he more,
In this, then what his Elders did before.
With truth (in complement) he seldom meets,
For naked truth with Eve lies without sheets,
And he endures not that, nor can incline,
To such a motion, but in progress time.
He cannot blush (no more can women now)
Till that their pretty painter tell them how.
He has a kind of vain in sonnetting,
Purchased by brocage or by pilse^ing,
With which he wooes his mistress, he will set,
His face to any fashion, and will bett,
VVagers on Ladies honors: having forgotten
VVha^ he should speak, he is fingering his button,
Or some such trifling action, till he store
himself with wit, which he had lost before:
Nor did that Moral err, who wisely would,
Compare a Courtiers wit to th'Marigold.
It opens with the Sun, but being set
The Mari-gold shuts up, so does his wit.
The Marigold's most cheered by midday sun,
So's he, whence ^'st, he lies in bed till noone.
Occasion is his Cupid, lust his lure,
Pleasure his Pander, dalliance his whore,
He h'as but one receipt of making love,
And being put out, he cannot speak, nor move,
But like a liue-les^e image, seems to be,
Till by good hap his speech recovered be.
He smells of Complement, in presence fair,
And uses often to wear bracelets of hair,
Swearing they came from such, but it is not so,
For it was some tyre-woman he took them fro.
The Ornaments which he admires are these,
To faune, to observe times, to court, to please,
To make strange faces, sleeke his prefum'd skin,
Starch his Mouchatoes, and forget his sin.
To dance, to dice, to congie, to salute,
To stamp, to stalk, to finger well a lute.
To tremble at a Cannon when it shootes,
To like, dislike, and fill his head with doubts.
To be in passion, wind his careless arms,
To plie his Mistress with delightful charms.
To be for all, yet ignorant in all,
To be disguisd, and strange fantastical:
Briefly to be, what all his kind have been,
Seem what they be not, be what least they seem.
Such is my Puntauallo, and in time
No question but he will prove true Pantomime,
To imitate all forms, shapes, habits, ty^es
Suting the Court, and sorting his desires,
And then what the Satyr said, shall well appear:
The Devil is the perfects Courtier.
Having my complete Courtier thus defined,
I have no more that I can call to mind,
" Save what is common, and is known to all,
" That Courtiers as the tide do rise and fall,
So I will end with what I have writ before,
"Till the'next tide come, and then I will write more.
Upon his much honored friend Master William Ascam, and his selected Temple.
Whose Anagram is produced by the Poet.
William Ascam.
-- Sum Via Luci -- Alma.
Hoc Anagramma tenes Gulielmi) -- Sum via Luci
Alma, per aethereos qua iuuatire locos.
Quae via? virtutis via lactea, quae tibi nota est:
Nec minor Exemplis Gloria parta tuis.
Epigram.
In Templo, Venerem Spectet
Qui amat Venerem.
Ask him what Temple most delights him,
And he will replye, that Temple thou art in.
Nec Venus est quae nomen habet veneris, sed Amica
Casta deae Arcadiae, Deli^ nomen habet, etc.
Ask him what Prayers should in that Temple be,
And he will reply, what prayers best likes thee*
Ask him what Temple yields him most content,
And he will reply thy Temple, there is his Saint.
Ask him what Temple's purer then above.
He'l^ say thy Temple: there is the Queen of Love;
Then let me ask your judgment is it not fit,
That Temple honor him, that honors it?
Posies upon bracelets.
As love gives life to every part,
So this gives life unto my heart:
This cha^tly lies, and lives with me,
O that I might do so with thee?
Another.
How might I triumph in my bliss;
If love were where my Bracelet is.
For then should love do no such harm
To wring my heart, but wreath my arm.
An Eglogue between Billie and Iockie called the Mushrome.
Iockie. WHou Billie whou, what fair has thou bin at?
Thouse be so trim, I mickle torken at:
For well I wate, last time I met with thee,
Thou hardly had a lapp to swedle thee.
Pray thee (good Bille,) tell me swith and soon,
Iockie may do what Billy late has done.

Billie. What Iockie (lither lurden) less for wea,
Thou'st be so tattert, but there is many sea,
That ill can wappe it: but be vis'd by me,
And thou or lang sall glish in bravery.
Swatt on thy tail man, heeres a blythy place,
And i will ensure thee how I gat this grace. Ecloge apud Luciaenum extat quae hoc
titulo plane inscribitur, Mirica nimrium, quam Fung^m esse existimo,
intempestiue orientem ^rentemque, etc. Eo nomine Romanos Sabini appellauert,
Gallos Romani, Tuscos Icali, in fimo nempe genere, and ig^ota gen^^ ^r^os,
subitoque prouectos, etc.


Iockie. Mickle may Bille thrive, as he is begun,
My lugges are lithing, Bille now iogge on

Billy. Then hear me Iocky. Bout mid-belten it was
Or ^se bethought awrang, when I mut pass,
Ore th'Breamy bourne, and (well I traw) I had,
Smaw gere (at tat tide) but a lether-bagge,
A Motley iacket, an a s^op of blew,
It was my Fadders, I mun tell thee true.
A lang youd I, (and langer then thoule say)
And well, I knew not whether, ne what way,
Fute-sare I was, for Bille shoon had neane,
But an and pare with him, and they were gane.
Nor hose-legs (well I wate) but skoggers and,
That hardly hap't poor Bills legs fra c^ud.
Hate was my weasi^, empty was my maw,
And nane I met with, I could ken or know,
So vncath was the get (as but for shame)
I had com'd back toth place fra whein I came,
For siler had I skant, nor less nor mare,
Then three Bawbees, I Will tell thee all my stare.
But lith me Iocky (after many a mile)
At last I hapt to light upon an I Will,
Bu Come and full a gere, and full a store,
For Bille never met with like before,
Sae Greathy was the place where I was driven
That I me sicker thought I was in Heaven.
But well Ise sure they that this Island kept,
Were by our Whilome Fathers Angels clept.
And well they might be so, for well I wate,
They were fi^e men, and men of mickle state.
Had lusty husses (that were trick and trim,)
Cud well don on their geere, with every pin.
Here stood I musing lang full heavily,
Till Iockie wha do think speard up to me.

Iockie. Wha Bille mot that be?

Bille. Ane wha thou kens.
Cand ane, we raught on meanly, but now seen,
He has the prick and preze I Will say to thee.

Iockie. Was it not Lobbie?

Bille. Iocky it was he.
But now the mickle Lurden is so great,
Their blessed by God, that may with Lobbie speak.
By Gods bread Iockie, he so gaish was,
I thought no boot to speak, but let him pass,
And had done so, but Lobby was so kind.
To come to me, and leave his men behind.
Great chat we had, and many that were nigh,
Musd he would chat with sike an ene as I.
But blithe was Lobbie, and so meek he was,
That he unhorsed sat by me on the grass,
Lang did we tauke of this thing and of that,
A Judge, a Peggy, and a nut-brown Kate,
A Crowd the Piper, and the Fiddler Twang,
And many sike things, as we layen alang.
Ablangst the leave, this Council gave he me,
That made me well to leave, so may it thee.
Billie (quoth Lobby) if thoule prosper here,
Thou mun be bald, and learn to bandon fear,
Thou mun not blush, nor color change for ought,
Though th'plea thou have in hand be nere so naught.
Thou mun not take petition (lithen me)
Nor entertain him, till thou take thy fee,
And (well I warn thee) better way thou thrive,
If thy hand open be to aw that give.
Get me some prollers, they are best of all,
To make thee weet, when some good office falls,
Or a barre-hoisted Lawyer that can see,
With his four eyne where and concealments be,
But of aw things I mun fore-warne thee hence,
To have small dealing with a Conscience.
That will undo thee ( Billy) look to ane,
Poor men have Conscience, but rich men have nane.
Amongst other things listen to what I say,
For I in brief will speak now what I may.
In T^ucria here (this City where there be)
Many a man will have an eye of thee,
Gain me Acquaintance: it is the spring of life,
And know thou may a Tradesman by his Wife.
Be sicker on her Billye, she it is
Can open her husbands Casket with a kiss.
Diue me into a Mercers Book, and say,
Thou Wilt pay on sike a time, but do not pay.
Chauke me on Vintners, and for aw thy skore,
Let great words pay for aw, still run on more.
Be stately Billy (and I do thee read)
Thou mun now throw away thy country weed.
For skoggers, hozen of the Naples twine,
For thy blew slop, sike a made breeke as mine:
For thy and motley iacket, thou mun wear,
A cloth a silver, sike as I have here.
Then mun thou look big (what way ere thou pass)
As if that Billy were not the man he was.
Then learn me Billy some and Pedigree,
Noe matter though it belong not unto thee,
And say thy Grand-sire was a Duke at least,
And first inuentor of Saint Gallowayes feast.
Maintain me leeing in a Livery,
For that is the first means that mun honor thee:
Let her be Page-like, at thy elbow still,
For when thou can not do it, leeing will,
Let Suitors dance Attendance, lithen me,
And quick dispatch, be it thine enemy.
Take fees for expedition, for of aw,
Suits hastly ended wreake our overthrow.
Get me an Heralt (well I wat) oath best,
That may for Bille find some pretty Crest,
A ^at, a ^ismire, or a Butterfly,
A Cornish Chucke, a Parrat, or a Pie,
A nimble Squirrell or a picke-a tree,
A Wesell, Vrchin, or a Bumble Be.
Or if of plants, my Bille will haeue ane,
He may full swithly mange these choose him ane.
The Brier, the haw-thorne: or the Priuet bush,
The Osire, Cypress, or where th'merry Thrush,
Sings out her Fa, la, la, but nane there be,
"That like the Mushrome Bille fitteth thee,
Her grouth is sudden, Bille so is thine,
Then take the Mushrome, its a Crest of mine.
Mare need I not say, keep but well my reed,
And siker I se, thou cannot choose but speed.
With that he twined frame, and left me there,
Where I with mickle Carke, and mickle Care,
Bustling now up now down, at last me yode,
To ply my lesson well I understood,
And in a pretty while I learnd to be,
That cunning Clerk that he awarded me.
Deftly could I trick up me sell, and trim,
Me featly fine, in every leg and limme,
Well cud I mark my name in Merchants books,
Fo well I wate, wha ere he be, that looks,
I'se there in black and white, and well I may,
For he is said to aw that menes to pay.
Not a petion would I listen ore,
Till Billie had sam chinke in's fist before.
Not a rich mickle lossell could there be,
That had a plea but had his path by me.
And sine I sau as Lobbie teld beliue,
That he that had a conscience could not thrive.
I drove the Haggard frame, sine whilke time,
Iockie thou sees how Billie gins to shine.

Iockie, And lang may Billie shine, but said to me
Fare aw our Coustrils hause as weke as thee,

Billie. Iockie they do, nor need thou t'arken out,
For we will feed, wha ever famish for it:
O its a place so full of louisance,
Play but thy round the Ilanders will dance.
Ladies and Lordings, Swain lines with their swains,
Will trimly trip it ore the levy plains.
And well I wat that Iockie ance could play,
For I have heard him, --

Iockie And so Billie may.

Billie. Then tune thy chanter up and go with me,
Come blithly on, --

Iockie. Iockie does follow thee.

A Panegirick Embleame, Entitled, Saint George for England.
The Argument of the Embleame.
From whence the English anciently derived this Saints canonization, his
orders, inauguration -- of Sigismund, Emperor of Almaine: and his present to
Henry the fifth. The institution of this order where, the solemnizing where: the
several games, exercises, Races, and Martial trials auspiciously begun with
that Saint. -- And the like of Honor and advancement. -- A comparison had
between Perseus son to Jupiter and Danae; who preserved Andromoda from the
sea monster, and Saint George, who slew the Dragon. The description of Perseus,
and of Saint George: concluding with a victorious Paean to Saint George.

The Embleame
Hail to thy shrine thou Saint of Albion,
Who had thy ancient consecration
From thy religious mannagements, as far
Dispersed, as Turk or Christian planted are,
Thou art the Saint which we in war do use,
Hoping by thee to be auspicious.
Yet void of superstition we impart,
Sole laud to him, whose noble Saint thou art.
Nor loose we the name of the Almaine Sigismund,
By whom thy precious Relics first were found.
And here presented as a royal gift
To Englands Mirror, Henry the fifth.
Since when thy order is solemnized,
At Windsor, where a part of thee is sed
To be interred: thrice happy monument,
To cover part of one so eminent.
So Saintly virtuous as no honor can,
"Give thee thy due, as only due to man.
O may thy institution honored be,
By true deserts, and due solemnity.
Nor whom thy order does inaugurate,
May they by vice stand subject unto hate.
But so even weighd in all their actions here,
"As Georges Knights may after Saints appear:
Which they shall be, by showing fervent zeal
Unto the Church, love to the commonweal.
In all our games and pastimes several,
Eu^r on George as on our Saint we call:
For by that name the ancients understood,
Their Fortune could not choose but to be good,
As Tournaments, Iusts, Ba^riers, and the rest,
In which his name was evermore expressed.
In Races too these present times afford
Instances store, Saint George he gives the word.
So as it was (as common stories tell)
To say Saint George, as say God speed you well.
In Martial trials when our armies met,
His name would spirit in our men beget,
" Heightning their courage, perils passing through,
" Standing desolu'd before a Cannons mouth.
" Out-bearing danger, and with violent breath
" Stand at defiance against the threats of death.
Marching through horror they would boldly pass,
(As for pale fear, they knew not what it was)
Which may be instanced in that holy war,
Where those that lost their lives canonized are
In leaves of perpetuity: I mean,
In the regayning of Jerusalem,
Where those renouned Champions enterprist,
For the due honor of their Savior Christ.
Either to win that City (maugre th'vaunts
Of all those hellish god less mis^reants,)
Or if they could not the City so surprise,
Resolved they were their lives to sacrifice;
Even then I say when those that Marshalled them,
Could not withold from flight their recreant men;
" Saint George appeared in a submissiue show,
" Wishing them not to wrong their Country so:
And though a ghost (and therefore less belieu'd;
Yet was his moving presence so received
As none to fight it out ^esolued more,
Then such as readiest were to fly before.
Up went their s^aling-ladders to displant
Th'abhorred offspring of the miscreant,
And ever as some danger they espide,
God and S t George for England still they cride.
And how successiue that renowned war
Was to those Christians, which enrolled are
In an eternal register, may well appear
" By Godfrey Bulloyne who was styled there
" King of Jerusalem, yet as its shown,
" By ancient stories, would receive no crown,
" Thinking't unfit that it should be rehearst,
" Tha^ where his masters head with thorns was pierst,
He that his servant was should be so bold,
As have his head girt with a crown of gold.
What fame in foreign coasts this Hero got,
The lake Sylene the pond or lake where the Dragon was.
Silene shows, if we should not;
Where in the reskew of a lovely Maid,
A fearful Dragon he discomfited,
So as we have portraide to every view,
On signs of Innes-how George the Dragon slew;
Which story to express were too too long,
Being a subject for each fiddlers song:
"Yet cause there is (I cannot will nor choose)
Comparison 'twixt him and Perseus,
Who son to Jove and show restain'd Dana^*
In reskew of the fair Andromade,
Encountered that sea^monster; I Will explane
Each attribute of their peculiar fame:
" And then conferring them one with the other,
" Collect whose best their actions laid together.
And first for Perseus; great I must confess,
He was in name, his birth inferres no less
Being Jove's son, yet can he no way shun
The name of Bastard, though he were his son:
Deflowered his mother was -- and in a shower
Of gold, to show how gold has sovereign power,
T'vnlocke the fort of fancy, and how soon
"Women are won, when golden bayts are shown.
Long Jove had wooed and yet he could not win
What he desired, till gold received him in,
Which seems by easy consequence to prove,
"Gifts be the gives that binds the hands of love.
Thus sprung the noble Perseus, who in time
"To propagate the honor of that line
From whence he came, and that it might be sed,
That he from Jove was rightly fathered
Took on him strange adventures; as to right
" Injured Ladies by a single fight,
" Encounter Giants, rescew men distressed,
In each where of his glory was expressed:
" For valiant and more worthy they do show them,
" That wrongs redress, then such as use to do them,
But th'first and best attempt he did on Earth,
"Was, to wipe off th'blemish of his birth,
And th'staine of his corrupted mothers honor,
Which blushes blazed who ever looked upon her.
"On then along imagined it may be
Went he to th'reskew of Andromade;
Who now was marked for death, and brought to the shore
Where many maids had bin devoured before,
By a sea monster: here the Virgin stood,
To free her Country with her guiltless blood,
Whom Perseus (as he coasted by that way)
No sooner vew'd then he began to say.
Fair Virgin (then he wept) impart to us
What rude unhallowed hand has used thee thus
And by the honor of my heavenly Sire
What ere he be he shall receive his hire,
Giant or Monster in the earth or Sea,
Revenged he shall-sweete Virgin tell it me.
Kind Sir (quoth she) and then she staide her breath
As one addressed to meditate of death,
Treat not with me of life, nor ask who it is
Giant or Monster that is the cause of this,
Only know this (thou gentle Knight) that I
" Am doomed to death, and IN me resolved to die.
To die (fair Maid quoth he)? if it be thy fate,
I Will sympathize with thee in equal state
And die with thee: only give grief a tongue,
To tell me who is the Author of thy wrong:
Know then (said he) I am that hapless she,
The wretched, pitied, poor Andromade,
Who here am left of friends, bereft of all
To be a prey unto a ravenous whale:
Many have suffered ere it came to me,
No^ is my lot and welcome it shall be,
To expiate with my unstained blood
The Monsters wrath and do my country good;
As she spoke this up from the Ocean
Came that devouring vaste Leuiathan,
Sweeping along the shore, which being spide;
Good sir retire the noble Damsel cride,
Yonder he comes for love of honor fly,
It Is I am doomed, then let me only die.
But Perseus (one better tempered,
Then to behold a Virgin slaughtered,
Without assayd revenge) did straight begin
With man-like valor to encounter him,
Doubtful the skirmish was on either side,
(While th'Maide a sad spectator did abide)
Wooing with tears which from her cheeks did flow
That Jove would give this Monster th'ouerthrow;
At last her prayers and tears prevailed so well,
As under Perseus feet the Monster fell;
Whence came it (as the story does proceed)
The Virgin and her Country both were freede:
Which to requite (in guerdon of her life)
She gave her self to Perseus as wife,
" Whom he receiu'd-o he did ill in this,
" Since by the Ancient it recorded is,
Before that Perseus to her reskew came,
She was espoused to another man
" By name Vax^dor, (o it was a sin
To marry her that was not dew to him:)
And better had 't been to sustain her fate,
"Then by such breach of faith to violate
Her former Spousals-which unjust offense
" Gods may wink at but never will dispense:
Yea to a barraine Rock though she were tide,
Yet better 'twas then to be made a Bride
" To an usurped Bed, for that did lay,
" That stain on her, time cannot wipe away.
Thus have you heard what noble Perseus was
With greatest dangers that his worth did pass,
The imminence whereof merits due praise,
"And such a Poet as deserves the Baies:
Laurel and Myrtle-though his Nuptial knot
" Lost him more fame then ere his valor got:
" For so deprau'd's the Nature of our will,
" What Is good we lain, what is ill we harp on still.
Now to thy English Saint, my Muse repair,
And lim him so, that when thou shall compare
These two: He Perseus may outstrip as far,
As sun the Moon, or th'Moone a twinkling star.
GEORGE now enstil'd the Saint of Albion,
By lineage was a Capadocian;
Whose The Etimologie of GEORGE from Gera and Gion, Warlike, or valiant.
valor was expressed in all his time,
That virtue might in every action shine,
Which to induce belief by moving sense,
I will produce his best description thence,
Both for th'resemblance which has ever bin,
Twixt the renowned Perseus and him:
As also to make good, that not one stain
" Eclipst that glory which his acts did gain
All which by instance seconded shall be
" Perseus was great yet George more great then he.
Tutching that Dragon on Sylenes shore,
I have in part rela^ed it before:
Yet but as shadows do resemblance make,
Unto the substance and material shape,
Digressiuely I only seemed to glance,
At the act it self, not at the circumstance:
Know then this noble Champion hearing one,
Along his travail making piteous moan,
In mere remorce drew nearer to the noice,
" Till he perceived it was a Ladies voice,
Who in a Virgin-milky white araide,
Showed by her habit that she was a Maid;
Careless her hair hung dowre, and in her look,
Her woes were writ as in a Table book:
Warm-trickling teres came streaming from her eyes*
Sighs from her heart, and from her accent cries.
Tied was she fast unto a pitched stake,
Bounding on Sylen's Dragon-haunted lake,
All which expressed without a Character
The woeful state which did enuiron her:
Saint George observed her tears, and from his eyes
Her tears by his find their renewed supplies,
Both vie as for a wager which to win,
" The more she wept, the more she forced him:
At last with modest hauiour in relief,
Of her distress, he thus a^^aide her grief.
" Sorrowful Lady if griefs lesne dare,
When those that pity griefs receige their share,
Impart your sorrows to me, and in lieu,
" If right I cannot, I will pity you.
Alas (sweet youth quoth she) pit^le's too late,
When my d^sease is grown so desperate,
Yet do I thank thee for thy love to me,
That never yet deserved so much of thee:
" Pray thee begone, such friendship I Will not try,
To see thy death one is ^nowe to die,
And I am she, - cross not the will of Fate,
"Better's to loose one then a double state:
Be gone I say do not the time fore-slowe,
" Perish I must of force, so needs not thou.
Imminent horror would admit no more;
For now the Dragon from Sylenes shore
Came spitting loathsome venom all about,
Which blasted trees and dried up their root,
St George the Dragon had no sooner vew'd,
Then fresh supplies of spirit was renewed
In his unmatched breast: him he assailes,
And though ore-matcht his spirit never fails
Till he subdew'd him: and as some auerre,
He tied him fast and made him follow her
Unto her fathers palace, where we read
In public triumph he cut off his head.
Here may we see that act of Perseus
Equal^'d by George and made more glorious
In that he aimed no further nor was fe'd
" To put his feet into another bed,
" His conquest it was temporate and just,
Not stayn'd with blemish of defaming lust
For no attempt used he to undertake,
But for true honor and for Virtues sake.
A Victorious Paean to our Albions St, alluding to all noble spirits, native
assumers of his Honor and Order.
Io Pean then must we
Give St George the victory:
Whose desert
Graced each part;
Where so ere he used to be,
None more graced, or loved then he.
Perseus though his renown,
Did to all the world come;
Yet one stain,
Dimmed his same:
But the worlds spacious room,
Shrines St George in honors tomb.
A Satyr called the Coniborrowe.
NOw in the name of fate what Saint is she,
That keeps a shop of public Brothelrie?
Harbors the sha^king Lawyer for his pence,
And Martir-like consumes his evidence?
Nusles my damned Atheist, makes him curse
Nature and fortune, that his thin-lin'd purse
Should be deprived of crowns: do you ask what St?
This Saint was sent from th'siery Regiment.
A Sodome-apple, a lascivious stain
To virtues habit, or a whore in grain,
A sucke-blood, Hyene, feigning Crocodile
Worse then the monster bred on th'banks of Nyle,
A purple Strumpet, Gangrene to the state,
Earths-curse, hels-blisse, soules-soile, and Angels hate.
Smoothed Damnation, smothered infamy,
Horror to Age, and youths calamity,
Pritty-fac'd devil of a ginger pace,
Grace-lesse in all save that her name is Grace,
Soules-running ulcer that infects the heart,
With painting, pur^^ing and a face of Art,
Star blasting honor, virtues foe, expressed
By hating where she seems to fancy best.
Vow-breaking pe^iure, that her self adornes,
With thousand fashions, and as many forms.
Creature of her own making, hollow trunk,
A Christian Paganis'd with name of Punke.
A ^^ll, a hell, where she will no others have,
The common Palliard-Pandor, Baud, or slave,
A cage of unclean birds, which is possessed,
Of none save such as will de^le their nest.
Where fries of Hell hounds never come abroad,
But in that earthly Tophet make aboade.
Where bankrupt Factors to maintain a state,
Forlorn (heaven knows) and wholly desperate,
Tur^e valiant Boults, Pimps, Haxtars, roaring boys,
Till flesht in bload, counting but murders ^oyes,
Are forced in the end a doleful Psalm to sing,
Going to Heaven by Derick in a string.
It Is you damned prostitutes that soil this land,
With all pollutions, haling down the hand
Of vengeance and subversion on the State,
Making her flowrie borders desolate.
It Is you that ruin ancient families,
Occasion bloodshed, pillage, periuries.
Its you that make the wicked prodigal,
Strips him of fortune, heritance, and all,
Its you that makes new Troy with factions bleed,
As much or more then ever old Troy did.
Its you (sin-branded wantons) brings decay,
To public states. Its you that hate the day,
But honor night: where every female sinner
Resembles the Moon, that has a man within her.
Lascivious Burrowes, where there nothing are,
But ^oused, sullied, and ore iaded ware.
No music but despair, no other note,
Save some French language from a profane throat*
Noe other Accent then the voice of hell,
Where Stygian Circe mumbles ore her spell
Shakes her pox-eaten i^ynts, and sends for spies,
To gain her traders two sin tempting eyes.
Where she in praise and ho^our of her trade
Says, that the Stews were in the beginning made,
For the advancement of a public good,
And well it may, if rightly understood:
For if in pleasures there such bitters be,
As still repentance lackies vanity?
If lust that is called by the sensual Epicure,
The best of moving pleasures, and the lure,
That for the instance makes our organs rise,
Thinking that plase we are in is Paradise.
If she (I say) bring forth no fruit at all,
Save news from'th Spittle, or the Hospital.
Dry rewmes, catarchs, diseases of despair,
Puritane-sniueling, falling of the hair.
Aches in the joints, and ring-worme in the face*
Cramps in the nerves, fire in the privy place.
Racking the sinews, burning of the gall,
Searing the veins, and bowels most of all:
Drying the head, which natur's wont to feed,
Sucking the blood, whence all distempers breed.
If best of pleasures have no other end,
Mong'st earths delights, the^ have we cause t'extend,
Our pure affections to an higher aim,
Then to corrupt the honor of our name.
For present appetite: I thank thee whoor,
Thou have instructed me to have a power
Over my sense by reason rectified,
And have well near my senses mortefied.
I know thy habit* (and I once have sworn,
But now recant it) that no earthy form
Was of like composition, but conceiving,
That the period of thy pleasure was in having,
And that thy lust was but desire of gain,
I curbed my self that I should be so vain.
To spend my state, my stock, my name, my nature,
On such a brittle fickle, faithless creature.
Fond was my judgment when my reason straid,
To soil the honored title of a maid,
With brothell greeting, or a painted trunk,
A rotten Tomb, a Basiliske, a Punke.
For tell me whore? what bewty's in thee shown,
Or moving part that thou can says thine own?
The blush that is on thy cheek I know is made
By The Painters hand, and not by nature laid:
And that same rosie-red, and lilly white,
Which seems to include a volume of delight.
Is no more thine, then as it may be said;
Fair is the waine skote when it is varnished.
Y^a I have heard some of thy consorts say,
Thy night-face is not that thou wearst by day.
But of a different form, which understood,
Rightly implies too faces in one hood.
Now my (prodigious faery) that can take,
Upon occasion a contrary shape.
Thou that can va^ie habits and delight,
To wear by day what thou putst of at night.
Thou that with tempting motives of despair,
Braiding the net-like tresses of thy hair,
Smoothing thy brazed front, oyling thy skin,
Taking a truce with Satan, and with sin.
How can thou think that I will loose the light,
Of my dear soul, to please mine appetite?
How can thou think that for a moments sweet,
Wherein the height of pleasures, sorrows meet.
I will engage that essence of delight
For time eternal,, measure infinite?
How can thou think I am so void of sense,
Or blind, as not to know thy impudence?
True, I was blind, when thy sin- Siren voice,
Made me despise my self, and make a choice
Of souls seducing Error: I was blind,
When I did hope contented joys to sinde
In so profane a cover: Blind was I,
When I expected ought but vanity.
In such an odious harbor: blind I was
To look for virtue in so vile a case.
But now the glorious essence of my soul
Tells me, For all thy virtue thou art foul.
Spotted with Ermins, and that vanity,
Of which tha^ t proud, is like a leprosy.
Which runs to every vain, whose very breath,
Poisons the tutcher with infectious death.
For what is complexion if I should speak true,
(That which thou wea^s I mean) but what the Jew
Of loathsome compositions '^vsd to make,
As th'fat of Serpents, and the slough of snak^s,
With cursed spittle or fleagme commixed is,
And can thou think this face deserves a kiss?
No, odious Lecher that bes^obbered face,
That entertaines no sign nor stamp of grace,
That sin-reflecting eye, whose piercings are,
VVounds to the soul, and to the mind a care,
That artificial blush, that painted check,
Which never seeks, what woman-hood should seek,
That whorish look drained from a wanton mind,
Shall make me hate, where I was once inclined,
Shall make me hate? O that I did not hate,
Before this time: but sorrow's nere too late,
If fervent, and may I excluded be,
If my resolves proceed not inwardly.
Fare^ell, but well I doubt thou can not fare,
So long as (...) do lodge in this despair:
Prevent me then the cause, and thou shall see,
The effect thereof will soon prevented be:
Till then adieu: for till that time I swear it,
Thy Connie-burrow is not for my Ferret.
Upon a Poets Palfrey, lying in Lauander, for the discharge of his Prouender.
An Epigram.
IF I had lined but in King Richards days,
Who in his heat of passion, midst the force
Of his Assailants troubled many ways
Crying A horse, a Kingdom for a horse.
O then my horse which now at Livery stays.
" Had been set free, where now he is forced to stand
" And like to fall into the Ostlers hand.
If I had lived in Agamemnons time,
Who was the leader of the Mirmidons,
Mounting a loft as wantons in their prime,
Of frolike youth, planting the Graecians
In their due order, then this horse of mine,
" Had not bin thus confined, for there he might,
" Have shown himself, and done his master right.
If I had lived when Pallas horse was made,
Aptly contrived for th'ruine of poor Troy
O then there had been doings for my Jade,
For he had been sole author of annoy,
Unto the Trojans: well as I have said,
" He might be Pallas horse in leg and limme,
" Being so near proportioned unto him.
If I had lived in Pasiphaes reign,
That lusty Less, in pleasure ever full,
And perfect dalliance: O I blessed had been,
" She sure would love a horse, that loved a Bull,
And better might it with her honor seem.
" A Bul's too fierce, a horse more modest aye,
" The One routs and rores, the others answer's ney.
If I had lived in Alexanders age,
Crowning my youth amongst his triumphant heirs,
O then that prince, who in his heat of rage,
Bad th'M^cedons get sta^lions for their Mares,
More lively and more likely would not gage,
" His love for naught, to such as among the rest,
" Would bring a Stallion that could do with best.
If I had lived amongst th'Amazonites,
Those Warlike champions, monuments of Fame,
Trophies of Honor friends to choice de^ights,
Who much desired to propagate, their name,
" And therefore wished that they so many nights.
" Might have free use with men, in due remorce,
For want of men would take them to my horse.
If I had lived in Phaeton his days,
When with vngiddy course he ruled the Sun,
O then my Palfr^y had been of great prise,
For he is not head strong, nor would have outrun,
His fellow-Horses, but with gentler pace,
As soft and easy as the nimble wind.
He would with hakney pace lagg'd on behind.
If I had lived when th'warre of Agincourt,
Burnish't with shields as bright as Diamond,
To which our noblest Heroes made resort,
O then my Stallion would have kept his ground,
And been at razing of the stateliest fort,
In all that Province: and though small he may,
Yet am I sure he would not run away.
If I had lived but in Don Quixotes time,
His Rozinant had been of little worth,
For mine was bred within a coulder clime,
And can endure the motion of the earth,
With greater patience: nor will he repine
At any prouender, so mild is he,
How many men want his humility?
If I had lived when that proud fayry Queen,
Boasted to run with swift wingd Zephirus,
Tripping so nimbly ore the levy green,
Of Oetas flourie forest, where each bush,
T^x^ her presumption: then my Horse had been,
A Horse of price, O then he had been tried,
And to no manger in subjection tide.
If I had lived when Fame-spred Tamberlaine
Displaid his purple signalls in the East,
Hallow ye pamphred Iades, had been in vain,
For mine is not pamphred, nor was ere at feast,
But once, which once's nere like to be again,
How methinks would he have scoured the wheels,
Having bra^e Tamberlaine whipping at's heels.
If I had lived but in our Banks his time,
I do not doubt, so witty is my lade,
So f^ll of Imitation, but in fine,
He would have proved a mirror in his trade,
And told Duke Humphreis Knights the hour to dine
Yea by a secret instinct would had power,
To know an honest woman from a whore.
Well there is no remedy, since I am poor,
And cannot feed my horse as I desire,
I must be forced to set a Bill oath door,
And with my Bill pay for my horses hire,
Which once discharged, I Will never run o'th sko^e;
But for my Bill, (invention play thy part,
And for my horse-sake, tell men what thou art.
Here stands a beast that eats and has no teeth,
Wiske out and winches and yet has no tail,
Looks like Deaths-head, and yet he is not death,
Neighs like an Ass, and crawleth like a snayle,
All bones above, no belly underneath,
" Legged like a Cammell, with a Seahorse foot,
" So bigg's his head he cannot be got out.
Now generous spirits that inhabit here,
And love to see the wonders of this Isle,
Compared with other nations, draw but near
And you shall see what was expressed ere-while,
Your pay's but pence, and that is not half so dear,
" If you remember, as was that same to^,
" Of Banks his horse, or Fenners Englands joy.
What would you see, that may not here be seen,
A Monster? Why, it^ he^re: o^ would you see,
That which has ^rst been shown to other men,
" A horses tay^e stand where his head should be.
Less you must know I am for ^one of them,
That love such novelties: my two year sail,
Has brought a winching thing that has no tail.
Observe the wonder, it is not obuious,
Nor each day common: see now while its here,
For its a monster so prodigious,
That if I can* I Will hau't some other where,
And show my travel to the gener'ous.
" For know my monster does this stable hate,
" Having a head so great, a room so strait.
Why crowd ye here no faster? 'lasse I see,
Because I cannot garnish out my post
With fair inscriptions graven curiously.
" Like to your Mountebanke or English Foist.
The trifling vulgar will not come to me.
Nor visit my strange one beast: let them pass.
My Monster's not set up for every Ass.
It' for these brave renowned Ca^al^res,
"That crave to see, and talk of what they see;
Nay talk of more then either eyes or ears
Were witness of. These welcome are to me,
And to my Monster, for to them't appears,
" And to no others, that they might beget,
" More gain by the sight, then ere I gained by it.
What none? no Mandeuill? is London grown
To surfeit of new accideats? why hoe, --
Saint Bartlemews, where all the Pagents shown,
And all those acts from Adam unto Noe
Used to be represent? can send me none,
Of any sort? or thou'ld not any spare,
But keep them for the Pagents of thy Fair.
How many vsd to swarm from Booth to booth*
" Like to Scl^uoniaus, when with famine pinde,
Going like Herds, as other cattle does,
Itching for news, yet never more inclinde
To hear the worst: where now is all that froth,
Of crab-fac't Raskals? O I know their strain,
" The Fair being done, they sleep till fair again.
If mother Red-cap, chance to have an Ox
Roasted all whole, O how you will fly to it,
Like Widgeons, or like wild geese in full flocks,
That for his penny each may have his bitte:
Or if that limping Pedant at the stocks,
Set out a Pageant, whoo'l not thither run,
As twere to whip the cat at Abington.
Ill nurtured Bowbies, know what I have here
Is such a Monster, as to know what it is,
Would breed amazement in the strangest ear,
But vulgar eyes are aiming still amiss,
To whom what is only rare, is only dear.
For you my wonder sleeps, nor shall't awake,
Till riper wits come for my monsters sake.
Farewell uncivil Stinkards, skum oath City.
The Suburbs pandors, boults to garden Alleys,
May you through grates sing out your doleful ditty,
For now my Dragon Monster spits his malice,
That as you pit^y none, so none may pity,
Your forlorn state: O may't be as I pray,
So saddest night may cloud your cleerest day.
And for the Ostler, since I reap no gain,
Out of my Monster, take him for thy pain.
Yet for remembrance write upon this shelfe,
Here stood a Horse that eat away himself.
Hymen's Satyr.
DOn Bassiano married now of late:
Has got his witless pate a fair estate,
Is It possible, Fortune should be so blind,
As of a world of men not one to find,
Worthy her training in her thriuing school
But an admired Wittall or a Fool?
It Is true: why then Fortune's a partial whore,
To make the foolish rich, the wisest poor.
Whence we observe (experience teaches it)
The younger brother has the elder wit,
Yea by example instanced every where,
The Cockney-Cittie's rich, the Suburbs bare,
O then I see the Goulden age begins,
When fools are mates for wisest Citizens.
A Marriage song called by the Author In and Out: and now dedicated to the
lately converted honest-man, W. G. and his long loue-crossed Eliza.
The Marriage song, called In and Out.
HAh, have I caught you prithee sweet-hart show,
If so thou can, who is in Turne-ball now?
Do smile my precious one? nay I must know,
There is no remedy, then tell me how;
What my ingenuous cheat, do laugh to see,
All former ^arres turn to an harmony,
So generally applauded? true thou may,
The Night is past, and now appears the day,
Full of true Iouisance; long was thy suit,
Ere it was effected, being in and out,
Vowing and breaking, making many an oath,
Which now I hope's confirmed by you both.
O how I clip thee for it? since thy name,
Is there renewed, which first defamed the same,
For (hear me Bridegroom) thou by this shall save
Thy self a Title: I will raze out knave,
Dishonest lover: vow infringing swain,
And say thou ceast to love, that thou again*
Might love more fervent, being taught to woo,
And wooing do what Silke-wormes use to do;
Who do surcesse from labor now and then,
That after rest the better they might spin.
Spin then (my pretty Cobweb) let me see,
How well thy Bride likes thy actiuitie.
That when she sees thy cunning, she may say;
" Why now I Am pleased for all my long delay;
" Play that stroke still, there is none that here can let thee,
" For non there is can better please thy Bettie.
" O there (my dear) I hope thou'le nere give ore,
" Why might not this been done as well before?
" Nay faint not man, was Bettie so soon won,
" That her short pleasure should be so soon done.
" Nay then come up, are marriage joys so short,
" That Maydenheads are lost with such small sport?
" This if she say (as this she well may say)
Like a good Gamster hold her still out play.
First night at least wise, and it will be hard,
But she will love the better afterward.
Whence is the Proverb (as it has been said)
Maidens love them that have their maydenhead:
Come then my lad of metal make resort,
Unto the throne of love thy Betties fort.
There plant thy Cannon siedge her round about.
Be sure (my Boy) she cannot long hold out.
Erect thy standerd, let her tender breast,
Be thy pauillion: where thou takes thy rest.
Let her sweet-rosie Breath such joys bestow.
That in that vale of Paradise below,
Thou may collect thy joys to be far more,
Then any mortal ever had before.
Yet hear me f^iend, if thou secure wilt be,
Observe these rules which I prescribe to thee.
Be not horn jealous, it will make thee mad,
Women will have it if it may be had.
Nor can a jealous eye prevent their sport,
For if they lou't far will they venture for it.
Suppose her straying beauty should be led,
To the embraces of another bed,
VVilt thou Acteon-like thy houre-glasse spend,
In moning that thou never can amend?
No, my kind friend, if thou wilt be ruled by me,
I Would have thee w^nke at that which thou do see,
sha^ing thy wives defects with patient mind,
Seeing, yet seeming to the world blind.
For tell me friend, what harm is there in it?
If then being cloyd, another have a bitte?
Which thou may spare, and she as freely give,
Believe me friend, thou have no cause to grieve.
For though another in thy saddle ride,
When he is gone, there is place for thee beside,
Which thou may use at pleasure, and in the end,
Reserve a pretty mo^s^ll for thy friend.
Let not thy reason then be counter-bufft,
Nor think thy pillow with horne-shauings stuffed,
If It be thy destiny to be a monster,
Thou must be one, if not, how ere men co^ster.
Thou may remain secure, exempt from shame,
Though megre Envy aggrauate the same.
For this has been my firm position still,
The husbands horns be in the woman's will.
Upon the Marriage.
THis Marriage went the nearest way about.
Playing now up, now down, now in, now out,
But being done I wish love may b^gin,
Now to be never out, but ever in.
An Epigramme, Like to like.
Upon a time (as I informed am)
A Sub-vrbs Baud and Country Gentleman,
Coming at the door where I do lie,
A gallant rufling wench chanced to pass by;
Which the Baud obreruing, -- Sir I pray you see,
"How like you gallant and my daughter be.
Indeed they much resemble, both in face,
Painting, complexion, and in huffing pace,
Yea I should say nere any two were liker,
If this be as thy daughter is? a striker.
Upon the commodious though compendious labor of M r. Arthur Standish* In the
invention of planting of Wood. A wood-mans Emblealme.
COme Syluanes, come each in his fresh array,
And sing his name that makes you look so g^y,
Every Branch,
Every spray,
Budds as in the
Month of May.
Here the myrtle Venus tree,
There the Chessenut, wallnut be,
Here the Medlar set above,
Intimates what women love.
Lofy pine,
Fruitful vine,
Make a spring
In winter time.
The naked field has put a garment on,
With lea^^ shades for birds to peck upon.
Now Nemaea
does appear,
Flower emb^rdered
every where.
Here the popular, A^dor there,
Witch-tree, holy-thorne and B^e^^
Here the shady Elm, and fur,
Dew it, texe-distilling mirrh.
Every cliffe,
every ^lim^,
Makes a spring
in Winter time.
Wood-haunting Satires now their minions seek^,
And having found them pla^ at Barley-br^k^.
Where delight
makes the night,
Short (though long)
by lovers sight.
Where Marisco Fairies Que^ene,
With her Ladies trace the green;
Dancing measures, singing lays,
In the worthy planters praise;
Standish fame
each voice implies,
Bliss to Standish
Ecco cries.
Here stands the Wilding on the steepie rock,
The Quinee, the Date, the dangling Apricock,
Rough skind'd Peeh,
lip-died cherrie,
M^lou citron,
Mulberie.
Sallow, Willow, Mellow Birt,
Sweete-breathd Sicamour and Mirt,
Here the Plum, the Damsen there
The Pu^ill, and the Katherins pear
Flowers and flourish
blown so green,
As the spring
does ever seem.
The brittle Ash and shade-obscuring Yewe,
The aged Oak claspt with the Missletoe,
Hawthornes grow,
one a row,
And their sweetest
smells bestow.
Royal Palm, Laurel wreath,
With young O siers underneath,
Loue-resembling Box tree there,
Flowrishing through all the year.
Seyons young,
tender plants,
Where the quire
of woodbirds chants,
Flora now takes her throne and for she knows,
Of Standish care, she decks his aged brows:
With crown
of renown,
Monument
in time to come.
That what he has done of late,
After times may imitate,
So when al our Gro^es grow green,
Albion may a Forest seem,
Where if she
the Forest were,
Standish would
be Forrester.
Then should no gorse grounds furrie whin, or Brir^,
Deprive the painful plough man of his hire.
Every field,
then should yield,
Great relief
to share and shield.
To the Plow share for his pain,
To the shield for discipline,
Since the first he sows and reapes,
And the last defends and keeps.
Standish gives,
to both a part,
To the Ga^^tlet,
and the Cart.
Trees ( Standish says) in summer upward grow,
In winter downe-ward to the root below:
This I know not,
but I know
That with him
it is not so.
For in winter of his time,
Now when sap gins to decline,
Store of science blossom out
From the top unto the root:
Root of age,
top of youth.
Winter bearing,
summers growth.
To the truly worthy, the Alderman of Kendall and his brethren.
SIr in regard of due respect to you,
(If I could write ought that might yield a due,
To the Corporation of which I may call,
(And dewly to) your self the principal:
I should desire, if power were to desire,
To take an Eagles wing and so are far higher.
Then hitherto my weak Muse could attain,
But 'lasse I see my labor is in vain;
For th'more I labor to express your worth,
The less I able am to set it forth:
Yet let not my endeavors so be taken,
As if with power my will had me forsaken;
For know (though my ability be poor)
My good will vie's with any Emperor.
Yea I must write and though I cannot speak*
What I desire yet I will ever seek,
To Express that love which has been borne by me,
(And shall be still) to your Society.
Then cause I know your place and have an aim,
To show your merits in a shadowed name:
I must be bold (affection makes me bold,
To tell you of some errors vncontrol'd,
Which to your best discretion I Will refer,
Having full power to punish such as err.
First therefore I intend to speak of is;
Because, through it, there is many do amiss,
Is Idleness, which I have partly known,
To be a vice inherent to your town:
Where errant pedlers, mercinarie slaves,
Tinkers, and Tookers and such idle knaves
Are too too conversant: let your command
Suppress this sin and refuse of the land,
They much disparage both your town and you:
Send them to the whipping-stocke, for that is their dew,
You know the Lord (whose will should be obeid)
Has in his sacred word expressly said,
That those which will not labor they should sterue,
(For rightly so their merits do deserve.
Yea if we should in moral stories see,
What punishments inflicted use to be
On such as could not give account what they
Did make profession of from day to day;
Yea such as could not (upon their demand
Express how they did live upon their hand;
I make no question (but by Pagans ear,)
You that both Magistrates and Christians are,
Would see your Town (by th'punishments expressed)
By selfsame censures to be soon redrest,
And this same error do I not epsy,
Only in them, but in the younger fry,
Who in their youth do lavish out their time.
Without correction or due discipline:
Respectlesse of themselves (as't may be said)
They seem forgetful whereto they were made:
O look to this let them not run at large,
For over these you have a special charge;
And if they fa I beleeu't from me it is true,
Their blood will be required of some of you.
We read in Rome how they did still retain,
Some exercise that they their youth might trains,
In warlike discipline or liberal arts,
Or education in some foreign parts;
So as in time as after it was shown,
These actions gained their City great renown.
But whence can I imagine that this sin,
Wherein too many have been nosled in,
Had her original but from that stain
Of reputation, and the worlds baine,
(Which I in brief am forced to express,)
To wit, that swinish use of drunkenness?
A vice in great request (for all receive it)
And being once trained in it there is few can leave it;
How happy should I in my wishes be,
If I this vice out of request could see,
Within that native place where I was borne,
It lies in you, dear Townes-men to reform,
Which to perform, if that I might presume,
Or so much under favor to assume,
As to express what my observance taught me,
Or bring to you what my experience brought me,
I would make bold some outward grounds to lay,
Which might in some sort lie an open way,
For rectify^ng such abuse as grow,
By this foul vice, and I will tell you how.
There is no mean that sooner moves to good,
If that the same be rightly understood,
Then is example, for it is that does move,
Such firm impression as we only love,
What greater wits approve, and what they say,
Stands for an axiom among the younger aye,
Which by the Proverb every man discernes,
Since as the old Cock crows, the young Cock learns;
So weak is youth, as there is naught in them,
Which they derive not from the Eldermen,
Quickly perverted (so depraud's our will)
If they see ought in the Elder sort that is ill,
And hardly (when they are customed in sin,)
Can they be wain'd from that they are nus^ed in,
But if they once perceive the Elder sort,
Hates vice in youth, and will reprove her for it
If they see Virtue honored by the Grave
And reverend Magistrate, care they will have,
To rectify their errors, and reduce,
Their streying courses to a civil use.
If this by due observance do appear,
Methinks you that are Elders, you should fear,
To act ought ill, lest your example should,
Approve in others, what should be contrould.
And ill may the Father chastise in his son,
That vice, which he himself is guilty on.
Your patterns are most obuious to the eye,
Of each vnseason'd youngling passes by,
Which if he see defective but in part
He presently applies it to his heart:
For Education which we may auerre
With that diuinely-learn'd Philosopher
To be a second Nature) now and then
Does alter quite the qualities of men,
And make them so transformed from what they were,
(As if there did some other men appear:
Yea so far from their Nature they are estraung'd,
As if they had been in the cradle changed:
And of this second nature I am sure,
Example is the only governor
Which Plutarch terms th'Idea of our life,
Tymon an emelation or a strife
We have to imitate, that what we see,
May in our selves as well accomplished be.
O then you Presidents (whose years do give
To most of you a fair prerogative)
Reform your selves (if you see ought) and then
You better may reform't in other men.
As you are first by order and by time,
So first inioine your selves a Discipline;
Which being observed by you and dewly kept,
You may wake such as have securely slept
In their excess of vanities: amongst which
Let me (with all respect to you) beseech
That you would seek exactly to redress,
(That brutish vice of beastly drunkenness.
And first to propagate a public good,
Banished I pray you from your brotherhood,
For diverse have observed it and will;
(For man observes not good so often as ill.
What Is done by the Elders of a Corporation,
Gives unto other men a toleration:
If any such there be (as well may be)
For that vice reigns in each Society:
First caution them, bid them for shame r^fraine
To lay on Gravity so foul a stain;
Tell them much happens twixt the cup and lip,
And those same teres of their good fellowship,
If they in time reform not what is amiss,
Shall drown their reeling souls in hels abisse:
Where they may yaule and yarme til that they burst,
Before they get one drop to quench their thirst,
Since th'punishment shall be proportioned there,
To that delight which we do live in here.
O then, for Gods love, bid them now prepare,
To be more st^ict then hitherto they were,
Or bid them have recourse unto their glass,
And there surueigh how swiftly time does pass,
How many aged Emblemes time does show,
In those same wrinkles of their furrowed browe;
How many motives of declining age,
What arguments of a short pilgrimage,
How many messengers of instant death,
As dropsy, gout, and shortness of the breath,
Catarrs descending howerly from the head,
Distaste of meats, wherein they surfeted:
And thousand such proceeding from ill diet,
Nights-sitting up, rere bankets, mid-dayes ryet,
But if these doting Gray-beards I have named,
Will not by your entreaties be reclaimed,
Then I would wish (because these vices lurk)
That you would fall another way to work,
And by dew castigation force them take
Another course for youths example sake:
For those that will not now, at last repent
After some twice or thrice admonishment,
Deserve a punishment, nay which is worse,
The Churches Anathema or that curse,
Which shall lie heavy on them in that day,
When what they owe they must be forced to pay:
But some of you such Reuerend-men appear,
As you deserve that title which you bear,
Towns Guardians, protectors of our peace,
And sole renewers of our hopes increase,
So discreet and so temporate withal,
As if Rome did her men Patritians call,
I without assentation might be bold
To name you so, nor could I be controlled.
Wherefore I need not fear but you that are
Of such sincerity will have a care,
To root out these (which as they seem to me)
Be maine Corrupters of your liberty,
I wish it and I hope to see it too,
That when I shall come to re-visit you
I may much glory, and so much the more,
To see them good that were deprau'd before:
Nor do I only shadow such should give,
Example unto others how to live;
But even such vice-supporters as begin,
Brauado-like to gallant it in sin:
These are incorrigible saying their state
Transcends the power of any Magistrate:
For why they are Gentlemen, whence they allege
They may be drunkards by a privilege:
But I would have you tell them this from me,
There is no such thing in gentilitie,
Those that will worthily deserve that name,
Must by their virtues character the same:
For vice and generous birth (if understood)
Differ as much in them, as ill from good.
Besides, if they do snuff when they are reproou'd,
Or seem as if, forsooth their blood were moov'd:
Tell them that weak and slender is that town,
When snuffes have power to menace justice down:
Show me true Resolution, they may know
That God has placed Magistrates below,
Who have power to control and chastise sin, (bin:)
(And blest's that town where such command has
For tell me, if when great men do offend
Justice were speech-lesse, to what especial end
Should laws enacted be? Since they do take
Nothing but Flies, like th'webs which spiders make
Where small ones they both taken and punished be,
While great ones break away more easily:
But rightly is it which that Cynicke said,
Who seeing justice o^ a time ore-swaid,
And over bearded by a great-mans will,
Why thus it is, quoth he, with Justice still:
Since th'golden Age did leave her, for at first
She was true-bred and scorned to be enforst
To ought but right, yea such was Time as then,
"Things lawful were most royal amongst men:
But now she that should be a sharp edged axe,
To cut down all sin's made a nose of wax;
Wherein it is Justice (if I not mistake it)
What ere it be, just as the Great-men make it.
But Saturn is not banished from your town,
For well I know there is perfect justice shown,
There Themis may be said to have her seat,
Where poore-ones may be heard as well as great,
There Is no corruption but even weight to all,
Equally tempered, firm, impartial,
Sincere, Judicious, and so well approved,
As they that justice love or ere have loved,
Are bound to hold that Corporation dear,
Since in her colors she is presented there.
Nor do I only speak of such as be,
Justices named within your liberty,
But of those men w^ere with your Bench is graced
And by Commission ore the County placed.
There may we see one take in hand the cause,
Ferreting out the secrecy of th'lawes
Anatomizing every circumstance,
Where if he ought omit, its a mere chance,
So serious is he, and withal so speedy
As sure his Pater noster's not more ready:
Yea I have wondered how he could contain
So many law-quer^es in so small a brain,
For as we see full of in summer time,
When Sun begins more South ward to incline,
A shower of haile-stones railing in the air:
Even so (for better can I not compare)
His law exhaling meteors) would he
Send out his Shower of law-termes usually:
So as I thought and many in those places,
That it did thunder law, and rain down cases.
Yea I have known some struck in such a blunder
As they imagined that his words were thunder;
Which to avoid (poor snakes) so scared were they.
As they would leave the Bench and sn^ake away.
There may we see another so well known
To penal statutes, as there is not one,
(So well experienst in them he does make him)
Which can by any kind of means escape him.
Besides for execution which we call,
The sovereign end and period of all;
Yea which may truly be esteemed the head,
From whence the life of Justice does proceed
He merits dew respect: witness (I say)
Those whipping-stocks erected in the high way
With stocks and pilleries, which he has se^
To have the vagrant Beggar soundly bet,
Nor does he want for any one of these,
A statute in warm store if that he please;
Which on occasion he can well produce,
Both for himself and for his Countries use,
Another may we see, though spare of speech,
And temporate in discourse, yet he may teach
By his effectual words the rasher sort,
Who speak so much as they are taxed fo^'t.
Yea so discreetly sober as I wish,
Many were of that temper as he is.
For then I know their motions would be good,
Nor would they speak before they understood.
Another solid, and though blunt in words,
Yet ma^ke him and his country scarce affords
One more ^^^cious, pithy in discourse,
Sound in his reasons, or of more remorce,
To such as are distressed, for he will take,
The pore man's cause* though he be nere so weak.
And much have I admired him in Surueigh
Of his deserts shown more from day to day,
That he should so disualue worldly praise,
When every man seeks his esteem to raise.
And worthyly, for never nature brought
Forth to the world a man so meanly wrought,
Of such rare workmanship as you shall find,
Inth' exquisite pe^fection of his mind*
Yea, if too partial though it I should not be,
(In that he has been still a friend to me)
I could express such arguments of love,
As were of force th'obduratst hearts to move,
To admiration of those virtues rest,
Within the generous table of his breast,
But I have ever hated, so has he,
^'To paint men's worths in words of flattery.
Yea I'doe know it derogates from worth,
To have her self in colors shadowed forth,
Since virtue rather craves for to be known
Unto her self, then unto others showen.
Only thus much i will say; ordained he was,
Even in his Cradle others to surpass.
Since for his education it may seem,
Being in mountains bred, that it was mean.
But now of such an equal form combin'de
As he is strong in body and in mind.
Sin^erely honest, and so well approved,
As where he is not known, h^^'s heard and loved,
So as on Mountains born, his thoughts aspire,
To Sions mount, and Jove's triumphant quire.
Another there is, who howsoere he seem,
In the eye of some distempered judgments mean.
In understanding, I do know his wit,
Out-strips the most of those that c^n^u^e it,
Besides there is in him parts of more desert
For Nature is supplide in him by Art.
And whereas some to's wit impute the wrong,
I rather do impute it to his tongue.
Since well I know by due experience,
(At such times as he deigned me conference)
For reading profound reason ^ipe conceits,
Discourse of stories, arguing of estates,
Such general judgment he in all did show,
As I was wrapped with admiration, how
Me^ could esteem so menely (hairebraind-elues)
Of such an one was wiser then themselves.
Its true indeed, he is not intemperate.
(As this age fashions) nor opinionate,
But humble in his judgment, which may be,
Some cause that he is censured as we see.
Alas of grief, none should be deemed wise,
But such as can like timists temporize.
Expose their reputation to the shame
Of an offensive or injurious name.
Whereas if we true wisdom understood,
We'd think non could be wise but such were good.
And though we question thus, asking what man?
Unless he be a politician,
Yet policy will be of small avail,
When that arch politician Machauell,
Shall flame and fry in his tormented soul,
Because toth' world wise, to heaven a fool.
Yea I do wish (if ere I have a son)
He may be so wise, as have wit to shun
A self conceit of being soly wise,
In his own bleared and dim-sighted eyes,
For then I know there will in him apeare,
A Christian zealous and religious fear,
Which like an Angel will attend him still,
Moving to good, and waine him from what is ill.
And far more comfort should I have of him,
Then if through vain conceit he should begin
To pride him in his follies, for by them,
We see how many root out house and nam^,
Yea of all virtues which subsisting be,
None makes more perfect then humility.
Since by it man deemes of himself and's worth,
As of the vilest worm the earth brings forth.
Which disesteeming I may boldly name,
More noble then to glory in our shame.
For it does lead us in a glorious path,
With safest conduct from the day of wrath.
When standig before that high Tribunal there
We Are found far better then we did appear.
And such is hee-yet have I heard it vowde,
"He has not wit enough for to be proud.
VVheras we know, and by experience see,
That fools be still the proudest men that be.
Nor is he only humble, for I hear,
Of other proper virtues which appear
In his well tempred disposition, when
I hear of no complaints among poorer men,
Who are his tenaunts for he has report,
Of showing mercy, and is blessed for it.
And is not this a point of wisdom, say?
For to provide thus for another day
That for terrestrial things, he may obtain
A far more glorious and transcendent gain.
Sure (I do think) there is no fool to him,
That does enrich his progeny by sin,
Makes shipwreck of a conscience, bars himself,
Of after hopes to rake a little pelf.
Ruins his soul, and ads unto the store,
Of his accounts, by racking of the pore.
Whereas ofth' other side he is truly wise,
(Though not to man, yet in thalmighties eyes.
Who pity and compassion does profess,
To the forlorn widow and the fatherless,
Does right to all men, nor will make his tongue,
An aduoc^te for him who is in the wrong;
Accepts of no advantage, which may seem
To stain his conscience, or to mak't unclean*
Hates an oppressors name, and all his time,
Was never wont to take too great a fine.
Bears himself blameless before God and man.
He Is truly wise, or much deceau'd I am.
Indeed he is, and such an one is plast,
In that same Mirror which I spoke of cast.
Who without assentation may be said,
To have a pattern unto others laid,
In actions of this kind, yea I may swear,
Rather for these respects I hold him dear,
Then for his state, which may be well expressed,
To equal, if not to surmount the best.
But Iu'e too far digrest, in brief it is he,
Who hates the leven of the Pharisee,
And (which is rare) amongst richer men to find,
He counts no wealth like th'riches of the mind.
How happy y^u ( Grave Elders) to have these,
Assistants in your p^ace, means for your ease,
So as their serious care joined to their powers,
May seem in some ^egree to lessen yours,
For powers united, make the army stronger,
"And minds combined preserve that union longer.
O may there be, one mind and one consent,
(Cohering in one proper continent)
One firm opinion, general decree,
Amongst you all concurring mutually:
And may your Throne, which such good men affords,
Nere fall at odds by multiplying words,
Since the spirit of contention stirs our blood,
And makes us often neglect a public good.
Thus with my best of wishes, I will end,
Resting your ever true devoted friend.
To all true-bred Northern Sparks, of the generous society of the Cottoneers,
who hold their High road by the Pinder of Wakefield, the Shoo-maker of
Brandford, and the white C^ate of Kendall: Light gains, Heavy Purses, good
Tradings, with clear Conscience.
TO you my friends that trade in black and white,
In black and white do I intend to write.
Where I Will insert such things are to be shown,
Which may in time add glory and renown,
To your commodious tradings, which shall be
Graceful to you, and such content to me,
As I should wish, at least my lines shall tell,
To aftertimes, that I did wish you well,
And in my observations seem to show,
That due respect I to my country owe.
First therefore ere I further go, I Will prove,
Wherein no less, I Will manifest my love,
Then in the greatest: that of all have been,
Shall be, or are, you seem the worthiest men,
And this's my reason; which may grounded be,
On the firm arches of Philosophy;
We say, and so we by experience find,
In man there is a body and a mind,
The body is the cover and in it
The minds internal soueraignnesse does sit,
As a great Princess, much admired at,
Sphered and reared in her chair of state,
While th'body like a handmaid pressed to obey,
Stands to perform, what ere her mistress say.
Yea some compare this bodies outward grace,
Unto a dainty fine contrived case,
Yet for all th'cost which is about her spent,
She sounds but harsh, without her instrument,
Which is the soul: others resembled have,
The bodies feature to a sumptuous grave,
Which garnisht is without full trick and trim,
Yet has naught else, but sculls and bones within.
Others compare the beauty of the mind,
To pith in trees, the body to the rind.
But of all others have been, be, or were,
In my opinion none does come so near,
In true Ressmblanes (nor indeed there can)
Then twixt the mind and li^ing of a man,
For its the inward substance which to me,
Seems for to line the body inwardly,
With ornaments of virtue, and from hence,
As he excells, we draw his excellence.
Then, my dear countrymen, to give your due,
From whence comes man's perfection, but from you
That do maintain with credit your estate,
And sells the best of man at easy rate,
To wit, the minds resemblance, which is gotten,
By those same linings which you sell of Cotton.
For see those thin breech Irish lackies run,
How small in the wast, how sparing in the bombe,
What Jack a Lents they are: yet view them when
They have been lined by you, their proper men,
Yea I may say, man is so strange an Elfe,
Without your help, he looks not like himself.
Indeed if we were in some parts of those,
Sun-parched countries, where they use no clothes,
But through the piercing violence of heat,
Which in some places is intemporate,
The Inhabitants go naked, and appear
In grisly sort, as if they frenticke were,
Then you that make us man-like, should not need,
Nor your profession stand in any fleed,
For why? the clymate which we then should have,
No Bombast, Cotton, or the like would crave:
Since scorching beams would smoulder so about them,
As th'dwellers might be hot enuffe without them.
But here is an Island that so temprate is,
As if it had plantation to your wish.
Neither so hot, but that we may abide,
Both to be clad and bombasted beside.
Neither so cold, but we may well allow it,
To wear such yarne, a blind man may look through it.
Its true indeed, well may it be confessed,
If all our parts were like some women's breast.
Bared and painted with pure Azure veins,
Though of themselves they have as many stains,
And riueld wrinkles, with some parts as badde,
Then the crooked Greek Thersytes ever had,
It might be thought your gains would be so small,
As I Am perswad'd they would be none at all:
But thanks be given to heavens supernall powers,
Which sways this Mass of earth, that trade of yours,
Has her dependence fixed in other places,
Then to be tide to women's breasts or faces.
Let Painters and Complexion sellers look,
To their cracked ware, you have another book
To view into, then they have to look in,
For yours's an honest trade, but their's is sin.
Next I express your worth in, shall be these,
First, your supportance of poor families,
Which are so weak in state, as I much doubt me,
They would be forced to beg or starve without ye.
The second is, (wherein you'ue well deserved,
The care you have to see your Country served,
Not as such men who live by foreign Nations,
Impouerishing this Land by transportations,
For their depraved Natures be well shown,
By loving strangers better then their own;
Or as it seems, to suck their Mothers blood,
Their Native Country for a private good.
The third and last, which here expressed shall be,
Shall reference have to your Antiquity,
All which I will dilate of, and though I
Cannot describe each thing so mouingly,
As I could wish, yet take it in good part,
Proceeding from the center of a heart,
That did this task and labor undertake,
For your profession and your countries sake,
Whose air I breathed, O I were worthy death,
Not to love them, who sucked with me one breath.
How many Families supported be,
Within the compas^e of one Barronry,
By your profession I may boldly show,
(For what I speak, I by observance know.)
Yea by eyewitness, where so many are,
Provided for by your peculiar care,
As many would the beggars be (I wot)
If your religious care releeu'd them not.
For there young brats, as we may well suppose,
Who hardly have the wit to don their clothes,
Are set to work, and w^ll can finish it,
Being such labors as do them befit:
Winding of spooles, or such like easy pain,
By which the least may pretty well maintain
Themselves, in that same simple manner clad,
As well agrees with place where they were bred.
Each plies his work, one cards, another spins,
One to the studdles goes, the next begins
To rauell for new wefte, thus none delay,
But make their webbe-vp, against each Market Day,
For to preserve their credit: but pray see,
Which of all these for all their industry,
Their early rising, or late sitting up,
Could get one bit to eat, or drop suppe.
If having wrought their webbes, their forced to stand,
And not have you to take them off their hand.
But now by the way, that I my love may show,
Unto the poorer sort as well as you,
Let me exhort you, in respect I am,
Unto you all both friend and Countriman,
And one that wishes, if he could express,
What Is wishes be unto your Trade success,
As to himself, these pooremen (under favor)
Who earne their means so truly by their labor,
Should not (observe me) be enforced to wait,
"For what you owe, and what is their due, so late,
Time unto them is precious, yea one hour,
If idlye spent, is charges to the poor:
Whose labor's their Revenue: do but go,
To Solomon, and he will tell you so,
Who wills none, expressly to fore-slow,
To pay to any man what they do owe,
But, if they have it, not to let them stand,
Craving their due, but pay it out a hand.
Say not unto thy friend (says Solomon)
I have not for thee now, but come anon:
For why should thou that have wherewith to pay,
Put of till morrow, what thou may to day
Believe me friends I could not choose but speak,
And caution you of this, for even the weak
And impotent, whose souls are full as dear,
As be the Monarchs, whisper in mine ear,
And bid me tell you yet to have a care,
Not to express their names what men they are,
For then they doubt that you to spite them more,
Would make them stay, far longer then before.
That you would see their injuries redrest,
Of which they think, you were not yet possessed.
But in transferring of the charge to such,
As be your Factors, which have had small tutc^
Of others griefs: your selves have had the bla^^
Though It seems your Factors well deserud the sat
Nor would I have you think I Am feed for this,
For they do plead in Forma pauperis
That be my Clyents, yea I Am tied too,
In countries love to do that which I do:
For even their tears, mon^s, and distressed state,
Have made me for them so compassionate,
That my soul yern'd within me, but to hear,
Their mones despisd, that were esteemed so dear,
To their Creator, see their Image then;
And make recourse to him that gave it them,
Whose mansion is above the highest sphere,
And bottles up the smallest trickling tear,
Shed by the poorest soul, (which in a word)
Shall in that glorious synod bear record:
Where for the least non-payment which we owe,
Shall pass this doom- Away ye cursed, go.
But I do know by my Experience,
The most of you have such a Conscience,
As in that day, what ever shall befall,
Your sincere souls will as a brazen wall,
Shield you from such a censure; for to me,
Some do I know bore such integrity.
As I dare well auow't, it is rare to find,
In such a crazie time, so pure a mind.
But now I must descend (as seems to me)
From the relief of many Family,
By you supported, to your special care,
To see your country served with good Ware;
Which of all others (if well understood)
Seems to have aim most at a public good.
Well it appears, even by your proper worth,
That you were borne for her that brought you forth,
Not for your selves, which instanced may be,
In that you aim at no Monopoly,
No private staples, but desire to sell,
(Which of all other seems approved as well,)
Your Ware in public places, which may stand
No more for your avail, then good of the land.
Nor are you careless what it is you bring,
Unto your Country, for your customing,
Dependence has upon that due esteem,
They have of you, that are the same you seem,
Plain homebred chapmen (yet of such due note)
Their word is good, how plain so ere's their coat.
Yea do I wish, I may have such as they,
Engaged to me, for they will do what they say,
When silken coats, and some of them I know,
Will say far more then ere they mean to do.
Therefore it much concerns you to produce,
That which you know is for a common use.
Not for the eye so much as for the proof,
For this does tend most to your own behoof:
Where Reputation does such custom gain,
As being got is seldom lost again.
Yet sure methinks my Friends, you put to th'venture,
When your commodities are stretched on the tenter,
So that as I have heard, when come to weting
They shrink a yard at least, more then is fitting,
Yet do I hear you make excuse of this.
That for your selves you know not what it is:
And for your Factors what they take, they pay,
If Shere-men stretch them so, the more knaves they.
It Is true they are so, yet for all you use
These words, beleeu't, they will ferue for no excuse,
For if you will be Commonweals men, know,
Whether your Shere-men use this feate or no,
Before you buy, (which found) reprove them then,
Or else avoid such tenter-hooking men.
There is a Gallant in this town I know,
(Who damnd himself, but most of them do so)
If that he had not, to make cloak and suit,
Some thirty yards of rug or thereabout,
Yet hardly came to fifteen afterward,
It had been measured by the Tailors yard.
Now was not this too monstrous and to badde,
That it should leese full half of that it had?
I know not what to think (but to be brief)
Either the Tailor was an arrant thief,
And made no bones of Theft, which is a crime,
Most Tailors will dispense with at this time:
Or sure, if my weak wit can judge of it,
The rugge was tentred more then did befit:
But you will say, the Gallant sure did lie,
Faith if you be of that mind so am I,
For its scarce possible so much to put,
In Cloak and suit, unless heed cloth his gut?
(And that's ofth'largest size) and so't may be,
For I Have heard one skild in Anatomy,
(Auerr thus much that every gut in man
For at that time his lecture then began,)
Was by due observation known to be
Seven times his length: so that it seems to me
If this be true, which Naturalists do teach,
The Tailor played the man to make it reach,
So far, for sure the yards could not be small,
That were to make cloak, suit, cloth guts, and all.
But I do find you guiltless, for I know,
As to your Country, you your lives do owe,
If priuare harms might propagate her good,
(For Countries love extends unto our blood)
So there is no Commerce which you entertain*
Aims not in some part at a public gain;
And that is the cause, Gods blessings do rene^
Making all things to cotton well with you.
"Now to the third Branch, is my muse addressed,
To make your Trades Antiquity expressed,
If I had skill but rightly to define,
The Original foundation and the time,
The cause of your increase, and in what space,
The people you Commerst with, and the place
Of your first planting, then it might appear,
Upon what terms your privileges were:
But so onfus'd be times antiquities,
As it is hard directly to show these,
In what especial sort they were begun,
(Yet I may do what other men have done)
And by conjectures make your Trade displayed
Speaking in Verse, what some in prose have said
Some are opiniond that your trade began
From old Carmentis, who in colors span
Such exquisit rare works, asth'webs she wrought
Were far and nere by foreign nations sought.
And as it may in ancient writ appear.
The Phrigian works were said to com from her.
But now the better to unfold the same,
Know that there were two women of that name,
The one (for Stories manifest no less)
Euanders mother was, a Prophetess,
Who wrote and spoke in verse with such a grace,
As she renoumd the Country where she was.
The other was a Spinster, which did come,
Along with Aquila (when he from Rome
Marching amain, la^cht forth for Britanie)
Which Coast Carmentis did no sooner see,
Then she admired, for well she saw by use,
The Inhabitants would prove industrious.
So as in th^se days rude, they gr^w in time,
Specially Nooth-ward) by her discipline,
To become civil, and where prompt to do,
Any set Task this Matron put them to.
Touching the place where she plantation had,
Diverse Historians have so differed,
As hardly iumpe they by a hundred mile,
And therefore difficult to reconcile
Their different opinions: for they strive,
Amongst themselves, and ask where shes'd ariue?
Since it appears when Aquila came ashore,
Save 3 or 4 choice dames, there were no more.
Of woman kind with him: for he was loath,
To ship such old hags, were not for his tooth,
And therefore such as bew^y did adorn,
Were shipped with him: for they would serve his turn
To reconcile these doubts, which seems a wonder,
Know that his fleet divided was a sunder.
And driven to sundry creeks, some East, some west,
Some North, some South; for so they were distressed.
By adverse winds (as forced from together)
They were dispersed, they knew not where, nor whither.
In which auspicious tempest, happy stray,
For happy was that tempest may you say,
This modest matron with an heavy heart,
Re^t of her friends arrived ith North part,
With some young maids which Aquila did mind
To bring along to keep his men in wind.
The Port when she ariud (as't seems to me,
For I do ground on probability,
Drawn from the clime and Ports description)
Was the rich haven of ancient VVorkington,
Whose stately prospect merits honors fame,
In naught more noble then a Curwens name.
And long may it reserve that name whose worth,
Has many knights from that descent brought forth,
For if to blaze true fame (I ere have skill),
In Bouskill joined with Curwen show't I will.
Carmentis thus ariud did travail on
To find find some place fit for plantation:
For then that Coast as we in stories read,
Lay wholly wast, and was unpeopled.
Where in her progress by the way she came,
She gave to sundry places disserent name.
"Among which her own name, whence it is they say,
Cartmell or Carment-hill holds to this day
Her Appelation: and now near an end
Of her set journey, as she did descend
Down from the neighboring Mountains, she might spy,
A woody vale, seat'd deliciously.
Through which a pleasant River seemd to glide,
Which did this vale in equal parts divide,
This having spide, (on Stauelaies Cliffes they say)
She laid her staff, whence comes the name Staffe-lay.
Corruptly Staulay, where she staid a space,
But seeing it a most notorious place,
And that the trades men were so given toth' Pot,
That they would drink far more then ere they got.
She turned from thence, yet left some Maids behind.
That might acquaint them in this wool work kind.
While she did plant, as ancient Records be,
Nearer to Kendall in the Barronrie.
Thus have I drawn your lineage as it was,
For other Accidents I let them pass,
Only such things as most obseruant were,
(As the erection of your Sturbidge fair.
I thought to shadow briefly, which began,
On this occasion by a Kendall man,
Who coming up or down I know not well,
Brought his commodities that way to sell:
Where being benighted, took no other shield,
To lodge him and his ware thenth' open field:
A Mastiffe had he, or a mungrill Cur,
Which he still cride and called on, Stur-bitch stur,
Least miching knaves now fore the spring of day,
Should come perchance, and filch his ware away.
From hence they say took Sturbidge first her name,
Which if she did, she need not think it a shame,
For noble Princes, as may instanced be,
From Braches had their names as well as she:
Such Romulus and Remus were, whose name
Taken from a she- Wolfes dug, raisd Romes first fame,
Yea Cyrus which 's as ill, (if not far worse,)
Had but a Bitch (called Spacon) for his nurse.
For in descents, it is our least of care,
To ask what men once were, but what they are.
Since great estates, yea Lordships raisd we see,
(And so shall still) fromth' rank of beggarie.
Yea Peasants (such has been their happy fate)
Without desert have come to great estate,
For true it is was said so long agon,
A paltry Sire may have a Princely Son.
"But have my Muse in colors to display,
Some ancient customs in their high roade-way,
By which thy loving Country men do pass,
Conferring that now is, with what once was,
At least such places labor to make known,
As former times have honored with renown.
So by thy true relation 't may appear
They are no others now, then as they were,
Ever esteemed by ancient times records,
Which shall be shadowed briefly in few words.
The first whereof that I intend to show,
Is merry Wakefield and her Pindar too;
Which Fame has blazed with all that did belong,
Unto that Town in many gladsome song:
The Pindars valor and how firm he stood,
In th'Townes defence' against th'Rebel Robin-hood,
How stoutly he behaved himself, and would,
In spite of Robin bring his horse to th'fold,
His many May games which were to be seen,
Yearly presented upon Wakefield green,
Where lovely Judge and lusty Tib would go,
To see Tom-liuely turn upon the toe;
Hob, Lob, and Crowde the fiddler would be there,
And many more I will not speak of here:
Good god how glad has been this heart of mine
To see that Town, which has in former time,
So florish'd and so gloried in her name,
Famous by the Pindar who first raised the same?
Yea I have paced ore that green and ore,
And the more I saw't, I took delight the more,
" For where we take contentment in a place,
" A whole days walk, seems as a cinquepace:
Yet as there is no solace upon earth,
Which is attended evermore with mirth:
But when we are transported most with gladness,
Then suddenly our joys reduced to sadness,
So fared with me to see the Pindar gone,
And of those jolly laddes that were, not one
Left to survive: I grieved more then I Will say,
(But now for Brad-ford I must have away).
Brad-ford if I should rightly set it forth,
Style it I might Banberry of the North,
And well this title with the Town agrees,
Famous for twanging, Ale, Zeal, Cakes and Cheese:
But why should I set zeal behind their ale?
Because zeal is for some, but ale for all;
Zealous indeed some are (for I do hear,
Of many zealous sempring sister there)
Who love their brother, from their heart iffaith.
For it is charity, as scripture says,
But I am charmed, God pardon what is amiss,
For what will th'wicked say that hear of this,
How by some evil brethren't has been sed,
Th'Brother was found in's zealous sisters bed?
Unto thy task my Muse, and now make known,
The jolly shoo-maker of Brad-ford town,
His gentle-craft so raised in former time
By princely Iourney-men his discipline,
" Where he was wont with passengers to quaffe,
" But suffer none to carry up their staff
Upon their shoulders, whilst they past through town
For if they did he soon would beat them down.
(So valiant was the Souter) and from hence,
Twixt Robin-hood and him grew th'difference;
Which cause it is by most stage-poets writ,
For breuity, I thought good to omit,
" Descending thither where most bound I am,
" To Kendall-white-coates, where your trade began.
Kendall (to which I all success do wish)
May termed be that parts Metropolis,
For seat as pleasant, as the most that are,
Instanc't in th'ruin'd Castle of Lord Par.
(For seat imparaled); where we may see,
"Great men to fall as subject are as we:
Yea there (as in a mirror) may be showen,
The Subjects fall rests in the Soueraigne's frown.
Many especial blessings has the Lord,
Poured on this Town, for what doth't not afford
(If necessary for man's proper use)
Sufficient, if not superfluous?
Yea I dare say (for well it does appear)
That other places are more bound to her,
Then ^he to any, there is no Town at all,
(Being for compass so exceeding small,
For commerce half so great, nor is there any
That does, consort in traffic, with so many.
But to her private blessings, for pure air,
Sweet wholesome water, she may make compare
With any clime, for air nor piercing is,
Nor in her temprate brething, too remiss:
For water, Kent, whence Kendall takes her name,
Whose spring (from Kent-mere) as they say, is taken:
Swift is it in pace, light-poiz'd, to look in clear,
And quick in boiling (which esteemed were)
Such qualities, as rightly understood
Without 'en these, no water could be good.
For Wood (how well she was in fore-time grown)
May soon appear by th'store that is cut down,
Which may occasion grief, when we shall see
What want shall be to our posterity:
Yet who seeks to prevent this surely none,
The Old prouerbe's in request, each man for one,
While each for one, one plots another fall,
"And few or none respect the good of all.
But of all blessings that were reckoned yet,
In my opinion there is none so great,
As that especial one which they receive,
By th'graue and reverend Pastor which they have;
Whose life and doctrine are so joint together,
(As both sincere, there is no defect in either,)
For in him both Vrim and Thummim be,
O that we had more Pastors such as he:
For then in Sion should Gods flock increase,
"Having such Shepherds would not flea but fleece;
Thus what wants Kendal that she can desire,
Tyre's her Pastor, and her self is Tire,
He to mistrust her people, she to bring,
Wealth to her Town by foreign trafficking?
Now must I have the White-coates underhand
Who were in fore-time a defense to th'land:
Yea such they were, as when they did appear,
They made their foes perfume their hose for fear,
Experienst Archers, and so practiced it,
As they would seldom shoot but they would hit.
So that though th'darters of rude Scythia,
The golden-Archers of rich Persia,
The Siluer-shields of Greece have borne the name,
Blazed by the partial trumpe of lying fame.
Yet in behalf of Kendall (I durst swear it)
For true renown these Countries came not nere it.
As for this name of White-coate used to fore
It came from the milk-white furniture they wore
And in good-sooth they were but homespun fellows
"Yet would these white-coats make their foes die yellows,
Which might by latter times be instanced,
Even in those border-seruices they did:
But this to express (since it is known) were vain,
Therefore, my friends, I Will turn to you again,
And of some special matters caution you,
Which being done I Will bid you all adieu:
Since God has blessed you with such benefits,
As the relief of nature well befits,
Having of every thing sufficient store,
There Is reason ( Countrymen) you render more
To your Creator, who so kind has been,
To you and yours above all other men:
(Though all (I say) should thankful be) then such
Who nere received of him halse so much.
For well you know its in the Scripture said,
Account for every Talent must be made,
And how much more our Talents are, shall we
After this life exact Accomptants be:
Be good dispencers then of what you have,
And do not shut your Ears to such as crave
Your charities Relief (for in a word)
What you give th'poore, you lend unto the Lord,
And be you sure, your love is not in vain,
For with increase hele pay it you again:
Put not your labourer off with long delay,
But satisfy him if you can this day.
For pity it is, poor soul, that he should sit
Waiting your time when he has earned it.
And this believe me many crimes produces,
"Teeming of tenters and such like abuses
Which they are forced to, cause they are delaide
VVorking for more, then ere they can be paid:
Be not too rigorous unto your debtor,
(If he be poor) forbearance is far better,
For'lasse what gain accrewes to you thereby,
If that his carcass do in prison lie:
Yea, if you kept his body till't should rot,
Th'name of hard-hearted men were all you got.
And sure, if my opinion fail not me,
T'imprison debtors there is no policy,
Unless they able be and obstinate,
And like our Bank-rupts break t'encrease their state,
For th'poore they better may discharge their debt
When they are at liberty and freedom get,
For labor may they when they are enlarged,
But when they die in prison all is discharged,
O then (my friends) if you have such as these:
Remember to forgive your trespasses,
At least be not extreme to the poor'st of all,
"Give him but time and he will pay you all.
So Time shall crown you with an happy end,
And consummate the wishes of a friend.
So each (through peace of conscience) rapt with pleasure
Shall ioifully begin to dance his measure.
" One footing actiuely VVilsons delight,
Descanting on this note, I have done what is right,
Another ioying to be named amongst them,
Were made Men-fishers of poor fishermen.
The third as blithe as any tongue can tell,
Because he is found a faithful Samuel.
The fowrth is chanting of his Notes as gladly,
" Keeping the tune for the honor of Arthura Bradly.
The 5. so pranke, he scarce can stand on ground
Asking who will sing with him Mal Dixons round?
But where have been my senses all this while,
That he (on whom prosperity does smile)
And many parts of eminent respect,
Should be forgotten by my strange neglect?
Take heed my Muse least thou ungrateful be,
For well thou knows he better thinks of thee:
On then (I say) express what thou do wish,
And tell the woreld ^ruely what he is:
He Is one has shared in Nature special part,
And though beholding little unto art,
Yet bear his words more emphasis or force,
Then most of th'Schollers that I hear discourse,
His word keeps tutch (and of all men I know)
He has the best inside for so mean a show,
Outwardly bearing, temperate, yet will be
A bonus socius in good company.
He understands himself (as I have said)
And therefore aims whereto he first was made,
In briefe'mongst all men that deserve applauding,
None (having less ^f Art merits more lauding:
So that though true desert crown all the rest,
Yet if ought want in them its here expressed;
But th'Euening shade draws on, and damps the light
"Think friends on what I said, and so good night.
To the Worshipful Recorder of Kendall.
FOr Townes-abuses (worshipful Recorder)
I leave them to your discreet self to order:
My Iourney's at an end; hic baculum fixi,
My Tale concluded, naught now rests but Dixi*
Nor would I have you speak that, (though you may)
"Which I have heard a country Mayor did say,
Unto a Scholar, who concluded had
His latin speech with Dixi I have said:
To whom th'vnletter'd Mayor to aproue the same
Replying thus, took Dixi for his name.
"If that thy name be Dixi sure I am,
Dixi's a learned understanding man.
To the Lands-lord wheresoever.
LAnds^lord to thee, addressed to speak I am,
And full as much to thee as any man:
For many Errors and foul crimes I know
That thou art more then others subject toe,
Which i will in part, vnri^, and so make clear,
As in that day, when all men shall appear
Before their heavenly Lands-lord, where is had
A dew account: This now which I have said
May be a witness, and bear record still,
That thou did know before thy Masters will,
Which not performed thou know what thou have read
"With many stripes thou shall be chastised,
But first, ere I proceed, so great's the cries
Of widows, and so many tere-swolne eyes
Of Orphans succourlesse that reach to heaven,
As I Am well-nigh into amazement driven,
And cannot perfect what I do entend*
Until I see their sorrows at an end,
At least allayd (for I am forced to keep,
A consort with these silly souls that weep:)
So moving is their passion (as in brief)
So strong's compassion, I do feel their grief.
Wherefore I must (so great is griefs extent)
Persuade these blubbert wretches be content,
And bear with patience, till the Lord shall send,
In his good time unto their sorrows end:
Which to express the better I will move them
In mildest terms; and thus will speak unto them.
Cease, cease (poor injured soul) your teres to shed,
Weeping for that cannot be remeded,
'Lasse you are far deceived; if you suppose
Teres can move Lands-lords: they are none of those,
Their dispositions are more harder far*
Then any other of Gods creatures are:
For tell me (starueling) has thy trickling eye,
Pale-c^lourd^^sage heauen-ascending cry,
Earth bending knees* heart throbbing languishment,
Eccoing sighs, souls-fretting discontent,
Famine at home, surcharged with sorrows load,
Debt with a S^rgeant dogging thee abroad,
Have any these whereof thou have had part,
Been of that force to mollify his heart?
Have all thy cries and Orphans teres together
Moved him? o no: they are as if a fether,
Were here and there tossed with each gale of wind,
Thou shall not find that temper in his mind:
For h^ is cauteris'd and void of sense,
And thanks his God he has a conscience,
Can stand remorcelesse against both wind and weather,
^^hough he and's Conscience go to hell together,
Yea he does feel no more thy piteous moan,
Then does an Anuile when its struck upon.
Why then should thou thus strive against the stream,
T'importune him that seems as in a dream,
Secure of hell, careless of thy distress?
Fie take upon thee some more manliness,
Rouse thy dejected spirits which now lie,
As if surprised by a lethargy;
Wipe, wipe those eyes with briny streamelings drowned,
And plant thy self upon a firmer ground,
Then thus to wast thy grief enthralled heart,
Which done: pray tell me but, what better art?
Well, if thou will but silence thy just wrong
For one half hour, or hardly for so long,
I Will show the best I can of art and skill,
With an unbounded measure of good will,
To tell thy cruel lord, that there is a doom
As well as here in after time to come:
I Will tell him boldly though I chance to move him
For all he is lord, there is a Lord above him,
Before whose throne he must come to account;
For Syons-Lord is that Lord Paramount,
Who swayes the massy orb of heaven and earth,
Brething on every creature that brings forth,
It Is he that gives to each increase and store,
Girdling the swelling Ocean with a shore:
The proudest Peers he to subjection brings,
And prostrate lies the Diadems of Kings:
By him oppressors feel there is a God,
That can revenge and chastise with his rod;
Yea, thy injurious Lord, I mean to tell
Though he thinks of no hell, he is find a hell.
And those distreaming teres which thou have shed,
Are by thy loving father bottled,
For there is no teres, sighs, sorrows, grieves or mones,
Which come from any of his little -- ones
But in his due compassion still expressed
Unto their cause, he will see their wrongs redrest.
How thinks 't of this? will not these things enforce
In thy relentlesse Lands-lord a remorse,
Sooner and deeper (of that mind am I)
Then puling with thy finger in thine eye.
Well I will make attempt (which if it fall
Out to my wishes as I hope it shall)
The only fee which I expect of thee,
Is that thou would pour out thy prayers for me,
Meare time pray for thy self (while I express
Thy grieves, and heavens grant to my hopes success.)
Now (rent-inhauncer) where away so fast?
Pray stay a little sir for all your haste:
Perchance you may more profit by your stay,
Th^n if you should leave me and go your way:
For I conjecture whither you are going,
Nay, (do not blush) to so^^e poor snakes undoing,
To ^oot out some poor Family or other;
Speak freely man do not your conscience smother;
Is It not (you Suck-blood) to oppress the poor,
And put him and his children out a door;
Is It not to take advantage on some thing
Or other for his utter ruining:
Is It not because thou art not half content
That he should sit upon so easy rent.
And therefore takes occasion upon naught,
Forgiving something he neither said, nor thought.
If such effects make thee abroad to come,
Thou might with safer conscience stay at home.
For whence be these exactions thus to stretch,
And rack thy Tenants? thou will say, to enrich
Thy private Coffers, which in time may, be
A fair estate to thy posterity.
Or if not to increase thy wealth, or store,
For to maintain thy riot or thy whore.
O thou forlorn and miserable man,
Come these conclusions from a Christian?
Be these the ends whereto thou were created,
To love those things which make thy soul most hated?
I Am sorry for thee, (yet unhappy Elfe)
Why should I grieve that grieves not for thy self?
How can thou think thy children shall possess,
Long that estate is got by wickedness?
Or how imaginst that it can succeed
Well wi^h thy short lived heirs, or with their seed,
When all that wealth (was gathered to their hand.)
Came from the cries and curses of the land?
No no, thou greedy sponge that sucks up store,
Yet more thou suckes, thou need still the more.
Evil got goods (howbeit near so fair)
Seldom enjoyed are by the third heir
For wavering is that state is raisd by wrong,
Built its on Sand, and cannot hold out long.
Yea I have seen (even in that little time
Which I have lived) Some of you in their prime.
And so erected to the height of state,
As you might seem to be admired at.
For brave attendance, sumptuous attire,
For fare and pleasure what you could desire.
In building gorgeous so as you might be
Styled the heirs of Earths felicity.
Yet 'lasse (again) how quickly have I seen,
These men shrunk down, as if they had not been:
Their pomp decreased, their great attendance gone,
And for their many dishes one, or none?
True; for how can it any other's choose,
Since God has promisd not to bless that house,
Which aims at wealth, and honor, for to rise
By Orphans tears, and woeful widows cries.
Then for the first thou sees how it is vain,
To think that thy posterity can reign
Or long abide in that estates possession,
Is got by fraud, collusion, or oppression.
Now I will see whereto thy labors tend,
To squize the poor that thou may better spend
On wanton consorts (Souls eternal curse)
The first was ill, but this is ten-times worse.
Its well observed, that when we do begin,
One sinne's attended by an other sin.
They come in paires, which seems approud to be.
In none oppr^ssor b^tter then in thee.
Its not enough to prey upon the Poor,
But thou must spend his state upon thy whore.
So that me thinks I almost might aver,
Its rather he then thou maintains her.
Must his night cares and early rising to,
His daily labors, when and where to sow
His painful tillage, and his slender fare,
His grief when is crops the less successiue are,
His many hours of want, few of content,
His special care to pay his Lands-lords rent,
Must he that earnes his living best we know,
(Being as God command'd) in's sweat ofs Brow,
Must he the sleeps with many a troubled head,
To find his wife and hungry children bread,
Must he (I say) for all his life's disquiet,
Maintain thy whoredom and excessive riot,
Must he support thee in thy vain delights,
Thy midnight revels, and thy pagent sights,
Thy new invented fashions, and thy port,
Must he at the Cart, maintain thy pride at Cour^,
If this he do? this doom to thee is given,
Court it on earth, thou's never Court in Heaven.
No Ahab no, there is no place for such,
Whom poor men's grieves and sorrows will not tutch.
Such as will have compassion, shall be there,
Receiud in mercy that had mercy here.
But such as thou, who in the Pride of heart,
Had little feeling of an others smart,
Shall hear that Ve, Away thou cursed go,
"Repent in time, or thou shall find it so:
For tell me? why should whorish complement
Force thee to souls eternal languishment.
Why should a minutes pleasure take from thee,
All after-hope of thy felicity,
Why should a painted cheek be so sought after,
Beleeu't in common sense it merits laughter
That her complexion should by thee be sought,
That knows its not her own, but that'twas bought,
Yea one would think more reason there is to seek,
"Complexion in the shop, then on the cheek.
And better will it with generous humors stand,
To buy't at first then at the second hand:
Both's to be bought: no difference in the sale;
The one in gross, the other in Retaile.
O then take heed, mix not two sins in one,
Sins linkt together make the soul to groan.
Their burdens heavy yea it is such as they,
Draws in in Cart-ropes (as the Prophets say)
But if thou will needs to perdition run,
And follow on that chase thou have begun,
If thou will make thy body (in few words)
A filthy Caske, or Cage of unclean birds,
If that same soul, which should a Temple be,
And dedicated to Gods Majesty,
Must now be made (it grieves me to expres)
A stew for Harlots and licentiousness.
Yet let not thy oppression be the means
For to maintain such prostituted queanes,
That do expose themselves to public shame,
"One sin's enough: shun thou oppressions name.
I know indeed what was of Ahab told
Is grown a story now exceeding old.
His mouldred bones and ashes who can find,
Yea his example's quite worn out of mind,
Since for most part, men's corpse 's no sooner rotten,
Then they and all their actions be forgotten.
The stories old indeed, its true they say,
Yet is the use experienst every day,
" Each day we see a silly Naboth slain,
" And every day a wicked Ahab reign.
Who if he see one plat of ground that is
Delightful in his eye, or bordering his;
Whether't be vineyard, garden, or that land,
(The front I mean) where Naboths house does stand,
He cannot be content till he has got,
By fraud or violence, that same neighboring plot.
For like an eyesore, it did ever grieve him,
Nor till ge gained it, would he ever leave him.
Yet for all this, our modern Ahabs they,
No sooner hear what sacred Scriptures say,
Of that example, then they straight begin,
To give a curse to Ahab and his sin.
Who made no bones (poor Naboth to deny him)
To have one little Vineyard lying by him.
Cruel he was, say they, and well deserved
His punishment; for he was rightly served.
To be deprived of all, life, realm, and crown,
That would not suffer Naboth have his own.
Yea the reward did fit his Tyrant-hart,
Despoyl'd of all, that spoyld the poor of part.
So their own judgments (most unhappy Elues)
That thus pronounce the sentence on themselves.
Their own mouths do condemn them, for by this
Each prove their guilt by th'guilt they show of his.
Wherefore as Nathan did to David say,
Taking Vriahs life and wife away,
Where he proposd this question thereupon.
Of him had many Sheep, another one:
Wherein indeed the Prophet shadowed,
That fact which David to Vriah did,
Which when that good King heard, as th'Scripture says
He answered straight, he has deserved death,
Thou art the man (quoth he) so sure I am,
I may be bold to say thou art the man.
Thou Ahab, thou that by extortion gains,
Some Skreads of Land to better the demains.
Thou that triumphs in wrongs, and brings the cry
And curse of widows to thy Family.
Thou that with dainties do that carrian feed,
That maw of thine, while such do beg their bread,
As thou oppressed, (to their extremest wrong,)
Thou art the man, I Will sing no other song.
Do thou not yet relent? no streams of grace,
Thrilling or trickling from thy blubber't face*
No sign of reformation? Las I see,
Custom in sin cannot relinquisht be
Upon the instant, wherefore I must set
My resolution not to leave thee yet,
And howsoere thou take it, I will go,
Yet further with thee I Will not leave thee so,
Two special motives I might here pro^uce,
To move thee to a conscience, and to use.
A christian-l^ke respect to such as be,
Ordained by God for to live under thee*
The first is: to have eye unto that form
O^ image, which does every man adorn,
Even his creators image, which might move
Us to love him for his creators love.
The second is: a due especial care,
Or a consideration what we are,
Men; and in that we should be humbler still,
" Since best of us, are Tennants but at will:
On which two branches briefly I Will dilate,
Or rather cursiuely so shadow at,
As seeing his Form, thy little cause of pride,
This good surueigh may make thee mortified.
The comely feature which is given to man,
Implies the place from whence this creature came,
Even from that fragrant garden of delight,
That Spicy Eden, where in our makers sight,
He did enjoy far more then tongue can tell,
Till from that height he to corrup^ion fell:
Yet still retained his form which first was given him
In Paradise, whence now the Lord had driven him?
So precious was this form (as he who made it,
For as we read in Scripture, where he said it,
Let us make man after our Image: he
Saw in this form (I say) such majesty
As he who (in his mercy fast did make it)
Becoming man of God, vouchsafed to take it.
So that what the first man Adam did before
Christ, the second Adam as man, did restore.
Thou sees this Image then how it was given
And represented by the God of heaven,
Who in his great compassions, thought 't no scorn,
That the Creator take the creatures form.
And how can thou (irreuerent wretch) disdain
That form which thy Creator did retain?
How can despise that image, or presume
To wrong that shape thy Savior did assume?
How can thou press that soul with discontent,
Which thy Redeemer daign'd to represent?
How can abuse that type for hope of pelf,
Which Christ thy lover shadowed in himself?
How can thou see that image racked to be,
Which in thy Christ was ract and rent for thee?
How can endure to have that soul bereft,
Of all relief, and to have nothing left,
Driven from his house, forced from his Tenant-right,
When he that is the way truth, life and light,
Taking his form to satisfy for sin,
Had not so much as house to hide him in.
Birds had their nests, and every beast his den,
Yet had not he what was permitt'd to them.
O let me now persuade, be not extreme,
(Its easy says the Proverb) to wade the stream,
Where th'foord's at lowest, recollect to mind.
His noble image, and in it thou'l find,
Such singular impressions of reguard,
As I do think thou'l honourt' afterward.
When thou obseru's, there is nothing that is in him,
Was not before in Christ excepting sin.
O then refine the aim of thy intents,
In raising rents, think on thy Saviors rents.
In taking of advantage, think on this,
If God advantage take for each amiss,
In what a case were thou, how woe-begon,
That of a thousand cannot answer one?
If thou to grieve Gods little ones begin,
Think therewithal, that thou art grieuing him.
Who in his mercy hares the widows cry,
And in his pity wipes the Orphans eye,
Which thou have cause to think on, so much rather
Since God's the widows Judge, the orphans Father:
And though earths Justice, be of th'second sight,
Yet he is so just, he will do the poorest right.
But if man's Image, which were strange, should fail,
With thy remorselesse conscience to prevail,
From that transparent Mirror, I Will descend,
Though it may seem in it to comprehend
All humane glory, yea I may say more,
The form of God which he assumed before,
Unto that due observance, or that care,
Whereby we come to acknowledge what we are.
Man's of a substance mean, having his birth,
As his first native Mother, from frail Earth,
Brittle's his composition, and so weak,
Be his resolves, as he can undertake
Naught with so firm a purpose as may stand,
Or will not change with th'turning of a hand.
His health's a stranger to him, for when most,
It seems with him, it is soonest lost;
For his abiding, he is as in a Tent,
Wherein he is militant, not permanent.
The world's his camp, his professed enemies,
Wherewith he is to grapple, they be these.
The turbulent affections of his mind,
Which every hour is severally inclined.
The goal which he does aim at, or th'reward,
After the fight, he looks for after-ward:
Thus thou may see, in this same earthly cell,
Though dwell we seem, indeed, we do not dwell,
But foiourne: Its no mansion but an Inn,
Syons our home, this pilgrimage is sin.
As for our states, we are but leacers all,
And shall be put off, when he is pleased to call,
Yea I may rather say (and not amiss)
We are the Lessees, he the Lessour is.
And howsoere our Lands-Lords make account,
They Are but inferior Lords, he is Paramount.
Then if thou will but duly look upon it,
Thy tenure stands upon a tickle point,
Yea I do find thy state not worth a straw,
If I have any judgment in the law:
And why should thou bring poor men into suit,
Since thou thy self have no state absolute,
But for thy term of life: so as methinks,
When that French gibberish to my braine-pan sinks
Where John a Styles and 's neighbor John an Oaks,
With many other Law-baptized folks,
Are brought in seaz'd of land, as they do find,
In Burrow, English, Soccage, Gauell-kinde,
Fee-tayle, fee-simple (it often seems to me)
These Lawyers are the simplest men that be;
Who are persuaded (and would have us too)
But let us descent from them: -- there is fools enough:
That of al states and Tenures are possessed,
Or can be had, Fee-Simple is the best.
Whereas I think, if well they understood,
What specially concerned them, and their good.
They would conclude, Fee-simple will not do,
A double-Fee is better of the two.
If we could find indeed a difference,
In th'liues of the tenures, then there were some sense
To say, that such a tenure were the strongest;
Because by it the Tennant lives the longest.
But tell me, are not all estates that be
Subject alike to mutability:
To the possessour you will say they are;
If unto him, why should we further care,
Since as the Proverb is, when he is gone,
The world's gone with him, as all in One:
O then thou Earth-bred worm, why should thou vant,
As if thou were a Lord praedominant.
Why should triumph ore th'meaner sort of men,
Since thour't composd of one self Mould with the^?
Thou art but Adams son, and so are they,
Both of you framed and fashioned of one clay,
Both have one image: then compassion take,
If not for them, yet for their image sake.
For though thou can not one good look afford,
To these poor snakes, they are dear unto the Lord,
As is thy self, as precious in Gods eyes,
Bought and redeemed with as great a price.
And though there be twixt Substitutes and Kings,
Superior states, and lower underlings,
A difference in the world, yet there shall
Twixt them (in heaven) no difference be at all,
Only what is good shall approbation have,
With King and subject, conqueror and slave.
O then receive the bowels of compassion,
And bear like mind, as thou do bear like fashion:
Let thy unrighteous Mammon get thee friends,
That when thy pilgrim days of Labor ends,
Thou may possess a glorious heritage,
After the period of this pilgrimage.
My lessons are but short, pray then remember,
As thou the welfare of thy soul do tender.
" The best of us are tennants but at will,
" And stand in hazard of disseisure still.
And though our states seem firmer then the rest,
They are uncertain tenures at the best.
In brief, thou earthly Lands-lord strive to be,
As thou would have Heavens Lands-lord toward thee
Not too extreme: thou know the doom is given,
That not extortioner shall enter Heaven.
Resolve what thou will do: for though it grieve me
To leave thee yet, I am enforced to leave thee,
And turn unto thy Tennant, who dismaide,
Stands here at door to hear what I have said.
To the Tennant howsoever.
WHat state soever thou art seized on,
Or in what Tenure thou do hold upon,
I Will now address my speech in brief to thee,
Wherein I aim in part to comfort thee,
In part to rectify what may seem ill,
In thy perverse and vn-conformed will;
That in them both for th'loue which I do owe,
To him thou represents, I may so show,
That dear affection which we are bound to bear,
To one another while we soiourne here,
As when an end of all our sorrows are
Reduced to one set period, and our care
Shall have a final end, what I have done,
" In love may be approved when I am gone.
To move thee unto comfort, in a word,
I Will use th'perswasion which I gave thy Lord,
To humble his ambicious spirit, when
I told him of the different state of Men,
How in the eyes of men indeed they were
Esteemed great, but when they should appear,
Before that high Tribunal, where all should,
(Though if they might avoid it, many would,)
Make their appearance, then the great should know,
They were no more respected then the low:
One advocate, one Judge, one bar one trial,
Conscience the only difference, when Denial,
Sealed with abite, or th'accursed doom,
Or th'inuitation with Venite come,
Shall in that general judgment there express,
Or weal, or woe, or hell, or happiness:
" So as when all are summoned fore that seat,
It Is better to be good, then to be great.
For then, as well it may be understood,
They only shall be great that are found good.
But thou will ask, is there no comfort else?
Yes that there is, thy daily labor tells,
There Is a reward of glory that is reserved,
For such as have their Master duly served,
In their vocation: there is a penny too,
Which though it be not given unto thee now,
Yet be assured, (for he that spoke't is true)
" When th'euening comes, thou shall receive thy due.
And though thou seem a little while to stay,
Do not repine, it is th'euening crowns the day.
Would know what I by the Evening do intend?
I mean the sunset of thy life or end
Of all thy pilgrim days, which though they be,
A very death, or Martyrdom to thee,
(So little joy conceau's thou upon earth,)
Yet will thy Comicke end include thy mirth,
When from this Vale of labor and of care,
Thou shall unto a mount of joy repair.
When from this floting Sea, this fading cell,
Thou shall depart, and with thy Savior dwell.
Yea on thy deathbed thou art comforted,
Thinking how truly thou have labored.
How many careful nights thou have orepast,
Without the least of rest, how thy repast,
Was not delighfull feeding with excess,
But the bread thou eat was mixed with carfulness*
Noe hour without affliction or some grief,
And now to find to all thy woes relief
It may no little solace the, when the end
Of discontents shall bring thee to a friend
That will in arms of charity receive thee,
Where being lodged, no woe, no want can grieve thee.
Happy translation, and by so much more,
In that those Lordings which triumphed before,
And played upon thy weakness, now shall stand,
To the doom which those oppressors of the land*
Are subject to: tell me (poor wormeling) then,
What difference there will be twixt thee and them?
Great were they here indeed, and did resemble,
Those Bulls of Basan, yet see how they tremble,
How quick their powerful greatness is made small,
For little is their pomp, or none at all:
See, see these Cedars now are struck with thunder,
And though they once sat high, their now brought under
Those glorious titles which gave wings to pride,
Those gorgeous buildings made them deifide.
Those many state-attendants, more or less,
Like Sommer-Swallows following their success.
Are vanished, ruined, and dispersed quite,
There Is none of these can come into their sight,
Yea which is worse in-steed of Eminence;
There is an enemy called Conscience,
That still disturbs their quiet and their rest:
Which if at peace there were continual feast.
But that is impossible, such means as these;
Have in themselves a thousand Witnesses,
And these poor snakes cause they did here contemn them,
Shall with their Conscience stand there to condemn the^,
Where that same place, they are appointed to
Shall Tophet be, their word, ye cursed go.
Thou see then no difference does appear,
Twixt thou and them save only when you're here
A little garish vanity there is,
Which does include that happiness of his,
Who seems so popular, yet thou shall see,
From thence is drawn his greatest misery.
For (tell me) does no that external state,
Make him forget whereto he was create
Doth't not be ^ull his soul in sins delights,
(Not knowing how the flesh against spirit fights,)
Whereby he comes, which is the worst of all,
To bring his reason to his senses thrall.
Yea I have heard of many great men's end,
So full of fear and horror* as God send
Me less delights on earth, so I may have,
A quiet easy passage to my grave.
" For reason does inform me, rare it is,
That earths delight should bring a man to bliss*
More could I speak to comfort thy distress,
And more I was determinde, I confess,
To insist on thy affliction, but I found,
By my Experience this especial ground,
Held ever firm when we do comforts tutch,
Such is man's nature he will take too much,
Rather then too too little, yea its sed;
More have through store of comforts surfeted,
The^ such as from all outward solace p^nt,
Have famisht been through inward discontent.
With Gedeons soldier therefore pressed I am,
Rather to lap, and like a Jonathan,
To tutch the honey only with my rod,
Then on this subject make too long abode.
Which that I may, from comfort I Will descend,
To faults in the which I would gladly mend.
That God commands from who^ proceeds all power,
" Let each be subject to's Superior.
For it would breed confusion in the Land,
If people did admit of no command.
But like a Platoes Commonwealth, should be,
Subject to none, but in equality.
Therefore that Lord, who of his grace does love us,
Has ranked some below us, some above us.
Above us that we might be cautioned thence,
To show unto them due obedience.
Below us, that we might thereby express,
To them our love, to God our thankfulness,
Our love, that we might our affection show,
In love to them that ranked are so low.
Our thankfulness, that we should more receive,
Then other some, that more deserved have.
Again, above us, to acknowledge here,
Without that power above, how weak we are.
Below us, that if we unhappy Elues,
Should grudge to see some greater then our selves,
By seeing these we might suppose they are sent,
By their degree to bid us be content,
In this same decent comely order then
Of high and low, great and inferior men,
Thou ranked art, nor richest, nor most pore,
For thou see many go from door to door,
Whose scrips their store, whose wallet is their wealth,
Whose staffe's their stay, whose treasure is their health.
Now in thy rank there is many things I wish
Thou would reform, which I do see amiss.
" As first for all thy poverty and want,
Thou have a disposition arrogant:
Rash, heady-selfe-wild, prouder then thy state
Can well bear out, extremely obstinate,
Foolishly peremptory, saucy with all,
Besides I see in thee (I must tell all)
A factious wavering nature, apt to rise
Through discontent, in any enterprise.
A very Jack Straw, or a custom as^e,
Alleging such records as never was.
A pest' lent member to the Kingdoms quiet,
Prone to division, enmity and riot,
Sower of discord, selfe-conceitedly
Wise, yet I cannot we^l imagine why.
Yea, I have seen, some of thy crew to gather,
Like wild-geese for the wagging of a feather,
Making strange combinations, which did tend,
Still to their own subversion in the end.
Some Term ago on one I chanct to light,
Was come to town to try his tenant-right,
With whom discoursing, he impart'd to me,
Among other things how most injuriously
He and the rest which held one tenure there,
About their state or title troubled were,
And therewithal alleadgd that he could show,
Customs and discords (so he said) enough,
And that from Noah's indignation, when
Of all the world there were but left 8 men;
No, this is true, quoth he, I will assure ye,
Without delayer pannelled a Jury:
Where those 12. men (the number scarce holds right)
Rising to 12, that were before but eight,
Found that our ancestry did hold in pottage,
Now I imagine he did mean in Soccage,
Which to make sure, this Custom speaks for us,
And he with that draws forth a Mittimus.
This I may swear, more then a sennet after,
I could not think on, but was forced to laughter.
But now to thee, for I have done thee wrong,
To keep me from discourse with thee so long,
Whom I resolved to have advertised,
Of these precedent errors mentioned;
" Conform thy will unto thy Lords command
In fitting things, thou live upon his land.
And art his liedge-man, therefore thou should sho
Thy self to him, as thou thy self do owe.
Unto the Heir to, a respect is due,
For time may come when he shall pleasure you.
Yet mean I not that thou should pay a Fine,
Unto the heir now in his Fathers time,
" For if I were an heir as I am not,
" Believe it I would think that fine ill got.
What I do wish to the is briefly this,
Success in thy estate, as thou would wish,
Conformed so unto thy Lands Lordheire,
That with heavens Land^lord thou may live elsewher^*
FINIS.
LOVES LABYRINTH: OR The true-Louers knot: INCLVDING The disastrous falls of two
star-crost Lovers PYRAMVS and THYSBE. A Subject heretofore handled, but now
with much more propriety of passion, and variety of invention, continued:

By RICHARD BRATHWAYTE.

Res est soliciti plena timoris amor.

At London printed by I. B. for Richard Redmor and are to be sold at the West
door of Paul's at the Star. 1615.

CANDIDO ET cordato, Amico faelici Genio, perspicaci ingenio, Richardo Musgraue
de Harcley Baronetto, coque titulo vere digno: Richardus Brathwaite hosce
extremos Amatorum amplexus, grati animi permitias, solennique officio,
perfunctas humillime Dedit, Dicauit, Dedicauit.
Richardus Musgraueensis.

ANAGRAMM.

Charus musis diurna reges.

Dystichon.

Sicut amas Musas, Musis redamaris ab ipsis,
Charus vt es Musis, secla diurna reges.
Upon the Dedicatorie.
I Hear one ask me, if I could find none,
To dedicate this Poem to, but one
That Is now transplanted to another sphere,
And better measures sings then anie's here.
Its true indeed, the world's large and wide,
And many were there I confess beside,
My now deceased- Patron, I could find,
But none so well agreeing with my mind;
He was one that I honored, and his worth
Deserved a pregnant Muse to set it forth,
Which though I have not I will show my best,
To crown him sleeping in the bed of rest,
Where, while I write, my passion shall appear,
By each lines accent mixed with a tere:
But you will say this subject cannot move,
Such firm impression, cause it treats of love,
A sadder strain would better fitting be
"Drained from the streams of grave Melpomene,
Where every sentence might that passion breed,
"as if himself were here portraide indeed;
This I could do and so express him too
(But that his worth would be a shame to you.
That are desertlesse to see him by Fate
Lopt, that has left you much to imitate,
Of honor I dare say, (which ere't be long,
" May be a subject to a better song.)
But I would have you know how ere this is,
It was from th'cradle nat'ralized his:
Nor would I raze my Patrons dedicate,
"How ere he seemed to be obscured by Fate,
But as I loved him living, my desire
Is to express my love unto him higher
Being now dead; that though my friend be gone,
Yet life and death to friendship may be one:
For th'print of love if it be stamped aright,
Is most in heart when it is least in sight.
FINIS.
UPON THE PREMAture death of the most Generous and Ingenious; the right
Worshipful, Sir RICHARD MVSGRAVE Knight-Barronett of Hartley: Who died in
Italy, being prevented of his religious purpose, intending to visit the holy
Sepulcher of our Savior in Jerusalem, an EPICEDIVM: The Author Dedicates these
Obit-teres, unto his virtuous and modest Lady, the much honored FRANCIS
MVSGRAVE, Daughter to the truly honorable PHILIP LORD WHARTON.
His Ladies Obit-teres.
TEres I do shed, yet are they shed in vain,
Nor can they call him back to life again:
A funeral Elegy.
Yet sigh I will, to
wake him from his
sleep,
Thus whilst he sleeps
in Earth, on Earth
i will weep.
So my sad groans sent forth unfeignedly
May move the hardest heart to pity me,
To pity me, that
though I cannot
have
The privilege to
see my husbands
grave
Yet may my teres (as me it does beh^ue)
Transported be to testify my love:
My love which ever
shall these obites
keep,
She can do very
little cannot
weep.
Richardus Musgrauiensis. ANAGRAMM. Vnis resurgam charus diis. Dystichon.
Nascimur and morimur: sed tu moriendo resurges,
Gratior and sanctis, charior atque deis.
De profectione eius ad
Sanctiss. Christi
Sepulchrum.
Christus erat pretium, Christi quia morte sepulchru^*
perlustrare cupis* quem moriendo capis.
Richard Musgraue. ANAGRAMM. Graces reward him: or We admire his grace.
Two Anagrammes included in one verse.

Dystich.
Graces reward him, we admire his grace,
Serve both as proper Mottoes for this place:
A funeral Elegy.
The first to express the hope of his reward,
Whence is implie'd our comfort afterward.
Upon his Grave.
In Musgraues hearse I find the Muses grave,
For by his loss a Patron lost they have:
Yet he is not lost, but is ascended higher,
And sings with Muses of the heavenly quire.
His Character.
Fair England gave me breeding, birth, and name,
Jerusalem was th'place where I did aim,
But lo my Saviors grave I could not see,
For my own grave was made in Italy.
Unto the Italian.
Do not contemn my corpse Italian,
I am th'remainder of a Gentleman,
Who knew what honor was: so after-time
May show like love to thee, thou shows to mine.
Unto Report.
To speak well of the dead is charity,
If thou be then a Christian, tax not me
Of what I did: (if men, we are prone to fall,)
Speak what is well, or do not speak at all.
More fidelium est Transitus (de Morte ii Vitam. (de Fide ii Noritiam. (de
Agone ii Brauium. (de Peregrinatione ii Patriam. (de Labor ii Refrigerium. (de
Expectatione ii Praemium. (de Mundo ii Deum.


BERNARDVS. Peregi officium morientis amici.

To all unhappy Lovers.
COme near me lovers, crossed by lovers fate,
And see these star-crost lovers, that their sight,
May something cheer the drowping of your state,
Showing such beams of comfort in the night,
Of your discomforts: that both love and hate,
" May make you happy lovers by renew,
" Had to these lovers crossed as well as you.
You say you loved; it is true: and so did these;
" You say you loved a fair one; so did he,
Who fancied Thisbee; you say lovers peace,
Is seldom purchased but by enmity,
Derived from parents: so did love increase,
" In these unhappy Lovers, who were crossed,
By Parents means, of what they fancied most.
Tell me then hapless lover, have thou cause
To grieve at that which others have endured,
As if thou were quite priuiledg'd from laws,
Firm in thy self, from lovers hate secured,
" O no, believe it, prickles has the Rose,
" The sweet her sower; the hony-Bee her sting,
" Love though a toy, yet she is a toil something.
Repose thee then unhappy lover here,
And see loves fall in tragic measures framed,
That when thou see a lover loose his dear,
Thou of like chance may never be ashamed
Since thou art but as other lovers were.
" For shame its none, to loose what is scarce begun,
" But shame is it not to do what should be done.
Your passion-pittier, Richard Brathwaite.

The Author upon his infant Poem.
IF ought's amiss, imputed let it be,
Toth' time wherein this Poem it was writ,
Which was (I must confess) my infancy
Of Age, Art Judgment, Knowledge, and of Wit:
Nor do I think it would this time befit,
To meddle with my youths minority.
Unpolished and vnhewd, I therefore send it
Freely toth' World, that she may friendly mend it.
Upon the Press.
Tried would I bin byth' Country, Bench, and Prince,
Yet but a month ago, no longer since,
Was I for speaking (as it may be thought)
And not for silence to the press thus brought,
Judge you my friends what conscience there is in it:
By the weights I bear the errors of the Print.
The Argument of Pyramus and Thysbe.
CHildrens love and Parents hate,
Pure affection cros'd by fate.
True their love, so true to either,
That they chusd to die together.
Courteous woodnimphs, Tigres fierce,
" Wash with tears their doleful hearse,
Myrtle branches, roses sweet.
" Satyrs strew about their feet.
Woodnimphs with their Sirens voice,
Call their parents by their noise.
Who with pace (slow pace God wot,)
" Made have they could, yet hasted not;
Till they saw their children lie,
" Arm in arm full lovingly.
Often they sought, but all in vain,
To bring life to them again.
Trickling tears came dropping down,
" Groves with tears were overflowed,
Water mixed with crimson blood,
" Made a deluge where they stood.
This bees obsequies they see,
" Graven in an Olive tree,
Their bones to ashes they do burn
And place them in one sacred vrne.
That as their love was all in all,
So they might have one Burial.
To this shrine, this statue fair,
Lovers wont for to repair.
Who to confirm their sincere Love,
Offered them a Turtle Dove.
But when their relics scattered were,
Maids nere after offered there
Their wonted incense, but forsook,
The Altar which was wont to smoke,
With mirrhe and thime, which they did burn,
With solemn rites about their vrne.
Yet lest their fame should so decay,
Their tomb is to be seen this day,
Which first erected was to be,
Conseruer of their memory.
Pyramus and Thysbe.
NImrods fair City, beauteous Babylon,
which admirations eyes once gazed upon,
Though graced in all, in naught so gracious,
as in her Thysbe, and young Pyramus.
Thysbe a maid as fair, as fair could be,
he for his sex, was full as fair as she.
These two resplendent stars, shone in one sphere,
and by contiguate mansions bordering near,
Renewd their loves unhappy memory,
pressed down too much by parents jealousy.
Aye me too jealous, to prevent that good,
of sincere love which cannot be withstood.
These two debar'rd of meeting, not of loving,
for love, though smothred, has an inward moving
Sought means to show their mutual love by woing,
supplying that in words, they mist in doing.
Their walls abutting neree, so near did meet,
That these two Saints might each another greet.
A chinke there was, which Thysbe soon espies,
for maids in wanton feats, have Linceus eyes.
Which being seen (well seen) she did repair
each morn betime to see if he were there:
At last he spies it, (men have duller wit,
then women have, yet better manage it.)
This crany was the shrine to which they came,
where either called on other, by their name.
And with devotion each to other kneeled,
protesting love, hid love, so long concealed.
Why should our Parents, Pyramus would say,
seek to protract our loves by long delay?
Or why should we, with such preciseness shun,
that which our parents long before have done?
Suppose their love was pure: our love's as pure,
they full as fond as we, were drawn to th'lure.
And why, my Thysbe, should that comely face,
for all her feature, have a ciphers place?
Thou art no shadow, but a substance (dear)
in substances, impressions best appear.
Then for my love, thy joy, and beauties sake,
that seems eclyps'd, let me the impression make.
Lets to the field, aye me, we cannot go,
we are immured within the grate of vvoe;
And why should I, fond man, my Thysbe move,
to vvanton pleasure? where is no use of love;
I know thou love, in that thy grief is more,
pent from that St which thou would fain adore.
Thysbe stood peeping through this narrovv chinke
and though she spoke naught, yet she more did think,
Her blush, her smile, her bittng of her lip,
did all the secrets of her heart vnrippe.
Thus whilst they stood both standing at a bay,
wishing some private passage, or some way,
To consummate their vows: in comes her mother,
which made them take their leave one of another.
She skoold her daughter: what my tricksie girl,
are you besotted with this worthless pearl,
This beauties blossom? fair enough, but poor,
dote on the rich, affect his rags no more.
Mother (quoth Thisbe) you are much decau'd,
if I may speak with reverence, he nere craved
Love at my hands: what did he here, quoth she,
that he so private should discourse with thee?
He is (quoth Thisbe) come from Salamine,
and brought me grapes, plucked from that tender vine
Aetolus planted, which she gave in have,
unto her mother, praying her to taste:
She took and tasted: fruits variety
served at that time for her Apology.
The pitchy shade of night approach't at hand,
when Screech-owles, Fauns, and Satyrs have co^ma^d
Where skipping in their lawne and flowery grove,
Siluane to Siluane consecrates his love.
Yet when each chirping bird, goes to her nest,
loves eyes be open, and can take no rest.
Beasts to their caves resort, surcease to prey,
feeding on that they purchased by the day.
Each creature in his kind disposed to sleep,
but fervent love continual watch does keep*
He tosseth in his bed, wishing it day,
hoping thereby his cares to throw away.
Yet when the night is past, the day yields more,
then ere the night affoorded him before.
Thus Pyramus enthralled twixt hope and fear,
hopes, though small fruit of hope in him appear.
He cannot sleep nor wake, but twixt them both,
sleeping and waking as a letharge does.
Often would he hug his pillow in his arm,
and cling it fast about, to keep it warm.
Supposing it was Thysbe, and would swear,
no creature ere could be more welcome there,
Straight would he call on Hymen, then inuit,
his friends and kinsfolk to his nuptial rite.
And faigning their replies, thanks he would give,
vowing requital once, if he should live.
Oh what distractions haunt a lovers mind
passing those bounds which nature has assigned,
Naught upon earth, but limits has we see,
but boundless love can nere contained be.
Herbs yield a sovereign cure to every wound,
but for loves cure, in herbs no virtue 's found.
Then blessed is he, and in an happy state,
who for loves dart is made inuulnerate.
Yet was it hard to see and not to love,
Thysbe's admired beauty, which could move,
Serpe^ts, birds, pla^ts brute beasts which grase and feed,
more then ere Orpheus with his music did.
Her goulden tresses, pure ambrosian,
Fairer then all the twists Arachne span,
Shone far more bright then Phoebus glistring rays,
by all men's judgments, meriting more praise;
Her coral lip, (no lip) but ports of pleasure,
which seemed to open to whole mines of treasure,
Appeard so sweet, that all was sweet about it,
for I am sure naught could be sweet without it.
Her breasts two iuory mounts, mounts may I call the^
for many vales of pleasant veins empall'd them
These like two borders, did such sweets display,
that who lodged there, lodged in the milkie way.
Below a shady vale, aye me that shade,
which nature in her own despite had made,
Had made for glory of that sacred mount,
with the sweet Nectar of a lively fount.
A still distilling fount, an heavenly river,
for there is no earthly spring can spring for ever.
Her wanton gate, her glance, her smile, her toying,
all joyed in one, showed pleasure in enjoying.
So as b Euphrates, where this city bounded,
vents up his passions, for he often resounded
Beating his bancks, and eccoing in the air,
and then retiring back, seemed to despair.
That Thysbe could not love a senseless one,
at which repining, he would make his moan.
Has not my current ere renowned been,
for th'easie passage of my quiet stream?
Has not my torrent yielded much content,
to gild his means, whose means where wholy spent?
Have I not suffered much? sustained great pains,
fraughting your travail with a double gains.
And for supporting of so many ships,
may not Euphrates graze upon her lips,
Whom thus he loves? unthankful coast (quoth he)
respecting least, who did the most for thee.
This being said, he could express no more,
but in a loue-sicke passion, bett the shore.
And to c confirm, what I have heard men say,
he left his course and took another way.
If senseless rivers that were never seen
to love, or care for loving, held no mean,
In their affecting Thisbe: what should he
that had both sense and reasons purity?
Pure in his mind, and fair in beauties show,
Narcissus second for his comely hew:
Lipp'd like Ador is, Frycina loved,
shaped like Alexis Pollyos approved.
Graced with a smiling countenance, which did breed,
a lovely white, mixed with a comely red.
Two sparkling eyes pierciue as Diamond,
which, whersoere they gas'd, they seemed to wou^d,
That though the Sun were set, yet his bright eyes
shone as the Beams which from the sun do rise:
The night being gone, too long god wot in going,
her wandering lights to Tethis banks bestowing,
Titan came peeping in at Thyisbes chamber,
whom she reflected with her locks of amber.
Each other greeting, as if had been there,
two Suns at once, both in one hemysphere.
Hard was the combat, but more hard it were,
to tell whose beams diffused their light most clear,
Yet in the end Titan in an angry mood,
seeming surpast, did hide him in a cloud.
Thysbe puts on her cloths, blessed were those cloths,
thrice happy shade, that shadowed such a Rose,
Where being dressed, not dressed as she would be,
she took her to her prayers religiously.
High heavens (quoth she) from whence al pleasures flow,
deigne some of them on Thysbe to bestow.
For by your power, which I do much adore.
I love but that which you have loved before.
Thou thundering Jove, did dote as well as I,
when thou desired with Danae to lie;
Which to effect, thou turned her to a shower.
a Goulden shower her beauty to defloure,
For clothed in lightning, Danae denaied,
to join with thunder: afterward arr^id
In dewie moisture, (moisture we do love,)
she cast off shame, and did thy shape approve.
And Juno lou's Ixion for his kiss,
Venus, Adonis, for his comeliness.
Daphne (poor Laurel) chased by Apollo,
running as fast before as he did follow*
Thus did your love, your lust, your thoughts renew,
if I think ill, I think no worse then you.
And well may gods with women's sex dispense,
Since they were first authorized their offense.
My love's not spotted with lascivious tutch,
unless it be by loving overmuch.
Nor branded with the note of Infamy,
but pure as Delia Queen of Chastity.
Thoughts are the worst, my actions they be clear,
and he'se no man whose thoughts nere soyled were.
Then pardon if I love, suppose it zeal,
whose passions be too hot for to conceal:
Leaving her Orisons, composed of Love,
love dallying prayers: her eyes aside she moves,
And sees the chinke* which she first saw before,
which did augment her dolors much the more.
For she recalled to mind, to memory,
her mothers chiding, fathers Jealousy;
Both which a stream of tears extract from her,
as if pale death her comforts should interre.
Often would she call on lovely Pyramus,
with smothered speech, as one suspicious:
Lest the pure air, and walls adjoining near,
should prattle love unto her parents ear.
Often would she nibble out a stone or two,
to make the crift seem bigger to the show
Of her deep love: for they suspected were,
therefore debard, lest they should come too near.
Pyramus pent up all this while, at last,
gets out and hies him to the chinke as fast.
Where what discourse their mutual love affoorded,
seemed by the Gods in heaven to be recorded.
Either with greedy eye gasing on other,
Thysbe looked back sometimes, doubting her mother:
For she suspected much her jealous eye,
in her loves presence to be ever by.
Envious wall often would these lovers say,
divide thy self and let us have a way,
To meet, to kiss, to parley and relate,
the solemn festiues of our nuptial state.
Why should thy marble stuctures hold us out,
whose love encircles Babylon about?
Or why should terrene composition move
a breach or separaration of our love?
Love is celestial: thou a marble shrine,
why should thou hinder love that is divine?
And yet we cannot so ungrateful be,
but we must offer up our thanks to thee;
Our vows, our gifts, our best pris'd sacrifice,
in that thou yields a passage to our eyes,
Yielding some comfort in this gloomie night,
supplying kisses with the use of sight.
Love has some harmony, some small agreeing,
for what it wants in tutch it has in seeing.
Hesperias garden was by serpents kept,
whose ever watching eye-liddes never slept.
And Colchis Fleece was kept as warily,
till Iasons means obtained the victory
So be our loves immured, interred rather,
by two suspicious dames, one subtle father.
Then would they kiss the wall and often entreat,
that in compassion it would let them meet.
We willl not tell our parents, nor express,
who it was, gave way unto our happiness.
Lovers be faithful, of our faiths believe us,
since this straight durance cannot choose but grieve us.
The wall replyde not: yet their words had force,
piersing her hardness, foftned with remorse.
For ever since, as well it may appear,
the marble sheds each morn a Trickling tear,
Thus did these lovers pass the weary morn,
deprived of that which lovers best adorn,
And that is private meeting, which being missing,
we beat the air but with conceit of kissing,
A vain conceit, to dally with delight,
Expecting sunshine in a clowdy night.
Imparadis'd in joys he cannot be,
that is clad in sable roabs of misery.
Oh then conceive what sorrow he sustaines,
that in perpetual languishment remains.
O what distractions do his joys disseuer,
feeding like vultures on his heart for ever.
If c Zeuxes pictured grapes, so lively were;
That many birds in flocks repaired there,
Pecking upon his statues, and did brow se
upon his lively grapes, mere liueles shows.
Well may we think, that Jove himself can make,
a far more lively, and proportioned shape,
Then a poor painter; though his Grapes seem ripe,
yet they were drawn from Jove's first Archetype.
Then Jove's best picture, Natures admiration,
Thysbe, even Thysbe made for recreation,
May well be thought to draw each bird each beast,
from Pastures green, upon her lips to feast.
It were a festiue banquet there to be,
whose breath is Nectar, breathing deity.
Here Pyramus would be, if heavens would grant it,
for he esteems no treasure, whilst he wants it,
Since such a Jewel, such a precious Gem,
in that it is rare, is more admired by men.
Thus Tantalised, the Gods do seem to love him,
setting him fruit, but fruit too far above him:
For when his lips (pure lips) should but com ny them
they mock his lips and in dirision fly them.
Do fly my lips (quoth he) o do not fly me,
for what I do, I do it but to try thee,
To try thy loves which though our parents thwarted
our conioin'd love disioin'd shall nere be parted,
Well may our bodies be disioin'd a sunder,
but love's to headstrong, none can keep it under:
Love is freeborn, it cannot servile be,
to beg for courtesy with a bended knee.
Thysbe kept concord, for each word he spoke,
seemed her retired passions to awake,
Stird up her spirit, as inspired by fate,
making her stout that was effeminate.
Continue thy intendments sweet, quoth she,
and as thy shadow I will follow thee,
Passing a sea of dangers launching deep,
^ill ^ the shadow to the substance creep,
Pass or't as forest, snow-cliued Caucasus,
Thysbe will follow steps of Pyramus;
The c Riphea^ Mountains, or the Hetririan plains,
Each morn resounding with the notes of swains,
If thou love Vin^lus, with her fragrant spices,
or Eric^hea famous for devices:
Thysbe will follow thee with speed she may,
only, her travail with thy love repaie.
But these are but discourses of our ill,
which if not cured, be augmented still.
For that you know renues the malady,
which rubs the sore, and yields no remedy:
For why should any labor me remove,
From that admired mirror whom I love.
And I am of that nature: more they hold me,
from fancying thee, more passions do enfould me;
Then plot (my Pyramus,) contriue, invent,
that we may harbor love in loves content,
Till wearied with joy, wearyed too soon,
thou leave adoring of the watrie Moon.
Where being cloyed with the sweetes of love
may leave the vale, and taste the fruits above.
Thou art my shepherd, I will be thy plain,
I the poor cottage, thou the homely swain,
Thou shall refresh thy self upon my banckes,
which having don, I know thou'le give me thanks,
For my diffused streams, streams merely sent,
not much enforced from Thysbes continent,
Come then, for why should any marble wall
being material substance, so appall
Our ardent wishes, wishes which proceed
from loue-sick passions, which more passions feed.
Let our distilling tears congealed in one,
dissolve the hardness of this flinty stone.
Remorse may move this stone by divine wonder,
to let us meet, divide herself a sunder.
This said, maine rivers of distreaming tears,
in their woes-torrents purblinde eyes appears,
Seeking, but seeking all in vain God wot,
to move that shrine which weeping moved not.
It wept to see true love so strait confinde,
disioyn'd by fates, which favors had combinde.
It wept to see their parents so unkind,
to curb their bodies presence, whose pure mind,
Rapt with content of seeing, not enjoying,
acts discontent, debard of further toying.
It wept to see their minds so well agreeing
in one self place, not to have one selfe-being*
It wept and much repined that dismal fate,
Should cross pure love by loue-disioyned hate:
And pitying their case shed many a tear,
Shedding so many, she her self did were.
Oh what hard hearted parents had these two,
since what the stones allowed, they will not allow,
Reproouing that in theirs, themselves affected,
soiling their youth with what their youth respected
Are these the fruits and honors of our time,
the fruitless blossoms of a sterile clyme?
Are these our loving Sires? oh no, they are hard,
to press down love, that cannot be debarred.
You high resplendent heavens, whose cherishing heat
with seasoned warmth, our spacious borders greet,
Temper such parents hearts, as are not won,
till both their line and linnage be undone.
Soften their stifned minds, oppressed with rage,
playing sharp tyrants in declining age.
For why should they find fault their children play,
since in their prime they played as much as they.
Decrepit age, stilted for want of strength,
with brinish tears deplores their sins at length;
But thus I conster't: They their age deplore,
their youth is spent, and they can do no more.
And like an envious viper, would have none,
to use their strength, because their strength is gone.
But old age ers in this* experienced wit
swaies their proceedings, youth abandons it.
Nor do they know what hurt poor maids receive,
to pen them up from that they wish to have.
For though they be immured in walls of Brass,
Love has her loope-holes by which she will pass*
Inspite of jealous dotage, and espies
some privy chinke, though wacht by g Linceus eyes,
For love enclosed like raging elements
of fire and water, though imprisoned, vents,
And must eruption have, it cannot be
an heavenly motion should want liberty.
h Eurydice though shes enforced to dwell,
in Stygian Plutoes court infernal hell,
Yet her transmounting passions do remove
themselves from hell unto the earth above.
Poor swain Dorinda though by Satires kept,
in a vast cave, whose watchful eyes nere slept,
But with reflection both by night and day,
had special care lest she should get away,
Comforts her self in loving, fearing not,
but chaste desires ore long would get her out,
Love is enfranchisd not in bonds retained,
spotless as Crystal, for no soil can stain it.
The boistrous winds shut up in iron grates,
on each occasion and intendment waits,
When they come forth their tempests hurrie more
grieved at their durance, then they did before.
That morn which se^ds her glittering rays too soon,
sables her sun in clouds ere it be noone.
But when its long ere that her beams appear,
we do presage ere night they will shine more clear.
i Thetis exiled from her marine seat,
a willing exile with the Sea^nimphs meets,
To celebrate Achilles funerals,
in sable robes, in dismal festiuals.
Each wept whole flou^s of tears to wash his hearse,
whereon engraven was a doleful verse;
That no hard hearted passenger came by,
but seeing it, would sheede tears instantly:
Some made relation of his valiant spirit,
some of the glory which his acts did merit:
And woeful Brusis one amongst the rest,
being his captive, whom she loved best,
Emburied him with liquid streams of sorrow,
renewing grief with each renewing morrow.
So did these lovers, lovers too sincere,
rise ere the morning daystar could appear,
Bewayling much their parents frowardness,
that kept them from the support of happiness*
Happy, if happy in enjoying love,
to see the Turtle billing with the Dove,
The skipping Kid, the Goat, the pensive Hind,
consorting each with other in their kind:
Yet these two lovers are debard from this;
what brute beasts have, they have not but in wish:
And wishes yield small comfort, poor relief
to such as are pressed down with heaps of grief.
O that heavens splendour, her translucent eye
should see, and seeing, piety misery,
Yet suffer man to be oppres'd therewith,
Making him die a never dying death.
Or why should man endu'd with reasons light,
In his own bowels harbor such a fight,
As may subvert the palace of the soul,
ecclipsing it, making her bewty foul;
Converting that by her depraved will,
as first seemed good to some apparent ill;
Not gathering honey from each bitter flower
of discontent, nor reaping sweet of sower,
But in distractions passionate we run,
in headlong course till that we be undone:
And then despairing, we reside in woe
shut up in shelfes: we know not where to go.
The silly Be that labors in her hiue,
in her Hyblaean works addres'd to strive,
With nature in proportion: seems to make,
more for her self then nature for her sake,
In her digesting and disposing fit,
what she had gathered by her native wit,
^he rests secure of love, worse hap have we,
oppressed with loue-sick passions then has she
But heavens have so decreed; this is our lotte
Creatures that have most reason, most should dote.
Thus each ore-shadowing eu'ning shadowed hope,
aiming at love, love was their only scope:
At which they leuelled: But ('las) disdain
soaring aloft, the fruit of love retains:
Locked from all comfort, shut from sweet repose,
she to their parents does their love disclose.
Telling them how their children made repair,
unto a chinke which breathed a cooling air.
Yielding content enough: and they should see
that ere long time Thysbe would fruitful be.
Their parents stamped, but Tymon most of all,
for he was rich and feared his daughters fall.
Yet well he could have brook'd her nuptial bed,
if he were rich that should his daughter wed.
Fie on such Gould-adoring parentage,
that rests respectlesse both of youth and age,
Who measure love by wealth are sure to have,
Midas his ears, deprived of what they crave,
They wrest their childrens minds to make them taste,
the sweet of Gold, which works their baine at last.
m Thus parents are as vipers to their seed,
since they their venom in their bosoms feed.
Which like to Naptha that being once inflamed,
Burns of it self, and cannot be restrained.
But love the more repressd the more confined,
increases so much more in lovers mind.
n For though their watchful eyes did still look ore them,
Gods pitying their distres did more deplore them.
And Jove himself yields sovereign remedy,
to these two lovers fraught with misery.
And well might Jove yield comfort to their wounds,
since he his passions on like passions grounds.
For he (though God) did doat as well as man,
transforming Leda to a milk white Swan.
Jove in his aerie throne with piercing eyes,
these lovers griefs from high Olimpus spies,
And spying them oppres'd, pres'd down with loving
their humane passions force a divine moving.
You fruitful sprigs sprung of a fruitful tree,
I hear your plaints, and I do pity ye,
That the joint tablet of two loving hearts
should be divided into several parts.
Hard-hearted Parents, made of Marble sure,
Or else they could not such distress endure,
That their own budding blossoms which did grow,
from their unseasoned bosom should bestow
Their oil, their labor in affections strains,
yet kept in thraldom by their parents reins.
But I that have the Regiment above,
rules Cupids arrows, knows the use of love,
I that have poasted down from heavens high sphere,
to Danae, Io, and the milke-maides here,
And to Latona bewties sacred Queen,
yet to this hour, as Jove I nere was seen,
Nor ever known, such was our divine power,
transuming shapes of plants and roarie showers,
Will pity your affections and apply,
Unto your wounds are present remedy.
For we (as men) do naught of women crave,
but what they well may give, and we may have.
If the oreshadowing clouds whose duskie face,
obscures heavens splendour, Sols refulgent grace*
If misty vapors, foggy excrements,
thickened by mixture of gross elements,
If Heaven, earth, Sea, plants, stones, or serpents may
yield you content, or can your woes allay,
Rely on me; for Jove's high diadem,
was first ordained to succor wretched men,
And by the flagrant cresset of the Sun,
well either see your minds united one,
Or else my power shall contradict her self,
Making affection vassaile unto pelf,
Which were discordant music, harsher strains,
then ere Pan sung among his country swains
For its not fit that handmaids should command us
or subject powers should in their acts withstand us.
Pelf (worlds trash) in lowest rank should sit,
love as a Mistress framd to manage it:
For who will contemn the day, the night adore,
set best behind, and worst part before.
Jove having in compassion seen their woes,
to o Hesperus the evening st^r he goes,
And bids her show her light, for by her aid,
she might yield succor to a helpless maid,
Hesperus roused, roused before her time
in heavens horizon straight began to shine:
Ore cannoping heavens beawtie with a cloud,
all which by Jove himself was well allowde,
Then wandering stars in different dignity,
sent out their lights disparkled orderly.
Arctophilax begotten of the bear,
and Cassiopeia likewise did appear,
The Pleiades, Orion, with the rest,
Castor and Pollux, whom Jove loved best;
All these consort and make one constellation,
at Jove's command for lovers recreation.
The heavens be-sprinkled thus with sundry lights,
limit the day by bringing on the night,
To comfort wearied spirits spent with toil,
whose troubled brains the nightime should assoil.
For Jove at first conceiving mortal seed,
amidst his labors some repast to need,
Created night those cares to take away,
which had been fostred on the toilesome day.
Night wished night, to Lovers that desire
to be partakers of that heavenly fire,
Cupid (blind boy) infuseth in their breast,
which once infused engenders their unrest.
But its no matter, leave we cannot loving,
though bitter fruits redound to our approving:
This gloomy night yields comfort to their woe,
For Jove had showen the place, where they should go.
To Ninus toomb, a toomb to bury grief
shaded with covert, fit for loves relief:
These two blessed lovers, blessed in loves appearing,
address their eye for sight, their ear for hearing.
L^st their suspicious Parents should sift out,
Their fond intendments which they went about:
The Night was very dark, dark nights be best,
For such as on the daytime take no rest.
Since each disparkling beam which does appear,
yields to a Jealous lover cause of fear.
But duskie nights which Lovers best approve,
give free access of parley unto love.
Thisbe loue-sicke, for love had made her sick,
time thus occasioned, finds a pretty trick
To gull her keepers and her Parents too,
which who can blame her, all that love will do:
Dear be our Parents loves, their wills, their blessing^
by which we prosper: deerer be the kissings
Of those we love sincerely from our heart,
for where they be there is our chiefest part.
No unfrequented desert can remove
our hearts from them whom we entirely love.
No distance can disioine united minds,
no labyrinth framed with Meanders winds:
We rest the same or else it cannot be,
that our affections ground on constancy.
Thisbe with creeping pace paced ore the floor,
oyling the hinges of the creeking door,
Lest it should show her meaning to her mother,
whose eyes she q feared more then any other.
For they were too too jealous and would spy,
more in her dealing then her fathers eye:
For he was bedridden and could hardly move
his senseless ioints and knew not what was love:
Yet this bed full of bones, this sap-lesse wretch
had sap within his chest, for he was rich;
And more, for which all wisemen-may deride him,
he ever loved to have his gold beside him:
For on his trash he was so deeply rooted,
that he (fond-man could never sleep without it:
Thus had he much, yet he desired much more
his gold, his Idol which he did adore.
And though he had no use for that he got,
yet he from raking more surceased not.
Which punishment was first inflict'd by Jove,
Rich men should have no use of what they love;
But in an^n-bred appetite to gold,
delight to have it every minute told:
Which being done making an endless pain,
they tell their trash and put it up again.
Thus did this aged Tymon: and respected,
wealth more then youth of girls most affected,
For richlesse was the scope he leuel'd at,
heel call none sons but men of good estate.
Worth worthless seems, if worth have no retire,
nor means by which their honor might aspire.
For beggar Irus whose estate was poor,
made Ithacus to drive him out of door.
And seeing him arraide in beggars list,
in furious passion slew him with his fist.
Thus men are made respectlesse for their want,
and poverty, though fair, yet whole not taunt?
Deeming them most unfit of honors throne,
that have more wit then fortune of their own,
But he that poiseth worth as worth should be,
will not obscure true worth for poverty;
Being the substance and maine difference,
twixt savage beasts and humane excellence.
And more is trash inferior to the mind,
then pith of trees superior to the rind:
Thysbe escaping, hies her to the place
which was appointed: her admired face
Cast such a luster on the plains below,
as sleepy mountains covered with snow.
In Maiden white appareld: maids should be
arraied so to show their modesty;
Such piercing eyes she had, which shon so bright,
that they gave day unto a gloomy night:
So that each Wood-nimph, Faune and Satyr there,
rose from their caves perceiving light appear.
Siluanus god of woods and desert groves,
his shaggy head from off his pillow moves;
And half asleep seeing his arbor shine
and all about him, long before his time
He girds his quiver to him, and drew near
to Ninus toombe, where sunbeams shon most clear:
Where he no sooner came; ay me! too soon
to that unlucky shrine that ominous toombe:
But seeing her he cast all sleep aside,
sewing, and suting Thysbe for his bride.
Mirror of women, best of Natures art,
hear a poor wood-god that has pledged his heart
To thee and to thy feature: heavenly queen
that would these flowery thickets well beseem,
Sit thee down here: this is an arbor sweet,
where all the wood nymphs use each even to meet
Making a concord; whose mellifluous sound,
would glad the birds and all the desert round:
The Nimphs shall make their prayers and renew,
each morn their hymns, that they may pleasure you
The Muses nine from Pyerus shall descend,
and to our music their attention lend,
Where if there any discord chance to be,
Muses themselves will yield a remedy.
There Clio, Erato, and Melpomene,
Euterpe, Thalia, and Calliope,
Terpsychore, Urania, and that sweet
tong'd Poly-himnia singing at thy feet
All these shall grace thee in this rural plain,
if thou can brook to love a Country swain:
Yet am I borne more high then mortal men.
derived from gods even of immortal stem,
t Sprung my beginning, therefore scorn not me,
since if thou match thou match's with deity.
The flowery shrubbs thou see do I command,
nay even the Cedar which so high does stand,
Rests at my power: there is no branch does grow,
whose moisture does not from Syluanus flow.
The sweetest spices of Arabia,
the preciou'st perfumes breath in Lidia,
Smell by my means: for my celestial power,
can make each stinking weed a fragrant flower.
Then dear affect me, for no perfume's good*
if I want thee that perfumes every Wood.
Thysbees reply.
IF you (quoth Thysbee) as you do profess,
derive your birth from gods then show no lesse^ maid,
For its not fit that gods with stars araid,
and heavens immortal sphaeres, should love a
u A Country less best fits a Country swain,
his oaten pipe best suites with her harsh strain.
Those gods that in Olympus regiment,
sit and bear rule skorne baser elements.
Then if you be divine, as sure you be,
surcease your suite which yields indignity*
To that high offspring whence you did proceed,
stain not your love with any mortal seed.
Does mine high lineage (quoth Syluanus) show,
that I am too divine to match with you;
Thou art sure born of that ambrosian air,
which is infused in me: thou art too fair
To be of mortal race, oh do not then
debase that fair so much to match with men:
Yet if thou will not match but with a swain,
He be no god that I thy love may gain.
A shepherds habit I will take upon me,
if in that habit I may live with thee.
For credit me (heavens saint) if thou partake
of man, all men i will honor for thy sake:
Then love Siluanus, do not blush be free,
love god or swain, Syluanus both will be.
Thisbees reply.
IT ill becomes, quoth ^he, your peerless state,
with silly maids to be importunate:
You should protect our weakness and defend
our brittle sex, and ever be a friend
To woman's weak proceedings, ceasing still
to draw devoted Virgins to your will:
We that are consecrate to Vestas shrine,
must in no lascivious meetings spend no time.
If thou (quoth he) to Vesta dedicate
thy vows, thy hests: what make the here so late?
For well I know dame Vesta cannot bide
her maids should walk alone in evening tide.
And those that mean to satisfy her will.,
must both be chaste and fear suspicions ill.
Thysbe stood mute, she knew not what to say,
without reply she went a pretty way
And could not answer, for her tripping tongue
and modest silence told she spoke a wrong.
For she nere Vesta loved nor Vestas order,
but this was best excuse the time afford'd her.
Churlish Syluanus (for he was a churl)
so to importune a poor Country girl,
Half mad with anger that she would not yield
unto his suite: takes in his hand his shield,
And raging sternely, swears he means to go,
where he will plunge her in a depth of woe.
Are you so coy (quoth he) that you will deny,
to join with gods immortal deity?
Well learn young girls manners if we live,
and make them ^ew, that they our power should grieve
With this he went fast crot^ing up the hill,
pursuing hot the project of his will.
Intending to command some savage beast,
upon her, whom he loved, he liked to feast.
And reaching near unto the hill above,
he wagg'd his hand, and asked if she would love?
But she denied him love: do you deny me?
fond? quoth Syluanus, savages shall try thee,
And thy affection: which no sooner said,
then he sent out a Lion to this Maid.
A Lion new returnde from ravening pray,
came to the fount, his blood to wash away.
Where with a shaking pace he seemed to come
toward the place appointed Ninus tomb.
But Luna pitting poor Thysbes case,
sends out her light, to tell her who it was
That now approached her, whom no sooner spide,
then in a Cave, poor Thysbe did her hide.
But out alas for fear, she ran so fast,
that she forgot her tire through too much have:
For she all breathl^sse, and quite out of wind,
running so fast did leave her tire behind.
And as one careless of her weal or woe,
distressed thus, she knew not were to go,
Careless of what she left or what she had,
not knowing what was good, from what was bad.
Yet nature grafts in all a native fear,
by which the event of all things do appear,
As we conceive yield danger to our state,
and fear by time, lest we should fear too late.
Thus she pent up within a desert cave,
with sobs and sighs, express what she would have,
For in that Cave she wished her love were there,
For loves embraces would exempt her fear.
Often did she think the Lion staid without,
and therefore trembling Thysbe made a doubt,
To take the open air, but pent within,
wished in her heart, she had caractred him,
Whom she admires and loves, whose sweet respect,
makes her to have her parents in neglect.
But he too slow, aye me, too slow in doing,
being so forward in his formal woing:
Stays too too long, being more warely kept,
by such sharp keepers, that all night nere slept:
But as one grasing Heart the rest does keep,
by watchful eyes warning the rest that sleep;
So ever one was waking, that might call
upon the rest if any thing befall:
The Lion having quenched his scorching thirst,
with springing water which he longed for first:
Found Thysbes tire, and with his bloody pray,
besmeard the same, which done, he went away.
Now in the end Pyramus took a time,
a time too late to answer love divine:
Yet in this silent course of nighterne race,
with quick recourse he runs unto the place.
z So that to see him frolic ore the plain,
were worth more prise then z Hipodamias gain*
For golden apples drew her tempting eye,
But this young youth affects no vanity
But the true touch of love: vain, if abused*
but precious as pure gold, if rightly used.
Then who will blame us, labors to endure,
if we hy labors can our love make sure?
For constant love no travail will eschew,
that constant love by travail may renew.
Alcides he can serve the Lidian queen,
in spinning, carding, which do ill beseem
So stout a mirrors magnanimity,
but he must do it, there is no remedy.
For when his manly nature did withstand it,
one glance of her could well enough command it.
No spacious co^fines nor indurate labor,
if these ore-past, could purchase ere her favor,
Would he refuse: one smile reward enough,
for all the labors he had passed through.
Thysbe the troph^e of his breathing course,
Thysbe the garland which does him enforce.
Her he respects, and whiles he runs apace,
he meditates of Thysbes beuteous face;
Her comely feature made for Adons shrine,
whose Iuory orbs like Pelops shoulders shine,
Had made that deep impression in his heart,
that Nature seemed to strive with Natures Art.
Nature had given her much, Art much the more,
Art decking that which Nature dres'd before.
For that same creature cannot perfect be,
where Art and nature join not mutuallie.
If you would have the module of true wit,
Nature creates, but Art must polish it.
Thysbe was perfect both in Natures ^ew,
and artificial colors, which did show,
As if both Art and Nature should contend*
to make her such an one no skill could mend;
For she was witty* pregnant, full of favor,
Dictinna like, sent out a fragrant savor,
That when she walkt' in Babilons fair street,
she made the kennel with her perfumes sweet.
Pyramus coming, coming all too late,
to Ninus tomb expects his bewteous mate.
Whom when he could not find, he feared her end.
Fear is an adiunct to a faithful friend.
Roundly he goes unto the silver spring,
where all the water-nimphs were wont to sing,
In honor of their Goddess and her bewty,
to whom they offered hymns as was their duty.
He asked the Nymphs if they his Thysbe knew,
describing her, and eke her matchless hew:
And if they did, he praid them seek about
their Nectar springs with him to find her out,
For if you be immortal, as you seem,
and dedicate your service to your Queen,
A beter service sure you cannot do her,
then to redr^sse them owe their service to her.
This if you will in your compassion do,
I swear each morn I Will offer thime to you.
Better then any Hyble, can afford,
with music sweet to which the heavens accord,
And ever rest devoted to your shrine,
in that you dayn'd to glad this heart of mine.
The water-nimphs replide with curtuous cheer,
they knew none such, nor any did apeare,
But if it pleased him, they their springs would seek,
exquire each bushie shade, each private creek,
To see if she were in their mansions hid,
which he assented to; all which they did:
But when with watrie tripping they had sought
both brake and brier; yet could not find her out,
Wearied with their diurnall labor, left
Pyramus sighing, of all joy bere^t;
Yet did these nymphs bemone his hard mishap,
for sitting down under Nereus lap,
They turned their Warbling strings to that sad strain,
that all the woods re-eccoed them again.
Each in their order sung their doleful verse,
as if it had been over Thysbes hearse,
And tuned their odes with that unseasoned time,
as that brute beasts to pity did incline,
For they in sable colors did portend,
that their two loves were near a tragic end.
Thus shadie night, Sea-nimphs, stars, plan'ts and all
presage to them and to their loves a fall.
Yet Pyramus though sad, for he was sad
to have those hopes extinguished, which he had,
Seeks still about the tomb: sad tomb (quoth he)
that hides my love, so much admired of me:
Yet if thou will but tell me where she is,
I vow by Heavens I Will pardon what is amiss,
Yea I Will remit thine error and thy wrong,
for keeping her within thy chest so long,
Say, wilt thou^ tell me what became of her?
Did thou her bewty in thy shrine inter?
Did thou immure her in thy marble toombe?
what makes thee silent? bewty makes thee dumb:
Will thou so wrong a lover to conceal,
From him the mirror of his joy his, weal,
His heart, his liking even the flower of youth?
and yet conceiues within thy heart no ruth.
Fie, fie for shame: is it fit that monuments
should so eclipse natures best ornaments?
As to obscure the glory of her face,
that where she is gives honor to the place.
Thou much abstracts from trophies Ninus won,
in doing that which he would nere have done.
Thou lessens much the honor he obtained,
loosing that fame which Ninus conquests gained.
For what great gain or conquest is it to have said,
I have possession of a country maid.
A young vnnurtur'd girl fit for men,
unfit for liuelesse tombs which cover them?
This said this doting young man, blind with loving,
thinking old moldy shrines had lively moving.
Moved with her love, whom he did more esteem,
then any gem that ere on earth was seen.
But when he saw into his error well,
He seemed those loue-sick passions to dispell,
And to repair unto his search again,
seeking each covert, each unhaunted plain,
Each thick-set hill, each grove that he might find,
the diapason of his troubled mind.
At last too soon, by seeking long he found,
( Thysbe) not Thysbe, but her tire on ground.
Unhallowed ground, unseasoned her attire, ^
to cross the passions of an hot desire.
Oh now conceive what sorrows gall his breast,
to see the tire of her he loved best,
Be smeard with blood, for it all bloody shows,
her sanguine color tinct^ with Lions jaws;
Often would he look upon it, and would kiss,
the tire besmeared with blood, wishing it his,
His fate, his fortune, to remain with her,
since his long absence thus had injured her.
How to remain (quoth he) since she is dead,
oppressed by death, enclosed in mourneful weed*
How should I live with her whose life is gone,
and has left me (unhappy me) alone.
Die, die, with her, with whom thou can not live,
For thou by dying shall thy life repriue.
And have her presence that enthroned is,
in perfect ioies of heavens Elisian bliss.
Yet stay awhile, this is not Thysbes tire,
stay there (fond wretch) against thy tongue a liar.
This was her roabe, this was her comely weed,
which having lost her owner gins to bleed.
Oh Jove what cause had thou thus to remove
two, that had their intentions voud to love,
Or why should thou this fair occasion show us,
which being shown, do seek for to undo us?
Be gods so iron-hearted, to require
constant affection with a dismal spite?
A sharp revenge it is, to set us on,
and then to leave us when we are begun.
Did not high Jove yield us more hopes then these,
when he commanded Phoebus to sure ease,
For to diffuse his beams, bidding him go,
retire in have unto the shades below.
Calling for Luna to supply his place,
shrowding heavens luster with her clowdy face.
That our escape suspected less might be,
by the dark veil of nights obscurity.
But heavens I see, repine at our success,
since Gods themselves by Fates have showed no less,
To plunge my weal in woe, my love in tears,
producing naught, but sighs, and fruitless fears.
Thou harsh tuned Nemesis, thou tragic ghost,
against whose acts my love declaimeth most:
What cause had thou to sing this doleful song,
upon her hearse that never did thee wrong?
She never raild against thy Sovereign power,
but like an harmless dove, a fragrant flower;
Flourished secure at home, yielding content,
by graceful smiles, a maids best ornament:
She never curbed thy rage, nor did she mell
with ought but love, which made worst for her sell.
But Fates have made the instrument of sin,
respectlesse of our loss, so they may win.
The precious spoil of Thysbes bleeding soul,
whose sad mishap the plants themselves condole.
Yet thou remorselesse art, ill may betide thee,
that would have none to love that live beside thee.
Yet for all this thou can not me deprive,
of loving her, whose life did me revive,
For being dead, I Will rather choose to die,
then living, lose her loving company.
This said: he takes her tire, and kissing it,
upon the fountain banks did water it,
With dewie moisture of still-flowing tears,
which being shed, renewing drops appears.
Tears liquefied the arbor where he sat,
which water nimphs perceiving, wondered at.
Often would he beat his breast, and tear his hair,
shutting his hopes in clouds of deep despair.
Often would he curse the day, the hour, the night,
that banished him from Thisbes gladsome sight.
Wishing that night had never been descride,
for nere did night more harsh events betide.
Oh Pyramus, and then he sighed to speak,
for gusts of sorrow made his hart-strings break.
What meant thou to allure a simple maid,
to these vvild woods? her love is well repaid,
That she should come unto the place assignd,
and thou (base coward) come so far behind.
Thou with a tardy pace came at thy leisure,
such slow-paced coursers ill deserve such pleasure,
Thou too precise, made bones of what thou did,
such fond precisenes seldom has good speed.
She to enjoy her joy, cut off delay,
that she her minds perfection might display,
And with a course as quick as Pegasus,
run ore these plains to meet with Pyramus,
Which thou requited ill, basest of men,
which time shall character with scandalls pen.
A scandal to thy sex, and to thy state,
to leave thy love in deserts desolate.
Oh what mishap had she to love a swain,
that could not yield her love for love again?
Hard was her fortune to affect that creature,
who for a childish fear delaid to meet her.
The gods I know more forward would have been,
to meet loves Parragon, so fair a Queen.
As for her beauty, aye me, beauties fair,
with Ericina she might well compare;
And far more modest: Venus had her mole,
but nere was Thysbe stained with bewties soil.
But thou have stained her beauty by thy fault,
ruined that fort, which never had assault,
But by thy self, and by thy self too soon,
since by thy means her shrine is razed down.
Turn thee to heaven, and lo the heavens dismayed,
to see the tragic downfall of a maid:
Frowning at thee that was the cause of this,
causing her end that was thy Sovereign bliss.
Turn thee to earth, and see her turned to earth,
which makes the caves below resound with mirth
That they enjoy which thou did once enjoy,
reaping their comfort from thy deep annoy.
Turn thee unto the Sea, and thou shall see,
The Nymphs and Sirens crying out against thee.
That should make promise, yet not promise hold,
calling thee coward, but thy Thysbe bold.
Bold* to adventure on the gloomy night,
bold to encounter with Latonas light.
Bold in her course, swift in her cursiue moving,
bold to escape, and constant in her loving:
Thus heaven, earth, Sea, concording all in one,
do simpathize with thy discording moan.
And will thou live for this? O do not live,
but to requite her love, let earth receive
This little All of thine: which when they have,
they may interre two lovers in one grave.
Adjoining to this fount, a rock there was,
so steep and craggy, that no man could pass.
To which wild beasts repaired, making their den
in th'^ollow cau^rnes which did cover them.
Which seen by him^: what do not lovers see?
with face dejected, thus discoursed he.
If any Lion or fierce savage Bear,
lodge in this ragged rock, or coucheth near,
Let him come out, for here is amorous food,
9 and cooling streams to wash away our blood,
That this may bear record by every wight,
two faithful lovers perished on one night.
But these are but delays which cowards use,
10 their trembling passions seeking to excuse,
Cast off vain fear, fear is a vassalls weed,
and place true Resolution in her steed.
(...)
She will prescribe the rules, with fruits of woing,
for fruitless be those fruits that have no doing.
We that do hazard our good names for men,
if they will not pleasure us: what profit then,
Of all our toylsome labor we sustain,
that reap no harvest from such gusts of pain*
We patient are to bear, and what we bore,
we do accept, and wish it ten times more,
That we might pleasure you: how fond are we?
The weaker sort bears your infirmity.
But its our Nature Nature has ordained,
man's str^ngth by woman's weakness is sustained.
In this same cloudy night, with what desire.
did all my thoughts, and my intents aspire?
To that same treasure thou have promised me,
promise is debt, it must be kept by thee,
With what affection have I crossed these plains,
cheered by wood-nimphs, singing pleasant strain^,
And dans'd Laualto till I came to thee,
longing for that which thou did promise me.
Sad Philomela skared from her rest,
sung with a pricking slothorne at her breast,
And sung of Tereus something, what I know not,
which if I knew, yet would I never show it.
12 For Tereus impious in his profane life,
to wrong a sister, and so chaste a wife.
Sustains the torture of his wickedness,
transformed into a Bird: whose filthiness,
Loves marish places, flies the solid ground,
good reason why: his conscience was not sound.
13 For Tireus was a King and for his lust,
by Jove himself, was from his scepter thrust.
A sensual Prince to wanton motions stirred,
changed from a prince, unto a loathsome bird,
Thus did I pass the silence of the night,
till I arrived within my lovers sight,
Which yet I cannot do: oh why should we,
14 to get a little sport, paune modesty?
These shady thickets, and that secret cave.
those prattling Sea-nimphes, and this marble grave,
Bear all record what travel I have taken,
yet like a Turtle of her make forsaken,
Cannot enjoy my love, aye me, unkind,
that seems inconstant, to a constant mind.
Why should our favors so devoted rest,
to them, whose hardened hearts bred our unrest?
And make us subject to more inward grief,
then ere their comforts can afford relief.
But thou art too too rash: (believe me sweet,)
in more remiss Appearance do I greet,
Thy divine beauty; pardon what is said,
conceive no harm spoke by a harmless maid;
For if thou should (as sur^ I think thou do,)
lie hid under some bush, and hearst this noised,
This shroud inue^^io^, against thy love and thee,
thou might as well condemn my speech and me.
Why should I speak against so hallowed shrine,
to whom I have bequeathed both me and mine?
Or why should I detract from that fair sun,
which (if eclipsed) my glistring rays be done?
(...)
(...)
For this same Tree, bears record of our wrack,
decolored quite from white, to dismal black,
And this same ground, all in a gore of blood:
No chi^ping bird within this fatal wood,
And this for love of him, that now is gone,
leaving his forlorn Thysbe all alone.
Hard was mine hap, to see his doleful end,
at whose sad hearse the Fates themselves attend:
Hard was mine hap, more ha^sh the course of time,
to crop my love, my dazie in his prime.
Hard was his hap to extinguish his desire,
with apparition of a bloody tire:
Hard was his hap to forage here so late,
to miss his love, and meet so soon with Fate.
Turn to thy love, see if thy vital breath,
can call him from the slumber of pale death.
See if thou can revive his gasping soul,
for lo his eyes within his head do roll.
Embrace his iuory neck with foulded arms,
destill life in him by thy loving charms.
Buzze in his ears of love, it will not be,
his dying senses have no mind of thee.
Thus round empalld with grief, was Thysbes mind,
no hope of life in him can Thysbe find,
For he grew stiff engor'd with bloody wound,
and by h^s blood fast gl^ed to the ground.
^hysbe espied her Tire which he did hold,
(...) in his hand, and did the same enfould,
As (...) Antidote to cure
his gaping woe(...) make him ere endure:
Unhappy Tire (quoth she) unhappy were,
that gave occasion to my love of fear.
Thou that have pressed my soul in anguish more,
then all the robes which ere I wore before.
Thou wandering stragler, sliding from mine head,
gave the first onset to this ugly deed.
For if thou had not been, my love had lived,
that now of sense and moving is deprived.
What hap had I at first to put thee on,
when dark Latonas lights were drawing on,
Or what misfortune had I for to leave thee,
since thy departure does so greatly grieve me.
It needs must grieve me: for it cuts my heart,
as if my soul from body should depart.
He was my soul, my body cannot breath,
When as my soul is seized on by death.
Why should I have such curious regard
to Nightern robes, when meaner would have serud?
For well I know it was my loves desire,
to meet my self and not my curious tire.
Fie on this nice preciseness weomen use
in garish dressings: men should weomen choose,
Not by their bodies habit, but their mind,
in lists of virtue, and respect confinde.
We that do love as we protest we do,
must not get husbands with a painted show,
Like puppets in a play, addres'd to play
strange acts by night, to purchase love by day.
Best honor that beseems a country maid,
is to be modest, in her actions staid.
(...)
(...)
21He might command, and have what he commanded,
but death, pale death now swaies, and she will withstand it.
Then honored hearse, if hearses honor have,
yield to my suit, and perfect what I crave.
Do not deny me: to deny me this,
were to deprive thee honor me of bliss.
Nay do not smile, (for I do see thee smile)
if that our bones thou in thy breast compile,
And recollect them after Thysbes death,
the Nymphs themselves shall set a laurel wreath
Upon thy back: ever honored shall thou be,
for this good turn thou did my love and me.
But if thou scorn my vows, and call them vain,
yielding no ear to lovers that complain,
Rest Well assured the Nimphs revenged will be.
And for our sakes will quite demolish thee.
When trusty Ajax and Achilles came,
to Patrocles tomb, with tears they bathed the same
For every word they spoke of Patrocles,
drew tears from them, as streams from Caucasus.
Whose ragged top sends rivers out amain,
and being sent, renews her springs again.
So they deplored his death, his sacred hearse,
rank set with embleames and with doleful verse.
The swanes of Caister and eke of Poe,
came to ensable him in songs of woe^
Since which sad time the Poets have reported,
that each day twice the swannes have there resorted.
Passing by flocks along the Greequish plain,
seeking by songs to make him live again.
But when it would not be, the Swans there swore,
that from that time they nere would warble more:
But at their 23 death which they perform: for why
they never sing but hour before they die.
Why should a Grecian have such honor done,
that never any Trophies ere had won,
But slain by Hector: for no fame he had
of doing greatly good, or greatly bad.
And yet forsooth he must characters have*
in golden letters ore his worthless grave*
In polisht marble must his shrine be set
in saphires, 24 tophies and in british ieate.
Thus must he have respect, when we, god wot,
must lie obscure as if men knew us not.
And yet our fame deserves more praise then he,
more grace, more glory, and more memory:
Time shall race out that marble hearse of his,
time shall amend what time has done amiss.
For we shall live in spite of Fates decree,
when low interred this famous Greek shall be.
Love cannot die, we loved and therefore death
shall crown our hearse with times immortal wreath,
And though we die we love and live in dying,
love to pale death perpetual life applying.
Why should prince Ilus acts have such respect
whose toomb with precious emeralds bedeckt?
For well I know such acts did never he,
In amorous passions of true love as we,
25Yet Batias toomb must have inscriptions fair,
to show what man of birth was buried there.
(...)
And yet in death we languish not in loving,
though 27 death deprive us of all vital (...)
For we conceive more joy in toomb'd together,
then if we li^'d deprived the one of other*
More must I say to seal these obsequies;
for death is fearful and inuents delays,
And most of all in us: a weaker brood,
the talk of death yeeldes fear to woman-hood,
And yet, me thinks I stay from him too long,
and in my stay I do him double wrong.
First to deprive him life, and then begin
with tardie p^^e aloof to follow him.
Well I Will prepare my self, the ^ates decres
two Lovers (...) sustain their cruelty.
And ye not cr^^^, cruelty is shown
when either is (...) of his own.
But we by 28 Cupid^ m^anes, that pur blind boy,
obtain by (...) could not erst enjoy,
Death yields (...), comfort then our life time did,
showing our (...) which long before was hid^
No (...) secret ^hinks
need we find (...), nor fearful need we shrink.
For Parents (...) persuite we rest secure,
since (...) hearts, as earth our corp^ (...)
We need not have our Parents in suspect,
they (...) rest ^^relesse now whe^^ we affect*
For well I know we can be hardly seen,
twixt (...) and earth, so great a space between.
Thus (...)enly motion does ascend,
from earth to heaven to gra^ulate her friend,
Thysbees EPICAEDIVM.
YEt Thysbe stay thine hand: thine obsequies,
desire more celebrating exequies;
Die not intestate, in this desert grove,
but consecrate in token of thy love
Thine hests to Vesta. yet let Vesta know,
This be unwilling is enforced so.
Then let thy 29 Parents, Parents though unkind
By Natures law, some short memorials find,
Of thy affection: Swannes before they die,
leave pensive odes and warble merrily.
30 Yet must I needs declaime against your fear,
jealous of hurt where no hurt could appear:
For I am sure nere was your thriuing blissing,
more dear to me then was my lovers kissing.
Oh then unkind v^kindn^sse did not fit,
our chaste desires that could not bridle it.
Love was the hott'st when it did seem concealed,
and hid in ashes, yet in time revealed.
Then blame your selves, not us: you caused our end,
barring a lover from her long sought friend,
Which we do pardon if you will let us have,
our toomb in one, our ashes in one grave.
Which it you shall perform our hope extends,
out dis^o^n'd corpse conioin'd you make amends.
Well do I know our funerals renew,
currents of teres and streams of grief in you.
And many pagent mixd with liquid tears,
will make attendance on our desolate beres,
Many distreaming drops will dim your eye,
to see two lovers end so suddenly.
Yet all in vain, being dead, your tears restrain:
for teeres cannot recall us back again.
The 31 Nymphs themselves with Poplar twigs will make
an osier basket for Idalias sake,
Wherein collect you may such fragrant flowers,
as shall adorn our monumentall bowers:
Yet when you spread your flowers each in degree,
Strew more on his side then you strew on me.
He was more constant, he did first begin,
I like his shadow did but follow him.
He came unto the place, and spite of death
seeing my tire engor'd did lose his breath.
I like an Ape, to imitate my love,
follows his worth, his presence to approve.
A glorious presence where the gods accord
all wealth, all joy, Elysium can afford.
Fruitful Elysis where each constant mate,
reigns in fruition of his happy state,
Where Hero smiles to grapple with her dear,
Jealous of nothing, for no cause of fear
Can cross loves action? there is no Helespont,
But the sweet relish of a Nectar fount
Hight the Castalian fount which Gods adore,
where having drunk thei're never thirsty more.
By this renowned brook, shall he and I,
prattle of love, and parents cruelty.
(...)
Hang not the willow token of disdain
upon our Toome: for that each country swain
Can set upon his shrine: let Venus tree,
the lovely myrtle show our constancy.
If you want any rites or solemn hestes,
which may be seem our graves: the birds protests
Each in their order to solemnise them,
and gods themselves for to eternize them:
Each mourning Turtle having lost her make,
will mourning make resort for Venus sake.
And sweet Leucothoe will represent
of Vmolus odours a delicious sent.
The Nighterne owl, that night will cease from prey
howling by night, as she did howl by day.
The little Batt (though fearful heretofore)
will flock amongst the rest and fear no more.
Thus every Bird, for it is Gods desire,
will with their presence deck our funeral fire.
To purge our guilt dame Venus promised me,
shele go to heaven with low and bended knee.
And well I know Jove, Venus loves so well,
he will believe what tale so ere she tell.
Then for her love let Venus altars smoke,
and in each corner of her Temple look;
No ornament which best may her be-fit,
Be there a wanting but to perfect it.
You know our City much relies on her:
for by her succor no distress can stir
The prosperous sails of our prosperity,
but like a stern she is ever fixed nie,
To rid her from those rocks unto the shore,
in liew whereof we do her shrine adore.
Yet ere I die I must take leave of you,
you sacred mansions which my woes renew:
Thou oliue-tree that planted was so nie
unto my fathers house where I came by
This last unhappy night: thou render vine,
whose supple slips these fingers often did twine.
Thou 33 rosy border set with roses fair.
to which each morn I used to repair,
And rob thee of thy store to bewtifie
my hapless tire with crimson purity,
Farewell at once farewell, long may the dew
of silver hair'd Aurora water you,
Long may you flourish, this I only crave,
that with your flowers each morn you deck my grave.
Such sweetes, such fragrant roses represent,
that your repose may make it redolent.
Send out your spicy odours and attend,
with Hyble fruits upon my bleeding friend;
For many time and often has he and I,
chased one another full lasciuiously:
And if he chaunc't to be too slow in running,
I would hold 34 back and linger for his coming.
But of all monuments I bid a dew,
broad shadowing beech-trees to the sight of you:
You many times have yielded sweet repose
unto our love and seasoned have our woes,
By your contented shades blessed be you ever,
and like Elisian-shades fade may you never.
O many times have we two sported there,
(for we alone were privileged there)
And twisting nose-gaies we our flowers would hide, them,
lest by some Satyr we should be espide;
Often would we crop sweet flowers and having cut
within our wicker baskets we would put them:
And when we more had gathered then we needed,
we gathred still for so our love exceeded,
That every flower we cropped we did apply
unto the flower of our virginity.
" For if such flowers such sweetness did bestow,
flowers are much sweeter that do spring below.
Farewell thou spacious plain amongst the rest,
I have no cause but to respect thee best:
For many time and often have we two plaide
at Barli-breake, but now that sports decai'd,
Full many secret corners do thou yield,
for Lovers sports within thy lovely field.
And thou unhappy Pine that mounts so hie,
as if thou meant by height to tutch the sky;
Thou mai'st repine at fates that murdered me,
since Thysbees hand each morn did cherish thee,
Often have I planted grafts within thy stem,
which now are grown so high they shadow men
And with a 35 Water pot which I did bring
each morn by time; I made thine arms to spring:
But now, poor Pine, pine may thou now and die,
for none that I know cherish thee but I:
Now shall thy shadowing branches fall away,
their falling leaves to winters fury pay.
And none remains there now to pity thee,
When I am dead that living nourisht thee;
But be content; shed teres in love of me,
and when thou hear'st my death dejected be:
Cast down some withered leaves and send them hither,
portending thus much, we must die together;
This if thou do I will thee thankful call,
and will with Laurel thy sad head empall:
That though thou die, yet that thou die with me,
in aftertimes still honored thou may be.
And thou strait chinke to which full many time
we made repair: through thee our love did shine,
And spearst her beams; farewell, for never more,
shall we resort to thee as heretofore;
Thou wast the author of our first undoing,
for by thy means thou gave us means of woing,
Giving eyes liberty, which eyes so wounded
that by their passions passions new rebounded,
Yet we do thank thee for thy fore-past love,
for by our deaths the gods themselves approve
Our constant minds, recorded which must be
in heavens conuentions to our memory.
O happy thou whilst our two fragrant breaths
made thee so rich, impouerisht by our deaths:
For this I think, this is my prophecy,
nere shall such lips bestow their breath on thee,
When thou shall hear of our discording end,
some softened tears upon our funerals spend:
Let thine hard marble be dissolv' to streams
of liquid water, since those radiant beams
Which our reflecting eyes the marble gave
might pierce him more, then ever Lyricks have
The savage beasts, whose natures were made tame,
at the rehearsal of sweet Amphions name:
What then should Beauty? whose attractiue power
commands stones, serpen^s and sweet budding flowr:
What should the Splendour of fair Beawties eye
act, since such acts were done by harmony?
Open your flinty bosom, let remorse
shed riuolets of teres upon my coarse:
Or if you will not so, at least restrain
your ayrie chinke, and shut it up again:
Let not such Monuments live when we die,
for they'^e augment our Parents jealousy:
That as we loved, kissed toy'd when we are living,
so we may love, kiss, toy at life's depriving.
Then shut that crany up left after time,
impute the fault unto that chinke of thine.
This last record by Thysbe thus recorded
bred floods of teres: for teres their sighs afforded,
the Balme-trees wept, their teres concrete in one
distilled into th'substance of a stone:
Which stone it seems, did after cover them,
for after times found it laid over them.
With many fair inscription which did show
of love recorded never none more true,
Then this of Thysbe and her loving mate,
s^pposing mutual death a blessed state,
A state more blessed in that they had their wish,
Thysbe had hers and Pyramus had his;
They were deprived of loving in their living,
but by their deaths the gods themselves were giving
Tokens of love* for they enioied their love,
which no transparent jealous eye could move.
Empass'd by divine power, heavens majesty,
to honor them, that honored constancy;
And which was more: dame Venus (as we read)
yoking her Doves, came to high Jove with speed,
Her milke-white doves with ayrie colored wings,
unto Jove's throne their beawteous lady brings;
Where she with smiling countenance, for her smile,
all foggie mists Olympus did exile,
Thus spoke to Jove, who seeing her did grace her,
and with enfolded arms'gan to embrace her.
Heauen-habiting Jove, that in compassion sees,
lover, inflamed passions: on my knees,
Do I entreat as I am Queen of love
for shipwrackt lovers: that thou will remove
Their earthly members to participate
the glorious sunshine of one heavenly s^ate,
For they were constant, constancy thou loves
and in thy self their passions thou approues:
Deigne to eternize them with sacred Baise,
It Is fit such mirrors should have endless days.
That consecrate their v^wes to gods divine,
then so propitious to these prayers of mine,
They were enobled with a constant mind,
Such sacred lights it is hard on earth to find:
They were adorned with Vestas purity:
Vestas pure shape deserves eternity.
They lived in loving, and in loving did'e,
nor did two Vrns their joined love divide:
But both interred together, they have won
a fame recorded in all times to come.
She was as fair as fairenes could be laid
on mortal colors, though a country maid,
Yet for her thoughts as pure, as was her face,
she well deserves to have an heavenly place.
Do not frown (dear Sire) me thinks that frown,
do ill beseem, to such as be your own.
I am your daughter, and I know you love me*
and I presume my prayers needs must move you,
Or else I should despair e're to resort
from Idas mount unto your heavenly court.
Then yield assent unto your daughters suite,
if you deny it me, I will be mute,
And never make recourse unto your shrine,
which cannot choose but gall this heart of mine.
This earthly goddess will full well beseem,
in Iunoes absence to supply as Queen.
Jove smilde at this, for he desired change,
and therefore often from heaven to earth would range
For pleasure and delight: variety
willing unwilling, wrested this reply.
You speak of wonders (daughter) quoth high 37 Jove,
of mortal wights so constant in their love.
These two in constant loving you surpass,
For they are more constant then ere Venus was.
Death cannot part asunder their desires,
which like bright flames unto our throne aspires,
They Are worthy (daughter) of a glorious crown,
and they shall have it: for well use our own.
But to enjoy that joy, that amorous die
of bewties sweet complexion: how should I
Disioyne these two, both would I gladly grace,
if I could distance them in several place.
That fair formed creature thou do so much praise,
I do remember in her former days:
For she entirely wished she might have time
to use her love, and offered to my shrine
Great store of incense; incense it was sweet,
that I would give them time and place to meet.
Which I did promise: but I did not pay:
for seeing her more bewtious then the day,
Fair as Orgon, purer then that white
lovely 38 Alcmena wore upon the night
When she supposed Amphitrio her dear love
possessed the place which was supplide by Jove.
Being thus fair, (for Thysbe was more fair)
I much amazed stood, oppres'd with care,
Seeming asleep* yet sleeping I did moan*
my too large promise which was past and gone*
Often did I wish I had been Pyramus,
often I resolved (the night so tedious)
For to transhape my self, and to descend,
and meet with Thysbe as her pointed friend.
But Juno jealous Queen, with open eye
slept not all night, but f^aught with jealousy.
Asked me full often what aild me: turn (quoth she)
and with my ^ectar lips i will comfort thee.
Are you in love? I blushed; that blush displaies,
you are inclind (quoth she) some otherways:
You have some tricksie Girl, that does keep
your heart enchain'd, your powrefull eyes from sleep.
Fie fie (quoth she) as you are Jove, affect
her that affoords to you the most respect:
I am celestial 39 wife and sister both
unto your self: and Juno would be loath
To violate the glory of her spouse
with every swain, in every brothell house:
And can you then without regard of me,
or of your self, disgrace your deity
With every Leda, every milke-maide, toie,
while Juno is deprived of her joy?
Now by my God head mortal men adore,
I'aue borne so much that I can bear no more.
Either content you with your choice, your Queen,
or i will tell that which would full ill beseem
The glory of your state: the Gods shall hear,
what heretofore to tell I did forbear.
Then as you tender the honor of your name,
Be charie henceforth how you soil the same.
This said dame Juno, but I curbd her speech
with brows contracted, till she did beseech
With trickling tears, that I would pardon give,
protesting she would never after grieve
My royal person; wishing my delight,
if it pleased me even in my Iunos sight
Wherewith I seemd appeasd, and fayning 40 sleep,
with eie-lids shut, my heart a watch did keep;
Ever conceiving something what I know not,
which if I knew* it is shame for Gods to show it,
Being lascivious passions* which were bred
of the distempred humors of my head.
But to be brief, I did by means contriue
their long sought loves fruition to deprive,
Which thus accomplished, I am glad of this,
Venus intreates what Jove himself did wish.
This I will do, (which done) may seem a wonder,
equal their ioies, yet distance them asunder.
He from his Thysbe, Thysbe from her love,
Jove for his Thysbe, Thysbe for her Jove.
This said: bright Venus happy to receive
The full accomplished suit which she did crave,
Takes leave of Jove, and taking leave he 4^ kissed her,
amidst his kisses with his prayres he blist her.
Venus to 42 Ida hies Idas she sends
Ambassador to Thysbe, who attends,
The Gods decree; where having come at last,
tells to Thysbe all discourse was past
Twixt Jove and Venus, yet ^ot all she told,
for Venus bade him Jove's intendments hold,
Lest his narration should more sorrow breed,
then any comfort drawn from humane seed:
For well I know no Jove so pr^cious
to her, as was her lovely Pyramus.
When Idas had expressed what Jove decreed,
he took his leave of Thysbe, and with speed
Returned to Venus, Venus Queen of love,
whom he with Mars found lying in a grove
Of leauy Poplars, sporting midst their pleasure.
Vulcan was absent, they had time and leisure.
Where we will leave them, and swift Idas train,
and to our loue-sick Thysbe turn again.
Thysbe addressed to die, yet long in dying,
Draws courage to her, and that blade espying.
Which was be crimsond with the bloody gore,
of that same murder it had done before;
Takes it into her hand, ^her hand God wot
as soft as down, such weapons handled not
Before this time, (and this time was too soon
to vanquish bewty, and to cut it down.
43 Poor wench she knew not how to use the blade,
for other armor Nature had her made.
But like an vntraind Soldier wanting skill,
knows not to fight, yet uses his good will,
Trauerse his ground as other soldiers do,
yet has no method, for he knows not how:
Even so this heavenly creature handled it,
long time uncertain how to manage it.
At last by reason, 44 reason did acquaint,
which was the pummell, which the satall point,
Grasping the blade which she before did take,
to th'shade which shadowed Pyramus she spoke.
Thou shadowing tree, that 45 shadows this dark tomb,
shelter us two, that passengers which come,
Unto this forest, may thy pity praise,
and memorise thy love in after days.
Thou see we are deprived of friend or make,
which may deplore with teres our forlorn state.
Supply our want with thy remorsefull shade,
since (as it seems) for pity thou was made,
Cover us two (two lovers) that would be
gladly ore-cannoped with th'leaues of thee.
Thou 46 couerst him already: happy time,
that twists about him with those spraies of thine.
If Nature had accorded to our vows,
these arms had clept that neck, those flowery bows,
Do now enfold: but heavens have so decreed,
to have two lovers clad in sable weed.
Which I accord unto, heavens purge my sin,
he is gone before, and I must follow him.
Which said, she fixed the sword unto her Breast,
with more then woman's spirit which expressed,
Her love unto her Saint, who lay along,
congealed in blood, whose trunk she fell upon.
The tree sent out her Branches, which did cover,
their corpse with vernant blossoms, shadowed over.
Aurora breathed upon them, whose sweet breath,
perfumed their bodies, seazd upon by death.
Siluan. Epicaedium.
THis done in silent passage of the Night,
when stars shone fair and bright in Thetis sight,
The rural Wood-nimphes did their Odes display,
sabled with woes: which woes to take away,
They sung these verses, verses ominous,
Ore Thisbes hearse, and lovely Pyramus.
Long may your fame 48 and glory here remain,
honored by us, and by each country Swain.
Long may you live renowned, for your love
has made perpetual eccoes in this grove.
A thrice blessed grove, blessed grave* for such blessed Saints,
That in this flowery pale here pitch their tents,
Wherein loves war eternized for aye,
lost that by night, which was restored by day,
Smell sweet for ever, sweetest of all sweets:
you springing blossoms which the springtime greets.
Send out your fragrant savor and relieve,
our troubled springs which be adddress'd to grieve.
Let not your vernant bosom so retain,
all comfort from the oat-pipe of a Swain,
That no release of sorrow or distress,
makes diminution of his wretchedness.
What should we sing? no hymn of melody:
shall ere possess our desert empery.
No tune of joy, no pleasant strain of mirth,
shall yield contentment to Nereus birth.
For far more fair, more beauteous, Thysbe was
then any wood-Nimph, my Country Less.
49 Campaspe she was fair, and was beloved,
of potent Monarchs: her proportion moved,
Doting Apelles, loves effects to show,
to that same picture which his Pencile drew.
Yet if Campas^e were enshrined here,
no cause of love would in her frame appear.
More divine feature was in Thysbes face,
a more delightful smile more comely grace,
Then ere Apelles, though in skill most rare,
could make his picture any way compare.
Bring myrtle branches let us cover them,
shrowding their corpse with wreaths laid over them;
And every time and tide, let us shed a tear,
over the sad memorial of their Bear.
Well do these odes of sorrow us beseem,
and better would they please Arcadias Queen,
Then if with feasts and triumphs we should spend,
our dismal hours, about a lovers end.
We are not for Dianas cheerful game,
though we (foretime) have well approou'd the same.
No quiver, nor no bow, will we receive,
till we have spent our dirges on their grave,
Whose glorious loves, so well conioyn'd in one,
makes their two tears distill into one stone.
For every drop of blood which does descend,
from Thisbes wound, flies to her loving friend:
And those same streams which issued out amain,
from Pyramus make their recourse again.
And join with Thysbe, whose respective wound,
licks up the blood was shed upon the ground.
Eternal Trophies hung upon your hearse,
made everlasting, by our pensive verse;
And let this marble which does cover you,
her tears (each morn) with moistened drops renew,
Which in remorse, compassionate may spend,
some dewie drops to witness your sad end.
You pretty gliding streams which run apace,
leave off your course, and flow unto this place,
That you may moisten this sad monument,
this desert hearse with watery element.
And gratify our love, that love you dear,
and wish entirely your sweet presence here.
Leave off to wash those cliues and ruggy caves,
and now repair to monumentall graves,
To rinse all foul infection which did stain,
the corpse deceased by your still streaming vain.
Why do you stay? why seem you so hard hearted,
to shed no tears, at constant love departed?
If that our Queen should hear, as she shall hear,
this your remors^lesse heart* would cost you dear.
Do you not see how we in sable weeede,
to weep amain, have here repaired with speed?
And in distress enclosed, full fraught with woe,
may ask of you what is cause you do not so?
See how each sprig 50 sends out a pearled drop,
and when the pr^ner seems their height to crop,
They seem to thank him for it* wishing death,
to deck these lovers with a flowery wreath.
See how each bird resorts unto their shrine,
as if it were unto some power divine:
And dedicates unto their mournful tomb
lays, which shall serve in after times to come.
They warble out their doleful funerals,
having forgot their forepast festiualls.
Their sad 51 aspects such sorrow does afford,
that we our selves their sorrows may record
Time yields no tune, nor tune obseru's no time,
time, tune, nor measure keep we ore this shrine,
We cannot descant, descant there is none,
to such as know no descant but to moan.
Like spouse-lost Turtles, do we flock together,
and on each morn by time, consort we hither
To celebrate their deaths with memory,
whose constant loves make them charactred be.
Nor will we cease, or make an and of grief,
till that their parents yield them some relief,
To consummate their wishes, and supply
their former hardness by their clemency:
For in no time did ever children find,
parents more wilful, to their loves unkind.
Yet for that Fate has done her worst of ill,
in that she did the blood of lovers spill.
And tyrannis'd in showing of her force.
raging against love, deprived of remorse:
Let Parents cease to hate, and make amends,
by solemn hests for their untimely ends.
It is not fit that 52 death and enmity
should wage their battle ever mutually.
For none I know, but when their foe is dead
they scorn base envy in their breasts to feed.
But let us to our work, and build us bowres,
composed of fragrant blossoms, and of flowers,
Hard by this tomb, this hearse, this desert grave,
where we may give what constant love does crave,
An ode displaying passion: and relate,
the sad event of loves unhappy state.
Each nymph address her to her doleful voice,
that we may charm the furies with our noise;
And draw their hapless parents from their cell,
to hear the sadd Narration we shall tell*
So shall our first mornes moan performed be,
in honor of these lovers constancy.
Siluanor: Threnodia.
IF any rural God, or poor swain,
consecrate Leucothoes rod, to this plain:
This hearse, decked with sable verse,
Shall commend
Him as our friend,
Our springs, or groves, our strain.
Let your Temples sweet, mixed be,
With perfumes, let their feet embalmed be,
Then will we, mutually
Still express,
And confess,
You deserve eternity.
Venus with mirtlewand, Cupid bow,
Pelops with his Iuory hand will bestow;
All in one to this stone
To declare
Love is rare,
Love that has no painted show.
Jove admires Thysbes face full of favor,
Mirrha likes the striplings grace and behavior,
Venus lip, Ios skippe,
Were both rare,
Yet both are,
In one Thysbe, Jove would have her.
From Olympus Jove espies Thysbes beauty,
Which no sooner he descries, then in duty,
Cupids dart wounds his heart,
He by force,
Sues divorce,
Juno cannot please his fancy.
Thus did Thysbe live and dye, live by dying
Death confirms her deity, in applying
To her shrine, power divine,
Which does show,
And renew:
Life anew, renewed by dying.
This ode thus tuned in more doleful sort,
Then any Mus^ of mine can make report:
Such errors made resound both far and near,
that these sad strains came to their parents ear.
They much p^rplex'd to hear such woeful news.
which floods of tears in their moist eyes renues;
With speed they could, (which speed but easy was,)
they made recourse unto that forlorn place.
Tears trickled down, as drops from Aetas hill.
which with their streams each hollow 53 cave did fill
For woes exceeded more in that their Tomb,
had bard them hope of future ioys to come,
For they were old, old folks desire to see,
a good success unto their progeny.
But now no hope, mishap had crossed their hope,
e're to attain at their desired scope.
Oh what 54 salt seas for seas they seemed to be,
no drops but floods, which run incessantly
From their dim eyes for tears had made them dim,
which, nere the less, they took much pleasure in.
Often would the Mother clip her Thysbe round,
which lay all senseless on the bloody ground.
And with a kiss (as old vviues use to do,)
her entire love, her withered lips did show.
Turn to thy Mother (quoth he) or receive,
thy doleful Mother in thy hapless grave;
Acknowledge her that first, aye me too soon,
brought thee to light, which is eclyps'd and done;
I nourished thee, and with a kind embrace,
made me an Idol of that beauteous face;
For I conceived, deceived I could not be,
No birth more perfect, then the birth of thee.
Thus did the doting 55 trot deplore her fall,
with dropping nose, faint breath, more then them all
That did attend her passion: for the rest
did more repress those passions she expressed,
Nor is it proper, well I know, that man
should shed his tears with ease as women can;
For they more prompt to comfort, yield relief,
to such as are oppressed with heaps of grief,
And can conceal their sorrow, as is fit,
knowing the means and way to bridle it.
They thus remaining ore their childrens grave,
the hateful ground, which did their corpse receive,
They did consult how they might expiate
that wrong of theirs, which they had done so late.
Which whilst they did advise, they straight did see,
their childrens vows, graven in an Olive tree.
Which were to this effect. " Surcease to mourn,
" and place our several ashes in one Vrne.
For whilst we lived, we loved, then since we dye,
let one poor vrne preserve our memory.
And let this day recorded be by you,
and festiue kept: eternise lovers true.
Give upper hand to him, for he was first:
respect with care, our bones be not dispersed
Amongst unhallowed relics which will stain
the glorious Trophies which our love did gain,
Be not unkind unto your childrens love,
but what they like, let your consent approve,
For if your minds disposed so had been,
this (...) glass of woe you nere had seen.
But we forgive, forget, so you perform,
what we have wished: we feast, cease you to mourn.
These hestes, these rites thus read; without delay,
they sought their forepast guilt to take away,
And rinse their former ill by present good,
yielding to love which they before with-stood:
For admiration ^ apt them, and they saw,
no curb could hold the reins of Venus law:
For she enioyn'd them love, which they obeyed,
which by no Parents wishes could be stayed.
Each in their order did their obsequies,
with solemn rites as their last exequies,
Making a sire of Juniper composed,
in which their lovely corpse seemed well disposed,
Which were consumed to ashes and conseru'd,
in one small 57 pot, as well their fame deserved.
This vrne, poor vrne, which kept their ashes sure,
was made of Brass, that it might ere endure,
And as a relic, relics then were used,
in 58 Nimrods Temple in a chest enclosed.
There was it put, to which as some report,
all constant lovers used to make resort.
No marriage rite was to be consummate,
Before they did this relic invoke,
That it would be propitious to their love,
in sign whereof each gave a Turtle-Doue,
To explicate their truth, their constancy,
which they observed for ever solemnly.
Thus were these two with honor w^ll rewarded,
their ashes, as times Monuments regarded,
Kept and reserved for Fame, Fame graced the earth,
in suffering Nature bring so fair a birth
Into the world, which world unworthy was,
to have two mirrors and to let them pass.
But time, unthankful time, too soon forgot
the Gem she had, as if she had it not.
Soild in the luster, luster it had none,
deprived of Fame, when her renown was gone,
For Parents breathless were, and with their birth,
by times succession were interred in earth.
In selfsame earth for they desired to have,
their childrens 59 hearse their vrne, their comely grave
Which having got, men never did adore,
their sacred hearse as they had done before.
For less were they esteemed, so from that time,
nere any lover came unto their shrine.
Yet to this day, their pictures do remain,
in Marble wrought, describing every vain.
Each ruby blush, mixed with a crimson die,
with Thysbes smile decolour'd wantonly.
With face defaced by times injurious frown,
has shown more beauty the^ my Muse has shown,
The answer of Hipolitus unto Phaedra.
The Argument.
Hyppolitus son to Theseus, by the Amazo^ Hippolite, solicited by his step
mother Phedra to sensuality, seckes by all means to repress her inordinate
lust by exemplifying the worth, resolution, and magnanimity of his father and
her husband Theseus: as also aggravating the foulenes of the fact she intended
producing reasons to dissuade her from prosecuting her purpose any further: as
more particularly the scandal of the world, which of necessity would ensue
upon committing of a fact so detestable to the supreme de^tie so exorbitant to
the law of nature. Next he propou^deth the inevitable revenge of the Gods
above, who could not suffer such impieties to pass which impunity: but would
chastise incestuous actions with the exquisitest punishments they reserve for
any delinquent: concluding his Epistle more emphatically; assuring her if she
would not desist from her lascivious intendments, Theseus should be acquainted
with her entirest thoughts, who in no wise could brook her insatiable desires,
but ere long would expiate the guilt of her sin with the sacrifice of her blood.

The Epistle of Hyppolitus unto Phaedra.
If modest lines send out a modest smile,
and those immodest vows you dedicate
Unto my youth; youths frail^y to beguile,
my virtuous blossoms to extenuate,
What should I write? or in what tempred style
should I describe the ruin of my star^?
Since virtue is my center, truth the scope,
At which I aim the level of my hope?
I will not call you wanton, but you seem
too too respectles of your glorious fame,
That once in Creet for bewty deemed a Queen,
should now grow careless to eclipse the same.
O better fruits should in that grove be seen,
then to neglect the glory of your name.
Minos esteemed was more pure, more just,
then to expose his house to shameful lust.
Turn to your spouse my father, and obs^rue
his worth, his me^its, and disclaim your vow,
See what respect your Theseus does deser^e,
who consecrates his love and life to you:
Then I am sure you will be Ioth to swerue
from your allegiance, which is Theseus dew.
He thinks him blessed in you, O do not then
impair the blessing of such blessed men.
But if you will distaine my fathers bed,
make it a brothel prostitute to sin,
Rest well assured I Will never hear it said,
that I his son that lewdness did begin,
To poyn^ the prime rose, or to see it fade
within his bed where I have nourished been,
For ill it would be seem both him and me,
that his gray head should wear my liuerie.
Let not the glory of your ancient house
attainted be, or dazed by your stain:
For after ages would speak worse of us,
and this our shame would evermore remain:
Which could not choose but grow pernicious
to the renown your Theseus did attain.
That he who many monsters vanquished,
should let a monster live within his bed.
Employ those thoughts so wantonly inclined
to the comfort of your spouse, let him receive
The elixir of your love anew resin'd
your loves the harvest which your Lord does crave:
Then keep not from him that which is assigned,
by powers supernall for his worth to have:
Adore no shrine but his, let mine alone,
I am his image, he and I are one,
How ill would it be seem distasteful youth,
to wrong the winter of his reverend age:
Whom (if not graceless) would it not move to'ruth^
to s^^le his bed, Whose nie-spent Pilgrimage
Craves pity by prescription, graced bs truth,
and virtues colors, making fam* his page,
To follow every action with her breath,
to give him life when seaz'd upon by death.
Look at the trophies Cressa does possess,
times monumentall characters of worth,
And you shall see his spoils deserve no less,
then adoration deifi'd on earth.
Since every act proclaims his mightiness,
as if descended from Jove's divine breath.
His wars, his conquest, each express his merit,
indude with more then Adamantine spirit.
Leave of inuiting your Hyppolitus
to festiue banquets, of incestuous meeting,
Well loves he Phaedra, better Theseus,
then to wrong age with such licentious greeting*
To make his own to be most treacherous,
the sowrest taste from him that seemd his sweeting,
In working shame against him who first sustained
far more for me then in me is contained.
Much do I wonder how you should conceive,
such a suspicious thought of my neglect,
Unto my fathers age? or how you have,
grounded ^he reasons of your foul suspect?
That I his child, my childehood should deprave,
affecting that which love cannot effect,
Which loathed pleasures, loathed they are (God wot,
to use those sports which Nature fancieth not.
These 60 pastimes which I follow yield content
without repentance: here is no Parents shame,
No worlds Rumor: dangers imminent,
have no repose among those: admired fame
Follows the Court, and places eminent,
each seeking how they might dilate their name.
But I respectlesse of Fames admiration,
reap the content of harmless recreation.
Here steepy clifts, and heauen-aspiring Hills,
Yield a sweet aier to relish my delight,
There pleasant springs, from whence sweet streams destills
to quench my thirst: and when the glomie night.
Shuts up the rays of Phoebus, rest we still
till rosy cheek'd Aurora show her light.
Then we address us to our sports again,
For where we take delight there is no pain,
Then pardon me, (if p^rdon I may ask)
that knows no other pleasure then is here,
That never took upon me any task,
but the pursuing of the harmless Dear,
I need not shame, my blush requires no mask,
I have no objects of affection near,
But the true splendour of a Native face,
not mixed with colors to augment her grace.
If Ariadne desolate, forlorn,
should hear of your intendments: what would she
Reply, but jest, that he who had forsworn
those solemn vows which should observed be,
Has well deserved to wear his wantons horn,
that dedicates her self to luxury.
O sie for shame, let shame repress that sin,
which not repressed will shame both you and him.
How glad would Ariadne hear of this,
who rests dejected, robbed of that same Gem,
Which you respect not: she conceived a bliss
in his sweet smile, whose sweetness did regaine
Her much prisd love, her spells explan'd no less;
In the subduing him, who more had slain,
Then any monster, that in Cr^te was bred;
yet by her Art was soon discomfited.
But she! unhappy she, as Bacchus would,
deprived of him, for whom such pane^s she took,
In Chios left, near after to behold
her darling Theseus, who (you know) forsook
Her much distressed distresses did enfold
the very mansion pitched on 62 high to look,
At that unhappy place where Theseus left her,
whose absent steps all comfort had bereft her.
Then you that are preferred before her love,
set not at sale the treasure you possess,
Let Ariadnes exile something move
that fickle mind of yours, whose wantonness,
Seems more transparant in that you approve
more of my love, then of his excellence*
Whose beauteous outside's fair, but you may find,
a far more beauteous inside of his mind.
Constant he is, witness Peritheus,
whose two combined hearts so well united,
Have eternized the love of Theseus:
Mirror of men, that men should be exiled,
To pass such shelfes of perrils dangerous,
With sight of poor Proserpina delighted:
Whom to exempt with Pluto, they remain,
the one imprisoned close, the other slain.
Yet could not Pluto bar his eyes from tears,
which he pourd out each morn upon the hearse,
Of his dear friend, love after death appears,
which like an Ecco earths abyss did pierce,
Oppressed with woe, surmises of vain fears.
Maugre the fury, of those Furies fierce,
And Fiends below, which could not him surprise
with dastard fear: 63 Brave Spirits fear despise.
O do not then expose his virtuous age,
to such dishonor, add no discontent
Unto his outworne strength, lest you enrage
his patient spirit above his element.
Do not corrupt your honor nor engage,
the glory of your birth so eminent.
Scandalls are son engendered sooner bred,
then aftertimes can make extinguished.
Do not degrade your Theseus from his throne,
Which he enioies, conceiving more delight,
In that he has this little of his own,
reaping contented harbor on the night,
Then th'husband man to reap what he has sown,
or the poor Turtle, in her Turtles sight.
Believe me Qu^eue, more does your presence please
Your Theseus heart, then any one of these.
If you would have Hippolitus to love.
Love aged Theseus for Hippolitus sake;
For by those heavenly powers that reign above.
more comfort shall Hyppolitus partake
By that affection, then Idalias grove,
ere reaped in Venus when he did awake,
And roused from silent flumber to return,
unto her Birds which for their Queen did mourn.
Alas, fair queen, why should you thus assault,
the unprovided fortress of mine heart;
Or why should you your colors thus exalt,
displaying ruin to my chiefest part,
And under ground as in some secret vault
laying your shot, intending to subvert,
The Bulwark which supports my slender being,
to raze my Fort and put my friends to fleeing.
The fort which I possess is my pure heart,
my friends the virtues which do keep my fort,
The first in all my dolours bears a part,
the second in distress do make resort,
To arm my soul against invasions dart
upon their foe, their fury to retort.
Were 't not a pity then to see that fall,
which does sustain my self my means and all?
But sure you see in me some show of pleasure,
and gladly would have me express my thought,
Obiecting to my senses time and leisure,
seldom are such delights so lightly bought,
High is the price of such a precious treasure.
and well deserves it to be thoroughly sought:
But I reply that pleasure lasts not long
that it is vsurp't by force, and taken by wrong:
I love no bitter sweets immixd with gall,
whose sharp repentance drowns the pleasure past,
A pure unspotted soul, whose 64 Brasenwall
can hold out battrie and will ever last
That fear no ruin, no declining fall,
soilde with no blemish of her minds distaste,
But fraught with wealth, thrice happy in her wealth
feeding on free delights, not got by stelth.
What is that pleasure, where attends fear,
As faith-infringers do: who violate
The faith they owe: whereby it does appear
they rest respect less of their future state,
Preferring lust before their Spousals dear,
their shame with shameless Acts to aggrauate:
O none God wot: no pleasure can be there,
where there is naught but actions of despair.
O let those hests inviolable stand,
which heavens above confirm, and let them be
As Charactres, writ by dame Natures hand
to eleuate our senses purity:
Proceeding from the immortal powers command,
to consummate our lives integrity.
That love's well squared by an equal line.
whose groundwork is grounded on the laws divine
But if these motives cannot caution you,
not to adulterise your Nuptial bed,
Be you assured to Theseus I will show
those indigested humors which are bred,
By your unsettled thoughts which do renew
an heap of passions in your troubled head.
All which concording make that discord true.
No faith more faithless then the Faith of you.
Your brittle sex, so brittle is your mould,
you cannot long be free from alteration:
Grounds her foundation on no certain hold,
but tossed with sundry gusts of times mutation,
Exposed to shame and to confusion sold,
infringing love to purchase recreation,
Which we by nature do account a shame,
to set them light that have esteemed them.
Virtues surpriser, chastities depriuer,
sower of discord, refuge to the worst,
Forge of ambition enmities contriuer:
an hateful monster, vipers birth accursed,
Friendships dissoluer, simple souls deceiuer,
which from perdition had her birthright first.
The soil and sale of honor soonest showen,
where men affect all pleasure save their own.
And what be those but vain, unsavory joys.
whose fruits vnseas'ned yield but small delight,
When comforts are converted to annoies,
the beauty of our day obscured by night,
And that we judged for serious seem as toies,
which have eclipsed the glory of their light:
And then reuoluing what we did admire
let fall our hopes, to greater things aspire.
O be ashamed to blemish that fair Root,
which had deriuall from the powers above,
Stain not your bed with your polluted foot,
love him alone whom you are bound to love,
Give no occasion to your Spouse to doubt
of your licentious passion, but remove,
Both guilt and guilts, suspicion, whose bright eyes,
Iealouse of naught your secret'st councels spies.
Will you for any pleasure lose respect,
of all your kindred that attend your fame,
Which once surpised by infamies suspect,
will call your acts augmenters of their shame?
O do not so: let not your lust effect,
the ruin of that house from whence you came:
But as your glory does surpass the rest,
so in your heart let virtue build her nest.
Vain is the flower, soon fading, soon forgot,
which you do pamper to your overthrow,
Time will be, when those beauteous corpse shall rot,
their poor remainder to the earth bestow;
Then you shall be as if you flourished not
placed in earths center, Stigian lake below.
Where Minos judgment gives of every sin,
that those are guilty may remain with him.
He was your father, yet his equity,
will not permit his Phaedra to transgress:
His laws have no exception, purity
only exempted is, whose eminence
Was first ordained to reign eternally,
in the Elisian fields Jove's residence;
Then choose which two you please, whether you will dwell,
in heaven with Jove, or with your Sire in b^ll.
Erect your thoughts depressed down below,
and let them soar unto an higher pitch
Then terrene pleasures, let that beauteous show
of outward colors your affection teach
To taste the Spring of sweetes, from whence does flow
such mines of treasure, as will more enrich
The Ars'nall of your mind then vain delight,
which lopped is before it come to height.
Recall to mind Ixions punishment,
see in a mirror what his folly got,
Who whilst he soared above his element,
kindly received of Jove, himself forgot:
And as a stream which runs too violent,
passing his bounds and limits, knows not
How soon that flow shall have a sudden fall,
whose boundless current kept no mean at all.
So did Ixion who in self-conceit
of his proportion did aspire too high,
Affecting Juno which did ruinate,
the mansion of his Pristine dignity,
Dasling that sun which shone so bright of late,
for with a cloud deceived engendered he
The Centaurs varied forms, which being bred,
to Pelion came, where they inhabited.
O then confine affection with the bound,
of virtues honor, giving her the place
In every action, making reasons ground
the strong foundation, Time cannot deface,
With beauteous fair contexture closed round,
a correspondence twixt ^he mind and face:
The one renowned by the others purity.
as if both made to make one unity.
Shall Hymen's temple be defaced by you,
Her sacred hests by your inconstancy;
O be assured the gods will punish you,
imbranding shame in your posterity,
To break your faith and wrong a friend so true,
under pretense of mere simplicity:
Leave vertus shadow, and your self betake^,
to love the shadow for the substance sake.
What virtues did your maiden years attend?
white was your roabe but whiter was your mind,
When all your actions did to virtue tend;
Each sense her proper function had assigned,
Virtues foundation had perfections end,
youth mixed with grace: rare was it your like to find,
But now your luster soiled by shameless sinning,
argues your end far worse then your beginning.
Crete made renowned by fathers memory,
shal't be extinguished by the daughters shame?
Times ancient browe records his equity.
for time-impartialisters merit fame,
Proud was the earth to have such men as he:
earth seemed by him to change her earthly name.
For nere did fame with truth so nearly meet,
as when your aged father governed Crete.
O then be daughter to so good a father,
be his life's pattern, show from whence you sprang,
Seek to revive his glory tropheis rather,
then by your shame to see them overthrown,
Some fruitful blossoms from his virtues gather:
so may you make your fathers fame your own:
Crete was sustained often by others fall.
but she is sustained by Phaedra most of all.
How will this trumpe of glory make your mind
too low dejected, seek an other port
Then that you aim at now: where you shall find,
more perfect solace when you make resort
Unto the shrine of Virtue, that is refined
with purest colors, where the strongest fort
That could be built by Nature or by Art,
conserues the sacred treasure of the heart.
O time deceing youth abusing time,
making her stale to objects of delight,
Seeing the best will to the worst decline:
Night-owle, whose works dare not approach the light,
Profaning that which was before divine,
Truth's great'st opponent, virtues second sight,
Whose mind bewitching vanities ensnare,
our captived reason with a seeming fair.
More should I write, but that I loath to write
of such a subject whose lascivious soil,
Makes my poor lines ashamed of such delights,
That Parents birth, should Parents bed defile,
Or to play false when he is out of sight:
distrusting naught should I his trust beguile?
O cease to love live to advance your fame,
freeing your Bed and me from Parents shame.
Yours if your own: But being not your own,
I will not reope what other men have sown.
FINIS.
Riddle me this. An Embleame including the Authors name.
Two ways there be, one broad, the other strait,
which two beat paths lead to a distinct state
Of weal, of woe: this if you right explain,
the first, though worst, includes the Authors name.
Or thus,

A Brea, a Bank, a Border, or a Shore,
Smiles on his name that brought these Satires ore.
His Crest,

His Crest a Cuckolds Cross: his Motto, Here
I give a Badge which Citizens d^e wear.
Blow my Plump-fac't Poulterer of Saffron Hill.

Place this and the leaf following after the end of the First Book.

To the equal Reader.
IF that thy nature answer to thy name,
Thou in thy judgment wilt express the same
Which I entitle thee, and hate to be
A squintei'd Critic to misconster me.
Hows'ere: be what thou will, if Equal, find
Lines correspondent to thy Equal mind:
If rough (for all my smoothness thou have heard)
Thou'se hear far rougher Satires afterward.
For ^f these ierks so lightly laid on smart,
Thoule find rare whipping cheer in the Second part.
Where Furies run division on my song:
Patience a while, and thou shall haue't ere long.
To the Captious Reader.
MY answer's this to him that says I wrong
Our Art to make my Epigrams so long;
I dare not bite, therefore to change my nature,
I called an Epigram which is a Satire.
To the understanding Reader.
FOr your better direction I have reduced these ensuing notes Alphabettically,
with an apt relation to each particular included in the Poem, which may
minister no less Grace to the invention, then delight to your reading.

a SAlamina insula est Athenie^sis, quam Telamon gubernasse dicitur vitibus et
myrtetis, eiusque generis arboribus vestita. vid. Plutarch.

b Flumen maxim omnium inclytum, etc. Flumen e Niphatimonte originem ducens,
et Babilonians celerrimo cursu secans, in rubrum mare prolabitur.

c Alueum mutassa fertur ibid. etc.

d In personam amatorum.

e Zeuxis vuae viuis coloribus depictae. etc. vid. Plutarch, in Apoth.

f Riphaei montes Arcadiae, qui asperrimis verticibus subnixi sunt. vid. Caes.
commen.

g Lynceus and Argot incredibiliperspicatia luminum praediti.

h Coniux Orphui, qua per deserta loca currens, vt Arasteum, came immodeste
nimis sequentem, euitaret, a serpente venenato infectae extremam diem obijt,
came verolegimus, a plutone raptam esse, et subimperio suo miserrimam vitam
transegisse, vid. ovid. et Senec. Trag. Her. Fu.

i Homer. in Iliad. vid: super hunc lacum. Calabr^ in quar. lib. de supple.

k Turture sie Turtur iungit amanda suo. po^t.

l Timon pater Thisbis qui inge^tem Thesauri molem in Arca recondidisse
arbitratur eiusque aspectu, mirum in modum delectabatur. vid sab. in Ovid.
Metam.

m Naphtha bituminis genus quod aspersione aquae vehementius exaestuat. Testan.
plinio.

n Love is more vehement deprived of her object.

o Stellam veneris appellat Homerus (...).

p Vid lucan et pallin. de sid: nominibus.

q Res est imperiosa timor.

r Sordities, ira nummorum copia mira, his natura sen^^* tribus est
infectavenenis.

s Vnde Vestales virgins candidis stolis indutas ess^ ^egimus in Aulo. Gell.
in noct. At.

t Sublimi stemmate ductus.

u Nam si vis aptenubere, nube pari, Ovid.

x Succinctis humeris scuto.

y Vid. plinium in Nature. hist. and Arist. de Nature. animal. Quos si Argut
seruet? qui occulatus totus sait. Plane^ in Aulular.

z Hippodamia filia oenomai quam Peleps celeritate carsus obtinebat.

1 Pelopid: bumeri: proverb.

^ Diana.

3 Lustra ferarum. Virg.

4 Noctis opaco cardine fulgebant stellae.

5 Campi Elysij.

^ Nemesis vltionis dea.

7 Pegasus alatus equus, a quo Hypocrene originem duxit.

8 O quicunque sub hae habitatis rupe leones, etc, Ovid in Metam.

9 Vna duos (inquit) nox perdit amantes, Ovid.

1^ Sed timidi est optare necem: ibid.

11 Myrtus vener, etc.

12 Progne Phylomela, and it is.

13 Ter, in vpubam. Rex su^ram sic crista probat: sed sordida vita immunda^ e
tanto culmine fecit aucm, Campan in Ter.

14 Exegi monumentum are perennius: marmore durius ebore serenius, vid. Eleg.
Flac. et propert.

15 Aegis Aretusa, and Hesperitusa Atlant: filiae, quae hortum Hesperiae aureis
pomis refertissimum (open serpentis perpetuam vigiliam seruantis) tenebant, quam
poste^ Hercules interemit, vid. open: Her: in Sen: Trag.

16 Arbor niueis pulcherrima pomis -- Ardua Morus erat: Ibid. 17 Corticis
exiguae, nigrique colo. ris Ebenns, etc, de natura gagatis: vid. Plin.

1^ Postquam vestem coguouit, et eiusdem. Ovid.

19 In tumulum Nini, allocutio.

20 Viscera plus quam marmorea.

21 Purpurea vela, leuiorem auram trahe^tia, etc.

22 Homer in Iliad. vid. calab. in deliquijs super hunc locum.

23 Fluminis vt cecinit littore, cicnus, obit.

24 Gagates quae monume^ta excolere solebat non tam ob eximiae naturae
proprietates, quam politae et exaratae Formae elegantias vsurpata. vid. Plin.
in Nature. histo.

25 Batia, sepulchrum Ili, quod in Ilio erigebatur et in Troiano bello solenni
honor afficilegimus. vid. Hom. ib.

26 (...), honos.

27 Et mihi sortis in vnum haec manus est: et amor, etc. Ovid. ibid.

28 Quoque magis tegitur tanto magis aestuatiguis.

29 In parents naenia. 30 Vt sup. vid. eleg. Mart.

31 Volat irreuocabile verbum. 32 Pyra solennis vid. Funer. antiq. in Gell. et
al. 33 Rosa quae redolet, crescit cum spina quae pungit. 34 Et fugit ad
salices, and se cupit ante videri Virg. 35 Vid virg. in 1o. lib. Georg. de
Irrigatione. etc. 36 a Poetical fiction. 37 Jove's reply.

38 Vid. Hesiod. de generat. deor. de natal. Hercul. et Plau. in Amphytrio --
pol me haud penitet; Scilicet ^oni dimidium mihi diuidere cum love.

39 Et soror et coniux* etc. Virg. in Aenead 1o. lib.

40 Nocte somniat, quae vigilans volui^. Terent.

41 Oscula libauit natae. virg. 42 Idas filius Apharei qui celeritate equorum
incredibili, Marpessam egregia forma puella^ corripuit. vid. Ovid. 43 Horac. in
1. lib.

44 Ratione verum a falso discernimus, quam a Nat^ra, nobis insitam habemus
vid. Cic. 1, lib. offi. 45 Quae lae^o culmine Bustum occulit, arbustis teneris
intexit opaci^ vide Proper. 46 Tu quae ramis arbor miserabile corpus, ^unc
tegis vnius mox and tectura duorum. Ovid Metam. 47 Qui viret in folijs venit
eradicibus humor, et patrum in natos abeunt cum stem^sate mores. 48 Viuit post
f^^e; ra virtus, etc. 49 Vid. Apoth. romans apud. Plutarch. 50 -- Et germina
gemmis effulsere suis, fragrantia pascua veris, praemia diffundunt, nona fert
nona semina, Terra. 51 O quam difficile est crimen no^ prodere vultu? 52 Cessit
post funera liuor. vid. Apoth. Plut. de Aeschin. et Demosth. inimicit. et de
obitu Demost.

53 Ingentia terrae antra replere solent currentia font^ perenni, etc. 54 Mare
mittit amara, etc. 55 Vetus vietus veternosus mustellino color. Terentius.

56 De Oliua refert Plinius, quod post initi sedoris societatem, ramos eius
arboris Fecialis gestare solebat, cuins indicio pacis specimina proferebantur,
vid. in Philip. comm. de Bell. Ne apol. Oliuaeramos pacis indicia circumfere
solebant ij, cum quibus co^ditiones pacis confirmatae sunt. etc. 57 Recipit
populos vrna citatos. Senec^. 58 Babylon nunc vero Bagadeth appellata, a
Nimrod^ extruebatur. and a Semiramide exte^debatur. In Euphratem Flu: amaemis:
sita: vid: Geo-graph. comen. 59 Quia essa parentum little rogis imiscebantur.

60 Minotaure. 6^ Ascendo: vires animus dabat aequo ita late Aequora prospectu
metior alta meo, Ovid. in ep. Ariad. These.

FINIS.

