News from Niniue to England, brought by the Prophet Jonas: Which news is
plainlye published in the Godly and learned exposition of Master John Brentius
following, translated out of Latin into English by Thomas Tymme Minister.

The silent tongue, the listening ear,
which harkeneth after news:
With staring eye, and gaping mouth
this title makes me use.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the
sign of the star. 1570.

To the right honorable Lord Willyam Cobham, lord Warden of the cinque Ports:
Thomas Tymme wishes Nestors years, increase of honor, with preservation of
desired health.
THE CVRTEOVS Behavior, the noble virtue, but specially the godly zeal
(Right honorable) which fame and report certefieth me to be in you, has
kindled such an earnest affection in me, that my rudeness, and base state
stays me nothing at all, to dedicate this simple work unto you. For I know
that Nobility, gratefully accepts at others hands slender gifts, and of
small reputation, according to their ability that offer the same.

Artaxerxes, his good acceptance of a handful of running water, made me thus
bold, to offer this Pamphlet to your honor as a token of my good will: hoping
that as he thought no disdain^ of the one, so you will not take scorn of the
other. Let me crave therefore this one thing, at your honors hands, that the
baseness of my translation of the learned Brentius procure not you, to refuse
the patronage and defense of my slender work. Which as I know undoubtedly
shall never counteruayle your worthiness: so do I assuredly hope that it may
be a proof of my good will, and meaning. The worthy Prophet JONAS, deserves
a worthy personage to be his defense and guard, against scoffing Lucian, and
fretting Momus.

Wherefore, if your honor refuse not, but vouchsafe, to take the same upon you
(as I persuade my self you will, weying the giuers intent, and seeing that
these are partly the first fruits of his travail) you shall not only
purchase immortal praise of others: but I also shall be encouraged, and
animated to greater, and waightyer attemptes: which I shall no sooner atchieue,
but you shall be a witness of my endeavors, and a rampire to my exploytes.

Thus having boldly required your honors assistance, and tediously molested
your ears with circumstaunces, leaving now at length to abuse your friendly
patience, I end: wishing to your honor the increase of Nobility, with a most
happy estate, and after this life, the gladsome joys of the everlasting life
to come.

Beneficium dando accepit, qui digno dedit.
Your humble Orator Thomas Tymme.

The translator to the Reader.
THe Merchant man that often sails
upon the rockie seas,
Has oftentimes for recompense
the gain that does him please.
The Fisher man that castes his net,
and lays his bayted ginne,
Does trust at length by happy hap,
his pray of fish to win.
The Plowman eke that sowes his seed
on soil, with toil, for gain,
The Winters travail being past,
does reap the riped grain.
If Plowman then, and Fisher too,
have steadfast hope for gains,
As recompense for their sore toil,
and daily pinching pains:
Why should not I as well as they,
by pain some profit have,
Since that my Muse as recompense
most justly does it crave?
The which good reader thou shall grant,
if that thou take in worth:
This simple Pamphlet at her hand
which she has now set forth.
And help to mosell Momus mouth
and bridle Zoilus chappes,
Which like a Curre each willing Wight
with currish fanges he snappes.
This done, well quighted is her pain,
her recompense is had,
And if thereby she do the good,
she is exceeding glad.
Thomas Tymme.

The Preface of John Brentius upon the Prophecy of Jonas.
THe Apostle Paul writing to the Corinthians, of the meeting and coming
together of the Church, commands all things to be done in ye same
congregation, to edifying. When ye come together (says he) every one of you
has a song, 1. Cor. 14.
has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Let
all things be done to edifiyng. Seeing therefore it is determined that we must
come together certain days in the week: I will take in hand (by the
assistance of Gods holy spirit) for our exercise at that time the explication
of the Prophet Jonas, to the end we may be godly occupied and exercised in
this our meetinge. For we come not together in the Church to trifle and
play, but we come to the end we might be instructed in the word of the
Lord. Neither are we created by God, and redeemed by the precious death and
bloudshedding of Christ, to the end we should riot, live in excess, and give
our selves to all kind of filthye pleasure, but we are created and redeemed to
the end we might glorify God by our life and conversation. We have taken in
hand therefore to expound the prophecy of Jonas, that by this prophecy we
may be admonished, of our office, duty and calling.

And although the book of this prophecy be very small, yet notwithstanding,
it contains an excellent and famous history. First of all therefore, we will
declare, who was this Prophet Jonas: Then what, and how great authority his
prophecy has: And last of all, we will show the argument, and what the sum
of the doctrine contained in this book, is.

First, there are many, which think, and judge the prophet Jonas to be the
son of the widow of Sarepta, which received and fed Elias in the time of
famine: but their judgment is neither likely nor probable. For, of this
Prophet Jonas, we have mention made in the fourtenth Chapter of the fourth
book of Kings, 4. Reg. 14.
how that Jeroboam king of Israel, reedified his decayed Kingdom, according
to the word of the Lord which he spoke by the prophet Jonas, the son of
Amithay, which was of Gathhepher. By the which it appears, that he made not
only the sermon contained in this book, but many other notable and famous
sermons, which are not written. For he preserved by his sermons, two of the
most excellent kingdoms that were. Excellent was the kingdom of Israel: but
in the time of Jonas it was a decayed and ruinous kingdom, by impiety and
invasion of enemies. Jonas therefore, being stirred up by the holy ghost,
exhorts the people to repentance, and incourageth king Jeroboam valiauntlye
to govern his commonwealth: promising, that God will send a time of mercy,
wherein he will restore his kingdom. And so in deed it came to pass, that
the coast of Israel, from the entering of Hemath, unto the sea of the
wilderness, was restored by the goodness of the Lord.

Famous also was the City of Niniue, for in it, was the greatest Monarchy of
the whole world. But the Lord had determined to destroy the City of Niniue,
from the face of the earth. Yet notwithstanding, Jonas saved the same by his
sermon. Wherefore, seeing Jonas by his sermons saved such two excellent
kingdoms, he is not to be counted among the common sort of men, but even
among the chiefest Prophets that have been, either before his time, or since.

Secondly, we must consider the certaintye, and authority of this book. The
Church as yet, never rejected or refused this book: but have accounted the
same among those, which we call Canonical books of holy scripture, and
which have Ecclesiastical, and heavenly testimonies. Furthermore, we have our
savior Christ (as concerning this matter) a sufficient testimony and witness,
as may appear by the.xij. Math. 12.
Chapter of Matthew, where he alleges the example of Jonas for his
resurrection, affirming, that the coming of Jonas out of the Whales bellye,
was a type of the same. Furthermore, Christ prefers the Niniuets, before the
Israelites, because the Niniuets repented at the one only sermon of Jonas,
and the Israelites would not be converted unto the Lord by many sermons.

Wherefore, if ever any man did, or shall hereafter doubt of the authority,
truth, and certainty of this book, Christ by his testimony, has so
confirmed the same, that though an Angel came from heaven teaching the
contrary, he ought not to be believed.

Last of all, we must know the argument or sum of this prophecy, in the
which certain particular places are noted.

1 The first place conteyneth the severity of the wrath of God toward all
such as walk disobediently in their calling. Jonas was a Prophet which was
most acceptable unto god, and which before, had done notable things in Israel,
and by his sermons had preserved the kingdom of the same: notwithstanding,
when he fled and was disobedient to his calling, he was cast by the ordinance
of God, into the Sea. An example of Gods severe punishment worthy to be
noted. The like we have of Saul, 1. King. 15.
who, disobeying the commandment of God, reserved part of the pray of
Amelecke, for the which disobedience he was rent from his kingdom. Another
example we have of the prophet, 3. King. 13.
whom the Lion slew by Gods appointment for his disobedience. Whereupon it is
said, to obey, is better than sacrifice, and to hearken is better than the fat
of Rams. 1. King. 15.


2 The second place conteyneth the wonderful, and inspeakeable mercy of God,
by the which, he commonly delivers all those which call upon him in truth.
Jonas was cast into the sea, and devoured of the Whale. And although he could
not be saved and delivered naturally: yet notwithstanding, by the divine power
and clemency of God, he is supernaturally, and miraculouslye delivered. This
miracle, to certain worldly wise men, and contemners of the word of God,
seems ridiculous, and like unto old wives tales.

And amongst all others, scoffing Lucian being stirred up of Satan the Devil,
the father of lies, to obscure, discredit, and deride this miracle, has
written a book entitled, De veris narrationibus, that is, a book of true
narrations: in the which, he makes mention of certain men, which being in a
ship, were swallowed up ship and all, of a Whale, in the which Whale (says
he) there were Mountains, woods, and Cities, to the which the men arrived with
their ship, and had great delectation there. This fond fable seems to be
invented by Lucian, to deride the Christians, which believe the story of Jonas
to be true. But this and many other such are devised by the Devil and his
ministers, to deride, and deface, true, and godly miracles.

But let us understand, that this miracle was done in deed, and that it has
heavenly testimonies to prove and ratify the same, as we have already
declared. God which created heaven, and earth of nothing, and which raised, and
will raise the dead to life, could also for a time, save and preserve Jonas in
the whales belly. Let us acknowledge therefore this miracle to be a declaration
of the power and clemency of God, and an example also of the resurrection of
Christ, and of all the godly also to everlasting life, as hereafter GOD willing
shall be declared.

3 The third place conteyneth the doctrine of repentance. There have been
many which have denied to sinners after their fall any hope of gods grace. And
there are many, which when they have sinned, persuade themselves that there is
no way of salvation left unto them. Here therefore there are two examples of
repentance propounded unto us: The one in the Prophet Jonas, who although he
fell into disobedience: yet notwithstanding, repenting he is received into Gods
favor again.

The other, in the Niniuets, who although they had greatly sinned, insomuch,
that they deserved eternal destruction and damnation: yet notwithstanding,
repenting, they are received into Gods favor, and preserved with their City.
Let us therefore turn to the Lord by repentance, being persuaded that the
Lord will receive us, and that the Angels in heaven shall rejoice over our
repentance.

Thus (gentle Reader) I have declared, who this Prophet Jonas was, what
authority this book has, and which are the special places of this book.
The which, if thou well observe and note, they will profit, to the nourishing
of the fear of God, to the increase of faith, and to the bringing forth of
true obedience, which are the most acceptable service of God.

A godly exposition of the Prophet Jonas.
The first Chapter.
THE Word of the Lord came unto JONAS the son of Amithai, saying: The text.
Arise, and get thee to Niniue that great ci^ie, and preach unto them how
that their wickedness is come up before me.
THe Scripture of the old Testament, does often and very much testify, that
God in times past, has spoken with ^he Patriarchs, and Prophets: As says the
Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews. Cap. 1.
God in times past diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers, by
Prophets. Let us therefore understand and know, how and after what manner
God has revealed his will to the Patriarchs and Prophets.

1 Sometimes he spoke with them, by sending Angels visiblye unto them: Gene.
18.
example we have in the book of Genesis, where we read that Angels came unto
Abraham, in the likeness and shape of men. Gene. 19.
Also there came Angels unto ^oth, which brought him out of Sodom before it
was destroyed. And so an Angel appeared visibly unto Zacharias the father of
John: Luke. 1. Math. 1.
to the virgin Marie likewise, and to many other.

2 Sometimes, God spoke unto the fathers by the voice of an Angel inuisibly.
And so he talked with Moses out of the bushe, Exodus 3.
where Moses heard the voice of an Angel speaking in the person of God, but
saw no Angel. So the Angel in the person of God recited the law, in the
Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. and.20.
the which voice was heard of more than six hundredth thousand men, but they
saw no man: as appears by the words of Moses, saying. You heard the voice
of his words, Deuter. 4.
but you saw no form or shape at all. So God spoke by an invisible Angel
unto Samuel. 1. Reg. 3.
So (I think) also that the Lord spoke to Moses, from the mercy seat as
appears ^y this text. Exodus 25.
And from thence I will testify unto thee, and will common with thee, from of
the mercy seat.

3 Oftentimes he spoke unto the fathers ^y dreams: Daniel. 7. Genesi. 37.
as may appear by the examples of Nabuchadnezar, Joseph, and such like.

4 Oftentimes by the Ephod of the Priest which shone with precious stones, the
which stones (as Josephus says) when God answered the demand of the Priest
by his Ephod, Josephus lib. 3. de antiquita. cap. 12.
excelled and surmounted their accustomed shine and brightness: but when God
refused to answer, the precious stones remained in their woonted glory,
nothing altered or changed.

That the Lord did sometimes answer by Ephod, it is apparaunt by the
scriptures, as by the three and twenty and eight and twenty Chapters of the
first book of Kings.

5 Oftentimes he spoke to the fathers by visions, Ezech. 1.
the which visions the holy ghost by secret inspiration revealed and
interpreted.

6 And oftentimes he spoke unto them without visions, only by the secret
inspiration of the spirit.

But howsoever it pleased God to speak, and talk with this our Prophet JONAS
there is no mention made, neither is it greatly necessary to be known. For it
is sufficient to us to know, that God in deed spoke with JONAS, and that the
calling of the Prophet to preach the word of the Lord, was done in deed by
the will of God. And although there be many curious persons which think those
times to be most happy, in the which God by so many ways spoke unto the
fathers, and do affirm that they would more willingly believe the word of
God, if so be it would please him to talk with them after that fashion.
Notwithstanding, if we well consider of the matter, now that Christ is come,
and has published his Gospel throughout the whole world, we must needs
confess, that the times are much more happy, than they were in times past.
For God has spoken with us, not by Angel, not by dreams, or visions, but by
his own son our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, who by his divine majesty
excels all Angels. Whereupon in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is written.
Cap. 1.
In these last days God has spoken unto us by his son, whom he has
appointed heir of all things. And Christ himself says: Math. 13.
Blessed are the eyes which see those things that ye see. And straight after he
adds saying: many have desired to see those things that ye see, and have not
seen them. And the Apostle Paul says: Now salvation is nearer unto us than
it was then. For seeing that the son of God is commended unto us by the voice
of God from heaven, saying: This is my beloved son, hear him. Math. 17.
He is most happy which so hears him by his Gospel, that by faith he
comprehends the same, and obeys his calling. For whosoever he be that
believes not this son of God, he will not believe, though all the Angels in
heaven, all the Patriarchs, all the Prophets and fathers stood before him to
testify of the word of God. Wherefore, let us not neglect the felicity and
happiness of our time, but let us attend and give ear to the voice of the
son of God, whereby we may obtain everlasting salvation.

Now it follows to show to what thing the word of the Lord called JONAS.
Arise (says he) go to that great City of Niniue and preach in it how that
their wickedness is come up before me. As concerning the City of Niniue, and
who was the first builder of the same, we may read in the tenth Chapter of
Genesis. This city was so enlarged that in bigness it was comparable to
Babylon, which was fifteen miles compass, according to the miles of Germany.

Whereupon it follows in the text: Niniue was a great City and of three
days journey. Cap. 3.
And in the end of this Prophecy, Cap. 4.
it is said, that in that city there were an.Cxx. thousand children. How
great then was the number of men, women, servants, maidens, and strangers?
Wherefore Niniue was one of ye greatest Cities in the whole world. And at that
time when JONAS was sent unto it, the mightiest Monarchy of the whole earth
was in the same. Moreover, circumcised Jews dwelt not in it, but uncircumcised
Gentiles had their habitation there.

When as therefore it pleased God to send the Prophet JONAS unto it, he does
plainly declare himself to be no respecter of persons, which should favor
one nation and abhor another, and which should be only the God of the Jews,
and not the God of the Gentiles also. Wherefore God would not have one nation
or people, but all men to be saved. There is no difference (says Paul)
between the Jew and the Gentile, for there is one Lord of all. etc. But this
is not so to be understood as though God saves all the Gentiles without
difference, although they abide in their impiety, and be not converted unto
the Lord: but that he desires to have all men saved, and rejects none that
repent and acknowledge the true god. Whereupon the Apostle Paul says not
simply, there is one Lord of all, rich toward all. But he adds: to such as
call upon him. For all simplye shall not be saved, but all such as call upon
the Lord. Every one (says he) which calls upon the name of the Lord,
shall be saved. But how shall they call upon him in whom they believe not?
therefore they which desire to be saved, must of necessity hear the word of
God, believe the same, and call upon God, through Jesus Christ. For there is
salvation in no other. Whereupon, we may gather that the Niniuets are not
simply saved. But a Prophet is sent unto them to declare the word of God,
that they might believe and repent.

Furthermore, when the Lord says, preach unto them, because their
wickedness is come up before me, and so forth: he plainly declared what
affection he bears toward those that are sinners. For although he hates
sin and iniquity: yet notwithstanding, he desires to have all men saved, if
so be they repent. Before the flood came, the Lord called men to repentance by
Noe. Before the burning of Sodom, the Lord called the Sodomites to
repentance, by Loath. When the destruction of Jerusalem was at hand, the Lord
called the Jews to repentance by the Prophets, and afterward by Christ and
the Apostles. So in this place before Niniue should be destroyed, the Citizens
are called to repentance by JONAS. And because they repented, they escaped
punishment, as hereafter shall be declared.

These things therefore are diligently to be considered of us, because in
these days God has revealed himself unto us by his word, and therefore
calls this Realm of England to repentance. Wherefore, first of all let us
consider and know that the wickedness of England is ascended and come before
the presence of God, and that his just wrath and punishment is at hand for the
same. For it is not at this time or of late that England has begone to sin,
or to commit abomination. But it has sinned and continued in the same many
years, as in Idolatry, in abusing the name of God, in adultery, in usury,
yea in all kind of wickedness. The which are so grown, so increased, and so
ripe, that they ascend into heaven before the majesty seat of God. Wherefore
there is nothing more certain than that England has deserved extreme
punishment and perdition.

A manifest token of Gods love toward us.
Furthermore, let us understand and know, that seeing the word of God is
revealed and preached so freelye unto us, there is some hope left unto us of
salvation. For except the Lord sought to save this Realm of England, he
would not have sent JONAS (I mean the preachers of his word) unto the same.
Seeing therefore he has revealed his will by JONAS, and his whole intent, we
have a manifest argument of his clemency and love toward us. Wherefore, if
we will escape the punishment threatened, we must fall to repentance: the use
whereof hereafter (God willing) more plainly shall be declared. But, and if we
be contemners of the word of God, and impenitent, let us look undoubtedly for
destruction, and everlasting perdition. Whereupon our savior Christ says:
This is condemnation, that light came into the world, and men loved darkness
more than light.

And Jonas made him ready to fly unto Tharsis from the face of the Lord: The
text

JONAS flies to Tharsis from the presence of the Lord, which some interpret
to be the sea, other think it to be the proper name of a City, which men call
now Tunetum, sometime Carthage.

Here therefore two things are to be considered, the one, Two things here
to be considered.
is the disobedience of JONAS, and his flight from the presence of the Lord.
The other, is the cause why he fled and was disobedient to the calling of God.

First, let me here demand a question. Of flying from the Lord.
What means the Scripture when it says that JONAS fled from the presence of
the Lord? How could JONAS fly from the presence of God, when as his
majesty fulfilleth both heaven and earth and all places else? Whither shall I
go (says the Psalmist) from thy spirit, or where shall I hyde me from thy
presence: if I climb up into heaven, thou art there, and if I go down to hell,
thou art there also, and so forth. And the Prophet Amos says: Cap. 9.
They shall not fly away: there shall not one of them escape, nor be
delivered. Though they were buried in the hell, my hand shall fetch them from
thence: though they climb up to heaven, yet shall I cast them down: though
they hyde themselves upon the top of Carmell, yet shall I seek them out:
though they creep down from my sight into the deep of the sea, I shall
command the serpent even there to bite them. Let us therefore note, that if
mention be made here of the eternal and omnipotent majesty of God, then there
is none that can fly from his hand or presence. The which thing the example of
JONAS proves very well.

For here he flies from the hand and presence of the Lord, takes ship,
and goes about to pass into a strange country: yet notwithstanding, he
could not escape from the presence of the Lord. God saw his flight, yea, God
saw his secret council, purpose, and intent. And he so stays him with his
mighty arm in the sea, that the more he seeks to escape, the more straightly
he is held with the hand and power of God, and is cast into extreme peril
and danger which he sought to avoid. Wherefore, mere foolish and vain is
their purpose, which think by their devise and policy to escape from the
power and presence of God. But where as the scripture says that JONAS fled
from the presence of the Lord, it signifies that he fled out of the land of
Israel, in the which, God is said above all other nations to dwell. First,
because in that land was the chief place of the Church of God, and the Arc
of the testament, Exodus. 15.
by the which it pleased God oftentimes to answer. Secondly, because God had
appointed in that land the public ministry of the preaching of his word,
and was wont to reveal himself to the Prophets, and to work miracles to
confirm his promises as concerning Christ. Last of all because in that land
the stock of Christ dwelt, which is the true face and liuelye presence of
God, because whosoever sees Christ, sees the true and everlasting God. By
this we may learn, that then a man is said to fly from the presence of God,
or to hyde him from his sight when he flies those places, in the which the
word of God is preached, or when he shunneth those men which preach the
word of God. So Caine is said to go forth, and to fly from the presence of
God, because he fled from his father Adam, and dwelt far from him, least he
should be reprehended of his father by the word of God. So disobedient
servants and sons fly from the face of God, when they fly from their
parents and masters, least for their disobedience they should be reprehended
by the word of the Lord and punished. So the wicked and ungodly fly from
the face of God, when they despise the preaching of the word of God, fearing
least by the same they should be reprehended from their sin and wickedness.
Wherefore although no man as touching the omnipotency of God, can fly from
his majesty, power, and presence: yet notwithstanding, as touching the
external preaching of the word of God, those fly his presence, which do
despise his word, neglect his sacraments, continue in disobedience toward
him, and go forward in a wicked life.

What shall we say then? Can such as fly the presence of God, escape God
himself, and his punishment which they so fear? No undoubtedly. For the more
they fly the word and sacraments of God, the more they fall into his hand,
and incur his wrath, provoking just vengeance upon themselves. Caine fled
from the presence of the Lord, but the more he fled the more he was
tormented with horror of mind. JONAS fled from the presence of the Lord, but
the farther he fled, the more subject he was to peril and danger. Wherefore,
we must not fly from God in sin, and in the fear of punishment, but rather
we must approach unto God by repentance and invocation, by the which means
alone, we escape the wrath of God, and the deserved punishment for sin. But
of this we will speak more plentifully anon.

Secondlye, it is demanded for what purpose and intent JONAS fled out of the
land of Israel, and would not obey the calling of God sending him to Niniue.
Of sundry men sundry and diverse causes are declared and alleged. Some say
that JONAS was afearde of the danger that might come unto him at Niniue for
his embassage sake. For to preach, that a city should suddenly be overthrown
and destroyed, in the City it self, is enough to stir up against a man all
the Citizens and inhabitants of the same, and to make himself to be accused of
sedition. Other some think, that JONAS feared least that the Niniuets which
were Ethnickes should receive the word of God, and repent, and be received of
the Lord to be his people, and so the Israelites to be rejected. Therefore
least his countriemen the Israelites should be rejected, he rather sought to
fly, than to obey the calling of God. And it may be that JONAS had such
cogitations in his mind. Cap. 4.
But JONAS himself in ye fourth chapter following rehearses the true and
certain cause of his flight. For when God did spare the Niniuets, and
destroyed them not, according to the preaching of JONAS, JONAS reasoned with
God, and says: O Lord was not this my saying (I pray thee) when I was yet in
my country? therefore I hasted rather to fly unto Tharsis. By these words we
may plainly gather, that JONAS hearing the commandment of the Lord, by the
which he was commanded to preach the subversion of the Niniuets, thought
within himself of the inspeakable clemency and mercy of God: by the which, God
is wont to forgive those that repent, and seek for the same. He feared
therefore, least he preaching the overthrow of the Niniuets, they in repenting
should be preserved, and so he counted and esteemed as a vain and false
Prophet. For JONAS was not of the common sort of men, neither was he only
famous in Israel. But he was a singular and excellent Prophet, and so he was
esteemed and accounted of, not only among the Jews his countriemen, but also
among other nations. Which fame he got by this, that according to his prophecy
the whole kingdom of Israel was restored, 4. Reg. 14.
as it is written in the book of Kings.

Wherefore, JONAS feared to impair his fame and glory, by preaching that to
the Niniuets which afterward should not come to pass, whereby he might be
counted a liar, the which thing to the virtuous JONAS was more grievous than
death.

But what? Could JONAS by his determined flight escape dangers, and preserve
the fame and glory of his name? No truly: but rather he casts himself into
extreme peril, and does not only by his disobedience bring infamy to
himself, but also puts his life in venture, and suffers even the pains
of hell, while he is constreyned three days to lie in the belly of the Whale,
always looking for present destruction. Here therefore we may see that the
common proverb is oftentimes verified: namely, that the wise man sometimes
proves himself a fool. JONAS was the wisest and ye holiest Prophet in
Israel. And yet notwithstanding in this point he is so overwhelmed with
foolishness, that he thinks by disobedience and sin to preserve his name
and fame: not considering that by this way he should rather loose all his
goods, both corporal and spiritual, than preserve and keep them from
shipwreck and hazard. He knew no doubt, that Solomon says: that the thing
which the ungodly fears, falls always on him. But this saying came not now
into his mind. For so it was wont to come to pass, that if God do stay his
hand, then not one Prophet abides in true obedience.

First of all therefore let us learn by this example of JONAS the fear of
God. No man ought to trust to his wisdom, holiness, power, or other gifts,
but only to the clemency and mercy of God, and in all his actions to call
upon God by Christ his son, that he will vouchsafe to preserve and keep us
in the true obedience of his word. We may not by the example of JONAS take
any thing rashly or disobediently in hand, and say: if God preserved JONAS
in his disobedience, he will also preserve me: wherefore, I also will be
disobedient unto God. This is detestable rashness and temptation of God. For
God preserved JONAS not that we should learn to be rash, and disobedient, but
because we should learn to fear God and to obey him, because truly we may
fall with JONAS: but peradventure we cannot rise with him again, specially if
we rashly tempt God. But and if we fall unadvisedly, then the example of JONAS
teaches us to repent, and to trust to the mercy of god, and so we shall be
delivered. Furthermore, the example of JONAS veryfieth and confirms the
saying of Solomon, namelye, that the thing which the ungodly man fears,
falls on him. For it is commonly seen that men seek to escape danger by
impiety and sin, as JONAS did: who went about to put away infamy by
disobeying the will of God. So Pilate would avoid exile and banishment from
his dominion and office, by shedding the innocent blood of Christ. So
artificers, merchant men, and other occupiers, go about to avoid poverty and
need, by craft, fraud, and deceyte in bargayning, and selling. But that which
they so greatly fear falls upon them. Let us therefore abide in our calling
and obedience toward god, so shall we in deed escape all danger and peril.

And gatte him down to Ioppa: The Text.
where he found a ship ready to go unto Tharsis. So he paid his fare and went
abourde, that he might go with them unto Tharsis, from the presence of the
Lord.
The disobedience of JONAS is already described, and now his security is set
forth. For after he had determined to fly out of the land of Israel, not to
Niniue whereunto he was called, but by sea unto Tharsis, that is to Aphrica, in
Carthage, or as men now call it, to Tunetum, he takes his journey, void of
all care.

He fears no danger in fleeing, he thinks not that God is angrye with him
for his disobedience, he thinks and persuades himself that he is not seen,
but that he lies hidden from the eyes of ye almightye. And therefore he goes
to the ship, and pays his fare that he might seem to be a just and honest
man. And afterward when the tempest arose, he gets himself under the
hatches void of all care and sleeps, thinkinge that this tempest
peradventure came either by chance, or else because of those wicked Idolaters,
and uncircumcised, which were also in the ship. In this place of JONAS an
example of human security after sin committed, is described. For this is
the nature of man, namelye, when he has newly sinned or committed any kind of
wickedness, he carelesselye contemns the judgment of god. He thinks then
that the wrath of God is not so grievous as it was said to be, and that hell
fire flameth not so much as men paynt it out. So Adam after the eating of the
Apple became careless. He thought himself to be sufficiently hidden with his
aperne of fig leaves. So Caine after he had killed his brother, carelessly
says, am I the keeper of my brother? So David when he had newlye committed
adultery and homicide, carelessly he married the adulteress, 2. King. 11.
saying: diverse is the chance of war, which some while kills one, some
while another. So Judas after his treason walked careless for a while, not
waying the heinous offense that he had committed. So Peter when he had denied
Christ before the damzell, Luke. 22.
stood warmyng himself at the fire void of care, as though he had done no
evil. To be short, there are infinite examples, by the which we may note that
sin is of that quality and nature, that in the beginning, it hydeth from man
the grieuousnesse of the wrath of God, and brings him to security. But this
nature of sin, and the quality of the sinner are not only to be known, but
also a remedy for the same ought to be sought for of us. Security after the
sin committed is a grievous disease, and a great impiety, because it
brings the contempt of god, the neglecting also of the knowledge of his wrath
and punishments, which are the rewards of sin: and keeps also man in
hardness of heart and impenitencye. This truly is even to bring man to
extreme destruction. Wherefore, this disease is expressed and set forth, not
only that it may be known, but also that we may be stirred up to seek a
remedy for the same, because the neglecting thereof brings eternal and
everlasting death.

What ought then to be done, that we may have remedy against this security,
a disease of al other most pernicious? First we must take heed of all sin
and disobedience: because (as we said before) disobedience brings with it
that foul disease security. Then if thou be prevented with sin, and have
committed the same, see thou defer not the time of repentance, but out of
hand with all expedition bewail thy crime. For god is not wont to punish the
sinner immediately or so soon as the deed is committed, but deferreth the
punishment, not that he does allow sin, but that he looks for the
repentance of the sinner. If therefore thou repent in time, thou shall escape
the punishment of God.

But and if thou persist and go forward in sin, 1. Cor. 11.
then shall thy punishment be the greater. If we did judge of our selves we
should not be judged of the Lord. That is, if we after we had sinned against
the Lord, would by and by repent us of our sin we should not be punished
at the hands of God. If JONAS had repented him of his disobedience, before he
entered into the ship, then had he not been brought into such extreme peril
of shipwreck as he was. Ierem. 18.
If that people (says the Lord) against whom I have devised a plague,
convert from their wickedness, I repent of the plague that I devised to bring
upon them. Wherefore least by security after sin committed, thou be cast
into perpetual destruction, repent without delay, and turn with expedition to
the Lord and merciful God.

But the Lord hurled a great wind into the sea, The text.
and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was in danger
of going in pieces.
JONAS imagined that the Lord had forgotten his disobedience, and was a
sleep. But as he neither slumbereth nor sleeps, which keeps Israel, that
is, the godly and obedient, so he slepeth not, which punishes Esau, that is,
all impenitent sinners. The Lord therefore stirred up a great tempest in the
sea, insomuch that they which were in the ship dispayred and were without all
hope of life.

1 First, here is to be noted, that tempests either upon the sea, or upon the
land, come not by chance, but by the will of God the aucthor of the same. For
the text says here, the Lord sent a mighty wind. Wherefore, we may not
think that enchaunters, sorcerers, or coniurers, can at their will and
pleasure stir up tempests. For except the Lord permit and suffer, not one
hear of the head shall shake or be moved. The Lord therefore is to be
feared, and not enchaunters.

Yet notwithstanding, such pernicious and wicked persons were wont to be
punished by public laws, because so much as in them lies, they go about
undoubtedly to hurt men, when as notwithstanding, they are able to do nothing
without the sufferance of the Lord.

2 Here thou may see (Christian reader) how wicked a thing it is not to obey
the calling of God. JONAS is disobedient. And he is not only punished, but also
those which are with him in the ship, are cast for his sake into extreme
peril of their lives. Such an example is Adam, which drew with him by his
disobedience, all mankind into continual bondage and slavery of Satan. This
therefore is declared unto us: first, that we may learn to acknowledge the
heinous weight of sin, and to beware of the same, least that we thereby bring
our selves, our friends, and neighbors into destruction. Then that we take
heed of the fellowship and company of wicked men. Wicked and disobedient men
are blasphemers, drunkardes, fornicators, backbyters, and such like, whose
company and fellowship we ought to avoid, knowing that there is no felicity
in their familiarity.

And let us join our selves with godly and virtuous men, that with them our
estate may be happy and prosperous. For godly and obedient Paul's sake all
those that were in the ship were preserved. Acts. 26.


3 Consider the foolishness of disobedient persons. JONAS thought that he
could escape the punishment of God in the sea, but thereby he casts himself
into great danger. For there are no greater external dangers than upon the
sea. As testifies the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.
saying: They that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy their business
in great waters, these men see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the
deep. They are carried up to heaven and down again to the deep, their soul
melts away because of their trouble. Therefore JONAS by that means comes
into great danger, by the which he thought to escape the same. This ought
diligently to be observed and noted of us, that we may learn to show unto God
true obedience. For look what God commands unto man, the same he must do,
or else perish, and not escape. It was commanded unto JONAS, that he should
preach destruction unto the City of Niniue. JONAS therefore was constreyned
either to do the commandment of god, or else to perish. Here there is no
mean. But this must be transferred to every calling of God, and to all his
commandments. God has commanded us not to abuse his holy name, not to
commit adultery, and so forth. Here now we must of necessity obey, or
perish. Neither can we escape destruction if we do not obey, although we
fortify and arm our selves never so much with human power. For as JONAS by
fleeing in the sea, escaped not punishment, but cast himself into the same, so
blasphemers, adulterers, usurers, and such like, in this are subject to
punishment, that they think and persuade themselves to be free and safe from
the same. Wherefore, there is no other way left to escape danger and
punishment, but the way of obedience or repentance.

Then the Mariners were afraid, The Text.
and cried every man to his God: and the goods that were in the ship, they
cast into the sea, to lighten it of them. But JONAS gat him under the hatches,
where he laid him down and slumbered. So the master of the ship came to
him, and said unto him: why slumberest thou? up, call upon thy God: if God
happilye will think upon us, that we perish not. And they said one to
another: come, let us cast lots, that we may know, for whose cause we are thus
troubled. And so they cast lottes.
The Maryners and the rest in the ship were wonderfullye vexed with horror of
mind, because of the extreme danger in the which they were, without all hope
of recovery. They take in hand notwithstanding three things to deliver
themselves from peril, if it were possible. The first is invocation: the
second is, the vnlading of the ship, and the third is lots. 1 The Mariners
did very well and godly, Invocation.
to call upon God in danger and peril. For this is a speedye way to escape
perils, or at least to mittigate the same.

But they being Gentiles and heathen, called not upon the true God: Roma. 1.
and therefore they held this piety and truth in a lie, as says the Apostle
Paul. They have not called upon the true God, by faith of the seed of
Abraham, but every one (says he) calls upon his own God. Whereupon the
Mariners exhorted JONAS that he would call upon his God. And truly the same
was done in this Ship, which was wont to be done throughout the whole
world, yea, amongst us Christians also. For there have been some, which in
danger called one while upon our Lady, another while upon Saint Peter,
sometime upon this Saint, and sometime on that Saint. And if one Saint help
not, they run from Saint to Saint, leaving to call upon the true God. This is
plain impiety and heathenish Idolatry. For the Saints in heaven are set
forth unto us to declare the clemency and love of God, and for examples for
us to imitate their godliness and virtue, and not for us to call upon them.
But God only in all peril, trouble, and adversity ought to be called upon
by his son Christ. For there are as well commandments as promises, for the
true inuocating upon God alone by faith in Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, we are here admonished what utility and profit there comes by
affliction and trouble. Men are secure and careless when al things are in
peace and quiet: but when trouble aryseth, they lift up their heads, they cast
up their eyes to the heaven, and they call upon God. Let us understand
therefore, whenever it pleases God to send a sword, famine, or pestilence,
to raise up storm, tempest, or whatsoever for to punish our sins, let us (I
say) know that he does it, to stir us up to prayer, to invocation, and
repentance. By external tempests, the Lord seeks oftentimes, to stir up
internal tempests in the heart, that we may consider of the wrath of God
toward sinners. We see here that men in this ship were void of care before
the tempest, but the tempest and storm being up, they made haste to prayer,
they enquire diligently for the cause of the tempest, they consider of the
wrath of God, and they seek for a remedy. This ship therefore is a figure of
this world, in the which men walk secure, before afflictions come. But God
sends afflictions, to drive security from them, and to call them to
repentance. Therefore let us use swoorde, famine, pestilence, storm, tempest
and all kind of plagues, and punishments, to our health, that we knowing the
wrath of God, may obey his will.

2 The second thing that these Mariners take in hand, The vnlading of the
ship.
is the vnlading of the ship, and the casting of the goods into the sea, that
the ship might be more light, and escape drowning. A singular example of
wisdom set forth unto us to follow. These Mariners were so discrete and wise,
that they rather sought to lose all their Marchaundice and goods which were in
the ship, than to forsake their life. And it is likely that this ship was
fraught and laden with precious Merchandise: and yet notwithstanding, they are
cast into the sea, to preserve life. This example is set forth unto us, to
admonish us, that as the Mariners to save their corporal and corruptible life,
cast from them all their riches: so also, we ought much more to cast from us al
things whatsoever, to save, preserve, and keep our spiritual and heavenly life.
And if the state and condition of things be such, and if the time so serve that
we may enjoy our spiritual life, with the preservation of our temporal
goods. God is well pleased therewith. But if the case so stand that we cannot
keep and save our earthly substance unless we offend and disobey the will
of God: then we must rather lose and forsake our momentany and rustie riches
than our heavenly treasure, which being once lost, can never be recovered and
gotten again. Whereupon our savior Christ says. Math. 18.
It is better for thee to enter into life, hault, or maimed, rather than thou
should (having two hands, or two feet) be cast into everlasting fire. But
believe me, that the greatest part of men among us Christians, are not so wise
as these heathen Mariners. For, there are (not a few) which had rather not
only that the word of God, but also that God himself should be forsaken and
despised of them, than that they will suffer any thing of their gain to be cut
off. In their occupasion they seek to deceive: in office they envy one
another, and are ambicious. These, and such like unlade not their ship in
perils, but rather fraught the same so full, that ship and all perishes in the
waves of this world, before it come to the prosperous haven of the heavenly
kingdom. Wherefore, these Mariners shall rise in the last day, and shall
condemn the greatest part of Christians, which so esteem riches, honors, and
the pleasures of this world, that they regard not true godliness, or at the
least they make small account of the same.

3 The third thing, Lottes.
is the casting of lots: the which they take in hand to search out and know
for whose sake it was that so great a tempest arose. But although it be lawful
ciuillye to use lots, in dividing inheritaunces, as Joshua divided the land of
Canaan by lot, or in choosing of magistrates, as the Apostles choose Mathie by
lot: this is the ciuille use of lots, and lawful, of the which Solomon
speaks saying. Proverb. 16.
The Lots are cast into the lap, but the ordering thereof stands all in the
Lord: yet notwithstanding, ye examples of JONAS, of Achan, and of Ionathas, are
not to be imitated and followed of us, without the special calling of God. It
is not lawful for us by lotte to seek out those things that are secret and
hydden. If any man have robbed his brother, or stolen any thing in the City,
and the thief unknown, it is not lawful to try the Citizens by lotte, and
to apprehende him for the thief, upon whom the lot chances. For as it does
not follow that all dreams are true, and that the truth ought to be sought
out by dreams, because that Pharao saw the truth by dreams, even so also it
is not lawful generally to seek by lot for secret thieves, and to bring them
for thieves to the gallows, upon whom the lotte chances. This is a
temptation of God. What then, does the example of the casting of lottes of the
Mariners profit us? Surely in all points it serves greatly for our
commodity. For we see that the sin of JONAS which was hidden, secret, and
unknown to all men, to be manifested and revealed not naturallye, but
miraculouslye by lotte. Let us therefore know and well assure our selves, that
no sin, no wickedness how secret soever it be, can be hid from the
presence of the Lord. Men commonly sin in secret, and thereby they hope to
escape unpunished, because their sin is not manifest. But although sin be
unknown and hidden from the eyes of men: yet notwithstanding it is not hid
from the sight of God, who reuealeth and makes them known oftentimes to all
the world, by extraordinary means. Wherefore, the Prophet David says,
whither shall I go then from thy spirit, or where shall I hide me from thy
presence. etc. Also the wise man says: Ecclesiastes. 10.
Wish the king no evil in thy thought, and speak no hurt of the rich in thy
privy chamber: for a bird of the air shall bewray thy voice, and with her
feathers shall she bewraye thy words. Beware therefore that thou sin not in
secret upon hope to escape unpunished, but abstain from all sin, as well
secret as open and manifest.

The Text.
And the lot fell upon JONAS. Then said they unto him: tell us for whose cause
we are thus troubled: what is thine occupation? whence come thou, and
whither go thou? what Countrieman art thou, and of what nation? He answered
them. I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord God of Heaven, which made both the
sea and dry land. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him:
why did thou so? (for they knew that he was fled from the presence of
the Lord, because he had told them) and said moreover unto him, what shall
we do unto thee, that the sea may cease from troublinge us: For the sea
wrought, and was troublous. He answered them: take me and cast me into the
sea, so shall it let you be in rest: for I wotte it is for my sake that this
great tempest is come upon you. Nevertheless, the men assayed with rowyng to
bring the ship to land, but it would not be: because the sea wrought so
sore, and was so troublous against them. Wherefore they cried unto the Lord,
and said: O Lord, let us not perish for this man's death, neither lay thou
innocent blood unto our charge: for thou, O Lord, have done even as thy
pleasure was. So they took JONAS, and cast him into the sea, and the sea left
raging. And the men feared the Lord exceedingly, doing sacrifices, and making
vows unto the Lord.
JONAS is found out by lot. Hitherto has been described the secure and
disobedient fleeing and starting aside of JONAS. Now it is declared that he is
brought to the acknowledging of his fault, and that his security is altered
and changed into extreme tremblinge fear, and carfulness. For as Peter at
the third time of the crowing of the Cock, remembered the words of Christ,
and by and by acknowledged his sin, and wept bitterly: even so JONAS, being
bewrayed by lotte, streightway understood that the tempest arose for his sake,
and felt the greatness of his sin. Wherefore, by his own accord he
confesses his sin, and pronounces the deserved punishment against himself,
namely, that he must be cast into the sea. Take me (says he) and cast me
into the sea, so shall it let you be at rest.

Here we have in JONAS those three parts of repentance, which the hypocrites
(the Papists I mean) do teach, to be the satisfactions for sin. And yet
notwithstanding, he is so impotent, weak, and unable to satisfy for his
sin, that unless he had been preserved by the mercy of God, he had
perished euerlastinglye. For first he had contrition, because he bewailed his
sin, and felt the wrath of God against him for the same. Secondlye, he
confessed his sin, not in the ear of a Priest, but publicly to all those
that were in the ship. Last of all, he satisfied for the sin that he had
committed (say the Papists) when he had commanded the Mariners to cast him
into the sea. So Judas had these three Papisticall parts of repentance. He had
contrition, because he was sorry that he had betrayed Christ. He had
confession, because he confessed his traiterous fault before the hye Priests,
saying, I have sinned in betrayinge the innocent blood. He had also
satisfaction, for desperately he hanged himself. I pray God give these enimes
of his son Christ, if it be his will, a more righteous and just satisfaction,
than this hypocritical satisfaction. But the reason why JONAS obtained
remission of his sin, and not Judas, when as both of them had these three
parts of repentance, shall be hereafter God willing showed: Now let us see what
things are to be gathered and observed in this place.

First, know we that JONAS was a Prophet, accepted and beloved of the Lord.
And yet notwithstanding, when he took not his journey to Niniue at the
commandment of the Lord, he was cast into grievous punishment, when as his
sin might seem to be not so horrible and grievous. For JONAS had neither
committed homicide, nor adultery, but only refused to preach to wicked men.
Is this so great an offense? Were there not many in the land of Israel, which
had committed most cruel deeds? and yet nevertheless, led a secure and quiet
life. Were not the Mariners themselves which were Ethnickes, and heathen, more
heinous, and horrible offenders than JONAS? For they were Idolators. And yet
notwithstanding, these escape danger, only JONAS is cast into the sea, and is
swallowed of the Whale, when as in deed the other deserved to be swallowed,
and devoured both of sea, fish, and land. But this is the same which Peter
writes, 1. Peter. 4.
saying, Judgment begins at the house of God, EZech. 9.
that is, when God goes about to punish, he begins first with his saints.
Also the Lord himself by the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy says. Iere. 25.
In the City where my name is called upon, will I begin to punish. So Malchus
the servant of the hie Priest, offended more than did Peter: and yet
notwithstanding, Peter is reprehended, and Malchus has his ear restored. The
almightye God does as the master of a household or family is wont to do,
which first of all reformeth his own household. Wherefore, we must learn and
know this, that when we are afflicted, and see in the mean season wicked men
to escape unpunished, that the almighty does it, to signify unto us, that we
are of his family and household, and that therefore he begins first to
punish us. Wherefore, let us patiently receive his punishment, and repent us
of our sins.

Furthermore, although the Mariners went about to bring the ship unto land,
least they should cast him into ye sea, whom they judged innocent: yet
notwithstanding, ye more they striued against the stream, the greater was the
tempest, neither did the vnlading of the ship help them any thing at all.

By this example we are taught that the dangers which are sent of God, are not
avoided by man's policy and wit, but only by obedience, which is due to
God. It was humane policy to unlade and lighten the ship: it was humane
policy to bring the ship to shore: but those devises profited nothing. Only
obedience would have profited. For God laid the punishment upon JONAS, and
appointed the Mariners to be executours of the same. This office, this
obedience, was fulfilled of the Mariners. Wherefore they sought not to avoid
the peril and danger, before they left their own devises, and obeyed the
council and motion of god in casting JONAS into the Sea. The which council,
and will of God was revealed as well by lot as by the confession of JONAS
himself. This example in these difficult and dangerous times is to be
considered, specially of Magistrates, parents, and Masters of housholdes. For
God has even now begone to punish us, and to afflict us for our sins, and
reuealeth his wrath by diverse stormy, and boisterous tempests. For at this
present he afflicts us with war, with penury, with pestilence, with civil
contention, and greater plagues no doubt than these hang over our heads, and
are at hand. And what do we to avoid, or eschew this just vengeance of God?
Surely, according to our accustomed and natural wont, we follow our own
devices, we trust unto them, we make flesh our arm. Against the forreyne
enemy, we fortify and arm our selves. But what does that profit us against
the wrath of God? To avoid the plague or pestilence (so called) we take
preparatiues, and diverse medicines, but what can they prevail against the
wrath of God? (Yet notwithstanding, I say not that the use of such ordinary
means are to be forsaken.) But if we will prevail, and have good success, we
must cloth our selves with repentance, we must exercise our selves with
obedience, and we must arm our selves with faith. God commands the
Magistrate to punish the fault, and offense of the common people, even as he
required the Mariners to cast JONAS into the sea. Except therefore, this
commandment be obeyed in punishing the enemies of God (I mean the Papists)
the blasphemer, the drunkarde, the fornicator, the usurer, and such like, the
wrath, and punishment of God cannot have an end. The wrath of God fell upon
the children of Israel for whoredom: Numb. 25.
but after that Phinees began to punish the same, the wrath of God was
appeased. Judges. 7.
The like example we have of Achan, and such like.

But we must take an ensample of these Mariners, and consider with how great
fear of God Magistrates ought to punish the wicked. For they took not in
hand to cast JONAS into the sea, before they had made their prayers unto God,
saying: we beseech thee, O Lord, suffer us not to perish. This example all
Magistrates ought to follow in punishing malefactors, and wicked offenders.
For to punish wickedness, and to put the malefactors to death, is a work
only pertaining to the divine power of God. For in the law it is said thou
shall not kill. This law is natural, pertaining generally to all men.
Whereupon before the flood, when as Magistrates were not ordained, it was not
lawful for any man, though he were a murderer to be put to death. Caine, and
(as some think) Lamech, were murderers, yet they were not put to death.

But after the flood the office of a Magistrate was ordained, to the which: God
gave power and authority to put malefactors to death, according to law. All
Magistrates therefore, ought to execute their office with the fear of god,
least they punish the innocent for the offender.

The second Chapter.
BUT the LORD prepared a great Fish to swallowe up JONAS. The text.

THis sentence comprehends few words, but if we consider, and mark them
well, they bring unto us great comfort, and consolation in all adversities and
troubles. For whereas the Text says, not simply, that JONAS was cast into the
sea, and devoured of the fish, but that the Lord prepared a fish, which
swalowed up JONAS: it manifestlye declares, that the clemency and providence
of the Lord is so great, in preserving his people, and defending his Church,
that he will suffer no hurt, or harm to happen unto them, unless he have
appointed, and provided a mean and way before, by the which he may preserve
and deliver them: the which thing both the examples and promises of scripture
do testify. Among examples, let this which we have here of JONAS, be the
first. For although the Lord was angrye with JONAS for his disobedience: yet
notwithstanding, because he acknowledges him, not only for a member of his
Church, but also for a Prophet beloved of him, he prepares for him a lodging,
or guest Chamber in the sea, before he was cast into the same. For he would
never have suffered the Mariners to cast JONAS into the sea, unless he had
foreseen, and provided first a mean, by the which he might preserve him in
the sea, and deliver him again. Another example we have in the Israelites, who
were oppressed many years, under the cruel tyranny of Pharao in Egypt: and
yet notwithstanding, they were the people or Church of God. But unless God had
foresene and provided a way, by the which he might deliver them, from so cruel
tyranny, he would never have suffered them to have come into Egypt, and to have
been there afflicted. For that he had provided such a mean before his people
went into Egypt and were there afflicted, it is evident by the fiftene of
Genesis, Gene. 15.
where it is fayde unto Abraham. Thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that
apperteyneth not unto them. And shall serve them, and they shall entreat them
evil four hundred years. But afterward they shall come out with great
substance. Here we may see that God had appointed a mean to deliver them out
of affliction before they were afflicted.

An other example we have in the Citizens of Jerusalem. For it was appointed,
that within a hundred years or there aboutes after the death of Ezechias,
Jerusalem should be destroyed of the Babilonians, and the Citizens carried into
captivity. But before this thing came to pass, ye lord prepared Cyrus to be
their deliverer, of whom Esaias prophesied, Esaias. 44. and.45.
the said Cyrus being yet unborn, and promised deliverance to his church,
before affliction came.

For of so great prise is the Church or Congregation of the Lord unto him,
that he winketh not at the adversaries, but punishes them in the end, and
delivers his Church from all trouble and vexation. And therefore also the
Prophet Jeremy prophesied the certain time of the deliverance of the people
out of Babylon, saying that they should be set free the seventh hundredth year.

But the special example is of Christ Jesus the son of God, for he suffered
the most shameful death of the Cross. But before he took upon him our
human nature, and was borne of the virgin, the prophets preached of his
death, resurrection, and kingdom. As we may read in the three and fifty
Chapter of Esaias, and in many other places. Esaias. 53.
For God so loved his only begotten son, that he would not have suffered
the Jews so cruelly to have put him to death, unless he had before appointed
and determined how to save and deliver him.

But some man will say: I grant in deed that this happened to Christ the son
of God, to JONAS likewise, and to other Prophets, and holy men. Respond.
if we consider our corporal estate, and our sins no doubt do provoke the
wrath of God against us. But he which rejects sinners for their sin, he
also receives sinners through repentance. And although as touching our
corporal estate, we are abject, and subject to death: yet notwithstanding, if
we be of the Church of Christ, then are we in the sight of God an excellent
treasure. Wherefore, we must seek by all means to come to repentance, and to
be members of the Church of Christ, The which thing we shall bring to pass,
when we acknowledging our sins, embrace Jesus Christ, by a true faith, and
walk by this faith, in invocation and calling upon God, and in good works,
which God has commanded. In so doing, all the promises of the care and
providence of God mentioned in holy scripture pertain unto us. EZech. 33.
I live says the Lord, and will not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he turn from his wickedness, and live. The Lord is nigh unto all those that
are of a contrite heart, Psalm. 33.
and an humble spirit. Moreover, Ier. 3. lamen
the Lord is nigh unto all those that call upon him. And our savior Christ
says. Math. 10.
All the hears of your head are numbered.

The text.
And JONAS was in the belly of the Whale, three days, and three nights.
This is that miracle which the godly and faithful do wonder at, and whereat
the ungodly and infidels, do scoff and jest. Neither is their any doubt but
that Lucian took occasion by this place to write and indyte his book of true
Narrations, to the end he might thereby set forth the doctrine and miracles of
holy scripture to ye whole world, to be derided, and iested at. But that
scoffing Lucian, and wicked Ethnicke, received a just reward of his impiety.
But let us understand, and know, that although this miracle of JONAS (being
three days, and three nights in the belly of the Whale) seems to human
reason, not only ridiculous, but also impossible: yet notwithstanding, we
ought in no wise to doubt, as concerning the verity and truth of this matter.
For first of all, this history of JONAS, is contained in the Canonical books
of holy scripture, neither ought we to doubt in any point of the authority of
the same, for as yet it was never uncertain. Look how great therefore the
certainty and truth of the whole sum of sacred scripture is, so great also
is the certainty and truth of this miracle.

Furthermore, Christ himself the son of God our Lord, commends unto us
this miracle by name saying: As JONAS was in the Whales belly three days, and
three nights, so must the son of man be. etc. Even as therefore the
authority of Christ was confirmed by heavenly prophecies, and miracles, as by
clensing the Lepers, by restoring the Lame to lymme, by raising the dead, and
such like: even so also the truth of this miracle of JONAS is confirmed by the
same miracles. Wherefore, although the heathnish Ethnicks deride our credulity,
and belief: yet notwithstanding, there is nothing more certain, sure, and
firm, than these miracles. Our daily and common miracles, do confirm
somewhat the truth of this miracle of JONAS. As for example. Does not the
infant, Embryon is the imperfect shape of the child being in the mothers womb.
or rather that which the Greeks call Embryon, lie many weeks alive in the
mothers womb: and yet notwithstanding, is neither choked nor killed, but
rather, receives more perfect strength? These and such like are daily seen:
and yet notwithstanding, because they are common, they are rather counted
natural, than myraculous. But in deed they are no less miracles than this
which concerns JONAS. Wherefore the same God which preserves and quickneth,
by his omnipotent power the imperfect child, in the mothers womb, preserved
also JONAS in the Whales belly.

But this miracle has his use. First, as God exercised and tried the faith of
JONAS, being as yet in the belly of the Whale, so he confirmed the same, by
making the Whale to cast him a land safe and sound. Furthermore, it
certefieth us that in all our affliction we shall receive the help of God, if
we call upon God, as JONAS did, as hereafter follows.

Last of all, this miracle prefigured the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ, as Christ himself expounds the same. Wherefore by this miracle we
are admonished, as well of the clemency of God in adversity, as of the death,
and the resurrection of Christ, that we also might conceive a hope of
deliverance, and be certified and surely persuaded of our resurrection.

The text.
And JONAS prayed unto the Lord his God, out of the fishes belly, and said:
In my trouble I called unto the Lord, and he heard me, out of the belly of
hell I cried and thou heardest my voice.
Here follows the Psalm which JONAS made to give thanks unto God for his
benifits. But we must not think that he had so much leisure, that he might
walk up and down in the Whales belly securely, and sing this Psalm, to pass
away the time: for he was overwhelmed with infinite dolors and griefs of
death, and hell, having no hope almost of deliverance.

Therefore he prayed unto the Lord in the Whales bellye, both with a sorrowful
mind, and with an undoubted faith also. But after he was delivered, and had
escaped danger, he made this Psalm, by the which he did not only declare
the thankfulness of his mind toward god, but also commended this miracle to
his posterity, that all men being in danger, by his example should call upon
God, and look for undoubted help at his hand.

It was a common custom among the ancient fathers in old time to commit the
divine miracles into publik verses and psalms, which is an acceptable kind of
service of God, as testifies the Psalmist, I will praise the name of God with a
song, and will magnify him, and it shall please God more than a Bullock that
has horns and hoofes. For first of all by this worshipping of God, his
goodness, clemency, mercy, and omnipotency is set forth.

Furthermore, men are stirred up to faith and invocation of God in all
adversities. These are the holy and acceptable things which please God, and by
the which we ought to declare a thankful mind for those benifites that we
have received. And if any man require examples of this matter, we have Moses,
Debora, Anna the mother of Samuel, David, Ezechias, Zacharias the father of
John the Baptist, Symeon, and Marie the mother of Christ for examples.
Wherefore it is our parts and duties to know, and learn such Psalms, and by
these we being admonished of the divine miracles, may conceive a firm and
undoubted hope in adversity, and may stir up the holy ghost, by the which we
are made apt to call upon God, and so we shall be in deed delivered in
adversity. For every man which calls upon the name of God shall be saved.

This Psalm consists of seven verses.
But to return to our Psalm, which JONAS made, and committed to the Church to
be song, we must know that it comprehends seven verses. The first verse is:
I cried in my trouble unto the Lord, and he heard me. This verse
comprehends in it self the argument and sum of the whole Psalm, namely,
that JONAS was overwhelmed with great sorrows and grief of the mind. But
when he called upon the Lord by faith, he was wonderfully and miraculously
delivered.

1 First of all therefore, when he turns himself aright, unto the Lord, not
to any of the Patriarchs which were dead, he teaches us yt we ought not in
our troubles, to turn us either by vows or prayers unto dead Saints, but
only to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in the name of
Christ, and for Christ his sake, seeing that we have a manifest promise: John
16.
Whatsoever ye ask of the father in my name, he will give it you.

2 Furthermore, it teaches us, what time is most apt to offer our prayers and
supplications unto God. Ignorant and unlearned men judge, and esteem, that
that time is fit and meet to pray unto God, when either they rise in the
morning, or go to bed at night, or else when they lead a happy and
prosperous life: and truly we ought not to pretermit prayer at these times and
seasons. But when as great and grievous afflictions do arise, and dangerous
perilles approach, men think then that it is hye time, and more fit to
blaspheme, to curse, and to rage against God and men, than to pray unto God.
But the Prophet when he says, in my trouble I cried unto the Lord, and from
the belly of hell I cried, he plainelye declares that then, the time is most
convenient to pray unto God, when great perils are at hand, and we compassed
round about with present death, as testifies the Prophet David, Psalm. 34.
saying: The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and he will
save such as are of an humble spirit. Psalm. 50.
And again: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. Also it is written: I am with him in trouble, I will
deliver him and glorify him.

3 Thirdly, the Prophet teaches us by his own example in all our trouble, to
look for certain help and deliverance, if we repent and call upon God by true
faith. For the Prophet fell into this danger, not for his own righteousness
and obedience of Gods calling, but for unrighteousness, and disobedience, by
the which he fled the calling of God: yet nevertheless when in the midst of
dangers he acknowledged his sin, and converted him self by faith and
prayer unto the Lord, he was heard, saved, and miraculouslye delivered.
External salvation, and deliverance is not always wont to happen to every one
in extreme perils and danger. Yet notwithstanding it is most certain and
sure, that if a sinner even in the midst of his trouble and adversity, repent
and convert unto the Lord, he shall always obtain true, and eternal
salvation, although he should perish with corporal death. Whereupon the
Psalmist says, Approach unto the Lord, and be lightened, and ye shall not be
ashamed. This poor man JONAS cried, and the Lord heard him. And Christ
himself says, John. 11.
I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me though he were
dead, yet shall he live. Wherefore let not our sins dismay or discourage us
from calling upon God in our trouble and adversity, but rather let them be a
mean to stir us up to repentance, that we may call upon God by faith, and
look certainly at his hands for the promised salvation.

Thou had cast me down in the The text.
midst of the sea, and the floude compassed me about: yea, all thy waves and
rowles of water went over me. I thought that I had been cast away out of thy
sight. But I will yet again look toward thy holy temple. The waters
compassed me, even to the very soul: the deep lay about me, and the
weeds were wrapped about my head. I went down to the bottom of the hills, and
was barred in with earth for ever.
In the first verse of this Psalm, the whole state, and sum of the Psalm is
contained, as we have showed before. And now the other seven verses follow:
in ye which, that which was briefly comprised in the first verse, is
plentifully expounded.

And first of all the Prophet rehearses and expounds the tribulations,
afflictions, and sorrows which he suffered, the which no man can sufficiently
understand, unless he himself at some time feel in deed the like. Thou had
cast me (says he) down in the midst of the sea. We know that the Prophet
was cast of the Mariners into the sea, and received of the Whale. Behold
therefore and see how copiouslye he does expound and dilate this thing. Thou
have cast me not simply in the sea, but in the deep of the sea, in the heart of
the sea, in the midst of the sea, that the water might compass me about on
every side, yea, that all thy waves and rowles of water might go over me. For I
did not only swim upon the superficial part of the sea, but also when I was
received into the Whales belly, the waters did so compass me, that they
entered even into my soul, that is, I was even ready to be choked. For I was
in the deep of the sea, and when the head of the Whale, in the which I lay,
was wrapped about with weeds and sedge, I seemed also to be tangled and tied
in the same, insomuch that I looked for no way to escape. Neither was I carried
simplye by the sea shore, but of necessity I was constreyned to bear the
Whale company even to the steep and deep valleys of the mountains in the
sea, where I thought my self to be barred in for ever. To be short, because I
was in the Whales belly, I was so subject to the sea, that I had no hope to be
delivered. In so great therefore, and horrible danger, I was so affected and
persuaded, that I thought my self as touching my corporal health and life, to
be rejected and cast out of Gods favor, for I never looked to escape alive out
of the Whales belly, and to see and visit the holy temple at Jerusalem, and
to be conversant among men again. Thus we have the Paraphrasticall exposition
of these verses, in the which the Prophet shows the danger that he was in,
and the affection of his mind. And now let us see what things ought specially
in these words to be considered and observed.

First of all the Prophet speaks unto God, and affirms that he was cast by
him into the sea. But it is manifest that the Mariners cast him into the sea.
And yet notwithstanding we see that JONAS pretermitting the Mariners says unto
God: Thou had cast me down. Neither does he say, the rowles and waves of
the sea, but he says, thy waves, and thy rowles went over me. By the which
words the Prophet teaches us, that in adversity and trouble, we ought not
to have respect to the isntrumental causes of adversity, but rather to look
and have regard unto God the author of the same. For we are so corrupt and
affected by nature, that we attribute, and refer the causes of our
afflictions, either to men, or to Satan. And as it is commonly said of the
Bear, that when she is hurt, she reuengeth her self on that which is next
unto her: even so man being offended, inueyeth against the next or second
cause, by which he seems to be offended and hurt. But if we consider
well, we shall find it our parts in all adversity and trouble, to lift up
our eyes unto heaven to God the Father, the true and first cause of adversity,
and the author thereof. For neither Satan nor man, nor any other creature can
hurt us, no they can not move one hear of our head, unless before, power be
given and granted of God from above. One hear (says our savior Christ)
falls not to the ground without the will of your heavenly father. Math. 10.
And the Prophet Jeremy in his lamentations, says: What is he which said
that neither good nor evil shall proceed out of the mouth of the most
highest? The which thing, when good and godly men considered, they turned not
themselves to contumelious sayings, to blasphemous oaths, to execrable and
bitter cursinges, in adversity and affliction, as though men or any other
creatures, had been the authors of the same: But they rather turned themselves
by godly obedience and prayer, unto God, which is the special author of
affliction and trouble.

Two causes of afflictions.
For although we our selves are the principal cause of al our afflictions by
reason of our sin: yet notwithstanding, we speak not of the deserving cause
of affliction, but of the inferring and bringinge cause of afflictions, the
which is God, the worker and giver of all things, Math. 10.
without whose will and providence the little Sparrowe falls not to the
ground. Job. 1.
So Iobe said: The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, when the Chaldees
took away his sheep and oxen, when the fire burned his corn, and when the
wind ouerthrewe the house in the which his sons and daughters were
banqueting.

So Daniell says, that the Lord cast the Jews out of Jerusalem into all
lands, Cap. 9.
when as notwithstanding the Babilonians did it. So JONAS in this place
affirms that the Lord cast him into the sea, when (as it appears by the
text) the Mariners did it. But we commonly in adversity say: The Lord gave,
and the thieves have taken: The Lord gave, and the fire consumed: The Lord
gave, and the sea has drowned: contrary to the examples of Job, Daniell, and
JONAS, who had not cause unto the isntrumental cause, but unto ye principal
cause.

Let us learn therefore by this example, in all our trouble, to lift up our
eyes unto the Lord God of heaven only, and to impute the cause of all our
trouble unto him, that we thereby knowing the will of God, may conceive
patience, and be stirred up to repentance and invocation, by the which we may
obtain the true salvation, the which we cannot obtain, if we refer the
cause of our adversity to creatures (which are but the isntrumental cause)
and so fall to banning and cursing them.

Secondly, we see, that JONAS being in the Whales belly, trembled with great
horror and fear of death. When the waters (says he) compassed me, even to the
very soul. Whereby he declares that with a fearful mind, he looked every
moment for present death.

The Legendes of Saynctes do declare unto us, that they suffered death, void
almost of all pain, and that they went to their death with no less courage
and joy, than if a Maid should prepare her self to the dance. And truly
by the goodness of God we have seen by experience, that one man has gone to
his death with a more stout and valiant mind than another. For we may not
think that they are in happy state which are withdrawn by great fear of
death, for God does oftentimes exercise his Saints with this fear, that they
may have a perfect feeling and understanding of the imbecilicie and
weakness of their flesh, and may be stirred up thereby to be the more fervent
in prayer to God. Who was more strong, more holy, and more mighty than the
son of God? And yet notwithstanding, when he should suffer death he was vexed
with so great fear that he trembled, and bled a bloody sweat. What shall we
say then? Did he not know that by this death he should redeem mankind, and
enter into the glory of his father? Yes undoubtedly he knew it. What did he
fear then? He feared to declare himself to be a perfect man, and by this
fear, to satisfy for man, and to have the victory over the fear of death,
that if we at any time should be troubled with fear, should not despair,
but have a certain and sure hope, and call upon God for deliverance.

For he does not reject us for our imbecilitie, but the more weak and
fearful we are, the more care he has over us. Was not David a valiant man,
a mighty, a worthy, and a holy Prophet? And yet notwithstanding, when he
thought upon the deceytes, Psalm. 55.
and cruelty of his enemies, he said: Fearfulness, and trembling are come
upon me: and an horrible dread of death has overwhelmed me. By the which he
was made so timorous, and so fearful, that he said: O that I had wings like
a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest. What was therefore done to
so valiant a Worthy, that so childishly he should fear death? This fear of
it self is not impiety, but it is partly a punishment of impiety. For if man
had not sinned, he had not been subject to the fear of death. This part
therefore of punishment, is left even in the most holy men: first, that they
may acknowledge their natural impiety, by the which they have deserved
everlasting punishment, if God for Christ's sake had not forgiven the same.
Furthermore, that they may be styrred to the more ardencie of prayer and
faith. So JONAS also, although he were so excellent a Prophet, that by his
preaching he restored the decayed kingdom of Israel (as it is written in the
xiiij. Chapter of the fourth book of kings. 4. Reg. 14.
) Yet notwithstanding, he is now compassed about with so great fear of death,
that in dying, he is more cowardly and effeminate, than any common or rascal
Soldier. But God would exercise him in this fear, that he might know his
own estate, and so be stirred the more earnestly to pray.

Wherefore, let us not fear our salvation in the peril of death, but rather
let us have a sure trust, having respect unto Christ the son of God, who
having suffered the fear of death, has delivered us from the malediction of
this fear, that although we be wrapped and tangled in the same: yet
notwithstanding, we shall not perish, but be saved for Christ's sake.

Thirdly, JONAS is not only vexed with grievous fear of death, but also
dispayreth of his corporal life: I am cast (says he) out of thy sight, that
is, thou have no more respect unto me, to preserve me in this life: neither
shall I see any more thy holy temple, that is, I am constrained in this Whale
to die, that I may go no more to the flock of thy Church, in thy temple.

What is the cause therefore, that the Prophet dispayreth of his life? where
is his faith? Could he believe that GOD would save his soul, and not believe
also, that he would preserve and save his body? Can not God raise up men from
death to life? how could he not than preserve those in life which are yet
living? Did he not save the Israelites in the red sea? how than could he
not save JONAS in the Whales belly? These and such like might be objected to
the prophet dispayring of his corporal life in the Whales belly. But the
prophet by this desperation shows forth no part of wicked incredulity, or
distrust, no more than Paul did, when he said, we were grieved out of measure
passing strength, 1. Cor. 1.
so greatly that we dispaired even of life. Also we received an answer of
death in our selves. For there is two manner of deliverance or salvation from
death. The one is corporal, the other is spiritual. And every one truly
which believes in Christ, has the certain promise of the spiritual and
heavenly salvation, and deliverance from death. For Christ has overcome
death, and says: Every one which beeleueth in me, John. 5. and 6
shall not die for ever. Wherefore, we must in no wise doubt or despair of
this deliverance, and salvation. For whosoever dispayreth of the same, shall
die for ever. The other is the corporal life, the which although it has been
promised, and is performed by God toward many: yet notwithstanding, we
have not a general promise at the hands of God, that every one which
believes in Christ, shall always corporally be delivered from the perils of
death. Wherefore, seeing this externe, and corporal deliverance has not a
certain promise, it can not certainly be looked for, but we must commit our
will to the will of God. Whereupon we may gather, that our Prophet JONAS
dispayred not of the true and eternal salvation, and deliverance, which has
a certain promise in the seed of the woman, and in the seed of Abraham,
which is Christ. As touching the corporal salvation and deliverance, seeing
it has not a certain, and express promise, it cannot conceive a certain,
and undoubted trust, but it must call upon God, and repose, and commit the
certainty of the deliverance to his will. For so Christ taught us by his
prayer, that we being compassed about with externe and corporal perils (from
the which to be delivered, we have no certain promise) should pray unto God
that he would vouchsafe corporally to defend and deliver us. Let this cup
pass (says our savior Christ) from me: Math. 26.
yet not as I will, but as thou will. This if we do with heart and mind, then
shall we oftentimes have a deliverance out of peril unlooked for, when all
hope is gone, even as it happened to JONAS, to the three young men in the fiery
Oven in Babylon, Daniel. 3.
to Daniell, David, and such like. Yea, in all our trouble God will make a way
in the midst of the same, whereby we may escape: But if this deliverance
happen not unto us: yet nevertheless our celestial deliverance is most sure
and certain, by the which, whosoever believes in Christ, and calls upon the
father in his name, shall never be destitute.

Now it follows in the other verses, what the Prophet did in so great fear
of death, and desperation of life.

But thou, O Lord my God, The Text.
have brought up my life again out of corruption, when my soul fainted within
me, I thought upon the Lord: and my prayer came in unto thee, even into thy
holy temple. They that hold of vain vanities will forsake his mercy. But I
will do thee sacrifice, with the voice of thanksgiving, and will pay that
which I have vowed: for why? salvation comes of the Lord. And the Lord spoke
unto the fish, and it cast out JONAS again upon the dry land.
THe Prophet has rehearsed the troubles and afflictions, yea, the flames of
hell fire with the which he was tormented in the Whales belly. Now follows
the other part of the Canticle or Psalm, in the which the Prophet shows what
he did to obtain delyuerance from such narrow strayts, and to slake the
tormenting heat and rage of hell fire. Although (says he) I went down to
the bottom of the hills, and was barred in with earth: yet notwithstanding,
thou, O Lord God have brought my life again out of corruption. But have thou
delivered me, I doing nothing, or rather dispairing? No truly: I was not idle
in the Whales bellye, but when my soul was troubled within me, I remembered
thee, O Lord, that my prayer might come to thy holy temple.

We see here, that the Prophet in his extreme necessity had no other respect
and regard than to the Lord himself, to whom he came by earnest and
faithful invocation and prayer. Whereas many of us being set in affliction and
trouble, make haste to impacience, to curssing, and to blaspheming ye name of
god. But by this way we obtain not deliverance, but our affliction and misery
is the more increased. For if we covet to be preserved and delivered in
adversity and trouble we must make have to pray unto the Lord. For invocation
is the way by the which we purchase unto us true deliverance. Every one, says
the Prophet Ioell, which inuocateth, Ioell. 2.
or calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. The which saying, being
once uttered by the Prophet Ioell, Acts. 2. Romans 10.
is also repeated by Peter and Paul: and therefore worthy to be noted. There is
nothing that seems more easy than to call upon the name of the Lord. For
what work can be more slight and easy than the tongue to speak, and say:
Our father which art in heaven. etc. Yea, the children and Infantes can utter
these words. But childishe invocation is one, and true and earnest invocation
is another. The one is most easy, the other is most hard. I remember a
certain Father, said: there is nothing more hard than to pray and invoke
the name of God. For it is an easy matter to recite the words of prayer. But
to pray and call truly upon the name of God is a great work and painful
labor. For no man can call truly upon God, except he be first of all in the
favor of God, and reconciled unto him. For how should thou call upon or
pray unto him, whom thou hate and know to be thine enemy. For thou
can not be in Gods favor and reconciled unto him, unless thou repent thee
truly of thy sins. And in repenting aright, we must first acknowledge our
sins and wickedness, and avoid them. Then we must believe that our sins
are put away by Christ and forgiven, by the which faith there follows a true
obedience toward God in every calling. Here let us consider how hard a thing
it is, to call upon God aright in adversity. For no man calls truly upon
him, but he which repents him of his sins, flies the same, and believes
firmly that he has free remission in Christ, and then gives himself wholly
to the obedience of god. But what seems more difficult unto me^, than to hate
sin, to fly the same, and to follow the works of righteousness. Let no man
therefore think that he is called to an easy or light work, when he is called
to invocation of God and prayer. These things are set before us not that we
should be terrified, or discouraged from invocation, but that we should be
stirred to earnest, true, and fervent prayer.

Our Prophet JONAS is set here for an ensample unto us. For he is cast into the
sea for his sin, because he fled from the presence of the Lord, and obeyed
not his calling. He saw therefore in the bellye of the Whale the wrath of God
to follow his disobedience. What does he therefore? He begins to cry unto
the Lord, and to call upon God. But God is angrye. He is therefore constrained
first of all, to acknowledge his sin, and to attribute unto God the glory of
righteousness, namely, because God justly punished him with so great and
dangerous perils: neither had he done unjustly if he had suffered him to have
perished euerlastinglye. Having acknowledged his sin, he believed certainly
that by the promised seed of Abraham (which was Jesus Christ) he should have
free remission and pardon for the same. Then in heart he promised obedience unto
God, that he would ever afterward serve him, and never run away again as he
had done before. These things being done, he might boldlye come unto God, call
upon his name, and look for deliverance out of the belly of the Whale.

But some man will say, many call upon God, which notwithstanding are not
delivered from their corporal trouble. Did not Christ himself call upon God
the father that the cup of his passion might pass away from him: Math. 26.
and yet notwithstanding, Christ was not delivered from the external cross?
Steven called upon Christ Jesus, Acts. 7.
and yet notwithstanding he was stoned. We must so think therefore of
invocation, that although external salvation happen not always: yet
notwithstanding eternal salvation shall always happen to the true caller
upon God. So Christ was not delivered from the external cross, but yet he
was delivered from death it self, and obtained a name above all names. So
Steven was not delivered from the stoning, but nevertheless he was delivered
from death and hell, and when he saw Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, he
was received of him into the fellowship of his kingdom.

But how did JONAS behave himself toward God for the wonderful benifite of
his deliverance? Surely he offered unto God the acceptable sacrifice of thanks
giving, as appears by the text: I will do unto thee, sacrifice, with the
voice of thanksgiving. And before it is said, they that hold of vain
vanities will forsake his mercy. By the which words the Prophet makes a
difference between the thankfulness of the godly, and the thankesgiuinge of
the wicked. The wicked, when they receive any benifite at the hands of God,
they refer it to their Idolles, and to their hypocritical worshippings, and
service. The Ethnicke or heathen being delivered from a Fever, or any other
disease, runs straight way to Jupiter, and for his health offers to him
the offering and sacrifice of thanksgiving. The hypocrite being delivered from
the pain of tooth ache, goes to Saint Appoline, to whom for the ease
received, he offers the sacrifice of thankesgiuinge. The Monk being
delivered from the peril of waters, makes haste to S. Frauncis, or to his
Mass where he yields the sacrifice of thanksgiving. But what says the
Prophet here of such. They that hold of vain things (says he) will forsake
the mercy of the Lord. That is, they which follow vain Idolles, and
hypocritical worshippinges in offering thanks unto God, these forsake the
mercy of the Lord, which he bestowed upon them, and make themselves unworthy
of the same.

But I (says the Prophet) will do to thee sacrifice, with the voice of
thanksgiving, and will perform that which I have vowed, for why? salvation
comes of the Lord. That is, I in offering the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving will not do as the wicked and hypocrytes do, which worship God
with abominable Idols, with vain worshippings, and fained inventions. But I
will offer unto thee my true God, and savior, the voice of praise: yea, I will
praise thy name for ever, and will set forth the glory of the same unto all
men. I will preach and proclayme thy clemency, and mercy, so long as I live.
And I will pay my vows, that is, I will do those things which I ought to
do. I will not devise and invent feigned sacrifices, as the hypocrites do, but
I will do those duties which God requires at my hands to be done. If it
please God to send me again unto Niniue, I will not murmr, but with heart
and mind, I will seek the performance of his will. This example therefore of
the Prophet JONAS is set forth unto us, to the end we might learn to offer
the true sacrifice of thanksgiving unto God, for those benifites which we
receive at his hands, whether they pertayne to the body or to the mind, that
we may continually abide in the favor of the Lord.

The third Chapter.
THen the word of the Lord came to JONAS again, saying: up, The text.
and get thee to Niniue that great City, and preach unto them the preaching
that I bade thee. So JONAS arose, and went to Niniue, at the Lords
commandment. Niniue was a great City unto God, namely, of three days
journey. And JONAS went to, and entered into the City, even a days journey.
JONAS at the length escaped out of the Whales belly, that is, from extreme
death and hell. For after that JONAS had repented, and called upon the name of
the Lord by true faith, the Whale was constrained to cast him out alive, and
to let him go free. For God being reconciled unto us, all creatures are
constrained to minister unto us, and to serve our necessity, and those things
also which before were hurtful unto us, bring then much profit and
commodity with them to our great comfort and consolation.

Therefore now consequently the ministry to the which JONAS after his
deliverance was called by the mouth of God, must be declared. For he is now
sent of God (as he was before) to Niniue, to the end he might preach there the
destruction of the City. Up (says he) and get thee to Niniue that great
City. As concerning the greatness of the City of Niniue, it was before
declared. And now the things which are to be considered in this place, are
these. First, JONAS after his deliverance is not placed of God in a soft
Fetherbed, but he is sent to preach the word of God in Niniue, which was a
work not only laborious, but also dangerous. Here therefore we are taught
whereunto we are called of God, and what we ought to do, when we have received
any benifite at his hand.

For we truly are so corrupted by nature with sin, that after we have
received benifites, we are more perverse, and disobedient unto God, than we
were before. And we see by experience, that they which have come from extreme
beggary and penury, to great riches and possessions, and from the dunghill to
Nobility, have been then more insolent and unthankful then they were
before. But the example of JONAS in this place, teaches us true obedience, and
piety. For after that we are delivered out of great perils and dangers, we
must not be idle, neither must we then begin to despise God, but rather it is
our duties to obey God, and his calling, and to be thankful for those
benifits that we have received at his hands. In the fifth Chapter of Saint
John, our Savior Christ says to the man that was restored to his health. John.
5.
Behold, thou art now made whole, go, and sin no more, least some worse thing
happen unto thee. So JONAS also seemed to say within himself: behold, thou
art now delivered from the peril of death, and the goulfe of hell, see
therefore, that thou be no more disobedient, but obey the calling of God, least
a worse thing happen unto thee. Even so it is our parts to think also, after
that we are delivered either from the peril of poverty, from the peril of
infirmity, or from the peril of death. Behold, thou have received an
excellent benefit at the hands of God, be not therefore unthankful, but
seek by all means thou can to show a thankful mind by doing thy duty.
For God most liberally bestows his benifites, not that we should be worse,
but to the end we should be better. But and it we abuse the benifites of God,
as riches to luxvrie, and to fulfill our pleasure: wine, to drunkenness: and
health, to dishonestie and wicked life: then let us look for nothing else but
to be deprived, not only of these corporal benifits, but also of heavenly
treasure and felicity, and to perish with everlasting pain and punishment.
Wherefore, let us consider, that after the benifits received, we are called to
thankfulness, and obedience, the which, if we perform we shall provoke the
Lord to bestow greater benifites upon us. Furthermore, we must consider in
the example of JONAS, his singular obedience. For the Text says, JONAS arose,
and went to Niniue, according to the word of the Lord.

Before JONAS arose to fly from the presence of God. Cap. 1
But now he arises not to fly, but to obey the calling of the Lord. What
was the cause that JONAS is thus altered and changed, and that he is so prompt
and ready to perform the will and commandment of God? Surely, the
affliction, peril, and trouble, was the cause, as has been already at large
declared. We see therefore what is the principal reason, why God does
oftentimes lay crosses, and sundry afflictions upon us. JONAS would not simplye
at the first obey the word of the Lord, he is cast therefore into the sea,
that seeing he would not by the word, and in prosperity, learn to obey, he
might learn the same by cross in adversity.

The like oftentimes happens unto us. For God first of all calls us being
sinners, and disobedient, to righteousness and obedience by the preachinge of
his word when we are in prosperity. But when we fly obedience, then he
casts us into the sea of diverse afflictions, to the end we might learn
that, in adversity and trouble, which we refused in prosperity and ease. So
the Lord God of our fathers sent to the Citizens of Jerusalem, that they
should forsake their idolatry, but when they would not obey his word in
liberty, they were constreyned to learn obedience in captivity. Wherefore,
when we flourishing in prosperity are called to repentance, let us not despise
the voice of the Lord, but let us obey him in time, least with the wicked we
be afflicted and destroyed.

And he cried, saying: The Text.
there are yet forty days, and then shall Niniue be overthrown.
This is the sermon which JONAS made in Niniue, being very brief, and short,
if we have respect to the number of the words, but if we consider the sentence,
it is very long, and contains much matter. First of all let us weye and
consider the place of the City, in the which JONAS began to preach. When he
had entered (says the text) into the city even a days journey, and so forth.
Therefore JONAS preached even in the midst of the city almost, not in the
coming in, nor in the going forth, to the end the fame of his sermonde, or
preachinge, might the more easily be spread among all the citizens and
inhabitants thereabout. For the word of the Lord must be preached, not to a
few men only, neither in an obscure place, but to all men openly, to the
end no man might have excuse. Herevppon it came to pass, and was accustomed,
that always from the beginning of the world the word of God was preached in ye
chief Monarchies and Cities of the earth. For as JONAS could not go from house
to house generally throughout ye City of Niniue, but stood in a convenient
place of ye City, that the fame of his preaching might come to all men, even so
the word of the Lord is not wont to be carried to every corner of every region,
but it is revealed and published in the special and principal kingdoms, that
by them the fame thereof might be spread abroad throughout the whole world, that
no man might have excuse. So the word of the Lord was preached in the time of
Abraham, in Canaan, and Egypt, which were in those places and times the
special kingdoms. So likewise in the Monarchy of Babylon, and Persia, by
Daniell. And so the word of God was preached in Rome by ye Apostles. Wherefore
they which lurk in woods and mountains have no excuse, that the word of God
is not brought peculiarlye unto them by the Prophets, and Apostles: but it is
sufficient that the word of God is preached openly and freely in public
places, whereby the fame may be spread into all places. But this is not spoken
to the end ye Parishes in little towns and vilages should be neglected and
abrogated. For our ancestors appointed and ordained Parishes with their great
cost, and the inhabitants of villages to pay their tenthes, that they might
have Pastors appointed unto them.

Wherefore, they which care not to have Pastors, or Preachers, which might show
the word of the Lord unto them, but keep the tenth and tribute, to
themselves. These I say are open thieves and spoilers of the Church of God. But
they are rehearsed and spoken, to the end we may know that no man in the
whole earth, wheresoever he dwells, might have any excuse of his impiety,
wickedness, or ignorance, because that, although the word of God be not
preached in every mountain and wood: yet notwithstanding it is preached in
the special places of the earth. It grieueth not the Merchaunt man to make a
long and dangerous voyage from England to Spain, to Ginnie, to India, to
fetch his merchaundise thence for advantage and gain, and shall it grieve us
to seek for the hearing of the word of God, Math. 13.
that precious pearl and jewel, because the place where it is preached, is
far distant from us? God forbid. For if that we be so slow in seking for
that heavenly treasure, the muck and dross of this world which is so
diligently sought for, shall condemn us in the day of judgment.

Furthermore, we must also wey and note the manner of JONAS preachinge, for the
text says: he cried. We must not think here, that he cried out, or raged with
exclamation as mad men do, or such as be drunk, but rather that he spoke
plainly placing his words without obscurity. Wherefore, it is the duty of
all Pastors and Preachers, after the example of JONAS, to avoid and eschew
all obscurity in their doctrine, which teaches not evidently and plainly, the
way of truth. Such were the Sophisters, and others, in old time, which
endeavored themselves always to speak obscurely, mistically, and darkely of
religion. Such also are the Papists, and enemies of Gods truth, which publish
and set forth all their ceremonies and service in an unknown tongue. Wherefore,
although they howl, chaunt, pipe, and babble much in the Latin tongue before
the common people in their churches: yet notwithstanding they do but whisper,
and talk to them that have no ears. They do but speak in the air, 1. Cor.
14.
as witnesses Saint Paul. For if the trump give an uncertain sound, who
shall prepare himself to the battle? Even so ye (says the Apostle) speaking
with tongues, except ye speak words that have signification, how shall it be
understood what is spoken. For so the simple and unlearned man, may say,
Amen, to him that curses, when he should bless. Wherefore, let every man
desire with Saint Paul, rather to speak five words in the congregation to
the information of other, than ten thousand words with the tongue.

Now let us hear what the Prophet preached. There are yet forty days (says
he) and then shall Niniue be overthrown. A short sermon truly to be made in so
great a city: yet notwithstanding so great in effect, that JONAS thereby
stood not only in peril of his life, but also in hazard of his good name and
fame. For the king of the Niniuets, and his Citizens, might have surmised by
this sermon, that JONAS with foreign enemies had priuilye conspired the
destruction of the City, either by fire in the night, or else by tumult, and
so might have accused him of sedition, and destroyed him. Further, if they had
believed that it was the word of God which he preached (as they did in deed)
and the same had not been fulfilled, then might they have accused JONAS to be a
vain and a lying Prophet. Nevertheless, the Prophet is not discouraged by
these perils of his life and fame, but proceeds in his calling with
obedience, showing that, to the Niniuets which he was commanded of God to
declare. By the which example we are admonished, that in following our vocation
and calling, we should rather have a consideration of the wrath of God
toward disobedience, than of peril and danger which happen unto us by
disobedience. For if God be angry with us for disobedience, then we may
assure our selves to suffer peril, in the which unless we repent, we may
look for nothing but everlasting destruction. But if we obey ye calling of
god, although most dangerous perils and horrible destruction lie before our
eyes ready to devour us: yet nevertheless, they shall either not happen unto
us, or if they do happen unto us, God shall myraculously, save, defend, and
deliver us. Examples of this, we have Joseph in Egypt, the Israelites in the
desert, Daniell in the Lions den, Job on the dunghill, the three children in
the fiery Oven, and many other. But what shall we say to the sermon of JONAS,
which said, that Niniue should be destroyed within forty days, and yet was
not destroyed. Is the Prophet therefore a liar? Truly this was the special
cause why the Prophet fled before from the presence of the lord, and would not
preach destruction to the Niniuets, For he considered that if they should
repent, the City should continue in the former state, and he counted a vain
and lying Prophet. And yet notwithstanding, being exercised with cross and
trouble, he obeys the calling of God, and publicly preaches, that the City
shall be destroyed within forty days. How then is the Prophecy to be
understood and cleared of a lie? Some dissolve it after this sort, affirming
that there are two manner of Prophecies, Two manner of prophecies.
namely the prophecy of Predestination, and the prophecy of commination or
threatening. The prophecy of predestination is that, which by no means may be
retracted: such was the prophecy of the Messiah to come, and of the publishing
of the Gospel throughout the whole world. This is the prophecy of
predestination, that is, without any certain condition, which could not
either by any man's power, wisdom, or wickedness, be stayed or frustrate.
The prophecy of commination is, which threatens only the evil of punishments
to come, the which notwithstanding may be stayed and prevented by the
repentance of the hearers: and such is this Prophecy of the destruction of the
Niniuets. And these things truly are rightly spoken of the prophecy of
commination, if so be that they be rightly understood. The which, that we may
in deed, let us understand the difference between the law and the Prophets,
that we may know which is the true sense of the Prophecies, and threatenings,
which pertayne to the law. For the law of God, does manifestly require the
perfect fulfilling of the commandments of God, and absolute righteousness
also. And if any man do not fulfill the commandments of God perfitely,
neither does perform absolute righteousness, then does the law curse him,
and pronounce him to be guilty, as well of corporal as of eternal damnation.
After the same manner also the prophecies of the law require righteousness, the
which except a man observe, and perform, both corporal and spiritual
afflictions are threatened unto him. But the Gospel interprets these
Prophecies, threatenings, and maledictions of Christ, namely, that the
prophecies, and threatenings of the law shall proceed and fall upon
impenitent persons, but because Christ has satisfied for sin, and has
reconciled us unto God the father, therefore he which repents, and turns by
faith unto Christ, is no more subject to the threatenings and curses of the
law.

Wherefore this Prophecy of JONAS also saying: There are yet forty days, and
then Niniue shall be destroyed, is to be understood with this condition: if ye
do not convert, repent, and amend.

For, that such prophecies and threatenings are so to be understood, many
other places of Scripture do testify. As this: But if that people do repent
them of their evil, Hiere. 48.
I also will repent me of the plague that I have devised against them. Here ye
Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Hieremie teaches that the prophecy of
destruction, or plague, is understood with this condition: if the Jews do
not repent. For if they had repented at the preachings of the Prophets, then
Jerusalem had not been destroyed. The Lord also by the Prophet Ezechiell
says, I live, EZechiel. 18.
and will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his
wickedness, and live. Here again, the Lord plainlye declares, how he would
have his Prophecies to be understood, by the which, he threatens death, or
destruction unto sinners. For he says often times, to a nation, to a City, or
to a private man: thou have grieuouslye sinned against me, by committing this
or that sin. Wherefore, thou must of necessity die, not only corporally, but
also eternally. This is a most true and certain prophecy: but yet
notwithstanding, we must understand it aright. How? God himself in this
place of Ezechiell swears by himself, by his life, that he would not
simplye have the sinner to be damned, but rather that he repent him of his
sin, and live. And most sure and certain it is, that the sinner should dye
eternally if he did not repent, but if he do repent, then is the plague before
threatened, retracted.

2. Tim. 2.
Saint Paul says. If we deny him, he remains faithful, he can not deny him
self. And again he says: The gifts and calling of God are such, Romans 11.
that it cannot repent him of them, that is, god repents him not of his
promises. All these things teach, that the promises of the Gospel as
concerning the redemption from everlasting death, are most sure, and
irreuocable. But the promises and threatenings of the law may be retracted,
not from the impenitent, upon whom they remain most firm and immutable, but
from the godly and penitent, which turn themselves unto Christ by faith,
which cannot deny himself to those that believe in him. Wherefore, when our
sins do prick our consciences, and accuse us before God, and do condemn
us to everlasting death, let us turn to the gospel, to Christ, who being made
accursed for us, has purchased everlasting benediction to us.

The text.
And the people of Niniue believed God, and proclaimed fasting, and arrayed
themselves in sackecloth, as well the great as the small of them.
This place of the repentance of the Niniuets, is worthy the remembrance, and
diligently to be noted: and it is not only known to the godly teachers, but
also to the hypocrytes, sacrificing Priests, and Monks. For these men always
in speaking of repentance, are wont to bring forth straight way the example
of the Niniuets, and to exhort their Church to repent by their example. But
they choose out in this place, only those things which make more to the
stablishing of hypocrisy, than to the setting forth of true repentance. For
that which the text says (they believed in the Lord) they covertly omit, and
take only for their purpose, fasting, and sackcloth, and persuade themselves
that they preach true repentance, when they urge the church to fast certain
days, and to go woolwarde without linen. For they think that by eating of
bread only, and by drinking water, and by going woolwarde their sins are
done away before God, and that these are merits, for the which God does omit
the fault and punishment of sin. And in the mean time they make no mention
of the true acknowledging of their sins, of the true faith in Christ (for the
which faith alone, God is merciful unto us) and of the true fruits of faith,
and repentance. But this place conteyneth a manifest and plain doctrine of
true repentance. Wherefore, let us omit the dreams of Monks, and learn out
of this place true repentance, which God regards, and which saves and
delivers us in extreme perils.

And first of all, before we come to the explication of repentance, we must
know that the repentance is not in vain in the Church, but of great force
before God, obteyning for us the true and everlasting salvation.

Nouation heretics.
There were sometimes certain heretics called Nouations, which left to the
sinner after he was baptized, and had received once remission of his sins, no
place of repentance. But the error of these men is manifestly refuted, by many
evident testimonies of Scripture. Hiere. 3.
As in the third of Hieremie, where the Lord speaks to the people thus:
Commonly when a man puts away his wife, and she goes from him, and maryeth
with another, then the question is: should he resort unto her any more after
that? Is not his field then defiled, and unclean? But as for thee, thou have
played the harlot with many lovers: Hiere. 18.
yet turn again to me says the Lord. And again he says: If that nation
repent, I will also repent. The Parables also in the.xv. Luke. 15.
of Luke teach the same thing, by the lost sheep, by the lost grote, by the
prodigal son. Wherefore let us understand, that true repentance is most
acceptable unto God, and auayleable to salvation, sometimes corporally, as
appears here by the example of the Niniuets, but always eternally.

Let us now therefore see what we must do, when we have sinned, and for sin
deserved, most grievous punishment, both corporal, and eternal, as the
Niniuetes deserved. First, let us truly repent, and we shall obtain not
only remission of sin, but also release of punishment. It is not necessary
that we should be curious or much inquisitiue, when as this present place
brieflye (yet notwithstanding, both godly and truly) teaches us the true and
perfect way to repent. For the Scripture says: the people of Niniue believed in
the Lord. This is the true and certain way of repentance to believe in the
Lord.

The which thing being uttered and spoken: Epicures, and contemners of true
godliness, can scarce refrain laughter, esteeming that there is nothing more
easy to be done, than to believe in the Lord. But I would not that we should
err. For when faith in the Lord, is required of us, let us know and
understand that a work, no less hard, heavenly, and divine, is required of
us, than was the creation of heaven and earth. If a man should say unto thee,
make heaven and earth, thou would think that a work impossible, and above
thy strength were required of thee. But when it is said: believe in the Lord,
a thing no less impossible is required of thee then the creation of heaven and
earth. Math. 19.
Impossible I mean it is to flesh and blood, but not impossible to the
spirit, and spiritual force. The which thing to explicate, let us take the
example of the Niniuetes. For where as it is said, that they believed in the
Lord, it is meant that they believed the sermon which JONAS made at the
commandment of the Lord, that it was the true, divine, and heavenly voice of
God. But how hard a thing it was to believe this, many things do declare. 4.
King. 14.
For first of all, if we have respect to the person of JONAS, although he were
counted a great Prophet among the Israelites: yet notwithstanding, he was not
of so great authority among the Niniuetes, which were uncircumcised Gentiles.
It is marvel therefore that they said not, what have we to do with that Jew,
that stranger? what means that fugitive, and runnagate fellow? has God
talked more with him than with our Bishops and high Priests? If it had been
the purpose of God to overthrow our City, would he not sooner have revealed
it to our King, or to some of our chief rulers in the City, than to this
runneawaye Jew. But neither the Citizens, nor the Magistrates, nor the King
himself, objected any such thing to JONAS, but simply believed his word, as
the word of God. Wherefore, it is manifest that they were stirred up to
believe, not by humane power, but by heavenly force, even by the spirit of God.
Furthermore, if we mark the text well, when it says: They believed in the
Lord, it shall easily appear that faith is not a humane work, but a divine
work. For to believe in the Lord comprehends three things. 1 The first is,
to believe yt the law of God is true, when it reproves us of sin, and
condemns us for sin, and pronounces us to be guilty of all, as well
corporal as eternal punishments. But to believe this, is not a work of the
flesh, but a work of the spirit. Let us behold therefore the sermon of
JONAS. There are yet (says he) forty days, and then shall Niniue be
overthrown. This is a sermon of the law, which is in effect, as if he had
said: You Niniuets, ye are ungodly men, and the most wicked sinners in the
whole world. Wherefore, God within forty days will so overthrow, and destroy
your City, that ye shall be cast both body and soul into hell. To take such a
sermon in good part, and to believe the same to be true, is not of the flesh
and blood, but a work of the holy ghost. For men being left and given over
unto their strength cannot abide to be reprehended, much less to be told,
that they shall be damned. Wherefore, if they patiently bear reprehension,
and acknowledge their sin and damnation, it is manifest that they are indewed
with the power of the holy ghost.

2 Secondly, to believe in the Lord, is to believe the promise made to
Abraham, as concerning Christ, that is, to believe that the remission of our
sins, our life, and salvation is eternal, true, and infallible. But to
believe this, cannot be brought to pass in man, but only by the holy ghost.
For it is not a work of the flesh, or of humane wisdom, but only of the
spirit of God. Let us therefore once again consider of the sermon of JONAS,
There are yet (says he) forty days, and then shall Niniue be destroyed.
Although this sermon seems only to be a sermon of the law: yet
notwithstanding, he which understands the law of God aryghte, he
understands also that in this sermon is contained the sermon of the Gospel
of Christ. For Paul (as concerning the law) says, Galath. 3.
The law is a schoolemaister unto Christ. Wheresoever therefore the law does
condemn us, there does it refer us unto Christ, that we might be delivered
from damnation. Moreover, S. Paul says, The scripture (that is the law of the
Lord) has concluded al things under sin, that the promise of the faith of
Christ Jesus might be given to those ye believe: That is to say. The law
brings us to the knowledge of sin, not that we should perish in sin, but
that we should be referred to Christ by faith, and by him obtain salvation.
Also the Lord by the mouth of Ezechiell says, Chap. 18.
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his
wickedness and live. But the law threatens death to the sinner, yet, not that
he should perish by death, but to the end he might be stirred up to come
unto Christ by faith, and so obtain life. So this sermon of JONAS includes in
it self the Gospel of the seed of Abraham, as concerning Christ. For he
would not that the Niniuets should perish, but that they should be converted
to the seed of Abraham (which is Christ) by faith, and might have in him
remission of sins, and eternal life. To believe this, is not a work of the
flesh, but of the spirit.

3 Thirdly, to believe in the Lord, comprehends also in it self, to believe
the commandments of the Lord to be divine, and that it is necessary to
exhibit unto them obedience by faith, and to bring forth the true fruits of
repentance, namely, the acknowledge of our sin and faith in Christ. To do
this also, we are unable without the aid of Gods spirit. For we cannot truly
obey the commandments of God, unless the Lord incline our hearts thereunto
by his holy spirit. Wherefore, when it is said in the text, that the
Niniuets believed the Lord, it means not that they only had a light belief,
and imagination of God, but it signifies that they showed forth these three
things, namely, that they believed themselves to be sinners, and that they
deserved not only destruction, but also eternal damnation. Secondly, that they
believed to receive pardon and forgiveness of their sins for the seed of
Abraham only (which was Christ) whose Prophet JONAS was. Thirdly, it
signifies that they determined with themselves ever after to avoid sin, and
to obey the commandments of God. This is that true repentance which God
regards, and which obteyneth remission of sins and punishments.

What means it then, that the Niniuets proclaim a fast, and put on
sackecloth? These are not the true works of repentance, but they are the
external signs of repentance. For fasting is not auayleable to put away
sin, The end of fasting.
but serves only to chastise the flesh, and to make it apt and obedient to
hear the word of God. Therefore when the Niniuets proclaimed a fasting, they
did it to the end the Citizens might come sober to the sermon, and every man
to do his duty. But whereas they did put on sackecloth, (that is, base
apparel) it is a sign and token of public sorrow and grief for sin, and
an admonition to true repentance, which is the chiefest thing to be looked for,
as shall appear by the proclamation of the king.

And tydinges came unto the king of Niniue, The Text.
which arose out of his seat, and did his apparel off, and put on sackcloth,
and sat him down in ashes. And it was cried and commanded in Niniue by the
authority of the king, and his Lords, saying: See that neither man, nor beast,
Ox, or sheep taste ought at all, and that they neither feed nor drink
water: but put on sackcloth both man and beast: and cry mightily unto God.
Yea, see that every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness
that he has in hand. Who can tell? God may turn and repent, and cease from
his fierce wrath, that we perish not.
The text here makes no mention of the Kings name. But by what name soever he
were called, he deserved great commendation. For he was not adorned and
bewtified only with kingly virtues, but also with heavenly graces.

1 First of al, when tidings was brought unto the King of the sermon which
JONAS made, and of the study, and endeavor of the Citizens, he makes not
exclamation of the Prophet, he accuses him not of sedition, and tumult, but
believes also himself the word of JONAS. The Prophet Hieremie reproves the
Citizens of Jerusalem for their wickedness and impiety, Hiere. 26.
and says, that unless they repent, it will come to pass that the temple of
the Lord shall be destroyed as Siloh was, and so forth. The hie Priests then
and the common people took him, and would have put him to death as a
blasphemer, and sedicious person. So some wicked tyrant would not have wincked
at the preaching of JONAS, when he said the City should be overthrown: but
would have apprehended him, and put him to death, as if he had been of some
secret conspiracy to destroy the same at a sodeine, by fire, or else to bring
in the enemy by night.

But the godly king of the Niniuetes, suspected no such thing in JONAS, but
receives him as a true Prophet of the Lord, and acknowledges his sermon for
the word of God. For we may not think that this king was so simple, so rash,
or so mad, that he would unadvisedly believe the words of this Prophet. And
although in hearing Sermons, we must specially note, not who speaks, but what
is spoken: yet notwithstanding, in great matters, and things pertaining to
salvation, we must not rashely credit every stranger, which preaches new
things without certain and manifest testimonies. Prove (says saint Paul)
all things, Thessa. 5.
and keep that which is good. And saint John says: 1. John. 3.
Believe not every spirit, but prove ye spirits whether they be of God or no.
So we must think of this godly king of Niniue, that he believed not rashely
the sermons of JONAS, but that he first proved who it was that preached these
things, and what testimonies he had of his calling. For JONAS was neither
unknown to the king, nor to the Citizens of Niniue, but they knew him to be
the true prophet of the Lord, because his fame was spread even to Niniue, when
as by his prophecy the Kingdom of Israel was restored by Jeroboam, 4 Kin. 14.
as it is written in the book of Kings. Furthermore, the godly king knew,
that God would not suffer sin and wickedness, to escape unpunished, and that
he was severe in looking for repentance. Seeing therefore JONAS to have
certain testimonies, that he was the prophet of the Lord, and perceiving how
all things were corrupt in the City with wicked manners, he worthily received
the Sermon of JONAS, as a divine Oracle.

By the which example we are taught not to receive the doctrine of every one by
and by (which bosteth himself to be a prophet) as the word of God, and not
to allow by and by the prophecy of every one, which says, that he has the
spirit of God. For this were a great token of lightness, to believe every
busy body. But after that we know, that the word set forth, and expounded
unto us, is the word of God in deed, then we must believe the same without al
doubt or delay, that we may obtain and enjoy the end of faith, which is (as
says saint Peter) the salvation of our souls.

2 Secondly, this king, when he heard that Niniue, for sin should be
overthrown, he prefers not himself before his Citizens, he judges not
himself to be more just than other men, but in repenting, he puts of his
kingly robes, and Majesty, and puts on the apparel of a mourner,
repenting, and acknowledging his sin. For he put off his kinglike apparel,
and clothed himself with sackcloth, which is a garment betokening repentance.
Neither does he sit in his throne, or chair of estate, wrought with silk,
with needle work, and with gold, but he sits with the rest of his
subjects in the dust, that is, in filthy places, and vndecked, to testify
and declare, that he also lamented and bewailed the common state of the City.
By the which example we are not taught, that kings and princes, when they
repent, should forsake the office and rule of their kingdom, The yoke of
Monkerye.
and go into a Monastery, and there put on a Cool. For hitherto, or to this
pass, Monks brought Princes when they went about to repent, persuading them
to forsake their kingly and princely calling, and to put the yoke of Monkery
upon their necks, to satisfy for sin. This was great impiety and
abominable. But kings and princes are here taught, when GOD reuealeth his
wrath against sin, not to think that they by the privilege of their
majesty, are just before God, and that the rude and rascal sort, are only
wicked and unjust before him: no, rather, they are taught to think themselves
to be comprehended among the common sort of men, of whom it is said, Every man
is a liar. Also: Psalm. 115. Psalm. 14.
All have erred and gone out of the way, there is not one that does good, no
not one. And again, No man living shall be justified in thy sight. Wherefore,
from the king that sits on his throne, to the beggar that lies in the
streate, there is not one, but he has sinned and has need of the glory of
God. We have all need of one Jesus Christ, of whom every one is partaker,
according to the measure of his faith, whether he be king, or subject,
master, or servant, father or son, according to the saying of saint Paul:
There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither Barbarous nor Sythia^, Coloss. 3.
neither bond nor free, neither man nor woman, but all are one in Christ Jesus.

3 Thirdly, the king is not content to do penance himself alone, and to
begin to lead a new and godly life, but also he constituteth a puplike and
general ordinance in the Church, that other men likewise might embrace
godliness. For first of all, he proclaymeth a general fast, not only of men,
but also of beasts: See (says he) that neither man, nor beast, ox, or
sheep, taste ought at all: and that they neither feed, nor drink water. Then
he commands them to put off their costly apparel, and mourning wise to
array themselves in sack. Furthermore, he commands them to pray
generallye, saying: and cry mightily unto the Lord. Last of all, he appoynteth
a sermon, or proclamation to be made of repentance, saying: See that every man
turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness he has in hand. Here we
have an excellent example of this godly king, from whom al other kings and
princes, may take examples of their calling. There are many which think that
mundane or seculer princes (as they term them) ought not to deal in matters
Ecclesiastical, but only in matters pollitique. But this example, and many
other examples of David, Solomon, of Iosophat, of Josias, and likewise many
sayings of holy scripture do testify, that princes ought specially to have a
care of matters Ecclesiastical. It is not required at their hands to preach,
but it is required at their hands to appoint preachers, and to see that the
word of God be preached sincerely. For it is not enough for Princes, that
they themselves are honest, godly, and virtuous, but they ought to labor, and
to seek by all means, that their subjects may also be honest, godly, and
virtuous. For as the good man of the house, has not done his duty, if he
only here sermons, and lead a godly life, but must also seek to train up
his familye in true godliness and virtue: even so kings and princes, have not
sufficiently discharged their duty, in directing their own footesteps
aright, unless they have a farther regard to the paths of their subjects. But
now let us see by the Text, what things are here to be noted.

1 First, the king with his Citizens are clothed in sackcloth, and sit in the
dust while they go about to repent them of their sins. But what: are those
works a satisfaction for sin? are sackcloth and ashes of such force before
God, that he respects them, and for them turns from his wrath and
punishment? Nothing less truly. For otherwise, it were but vain that God had
promised his son from the beginning of the world, to be the satisfaction for
sin, and at the fullness of time to have sent him to suffer death for sin.
For he might then have showed us sackcloth and ashes, by the which, our sins
might have been done away. But the matter is far otherwise. For the sins
of the Niniuetes, and our sins are far greater than that, they should be
forgiven of God by putting on of sackcloth, or by sitting in the dust. It was
necessary to the satisfying for sin, that the son of God should not put on
sackcloth, but that he should suffer death: that he should not sit in the
dust, but that he should hang on the Cross. What is meant then by the
sackcloth and dust, which the Niniuetes used? They are not things able to
pacify the wrath of God, but they are true signs of confession of sins, and
arguments of contricion, which is had for sin. In the King, the throne was a
sign of majesty. In the Citizens, the hie and precious seats in the temple,
were signs of dignity. But now the king places not himself publicly, in
his kingly throne, but sits with his Citizens in the dust of the earth, or
in base and uncomely seats, to the end they might openly declare themselves,
for their sins to be unworthy before God of their majesty and dignity, and
to have deserved death and destruction. The King and his Citizens had their
sumptuous, and precious apparel on festival days, at marriages, and at other
solemn meetinges, with the which, they did bewtifie themselves, and excel
other men. But now they put on vile and base apparel, to the end there might
seem to be no difference between the king, and his magistrates, and other
common people: and also to declare that they thought themselves unworthy of
their bodily apparel, by reason of their sinnne.

Therefore sackcloth and ashes, are not satisfactions for sin, but they are
only arguments of the acknowledging and confession of sins before God.
Luke. 17.
The sinful woman (whereof Luke speaks) when she came and besought Jesus to
have her sins forgiven her, she wept: yet notwithstanding, by this weeping
she did not put away her sin. Genesis. 27.
Esau also wept, when Jacob had prevented him of his blessing: yet
notwithstanding, he did not thereby put away his sin. Math. 25.
And Christ says: In the vtward parts there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, and yet nevertheless there shall be no satisfaction there.

2 Secondly, the king commands a general fast, saying: neither man nor
beast, shall taste ought at all, neither shall they feed or drink water. But
he commands not a fast, as though thereby sin should be forgiven, and the
wrath of God pacified, as the hypocrytes imagine of fasting, but he commanded
it: first, to the end the flesh might be brideled by sobriety, then to the
end common banqueting might be omitted, whereby they might more conveniently
come together to public preaching and prayer. Whereupon also it is added in
the commandment: let every man cry mightily unto God. These are the public
prayers, or suffrages, which in solemn wise were observed and used of our
elders not one hour, but the whole day. It were necessary therefore that men
should abstain from meat all the day long, to the end they might be ready
in the Church. 2. Para. 20.
So Iosaphat proclaimed a fasting, not to satisfy thereby for sin, but for
public prayers sake, which were appointed to call upon God in extreme
peril. So in many other places of the scripture, fasting and prayer are joined
together, to the end we might know that fastings were appointed as a
preparatiue unto prayer.

3 But what means the commandment given, for oxen, and sheep, The fast of
beasts.
and other beasts to fast? Has God respect unto the fasting of beasts? There
is nothing less meant truly, but they are commanded to fast in that sense and
meaning, that beasts were commanded in the law to have rest on the Sabbath
day. Exodus 20.
Thou shall do no work (says the Lord) on the Sabbath day, neither thou,
nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates. For rest is
required of cattle, on the Sabbath day, that by that occasion men might leave
off their rusticall labors, and come together about sacred business. So also,
fasting is commanded to oxen and sheep, least men being occupied in feeding
their cattle, should neglect and pretermit the public prayers, and sermons,
which were then in Niniue, for the avoiding of the danger which was at hand.
For it was very needful for the Niniuets to be occupied in their public
temples, with prayers, with sermons, with sacrifices, and such like services
of God. Such rite and custom the primitive Church also imitated, after the
Gospel was revealed, and it is lawefull as yet in extreme perilles to imitate
the same, so that it be not done hypocritically, papistically, and
monastically, but godly, virtuously, and christianlye. The Papists, and Monks
use these works to the end they might thereby merit remission of their
sins. This is a detestable opinion, and far from true repentance. But we
must use these rightes and customs, to the end we may declare our selves to
be sinners, and to have deserved the wrath of God, and that we call now upon
the Lord for remission of our sins.

4 This is also contained in the Kings commandment. Let every man turn
from his evil way, and from the wickedness which he has in hand. This is a
sermon of true repentance, and of the true fruits of repentance. For whereas
before mention is made of sackecloth, fasting, and ashes, true repentance is
not as yet declared, but only a sign of humility or confession of sin. But
now true repentance is taught, for it consists in the conversion from our
evil way, and from the wickedness which we have in hand. But to be converted
from iniquity, is first to be converted from incredulity, and from Idolatry
to the true faith in Christ the son of God. Furthermore, to be converted from
iniquity is to be turned from external vices, to virtue, as from drunkenness
to sobriety, from deceyte to true dealinge, from envy to the love of our
neighbor, from whoredom to chastity: and to be short, from all kind of
wickedness, to all manner of virtue. This is the meaning of the kings
commandment when he willed every man to turn from his wicked way. And this
is true repentance, which is always required of us.

5 Furthermore, in the commandment, or proclamation of the king, this is also
added. Who can tell, whether God will turn, and repent, and cease from his
fierce wrath that we perish not. What shall we say to this? Does the king
doubt of the mercy of God, and of the remission of sins? Are we not
commanded certainly to believe, and without doubting to be persuaded, that God
for Christ's sake does forgive us our sins? and to the end we should firmly
believe it in deed: sacraments are ordained, as baptism, and the supper of
the Lord. Let us therefore here note, that the king speaks not simplye of
the remission of sins, when he says, Who can tell whether God will turn,
and repent, and cease from his fierce wrath, and so forth, but includes the
remission of punishment, which JONAS prophesied should come. For in the
remission of sin, there is commonly a double remission, as the remission of
fault, and the remission of punishment. By the Gospel of Christ the remission
of fault is most certain, and the remission of punishment also. For Christ was
promised unto the elders, and offered unto us, to take away our sin, and to
deliver us from the eternal torment of hell fire. Wherefore we must never doubt
of this remission, and if any do doubt, he reproves Christ and his Gospel
of a lie.

But beside the fault and eternal punishment, the law of God threateneth to
sinners, temporal and externe punishment also. As in this place, the Niniuets
had deserved for their sins eternal punishment, but the Prophet threatens
unto them also, external and worldly punishment which should happen unto
them, and to their City within forty days after. Neither does he add the
promise of the remission of this external punishment, if so be they should be
converted. Wherefore, the king although he could certainly determine and
appoint, that if they did certainly repent, their sins should be remitted,
and they delivered from eternal punishment: yet notwithstanding, he could not
certainlye affirm, or say, whether God would forgive for their repentance
and conversion, the external and worldly punishment. He commands the people
therefore to hope well, and to repent them truly, because he being sure that
their sin should be forgiven, and they delivered from hell, thought also that
it might come to pass, that by the mere, free, and vnpromised mercy of God,
they might be delivered from the overthrow and destruction of the City. So
David knew that God had forgiven him his sin, and delivered him from hell,
but he knew not whether he should return to his kingdom. Therefore he
says: If I shall find favor in the sight of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it and the tabernacle thereof. But and if the Lord
say thus: 2. King. 15.
I have no lust unto thee, behold here I am, let him do with me what seems
him good in his eyes. Daniel. 3.
So the three young men in the fiery Oven, knew not that they should be
delivered from the fire, although they did not doubt of the grace of God in
forgiving their sin, and in delivering them from hell. Therefore they say, our
God whom we serve, is able to keep us from the hot burning Oven (O king) and
can right well deliver us out of thy hands. And though he will not, yet shall
thou know, that we will not serve thy Gods, and so forth.

And when God saw their works, The text.
how they turned from their wicked ways, he repented on the evil, which he
said he would do unto them, and did it not.
This place the hypocrites do abuse, to defend the merits of humane
righteousness. And do affirm that the wrath of God may be pacified, and
that sins might be forgiven for such works as are before mentioned, as by
fasting, putting on of sackecloth, and sitting in dust. But they greatly err,
and are deceived. For first of all, the whole end and scope of the Gospel of
Christ is to teach only that our sins are forgiven, and that the wrath of God
is pacified for Christ's sake, and by his death and passion, the which must be
acknowledged and comprehended by faith.

The pacifying therefore of the wrath of God, and the satisfaction for sin
before GOD, must not be attributed to any of man's merits or deserts, but to
the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. Furthermore, we have showed before, that
fasting, and sackcloth of themselves, are works indifferent and not acceptable
unto God, if so be they be done of wicked men, and of such as are not
reconciled unto God. Whereupon it is written in the prophecy of Esaias Wherefore
fast we (say they) and thou see it not? Esaias. 58.
Behold when ye fast, your lust remains still.

What means then the text when it says: God saw their works? This
scripture is not to be understood of works which are done without repentance,
but of the works of true repentance: whereupon it follows in this place,
how every man turned from his wicked way. This is the preaching and showing
forth of true repentance. For God in asswaging his wrath, and in forgiving
sins, has first of al respect unto his only begotten son, which has
satisfied for sin, then he has respect unto them in whom he has found his
son by faith. When as therefore they which believe in Christ, testify ye
acknowledging of their sins, by fasting and sackcloth, and declare their
faith also by the amendment of their lives, and by embracing of virtue, then
is God said to have respect unto their works, not that works of themselves
are so meritorious, that for them God will turn away his wrath, but because
works are arguments and certain signs of the faith which we have in Christ
Jesus, whom God only regards, and for whose merits alone he is pacified
and forgiueth sins. This now must be applied to the Niniuets. For the
Niniuets were sinners, and for their sins they deserved to have their City
destroyed. But at the preaching of JONAS they are terrified, and made believe,
as is aforesaid. But what did they believe? 1 First, they believed that God was
angerie with them for their sins, and that the word which was preached unto
them as concerning the destruction of the City, was true, and divine. 2 Then
they believed that God was merciful for the promised seed of Abraham: by the
which faith they fasted, and put on sackcloth, to declare the true
acknowledging of their sins. 3 Last of all, they turned every one from their
wicked ways to godliness and virtue, to testify their faith and obedience
toward the seed of Abraham. God therefore respects their works, not for
their merits, but for the seed of Abraham which was: Christ, whom they
acknowledged by faith to be their only Savior and redeemer.

And in this place we have an excellent example, of how great efficacy and
profit, true repentance is. Many men think and deem, that all things are
done and come to pass by fatal destiny, that is, by a certain necessity,
and immutable order of things. And therefore they count it vain, to seek
means to avoid dangers to come, and to call upon God to turn away such
dangers as are at hand.

And truly it is most certain that God is immutable, James. 1.
and without all shadow of change: I am God (says he) and am not changed.
Psalm. 102.
And the Prophet David says. They shall perish, but thou shall endure. But as
touching perils and dangers at hand, God does so determine them to come to
pass, that if men do repent, he receives them into his favor, and forgiueth
the punishment to come, and if not the temporal, yet at least the punishment
which is eternal. As the Lord himself testifies by the mouth of ye Prophet
Hieremie saying. If that people repent them of their wickedness, I also will
repent me of the plague which I have spoken. Cap. 18.
This truly was spoken even at the first, of the destruction of Jerusalem to
come, of the which Esayas also prophesied long before. By the which saying is
signified that notwithstanding the purpose of God in his threatninges, if men
do repent them of their sin, the Lord also will turn from his wrath and
forgive. The which thing the example of the Niniuets well proves: By whose
example also Jerusalem had remained safe, if so be ye Citizens of Jerusalem,
had so repented at the preaching of Hieremy, as the Niniuets did at the
preaching of JONAS. The like had happened to the Jews, if they had afterward
repented, at the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, as Christ himself
declares saying. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee,
Math. 23.
even as the Hen gathers her Chickings under her wings, and ye would not.
And again: There shall no sign be given unto them, Math. 12.
but the sign of JONAS in the Whales belly. God truly, is so delighted in
repentance, that if the wicked do but repent him externally, although he
forgive not his sin, and remit not his eternal punishment: yet
notwithstanding, he will forgive some part, of his externe and temporal
punishment in this world: as testifies the example of Achab, the wickedness
of whose heart, although it remained still: yet nevertheless, when he humbled
himself at the preaching of Elias, and repented externally, God was so
delighted therewith that the punishment was deferred to the posterity of Achab.
Wherefore if any man desire to have not only the temporal punishment in this
world for sin, but also the everlasting punishmente in the world to come,
remitted. Let him repent truly, that is, let him acknowledge his sin, let
him believe in Christ, and let him show true obedience toward God. So God
granted a hundred and twenty years space of repentance before the flood. So
that if they had repented at the preaching of Noe, they had not only escaped
the punishment of the flood, but also the punishment of Hell fire. So God gave
four hundred years space of repentance to the Gentiles, the Cananites, so to
Pharao, so also in these days to us, in the which, the Turk threateneth to us
Christians destruction: I say he has given us space of repentance, to the
which, he calls us by the preaching of his holy Gospel.

If therefore we repent us truly, that is, if we faithfully and vnfeynedlye
embrace the Gospel, and amend our lives publikelye and privately, generally
and perticularly, from the highest to the lowest, then we shall escape the
punishment and tyranny of the Turk, Pope, and all the enemies of God. But for
so much as the contempt of the Gospel is great, and the wickedness of life
also very much, as in drunkenness, deceyte, whoredom, swearing, and in many
other vices, it is to be feared that we shall not escape unpunished. Wherefore,
let us all generally with one consent pray unto God, that he will vouchsafe so
to kindle our hearts with his holy spirit, that we may amend our lives, and
so be delivered from all those plagues which are at hand.

The fourth Chapter.
The text.
THerefore JONAS was sore discontent, and angry. And he prayed unto the Lord,
and said: O Lord, was not this my saying (I pray thee) when I was yet in my
country? Therefore I hasted rather to fly unto Tharsis. For I know well
enough that thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long suffering, and
of great kindness, and repentest when thou should take punishment. And
now, O Lord I beseech thee, take my life from me, for I had rather die than
live. Then said the Lord: art thou so angrye? And JONAS gat him out of the
City, and sat down on the east side thereof: and there made him a booth, and
sat under it, in the shadow, till he might see what should chance unto the
city.
HItherto we have spoken of the repentance of the Niniuets: and now we must
say somewhat of the indignation and displeasure which JONAS took at the
repentance and conservation of the Niniuets. For after that JONAS saw that the
Niniuets at his preaching, were converted unto the Lord, and had obtained not
only remission of their sins, but also the safegarde of the City, he should
greatly have rejoiced, Math. 18.
even as the Angels rejoice more, over one sinner that repents, than over
ninety and nine that are righteous: but he is so far from rejoicing, that he
rather takes indignation and displeasure with him self, and inueyeth with his
complaint against the Lord our God, for sparing them. For he says, O Lord
was not this my saying I pray thee when I was yet in my country? By the which
expostulation and complaint, he casts God in the teeth with his exceeding
mercy, and long sufferance, and accuses him of injustice, and
unrighteousness. And also he sorroweth so much for the repentance and
preservation of the Niniuets, that he wishes death unto himself.

Although many men were wont to excuse the faults of holy men, and to
interpret them to the best: yet notwithstanding, because this deed and this
indignation of JONAS is reprehended of God himself (as hereafter shall
appear) therefore it is not lawful for us, vainelye to excuse this sin of
the Prophet. 1. Peter. 4.
Charity truly binds us to cover the sins of our neighbors so much as we
may. But yet we may not make righteousness of sin, neither must we say that
sin is equity, and equity, sin.

JONAS therefore in this, sins once again, because he is offended at the
repentance and preservation of the Niniuets.

He seems truly to himself to have just cause of indignation. For first of
all, when God spared the Niniuets: JONAS thought that the word of God which he
preached, was in danger of discredit. For he had said it would come to pass
within forty days that Niniue should be overthrown. The which thing, when
it came not to pass according to his prophecy, who would afterward believe
the word of the Lord? who would believe the promises of God, if God fulfill
not the threatenings of his word? who would not condemn the Prophets of
vanity and leasing? JONAS therefore thought that it would be to the glory of
Gods name to have the City of Niniue destroyed. The which, when it came not to
pass, he thought that the glory of Gods name was in hazard and peril.
Furthermore, when he saw the Niniuets which were Ethnickes and uncircumcised,
to obtain remission of sins, and to be received into gods favor, he thought
that the law of Moses, and Circumcision, was in great peril, because ye other
Ethnicks when they should hear that god without respect of persons, receives
those that truly repent (although they were uncircumcised) would say by and
by, what avails Circumcision? what profit shall the law of Moses bring unto
us, when these being Ethnickes, are received without Circumcision, and the law
of Moses into Gods favor? JONAS judged these things to be most unjust. Fearing
therefore least by the sufferaunce of God, the truth of his word, the glory
of Circumcision, and the law of Moses, should be in danger of discredit, he
takes such indignation at the matter, that he wishes death unto himself.

But JONAS (I say) greatly erred. For as touching the preservation of the
truth of Gods word, God in sparing the Niniuets, truly fulfilled the truth of
his word. For although it were said: There are yet forty days, and then
shall Niniue be overthrown: yet notwithstanding (as it is said before) this
is so to be understood, that Niniue shall be overthrown, if the Citizens of
the same did not repent. But and if they repent, then shall the City abide in
safety. For, that this is the meaning of Gods threatenings, those words and
Epithytes, which JONAS himself in this place rehearses, declare. For if God
be gentle, merciful, and long suffering, he will willinglye, no doubt, forgive
the sins of those that turn unto him, as appears by the mouth of Ezechiell,
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his
wickedness, and live. Wherefore JONAS feared in vain, that God in sparing the
Niniuets, should lose the credit and authority of his word.

And as touching the Circumcision, and law of Moses, which seem to be
adventured, because God received the Niniuets into his favor without those:
JONAS declares again his ignorance. For Circumcision, and the law of Moses
(so far as it conteyneth the ceremonial and judicial rightes) pertayne not
to the Gentiles, but only to the externe posterity of Abraham. And God is not
only the God of the Jews, but also the God of the Gentiles. For although the
Jews only, had a promise that Christ should spring out of their nation: yet
notwithstanding the promise was not so made unto them, that they alone should
obtain salvation by Christ, but as Saint Peter says: among all people whosoever
calls upon the name of the Lord, is acceptable unto him. And again: Every
one which calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Wherefore, JONAS
once again falls into a foul error.

Here therefore behold and see, with how great fear of God every man ought to
walk in his vocation, and never to turn away his eyes from Gods holy word.
This JONAS was a great Prophet, which by inspiration of the holy ghost
prophesied of many things, and by his prophecy restored the kingdom of
Israel, with whom also it pleased God to talk. And yet when he was left to
his own strength, and turned away his eyes from the word of the Lord, he
greatly erred in the understanding of the law and the gospel. He understands
not the true sense and meaning of the law, namely, that the law brings not
death but to impenitent persons only. He understands not the condition of
Christ, namely, that he pertains to all nations, which by faith in him,
repent them of their sins. Therefore let us not be proud of our gifts, but
let us walk in the fear of the Lord, and persist in his calling, let us be
thankful to God for his benifits, least by our ingratitude he take them from
us. This is also to be noted, that we must not trust to our good intentions (as
some term them) but we must direct all our doings by the word of God. JONAS
in this his indignation and displeasure, has (as seems unto him) a very
good intention and meaning, he persuades himself to have just causes of
offense, but when they are examined by the word of God, they shall be found
manifestlye repugnaunt against the same. Whereupon it is said in Deuteronomie,
that no man shall do that which seems right to be done in his own eyes. let
us take heed therefore, in all our actions, that we take nothing in hand,
contrary to the calling of the word of God.

But the titles and Epithytes of God which JONAS here rehearses, are not to be
pretermitted. For although he recites these, to reason and argue with God: yet
notwithstanding, they are most true and taken out of ye books of Exodus and
Numeri, which are set forth before our eyes, to the end we may learn to know
what affection god bears unto us, and what opinion we ought to have of him.

Joel. 2:
1 A merciful God. This title, God attributes to himself in all places of the
scripture, to the end we might know his nature, that although he be sometimes
angry, yet notwithstanding he is not angry to destroy, but to save all those
that hope and call upon him. Esaias. 28.
He is angry (says the Prophet Esaias) to the end he might be merciful, he
makes dead to the end he might revive. This title (if we well consider of
the same) confirms our faith in all adversity. And faith is the observation
of the first commandment. Wherefore, this title being well known, makes us
to obey the first and special commandment of God.

2 Full of compassion. This title properly pertayneth to natural benevolence,
such as we see commonly in parents toward their children. The mother so
loves her children, that for their pain she sorroweth even at the very heart,
and desires (if it might be possible) for the ease of her child, to feel the
same her self. Such, and far greater, is the mercy of god toward his
afflicted Church. He is not simplye sorye for it, but he is sorry in heart and
mind: yea (if I may so speak) he yerneth in the bowels of his mercy. This
title of God being well known, works in our hearts by the holy ghost,
patience in trouble, and affliction.

For if God be sorye for our evil and harm, even as the mother is sorye for
her child, it cannot be that evils (whatsoever they be) shall oppress us. For
God will not suffer us to perish in them, but will make a way even in the
very midst for us to escape.

3 Long suffering. This title teaches us the fear of God, that we flatter not
our selves in our sins. For God wynketh at sinners, not that he does allow
their sins, but because he looks for repentance. Wherefore if they repent,
they are saved. If they be impenitent, they receive a just reward for the same.
Know thou not, (says saint Paul) that the long sufferaunce of the Lord
leads thee to repentance. This place also teaches us patience in
adversity. For whereas it does not at the first punish those which do molest
or trouble us, it comes so to pass, because he is long suffering, the which
virtue we ought to imitate, and patiently to look for help at his hands.

4 Of great kindness. That is, exceeding benificiall, and liberal. For God
is not only merciful, loving, and kind in heart, but also he testifies the
same, by many benifites bestowed upon us. And he bestows in deed more, and
greater benifits upon us, than either we can or dare ask at his hands.
Wherefore let us not despair in adversity.

And the Lord God prepared a wild Vine: The Text.
which sprang up over JONAS, that he might have shadow over his head, to
deliver him out of his pain. And JONAS was exceeding glad of the wild Vine.
JONAS being gone out of the city, after his sermon, waited that he might see
with his eyes, what happened to the City. But when he perceived in deed his
expectation to be frustrate, and that it came far otherwise to pass than he
looked for, and that all things proved contrary to his preaching, he was
greatly vexed and tormented in mind, as we have showed before.

But in the mean season, while JONAS beheld what should happen, he is
greatly troubled in the field with the heat of the Sun, in so much that he
desires to die in so great affliction, rather than to live any longer. For
although JONAS had made him a Boothe, (peradventure of such boughs and shrubs
as came next to hand) yet notwithstanding this Boothe, could not so shadow him
from the beams of the sun, but that he might be parched with the same.
Wherefore, the Lord prepared for him a wild Vine, with the shadow whereof,
JONAS was so refreshed, that he greatly rejoiced. First of all therefore here
note, that where as the Boothe, which JONAS builte, help him nothing at al,
neither defended him from the heat of the Sun, it is plainly set forth unto
us, that humane studies, policies and devises, do help us nothing at all in
our great temptations and afflictions.

For although our endeavors (if so be they be godly and done with a good
conscience) are not in adversity to be omitted, but all godly, just, right,
lawful, and honest means are to be used, least God be tempted: yet
notwithstanding, necessity constrayneth us that when we have done all that
ever we can, not to trust unto the same, but only to depend upon the Lord our
God, and to beseech him that he will vouchsafe to prosper, and give good
success unto our endeavor. We ought always to have in mind Peter's fishing,
Luke. 5.
who having labored all the night in vain to take fish, and letting slip
again his Nets to make a draught at the commandment of Christ, enclosed a
great multitude of fishes. Luke. 8.
The woman likewise which was diseased with an issue of blood a long time, and
spent all her goods upon Physicians to be cured, and could not: yet
nevertheless afterward by the only word of Christ, she received present
remedy and health. So JONAS also was nothing helped by his Booth, which he
made himself, but after that the Lord had caused a wild Vine to grow over
him, he was not only defended from the heat of the Sun, but also he was
greatly refreshed, and filled with joy. These things are not spoken to the end
we should be negligent or slothful in our vocation, and careless in doing
our duty: (For we ought to leave nothing unassayed in perils and dangers,
which may be done godly, honestly, and lawfully.) But these things are spoken
to this end, that when by our industry we have provided all things
necessary, we may yet know that ye help of God is most necessary, and that we
ought to call for the same by prayer. According to the saying of the Prophet
David. Psalm. 127.
Except the Lord keep the City, the watch man waketh but in vain.
Furthermore, where as God in so great trouble of heat prepared a wild Vine
for JONAS, by the shadow whereof he was recreated, we learn that God is of so
great clemency and loving kindness, that so many as walk in his vocation
and are afflicted in the same, shall receive at his hands a mean to endure the
same, according to the Psalmist, The Sun shall not burn thee by day, Psalm.
121.
neither the Moon by night. Also it is said, Who so dwells under the
defense of the most highest, Psalm. 91.
shall abide under the shadow of ye almighty. Further it is said, A thousand
shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not
come nigh thee.

And the Prophet Esaias says, if thou walk through fire, Esaias. 43.
it shall not burn thee. So, the children of Israel went out of Egypt into
the desert, for although there was not corn in ye desert: yet notwithstanding
God brought to pass that they might bear it, because he sent them Manna, and
gave them water out of the rock. Hieremy walked in the calling of God, when he
prophesied of ye destruction of Jerusalem, for the which he was cast not only
into prison, but also into the mire, to the end he might seem to perish with
hunger. But God made him able to bear it, and wrought means by his friends
to deliver him, and to set him at liberty.

The Apostles were sent out to preach the Gospel throughout the whole world,
but without provision: God therefore brought to pass, yt they having nothing,
possessed all things. These sayings and examples of Scripture are set down
unto us to this end, that although we must suffer great perils in the vocation
whereunto God has called us: yet notwithstanding, we must go forward void of
fear, having a certain hope, that he will deliver us in the same.

But upon the next morrow, The Text.
against the spring of the day, the Lord ordained a worm, which smote the
wild Vine, so that it withered away. And when the Sun was up, God prepared a
fervent east wind: and the Sun bet over the head of JONAS, that he faynted
again, and wished unto his soul that he might dye, and said: it is better
for me to die than to live.
JONAS is refreshed and recreated with the shadow of the wild Vine, but his
joy lasts not long, because the wild Vine is by and by stricken with a
worm, that it perishes: and JONAS again is so greatly afflicted that he
wysheth death unto himself.

This is a lively Image and spectacle, of the variety, alteration, and change
of humane things in this world. And yet notwithstanding, we must consider
that this alteration was not rashely brought to pass, but by the just and
wise council of God.

At the first JONAS rejoiced for the shadow of the Vine, now he sorroweth for
the destruction of the same. Such is the course and raze of man's life. One
while he rejoices because of prosperitye, another while he lamenteth because
of adversity. And yet notwithstanding these things come not to pass by hap or
by chance, but by the ordinance of God. For in that the wild Vine perished,
and JONAS thereby brought into great sorrow and indignation, God had a secret
meaning. For he meant thereby to teach JONAS, that if he sorrowed so much for
the destruction of a wild Vine, for the which he never labored: how much more
should God be sorry for the destruction of so great a City as Niniue was, of
the which he was the creator and governor, and how much more should he spare
so great a multitude. Let us learn therefore by this place, that God does never
cast us into any sorrow or affliction, but that he means to teach us
somewhat, as to prove our faith, The end of affliction
to stir us up to repentance, or else to set forth the glory of his name.

Furthermore, this is not to be pretermitted that JONAS so often wishes death
unto himself, when as he greatly feared death, before he was swallowed up of
the Whale. Here again, the inconstancy of man is plainly set forth unto us.
Oftentimes I wish for death (says the Poet) and oftentimes I refuse it
again. So Elias, 3. Kings. 19.
one while flees death, and another while wishes for the same. This
inconstancy of man's nature is diligently to be noted even in the holiest men,
not that we ought to allow or excuse the same, but because it is our duties to
correct and amend the like in our selves. We can not put from us all fear of
death, neither can we let or cease to wyshe for death in great adversity. But
we must specially beware least we despair in the fear of death, whereas we
ought to have a sure trust in Christ, and to suffer death with a valyant mind.
Also we must beware, least in wyshing for death, we bring death to our selves,
but rather we must persist in our vocation, having a sure hope that although we
be beset with danger, on every side, God will make away in the midst, whereby
we shall escape.

And God said unto JONAS: The text.
art thou so angry for the wild Vine? And he said, yea very angry am I, even
unto the death. And the Lord said thou have compassion upon a wild Vine,
whereon thou bestowedst no labor, nor made it grow, which sprang up in one
night, and perished in another: And should not I then have compassion upon
Niniue that great City, wherein there are about an hundred and twenty
thousand persons, that know not their right hand from their left, besides
much cattle?
God prepared (as we heard before) a wild Vine for JONAS, that under the
shadow of it, he might be defended from the heat of the sun. This wild
Vine being withered, JONAS was full of indignation and wrath. The Lord
therefore reprehendeth his wrath, and declares for what cause he brought to
pass that the wild Vine should spring up in one night and vanish away again
in another. For before, when JONAS saw that God did spare the Niniuets, he
took it grieuouslye that the Lord should show such clemency toward them,
and was greatly angry. Now therefore the Lord teaches JONAS, how unjust,
uncharitable, and cruel his anger is, by a comparison of the wild Vine. Thou
art sorye (says he) for the wild Vine, which thou have not made to grow, and
should not I be sorry, and spare so great a City which first of all by my
benediction is come to so great majesty, and by the benifites which I have
bestowed upon them is at this time the monarchy of the whole world? In the
which City also there are so many thousands of infants and young children,
which as yet are not come to the age of discretion, besides thousands of
cattle which never did harm.

We have therefore here an example of that saying, which is in S. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, Romans 1.
where it is said, the invisible things of God, are known by visible
creatures. But among all creatures, the natural affections of men are spoken
of. For we speak not of corrupt or vicious affections, as of pride, of envy,
of covetousness, of cruelty, of desiring other men's goods, or such like,
which are sins, the author whereof is Satan, and not god. But we speak of
the affections of men, which God by nature has ingraffed in us. Of the which
affections, one is, to be sorry if any thing profitable prosper not, but
perish: as in this place, JONAS is sorry that the Vine, (a thing very
profitable for him) should so suddenly perish. For although this affection was
not in JONAS without sin: yet notwithstanding, the affection of it self was
not sin. So the disciple of Elizeus was sorry, because his Axe being a thing
profitable to cut wood, 4. Kings. 6.
fell into the water. This affection is natural, not sprung up in our flesh by
chance, but by the wisdom and secret council of god created and ingraffed
in us. What then do we learn by this? Surely by this sensible affection in us
we learn and are admonished of the insensible and invisible affection of God
toward us. For if we greatly sorrow for things lost and destroyed, which we
notwithstanding neither created nor made, let us understand and know that the
Lord does much more sorrow for men which he has created, and for whose
salvation he has sent his only begotten son into the world to suffer death.

Whereupon by the mouth of the Prophet, he swears, saying, I live, and will
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness, and
live. So in the nine and forty Chapter of Esaias, he teaches us to know the
affection and love which he bears toward us by the affection of a mother
toward her child, Esaias. 49.
saying: Can the mother forget her child that she bare, and not pity the
son of her own flesh? And though she do forget, yet will I not forget
thee. So, also, he propounds his love before us to be known by the affection
of a father toward his son in the.xj. Chapter of saint Luke, saying: Which
of you being a father, Luke. 11.
of whom if the son shall ask bread, will give him a stone? If ye then being
evil can give good things unto your children, how much more shall your father
of heaven give the holy spirit to those that desire it of him. So likewise in
the fiftene of Luke, Luke. 15.
by the Parable of the householder which sorowed for the loss of his sheep,
and by the Parable of the lost groate, is set forth unto us the exceeding love
of God toward lost men, that is, toward sinners, that they might be brought
to repentance and salvation. Wherefore our affections are ordained of God to be
domestical preachers unto us, and to teach us how God is affectioned toward
us, and to make us feel the affections of God, which otherwise are insensible,
and invisible.

Furthermore, when as it is said that God spared, and had compassion upon the
City of Niniue for so many thousands of men, which knew not their right hand
from their left, there are diverse expositions. Some expound those that knew
not their right hand from their left, to be infantes and children: Othersome
thereby understand the common and simple sort of people. But the first opinion
is best allowed, namelye, that they were children, as yet not come to age of
discretion. Notwithstanding we must not think that God spared those infants and
children for their innocence: (for although children and infants be innocents
before men: yet they are not innocents before god, because they are conceived
and borne in sin.) But he spared them for two causes. The first is, because
he is gentle and merciful. It is neither (says S. Paul) in the willer nor in
the runner, but in the mercy of god. Moses also eryed and said, Lord, Lord
God, merciful, and gracious, long suffering, and abundaunt in goodness and
truth, and keeping mercy in store for thousands, Exodus 34.
forgiving wickedness, ungodliness, and sin, and not leaving one innocent,
visiting the wickedness of fathers upon the children. etc.

The second cause why God spared the Innocents was, for that the ancient men
of the City (though not all, yet the greatest part) repented at the preaching
of JONAS. God therefore spared the Infants, for the elders sake which repented:
As appears by that which he says in another place thus: Exo. 20.
Showing mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my
commandments. For as God was wont to destroy children and Infantes, for the
wickedness of their forefathers (as appears in the time of the floode, in
the destruction of Sodom, and in the overthrowing of the Amalekyts) So he was
wont to spare, bless, 1. Kings. 15.
and preserve Infants for the godliness of their forefathers and elders.
Wherefore if Parents wish well unto their children, and would bestow great
benifits upon their children, they shall not need to scrape great abundance
of rythes together, for God will bless and provide for them, if so be that
Parents themselves live godly, and virtuously in their vocation.

3 Last of all whereas he adds, Beside much cattle: We may not think that it
is spoken, as though God spared such a City for the brute beasts sake, and
that he so much regarded them. It cannot be denied, but that God after a
certain manner has a care over beasts and cattle: As we may read in the
law where it is said. In the Saboth day thou shall do no manner of work,
neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter (and in the end he adds)
neither thy cattle that is within thy gates. And in the hundred and fourth
Psalm, Psalm. 104.145.147.
it is said, he brings forth grass for the cattle. Yet notwithstanding, God
spares not men for the cattles sake, but he spares the cattle for the men's
sake. As we may read, that the beasts of the earth are destroyed for the sins
of men, as in the floode, in Sodom, in Amelecke: So also we may read that
beasts were and are preserved for the godliness of men, as in the.xxviij.
Deutr. 28.
Chapter of Deutronomy. If thou shall harken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God. Blessed shall thou be in the town, and blessed in the fields: blessed
shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit
of thy cattle, the increase of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep. etc.
Wherefore whosoever thou be, that wilt have thy cattle, thy goods, and
substance preserved, blessed, and increased, thou shall not need to use
sorceries, nor Witchcraftes, but see that thou thy self be godly, and that
thou persevere in thy calling, so shall thou be sure and safe in the land: so
shall God bless thee and thy posterity for ever.

This we have passed over the History of JONAS, in the which there are many
things to be observed and noted, but specially these. First in JONAS, we have
an example of the infirmity and weakness of all men, and even of those which
are the holiest, and the saints of God, for we see the disobedience of JONAS,
his terrors, and fears in the Whales belly, his indignation also and grief at
the repentance of the Niniuets. But notwithstanding, because he obeyed the
calling of the Lord, and perseuered in the same, he is miraculously saved, and
preserved.

Last of all, we have an example of repentance in the Niniuets: by the which
we are admonished that although we grievously offend the divine majesty of
God, whereby we deserve everlasting destruction. Yet notwithstanding, we ought
not to despair of our salvation, but rather repent us truly, and unfeignedly
of our sins. For the gate of heaven always stands open to receive penitent
sinners. And Christ himself stands in the same, contynually inuiting, and
calling such unto him, Math. 11.
saying. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will ease
you. Wherefore, to him with the father and the holy ghost, three persons, and
omnipotent, immortal, wise, and invisible God, be all honor, praise, glory,
and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

Repent England in time,
as Niniue that City did:
For that thy sins before the Lord,
are not in secret hid.

FINIS.

