THE GOLDEN FLEECE. Whereto be annexed two ELEGIES, Entitled NARCISSUS Change*
AND AESONS Dotage. By RICHARD BRATHVVAYTE Gentleman.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Christopher Pursett dwelling in Holborne, near
Staple Inn. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL M. ROBERT BINDLOSSE Esquire, his approved kind Uncle:
The continuance of Gods temporal blessings in this life, with the Crown^ of
immortality in the World to come.
RIght Worshipful, I have penncd here a short Treatise, entitled the Golden
Fleece, which I no sooner had reuie^ed and corrected, making it fit for the
press: as not doubting but it should pass the press of detraction, which
delights more in carping, then discreet^ censuring of others labors: But I
bethought me of some Patron, not so much for the pr^s^ruing this my first issue
from abort^ent, as from the detraction of male^^lent carpers, whovse to find
fault with Nature herself that she set not the Oxes ^ornes upon his back
rather then upon his head, being the stronger and more puissant part. At the
first I resolved to dedicate these fruits of my labors unto him, from whom ^
received the grouth, and quiet increase of my studies: But it pleased God to
alter my purpose, ^y preventing him by death, who was the nourisher of my
slender endeavors, and the protector of mine orphane labors, which had no
sooner happened then in a distaste of my studies, wanting him, whose relish
sweetened my unseasoned poemes, I was fully resolved to have wrapped this tract
up in oblivion, and to have deprived it of public view. But the troubled
course of our estates, and the favorable regard you had of our atonement,
which is now so happily confirmed, enforced me to consecrate this pamphlet as
one of Bassas fragments, to your best affectioned self: to show a willingness
in me to gratify that sollicitous and careful regard you ever had, since the
time of our desolation, even his death, whose life was a mirror in his time,
and whose well concording death ensued, as a reward of eternity for his well
spent days: for his fruits shall follow him. The argument of this Treatise is
moral: the use spiritual, morally derived from Jason son to Aeson by
Polymela, who, after the death of his father was committed to the tuition of
his uncle Pelias: he to usurp the possessions, limited to his Nephew Jason
devised a dangerous enterprise for him, to get the Golden Fleece of Cholcos,
which he h^uing achieved with great honor, and the safe return of such
Argonautes as went with him: received his inheritance, Vid Ovid, in Metamor.
and propagated his glory to the utmost bounds of Asia. The use, or moral
implies: what felicity they shall obtain that with resolution and long
animitie sustain the pe^illous gusts of afflictions, with a respect had to
virtue, without which regard no happy or successiue event can attend any
intendment: This tract though compendious, may afford no small fruit to your
conce^uing understanding, shadowing under this title of Golden Fleece, the
reward of a sincere and provident pilgrim, who with Jason endures patiently
the surging Sea of persecution, the r^ging tempests of ^ffliction, not to be
allured with the enchanting voice of the Sirens melody, abstaining from Cyrces
cup, Ponet Deus his quoque^ine^. Virgil.
say^ing by the perilous rocks of Scylla and Charybdis, and now at last
arriving at the port of a prosperous repose, cries out; hic ^edes fata quietas
o^tendunt.

Alexander had his Homer in reverence, Alcybiades his Socrates, Caesar the
perusal of his own divine writings, Scipio Affrican^s the works of Xenophon,
Epaminondas will receive instruction of his Lysias, In Cyropedia.
Agesilaus of Xenophon, Scipio by Genesius: Yea Bassus was sometime acceptable
to his Caesar.

I fear not but there be ever some Mae^enas to give a favorable respect to
the meane^t labors. Socrates thinks his works very fruitful, and to have
produced good effects, when by them he has provoked any to the knowledge and
learning of virtue.

Stylpho the Roman had neu^r attained the chaste name of a continent Citizen,
Vid. Cicer. in lib de Orator.
if he had not applied his corrupt disposition to moral discourse, and made
moral poems a sovereign for his lascivious intentions.

Those famous matrons of Rome, Octauia, Gorcia, Caecilia, and Cornelia,
bestowed no less time in morality then Tullia, Vid. Apotheg Plutarch. etc.
Lucilla, and Claudia did in music and harmony: more renown attained they,
by moral observations, then those wanton Dames did by their discourse of
Hymenaeus.

Semyramis and Cleopatra never grew more memorable for their affecting
dainties, Vid. Trog. Pom.
then Hermyone and Dyotmia for their moral precepts.

Many which professed morality, have been the preservation of whole Cities,
as Aristotle, Vid. Quint Curt. in octau. lib. in descrip. Dyon. and Dyonisij.
by whose means, and for whose sake Alexander commanded the City Stagyra to
be builded ag^ine, being demolished in the reign of his father Philip.

The like of Socrates we read, Vid. vit. Socrat.
and reason good, since Apollo termed him the wisest man in all Greece.

But wherefore should I prosecute this argument, Vid. Apotheg. de Apell* and
Prolog.
always putting my hand with Protogenes to that table which I am sure can be
bettered by no colors? Receive this unripe fruit into the warm harbor of
your love, let it be kindly entertained, least it blush and be ashamed, to
receive so ill an entertainment, where it expected an undoubted welcome.

This Mindian building have I erected before her, to usher her, and encourage
her modest face, with the assurance of your acceptance.

The Lord of heaven continue his blessings toward you, lengthen your days,
multiply your comfortes here upon earth, that enjoying Heaven upon Earth in
this life, you may be invested with the crown of immortality in the world to
come.

Your affectioned Nephew, Richard Brathwaite.

PIERIDVM INVOCATIO, QVARVM OPEN AEGON IN T^IVIIS, Aedon in nemoribus cecinit.
Quarum auspic^^s riuos saltim apertos degustare licuit, tenuisque stipulae
liberate frui.
YOu sacred Muses by whose divine skill,
Each Poet in his rank observes his measure,
Direct the progress of Menalchas quill,
Enrich his labor with your heavenly treasure.
And so vouchsafe to favor his poor verse,
That some may daigne his poems to rehearse.
Well do I know so many rural swains,
Seek to ^euote their labors to your shrine,
That they offend you with their fruitless pains,
Since in harsh strains their labors they confine.
Yet pity them and me, whose barraine wit,
Will move you in remorce to pity it.
And yet when I consider worthless men,
Such as Afranius, Bardus, and the rest,
Then with a cheerful countenance do I pen,
Since many illes do counterpoise the best. Necre^e poemata digna, ^ec regu^
so^iis.

For sure I am with Bardus I can sing,
Though not a matter worthy of a king.
Affranius, he will weary Traians eare^,
With rude impolisht, tunelesse harmony,
He is impudent, Affranius, nothing fears,
His Oaten pipe delights his Majesty.
But I esteem of such as little worth,
Their works be correspondent to their birth.
For as Affranius was of mean estate, As is re^orded in his life.
raisde from declining fortunes low descent,
So his immodest vain engenders hate,
Since his sharp poems with his ayle be spent.
His works confusde, his harsh unseasoned style,
Do ill beseem the Sybils of our I Will.
Such works I scorn to pen, as may detract
From the respect of any mean estate,
I hate that Aspes that is of spleen compact,
The furi^s brands which vaun^ of ^ought but hate.
Aemulate virtuous men, for virtues sake,
Is a good ha^red, so I Will always hate.
But to contemn the mean degrees of men,
Or to envy sails of prosperity,
Nere shall my Muse ensource her odious pen,
Furnished with naught but ^ags of enmi^ie.
I smile when others smile, when others weep,
I plunge my self into like sorrows deep.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis little Treatise is a Golden Fleece,
Not that which ^ason got from Colchos I Will,
For this comaines a more celestial ^rize,
Since mundane states do earth^y men beguile.
This is that prize which will procure souls peace,
Unto thy minds content, heavens Golden Fleece.
No Argonautes can get you this some prize,
Nor no Maedea can procure this gain,
No fruitful Colchis can this Fleece comprize,
No brain sick Zethes can this spoil obtain.
If thou will have this Golden Fleece, this prize,
With due attention here reflect thine eyes.
FIrst do not give thy self to fond delights, Calais and Zethes were brethren
and sons to Boreas, ^cco^panying lason in his journey, etc.

Which like the morning dew fade and decay,
Restrain thy flesh which against thy spirit fights,
Reform thy perverse life from day to day.
Let abstinence be Empress and command,
Lest hateful lust devotion should withstand.
For many times by abstinence desire
Of hateful lust is quite extinguished,
Which otherwise like an incessant fire,
By curious fare would soon be nourished.
And that desire which is restrainde by thee,
Shall work content in minds tranquillity.
Spare not to travail nor to pass the sea
Of surging waves this treasure to obtain,
The way to rest, is through calamity,
The port to harbor, is through shelfes of pain.
For valiant Jason never could have won,
The Golden Fleece, if he had sorrows shun.
Now by Charybdis, Ratibusque inimica charybdis nunc sorbore fretum nunc
reddere. Ovid. in s^p^im. lib. ^et.
now by Scylla tossed,
Shipwrackt poor man, distressed by winters rage,
Those Gusts of grief wherewith his course was crossed
Will rest memorials to ensuing age.
So then if thou, with Jason will attain
Such glorious Trophies, thou must suffer pain.
Sylenus he can tumble in his cave,
A lazy lubber made to cherish sloth,
Naught besides ease, Silenus foster-father to Bacchus.
his blockish trunk does crave,
From secure sleep to rise he is very loath.
Yet this I Will tell him his security,
Shall bring his sloth to extreme penury.
Sylenus is no soldier for thy Tent,
Stout Jason, which combines thy force with death,
He harmless soul, to live at ease content,
Not in a foreign war to spend his breath.
But thou contemnes base servitude, base fear,
That thy renown may to the world appear.
It does appear, for Pelias repines,
That thou should get fair Colchis monument, Uncle to ^ason.

Yet thy aspiring thoughts some good divines,
Aims at some conquest, in thy sacred Tent.
Live then for ever, thou shall ever live,
For envious hate shall not thy fame deprive.
I would we had such Argonautes as these,
That could and would embarke them on the Sea, Qui participant pass^onibus,
participant consol ationibus.

So to obtain that prize, that Golden Fleece,
Purchasing heaven by suffering misery.
Then might we glory full as much or more;
Then ever Greece of Jason did before. S. Aug^st.

I would such Argonauts liude in this I Will,
This Hyble fair, famous by memory,
That Hydra-headed monster to beguile,
And purchase to them immortality.
Then should we sing more Trophies in their praise
Then ever Colchis did in former daie^.
But such is times iniquity, whose frame,
Is out of frame, confusde, disordered,
So that she seems to change her timelesse name,
Whose name was Golden, now is relinquished,
That Golden Age, an Iron Age appears,
Producing naught but sad events of fears.
Once did those Golden Ages flourishing
Give a good morrow to the Eastern parts, Aure^ secla.

Where virtues springing, were in nourishing,
Which ministered great comfort to our hearts.
But now the Moon's eclipsde, that age decaide,
Depressing down her head, as one affraide.
Afraid: no marvel since such enmity,
Arises twixt our manners, and her state,
That they opposed stand at mutiny,
Which makes the Golden Age, so out of date.
Since Sa^urnes ki^gdomes be dispeopled here, Saturnia reg^a.

Or else like snailes shut in their heads for fear.
Hesi^d relates of one Prometheus
Who was astute and sub^ile in his drifts,
And he reports of Epymetheus.
A simple soul deuoide of cunning shifts.
Sure Epymetheus lives in this age, De ^perib. et dieb vid. He^s^od.

^rometheus, he is fled for want of wage.
Iupit^r god of the celestial powers,
Sent on a time Argicid as from heaven,
To bring a gift, w^^h limit of his hours,
Unto Prometheus^ whereon was engraven.
Who takes this gift, shall presently enjoy
Rest in his mind* delivered of annoy.
Prometheus conceiving what was meant,
By ^oues attracting gifts, refusde the same,
For through his wisdom, he knew ^oues intent,
Wherefore this prudent answer d^d he frame.
Argicidas, Pomon^.
quoth he, I thank high ^oue,
That he has shewde to me his divine love.
But forasmuch as I deserve the least,
Much less the great^^ and choicest gifts he has,
I wish he should some other man inuest,
With this celestial token of his breath.
Hie thee to Jove, and tell him this from me,
Prometheus binds him to his deity.
Jove having heard, what sage Prometheus said,
Commended much his humane policy,
Prometheus (quoth Jove) is sore affraide,
Lest Golden gifts smell of hypocrisy.
Well Epymetheus wants Prometheus shifts,
For well I know he will accept my gifts,
NOTE This volume has a very tight binding and while every effort has been made
to reproduce the centres, force would result in damage*

And so he did for judging no deceit,
For to proceed from Jove's high Majesty,
Of this dissembled gift ^e made receipt,
Hoping to purchase endless memory
But this sweet honey was d^s^olude to gall,
And this his precious gift procurde his fall.
This was the great desire he had to know
What did concern the mysteries of Jove,
From this same root aspiring branches grow,
Which do extirpe the seeds of Christian love.
Presumption of our knowledge, and desire,
Of knowing more does in our thoughts aspire.
Fond Epy^etheus not content to know,
That which allotted was unto his share,
De^ires a further scope then earth below,
That his high knowledge might surp^sse compare.
Wherefore de^ided he the state of such,
As did not care for knowing overmuch.
And since that time we have desirde to know
Things too transcendent, Scientia b^ni and mal^ mala. Genesis chap. ^. verse. 1^.
higher then our reach,
Mystical types which God did never show
To us, or ever deignde the same to teach,
Thinking that fittest for man's shallow sense,
Which paralleld his strait circumference.
This fond presumption is a step to sin, (...) ab i^a voragine quocoetus
omnium viciorum exces^it Cicer, in ora, cont. Salust.

No it is the root, and ground of our distress,
By which we see the Gulf we wallow in,
The mansion of our woe and wretchedness.
This is the sea of our distress and woe,
Which does oppress us, wheresoere we go.
And sure as long as these presumptuous sins
Do burgen in us, Poly^ices and Etecoles. vid. Hesyod.
with their full increase,
Like O^dipus his two accursed twins
Erected for the ^uine of our peace.
Farewell content in men of each degree,
If thou be proud, foul hate will follow thee.
Thou can not have the Fleece of Colchis I Will,
No^ that resplendent Fleece of sanctity,
For why? presumption does thy thoughts beguile,
Pride cannot dwell with poor humility.
Thou may remain, Psalm. 36.
and flourish for a time,
But ill success will ^ntercept thy prime.
So on thy course, and with the Giants ^ierce,
Wage battle with the Gods of heaven and earth, Virg. in (...) Geor.
tum^partu terra nesando, etc.

Seem as thou would the stars with Julian pierce,
Outdare the Author of thy cursed birth.
Care not for God or man, but in despite,
Damnation in thine ugly forehead write.
Arachne, Scires a ^al^lade doctam. Quod tamen ipsa negat. ovid Meta. lib.
sexto.
she can weaue her purp^e threede,
And well conceited of her curious skill,
Challenges stately ^allas with all speed,
Whose Art this Art did into her distill,
Pallas (quoth she) I hope I may compare,
With you in spinning, if you better were.
But what succeeded? Pallas did reply,
Minion, Tan^aq^e offensa magistra, certet ait, mecum? ^bid.
ere long, I Will teach you to confess,
Your fond presumption: who, I pray, am I,
Your mistress sure, I will approve no less.
This does proceed from thy inuectiue tongue,
Which by this heavenly feature, I Will make dumb^.
No sooner had she spoken, (...) comae, cum queis et naris ^t aures.
but her form
Was quite transformde into another shape,
Two twigs by Pallas will, did her adorn,
This feature got she for presumption sake.
And that which had a comely form before,
In Spiders likeness does her state deplore.
These be the fruits of a presumptuous mind,
Bitter in taste, Atque ita Viue quidem, pende, tamen imp^oba dixit. Ibid.
working thee Authors baine,
And like a Viper deadly to her kind,
Which by engendring, breeds endless pain.
This will dispoile thee of thy Golden Fleece,
Nere to return from Colchis into Greece. Vid. Plin, in Not. Hist.

Be humble, Obedience.
meek, obedient to thine head,
Least with a sudden overthrow thy friend,
Condole thy fortune by misfortune lead,
Yet cannot by his salve, thy griefs amend.
So succourlesse and eke distressed with grief,
In thy distress can purchase no relief.
The lowest Tamricke is the saf'st from hail, Arbores ^ltius plantatae citius
ventor^s pr^pter vehementi^a foliis priu^atur. Stel. de cont. m^nd. Eccl. 9.
Chap. Vers^^.

The lof^iest Cedar's soonest thrown down,
An humble mind there is naught that can appal,
High spirits be most subject to a frown.
Each thing by Nature must one time decay,
But mean estates be saf'st from harm always.
If thou will have this Golden Fleece, this prize,
Thou must embarke thy self in troops of grief,
Those who obtain thy conq^est, sloth despise,
Oftimes dismayed without the least relief.
And then if thou will conquer, thou must fight,
By meditation against sin, day and night.
The valiant Argonautes did not refuse,
Hail, rain or snow for to obtain that gain,
Under a faignde pretense they not refuse;
Their serious labor or industrious pain.
Wherefore they got the haven of their rest,
And did enjoy that which they loved best.
A worthy prize, if prizes temporal,
Can have such worth, or yet deserve such labor:
Who will not seek a price celestial
Purchasde by earnest suite and Gods high favor*
Then let it be our will, Luke Chap. 12. Verse. 33.
our only pleasure,
Sell all we have, and buy this heavenly treasure.
No rust can ere consume this precious gemme,
No mothes can eat into this sacred shrine,
A Roabe most fit for well disposed men,
Who at an others state do not repine.
Of this be sure, Via a^gu^ta etc. arctissimap^r^a.
who enuies each man's state,
Shall never enter in the narrow gate.
If that the Argonautes with mutual spleen,
Should have enuide at each an others worth,
With this same prize, they near enricht had been,
But with unlucky labors cursed their birth.
A threesold cord is hardly broke men say,
But being dissolude, like vapors glides away.
Then let this mutual love dispell each hate, (...). (...)

And each revenge pretended in your hearts,
Nothing is more pernicious then debate,
Which flourishing Empires many time subuerts.
This is the state of men that each will cry,
Caesar aut Nullus to their enemy.
Caesar if he had raignde in common love,
Or governed his Realm in amity,
Brutus his own adopted would approve,
Of his proceedings: without enmity.
But these aspiring heads be often brought low,
With tu mi Brute, thoule kill Caesar too.
But of all discords in an humane sense, Tit. Liu. patauin, ^ decad^et lib. ^.

None more detested then a brothers hate,
Remus against Romulus prepares defense,
Amulius with Numitor debate. Virg. in ^. lib. Aene Ille Sycha^u impius ante
a^as, (...) ^uri caecus amore, clam ferroincautum super at securus am^rum
German.

And rich Sichae^s must of force be slain,
Alcydes priest, by his Pigmalion.
These sharp contentions cannot get the price,
But ruin their own forces by their hand,
These are not undertaken by advice, Eumenid^uque sat^, Vtrg.

But guided by the Eumenides command.
All things have end, to these unhappy end,
By short prescription, Lord of Lords will send.
Caine is offended with his loving brother,
And what is the cause, perchance his sacrifice
Is better far respected then the other,
Which he does offer: wherefore thence he flies,
And does provide, by his accurled breath,
To be the Agent of his brothers death.
Yet Abels blood, like to the morning dew,
As^endeth up unto Gods heavenly throne,
Showing how Caine, his hands did ^rst embrew,
In brothers blood, his blood to heaven does groan
Wheerefore the Lord, who ta^es revenge of sin,
Damned Cains despair, which he did welter in.
Caine where is thy brother? Genesis chap. 4. verse. 9.
Caine does answer him,
Am I my brothers keeper? insolence
Dare thou that art compact of naught but sin,
Answer him so? who^e heavenly excellence.
Rules each thing, and has created thee
To laud his name, not grieve his majesty.
Go thou thy way, for thou can never obtain
This Golden Fleece, interred in despair,
Go wag thine head, with thy distracted braine^.
Thou of perdition art the lineall heir.
The Golden Fleece is kept for such as live,
To please their God, and not their God to grieve.
But such as like the Sabines do disdain, (...) Tit^. Li^ page 20. Vibes
quoque vt catera, ex in^r^o nasci, etc.

That ere the Romans should in marriage join,
With their renowned stock, and think it shame,
That their vpstart descent, should them detain.
Shall soon be vanquished, and deuoid of aid,
To dark obliuions Tomb, retire, dismayed.
The Argonautes, who got the Golden Fleece,
Never disdaind to join with any power,
Combinde with every Nation in a peace,
Which did distill like Danaes Golden shower.
This golden peace did get them that renown,
Which all the I Will of Colchis pulled not down.
Naught there can be more strong then unity, V^pax Gabior^, c^^u^ixdigniss^
mam quide^ speciem te^errima bell^ sequ^ta sun^ Vid. Ovid. in sast. Cleobis et
Byto^.

If so that union do no discord breed,
For it effects things worthy memory,
Which no commotion in the state does feed.
For wealth and peace blessed Aegias kind twins,
With mutual passions, mutual honor wins.
Both weep at once, both smile with like desire,
Both walk, both stand, both make a like repose,
And to conclude they burn with equal fire,
Both win at once, both equally do lose.
Naught there can be, being borne of selfsame mother,
Belonging to the one, not to the other.
And then what is it which obtaines this prize?
Not wealth, nor treasure in abundance had,
To get this prize, is not to temporize,
For flattery in Princes seems too bad.
And time obseruers be of small regard,
When divine honor is the due reward.
Do not with glosing, nor with sugared speech
Think to allure thy God, unto thy will:
Of thy frail temple he can make a breach,
And in one moment soul and body kill.
The difference twixt God and man assignde,
One kills the body, the other kills the mind.
Care not for him, M^t. 10. 28.
that has power corporal,
Able to kill the body is the worst,
But care for him whose power celestial,
For he can make both soul and body cursed.
Wherefore take heed, thou do not grieve that God,
Who can avenge thy folly with his rod.
Be so determinde in thy daily labor, Vbi non est p^r gratiam, adest per
vin^dictam.

That thou offend not Gods high majesty,
For he that is out of Gods heavenly favor,
Shall be destroyed by his deity. Alms. Eccl. chap. 7 verse. 32.

The Lord has pi^tie, when he sees us take
Compassion on the poor for Christ his sake.
But when with impudent and careless eye,
We do neglect the cries of silly souls,
And wallowing in deep security, Amos. chap. 6. ver^. 6.

Cherish our pleasures; and drink wine in bowls.
Whilst we anoint our selves with ointments sweet,
Who will with tears ofsorrow wash Christ feet?
No man is sorry for poor Joseph's woe,
Joseph's affliction does not touch our hearts,
Pleasures induce us where so ere we go,
Sins lamentation instantly departs.
Joseph in prison, Genesis chap. 39. ^ers. 20.
we sweet pleasures taste,
Relieude by none, til all his griefs be paste.
Those who contemn the miseries of men,
Shall nere attain unto this Golden prize,
These like to savage Lions in their den,
With proud Cal^gula, do ti^annize.
Nere shall they come to rest, M^t. 2. chap. verse. 10.
but endless war
Shall scatter them, without a shepherds star.
Ca^^^la would many times reprove,
The Gods on high, in that they did withstand,
His Saints ordainde to purchase peoples love,
And brandishing a weapon in his hand.
Come Aeolus (quoth he) and all ye Gods,
I Will whip you like to scholeboies with my rods.
Yet when he heard the messenger of rain, Qui Deos tant^pere cotemneret, ad
minima t^nitrua et falgura, conniuere, caput obuoluere, ad ve^o maiora
proreperet e strato, sub lectumque condere solebat. Vid. Suet. in vit. Cal^g.

Thu^der, with crackling noise, come hurrying down,
Then he, proud man, to hide himself was feign,
And who was high before, is humble grown.
For wandering what did hurrie ore his head
Fond witless man, he crept under his bed.
Caligula could never get this prize,
For he abashed was at every storm,
Nor with affiance could lift up his eyes,
To that same God whose grace does man adorn
For Grace does beautify each creature well,
And is a means foul vice for to expel.
Now whosoever will obtain that prize,
That Golden Fleece, even that celestial treasure,
Let him fear Gods high power in any wise,
And dedicate his life to Gods good pleasure. Time et T^^ ^or.

Then he cannot but get this precious gemme,
Reserude for such as be religious men.
There was a world though that wax hoary now,
When virtue was the scope each leueld at,
But few will virtue in their actions show,
All be respective of their private gain.
This private state is mundane happiness,
Which is the groundworke of our wretchedness.
Leave all thy wealth and thy preferment quite, Quis est amicus Det? qui
nimtrum nu^dum contemn^t propt^r Deam^ Stell. de cont, mu^d. lib. 2.

Info^ aminibus et caucr^ulis petra etc. Cantic. chap. 2. verse. 14.



Fly to the Anchor of thy hope and stay,
Here Is Jacobs ladder, which may thee incite,
Upon thy sovereign Lord thine head to lay*
Christ is no place whereon to lay his head,
But Christ his hand will us to glory lead.
Buie once this gemme again, and tell me then,
If ever Jewel were of such a price,
A Jewel requisite for Christian men,
For here is no Christian that will it despise.
Sell all and buie it, for it will procure
Thy endless safety which will ere endure.
What is it draws thee from thy loving Lord?
Is it promotion? hope of present gain?
Or is it all that frail earth can afford?
Naught but vain shadows does frail earth contain.
Leave then the shadow, and the substance get
Immortal things immortal minds beset.
What was the reason Alexander thought, And therefore slew Calisthenes. vid.
Quin. Curt. Quia eum pro Deo venerari nolui^. etc.

Naught could contain man's mind that worldly was?
Even forasmuch as he for honor sought
Which having gotten like a shade did pass.
And having conquerde all the world beside,
Yet he perceiude naught constant could abide.
One arrow piercing Alexanders thigh, Homines dicunt me esse immortalem, sed
haec sagitta probat me esse mortal^^ Ibid.

From whence there gushed streams of crimson blood,
Now do I grant (quoth he) mortality
Is incident to me, as here is showed.
Nor prince nor beggar can debar his state,
To be eclipsed by a mortal date.
Thou that wi^ win^e this Golden ^leece, this prize,
Conf^sse thy se^fe a man and not a God,
With pure denotion ^leuate thine eyes
Least thou be da^ht in pieces by his rod. Psalm. 2.

And being dashed reuerreceiue aga^ne
Gods d^uine spirit, A Cordial for thy pain.
Get thee to Noa^s Arc, and like a Dove,
Come flying with an Olive in thy bill,
The Ol^ue is the token of true love,
Which will ^he hatred of the serpent kill. Genesis ch^. ^. ^er^. 11.

For thou as long as thou abidest there,
No ouerflowing deluge needs to fear.
When Z^th^s aged Boreas son and heir,
Came down from Colchis into Arcadie,
When unto Phin^us Court he did repair,
And was receiude by Phineus sumptously.
He aided Phineus the Harpies to expel,
Whose filthy ordure gave a no^some smell.
For wheresoever Phineus did go,
They did pursue him, both by Sea and land,
And made king Phineus full of dismal woe,
For they were plagues inflicted by Jove's hand.
In that he did put out his childrens eyes,
Which did ascend to Jove with woeful cries.
Zethes by force expelde these cruellbirds,
Expulsing them the bounds of Arcadie, Maliominis aues, etc.

And for his welcome, this kind love affords,
And love for love is shown as mutually.
It was an a^mes for to renew his life, Idea.

Since what was done, was plotted by his wife.
Then this example shall induce thy love, Miserum est ingratum esse hominem.

Not with unthankful and fo^getfull mind,
For to requit^ his kindness wh^ did prove
A fai^hful^ friend, and in distress most kind. Pia^^^grato ^omine p^ius
terranil ^rea^ Ausonius^

For Zethes was in great dis^^esse before,
Till he arriude upon the Arcadian shore.
And sure unthankful minds be most accursed, Officiosa al^^s exuiosa suis.
Alcia. (...) Emblem.

Since they like Vip^rs be unkind to those
Who fos^red them, and make their wombes to burst,
Vipers to Vipers be the hateful foes.
Many foul vice, says Seneca, In Epi^t. ad L^cid.
I ken,
In Rome, yet none worse then unthankful men.
It is inhumane to forget good will,
The king of Persia did accept a gift, Dariu^* Vid. Apoth. Plutar. ^t E. rasm.
Roterod.

Even a small handful which a wife di^ fill
O^ liquid water, void of subtle drift.
This he accepted, and with like desert,
repaid the kindness of her loving heart.
And sure who is ungrateful to his friend, Inimica animam, exinanitio
m^ritorum dispersio virtutum, etc. S. Barnard.

Shall nere obtain this sacred prize of heaven.
And since Gods bounty store of gifts does send,
Strive in an equal poize, to be found even,
And whensoere thou do perceive Gods grace,
Stir thee to good, cease not his name to praise,
Thou an unfruitful servant, do thy best,
Yet all thou do, not so much as thou ought,
Christ with his sacred robe does thee inuest,
And in his mercy has thee homeward brought,
And yet thou wandrest in the fields astray,
Unless Gods mercy be thy hold and stay.
He is thine hold, yet like a drunken man,
Thou reelest from his shoulders to depart, Ami^a luto sus. Horat. Sus
^utulenta Cic. in dec. cont. Salust.

Unto thy vain delights, do what he can,
With second death thou penetrat'st his heart,
Thou make it bleed afresh, and in thy sin,
Like Sow in mire delight'st to wallow in.
Lament thy straggling footsteps, thy offenses,
Lament the horror of thy mis spent time,
Lament thy sin, thine Hypocrite pretenses,
Lament: so shall soules-splendour brightly shine.
The spirit and the flesh bandie their force,
With flesh the devil ioynes without remorce.
Be thou remorcefull, and the Lord will take
Pity upon all thine infirmities,
Even for his death, and for his passions sake,
Will he exempt thee thine enormities,
And bring thee to the place of heavenly joy,
Void of distress, exempted from annoy.
Buy this celestial treasure, this reward,
This heavenly Manna, made for Angels food,
This precious jewel all wise men regard, Vid. Aulum Gell. in A^t. noclib.

Purchasde to us, by Christ's effused blood.
This is no Tolosanum aurum, which was brought
To Rome by Q. Cepio, dearly bought.
That was the ruin of him that did find it,
This is the blessing of him, does possess it,
Who is he then that will not greatly mind it?
To be the worthiest gem, who will not confess it?
Since who obtaines it, lasting life obtaines,
Albeit precious, got with little pains.
That is obrizum aurum; gold refined,
Purer then Cristall, cleerer then the Glass,
This heavenly treasure is to such assignde,
As in devotion do their life time pass.
Then get this gold, and like a bracelet tie it,
About thine arm, sell all thy goods and buy it.
Then shall thou get this Golden Fleece of joy,
Solace unto thy soul, and endless bliss,
Esteem not of it, as a triuiall toy,
Since it is the haven of thy happiness.
So run and so con^inue in thy running, Cor. chap. 9. verse. 24.

That thou may be eternizd at Christ's coming.
None must obtain, unless they hold their course,
For he that lives must proceed therewith, Perfectio vir. tutisest
perseu^rantia,

And this same lewesse will each man enforce,
To run all breathless to recover breath.
God grant we may so run this mortal race,
That we with joy, may see Gods heavenly face.
Always provided for the day to come,
Least unawares our soul sustain the spoil,
And then even speechless we appear as dumb,
And undergo an euerduring foil.
Then shall we weep, and eke deplore our state,
But lamentation then will come too late.
Those five wise Virgins had their Lamps provided,
Therefore they were accepted in the room
Of nuptial rites, Mat^h. 25. chap. verse. 12.
the other were de^ided,
That unprovided would presume to come.
Oh then let us provide our Lamps with oil,
So shall the Lord us of our sin assoyle.
For those who have no oil within their lights,
Shall be debarred heavens f^licitie,
And rest enthroned in perpetual night,
Where howling is their sweetest harmony.
Nothing is better th^n provision sure,
To get that life, which ever shall endure.
Many intend to spend t^eir worthless^ life,
In ^aking riches^ through desire of gain,
But such things be the nourishers of st^ife,
And th^s thy substance will thy conscience stain.
It shall distaine thy conscience and oppress,
Thy dear bought soul with gall of bitterness.
Galde be he ever, that bestows his time,
In things offensive to Gods majesty,
Employing not himself in things divine,
But in profaneness and impiety.
Soon die they in despair and discontent, Paenitentia vera nunqu^ es^ Sera.

Who grieve their God, and g^i^uing not repent.
There can be nothing happier then that man, Paenitentia s^ra raro est vera.
Aug.

Who does direct his industry therein,
Which is concordant to Gods high command,
The safest antidote against all sin.
For he shall sure obtain that pr^ze, that pay,
Which power of darknesse^ nere shall take away.
Labor for this, and then thou shall do well,
Thou shall attain unto the port of rest, Sidus naui^ ganti^u, naufragii
portus.

There to remain even in that sacred cell,
Which above all is to be loved best. S. August.

That sacred mansion of tranquillity,
Eternal rest of heavens felicity.
Who would remain in this salt Sea of woe?
In this unfruitful vale of misery?
Who would in sinners paths delight to go?
Since naught there is but sharp calamity.
Be not besotted with this earthly pleasure,
Lest thou do leese the hope of heavenly treasure.
And then farewell fond man, Aetna a mountain in Sicilie, now called Gibello
monte, from whence issue forth wholesi^kes of fire, proceeding out of the
adusted matter of the earth. Vi^. Just.
for thy distress,
Cannot be vttred by the tongue of any,
Such is the platform of thy wretchedness,
That thy distresses be in number many.
And then an Aetna with a scorching flame,
Shall vex thy soul with everlasting pain.
Now give a sob, in token of thy grief,
Now weep amain, Quando spir^tu^ hominis suspirat, spiritus Dei aspirat.
least thou remorcelesse die,
A sigh perchance will yield thee some relief,
And make thee with a doleful heart to cry
Pity dear Lord, pity good God, I crave,
I do confess, that I offended have.
This short petition will appease his ire,
Such is his mercy toward penitents,
And though it burnd before more hot then fire,
Yet at thy tears he presently relents.
And answers thee, if thou will cease from sin,
Thou shall in joy for ever reign with him.
If thoule not weep, Jesus will weep for thee,
For ore Jerusalem did he lament,
He will cond^le thy woe, thy misery,
And tell thee plain, thy fall is imminent.
He has more feeling of our wretchedness,
Then we our selves have of our own distress.
How often has he calde us even with tears,
Stretching his racked arms upon the cross,
Yet we run headlong, void of filial fear,
Secure and careless of our own souls loss.
Oh weep for shame, and let thy tears bewail,
Thy careless life, which did thy Savior nail.
Shall thy distress more move another man,
Then thine own heart? which should sustain the grief,
Sure whosoever shall thy folly scan,
Will deem thee most unworthy of relief.
For this thy soul is cauterizde with sin,
Which thou for ever means to dally in.
Lascivious minion that consumes thy days, Dicit se vetulam cum sit (...)
p^^pa pup^^m (...) G^llta cu^ sit A^us. Far nec ban^poss^s, p^ssis Coliue,
necillam, alterari^icula est altera ^utidula. Valor. Martial. in Qua^. lib.
Epigram

In tricking up thy self in fine attire,
In decking those proud parts thy name decays,
Thy honor fa^les, dishonourd by desire.
Thou with the Argonautes shall ne^e obtain,
Without Gods special grace, this heavenly gain.
Yet if with Marie Magdalen thou weep,
And shed salt tears in token of r^morce,
If thou repose not in a sinful sleep,
Thy tears, thy sigh^s shall be of equal force.
Clear to exempt thee from ^he sting of death,
Which otherwise with mist would choke thy breath.
Oh that I could lament as Peter did,
Oh then should I to mercy have recourse,
But through dist^ust of mercy I am hid,
With Adam in the gro^e, Luke. chap. 2^. ver^. 62.
made worse and worse.
O^ mollify (dear Lord) this heart of mine, Genesis ch^p. 3. verse. 8.

That in contrition I may be found thine.
What if I have abundance of all treasure?
Wallow in curious cates, and sumptuou^ fare?
Yet all my deeds opponents to Gods pleasure,
Oh th^n (God knows) how poor I am and bare?
Naked, forlo^ne, oppressed with misery,
And so distressed, who is it will p^ttie me?
Grant us dear Lord, A petition?
so to employ our time,
And so our ^alent thou to us have lent
That like the stars in glory we may shine,
And reap the fruits of pilgrims steps well spent. Iux orien^ ab al^o sol
Iustiti^.

So shall that O^ient Sun our eyes del^ght,
And beautify us, both by day and night.
So shall that heavenly light enlighten us,
That we shall never stray from Gods desire,
Not turning things convenient to abuse,
Nor through presumptuous folly to aspire.
For true humility shall ere protect us, Humility.

And in this night of darkness shall direct us.
Stay thee a little while, ere thou proceed,
Do not go hurrying on thine headlong course, Allocutio a^ seipsum.

With bitter Satyrs make men's hearts to bleed,
Least they by reading be made worse and worse.
So read, and so conce^ue amidst thy reading,
Thy stony heart for sin may fall a bleeding. Institutio.

Yet will I know thou can not this perform,
^n the first progress of thine hapless race,
Without Gods Spirit (poor soul) thou art forlorn,
Where^ore with tears call unto God for grace.
Grace will illuminate thy purblinde eyes,
Before whose beams, whole heaps of vapors lies.
Solace thy self in that which is divine
Do not bestow thy time in wantonness,
Direct thy paths unto the equal line
Of Gods directions, where thine happiness
Only consists: and dependence having,
Is soon obtained by incessant craving.
Is not this mercy, and a kindness great,
To be delighted only in bestowing. F^ns perennis integer manans. S. August.

For when for mercy we do him entreat,
Mercy we have, as from a fountain flowing.
And this same fountain dried up is never,
But flows with continual graces ever.
Then beat thine heart, and be ashamde of sin,
Put thee on sackcloth, Jonah. chap. 3.
and in heart relent,
The goal is gotten, and the triumph win,
Heavens Paradise attainde, if thou repent.
Pierce thine obdurate heart with moisturde tears,
And then souls comfort shall dispell all fears.
Tremble and be astonished for thy life, Cum timore et tremore.

In that thou have offended thy good God,
Put from thee all contention, Deus quia vere bou^s. Vid. S. Aug. in Meditat.
and all strife,
Lest thou be punished by his fearful rod.
And that his rod shall be eternal fire,
Prepared for hardened sinners as their hire.
But if thou cease from sinning, then receive,
Veni^e, blessed of my father come,
Like sheep upon my right hand you shall have,
Rewards provided for you by his son.
The other branded with ^bite go, Apoc. chap. 19. verse. 20.

Into the lake of brimstone full of woe.
Oh that we might attain unto that heaven,
Whose gates are purer then the finest Gold,
Admirde in vision by the Martyr Stephen,
Promisde to David's seed, Act. chap. 7 verse. 55. 56.
in time of old.
Grant gracious Lord, that we may so endeavor,
That we with thee may reign in joys for ever. Petition.

So let thy countenance shine upon that mist
Of ignorance, Quamuis dis^ pa^sit singu. loru^g loria, tamen communis est
^mnium laeti^ tia. Aust.
which has obscurde our minds,
That we may be by Chores of Angels blist,
As those, to whom be several joys assignde.
As those who have obtainde the haven of bliss,
Enthroned in the thrones of happiness.
Oh let thy gracious favor flourish still
With a continuance of thine heavenly love,
Directed by the level of thy will,
Without a blemish, spotles^e, as the Dove.
So shall we laud and magnify thy name,
That deigned have to make us free from blame.
Let us with speed ^ake up our bed and walk,
Let us not wallow in lascivious beds,
Let us with speed hear what our Christ does talk,
Sounding alarums in our d^afest ear^s.
Come unto me that labor and are distressed,
Retire to me, for you shall be refresht.
Is not this solace to thy wearied spirit? Plus affctu^^ quam affat^,
plusg^mui^ bus quam s^rmonibus efficitu^, etc.

Is ^ot this comfort to thine heavy load?
Since Christ rewards thee, who naught does merit,
A greater kindness, neu^r could be showd.
Lament thy sin with tears, thy Christ does crave,
He Will in his mercy, soul and body save.
Now is the Golden Fleece attainde unto,
Then which no gem more precious or more ^aire,
Since Christ (...) of ou^ wor^hl^sse works allow,
And has adopted us to be his heir
This G^^den Fl^ece is got, none can w^thstand
The confi^^ation of Gods sacred hand.
Canc^ll'd he has the writin^ which he had, He has cancelled the handwriting
he had against v^v. 8. etc.

To show against us, and h^^ p^ec^ous blood,
Which he effusde for us that e^st were bad,
H^^h wash away ou^ sins: O blessed food.
Mo^e (...) and more swe^te then Hesh^ons pooles,
Whole p^^asant st^eames refreshed thirsty souls.
Flow thou for ever sweetest of all sweets,
Whose Nectar fountains relisheth our gall, (...). brosiaet nectare. etc.

And with a kind salute our anguish greets,
Protecting us, least our frail steps should fall.
Defend us Lord, and as thou hither have,
Protected us, continue thy repast.
For thy repast will nourish us for aye,
And feed our hunger-bitten souls with cates,
And sundry dishes, even from day to day,
Having promoted us to high estates.
What cause ha^st thou, since we deserved least,
To fashion us like man, and not like beast?
It was thy mercy Lord not our deserts,
That thou shoulds^ this impart unto thy foes,
Blessings full many flowing ^n our hear^s,
As in redemption from soule-bleeding woes.
Lord these thy blessings what tongue can unfold
This which our Fathers have declarde of old?
Thou might have made me like a worm or beast,
^r senseless creature, In Persons (...).
like to plants or stones,
But with thine own form thou did me inuest,
Like to thy self, and thy elected ones.
F^r which I cannot give thee worthy praise,
Yet I will praise thee, and thy name always.
O that the nature of our stony hearts
Would be dissolude to tears, whilst they receive
Those inward passions suffered for our parts,
For whose extremest sorrows we do crave.
That God would pity take, A Petition.
and us redress,
Which destitute of help, are comfortless^.
Thou art our comfort, Gaudiu^ per quod gaudeo* quando sane gaudeo, etc.
and our solacer,
That solacest our misery and woe,
Thou art our pillar and our nourisher,
Who do sustain us wheresoere we go,
Then happy we, since happiness consists,
To be by thee in heaven for ever blist.
Blessed be he ever that resides in Christ,
And does repose h^s comfort in his love,
For in his love all happiness comprisde
Hele fix the Anchor which will nere remove,
Let us exceed, if so we can exceed
In loving him, who for our love did bleed.
Never did man sustain, that he sustained,
To expiate that sin, we h^d committed,
For by his death, eternal life we gained,
And we unto his favor were admitted.
Pity us Lord, as we have here transgressed,
Endew us with that grace, we have professed.
If I could merit, Omirabilis censur^ conditio, e^ ineffabilis mysterii
dispos^tio, etc.
then there were no need
Of any merits Christ has wrought for me,
But Christ's dear heart did for my ^ollies bleed,
And he was wounded for my misery.
Then for thy wounds, and for thy passion sake, August. 1. med. cap. ^.

Save me O Lord, whom thou did re-create. Petition.

I have gone wandering in this surging sea
Of many troubles, shipped in waves of woe,
I was deprived of the purity
Of mine own soul, Inpers^. Auth^r.
from whence these griefs did flow.
For mine own soul defiled is with mudde,
Which erst was raised by thy precious blood.
Weep now, Da mihiirriguu^ superi^^ and inferius.
hard heart, and call to mind the death
Of thy sweet Savior, who appeasde their
Of Gods displeasure, and whose heavenly breath,
Attempred that which burnd more hot then fire.
There is no marble-heart so hardened,
But by Christ's death, it will be mollified.
Oh stony conscience fraught with wretchedness,
Oh vile disfigurde creature made of sin,
Thou that compacted art of wickedness,
How by thy merits can thou favor win?
Nay, nay to fly to them, thou would be loath,
For they be filthier then a menstruous clo^h. P^al. David.

Here let me fix my staff with Scipio, I^ ludibrio ^ratris nouos transilire
muros. ^. ^iuius Patau.

And set my foot unto Alc^des frame,
Beyond which pillars never one could go,
Non vltra fixte, to memorize his name.
Here Is Romulus high wall, who leapes ore this,
With Remus under it interred is.
Scipios firm staff I have defixed here,
In token that my province is obtainde,
Unto whose sacred shrine let all draw nere,
Now is the prize, the Golden Fleece regainde,
That Golden Fleece the subject of my verse,
The rarest Motto on a dead man's hearse.
For none that dies, pleasure can enjoy,
Unless he have a garment made of this,
Not like that poisoned shirt which did annoy, Seneca in tragaed, Oet^^, Her^ul.

Oetea^ Hercules depriude of bliss.
This is the garment of our chastity,
The milke-white Albe of our sincerity.
Who does not make his garment of this woole,
Purer then purple of the finest dye,
Does his own soul with wickedness defoule,
Depriude of Christ's death, means to cure his pai^
This garment is the ornament of love,
That Olive branch brought by a Turtle Dove.
The Tyrians were rich, Tyrr^en^ vestes proverb.
with orient gemme,
Yet not so rich, as this most precious jewel,
The Arabians sweet perfumed odors sends,
But those for dainty dames remain as fuel; Tmolus amemum mittit^

Pontus brings forth rich beuers of all kind,
But not comparde unto the peace of mind.
India is rich, furnished with golden mines,
But savage minds possess them without use, Virosaque Pontus castorea, Elyadum
palmas Phyro^ equaru^, Virg. Super extremos penetratit Indos. Long^ qualiter
resonante Eoa tundeturvnda. Catul. 1. lib. eleg.

More expert coasts, at the Indians rapines,
In that such precious metals they abuse.
But we repine not at their Indians gain,
So we this heavenly treasure may obtain.
Craesus was rich, Trog. Pom^^. and Lenoph in cyrop. Ovid. in Epist. vid.
yet he obtainde not this,
Irus was poor, Codrus as poor as he,
And these two beggars had their share of bliss,
As much as Craesus for his majesty. Quint. Curtium in vit.

Then what do I regard such wealth, Alexan^. de obit. and sepul^ Craesi. in
^upple^^ unto.
such store,
Since after death, I am not blessed therefore.
Poor Thestylis did labor to maintain,
Her poor estate, Virgil. in ec^log.
by daily toil and care,
Rich Menedemus carkte for rustie gain,
Yet at her death she had as much to spare. Terent. com^^ in (...).

Both these did toil, yet toild they not for this,
To be partakers of e^ernall bliss.
This richesse is a canker which consumes
The rare framed substance of the soul divine,
For rich men through their rich estates presume
To purchase heaven, as they did earth for^ time.
But gold adoring creatures they must know
That their confusion from their richesse grow.
Thus that converted is to bitter pain,
Which they reserude for antidotes of health,
They lose in traffic, where they thought to gain,
Not much unlike unto Prometheus stealth, Hesiod. et Aeschyl. in Tragaed.

Who by his theft resolving to revive,
His liuelesse shrines, himself of life depriude.
Who being on mount Caucasus stands bound,
Enchaind in fetters of captivity,
Whose heart consuming Eagles grapple round,
Yet right reuiues his endless misery.
Hartlesse consumde by day, ^r^metheus punishment*
his griefs renewde,
For with a new framde heart he is endewde.
Night does create in him that which the day
Had quite consumde, wounded by Eagles bills.
Thus he tormented is, as Poets say,
The night reviving what the day time killes. A poetical ^^ction.

Thus discontented, rests in discontent,
A just reward for theft, or thefts intent.
Read but these leaden poems, Conclusion with an exhortation. etc.
find of gold,
For gold is subject to their shapelesse form,
Though they degenerate from a golden mould,
Yet pious wits will not such fragments scorn.
And as a mask often veles deformity,
So may my errors by your clemency,
A kind embrace encourages a swain, Et tandem tener ausus e^^ Catullus*
magno mittere passerem Man roni. Catul. ^is Eleg.

To tell his rusticketale, and does excite^
His silly muse to frolic, or the plain,
So kindest censures them that rudely write,
If these naked poems please, I do protest
In bounden love, devoted I will rest.
To be commanded in the highest strain
That poor Menalchas ever shall attain.
Sat vobis est hac tenui and serpente vena.
FINIS.
AN ELEGY ENTITVLED Narcissus Change.
NArcissus pestred with the Summer heat,
Came to a fountain whose stil-flowing spring,
Refreshed him where silver fountains meet,
Upon whose banks did ripened berries hing.
Whose pleasant color did such beauty show,
That they their form did to the banks bestow.
Such was the beauty of that ripened fruit,
Whose fair adorning shadow did oreshade
The banks adioynde, where Clio with her Lute,
Used to play, with flourie roabes araide.
Where Clio played, the Naiades replide,
With tripping grace, in Tempe deifide.
Here did Narcissus bath himself a while,
And with a Nectar sweetness quench his thirst,
Ling him down, with quick conceit did smile,
Glutted with water, which he longde for first.
Where he perceiving how thee berries cast
A beauteous color, thus he spoke aghast.
Fair were that creature that surpassed these,
In beauty, or in color, but no shape,
Can be comparde to these delicious trees,
Whose fruitful sprigs send out this lovely grape.
O why should Gods (quoth he) such berries make
Of such rare color for Narcissus sake?
Narcissus is not in his shape so fair
Nor in his color, so admirde as these,
Bright-eide Alexis is beyond compare,
Yet not comparde to these broad shadowing trees.
Phyllis was fair, yet not so fair to me,
As these fair berries speckled pretily.
Thus whilst he spoke, he did reflect his eyes
Unto the fountain, where he did perceive,
His own affected beauty, which descries
Conceit of beauty does young youths deprave.
For he conceited of his beauteous form
With high ambition did his shape adorn.
Do thou advance (quoth he) wi^h high prizde praise
The beauty of these berries grow hard by?
And will not thine own beauty eternize,
Decked with pleasures in variety?
Thy blush exceeds the feature of all plants,
Thou art endewde with that the Cupresse wants.
The Cypress tree does not her verdure lose, Cupr^ssus in hyeme viriditat^m
no^ amittit suam.

But still reserues her vernant shape and springs,
With cheerful die, so does the blushing rose,
Which to her pruner, fragrant savor bring^. Plin. in Not. Histor.

Neither the Rose, nor yet the Cypress tree,
In any wise may be comparde to thee.
Damon has told me often, Orytha or* Orychia daughter to king Erycthetus, whom
Bo^cas stole away.
I was most fair,
Yet I beleeude him not: but now I see,
My beauty is among other shepherds rare
No marvel if Orytha favor me.
Since Nature by Apelles hand has sought,
To pass that nature which foretime was wrought.
Crotons fine daughters, framde by Zeuxes art,
Were much admirde for beauty yet must yield
To thee Narcissus, for in every part,
Thy well proportiond members them excelled.
They fair by art, thou by dame Nature fair,
Nature with art, we use not to compare.
Thersites that misshapen Grecian swain,
was of my stock and lovely progeny,
But he foul man, should be reformd again,
For his ill featurde forms deformity.
But thou N^rcissus do enjoy that name,
Which Nature does envy, whilst she does name.
Namde be thou ever, for thou do enjoy
The honor and the credit of thy maker,
Thou art Narcissus that same lovely boy,
That of celestial form art made partaker,
Partaker be thou ever of that form,
Since nature as her gemme did thee adorn.
Narcissus gemme, for who can ere compare
With the surpassing beauty of his face?
Which intermixed i^ with red most fair,
Resembling Io, whose admired grace.
Struck such a love in ^upiters high breast, Io daughter to the river Inachus,
etc.

That he protested, he loved Io best.
One day amongst the rest, high Jove would kiss,
The parragon of beauty Ios face, The description of Jove's love.

Juno stood at his back, and seeing this
You might forbear, quoth she whilst we are in place,
It were enough to vele your crimes by night,
And not to act them in your Iunoes sight.
Jove he replied little, but expressed,
His love to Juno still with feigned looks,
Io stood still, her silence lust confessed,
Such is the attracting power of divine hooks.
Their divine power is such, that being shown,
The chastest maids that breathe be not their own.
Jove loved still, yet could not hide his love,
From jealous Juno, Inque intentem Inachydos vu^tus mutau^^at ille iuue^cam.
wherefore he invented,
By metamorphozde shape, his joys to prove,
Io poor wench, without delay consented.
And left fair shapes, should Jove's conceit reveal,
An heifers form, did Io's shape conceal. Ovid. in Meo tamor.

Fondest of fonds will thou compare thy feature,
With a lascivious heifer Jove's delight?
Thou art the curious frame of divine nature,
Nature sure made thee in her own despite.
For she despiteth thee, thou art so fair,
That Nature with her work may not compare.
Leda fair wife to royal Tindarus,
Drew Jove from heaven, proportion of a swan,
For Gods at that time were voluptuous:
From whence the twins of Leda first began.
Ledas two eggs, Pollux and Hellen hight,
Castor and Clytemnestra brought to light.
These fair surpassing fair, endewed were
With vital breath by Jove's fair swanlike form,
Castor and Pollux staid not long time there,
For they bright lamps, the heavens with light adorn:
Hellen though fair, yet Hellen did amiss,
And Clytemnestra grew adulteress.
Auant degenerate thoughts, ill may betide thee,
Ob^ruding lustful Hellen to my shrine,
Or Clytemnestras known adultery,
Or with celestial bodies which do shine
In heavens supernall Throne, and what are they,
That thou the brightest star, should stars obey.
Look at thy face, and in this Crystal fount,
Gaze at thy golden locks: Oh do not blush,
Fairest of men, fit for Idalias mount,
There to inhabit: Idalio o^ Idalus a mount dedicated to Venus.
crowned with myrtle bush.
What shall I say Narcissus, to thy beauty,
To which Apollo tied is in duty.
Apollo followed Daphne in a chase, C^i Deus, et quoniam ^oniux mea non potes
esse, arbor ^riscerte dixit. Ovid. in Me^am.

An unchaste chase, when gods do follow maids,
And in this shameless course, this hapless race,
Daphne makes refuge to the Laurel shades.
Where she transformed was into that tree,
Under whose shade poor wench, she wished to be.
But what high Jove, Iphicus son to Praxonides, who first ordained the games of
Olympus.
or what Apollo can,
Transform Narcissus, since his shape exceeds,
Fair Hippodamia for whom Pelops ran,
Iphicus heart for me with sorrow bleeds.
And let it bleed I am of purer frame
Then each lascivious mate to entertain.
But if fair Deiopeia would descend
Daughter to Juno, Quar^^ pul^ cherrima D^^opeia.
and entreat my love,
Then would I to her suite attention lend,
And in a mutual sort her tears approve. V^rgil. in A^ne^d.

I am too fair for Galataeas vain,
Whom I loud once, yet nere will love again.
Though she allure me with her pretty favors,
Sending me bracelets, made of diverse sorts,
And fragrant nosegaies, mixed with sweetest savors,
Yet maids of greater place to me resorts. Themis a shepherdess

If any earthly creature me obtain,
It shall be Themis, she is a lovely swain.
But it is no humane creature can content me,
It must be some diuiner power shall have me,
Therefore some fair shapde god thou shall inu^t thee
To be thy mistress, who ere long will crave thee.
And craving thee, will dote upon thy face,
Wishing thou were borne of celestial race*
Thus whilst Narcissus spoke, his twisted arms
Began to flourish with a green clad least
With grim Nemesis by her posherfull charms* Ille caput vi^ ridi fe^sum
submisit in herba. Ovid. Metam.

Composde to be the blossoms of his grest.
His head was clothed with a color green,
None knew Narcissus where he erst had been.
This was the high prizde love he did conceive
Of his own beauty fitter for Gods then men,
Ambitious thoughts do worthy parts deprave,
More savage far then Lions in their den.
For having got their prey, they rest content,
But ^oaring thoughts are still to lewdness bent.
Another Elegy called Aesons affecting youth.
Aesons dotage.
THere was one Aeson who long time had liude,
And waxing old, was clad with hoarie hair, Son to Cretheus* Vt infra.

So that each day he looked to be depriude
Of his scarce living life consumde with care.
And every day he rose, farewell quoth he,
For ere to morrow death will summon me.
A looked for summons, yet not much desirde,
For what man living will desire his fall?
If that my fortunes have to wealth aspirde,
And that the Gods have blessed me therewithal,
Why should I die? Quid m^^iar.
yet these gray hairs portend,
Yet ere long time my state must have an end.
With that he wept, and sighing did despair,
Watring his pale-facde cheeks with aged drops, Aeg^on or Briareus a man of
remorcelesse spirit. etc.

And weeping, wipte his eyes with snow-white hair.
His beard was long, bedeckt with aged locks.
So that to see this oldman homwards creep,
Would move Aegaeon if alive, to weep.
Now whilst he wept, and did lament his woe,
Jason came to him, Jason was his son,
And with a quick pace mixed with te^res did go,
Hearing his father say, he was undone.
Undone quoth Jason, why dear Sir (quoth he)
Is it in that I have offended thee?
No quoth old Aeson, its because mine age,
Grows out of frame, Oreth^us (...) f^ther to Aeson, Alcide mon and Ae^
^ythaon.
decrepit and decaid,
Once was I nimble being Cretheus page,
But now I fly unto my staff for aid.
This (my kind son) is cause of my distress,
Of all my sorrow and my heaviness.
Jason did smile, yet he concealde his smile,
Least he should seem to scorn his fathers years
Or pure compassion of his griefs exile,
But washed his tearelesse face with fained tears,
And Aeson having all his woes descride,
With framed speech young Jason thus replide.
Dear father, if distress consist in this,
That is in sorrowing for your aged years, Iasons spe^ch

I think it were not very far amiss,
To show Medaea these your woeful tears.
VVhe^ewith (quoth Aeson) can she comfort me,
That will be dead, ere she can visit me?
Jason to comfort him, poor doting man,
Said, Helicon and Hamonia two delightful places.
she had used the like experiment
Of diverse others: and that Helicon
Yields powerful herbs, by Aesculapius sent.
Adding, Vid. Ovid.
he would make have, and bid her try,
What she could do in this extremity.
Aeson did thank him, with a fathers blissing,
Praying the Gods to prosper him for ever,
And like a dotard cloyed him with kissing,
Hoping to live for aye: Die should he never.
Jason made have to his enchanting wife, Med^^.

Bidding her try her skill for Aeson^ life.
Medaea wept to hear her Jason ask, Nec t^nuit lachrimas (...) est pietate
r^ga^tis. Ovid. Quod petis, experiar, maius dare munus. Ias^n. ibid.

In such lamenting manner for her father.
Protesting often, this was an extreme taste,
Nothing on earth, but she could do it rather.
Jason commands which she will not withstand,
But gins to try herbs virtues with her hand.
And going far and near, she gatherd flowers,
Which she distild into a vessel pure, Illic (...) valleresect as and (...).

From whence proceeded such all working powers,
That she by them could make men ere endure.
And more to die, which did content her sire.
For to be ever young was his desire.
When she had this confession made and tried,
The same by skill, made on a fruitless tree,
Whereof the withred branches down did slide,
To which applying Art: sprung fruitfully
Fair Olive branches, by whose vernant show
The virtue of her herbs she soon did know.
Wherefore she came to Aeson spedily,
Taking him by the hand: young man (quoth she)
Whereat she laughed, (...).
I have found remedy,
For your old age, if youl'e be ruled by me.
And drawing out (...) box of pleasant oil,
This will (quoth she) assuage your forepast toil.
Having anointed him good gods (quoth he)
How agile, and how nimble be my bones?
By lasting fame eternized be she,
That healde mine aches, yet saying this he groans.
For he beheld the excrements of time,
Gray hairs dispoile him of his flowery prime.
And sighing thus, you have done good to me,
Daughter Medaea, in that you have curde
My chill-cold joints spent with debilitie
For which approved kindness, rest assurde.
That Jason shall enjoy old Pelias ground.
Since thee more kind then Pelias I have found.
One thing is yet awan^ing, which if thou
By thy diuinest skill shall ere perform,
Or if by thy endeavors thou can do,
With a perpetu^ll wreath I Will thee adorn.
And character the honor of thy name,
With the dispersing of thy sacred fame.
She without further question made, applied
Unto his aged hairs such fragrant smell, Seminaeque (...) flores et succos
incoquit atros.

And by her concoct herbs so liquefied,
That in all have, his hoary hairs down fell,
And being fallen, Ovid. Ibid.
there sprung up in that place,
A coale-blacke bush of hair upon his face.
Seek not with Aeson to be young again,
But have desire to end thy pilgrimage,
Since it is fraughted with a sea of pain, Parainesis se^ institutio etc. in
Senectut.

Who would with youth change his declining age?
Youth is licentious, Aesons.
age experienced,
Tells us, That lust is to be banished.
FINIS.
^t vos Pompilius sa^guis carmen reprehendite, Ad Zoilum.

Quod non multa dies-litura coercuit
Atque, perfectum decies non castigauit ad v^guem.
SONNETS OR MADRIGALS. With the Art of Poesy annexed thereunto by the same
Author.

Horatius in Lib. de art Poetica. Non satis est pulchra esse Poemata, dulcia
sunto,
Et quocunque volunt animum aud^toris agunto.
Ovid. Nec modus aut requies, nisi mors reperitur amantis,
Verus amor nullum nou^t habere modum.
Idem. Hei mihi, quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.
Printed at London for Christopher Purset. 1611.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL HIS Approved brother THOMAS BRATHVVAITE Esquire, the
prosperity of times success in this life, with the reward of eternity in the
world to come.
IAnus ha^h now shut up his Temple, our^ iuil wars be now ended, union in the
sweet harmony of mind and conjunction, has prevented the current of ensuing
faction, we may now sit down under our Beech tree: and make a virtuous use of
an experienced necessity. Travelers having passed many perils, inexplicable
dangers, use to be delighted with the recounting of their forepast miseries,
sea beat mariners having sustained the tempestuous gustes of the surging sea,
and at last arrived at their haven, which so long time with importunacie they
desired, seem not a little delighted with the description of their manifold
dangers. We have purchased by a mutual experience of our own power, a
mutual peace: and reposing under the comfortable shade of minds atonement, may
make discourse of our forepast griefs.

Themystocles exiled his native country, and kindly entertained by the king of
Persia, used to say to h^s train: periisse^, nisi periissem. O sirs, I had
been undone, if I had not been undone; so we, for in our loss consists our
welfare, having tried the rough chasticement of discord, and exiled as it were,
the borders of peace and amity, and now enjoying the content of minds union,
may say, we had never been thus happy, if we had not been unhappy, for the
fruition of happiness has the best taste in his palate, who has once tasted
the bitter relish of unhappiness.

We may now make a good consort, since the iarring strings of discord be
reduced to so pleasant harmony, that the very strains of our well concording
strings may delight our friends with a soul conceiving melody, but distract
the minds of such as in the billows of our unnatural troubles, conceived no
small felicity. But these were like Tyrtaeus that envious Poet, who hearing
how the works of others grew acceptable and delightful, hanged himself in
despair of their good fortunes.

But let them alone, they labor of their own frenzy: and Codrus bowels will
burst with his own envy; I have composed some few Sonets, and dedicated them
unto your self, the fragments of Pernassus mount, though of the meanest: yet
some fruit may be gathered out of Ennius dunghill, they be amorous, penned in
a foolish passion, they are more fit for Venus shrine, then Vranias shape: for
I would not derogate from the praise of beauty, least I should have
Stesychorus fortune, who for dispraising Hellen of Greece, lost his sight. Let
these harsh poems now and then take place amongst more serious studies, Damon
ever carried about with him some works of Pythias as memorials of his
affections, Pylades the impression of his Orestes, and Pyrithous the statue of
his Thesaeus: A poem of love will relish the bitter taste of grauer stories.

Pyndarus fountains lie open as well to Ovid, to write lasciuiously, as to
Sophocles to write tragically: the mind affects variety, as the stomach uses
to be glutted, if she find no change, one instrument of Music would make a
slender consort.

It was no small praise for Alcibiades, to be esteemed skillful in exercises,
and to have general applause in what exploit soever he took in hand. Terpnus,
who was Neroes musician, was out of his element when he had not a Lute in his
hand, and a wanton song before him: Aeschines had little to speak, when he was
not pleading, but these resemble actors upon a stage, who can speak nothing,
but in their own parts: interrupt them but a little, they stand like
Praxiteles pictures. I receive that Gentleman more acceptably, who has a
superficial knowledge in all discourses, then such an one as is exact in one
distinct knowledge alone.

Thus recommending these few scattered poems to your reading, and wishing you
as much comfort as earth can afford you in this life, with the fruition of
heavens glory in the life to come, I take my leave ever resting,

Your affectioned Brother, Richard Brathwaite.

Upon the dedication of the last Epistle.
AFter this proeme, proeme, I may call it,
Came pensive tidings to my Muses cell,
At which my Muse, in boundless wars empalled
Resolude to bid lascivious rithms farewell.
Yet they in spite of me and my Muse
Burst out against my will (as others use.)
Then pardon me that could not use mine own,
In singing lays, when odes should best befit,
This was my first birth, which being riper grown,
Shall yield the blossoms of maturer wit.
Mean time receive this poem which I show
Portraid in sable colors unto you.
The Author to his disconsolate Brother.
Let not mishap deprive you of that hope,
Which yields some rel^sh to your discontent,
Aim your affections at heavens glorious scope,
Whic showers down comfort, when all comfort's spent.
Then rest secure, that power which you adore,
Will make your joys more full then ere before.
Let not the Sun now shadowed with a cloud,
Make you suspect the Sun will never shine,
That ill, which now seems ill, may once prove good,
Time betters that, which was depraude by time.
Thus let my prayers, your tears concord in one,
To reap heavens comforts, when earths comfort's gone.
THE FIRST SONET OR MADRIGALL.
NO sooner do I gaze upon that face,
But ravished with the beauty of thy cheek,
Would think it were a Paradise to place,
Those vernant comforts, which each day ith week,
Are now renewd by singing Al^mons hap,
Under the Sunshine of thy vestall lap.
Whole weeks seem minutes when I am with thee,
And years as hours do vanish from my sight,
There is no pleasant note, no melody,
That makes a luster equal to that light,
Thy sparkling eyes reflect more fair by far,
Then radiant Ph^bus in his Iuory carre.
Those burnisht locks, like Damons flocks appear
Before the temple of refined love,
And as the herds which shepherds use to sheare,
Or like the smoth plumes of the turtle Dove.
Neer'st to a Dove thou art, and I will call
Thine heart, a Turtles heart that has no gall.
That albone skin more pure, more polished,
Then the fair tomb, wherein Prince Ninus lay,
Whose structure (fair) was near demolished,
Dear, thou my mansion art, my life, my stay.
Therefore like Ziscoes skinnne, I will prepare
To sound Alarm in Antenors chair.
If those same nimble fingers, which thou have,
That tune the warbling Lute so pretily,
Be but engript about thy tender waste,
O what a beauty shows there presently?
Will thou believe me? there is no creature borne,
Whose beauteous out^ide, better gifts adorn.
I am no Merchant that will sell my breath,
Good wine needs not a bush to set it forth,
Yet I will praise thee ever, till pale death
Cut off the Poet of thy flowery youth,
I will enshrine thee in an hearse of time,
Which being made shall glad this heart of mine.
I cannot sing, for I have lost my voice,
With telling tales of love, and Venus grove,
But yet drone-like i will buzze and make a noise
Of Cupids arrows, Hyppodamias love.
For I can keep a measure with my tears,
And sighing still make sad the grauest ears.
Atlas three daughters, were beyond compare,
For Aegle was as fair, as fair could be,
And Arethusa was for beauty rare
Hesperitusa full as fair as she.
Yet these three daughters, if mine eye be true,
Seem but as shadows in respect of you.
These three fair daughters kept a Garden sweet,
Wher^in a serpent slept continually,
Which with a trembling fell before their feet,
As ravished with their beauties Majesty.
Thou keptst a garden (love) more fair then they
Which for Alcydes were a worthy pray.
There be sweet fruits so mellow and so rare,
That dropping down upon their tender twigs,
Often times amongst the valleys they repair
To deck wit^ spangled dew their budding sprigs.
Believe me dear, that fruit which grows of thee,
Is interlaid with full variety.
Well were that Gardener that enhedgde were,
Within the beds of that same rosarie,
No raggie bugbeares he should need to fear.
But were enthronde with pomp and majesty.
And in a precious carknet of pure gold
Like to a chain, might all his joys enfold.
Those pretty Daysies that spring on those banks,
With little stalks relisht with fragrant smells,
Give to the Gods above continual thanks,
That such a Gardnesse in their borders dwells.
For they are well assurde and often have said,
Whilst thou lookst ore them, they can never fade.
I could not talk of late, when thou appearde,
Yet glad I would have been to speak my mind,
And standing still, enclosde twixt hope and fear,
Within those looks of thine I was confinde.
Yet willingly confinde, I must confess
For all my throbbing senses showed no less.
Well you may take it rudeness in me then,
In that I could not cover, as others did,
But you must make a difference twixt such me^,
As never were in love, but wholly rid
Of all distempered passions, and of such
As cannot court by loving overmuch.
Near could I see a perfect love endure
To cogge, to flatter in his masters sight,
Love is refinde, and is so passing pure,
That with a monster it will dare to fight.
It hates vain complements, nor can agree
To glosing congies, or a bended knee.
I would not be a Pandor to my love,
Least I should leese the fruits I often have sought,
I will not praise too much, lest I approve,
Mine own vndoer, and to ruin brought,
Lament too late, that I should her commend,
Who by her praise, brought me to timelesse end.
Therefore will I here fix my staff and stay,
Least like Candaules while I praise my wife,
I show a Gygas her, and he betray
My best loved love, depriving me of life.
I cannot lain, and yet I will not praise
That sacred shrine which consecrates my daie^.
FINIS.
THE SECOND SONET.
PVh, fie, away I cannot brook to kiss,
For modest lips detest such wantonness,
Hold off those impure hands, whose only bliss
Is fraughted with the poize of wickedness.
Shake off these ca^kred thoughts* these apparitions,
These shittring dr^ames, and these lasci^^o^^ visions.
Thou dreamde the other night, thy masters mask,
Was hid under the pillow of thy bed,
And when thou wakt thou presently did ask,
Whose unchaste hands did take it from thine head.
Fond gull beware of these conceits of thine,
Like characters of louser acts do shine.
Endimion like with groueling in thy cave,
Thou sleptst of Satyrs, Fauns, and mountain gods
Love is the part thy slumbring eielids crave,
Thou dream'st thou kissed Diana in the woods,
Of steep cliffie Pindust, out upon the Ass,
Thou kissed Diana where she never was.
Thou dreamed of bugbeares, and oppressed with fear,
Ran to the pillow for to kill a fiend,
When (in good sooth) there nothing did appear,
Yet from a shadow did thy soul defend.
Leave off fond gull, no spirit thou can find,
Worse then the spirit of thy jealous mind.
Acteon was a coward to suppose
Each bush a Pandor to his beauteous wife,
And whilst unto the shadie groves he goes,
He fears the ruin of his worthless life.
No care to jealous (...) there can be,
For jealous thoughts despair of remedy.
Nature has plagude some with a jealous spirit,
And yet no cause given by his honored wife,
For jealous thoughts proceed not still from merit,
Surmisde conjectures breed intestine strife.
Reaping such things, as such minds do befit,
They lose the substance, and the shadow get.
Whenas desire of vain and wanton love,
Shows as a Tiger, and triumphs in woe
Her tyrant hands she in her course does prove*
And draws on despair where ere she go,
For desperate love appears often in such,
As are besotted with loving overmuch.
But well I know the portraie of thy mind,
Thou love, and art bewitched with jealousy,
And if a silly Mouse thou chance to find,
Within thy chamber, thy impatiencie.
Swears it has ^uckold thee, and in despair,
Protests the child she has is not thine heir.
Wherefore should bushes so affright brave men,
That are endewd with wit and dignity,
How should a Momus portraie with his pen,
Their jealous thoughts, and their impiety?
Believe me friend, no viper worse I find,
Then the rank poison of a jealous mind.
The Macedons were more discreet then they,
Who suffered all have public liberty.
And to repair unto their house each day,
For to supply their imbecility.
I cannot choose but count that man a gull,
That thinks his Pasyphae nee^s every B^ll.
I cannot choose, but sore condemn that man,
That soothes his pleasure in a veil of tears,
And blots the current of his glorious name,
By suppositions, and pretended pheres.
Honor thy wife, for she is chaste and pure,
Conceive but chastely of her, rest secure.
I am thy friend in counsel and must tell,
Thy follies err, and wander far amis^e,
For jealous thoughts run posting have to hell,
Never are partakers of an heavenly bliss.
Remember well, let jealous thoughts depart,
Least Queen of chaste desires frame thee an heart.
And then still grazing in the shadie grove,
Repent thy foolish and mishapt suspicion,
Which did conjecture false of such a love,
Grounding a truth out of an apparition.
Can tell this vain forgde deed, and then prepare,
More honored thoughts t'extenuate thy care.
I Will leave thee thus, and if thou do remain,
In thine ill formd suggestions then be sure,
There Is punishing Gods, that will in lieu of gain,
Enthrall thy soul in dep^h, ere to endure.
Emprisned fast with chains of slavery,
Condign reward for vntunde jealousy.
Hapless is he who so regards his name,
That he redoubles it with infamy, Supplementum.

Unfortunate that does impair the same,
And shows his thoughts by harsh tunde jealousy.
Juno can look upon her husband love,
To know, why he fair Io so should love?
I have known many in regard of time,
Show discontent, to see their wives partake,
Of popular aspect, and to repine
To love a friend, not for her husband sake,
But none I ever knew, or ere shall know,
That for true love will seem besotted so.
When Collatine did give his signet ring,
Unto young Sextus void of any ill,
He safe content, within his tent did sing
Devoted to his chaste Lucretiaes will,
Worthy was he of such a beauteous mate,
That could so well discern of his estate.
He had a pearl, and he did esteem it,
Not like vain trash floting with every wind,
For like a Phoenix upon earth did deem it,
Contented well with Jewel of his mind.
Thou have as fair a gemme as ere had he,
Why should thou then affect such jealousy?
FINIS.
THE THIRD SONET.
PVh, well I know thee, thou loves public gain,
And therefore I desire thy wan^on face,
I will not reap an harvest of such pain,
Since thou descended art of Lais race.
I cannot love thee, for thy taste seems sower,
Who reapes dishonest gain, approues an hour.
I will not talk of what thy life has been,
For well it may be thou was once converted,
But now it seems thou art transformed clean
Thy thoughts and all thy purposes perverted.
Thou loved the Church once, and did God adore,
But now forsakest him* thou loved before.
Fie on the visard, Lamia of sin,
Thou horrid Ghost compast of wickedness,
Fair though thou be without, thou art foul within,
Concoct of naught, but dregs of ^luttishnesse.
That ribband which thou wearst hung at thine ear,
Show what confusion in thy thoughts appear.
Hoy-day, what may game have we here in hand?
Women with men, and men as wantonly?
Unto their tackling constantly do stand,
Rebounding vice with vice successively.
I will not say, what here is to be done,
But maids seem not praecise in being won.
I cannot choose but blush at such vain words,
As curious passions birle to their loves,
But knowing what discourse vain love affords,
Amongst the shades of Ericinas groves.
I do not wonder, ears attention len.
For maids must needs make strange in kissing men.
If forest Oeta where Alcydes did,
And all the trees within that forest wild,
And all the stars, on Moon light nights descride,
And all the grass piles within earth compilde,
Were metamorphosde to maid^ beauteous shape,
I should suspect them (minion) for thy sake.
The Gods themselves have had enough of beauty,
Venus is spotless, yet she has a mole,
In tendering not to Vulcan native duty,
Breathing with Mars, whilst Vulcan with his cole.
Fie on that face that having beauteous looks,
Enchaines desires in two lascivious hooks.
Run to the Roman Brothell, not to me,
For I detest thy common infamy,
The Vestall Nuns will not to lust agree,
For they invested are with purity.
Cover that wanton face ore with a mask,
Since dregs for wine, be mixed in that caske.
Thou art created to another end,
Then to make prostitute those parts of thine,
Those ea^es of thine which do attention lend,
Unto each gallant mate oppressed with wine.
For wine makes men beso^ted so with thee,
Or without doubt, bewitched they could not be.
When Nature gave to thee two eyes, two arms,
Two ears, two legs, two breathing nosethrils wide,
She did ordain by two, to cure all harms,
Which might occur unto the rest beside,
Yet she did but create one heart, one mind,
To which at first, chaste thoughts she did assign.
One soul is fit, and that desires to dwell
In heavens eternal rest, whose purity
Might best be^^t it: to denounce and tell,
The wondrous works of Gods divinity.
Then fie for shame, one gemme mus^ needs remain,
Which is so precious without mole or stain.
This gemme though darkened by a wilful Eve,
Yet its renewed by Christ's gracious love,
By her original, our Lord we grieve,
By him we seem unspotted as a Dove.
For by his wounds are we to safeguard brought,
And much esteemd, that erst appeared naught.
Rest thee upon this Anchor suredly,
And here repose thee on thy Saviors cross,
Fly lustful thoughts which lackie misery.
Thy pleasure cannot counteruaile thy loss.
God has ordaind thou should survive with him,
Not to defile thy precious soul with sin.
That soul composde of sacred harmony,
Rarer then that Act^on first invented,
Not of that horrid, (...) ^^pollo and Calliope, etc.
iltunde paritie
To which old Orphe^s in hell first consented.
When he his wife attaind by Musicks strain,
That did long time before in hell remain.
Concord befitteth best the rarest wits,
And what tune rather then a quiet mind?
Immortal things immo^tall minds befit,
Affecting that which first was her assignde.
Solace thy chastest mind decked gloriously,
With present health, and future dignity.
Arcadian shepherds, borne of mean degree,
Will not so pass their time, but in regard,
Of times content, and minds tranquillity
Obtain that prize which may not be comparde
With terrene dross, more vile then brittle clay,
Which one hours sickness soon can take away.
Do thou trick up that vessel made of earth,
For to allure fond men unto thy will? Vid. Mart. in I. lib.

I tell thee beauty, it is little worth.
When death shall tinckle out her passing bell. Epigram.

Oh then how good thou art, and not how fair,
With dreadful sights, thou art demanded there.
Oh fie upon the vizard, bait of sin,
Pawn not thy credit in a brothell house,
For how can thou reward of Sion win,
That do thy soul by misdemeanour lose.
Repair unto the temple of that king,
Whose powerful might conserueth every thing.
If I have any thing preuailde with thee,
To change the horror of thy misspent time,
Thank not the Poet, but that deity,
Who is the Author both of me and mine.
For whatsoere I have, I must confess,
Proceeds from his gracious providence.
THE FOVRTH SONET.
Do thou so fondly love, and art not lou'de,
In loving those, who little care for thee?
If that thy fancy have such fruits approu'de*
I scorn to match with such imparity.
For well I know a Prince may love for lust,
Those eyes of thine, and then return to dust.
If Rosamond had ever been an hour,
Ner^ been interred in her bed of earth,
If she had ever kept such vital power.
A^ to smell sweet with her mellistuous breath.
She had been well excusde to choose that state,
Which should be near ecclipsde by mortal date.
But she poor wench did flourish for a while,
Cropped in the primrose of her wantonness,
And she that did the noblest thoughts beguile,
^s now converted into rottenness.
Thus do we find the truth of every thing,
S^nne is a sin even in the noblest king.
For there is naught can be esteemed so,
Depraude, deformde, as to apologize,
A sin actde by a Prince, but hence this woe,
Appears in Poets which do temporize.
I will not sooth a Monarch for his crown,
But I must tell him, sin will throw him down.
Plutarch says well, In M^ralib. ^. lib.
that he that bridle can
His fond affections, is half virtuous,
But he that is wholly firme's an honest man,
His mind remains certain not impious,
Not tossed with tempests of each breathing wind
But as a mirror of a constant mind.
Hard things are pleasant, Quo difficilius, ^o pr^cla^ius.
and those things appear,
To be the best, which be the hardliest won,
Then if repressing of fond lust thou fear,
To be too hard, (...) Gr^c. prou.
yet being once begun.
A better relish it will yield to thee,
Then treasure had in great variety.
One that should pass the Alps, and having done,
Reposing him upon some harbor low,
Considers with what peril he begun,
And numbering them discursiuely in row,
Cannot but joyfully be glad of this,
That he has ended what his heart did wish.
How o^t would he lie groueling on the ground,
And in a descant o^ his sweet repose,
With joyful mirth and pleasure would abound,
To have trans^reted such a Sea of woes.
And by recounting how he erst did creep
Above those cliffes, he would fall fast asleep.
So thou obtaining this so hard to task,
Must needs be joyful in the victory,
To have pure liquor in a purer caske,
Which might redound to minds felicity.
And that same caske, that vessel thou do bear,
Should have a crown of glory, do not fear.
Love not too high estates, for they will despise
Thy poor estate broug^t down to beggary,
Aim at the lower rank (if thou be wise)
For they will acknowledge thy supremacy. (...)

Yet in my min^e there is naught can equal that,
To condescend unto an equal state.
Neither can boast of birth or parentage,
Neither can brag of their too high estate,
But pass their days of woeful pilgrimage,
With like to like, the beggar with his mate*
Irus though he be poor, yet ^ich in this,
Irus a beggar, may a beggar kiss.
THE FIFTH SONET.
THou love for beauty, not for Ve^tue sake,
Fie on thee therefore, that have reasons lore,
And yet can not discern of such a make,
As being virtuous, thou need have no more.
This I have known, and ere approved I find,
None equals her, that has a virtuous mind.
Thou make description of each several part,
Her Iuory brows, and eke her ros^e cheeks,
But how can thou describe frame of her heart,
If all the minutes were turned into weeks.
And well I know there is no joint, no part,
Can be compared unto a sincere heart.
If V^nus had her mole, thou may be sure,
Thine has her blemish, full as foul as she,
If Venus be^utie could not ere endure,
Presume not thine to have ete^nity.
Thine (though as fa^re) yet if she draw a breath,
Stopped, she will tell me, there ensues death.
Was not chaste Lucrece much respected ever,
As fair, as virtuous, second was to none?
Yet ravished by Sextus, she had lever
Die in despair, then living make her moan
Of that abuse young Sextus had atchieude.
Which above all compare her heart had grieude.
Happy was Collatine of such a wife,
So fair, and yet so virtuously inclinde,
With such to live it were an happy life,
Enjoying aye the state of quiet mind,
Yet Collatine unhappy was in this,
He was depriude of such celestial bliss.
Hero I must confess lou'de constantly, (...). Ouil. i^ Epist.

And young Leander was as firm as she,
Though he be drowned, yet he gets memory
Of constant love, loves perpetuity.
And Hero she seeing Leander swim,
Love sick (poor wench) she thought to follow him*
But these were borne in Saturnes golden time,
The like we find not now, for they be rare,
Black Swans, white Moors they live not in this clime
Our Sexes breath a more inconstant air,
And so despairing, I have known of late,
By loving much their love grew desperate.
I will not make particular discourse,
For that seems odious in each curious eye,
I hope a general use will be of force,
To move judicious men to piety.
This I must tell them, beauteous locks of cover
A mishapte soul, a little vernisht over.
Will any man seem such an idle swain,
As to bestow more money on the case,
Then on the instrument it does contain,
More on the mask then odors for the face?
Believe me friend that man cannot be wise,
That is besotted with a pair of eyes.
I have known some more humerous then wise,
Who in fantastic foolish apparitions,
Seeing a woman maskt all but her eyes,
Fell into such distress and such distractions.
That he could stay in no place (foolish Ass)
Till he perceived how fair that Mistress was.
I have known some besotted with a voice,
could not contain themselves, till they did see,
The worthless Author of that warbling noise
Or what sweet Siren that should seem to be.
And having seen her, whom he wished to know,
She seemde a Saint above a friend below. Vid. Hor. in sor. I. pagin.

Fie on that Larua, Nil been cum facias, fac attamen omnia b^lle, vis dicam
quid sis? magnus es Ardelio. Martial.
or that bugbeares face,
That ce^usleth her skin ^o ga^dily,
And puppet-like trippeth in every place,
With nimble pace shows her actiuitie.
And so add^est to ^ond A^d^lios action,
By casting gloves and favors moves faction.
FINIS.
THE SIXTH SONET.
WHere mine heart is, there does my life abide
Mine heart remains with thee, and wherefore then
Should I survive in any place beside,
But where thou dwelst? best harbor to such men,
As dote on thy affection, f^iend to such
As are distre^^ by loving ou^rmuch.
Can I describe with characters of worth,
Those worthy parts of thine so amorous?
Fair in thy habit, borne of royal birth,
Blessed ere be they that are thought graci^us
In the fair aspect of that shining eye,
On whose bright luster all things do rely.
When statues are erected to adore
Those persons, which the statues represented,
Why should not I do this for thee and more,
With whom my mind in one ha^h still con^ented,
Honor of women fair beyond compare
The earth were blessed, if many suc^ there were.
Statues I will erect to honor thee,
And every day will resort unto them,
And pass the morn with joyful harmony,
Whilst I do consecrate my vows unto them.
And having talked enough I will betake,
My self to kiss thy picture for thy sake.
For if Pigmalion doted so on shrines?
Why should not (...) that have a fairer love
Then ere Pigmalion had? whose love combines
Mine heart in thrall, that it can nere remove,
For the strait durance which she has possessed
In her, by whom my mind is ever blessed.
If fond Protago^as did so conceive
Of senseless stones, that could not move nor feel
For to enjoy an happiness, Arist. in Phys.
I have
More happiness then stones, their haps conceal.
I clad in bliss which ever will endure,
A strong foundation, and munition sure.
They cannot show the fruits of their repose,
But I most happy, for I know mine hap,
They scarce discern from whenc their fortune flows
But I perceive me happy in her lap.
My Erycma does relieve my sheep,
Whilst quietly I lie me down and sleep.
Under a myrtle shade or Iuie bush,
Whilst I make covert to my wearied head,
I am delighted with the sweet tun'de Thrash,
Whilst she upon the Iuie berries feeds.
And being thus anointed with full pleasure,
I hoord me heaps of gold, and Indian treasure.
This gold is not such treasure as we read, Vid. Aul. Gell. in noct. Atticis.

That Q. Cepio Consul took away
From the Tolosan Temple, which did breed
Destruction to all them receiude that pray.
Nor its no Seian horse by which we find,
Be signifide calamities of mind.
This is as pleasant and as full of mirth,
As the Corbona of the Jewish Temple,
But far more gracious: its not got by stelth,
For that were proeme to a worse example.
These gifts, this gem prince Aquiloes excels, Vid. C^ron. aug.

For these be pearls, his were cockle shells.
I cannot speak enough, there for to blame,
To praise in part, and not commend in all,
But its a praise enough, to tell thy name.
Fair Erycina gyrt with Hymen's pall.
And all the Nymphs with chaplets cropped for thee
Shall deck the nuptial triumphs gorgiously.
Feign would I ^ee the day* each hour a year,
Each minute is an hour, till I enjoy,
That beauteous face of (...), when wilt appear
To relish ^orepast sorrow and annoy?
Where couching low in beds of Iuorie.
Well bandie kisses with loves harmony.
I Chec^e my self that (...) should so delaie,
The vernant spring time of our happiness,
Fearing least whilst our times do^ pass away,
Pale death engripe my bones with wretchedness.
Let us not put off time, but use our time,
And let thy sacred vow confirm the mine.
Sweet upon better and more ripe advice,
Let me appoint a time of greater have,
Our love will grow chil-cold, if we be nice
And will nor love, till fruit of love be past,
What comfort can thou have, or what delight,
To hate the day, and yet to love the night.
The day and sunshine of my life is spent,
And now the nightshade of my life draws on,
What comfort can thou have, or what content
In winter nights (poor soul) to lie alone?
And yet it better is to lie alone,
Then lie with him, whose vital heat is gone.
If ere the spring time of my younger grouth,
Could move thy nimble arms to compass me,
If ere the prelude of my flowrie youth,
Could be a means for to solicit thee?
Take time while time is let not joys berest thee,
Some wanton bloomes at lest of youth are left me.
And though I have not such per^ection in me,
For many furrows in mine aged brow,
Yet these same furrows may experience show thee
What wanton youth in time could never show.
Those many winters that have made me old*
Shall learn thee more then parents ever told.
Do not contemn me for my hoary locks,
For they are beauteous, full of comeliness,
And as the Goats that feed upon the rocks,
Whose beard do much adorn their raggedness.
This beard, thou see or^clad with hoary hair,
Is com^ly (love) though not so passing fair.
How well seems hoary frost upon green grass? Cana prima. etc.

Flowers interlaid with winters gabard me,
Naught can endure for aye that ever was,
Clouds ouercast those beams which erst did shine.
Green graffe with hoary frost do well agree,
So would these hoary locks of mine with thee.
But thou do fear I have an old man's mind,
I will be jealous of thy beauty dear,
Do not think so, thou shall more honor find,
In these same Arms of mine, thou needst not fear
I will be constant, for no jealous thought
Shall ere persuade my mind that thou art naught.
I Will leave thee (Dear) I hope thou will conceive,
A better satisfaction of my love,
Or else be sure thy frown shall dig my grave,
Which will bear record in the court above.
How being loved, yet would not love again,
Have causde my Ghost revived to complain.
FINIS.
THE SEVENTH SONET.
THou love me but for want of other loves,
And show affection, not for any worth,
Thou see in me, but in that thou approues
A wanton smile in me, a strain of mirth.
I should receive thy love more willingly.
If thou approude me for my constancy.
Thou shall not find me wavering or unkind,
But though distressde with want and penury,
More constant thoughts in me thou ere shall find,
Then in each wavering bubbles vanity,
I will remain as firm, my dear to thee,
As to Ulysses was Penelope.
Thou shall not doubt of my distrust in love,
For I approve no man so much as thee,
And as the Turtle with her Turtle Dove,
So thou shall find the like equality.
Believe me dear, if ever love was true,
Confirmd it shall be in my loving you.
I cannot praise possessions, I have none,
Yet in possessing me, yo ^ may enjoy,
As great revenues, dear, as any one,
Then be not curious in your choice, nor coye,
I am demure full fraught of modesty,
And its a Jewel worth a Monarchy.
Be not the inward gifts the richest treasure?
Why should thou then dote so on excrement,
A modest wife affords continual p^ea^ure.
Ado^nd with grace of Angels ornaments.
There Is naught so precious as a modest heart,
For if thou be distressed, she will bear a part.
Do thou esteem gold more then virtuous minds,
And art besotted more with worldly trash,
Then honest education? which combines
In awful band men vnaduisde and rash.
I am but poor indeed* and yet what then
Shall poor estates be destitu^e of men?
I can use honest l^bours and obtain
A daily fruit out of mine homely labor,
Reaping of honest travail, honest gain,
Purchased by loves respect and general favor*
I will not win rewards for lu^re sake
My soul a brothell house of sin to make.
Homely yet safely, I regard my state,
I love to l^ue remote, not aimed at,
I Will be no ^nare unto the po^entate,
I love to l^ue demure not pointed at.
With who come here ^ a Brothellhouse of sin,
Who by dishonest means does profit win.
I am not prostitute to slavish thoughts,
I work my night works ^ull industriously.
And hauin^ done that which my purpose sought,
I lie me down to sleep contentedly.
I aim not at the Palace, but remain*
No deerer to the Prince, then to the swain.
Fie on that woman who with painted face,
Lies open to the su^e of every man,
That painted visard couers little grace,
Though it be fair without, its pale and wan.
Void of all f^uour, grace and exce^lence,
Pitching her tent for wantons residence.
I am no cover for a puppet play,
I have no cerusse in mine Iuory box,
In dr^ssing me I spend not all the day,
I n^uer learnd to phrizle spangled locks.
What I can do my parents first did tell me,
(Proud hour) I little care if thou excel me.
Thus have I made description of my beauty,
Not passing fair, well fauorde though I be,
Protesting to thy love entirest duty,
If thou by Hymen's rites shall marry me.
Thus hoping well, I in the mean time rest,
Vowing by heau^ns, that I have loved thee best.
FINIS.

