A DIRECTION for the weaker sort of Christians, showing in what manner they
ought to fit and prepare themselves to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: with a short form of Trial or Examination
annexed. Grounded upon 1. Cor. 11. 23. -- 30. By W.B.

Whereunto is adioined a very profitable treatise of the same argument, by way
of question and answer, written by another.

MATTHEW. 22.12. Friend, how came thou in hither, and have not on a wedding
garment?

London, Printed by W. Hall for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bul-head. 1609.

TO THE Virtuous and worthy Lady, GRACE DARCY.
Madam,
THose notes which were lately writ forth for your private use, I am now
emboldened to make more common; not for any conceited worth in them, but to
avoid the trouble of yielding satisfaction to other good friends that desire
and expect the like office from me. I am sure herein I shall hurt none, except
my self; nor so much as offend any, excepting those for whose use I never
intended the publishing hereof.

Your Ladyships favorable acceptance of them in private, has made them thus
bold to come forth in public, and to grace themselves with the profession of
your favor, which is their greatest ornament.

I hope that you which have given them some entertainment in your closet, will
not pass by them as unknown, now they present themselves unto you in the
street: and the rather for that they come not alone, but accompanied and
assisted with a most profitable Treatise of the same Argument, written long
since by one whom your Ladyship reuerenceth, and whose person and labors in
the work of Christ Jesus are much esteemed of the people of God. I shall not
need to admonish you of the use of either of these Treatises: Themselves, how
little soever, are in that pointable to speak for themselves. Only take heed
(good Madam) lest in their withdrawing of you from the damnable sin of
profaning this holy Sacrament, you be not by misconstruction brought unto the
wicked and superstitious adoration thereof.

Thus in haste, unfeignedly praying the Lord more and more to bless the worthy
Knight your husband, and your self, and from heaven to reward those many
favors received from you both, I humbly take leave. Ian. 2. 1608.

Your Ladyships much bounden, W.B.

THE CONTENTS of the Direction following: framed according to the Apostles own
method.
THe first part declares what a dangerous sin it is to profane the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper.

1. By laying down the principal doctrine of the Sacrament.

2. By inferring and concluding from the said doctrine, the greatness and
grieuousnesse of the sin aforesaid.

The doctrine of the Sacrament consists in six points.

The first concerns the authority by which it was brought into the Church.
page 6 The second concerns the first Instituto^ and Administer of it. pa. 14.
The third concerns the circumstance of time wherein it was instituted. page
17 The fourth concerns the parts of the Sacraments. page 21 The fifth
concerns the consecration thereof. page 35 The sixth concerns the maine and
general end thereof. page 38
The inference and conclusion from the aforesaid doctrine, is; That those which
shall receive such a mystery unworthily, are guilty of the body and blood of
Christ.

Wherein is showed, First, what it is to receive unworthily, page 50 Secondly*
what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, page 54 Thirdly, why
such as receive unworthily, are guilty of the body and blood of Christ. page
56
THe second part shows, By what means the danger of the former sin may be
avoided.

The means is a due trial and examination of our selves before we receive.

For the better understanding whereof, five points are handled in order, so
far forth only all of them (excepting the second) as the Apostle gives
occasion.

1. What manner of trial it is which is here required. page 71 2. Wherein
particularly this trial consists. page 75 3 The duties in and after this
trial. page 109 4. The persons that are to make this trial. page 115 5. The
special motive unto this trial. page 126
THE form of trial explaineth these three things: 1. The excellency of the
person and merits of Jesus Christ, who has ordained the receiving of this
Sacrament. page 133 2 The special end why Christ Jesus did ordain the same.
page 136 3 The special benefit that comes to the worthy receiver thereby.


Faults escaped.
Page 9. lin. 16. For Ordinance, read Ordinances. p. 16. l. 2. for once, read
only. p 72. l. 4. add, For the word here v^ed implies as much. p. 86. l. 16.
That there is an heaven. p. 87. l. 8. for might, read may.

A direction for the weaker sort of Christians, showing how they may fit and
prepare themselves to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ.
Grounded upon 1. Cor. 11.23.33.
The first part of preparation. 1. Cor. 11.
23 For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have delivered unto you,
to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was betrayed, took bread.

24 And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take ye, eat ye,
this is my Body, which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me.

25 After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood: this do, as often as ye drink it
in remembrance of me.

26 For as often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come.

27 Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.


The first part of Preparation.
THe Church of Corinth, by reason of some disorders crept into their
assemblies, had often times profaned the holy Supper of the Lord. The Apostle
Paul in this Scripture endeavors to reform this sin in them. And this he
does, The mai^ parts of the Text
1. By declaring unto them what a dangerous sin it is to profane this
Sacrament, ver. 23. 2. By teaching them the special means by which the sin
aforesaid may be avoided, verse 28.33. Unto these two heads may be reduced
whatsoever is necessary for the due preparing of a Christian to the worthy
receiving of this Sacrament.

For the better manifesting of the first point, The first point, consisting of
two branches.
the Apostle first lays down the principal Doctrine of the Sacrament, verse
23.27. Secondly, from the doctrine he infers and concludes what a great and
grievous sin all they do commit which profane this Sacrament. The first
branch contains six points of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.
And in the first place he lays down six points of doctrine concerning this
Sacrament, every one of them severally, and all of them jointly, tending to
discover the great and fearful sin that all such run into, which pollute
these high and holy mysteries; therein inci^ing and provoking all true hearted
Christians to a holy and reverend regard, and due use of them, whenever they
be called thereunto.

In this order and course which the Apostle here observes, we may learn by
the way these short instructions:

1. That the ignorance or want of due consideration of the doctrine concerning
this Sacrament is one maine and principal cause, that so many do contemn and
profane the same.

2. That there is no hope or possibility, that gross ignorant persons, who
know not the doctrine of this Sacrament, (so long as they continue ignorant
thereof) should ever with due reverence receive the same. And therefore so often
as in their ignorance they go about to be made partaker thereof, they run
themselves and their souls upon a most dangerous rock: So that the first
means for a Christian to become a worthy and reverend partaker of this
Sacrament, is to be grounded in the doctrine and knowledge thereof. Ignorance
indeed well may be the mother of Popish devotion, but it is the very stepdame
of all true Christian piety, and (as it appears by the Apostles proceedings
in this present matter) the very mother of all profaneness, and irreligious
impieties in the Church of God.

The first point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.
The first point of doctrine is concerning the authority and commission by which
Paul brought this Sacrament into the Church: the sum and effect whereof is
this: That this Sacrament is no humane Tradition, brought into the Church upon
his own head, and by his own mere will and pleasure, but an ordinance of
Christ, received by Tradition from him. For so he says: I have received of
the Lord that which I also have delivered unto you. As though he should more
fully and plainly have said, If this Sacrament had been a devise of mine own
brain, or a Tradition having no other ground than mine own will and pleasure,
then might you have had some colorable excuse for your light account and
profanation of it: but I delivering this ordinance unto you by express warrant
and commission from Christ Jesus himself, the sole soueraign head of the
Church, you ought with more reverence and regard to have received the same,
than lately you have done.

The lessons from hence to further our preparation to the due receiving of this
Sacrament, are these:

1 That it is no small sin to use any ordinance of Jesus Christ, whatsoever,
profanely or irreuerently: such cannot be freed from sin, as shall show
contempt but unto the ordinances of men, though they require but things
indifferent: much less can they which shall show contempt to the ordinances of
Christ Jesus himself, who never instituted any thing which is not exceeding
good, and necessary to to be done; yea, whose very ordaining of a thing makes
it good, necessary, and profitable, though before it was indifferent, and
unprofitable, yea evil and hurtful. For this cannot but argue a wonderful
base and light estimation of Christ, and of his wisdom, to debase, by rude and
vnreuerent behavior, any order or constitution of his: And yet how ordinary a
thing is it for most men that are professed Christians, to make most base and
vile account, even no better than a may game, of the main and principal
ordinance of Christ? What palpable contempt of the word read and preached, of
prayer, of the Sacraments, of the Sabbath, etc. do most men show? How rudely,
carelessly, and irreverently, do they use to behave themselves, even in the
solemnest and most public worship and service of God; yea often times not
without apparent scorn and disdain of the same? What should we judge of this?
but that such either think that Christ himself is a mockery, or at the least,
that he has showed great want of wisdom, in requiring so base and
contemptible a service, such as is not fit for wise men to perform, but in
jest or scorn, or (at the best) but as if they were playing some counterfeit
part upon a stage.

2 A special means to prevent this sin, in the receiving of this Sacrament,
is to learn and to believe, that in receiving the same, we do not conform to
the private humors, conceits, and pleasures of men, no not of Peter or Paul, of
Magistrates or Ministers, of Churches or Fathers; but to the express Will and
Commandment of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. This is in the nature of
man, that if he be imperiously commanded any thing by an inferior and one
that has no authority to command, though the thing commanded be in it self
commodious, praise worthy, or honorable, yet he either will refuse to do it,
or if he do it, it shall be not without some scorn and contempt, and in a
kind of mockery: But if one in authority, whom he reuerenceth and honors,
and whom he knows has power to command, do require any thing, he will be
ready (except he be very leaud and impious) to yield obedience in fear and
reverence, albeit the action in it self be light and unprofitable, yea base
and servile, yea troublesome and hurtful unto him. Except therefore we should
be so impious, as to hold, that Christ Jesus has either no power to require
this duty at our hand, or so impudent, as to defend, that he does nowhere
require it of us, or so blasphemous, as to say he wanted wisdom in requiring
it of us, it must needs be yielded unto, that this sacrament ought with all
due reverence to be received, which is inioined by so awful and sovereign a
power, be the action it self in it self never so mean. When therefore men
come so rudely and irreverently to these holy Rites, it is a sign, that they
never think of that high and sacred authority that has ordained them. This
then is and ought to be the maine foundation of all true reverence, not only
toward this, but al other parts of Gods worship and service, That Christ Jesus
requires this Service at our hands. Would then the Ministers and servant of
Jesus Christ, that are by their special office to dispense the ordinances of
Christ, have their ministry truly reverenced of the saints and people of God,
and not contemned and despised? Let them make it appear, as Paul does here,
that they minister no other word or Sacraments, prescribe no other worship,
preach no other Gospel, bind men's consciences with no other laws, allure
them with no other promises, fear them with no other threatenings, than such as
they have received from Christ himself.

The second point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.
The second point of doctrine propounded by the Apostle, is concerning the first
Institutor and Administer of this Sacrament. The effect whereof is this; That
Christ Jesus in his own person did institute, yea and first of all with his
own hand administer this Sacrament. For it follows in these words, That the
Lord Jesus, the night that he was betrayed, took bread, etc. As though he
should say, If but my self, or any other Apostle, or any person inferior to
an Apostle, had instituted this Sacrament, by warrant and commission from
Christ, there had been therein cause enough to move any Christian heart to a
reverent receiving and using thereof: but when Christ Jesus himself, in his
own person, has immediately instituted it, yea and was himself a Minister of
it, yea the first Administer of it, what a fearful judgment are they guilty
of, that shall profane and disgrace that which Christ himself, in his own
person, so exceedingly graced and honored?

This doctrine also serves as a singular motive to stir up all the faithful
to a most careful respect and regard of this mystery. For first those
ordinances which Christ himself has expressly and in a special manner
instituted, ought with special reverence to be conformed unto. The services
which are required by the laws of man, framed once by consequence from the
word, or but according to the general rules thereof, are in a holy and
religious manner to be performed. But such a service as Christ himself shall
immediately and so expressly institute, not trusting to the discourse and wit of
man to appoint the same, and which himself did most religiously in his own
person perform, must needs deserve the highest respect and reverence, and must
needs argue great impiety in them that shall contemptuously, or but carelessly
perform the same. 2. In that himself did first not only institute, but
administer it; it teaches us, that we should always receive it from the
hands of Christ's Ministers, even as it were from the hands of Christ himself,
who, though not bodily, yet is as spiritually and effectually present now, as
at the first administration thereof.

The third point of doctrine concerns the circumstance of time, The third
point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.
that Christ in his special wisdom made choice of to institute this Sacrament
in, which was the night in which he was betrayed. This also serves to move
and persuade to a due and reverent respect of this ordinance.

For first, that could not but proceed from the infinite love of Christ, which
at this time he instituted for his Church, when he was preparing himself to
the greatest work of love that ever was showed, even to lay down his life for
it. The legacies bequeathed by friends upon their death beds, use much to be
esteemed, and where they are contemned, there the love of the giver is despised
and disgraced. If therefore the love of Christ Jesus, when he was ready to lay
down his life for us, be dear and precious unto us, this Sacrament, which at
that very time was instituted by him, and, as a legacy, bequeathed unto us
must needs be dear and precious unto us.

2. This was no time for Christ to spend in instituting needless and
unnecessary matters. The vainest men that are, or ever were, except they be
desperately wicked, or through some disease distempered in their brain, do
not use at such a time to busy themselves about vanities and needless
matters, but their thoughts use to be taken up with the most serious and
weightiest affairs, such as most necessarily concern themselves and their
friends: Far be it therefore from us, that we should think, that our
Savior at this time should find nothing else to do, but to trouble his
Church with idle and frivolous obseruances. Yea, if men at such times as this
is, how miserable soever, do use to bestow the best things they have upon them
they most love, we must either think that our Savior was very poor, or very
miserable, or else we must hold, that this Sacrament, which at this time he
bequeathed unto all his Churches, is of some special price, value, and use
unto the same, if it be received as it ought to be.

Thirdly, seeing that Christ at this time was entering upon the greatest, most
painful and difficult work that ever was or shall be performed, even the
salvation of sinners, the zeal whereof had now, more than ever, eaten him up,
and had captiuated all the thoughts and affections of his soul, so that it
(...) not possible for him (at this time) to think of any thing else, but what
might further the work of our redemption, and the salvation of our souls; we
must needs conclude, that this Sacrament being duly (according to Christ's
intent) administered and received, must needs tend, after a very special
manner, to the furtherance of our salvation, and to make the work of his
redemption effectual unto us; so that to set light by this Sacrament, is to
despise the work of redemption, and the salvation of our souls.

The fourth point of doctrine is concerning the parts of this Sacrament, The 4.
point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.
which before we can well understand, something is to be premised of a
Sacrament in general, whereof briefly:

This word [ Sacrament] was wont to signify that solemn oath which the
soldiers of Rome used to take, whereby they bound themselves to perform
faithful service to their Emperor in his wars, from whence the Latin
Divines have borrowed it, and now, by long custom, it is become in these
Western Churches, a proper name, whereby those outward badges and ensigns of
Christianity, (vz. Baptism and the Lords Supper) are called; because that
Christians, in the due receiving of them, do after a special manner bind
themselves, even as it were by a solemn vow and oath, to serve their Lord and
Master Jesus Christ, even as the soldiers of Rome did, by solemn oath, bind
themselves to serve their Emperors and Commanders in the war.

More particularly, we understand by Sacraments those mystical Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, which Christ has ordained for the setting forth and
confirming of the Covenant of grace.

Mystical Rites and Ceremonies are certain outward and bodily signs, which,
after a secret and artificial manner, shadow and represent things spiritual
and internal: so that in every Sacrament there are these two things to be
considered. 1. The outward bodily sign. 2. The spiritual matter, that is
mystically shadowed by the sign, and yet, after a sort, hidden and locked up
in the same.

The Apostle, in setting down the parts of this Sacrament, expresses both
these points.

1. The outward signs which Christ has instituted, are in themselves very
common, ordinary, and usual matters, as breaking and eating of Bread, and
drinking of Wine. Wine is not expressed here: but in Mat. 26. and Mar. 14. the
fruit of the Vine is expressly mentioned by our Savior Christ, immediately
after the institution.

These signs may be reduced to two heads: as 1. Unto certain outward
elements: 2. Unto certain mystical actions in and about the elements.

The elements are Bread and Wine: the actions are breaking and eating of the
bread, and drinking of the Wine. These are all the mystical signs which are
expressly mentioned in this place of Scripture, and in the Evangelists that
write of the institution of this Sacrament; and therefore I will not stand upon
any other, though I do not deny but there are other particular actions
performed in and about these elements, which of the soundest Divines are, and
rightly may, in some sense, by analogy, be counted Sacramental.

These signs considered nakedly in and by themselves, are not of any great
force to stir up any great reverence to the receiving of them, because there
is no one thing in the world more ordinary than eating and drinking; and yet
there is no just cause why, in regard of them, we should despise and contemn
the Sacrament, they being in themselves things both necessary, and pleasant,
and no ways base and contemptible. If Christ Jesus should have required of us
any light and senseless action, or which should have been bitter and
loathsome, or burdensome unto us, yet we ought, for his sake that requires it,
to yield reverent respect unto it: much more when he requires that which in it
self is both necessary, profitable, and pleasant, as eating of bread and
drinking of wine are. It had beecommed us in all humility, (if so it had
pleased him to ordain) even to have eaten Acornes, and husks, and swines meat,
such as the prodigal son was forced to eat of; and to have drunk vinegar
mingled with gall, such as Christ himself, for our sakes, tasted of: much more
will it beseem us, with all due reverence and honor, to eat bread, and drink
wine, upon Christ's will and pleasure, which is ever most holy and blessed. But
to let pass the outward signs in themselves, and to come to the mystery in
them, and to consider the one with the other, we shall then see great force in
the parts of the Sacrament, to stir up in us a special reverence in the
receiving of it. There are many things of no honor in themselves, that in
regard of some special use that they are applied unto, are honorable; as the
white wand carried before Judges, the Cap of Maintenance worn before the Lord
Mayor, the Sword borne before the King, etc. which in regard of some special
mystery and meaning that is hidden in them, are matters of special grace and
honor; so though these outward signs be not in themselves honorable, yet in
regard of the mystery that is in them, they both bring honor to Christ, and
are honorable to the vser.

The very circumstance of time wherein our Savior did administer it, shows
us, that this bread and wine, this eating and drinking, has in this place a
more than ordinary use or end. We eat bread commonly to satisfy hunger, and
to feed and nourish our bodies; and we drink wine to quench our thirst, and
to revive and refresh our heavy spirits: but this is not the proper end of the
eating of this bread, or of the drinking of this wine. For then Christ would
never have administered it immediately after supper, and that a festiu^ll supper,
when they that were to receive it, were full of bread and wine before. And
therefore in the receiving of this Sacrament, we must not so much look (as
we do in other eatings and drinkings) to satisfy our hunger, to fill our
bellies, and to quench our thirsts; but in this eating and drinking, we must
look to satisfy and fill our (...) with some heavenly and spiritual matters,
shadowed in these outward signs, and conveyed unto our souls in the due
receiving of them.

The mysteries then contained under these signs, and expressed by them, are
the greatest that can be imagined, even the great and high mystery of our
redemption and salvation by Jesus Christ; our faith and belief whereof, we do
profess in the use of them, and the fruit whereof is sealed and confirmed unto
us in the due receiving of them.

The breaking of the bread signifies, in a mystery, the breaking of Christ's
body, that is, all the unspeakable torments that he suffered in his own p^^son
for our sins, which were greater than if his living body had been rent and
torn into a thousand pieces, and all his bones broken and beaten to dust and
powder, Heb. 5.7. Esai 53.16.11. Matthew. 27.46.

The eating of the bread thus broken, and the drinking of this wine, signifies
the special fruit that comes unto all believers, by the passion and
sufferings of Jesus Christ. For Christ says; This Bread is my Body which was
broken for you: And this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. Or as he
speaks more plainly, Matt. 26.28. is my Blood in the New Testament that was
shed for many for the remission of their sins. And therefore he bids them
take and eat the one, and drink the other; as though he should more plainly
say unto them: This bread, so broken as you see, shall be a sign unto you,
and unto all them that believe in my name, of that which I have suffered in my
flesh for you. The wine in this Cup shall be a sign even of the blood that
in my Sacrifice upon the cross was shed for you, to procure the pardon and
remission of your sins, and of all their sins that shall beeleeue in me,
which is not the blood of Oxen and sheep, such as were offered in the Old
Testament, but is in very deed the blood of God and man, whereby the new
Testament is sealed and ratified, which offreth salvation unto al which shall
believe in me, and in the merits of this my blood: Therefore take ye and eat
ye this mystical bread, and drink this holy wine; and therein let it be a
pledge unto you and to all the faithful that shall in like manner receive the
same, that the fruit of that which is shadowed thereby, belongs unto you; so
that as verily as you eat this bread, and drink this wine with your bodily
mouths, so verily shall your souls taste of, and, as it were, eat and drink
of the fruits of my death and passion, even the remission of sins, and life
everlasting.

Is not this Sacrament then a mystery to be trembled at and adored? Is it not
a great indignity, that men should brutishly, without all preparation, come
unto the same, as an horse to the manger, or a swine to the trough? If it were
but a bare and simple eating of bread and drinking of wine for bodily
necessity or pleasure, we ought not like beasts, without any show of
reverence, seize upon them; but ought in the receiving of them, in some degree,
lift up our hearts to God for them: Much more when there is such an heavenly
use of these creatures, over and besides that natural and common use, which
cannot be separated from them. It were a great indignity offered to the work
of our redemption, but occasionally to speak or think of it without due
reverence: but to deny reverence and honor unto it then when under such a
special mystery it is presented unto us, and when we are thereby called to a
special consideration of it; yea wherein it is of purpose represented to our
senses, that we might the better behold it, and be stirred up to praise and
magnify God for it: and which is more, when in a reverend use of this mystery
we may spiritually partake even of all heavenly things that are shadowed by
it, what a sin must this needs be, irreverently to rush upon these holy
Ri^es? And what a forcible argument must it be, to stir us up to a worthy
receiving of this Sacrament?

The fifth point of doctrine is concerning the consecration of this Sacrament,
The fifth point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.
set down in these words: And when he had given thanks, he brake it. This
consecration was a special dedication of the elements in this Sacrament unto
this mystical and holy use, by prayer, and invocation upon the name of God,
and specially by thanksgiving: wherein this thanksgiving specially consisted, is
not revealed; most probable it is, that it was principally for our sake, to
wit, for the great fruit of this Sacrament, that should redound unto all the
worthy receivers thereof.

This shows, that special thanks are due unto GOD from us for this
Sacrament: For if Christ found cause to thank God for it, much more cause have
we, who reap all the fruit and benefit of it. And if the worthiness of this
Sacrament did draw thanks from Christ, it may challenge a worthy and reverend
acceptance of us; yea it much more concerns us to administer and receive the
same with prayer and thanksgiving. And it is great profaneness for us to
press irreverently upon that which Christ himself would not enter upon,
without special prayer; whereby he sufficiently declares, that this
Sacrament is a special holy Ordinance, and therefore to be used holily, and
not in a profane and vnreuerent manner. Jf Christ had but simply ordained it
without any such special thanksgiving or prayer, it had been our duty
notwithstanding, to receive it with all due reverence: But when he shall in
this manner, by special prayer, institute and administer it, it must needs be
great impiety for us to despise and contemn it, and not to make an high
account and reckoning of it.

The Evangelist Matthew says, He blessed the bread: i. By prayer and
thanksgiving obtained a special blessing from God upon it. For that which
Balac said of Balaam may be more truly said of Christ, Number. 22.6.
That which he blesses, is blessed; and that which he curses, is cursed: So
that this is a blessed Sacrament, which Christ Jesus, with his own mouth, has
after such a special manner blessed: And the more he has blessed it, the
more it will be a means of blessing to the worthy receiver of it; and the
more blessed it is of it self, the greater curse will it bring upon the
profane and vnreuerent abuser thereof.

(...) sixth (...) of ^^ctrine (...) the (...).
The sixth and last point of doctrine is concerning the maine and most general
ends of this Sacrament, which are two; the first, respecting our selves: the
second, others. That respecting our selves, is in these words; This do ye in
remembrance of me: So that we are to receive this Sacrament to this end and
purpose, that in and by it we might be stirred up in a special manner to
remember, and in remembering to meditate of Christ, and of his infinite love and
mercy toward us, in the great work of our Redemption, which is shadowed and
set forth by this Sacrament: When our special friends, upon their departure
^^om us, bestow upon us a token of remembrance, they do it to this end, that so
often as we look upon the same, or use it, we should call to mind the many
loves they have showed unto us: And this is written in our nature, that when an
occasion only is offered unto us of remembering a friend departed from us, we
use to show a special affection. Hence it is, that ignorant and superstitious
persons will so heartily, upon every occasion of remembrance, pray the Lord to
have mercy of their souls that are departed this life, whom they love and have
been beholding unto. But when they behold a special memorial of them in some
token of their love, which brings to their mind some ex^^aordinarie favors,
then they use to be extraordinarily affected with the remembrance thereof; yea,
and they use to show part of that love, affection, and honor, to the token and
memorial it self, which they bear to the person. They will carefully lay it
up in their de^kes and cabinets: They will (it may be) sometimes kiss it, and
do a kind of honor unto it: So much do we use to be affected with any thing
that brings into our mind the loves and favors of a deceased friend. And
therefore seeing this Sacrament that was not only left unto us by the greatest
friend that ever we had, but left of purpose to be a remembrance and a pledge
unto us, of the greatest love that ever was showed to mortal creatures, and
which has the very effects and fruits of the love written upon it, nay
engraven in it, yea in some sort contained in it; is it a thing credible, that
any that love and believe in Christ Jesus, should profane and lightly regard
this Sacrament? But here by the way we may observe how strangely forgetful
even those that are faithful, be of the great and unspeakable love of Christ,
that they stand in need of such a remembrance: for unto them is this Sacrament
given, as a help to bring to their minds the consideration of this love. Is
it possible that a man should forget the love of such a Lord and Master, that
has with a great price of money redeemed him from being a perpetual
Gally-slaue, yea who for to redeem him, has made himself a slave, yea has
purchased his servants liberty with his own death, and has bestowed upon him
all the honors and dignities that himself had, and even all that himself
possessed? Were it not wonderful that he should need a special remembrance
when he can no ways cast his eyes, but he shall behold the effects of his
Lords love? Would not one think that he should rather need some means to
make him forget this love, and to put it out of his head, rather than to bring
it unto his remembrance? This is the state and condition of all Christians;
though Christ Jesus has done a thousand times more for us than is possible for
one man to do for an other, though whatsoever we have, we have it by his
mercy and love, our souls, our bodies, our senses, our wit, our beauty, our
wealth, our life; so that we are compassed about with memorials of his
kindness: and we cannot see, feel, hear, taste, or smell any thing, but it
may put us in mind of his love, yea of his death and passion, by which the
free use of these things have been purchased unto us: yet for all this, we
stand in need, you see, of special remembrances; yea and yet (O sinful
wretches that we are!) we are ready to profane these special remembrances;
yea, and which exceeds all wonder, are prone, even in the midst of them, most
of all to forget the love of Christ, and to dishonor him.

The end that respects others, is The showing forth of Christ's death until
he come: i. By eating this bread, and drinking this wine, men shall testify
and profess, yea after a sort preach unto others, even unto the worlds end,
the mystery of the Gospel, the sum and substance whereof consists in the
death of Christ, and the fruits that flow therefrom, shadowed and represented
in this Sacrament; so that by our due receiving of this Sacrament, we do, as
it were, lead others by the hand into the garden in Gethsemane, and show them
Christ Jesus sweating water and blood; Judas traitorously kissing and betraying
him, and the soldiers thereupon binding and leading him to judgment; we lead
them to Caiaphas Hall, and Pilates Throne, to show them Christ most wickedly
and unjustly condemned, buffeted and spit upon, scourged and crowned with
thorns; we lead them to Mount Caluarie, and show them how he was nailed on
the Cross, how he was forced to drink vinegar mingled with gall, how he was
pierced with a spear, how with most bitter cries he said, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? And all this for our sakes, that he might procure the
forgiveness of our sins, and everlasting salvation. Can we in this mystery
see and behold all this with the eyes of faith? Can we, after a sort, show them
and point them unto others? And shall we therewith be no whit affected in our
own souls? Shall we come unto this Sacrament as blocks and stocks, without
any affection, as unto a vain, idle, and frivolous matter?

By this which has been said, you may see how forcible this doctrine of the
Apostle, concerning the Sacrament, is, to stir up al Christians to the worthy
receiving of the same: But it may be objected, that the Apostles labor
herein seems needless, and to no purpose, seeing the Church of Corinth could
not be ignorant of any of these points, which the Apostle has taught
concerning this Sacrament: It is true indeed, they could not be ignorant of any
of these matters: But what then? Was Paul's doctrine therefore needless and in
vain? No verily; but in this practice of Paul we are taught what a perpetual
use there is of teaching in the Church of Christ, when the Ministers must be
feign to instruct the people of God not only in that which they are ignorant
of, but often call unto their mind and consideration that which they know
already, 2. Pet. 1.12.13.
upon such particular occasions as they are to make special use thereof: And
verily, though men could say all the Scriptures by heart, though they could
understand every hard and difficult place of Scripture, though they knew all
the grounds and principles of the Christian faith, though they were able to
answer all oppositions against any divine truth in the word; yet for all this,
there would be a use of reading and preaching of the word of God in the
Church. For if our knowledge be not stirred up in us, if we be not often put
in mind of it, if we be not taught how to apply it unto these and these
particular cases, it will be as it were dead in us, and most out of our head
when we should most use it: For so was the knowledge of this Sacrament in the
Church of Corinth, until the Apostle endeavored to revive it by this Epistle;
and so it will be with any part of divine knowledge whatsoever, if there shall
be no means in the Church often to stir up the same in us, and to call us to
the true use and practice of it.

Wherefore, whosoever shall eat]

Hitherto the Apostle has laid down the doctrine of the Sacrament: now from
the said doctrine he infers and concludes, what a fearful sin all these
are guilty of, that do not receive this Sacrament in that holy manner which
they ought to do. Whosoever therefore (says the Apostle, ver. 27.) shall eat
this Bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord. For the better understanding of this conclusion,
we must consider in order these three points: 1. What it is in this place to
eat and drink unworthily. 2. What it is to be guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. 3. Why such as eat and drink unworthily, are guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord.


1. For the first, we must know, that to receive this Sacrament unworthily,
What it is to eat and drink unworthily.
is to receive the outward elements thereof, without due reverence and
respect, either of the mystery that is contained in them, or of the end why
they were ordained, or of the person by whose authority they were appointed.
The ordinary and most common causes of this unworthy receiving, are these:

1. Ignorance, when men will presume to partake of these mysteries, before they
understand stand and have learned, in any reasonable sort, the true meaning and
use of them; such must needs receive* hand over head, they know not and care
not what.

2. Want of special faith, when a man partakes of the outward elements of this
Sacrament, and yet is not persuaded, nor does believe, or expect, that any such
special fruit or benefit, as is promised in the word, shall redound unto him by
the same.

3. Superstition, when one comes unto this Sacrament in a fond conceit and
imagination, that he shall receive other manner of blessings and benefits by
it, than is revealed or promised by the word, or intended by Christ.

4. Profaneness or sensuality, which is when a man does so satiate and
pamper his soul and body with the delights and pleasures of the world and the
flesh, that he cannot, nor cares not to taste and relish the spiritual fruit
that comes by this Sacrament, or any other divine ordinance; and therefore
brings unto it no other heart nor affections, than unto ordinary meat and
drink, yea often times worse.

5. Carelessness and security, which is when a man comes with an affection
and disposition unto this Sacrament, as unto a matter that he neither look; to
receive good by, nor fears to receive hurt by; and therefore will never
trouble his mind about the matter.

6. Presumption, which is, when men never care in what manner they receive, and
yet presume to receive as much fruit and benefit by the Sacrament, as those
which are most careful to fit and prepare themselves thereunto.

7. Uncharitableness, when a man's soul is so full of bitterness, hatred, and
malice of his neighbor, and by means thereof, so vexed and disquieted, that
it cannot consider and meditate (as it ought to do) of the love of Christ
figured in this Sacrament.

Many other causes of unworthy receiving might be alleged; but these are the
usual and most ordinary. Let us then every one take heed, that no one of them
be found in us; for then we shall certainly profane this Sacrament, and
become unworthy receivers thereof, and so be guilty of that sin which is
here mentioned by the Apostle. There is not the least of one of these, but
they will make a man an unworthy receiver of this Sacrament. What then is the
estate of such persons, as are known to have all these corruptions abounding
in them, and yet will (at the least once in the year) presume to come to the
Table of the Lord? Thus much for the understanding of the first point of the
conclusion, vz. What is meant by unworthy eating and drinking.

For the second point in the conclusion, What it is to be guilty of the body
and Blood of Christ.
To be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, is, to offer a special wrong,
disgrace, and indignity unto the Body and Blood of Christ; i. unto the person
and sufferings of Christ, and in a special manner to sin against the great
work of our redemption; yea it is in some sort to commit a sin of the very
same nature and quality, which they did, that had their hands in putting
Christ Jesus to death. For every one that may truly be said to be guilty of
blood, is in some sense or other a shedder of blood. Every unworthy receiver
then of this Sacrament, according to the degrees of his unworthy receiving,
either more or less, does in some sort communicate even in the sin of Judas
that betrayed Christ; of the wicked Jews, that cried, Crucify him; of Annas,
Caiaphas, and Pilate, that condemned him; of the soldiers, that whipped and
scourged him, that spet in his face, crowned him with thorns, nailed him on the
Cross, and pierced him with a spear. The worst of us (I assure my self) do
abhor these persons, even for these sins which they committed against the
person of Christ. Let us then in like manner learn to abhor the unworthy
receiving of this Sacrament, which will pull upon our heads the guilt of the
same sin, even the blood of Jesus Christ, of which all unworthy receivers
are here said to be guilty.

But in the third place it is to be considered, Why unworthy receivers are
guilty of ye Body and Blood of Christ.
why unworthy receivers are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. The answer
unto this question may easily be gathered from the former doctrine of the
Sacrament, which is laid down by the Apostle; for from that does the Apostle
infer and conclude the same.

First, because such persons, in so doing, do despise the sacred authority of
Christ Jesus, who first instituted and administered this Sacrament, and ordained
it to be administered and received in all his Churches, until the end of the
world. Now they that despise the authority of Christ, must needs in some sort
despise the person of Christ, and his sufferings, and by consequent, his Body
and Blood, by which principally his authority is ratified and confirmed: And
to despise the person and sufferings of Christ, the Body and Blood of Christ,
what is it, but in some manner to assent unto them that nailed the Body of
Christ upon the Cross, and shed the Blood of Christ?

Secondly, they despise and set light by a special token of his love and
favor, yea and memorial of it, which he bequeathed unto us, even when he was
laying down his life for us, even when he was going to be nailed on the
cross, and to shed his blood for us. Now who can contemn and set light by
this token, but he must needs despise and set light by the love of Christ, and
therein of the body of Christ, which he gave for us, and the Blood of Christ,
which he shed for us, wherein the special fruit of his love appeared. Romans
5.7.8. And is not this in some sort to be guilty of it?

Thirdly, they offer contempt to the principal badges, cognizances, and
ensigns of Christianity, and, as it were, to the special coin and picture
of Christ, yea to a consecrated type, shadow, and representation of his body
and blood. Now that wilful contempt and wrong which is offered unto the
cognizances, ensigns, coins, pictures, or representations of a Prince, is
supposed to be offered to the person it self of the Prince: And therefore the
wrong that is offered, the carelessness, neglect, and contempt that is showed
to this Sacrament, must needs redound to the Body and Blood of Christ, yea unto
the whole mystery of redemption shadowed and represented by the same; Romans
4.11.
yea forasmuch as in this Sacrament the very Body and Blood of Christ, Genesis
17.10.11. Luc. 22.18. Tit. 3.9.
and all the benefits thereof are spiritually offered unto the receiver, even
as lands are offered unto men by the sealing and delivery of Deeds and
Jndentures; to make no account of, but to despise this Sacrament, is as much as
to despise the Body and Blood of Christ, and all the benefits thereof; as he
may be said to despise the lease or gift of lands, which despises the
Writings, Seals, and Jndentures, whereby they are secured and confirmed unto
him.

Thus you see how the Apostle has showed what a fearful and dangerous sin
it is to profane this Sacrament: And he has not barely affirmed it, but
proved it by most evident and apparent reasons. Let us from this conclusion of
the Apostle, thus explaned and laid open, observe these points:

First, that Christ Jesus receives strange indignity and wrong in his very
person, not from Jews and Infidels only, but often times from Christians, even
from such as look to be saved by the merits of his blood; and that even then,
when they are pe^forming special service and worship unto him. For what
greater wrong can there be, than to be guilty of that blood, which is the
price of our redemption? which was the sin of this Church of Corinth, and is
the sin of all such persons as are unworthy receivers of this Sacrament.

Secondly, this shows that the bare conformity unto the outward exercises of
Religion, whether the word or Sacraments, is not enough to make us good
Christians, but men may be the worse Christians for this, Romans 2.28. 1. Cor.
10.1.2.3.4.5.6. Many simple ignorant souls do think that they have Religion
and Christianity enough in them, if their foreheads have been sprinkled with
the water of Baptism, and if they sometimes hear the word and receive the
outward elements of this Sacrament; whereas in very deed they may be further
from Christianity, for their outward conformity unto these things, than if
they did not conform unto them at all: They may by eating t^is Bread, and
drinking this Cup, even as it were, crucify Christ Jesus, and trample his
blood under their feet. Christians therefore must not only strive to worship
God, to hear the word, to pray, to receive the Sacraments, but to do it in
that reverend form and manner that God requires; otherwise they may do it in
such a manner, that they shall more offend God in doing of it, than if they did
it not at all. It were better a thousand times for us never to receive this
Sacrament, than to receive it in such a manner, as shall for the very act of
receiving, pull upon our heads the guilt of that blood.

Thirdly, by this it appears, that this sin of unworthy receiving (if we
do not seek atonement and reconciliation betime for the same, at the hands of
God) will be a heavy sin upon our consciences. For to be guilty of blood,
though of sinful and wicked blood, has been a burden that has made the
stoutest heart to ache. But who is able, when his conscience shall be awakened,
to bear the guilt of innocent blood? And if the blood of innocent Abel was so
heavy to Cain. Gen 4.13. how heavy shall the blood of the innocent lamb of God
lie upon all them that are any way guilty of it? We may see how heavy it was
upon the heart of Judas, Matt. 27.3* 4 5. yea and how heavy it is, even to this
day, upon the heads of the whole Nation of the Jews, according to their own
cursed wish, Mat. 27.25. This sin therefore being a kind of bloody sin, and
by consequent, a most heavy and insupportable sin, can we be too careful to
avoid it? It is not our ignorance or good meaning, in this case, that will
excuse us, and free us from the guilt of it. Many of the Jews did in their
ignorance, crucify Christ, Luc. 23.34. Act. 3.17. And the Church of Corinth
had (no doubt) a good meaning in receiving this Sacrament, even then when they
received it most unworthily; yet this could not free them from the guilt of
Christ's blood: This may lessen the guilt; it cannot take it away. If this will
not move us to a careful preparation before we presume to be made partakers
of this Sacrament, nothing will.

Fourthly, note the different effect of this Sacrament in the worthy and
unworthy receivers thereof. It is the savor of death unto death to some, to
other some the savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.16. The soul of the worthy
receiver is fed and refreshed, washed, purified, and cleansed from sin by the
body and blood of Christ received therein. On the contrary side, the soul of
the unworthy receiver is polluted and defiled, and made accursed and miserable
thereby; and the oftener he receives the same, the more abominable he is in
the sight of God and man. And such as do in such a manner receive the body and
blood of Christ, and look for grace thereby, are as if they that whipped Christ,
and that nailed him on the Cross, and by means thereof, had their faces,
hands, and garments all to be sprinkled with his gore blood, should think
themselves thereby purged from their sins; or as if he which pierced Christ
with a spear, should have held a Challice at the wound, and have filled it
with the blood that issued therefrom, and so have carouzed it off, and should
think thereby to have drunken to his own eternal health, the blood of Christ.

The second part of Preparation.
1. COR. 11. 28 Let a man therefore try himself, and so let him eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup.

29 For he that eats and drinks unworthily, etc.


THe Apostle proceeds to the second part of Preparation, declaring unto the
Corinthians, by what means the danger of this former sin may be avoided,
and so we may become worthy receivers of these mysteries.

The means are, A due trial and examination of our selves, which he leaves
not to our liberty, to do, or not to do, but requires it at our hands, as a
necessary duty: The former danger then of committing so grievous a sin, must
not withold us from receiving the Sacrament, but it must make us so much the
more studious to use the means of worthy receiving of the same. For the Apostle
does not say: Let a man therefore forbear to receive this Sacrament, but let a
man try and examine himself, and so let him eat this bread and drink this
Cup; So that the more dangerous it is to receive unworthily, the more we must
try and examine our selves, that we may receive worthily; And hence it is that
the Apostle infers this duty from the danger aforesaid, as if he should say;
Every Christian stands bound to receive this Sacrament, and yet seeing therein,
the danger of unworthy receiving thereof is so great, it stands them all upon
most carefully to try and examine themselves before they presume to partake
the same.

For the better and more clear handling of this duty, we are to consider
according to the ground laid down in the text.

1 What manner of Trial it is, which is here required.

2 Wherein particularly this Trial consists.

3 Our special duties in and after this Trial.

4 What Persons are to make this Trial.

5 The motives inducing to the making of this Trial.

1 The manner of Trial.
The Trial and examination here required, is a most careful and diligent
search and inquisition to be made within our own Souls and consciences,
whether there be in us, those gifts and graces that are necessary to the
worthy and reverent receiving of this Sacrament yea or no; i. Whether we be
such Persons as have an interest in this Sacrament or no? And for the finding
out of this, we must try our selves after that manner that Goldsmiths by touch
and fire and hammer, do use to try whether Gold or Silver be pure, yea or no.

1 This shows, that the principal gifts and graces of God that are in a man,
are not always evident and apparent unto him, but do sometimes lie hid within
the secret of the soul, until by some special trial, they be discovered
and discerned; for if the said graces did always manifest themselves, then
there should never need any such trial of our selves. This should encourage
us to search our selves, so much the more narrowly; for if by our searching,
we shall find but one grace, yea or one degree of a grace in our soul, more
than we did perceive in our selves before, it will bring more sound comfort and
joy unto our souls, than if we had found the most precious jewel in the world.

2 By this it appears, that a man may (if he will carefully use the means)
come to some knowledge and sight of that grace and goodness which is in his
own soul: and therefore it must needs be a great fault in them that do not
carefully use the means. It is a sign they set no price of Gods grace, that
make no inquiry whether they have it or no in their possession. Men make
diligent inquiry after concealed land and treasures; much more should they
make inquiry after the concealed graces of God, that lie hid in their own
souls, and which they cannot employ as they ought to do, because they know
not whether they be in them, or no.

3 It is exceeding profitable and beneficial for us to know the gifts and
graces of God, that are in us: for it is a means not only (as appears by this
place) to prevent fearful and dangerous sins, but also to fit and prepare us
to the receiving of greater graces and favors, which otherwise shall be
withheld and detained from us.

4 Let us never think to receive any new grace or blessing in any ordinance of
God, until by a diligent search of our selves, we have first found some former
grace in our selves, that may make us fit and worthy receivers thereof. For to
him that has says our Savior) shall be given, and from him that has not,
shall be taken away, even those shows which he has, Luc. 19.26. The use of one
grace is to fit and prepare us, and to make us worthy receivers of another
grace.

2. Wherein particularly this trial consists.
The particular gifts and graces which make us fit and worthy receivers of this
Sacrament, and which give us an interest therein, which also in this trial we
must find in our selves, before we can be worthy partakers thereof, are such
graces and gifts, as are necessary to the making and being of a true
Christian. For none can worthily receive this Sacrament, or have an interest
therein, but a true Christian; and whosoever is a true Christian, (if he stir
up the grace of God that is in him) he may be a worthy and fruitful receiver
thereof. For he who has already received the thing signified, has a
privilege and interest to receive the sign, Act. 10.47. But ^uerie true
Christian has received already, in some measure, the thing signified by this
Sacrament, even Christ Jesus and his merits, who lives and reigns in them by
his spirit; and therefore they that are so graced, may worthily (if they will)
partake of this Sacrament, which is nothing else, but a sign of that which
they have already interest and possession in. Again, this Sacrament being one
of the outward badges and cognizances of Christ Jesus, which he has appointed
for his servants to wear, it must needs be, that he whom Christ Jesus has
graced so much, as to entertain into his service, may be, in some degree,
worthy to wear this badge and cognizance.

That grace which makes us indeed true Christians, Act. 8.3 37. Romans 4.22.
is a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ. By a true and lively faith, I
mean such a faith as is fruitful in good works; For that which is without
works, is a dead faith, as James speaks, Iam. 2.17. and indeed no better
than a mocke-faith: From this faith do all other Christian graces flow, and
upon it do they all depend, and according to the growth of it, do they grow
and increase; and they that have but the least degree thereof, are true
Christians, though but weak and imperfect, Mat. 17.20. Esai 42.3. and have an
interest in Christ and his merits, and therein a right into this Sacrament; so
that in this trial and examination of our selves, it shall suffice, that we
can find this true and lively faith in us, though in never so small a degree.
For when we have once found this grace in our souls, and stirred it up, it
will supply unto us all such other graces as shall make us in some measure
worthy receivers. For whatsoever is done in faith, (how simple and base soever
the action may seem to be) is pleasing and acceptable to God: and on the
contrary side, whatsoever is done, and is not of faith, is not pleasing or
acceptable unto him, Romans 14.23. So that all the worth of a Christian lies in
his faith, and in those fruits which spring from faith.

The means then to try our faith, whether it be true, lively, and saving, no
or yea, is, 1 By the ground and foundation thereof. 2 By the object and matter.
3 By the fruits and effects.


The ground of this faith is the word of God, The trial of our faith by ye
ground and foundation thereof.
revealed unto our conscience, by the spirit of God, to be the word of God,
Ephesians. 1.13. 1. Cor. 2.12. The faith with rests upon any other groundwork, is
no true saving faith. The special means to try whether our faith be
grounded upon the word of God, is, to examine our consciences in these
particulars:

First, whether we do believe indeed and in truth, that the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, in the Old and New Testament, are the very word of God.
For the whole word of God, so far as is needful to be believed unto salvation,
is contained therein* Ioh. 5.39. Or at the least, whether we be exceedingly
troubled and grieved in our souls, and from our very hearts, when, through any
temptation, we are moved to doubt of the same: And whether we use all the
means we can to come to a persuasion thereof. For God accepts the will and
endeavor for the deed, Mark 9.24. Romans 7.18. Matthew. 5.6.

Secondly, whether we do unfeignedly desire to be taught and instructed in the
word of God, and to come to the true knowledge and understanding thereof; and
whether we do love and affect those means which are most powerful and
effectual to that end and purpose. For he whose faith is grounded upon the
word* has his hope grounded upon the same word, even all the hope he has of
everlasting life, and therefore he must needs desire to be acquainted
therewith by all possible means.

Thirdly, whether our ignorance and dullness in understanding of the word, and
our forgetfulness thereof, be grievous and troublesome unto us. For how can it
choose but grieve and trouble a man, when he knows not, nor understands not,
or cannot remember, the evidence of his own everlasting estate?

Fourthly, whether our reading, or hearing the word read or preached; our
meditating, conference and study of it, do increase or nourish our love, and
delight, and belief in it, Psalm. 119.92.97.98. 103.

Fifthly, whether we give credit and authority unto it above all humane
traditions and customs whatsoever, Psalm. 119.113. And whether we do not
deny credit and belief unto whatsoever we know is repugnant unto the same
word.

Sixthly, whether we find a lightness and cheerfulness in our consciences
when we have done any thing agreeable unto the word of God, Psalm. 119.92. And
whether we find a trouble and a heaviness in the same, when we have done
any thing which we know to be repugnant unto the same word.

Seventhly, whether we hope in the promises, fear the threatenings, desire the
blessings, and endeavor to avoid the curses contained in this word: And whether
we equally believe the one as well as the other.

Eighthly, whether we do judge it a singular blessing of the Lord, that he
has in this manner revealed his will in the written word, and that he
vouchsafes us liberty and means to come to the knowledge, understanding, and
belief of it; and whether we judge it to be a great judgment and curse upon
them, from whom this word is hid, and who want this liberty and means that we
enjoy.

Ninthly, whether we can prove those points of religion and faith, which we
do hold and believe, by the written word of God; and whether we do therefore
believe them, because we know they are affirmed in the word of God; and whether
do we misdoubt and suspect all those points of Religion that we cannot see
warranted by the word of God.

If we can find these properties in our souls, then have we found in us so
many infallible signs and tokens, that our faith has a true and sound ground.

Secondly we are to try and examine our faith in Christ, The trial of our
faith by ye object or matter thereof.
whether it be true and lively, no or yea, by the object and matter thereof.

The object and matter of true faith, is that divine truth which God in his
word has reveled unto us. For if the testimony of God in his word, be the
ground of our faith; then that truth which is revealed in the word, must needs
be the object and matter thereof. Now forasmuch as, there was never any one
man, that could ever attain unto the knowledge of all and every particular
truth revealed in the word of God, the means herein to t^ie our faith, is by
the maine fundamental truths therein contained, upon which all other truths
do in some sort depend, and unto which they are to be reduced; And therefore
let us examine our consciences in these points:

1 Whether we do believe the mystery of the Trinity, the Creation of the world,
the fall of Adam, the incarnation, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus
Christ, that there shall be a rising again of all flesh, a general day of
judgment, an heaven and hell, an everlasting life for some, and an eternal
death for othersome after this life: and such other grounds of religion,
evidently contained in the word of God, and proved by the same in our ordinary
confessions of faith and catechisms.

2 Whether we do believe that the Law of God, Mat. 22.4.
(the sum whereof is contained in the ten Commandments) is a holy, perfect
and just law, Romans 7.12. and 9.14.15.16. Psalm. 19.7. Such a law as God might
justly bind every man to the obedience of every Commandment therein
contained, Deuteronomy. 6.2.4.5. And whether we believe, that he that perfectly
keeps this Law, is a most blessed and happy man, Deuteronomy. 28.15.

3 Whether we do believe, that the breach of this law deserves everlasting
death and condemnation, Gal. 3.10. Romans 6.23. 2. These. 1.9. And that God in his
justice may punish everlastingly, in hell fire, the breakers thereof, Romans
9.13, 14.21.

4 Whether we believe, that all men living upon earth, since the fall of Adam,
have broken this Law, Romans 3.10.11.12, 20.23. and 5.12. Prouer. 20.8. and so
are guilty of an everlasting death, and that no man by reason of the
corruption of his will, is able now since the said fall to keep this law, Genesis
8.21. Romans 7.7.27.

5 Whether we believe that our selves in particular, are gree^ous sinners, and
have deserved by our sins, everlasting death and condemnation, and that it is
a great misery, to be a sinner, and a happiness to be free from sin, Psalm.
51.3 4.5. Neh. 1.7. Dan. 9.5.12. Psalm. 40.12. and 32. 4. Ezra. 9.6.

6 Whether we believe, that God will punish everlastingly, in hell fire, the
greatest part of the world for their sin, to the praise of his glorious
justice, Luke 19.23. and 12.34. Mat. 7.13. Romans 9.27. Pro. 16.4.

7 Whether we do believe, that neither our selves, nor any man else, by his
own power, strength, or merit, is able to free himself from this
condemnation, and therefore if there be no means out of our selves to save us,
that we also shall be in the number of those that shall be everlastingly
condemned, Romans 3.23. and 5. 6 12. and 7.18.19.20.

8 Whether we believe, that God will show grace, mercy, and favor to some
sinners, freely saving, pardoning, and forgiving them, without the least merit
and desert on their part, Ioh. 17.9. Dan. 9.7. Romans 15.14. and 9.22.23. Heb. 46.

9 Whether we believe, that all that are saved, and pardoned of their sins,
are partakers of this mercy, only through the merits of Jesus Christ, God and
man, and that he merited the same by his death and bloodshedding upon the
Cross, Romans 8.1. and 7.24.25. and 5.1.2. Mat. 1.21. Romans 3.28.

10 Whether we believe, that the merits of Christ are sufficient for the
pardon and forgiveness of our own sins in particular, Ioh. 1.12. and 6.35.
Mat. 9.2. Romans 7.24.25. Esa. 1.18. Heb. 9.14.

11 Whether we believe, that all that are saved by Jesus Christ, shall in this
life (if they live until they come to years of discretion) have the mystery
of redemption revealed unto them in the preaching of the Gospel, by means
whereof, they shall be effectually called out of the world, to faith and
repentance; and that they shall testify the same by sorrow unfeigned for their
sins past, and endeavor carefully to lead a new life ever after, and in a
readiness to do Jesus Christ faithful service in his Church, according to
his will revealed in the word, Romans 8.30.31. 1. Cor. 1.30. Job. 15.19. and
17.6.20.21. Ephesians. 5.30. John 15.1. Ezech. 11.19. Act. 16.14. John 1.12.2. Pet.
7.5. And whether we believe that after this life they shall reign with Christ
Jesus in all bliss and glory in heaven for ever and ever, Matthew. 29.34. Reu.
22.1.2.3. 2. Tim. 4.8.

12 Whether we believe, that all such as do believe, and do unfeignedly repent
them of their sins, and have a constant purpose to lead a new life according
to the will and word of God, are in the number of them that shall be saved
everlastingly, John 3.36.1. John 5.10. And whether we judge and believe, that
it is a sin for any such person to despair of the mercy of God, and not to
repose trust and confidence therein. Ioh. 3.18.36.

13 Whether we believe, that all those persons are most vile and miserable,
that are not called to faith and repentance: and that they, most of al other,
are most vile and wicked persons that contemn and despise, or care not to use
those means that God has ordained, to bring them thereunto, Matt. 11.21.25.
Heb. 2.3.

14 Whether we believe* that we are bound to use all means we can, for
attaining faith and repentance. And whether we believe, that in using the
means, we shall attain them. Mat. 7.7.8. and 21.22, Mar. 11.24. And lastly,
whether when we feel that we have in some measure obtained these graces,
whether we do not believe, that our selves in particular, are of that number
that shall be saved, 2. Tim. 4.7.8. Luke 2.29. Job. 19.25* or whether we do use
al endeavor at the least, and unfeignedly desire to believe the same, Mark
9.24. Luke 17.5. Matthew. 5.6. Reuela. 21 6.

In these several points consists the substance and matter of the true
christian faith, every one of which are most evidently revealed in the word of
God; so that those which are conversant in the same, if they do not wilfully
shut their eyes against the light, cannot but see them plainly set down
therein; and upon these grounds and principles, do all other truths in the
word of God in some sort depend, tending to the confirmation and illustration
of them: so that if in the trial of our selves, we can find assuredly, that
we believe all and every of these points, or do our uttermost endeavor to
believe them; then verily our faith is sound in regard of the matter and
substance thereof.

The third and last trial of faith, The trial of our Faith by ye fruits
thereof.
is by the fruits thereof: For a true and lively faith is no barren faith, but
it bings forth fruit, and such fruit whereby it may be known and discerned to
be a true faith, Iam. ^.14. 17.18.20.26.2. Pet. 1, 5, 6.7.

The special fruit of faith is newness of life, Mat. 3.8.10. 2. Pet. 1.5 and
1 Pet. 4.3.6. A new life is a life reformed according to the word of God, Luke
16.29.31. And it consists in Repentance and New Obedience.

Repentance is an unfeigned sorrow for sin, arising from the special
apprehension of Gods love and mercy toward a man in Jesus Christ.

The means to try whether this Repentance be in thee, is to enquire,

1. Whether thou do see that thou art a grecuous sinner, Psalm. 51.3.4. and
hate thy sin: yea and accusest and condemnest thy self from thy heart, for
thy sin, and acknowledgest the just merit and desert of thy sin, Dan.
9.7.8. 1. Cor. 11.31. Mat. 11. 38.

2 Whether thou did come to the sight of thy sin by the law of God, Romans
3.20. and 4.15. and 7.7. And whether thou do love the same law the more, by
how much the more it discovers thy sins, Psalm. 119.18.143.176. And whether
also thou lo^est those means best, that are most powerful and effectual, to
bring thee into the knowledge, sense, and feeling of thy sin.

3 Whether the more that thou hear and beleeuest the Gospel, and in it the
love and mercy of Jesus Christ toward sinners, the more thou hate and
forsakest thy sin, Gal. 5.24.1. John 3.9. Romans 6.2.3.4.5.

4 Whether thou hate a sin as much or more in thy self, than in another;
and whether thou love another, because he makes a conscience of sin.

5 Whether thou hate and striuest against that sin that thy nature is most
bent unto, and that loves and haunteth thee most.

6 Whether the more that thou have formerly sinned against God, and by thy
sins dishonored God, the more thou now desire and indeuourest to please
God, Luke 7.47.

7 Whether thou do strive against not only great sins, such as are punished
at Assizes and Sessions, but also small sins, such as are not punished, nor
ever called into question in the Courts and Consistories of men, Gal. 5.9.1.
These. 5.22.

8 Whether thou hate and abhor in thy self, not only those sins that are
hateful and detestable in the eyes of men, but even those sins also which
men will account a grace and honor unto thee for to commit, and for which they
will recompense and reward thee, Genesis 36.9.

9 Whether thou hate sin principally, because God hates it, and forbids it,
and not in respect of the curse and punishment only or specially.

10 Whether thou do not repent, that thou did no sooner repent.

11 Whether thou would for any worldly good, be in that estate that thou
wast in before thy repentance, Phil. 3.7.8.

12 Whether thou can instance in any special or particular sins, which
formerly thou louedst and delightedst in, which now thou hate, and striuest
against.

13 Whether thou do so much the more study and embrace the contrary virtues
unto such sins as thou now repentest of, by how much the more thou have been
formerly given unto them.

14 Whether thou art not afraid, that something that thou love and affectest,
should by the word of God be discovered to be a sin: And whether thou do
not desire and pray, that God would discover unto thee all thy sins, to the
end that thou may strive against them, and forsake them.

15 Whether thou do rejoice, and unfeignedly thank God, when any thing that
thou take pleasure and delight in, is discovered to be a sin.

16 Whether thou esteemest it a singular blessing of God, that thou have been
and art crossed of God in those sins which thy nature thirsts after, and
that thou have not had that opportunity and means of committing them, which
thy flesh has desired.

17 Whether thou do not hate, but rather love him, that dutifully, lovingly,
and brotherly does admonish thee of a manifest sin, especially if he be a
Minister of God.

There be many other signs of true repentance, by which thou may try thy
self, as may appear by that which I have taught you elsewhere upon the 51
Psalm; but these may suffice, upon this occasion, to discover a true and sound
repentance: And these are such properties, as must of necessity in some degree,
be in every person that is truly penitent. It is against common sense and
reason, to imagine that there can be any true repentance, where these signs
are wanting; and where these signs are, there, without doubt, a man shall
find all other signs whatsoever, in some degree or other.

New Obedience, which is the second part of newness of life, is a constant
purpose and endeavor to obey and please God in all things, for Christ's sake, 1.
Pet. 4.2.3. and Chap. 1.21.22. Romans 6.15.16.17. Act. 13.1. Dan. 3.18.

In whomsoever there is a true and lively faith, in him there must of
necessity be such a purpose and endeavor. Every Article of our faith (as might
be easily showed, if it were fitting to stand upon it) is an irresistable
argument, to prove that we owe this duty to God; and if we believe them as we
ought to do, they will move us and stir us up, yea force and constrain us
unto the same; so that it is not possible there should be any true faith in
that man, in whom this constant purpose and endeavor cannot be found: And on
the contrary side, in whomsoever it is found, out of all question, in that man
there is a true and a lively faith.

But how art thou to try whether this fruit of faith be in thee? Surely by
examining thy conscience in these points:

1 Whether thou do desire and endeavor to know the will, pleasure, and
commandment of God, that thou might thereby frame thy self to please him,
1. These. 5.21. Act. 17.11. Psalm. 119.15. And whether thou do, to this end,
use the most likely and approved means to come to the knowledge thereof; and
whether thou reioicest in the knowledge thereof, after thou have attained unto
it.

2 Whether thou art content to subject thine own will, reason, and affections,
unto Gods revealed will, and do not exalt thine own wisdom and will above
his, Gal. 5.24. 1. Cor. 1.18.19.20. Matthew. 26.39. Number. 22.19.

3 Whether thou labourest to persuade thy self, that thou shall lose nothing
by yielding obedience to Gods will, 1. Pet. 4.12.13.14.16. Mat. 19.28.29. And
that it shall be worse for thee for crossing his will in any thing whatsoever,
1. Pet. 4.17.18.19. Yea that the more thou losest by thy obedience to God, the
more thou shall gain, Phil. 1.29. Psalm. 119.71. 2. Cor. 1.4. Romans 5.3.1. Pet.
4.13

4 Whether thou art not grieved when thou meetest with any lets and
hindrances, by means whereof, thou can not do his will as thou ought
and would do it; And whether thou art unfeignedly sorry, that thou want
strength and ability to do it as thou would and should do it, Romans
7.24. 2. Cor. 12.8. Pro. 30.8.9.

5 Whether thou count it a grace, honor, and favor unto thee, that God will
vouchsafe to command thee any service. And whether thou think nothing too
base for thee to do, that he requires at thy hands, Mat. 16.24.

6 Whether it be grievous unto thee, that others do not obey God, Psalm.
119.136. Or whether at the least, it be hateful unto thee, that another man
should displease God to pleasure thee:

7 Whether thou think all the service and duties that God requires of thee
to be performed, either to himself, or to thy neighbor, to be less by many
degrees, than he has deserved at thy hands: And whether if he should desire
greater matters at thy hand, thou think thy self bound to yield obedience
unto them, Romans 9.3. Genesis 22.1.2.

8 Whether thou account meanly and basely of thy actual obedience, and of the
best service thou can perform, or at any time have performed to God, as that
which is of no value to merit the least grace and favor of him, Luc. 18.13.
Psalm. 51.17. Esa. 66.2.

9 Whether it be a tediousness and vexation unto thy soul, to live in those
places, where thou can not have opportunity to serve and please God as thou
would and oughte^^ to do, Psalm. 120.5. And whether thou love those places
most, where thou have most means and opportunity to serve and honor God in,
Psalm. 84.1.2.3.4. and 27.4.

10 Whether thou love those persons most, from whence thou have most helps
and encouragements to serve and please God, 1. These. 5.12. And whether, of all
other persons, thou mislikest them most, that cross and hinder thy obedience
unto God, and will not suffer thee to perform those duties unto him, which
thou are able to do, and willingly would do, and which lay snares and
stumbling blocks in thy way, that thou may not so freely serve him as thou
would.

11 Whether thou desire to live no longer, than that thou may be able to do
God some honor and service; and whether every day more than other, the longer
thou live, thou think thy self bound, and endeuourest to do better and
better service unto God, and to make him amends for thy negligence past all the
days of thy life before, Phil. 1.9.10.11.

Thus much for thy direction and help, how to try and examine thy self,
whether there be true faith in thee or no, and so by consequent, whether there
be in thee any such graces as may make thee a worthy receiver of these
mysteries.

3 Of the duties in this Trial, and after this Trial.
The special duty in this trial, is, never to give over searching and trying
our selves, until we find these graces in us.

For the Apostle requires him that examineth himself, To eat of this Bread,
and to drink of this Cup. What? is he to do this, whether in this search
and trial he shall find any grace in himself or no? To what end then should
a man make any such trial? This then is certain, that a man is not to receive
this Sacrament, except after trial, he find in himself some degree and
measure of that grace which may make him a worthy receiver. But why does not
the Apostle put in this caution and exception? First, because he would therein
teach all Christians, so long to continue the examination and trial of
themselves, until they have found the grace above specified in themselves.
Secondly, to show that a man has not tried and examined himself in that
manner which the Holy Ghost intends and means, until he have found in
himself some degrees of that true saving faith, of which we have formerly
entreated: And thirdly, to teach that he that has this grace, but to search
and try earnestly and seriously, whether he have faith, shall be sure, in
good time, to find faith in himself, if he have an unfeigned desire to find
it. And if this seem scant probable by this place, let the precise promise of
Christ, Luc. 11.5.14. who says, Seek and ye shall find, confirm the same
unto you.

What an encouragement then ought this to be unto every one of us, to rifle and
ransacke our own souls, and to search narrowly every corner of them for this
faith, even as one would search for a mine of gold, seeing we have such a hope
and firm promise, that if we search with a desire to find, we shall be sure
to find it; and if we find it, we shall not find it alone, but with it, and
in it, a sealed pardon of the forgiveness of all our sins, yea and sure
Evidences and Indentures of a firm title to the kingdom of Heaven. If a poor
condemned man were credibly certified of this, that if he did but carefully
search about, he should find the kings pardon; or if a needy beggar were
certainly informed of this, that if he would make a diligent search, he
should be sure to find such treasures of gold and silver, as would make him a
great rich man as long as ever he shall live afterward; would any man pity
either the poverty of the one, or the death of the other, if they should
refuse in those cases to take pains to make a diligent search and trial? Much
less are any such to be pitied, that may find the saving grace aforesaid for
the seeking of it, and yet will not bestow the pains to seek it, or to make
any serious inquitie after it; verily there cannot be a greater sign, that a
man despises the grace of God, than in such a case as this, not to seek after
it, especially seeing a man may be sure to have it for the seeking for.

The duty after examination follows, which is, Then when we have examined
our selves in manner aforesaid (and not before then) to eat this Bread, and to
drink this Cup: wherein the Apostle plainly ties the duty of examination unto
the receiving of this Sacrament, and the receiving of this Sacrament unto the
duty of examination, wherein we are taught briefly these lessons:

First, that all Christians, that are bound to receive, are bound to make this
trial before they receive; and that it is a sin for any to eat this bread and
to drink this Cup, that have not tried and examined themselves.

Secondly, that it is a sin, not to eat this bread, and to drink this Cup,
after we have made a due trial of our selves.

Thirdly, that they which after the trial and examination of themselves, do
unworthily eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, did never diligently and
seriously try themselves.

Fourthly, that such as cannot try and examine themselves, can never worthily
partake of this mystery.

4 Of the persons that are to make this trial.
The person that is to make this trial, is a man's self, in and upon himself.
Let a man therefore, (says the Apostle) examine himself, and so let him eat,
etc. And the reason thereof is evident; for it is not possible, that another
man should be able to try the soundnes of our faith, which is known only to
God and our own consciences. For though a man should use never so many
experiments, and try never so many conclusions upon us, yet may we through
our hypocrisy and cunning dissimulation, cozen and delude the wisest men and
the most cunning Inquisitors in the world; yea, our own hearts are so full of
fraud and guile, that if in this trial and examination of our selves, we do
not proceed by a sound and sincere rule, our selves shall exceedingly cosen and
deceive our selves, and we shall conceit that grace to be in our hearts, which
was never in them in deed and truth. Does not experience teach us that some
persons have made great show of piety and faith, and have made a more than
ordinary profession thereof, insomuch as they have seemed, not only to others,
but no doubt, even unto themselves to burn in zeal and love, unto the truth
of Jesus Christ; which yet have afterward proved vile Apostataes, and wicked
and malicious persecutors of that grace in others, which themselves have
formerly professed? Verily the Lord seldom leaves his Church without some such
notorious example or other of this kind, that Christians might the more
narrowly try and examine themselves, and that they might take heed that their
corrupt hearts do not deceive them with semblances and shows of grace, in
stead of substances.

Let us learn hence, first that this examination and trial of our selves does
not exclude the trial and examination which others (as far as they are able)
are to make of us, especially our Governors, Teachers, and Instructers, such as
have the cure and charge of our souls; but it rather strengthens and
confirms the same. For they which shall in singleness of heart once set
themselves unto this work, to sift and winnow their own souls, and to search
and try them, whether the grace of God be firmly rooted in them or no, shall
find it a work of that difficulty, that they will be glad of any furtherance
and direction that they can get: For these trials and examinations that others
use to take of us, are but helps and directions, how we may in the best
manner try and examine our selves. Those therefore which are so ready to
conclude from hence, that others have nothing to do to examine them before
they receive, because they are commanded to examine themselves, they might as
well conclude, that no body else is to care or provide for them, or to look
unto them, or to do them good, because themselves are to care for, to look
unto, to provide and do good for themselves. But this is the very truth of the
matter; Such persons as are not willing that others should examine and try
them, do never intend and purpose to examine themselves; and they show
themselves to be guilty to themselves of ignorance and gracelesnesse, yea and
to affect the same, in which they had rather live and rot, than discover to
others, though they might have help thereby.

Indeed if this were the end of our trials and examinations, to find out the
defects, and wants and infirmities of our brethren, to the end that they might
be punished for them, or to the end that we might contemn and deride them for
the same, there were some color to except against it. But when the intent of
this examination, is to know what spiritual grace the examinant wants, to
this end that his want might be supplied; is it not strange, that any should
be found so unwilling to submit unto the same, and should count it as a great
injury and wrong? If a rich man should come unto a poor man, and in pity
and love should examine him of his estate, desiring him to tell him what he
wants, whether money or corn, or any other victuals for his wife and children,
and should offer to assure him, that if he would discover his want, he would
do his best, according to his power, to relieve him, were he not a strange
poor man, if having not one penny in the world to relieve his want, and if
himself, his wife, and children, were ready to starve for hunger, he should
murmur and grudge at this rich man, and ask him what he had to do to examine
him? Verily thus it is with many poor ignorant souls amongst us; the more
they stand in need of spiritual help, the less they can endure to be
examined of those which offer in love to help them, and to do their best to
supply their spiritual wants, if they might know them.

Secondly, this is not sufficient to make a man a worthy receiver of this
Sacrament, that upon trial and examination, made by others, he is found
worthy; but a man is bound to approve himself unto himself. A man may by
wise and politic carriage so demean himself, that all men, even the best
and holiest, after that they have sifted and tried him to the uttermost, shall
find no just matter of reproof in him: And many bear this mind, that if they
can behave themselves so as no man else can accuse them of any iniquity,
though they be guilty to themselves and their own consciences of never so
many secret corruptions, that then they are worthy enough of Christ, and of
this Sacrament, and of all the prerogatives of Christians. But here we are
taught, in this precept of the Apostle, never to judge our selves tried and
approved enough, but when we are approved unto our own souls and
consciences. For the strictest Inquisitors in the world may free and acquit us,
when our own consciences have a thousand capital crimes to arraigne, convict,
and condemn us of. Let us not therefore in the matter of our own worthiness, so
much rely upon the judgment of any man or all the me^ in the world, as of our
own souls and consciences, which are better able to judge of our inward state,
than are all the men in the world besides. But most men judge themselves
Christians worthy enough, if no man be able to lay any unworthiness unto their
charge; but if this had been true, the Apostle would have sent us to others, to
try and examine us, and not unto our selves.

3 This shows that the principal graces, required in a worthy receiver of
this Sacrament, are such as may be in a christian, and yet not only lie
hidden from the eyes of others, but also of a man's own soul. For otherwise a
man should not need in this manner to be commanded, to try and examine
himself, if so be he could always see what is in his own soul and heart;
or if so be that the saving graces of God whenever they are in the soul,
should presently show themselves to the eye of our soul; do we not by daily
experience see, that the worthiest christians do use to judge themselves of all
other the most unworthy; and are many times most dejected with the sense and
feeling of their own defects and wants, and that even of such graces, wherewith
their souls above others are richly adorned? The best then have need to
perform this duty to themselves. and surely it is an infallible sign that
that man wants that which should make him a worthy receiver, which is not
careful by diligent trial and examination, to assure himself, that that
grace is in him, which may in some measure make him a worthy receiver.

By this also it appears, that it is not enough for a man to be a worthy
receiver, but he must also know that he is one: and that he that knows not
himself to be one in some degree or other, cannot be such a one as he ought
to be.

5 Of the motives whereby we ought to be provoked unto this Trial.
The motives unto this duty of trial and examination follow, taken from the
dangers that come by the neglect thereof, which are threefold, one depending
upon another.

The first danger is; that such as neglect this duty, do not discern the body
of Christ; that is, they do not or cannot, as they ought to do, discern and
make a difference between this bread and wine, and that which at ordinary
feasts we eat and drink: They do not meditate of, and consider, the great
mystery that is shaddowed and represented by them, that is, the mystery of
redemption consisting in the sacrifice of the body, and shedding of the blood
of Christ.

The second danger arising from the former is this: That they, not discerning
of that which is mystically shadowed and represented in this Bread and Wine, do
eat and drink the same unworthily. That is, irreverently, carnally, profanely,
not as becomes men that partake of such high and heavenly mysteries.

The third danger arising from the other two, is this: That by this means,
they eating and drinking unworthily, do therein, eat and drink their own
judgment or damnation. That is, in stead of receiving by this action of
theirs, any spiritual food tending to their salvation, they do by this action,
pull down the judgment of God upon them, and bring themselves in danger of
destruction and condemnation, because they do profane, and irreligiously abuse,
through the want of due consideration and preparation, this heavenly Sacrament,
in coming unto it after an vnreuerent and unholy manner, without all due
regard for what intent and purpose it was instituted of Christ. Of these points
we have sufficiently entreated before. To conclude this matter; what more
effectual argument could the Apostle use, to stir us up to this trial than
this? If God should turn these elements of Bread and Wine, into a bodily bane
and poison, unto all such of us as should unworthily receive them, would it not
then make us come in fear and trembling with all due preparation unto the
same? Would it not make us again and again, to try and examine our selves,
and to be sure that we be in some measure worthy to receive this Sacrament,
before we presumed to partake thereof? How much more ought the consideration of
the danger here specified, to move us thereunto? It were safer and better for
us a thousand times, that the Sacrament should be turned unto a bodily poison
unto us, and that upon our unworthy receiving of it, our bowels and intrales
should rot, after we have been made partakers of it, than that in eating and
drinking thereof, we should eat and drink our own damnation and everlasting
judgment, which every soul is in danger to do, that neglects the
performance of this duty.

For the prevention hereof therefore, let us carefully remove the two former
causes of this judgment.

First, Let us endeavor with all holy reverence and fear, to come worthily,
and as it becomes holy Christians, unto this Sacrament.

Secondly, that we may come worthily thereunto, let us labor to discern the
Body of Christ therein, not coming to this Table, as to an ordinary or common
drinking, but coming thereto with a soul hungring and thirsting after that
blessed Body and Blood of Christ, which under this bread and wine is figured
and shadowed unto us, and, in a spiritual manner, offered in the same unto
every worthy Receiver and Communicant: Which if we shall carefully perform,
then shall our souls and spirits be truly satisfied with the body and blood
of Christ; so that as verily as we with our bodily mouths, do eat and drink
the outward figures and signs, and are recreated and refreshed by them, so
verily do our souls, after a spiritual manner, by faith, as it were, eat and
drink the thing signified, to the everlasting comfort and salvation both of
our bodies and souls.

The Lord, for his mercy sake, forgive our former want of Preparation, and
move our hearts to the careful performance of these duties, that so we may
not only avoid the judgments which unworthy Receivers are in danger to fall
into, but that we receiving worthily these holy mysteries, may in them, and by
them, receive the assurance of that grace and mercy that is shadowed and
represented by them, even the full and perfect redemption of our bodies and
souls, through the Sacrifice of Christ's body, and his most precious blood shed
upon the Cross. Amen.

FINIS.
A BRIEF FORM OF TRIAL; Whether one be in any measure fit to receive the
Sacrament of the Lord SVPPER.
I
Question.

WHy do you desire to receive the sacrament of the Lords Supper?

Answer.

Because it is one of the special ordinances of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 11.23.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. The only begotten son of God, and Redeemer of mankind, Mat. 3.17.

Q. From what has Christ redeemed mankind?

A. From everlasting death and condemnation.

Q. How came mankind subject thereunto?

A. By sinning against God in breaking of his Commandments.

Q. What are those Commandments?

A. God spoke these words, and said, etc.

Q. Have all mankind broken those Commandments?

A. Yea, all, without exception, Romans 3.10.11.12.23.

Q. Do you believe, that the breach of these Commandments do deserve
euer^asting death and condemnation?

A. Yea verily, Gal. 3.10. Romans 9.13.14.

Q. By what means did Christ redeem mankind?

A. By his death and bloodshedding upon the Cross, Romans 5.6.

Q. How could Christ, being the son of God, die?

A. He took unto himself the nature of man in the womb of a Virgin, and so
died for man, Mat. 1.18. etc.

Q. Was there no other means to save a sinner?

A. No verily, Act. 4.12.

Q. Shall all mankind be saved by Christ?

A. No, but those only who are true believers, Ioh. 3.18.

Q. Who are true believers?

A. Those which rely and depend upon Christ Jesus only for the pardon of their
sins, and for the everlasting salvation of their souls, Ioh. 3.16.

Q. What shall be the estate and condition of those that are saved by Christ?

A. They shall reign with Christ in all joy and glory for ever and ever in the
kingdom of heaven, Mat. 25.34.

Q. What shall be the estate of the rest of mankind?

A. They shall be tormented in hell for ever and ever, with the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25.41.

2
Q. But why has Christ ordained the receiving of this Sacrament?

A. For a perpetual remembrance and showing forth of his death and passion in
his Church, Luc. 22.19.

Q. How is this done?

A. By applying the things signified to the outward signs.

Q. What are the outward signs?

A. Breaking and eating of Bread, and drinking of Wine.

Q. What does the bread and wine signify?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. What does the breaking and eating of the bread, and the drinking of the
wine signify?

A. The sufferings of Christ in his Body upon the Cross, and the benefit that
every true believer receives thereby.

Q. For whom has Christ ordained this Sacrament?

A. For all true Christians, that are of years of discretion.

Q. Who are true Christians?

A. All those who being baptized, do unfeignedly profess their belief in
Christ.

Q. Where is this Sacrament to be received?

A. In the Church, 1. Cor. 11.22.

Q. What is a Church?

A. An holy Assembly ioining together in the worship and service of Jesus
Christ, 1. Cor. 11.20.

Q. Wherein consistes the woorship and service of Jesus Christ?

A. In hearing his word, receiving his Sacraments, and calling upon his name.

3
Q. What is the benefit that comes by the receiving of this Sacrament?

A. A further certainty and assurance of salvation by the death of Christ.

Q. What reason is there for that?

A. Because Christ has instituted it to be a seal of the covenant of grace,
Romans 4.11.

Q. What is the Covenant of grace?

A. A free offer and promise of salvation to all them that shall truly believe
in Christ, Ioh. 3.16.

Q. Are all that receive this Sacrament, partakers of this benefit?

A. No, but such only as are worthy receivers thereof, 1. Cor. 11.28.

Q. Who are worthy receivers thereof?

A. Only those, who, upon due trial, do find themselves to be true believers.

Q. By what means shall they find that?

A. By the special fruits and effects of faith.

Q. What are they?

A. An unfeigned hatred of sin, and an endeavor to obey God in all things for
Christ's sake, Ioh. 3.36.

Q. What if one that is unworthy do receive this Sacrament?

A. He eats and drinks his own judgment, 1. Cor. 11.29.

Q. What if a man do contemn to receive this Sacrament?

A. He therein contemns the grace of Christ represented thereby?

Q. Do you unfeignedly hate sin, and purpose hereafter to live in obedience
unto Gods Commandments for Christ's sake?

A. Yea by the grace of God through Christ.

FINIS.
THE DOCTRINE of communicating worthily in the LORDS SVPPER. Delivered by way
of Question and Answer, for the more familiar instruction of the simple.

LONDON Printed by William Hall for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Bull-head. 1609.

To the Reader.
GOOD Reader, after that I had yielded to the publishing of mine own poor
meditations upon 1. COR. 11.23. there came to my hands in writing, this ensuing
treatise, written some years since by a godly and faithful Pastor, for the
direction of his own people, in the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, at what time he was first called unto them. In the perusal
whereof, I being in my self well persuaded of the fullness and perspicuitie of
that doctrine of Preparation, which it propounds to entreat of, the orderly
method of every part thereof, the plain and familiar handling of the matter,
and that it did supply many needful points of instruction that are wanting in
mine own Treatise, I was earnest with the Author to give me leave to publish
the same, and to adioin it as an ornament and help unto mine; which with much
importunity at length I have obtained; though in the hard and unjust conceit
he intertaineth of it, he suffers, it in this sort as you see to, come abroad
as a Child of the Earth, without any mention of his name from whom it is
descended.

For the spiritual good that thou shall receive thereby, bless the Lord; and
pray for the Author, that God would restore him again to that former liberty
in his Church, which heretofore, to the glory of God, and the comfort of many
a Christian soul, he has enioied.

Thine in the Lord, W. B.

THE SVMME and Contents of the Doctrine following.
The first part.
OF preparation before receiving. page 2. Of the examination of a man's self
page 2. Three reasons for the necessity of examination. page 3. The danger of
unworthy receiving page 5. Whether the Minister be bound to examine the
communicants. pa. 9 That the people ought willingly to yield to be examined,
and the reasons why. page 9. Whether those which are worthy receivers, are
deprived of the benefit of the Sacrament, in communicating with them which are
unworthy. page. 11. That it makes to the comfort of the worthy receiver to
communicate with the godly. page 12 The graces that by examination we are to
find in our selves. pa. 16 The 1. grace, a desire to receive this Sacrament.
ibid. By what means this desire may be discerned. page 17. The necessity of
this Sacrament. page 17. The benefits of this Sacrament. page 18. The helps in
this Sacrament to apply the promise of grace. p. 23. How Christ in this
Sacrament is most clearly represented. pa. 25. The helps in this Sacrament
whereby we are put in mind of Christ's passion. page 26 How the benefits of
Christ are more particularly offered unto us in this Sacrament, then by any
other means. page. 33 Whether Christ be indeed in this Sacrament, and how.
page 35. That Christ is not corporally present. page 36. Why the bread and wine
is called the body and blood of Christ. p. 39 How our Communion with the
faithful is hereby represented and confirmed. page 41. That this Sacrament is
to be administered publicly. page 42. Reasons against private communions. page
46 Of the consecration of this Sacrament. page 49. At whose hands we are to
receive this Sacrament. page 52. Whether the worthynes and efficacy of this
Sacrament do depend upon the minister. pa. 56. Whether it be needful that
the word be preached at the administration of the Sacrament. page 56. Whether
after consecration the elements be not changed. page 59 Whether that part of
the bread and wine, which remains after the administration, does differ from
common bread or wine. p. 61. That all are bound to receive this Sacrament as
o^t as it is administered, except there be some necessary impediment. page 63.
That it is a dangerous sin to neglect the receiving of this Sacrament. page
64. That want of charity, or other worldly distractions, is no sufficient
excuse for not receiving. page 67 The great fault of them which receive this
Sacrement without any desire or sincere appetite. 69 Whether Magistrates may
not command and compel their subjects to receive this Sacrament. page 70. Of
that knowledge which by examination we ought to find in our selves, before we
can be worthy receivers. And the parts thereof. page 74. Faith the third grace
necessary for preparation. page. 77. How a Christian may be assured that he
is one of Christ's little flock page 79. What motives there are in the word to
persuade a Christian that he shall be saved. page 80 Repentance the fourth
grace necessary for preparation. page 85. What Repentance is. page 85. Reasons
why repentance is necessary hereunto. page 85. The use concerning the
necessity of Repentance. page 86. Motives to repentance. page 87. Newness of
life, the fith grace necessary for preparation. page 91. Reasons why it is
necessary. p. 92. The use of the doctrine concerning the necessity of newness
of life. page 93. Charity the sixth grace necessary for preparation. page 94.
Reasons of the necessity thereof page 95 The use of the former doctrine. p. 97.
Motives to persuade to forgive wrongs. page 98 Whether a Christian is to love
and think well of all men. page 102 How far forth we are bound to forgive
injuries. page. 104 Cautions and rules to be observed in going to law. page
107. How our faith is to be renewed ere we come to the Lords Table. 101 How
repentance is to be renewed before we come there. p. 111. That weak Christians
are not to forbear communicating in the Lords Supper. page. 113. Prayer to be
used both before and at the time of communication. page 117. That it is not
necessarily required to receive the Sacrament fasting. page 118. What things
be further required at the time of communication. page 119. Outward things
concerning the body. page 119 Joy and cheerfulness required in communicating
at the Lords table. page 128. What things to be performed by us after
communicating. p. 130.
The Doctrine of communicating worthily in the Lords Supper, delivered by way
of Question and Answer, for the more familiar instruction of the simple.
The First Part: Concerning the preparation of a man's self, before he come to
receive this Sacrament.
Question.

HOw many things are required of them that would receive the Sacrament of the
Lords supper to their comfort? Things required in worthy receiving.


Answer.

Three, first, a diligent and careful preparation of themselves, before they
come to receive it.

Secondly, a reverent and attentive disposition of body and mind in the
receiving of it.

Thirdly, an unfeigned endeavor to feel, and find in themselves the fruit of it,
after they have received it.

Prepara^ion before.
Q. What is that preparation that is required of every one, that would receive
this Sacrament to his Comfort?

Consisting in examation of a man's self.
A. Every one (even such as have made best proceedings in religion) before he
presume to come to the Lords Supper, must sequester himself from all other
business, that might any way distract him, and carefully set his whole mind
and heart upon this work that he is to go about, taking some time to examine
himself, whether those things be in him, that may make him a worthy receiver
of this holy Sacrament.

Q. What reasons may be given to show the necessity of this so careful an
examination and preparation of our selves before this Sacrament? Reason for the
necessity of examination.


A. First, Our v^s^nesse to serve God.
such is the untowardness and corruption of our hearts, Exodus 19.10. 1. Sam.
6.5. Joel. 2.15.16. Ioh 11.13. Psalm. 108 1. Eccl. 4.17. Exodus ^0.8. 2. Chro.
12.14.
that we are unfit to do any special service to God, Gods strict commanding
thereof.
till we have taken some pains to prepare our selves thereunto.

Secondly, there is no part of his service before which the Lord has so
straightly enjoined this preparation, as before the receiu^ng of this Sacrament.
Before the Passover (which was in substance the same with this Sacrament, and
in the place whereof this was ordained by Christ) the Lord did not only Exodus
12.56.
command that the Lamb should be taken out of the flock three days before
it was to be sacrificed (that his people might thereby be admonished to employ
themselves during that time in the sitting of themselves unto that service) 2.
Chron. 35.61.
but also he enjoined them a special preparation before they came unto And it
the Apostle affirms of this Sacrament, that even they that are believers, 1.
Cor. 11.27.3^.
may and shall certainly receive it unworthily if they do not examine and judge
themselue^ before they come. The da^^ge^ or unworthy receiving.


Thirdly, the extreme danger, that he casts himself into that receives it
unworthily, should make every man afraid to come rashly, irreverently, or
vnpreparedly unto it. The danger manifested in the judgments upon unworthy
receivers


Q. How may their danger appear to be so great, that receive this Sacrament
unworthily?

A. In eating of this bread, and drinking of this wine, Cor. 11.29 34.
they shall eat and drink the judgment and curse of God.

Q. By what judgments has God been wont to punish such as have profaned or
irreverently used any of his Sacraments?

A. Sometimes by corporal and outward plagues; 1. Sam. 5 6.7.9.11.12. and 4 3.
4, 10. and 6.19.
as he did them that in the days of Samuel, used the Arc without due
reverence; and them, 2. Chro. 30.20.
in the days of Hezechia, that went to the passover, not being sanctified and
prepared thereunto according to the law; and them 1. Cor. 11.30.
among the Corinthians, that went to the Lords table before they had examined
and judged themselves.

2 Sometimes he punishes them as he Ioh. 13.27.
did Judas (who with an evil and unpenitent heart presumed to receive the
Passover) by stripping them of those beginnings of grace, they had received,
hardening them, and making them unable to repent, so as after they have
received, they become two fold more the children of hell, then they were before.

The caus^es of the judgments aforesaid.
Q. What is the cause why the Lord is wont to be so severe in punishing the
vnreuerent and unworthy receiving of this Sacrament?

A. Because the unworthy receiver, 1. Cor. 11.27.
is guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Q. How can that be, seeing he receives it not, but the outward signs only?

A. Because 1. Cor. 11.29.
he discerns not the Lords body, nor judges and esteems so highly and
reverently of this his holy ordinance (whereby the same is represented and
offered unto us) as he ought; but accounts it as common bread and wine, which
the wicked as well as the godly have title unto: which is far greater dishonor
and contempt done to God, then could be done to any King, if his picture or
arms, that hang up in some public place, should be spet upon, or pulled
down, or broken and trampled on by any of his subjects.

The first use of the aforesaid necess^tie of Preparation.
Q. What use are we to make of this that has been said, touching the necessity
of preparing our selves aright before we come to the Lords table?

A. First, that therefore 2. Chro. 23.19. and 3 5 6. Ier. 15.19. Mat. 7.6. 1.
Cor. 5.2.7.13.
the minister and Church must do that which in them lies to keep from this
Sacrament all such as are unworthy and unprepared.

Q. Why so?

A. Because else, 1. Sam. 2.29.
they consent to the great dishonor that the unworthy receiver does unto God;
and Leu. 19.17. Iud. 23.
unto the certain peril that he casts his own soul into; and so make
themselves liable to that plague whereby God 1. Cor. 11.30. and 5.2.6
has been wont to punish whole congregations, that have willingly tolerated
so great an abuse.

Q. Is then the minister also bound to examine such as he admits unto this
Sacrament, Whether the Minister be bound to examine the communicants.
and not to receive indefferently all that shall offer themselves?

A. He is, for if at all other times Prou. 27.23. Ier. 6.27. Act. 20.28. Phil.
2.19. 1. These. 3.5.
he must be diligent to know the estate of his flock, that he may accordingly
be able 2. Tim. 2.15.
to divide the word of truth aright unto them, and Luke 12.42.
give them their portion of meat in due season; then much more must he be
careful to know them at that time, when he is to admit them to this holy
Sacrament.

Q. That the people ought to be willing to yield to be examined, and the
reasons why.
Then the people must also be willing to have there lives looked into and their
knowledge examined by their Pastor, and to make known unto him their
spiritual estate, that so with comfort and boldness, he may admit them.

A. Yes verily: for first if God required Mat. 3.6 Acts 8.37.
of them that (being at the years of discretion) were to be baptized, that
they should first make known unto the congregation and Minister, their faith
and repentance; then does h^ much more require this of them that come to the
Lords Supper.

Secondly, as every Christian is bound to acknowledge his Pastor, 1. Tim. 2.12.
Heb. 7.7.
his superior in all matters that belong to Gods worship and to his own soul,
and therein Deuteronomy. 17.11.12. 1. These. 5.12 13. Heb. 13.17
to obey him and submit himself to his direction in the Lord: so is he then
especially to show his obedience to this ordinance of God, when he intends to
be partaker of this Sacrament, became Mat. ^.14.15
there is no one act^on of the ministry, wherein the necess^^y and dignity of
that function is more set forth and commended by the Lord unto his church, then
in the administration of the Sacraments, that is committed unto them. Whether
the worthy receivers, are deprived of the benefit of this Sacrament, by
communicating with the unworthy.


Q. But if they that are notoriously unworthy, be (through the negligence of
the Church and Pastor) admitted to the Sacrament; can that deprive the
faithful that receive with them, of the benefit and comfort of the Sacrament;
or ought they for that cause to keep themselves from it?

A. No: for first, no man's sin Eze. 18.20 Gal. 6.5.
can defile an other, or make Gods promise or Sacrament of none effect unto
him, that is neither any way accessory unto it, nor has power and authority to
keep him from the Sacrament.

Secondly, Luc. 2.22.41. and 24.53. Act 2.1.26.
the holy Apostles and our Savior himself, did communicate in the service of
God with those assemblies, wherein there were many notoriously wicked.

Thirdly, if it had been so, 1 ^or. 11 28.
the Apostle would have required every man, not only to examine himself, but
al those also with whom he is to receive. That it makes to the comfort of the
worthy receiver, to com^unicate with the godly.


Q. Makes it then nothing to our comfort, what they are with whom we do
communicate?

A. Yes: we should desire to receive with them of whose holy profession and
godly life we are well persuaded.

Q. Why so?

A. First, because in this Sacrament, we profess our selus to be fellow
members (as with the whole Church of Christ, so) 1 Cor. 10 17.
especially with those Christians with whom we do receive; and that we seek
also and desire to be confirmed in that communion, and to become more and more
like unto them both in faith and conversation.

Secondly, because both our love and zeal may be better kindled and stirred
up by Mat. 18.19.20. Phil. 3.17. Romans 1.11.12.
the prayers and example of such as we know to be godly, then either by the
wicked or such as we know not at all.

Q. A second use of the necessity of this preparation.
What other use is to be made of this doctrine touching the necessity of
preparing our selves aright, before we come to this Sacrament?

A. That every one should be 1 Cor. 11.28. Gal. 6.4.
careful to examine himself, and not rest in the approbation of the Minister
or Church.

Q. Why so?

A. First, because a man John 13 24.28.
may have a most wicked heart, and yet seem a good man to the Church, and be
guilty also of many gross crimes that are unknown to his Pastor.

Secondly, though a man live so, as his Pastor may discern just cause to doubt
that he is not worthy (and consequently can not admit him without grief)
Deuteronomy. 13.14 and 17.4
yet may not he refuse him till he be evidently able to convict him of some
such thing as may prove him unworthy.

Thirdly, it may so fall out, that though a ma^e crime be public and
apparent, Mat. 18 17.
yet his Pastor may want power to keep him from the Sacrament.

Q. As you have showed the necessity of preparation, and the danger of such as
receive unworthily: so tell me who may be accounted worthy to come to the Lords
table.

A. As no man can deserve to receive Christ and all his merits: so can none
deserve to be admitted to the Lords table, wherein the same are represented
and offered unto him; but all that through Gods free grace are made Luke 3.8 1
These. 2.12. Col. 1.12.
meet and fit to receive it, and come with such hearts as it beseems men to
bring to so holy and heavenly a banquet, Reave. 3.4. Luc. 20.35
are (in Gods gracious acceptance) accounted worthy to come unto it.

Q. Tell me then, which be those special grac^s which are necessarily required
for the making of us fit to come to the Lords table, and which by diligent
examination we must labor to find in our selves?

The graces that by examination we are to find in our selves: in number 6.
A. They are six in number: First a sincere and right desire of it: 2.
Knowledge: 3. Faith: 4. Repentance: 5. newness of life: 6. Love.

Q. To handle these in order; tell me first, A desire to receive the Sacrament.
what mean you by this sincere and right desire of the Sacrament, without
which you say none can come worthily unto it?

1 Chr. ^8.9. Psa. 110.3 2 Cor. 8.10.12. and 9.7. Luc. 22.15
A. We must find in our selves an unfeigned and earnest desire unto it, and
come unto it with a holy appetit and delight.

Q. How may this sincere and right desire of this Sacrament be discerned? How
this desire may be discerned, viz.


A. When it rises from the serious consideration of these three things (which
are the only reasons that should move us to come to the Lords Supper) namely,
First, By the necessity of the Sacrament.
the necessity of the Sacrament. Secondly, the great benefits that are to be
received by it. Thirdly, the present need that our selves do stand in of all
those helps that the Lord in this Sacrament has provided for us.


Q. How may the conscience of a man be persuaded of the necessity of this
Sacrament?

A. By considering that this is a part of Gods 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
worship which was ordained by Christ himself even 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
in the same night that he was betrayed; and that he did not only ordain it,
and first administer it himself, but also gave command^ment to his disciples
(who did represent the whole Church, of which they were to be the
master builders) to take, to eat and drink it, yea to do that often, which was
done in the first institution thereof, in remembrance of him. So that though
there were no benefit or comfort to be found in it; yet were we bound in
obedience to this ordinance and commandment of Christ to come unto it.

By the benefits thereof, which are three.
Q. But seeing you have said that the consideration of the benefits that are to
be received by it is an other reason whereby we should be moved to desire it,
tell me, what benefits are those which a Christian may receive by this
Sacrament?

A. First, whereas every Christian is bound, not only to believe, Esa. 44.5
Psalm. 40.9.10. Mat. 10.32. Ioh. 12.42.44. Romans 10.10.
but also to take all good occasions of professing openly his says and
religion, and gladly to wear the livery and badge of his heavenly Lord and
master; Exodus 13.9. Genesis 17.11. 1. Cor. 10.16.21. For this cause Ezekia so
earnestly exhorts all Gods people to come to the Passover. 2. Chro. 30.1.5.
and calls this a turning to the Lord, and renewing their covenant with him. 2
Chro. 30.6.8. For this cause it is said they kept it unto the Lord. 2. Chro.
30.1. and 35.1. This one cause, why Christ received the Sacraments. Mat. 3.15.
Mar. 14.12.
the receiving of the Sacrament is one special mean ordained of God whereby we
are to make public profession that we are true believers and servants of God.

Secondly, whereas every Christian (out of the sense and experience he has of
his own pronenes to apostasy) Deuteronomy. 29 10.12. 2. Chro. 15.12.14. Neh. 9.38.
and 10.28.29. Psalm. 119.1^6.
should by all good means bind himself to continue in the faith and obedience
of Christ, Exodus 13 9 Mat. 28.19. Gal. 5.3. 1. Cor. 10.2.
the receiving of this Sacrament is ordained of God to be as a solemn seal
and vow, whereby we bind our selves (as strongly as by an oath) to continue in
the faith and obedience of Christ, and unity of his Church.

Thirdly, whereas every Christian 1. Cor. 16.13. 1. These. 5.19.20. 2. Pet. 3.18.
is bound to use all good means whereby his faith may be confirmed, quickened,
and increased in him, the receiving of this Sacrament is a principal means
that God has ordained for the strengthening, reviving and increase of our faith.

Q. How may that appear?

A. Because a singular promise of grace, and part of that covenant which God
has made with us in Christ, is in a most comfortable manner taught and applied
and confirmed to us by this Sacrament.

Q. What is that promise of grace which is thus taught, applied and confirmed
to us by this Sacrament?

A. As by Baptism we were taught and assured, that through the merit of
Christ's passion, and of it only, we were first received into Gods covenant
and favor, united to him and his Church, and so obtained remission of all our
sins, and the grace of regenesiatio^; so by this Sacrament we are taught and
assured, that through the merit of Christ's passion, and of it only, we are and
shall be kept in this blessed estate, nourished and confirmed in it, revived
and comforted in all tentations.

Q. Declare this more particularly and fully: and first tell me why it was
necessary that we should not onel^ have a Sacrament of our first entrance into
Gods favor, and of our regeneration, but also another Sacrament of our
nourishment and perseverance in the state of grace?

A. First, 1. Pet. 1.23. 1. Ioh. 39.
though the graces received by baptism can never totally be lost, Psalm.
51.10.12. 1. These. 5.19. Reu. 3.2.
yet (through our natural corruption and daily tentations) the assurance,
strength and feeling of them will decay, unless they be nourished.

Secondly the only thing that causes us to persevere in faith and obedience,
and gives us strength and comfort against al tentations, Gal. 6.14 1. Ioh. 5.4.
is the remembrance and faith we have in the merit of Christ's passion, Heb.
7.25 and 12.24.
whereby he makes continual intercession unto his father for us; which it was
needful we should be taught and assured of by this sacrament.

Q. What means and helps ha^^ we in this Sacrament to teach, The helps in
this Sacrament to apply the promise of Grace.
apply and confirm to us this promise of grace, in so comfortable a manner as
you have said?

A. First, Christ and his passion, and this nourishment and grace of
perseverance which we receive by the merit thereof, are more clearly and
sensibly represented to us in this Sacrament, then in any other means
whatsoever.

Secondly, Christ and this benefit and merit of his passion, is more
particularly off^red and applied to us in this Sacrament, then in any other
means.

Thirdly, Christ and this benefit of his passion, is by this Sacrament
exhibited, given and confirmed to us more fully and effectually, then by any
other means.

Fourthly, the communion that we have with the true Church of Christ and the
mutual love that should be in all Christians one toward another, is more
clearly and fully represented and confirmed to us by this Sacrament, then by
any other means.

Q. How may Christ be said to be represented to us in this Sacrament more
clearly and sensibly then in any other means? How Christ in this Sacrament is
most clearly represented.


A. First, Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
this is one end that this Sacrament was ordained for, to put us in remembrance
of Christ.

Secondly, by earthly creatures and outward actions ordained by God, whereof
all our senses can judge and discern, and by that fit and near proportion that
is between them, and that which is represented by them; the Lord does in this
Sacrament teach Christ unto us by all our senses, and Genesis 9.13. Esa. 7.11.
Ier. 19 10.11 Act. 21.11 Ioh. 3.12. Romans 4.11.
consequently more plainly and familiarly then by the word alone.

Q. But why did you say, that in this Sacrament the passion of Christ is more
clearly and sensibly represented to us then in any other means?

A. Because Christ in this Sacrament is represented unto us in Mat. 26.28. 1
Cor. 11.24.25.
no other estate then that he was in when he was crucified, and the Apostle
says 1 Cor. 12.26
that so often as we celebrate this Sacrament, we show forth the Lords death
till he come.

The helps in this Sacrament to put us in mind of Christ's passion.
Q. What helps have we here to represent and put us in mind of the passion of
Christ?

A. First, we have in this Sacrament, not only bread, which signifies his
body; but wine, which signifies his blood: whereby it is evident that Christ
is here represented, offered and given unto us, as he was at that time when
his blood was separated from his body.

Q. But if the Bread were dipped in the Wine (as in some ancient Churches it
was wont to be, and is yet used to be in some places) were it not every whit as
sufficient to represent Christ unto us, as if they were given and received
severally and apart?

A. No verily: for first our faith in this Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.26.
is specially directed to the passion of Christ, as we have already showed.

Secondly, Act 20.28 Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 13.^0 1. Pet. 1.19.
the death of Christ was not natural but violent and bloody, Luke 22.44 Psalm.
22.16 Ioh. 20.25. and 19.34.
and in his passion his blood was separated from his body, and powered out and
shed abundantly.

Thirdly, it was necessary for our salvation that Christ should not only die,
but in his passion shed his blood for us, Exo. 12.21. Heb. 11.28 Leu. 16.14.15.
Nu. 19 3-5 Heb. 9.22.
that so he might show himself the only true mean of the redemption of his
Church, that was shadowed and figured in all the sacrifices under the Law.

Q. What other help have we in this Sacrament, to represent and put us in
mind of the passion of Christ?

A. The bread is solemnly and in the sight of the congregation broken in
sunder, and the wine powered forth, and that by the ordinance and commandment
of Christ.

Q. May not then whole cakes (as among the Papists) be delivered and received
in this Sacrament?

A. No verily.

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, because Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22 Luk 22.19.
in all those places of holy Scripture where mention is made of this Sacrament,
this rite of the breaking of the bread is named: Act 2.42. and 20.7
yea the whole action in this Sacrament is called breaking of bread: and 1 Cor.
11.26.
the Apostle repeating the words of institution, mentions this rite twice.

Secondly, because the inward action that is represented to us thereby is most
necessary for us to be put in mind of.

Q. What is that?

A. The Esa. 53.5.6.
breaking of the body of Christ, and shedding of his blood; yea all those
infinite torments that he did endure both in body and soul for us.

Q. As you have showed how Christ and his bloody passion is represented to us
in this Sacrament; so tell me what helps we have here, to represent to our
souls the nourishment and strength to persevere in the state of grace, which we
receive by the merit of his passion?

A. First, there is not one element given and received here, but two; Ioh.
6.54 55 35.
to teach, that both meat and drink, that is, sufficient nourishment for our
souls, is to be found in Christ.

Q. But if bread alone were given to Gods people in this Sacrament (as in the
Church of Rome) were not that sufficient, seeing the blood of Christ (as of all
other living men) was, and is, contained in his body?

A. No verily: that cannot be done without manifest sacrilege: for:

First, Christ in the institution of this Sacrament, Mat. 26.28. Mar. 14.23
Luke 22, 20
ordained and Mat. 26.27. 1. Cor. 11.25
commanded all his Disciples (and in them the whole Church, which was, as J
have before said, represented by them) that they should as well take and drink
of the cup, as eat the bread. And 1. Cor. 11 26-29,
the Apostle by virtue of this ordinance and institution inioined to all the
Corinthians the use of the cup as well as of the bread. Yea the Lord (as
foreseeing this sacrilege of the Papists) has Mat. 7 2.28. Mar. 14.23.24.
more expressly commanded the use of the cup to all, then he has done the use
of the bread.

Secondly, it was necessary that we should in this Sacrament have two elements,
that might represent the full and sufficient nourishment and refection that we
have in Christ: 1 Cor. 10.34.
for else our state had been worse, then of the people of God under the law,
and our Sacraments less clear the^ theirs.

Thirdly, in that state wherein Christ is represented and offered to us in this
Sacrament (namely in his passion) Luke 22.44. Ioh. 19.34.
his blood was separated from his body.

Q. What other helps have we in this Sacrament to represent to our souls the
nourishment and strength to persevere in the state of grace, which we receive
by the merit of Christ's passion?

A. First, bread and wine are given and received here, which are most generally
used thorowout the world; Psalm. 104 14 5. Genesis 39.6 Mat. 6.11.
the one for the strengthening and nourishment of the body: Psalm. 104.15. and
4.7. P^o. 31.6.7 1. Tim. 5.23
the other for the que^ching of the thirst, refreshing them that faint and
cheering the heart of them, that are in heaviness, and are therefore most fit
to represent to the soul, the Ioh. 6.35.
strength and Pro.. 92.5 Cant. 1.2.4. and 5.1. and 7.9. Ioh. 15.1. Mat. 11.28
refreshing it receives by Christ.

Secondly, this bread and wine is not only received in this Sacrament, but
Mat. 26.26.27. Mat. 1^.22 1 Cor. 14.24
every commmunicant does eat and drink it, and that by the commandment of
Christ. Which action as it is of all other the chief mean of nourishment, and
makes our food of the same substance with us, so is it most fit to represent
the Ioh. 6.35.40.51.56. Ephesians. 5.30.
sound nourishment and comfort that we have by Christ, and that we are by
faith made all one with him.

Q. As you have showed how Christ and his passion and this benefit we receive
by the merit thereof is represented unto us, How the benefits of Christ are
more particularly offered unto us in this Sacrament, then by any other means.
so tell me now how all this is more particularly offered and applied unto us in
this Sacrament then by any other means.

A. The bread and wine is Mat. 26.26.27. Man. 14.22 Luke 22.17.19. 1 Cor.
11.24* 25.
particularly offered, and every communicant (according to the commandment
that is given in the name of Christ) does receive, eat and drink the same,
Ioh. 6.32 Romans 8.30.
which is most effectual to teach and persuade us, that the Lord does offer
and give us the body and blood of his son, and that it is the will of God 1
Ioh. 3.23
that every one of us should, and that every one that comes worthily to this
Sacrament does receive and apply Christ to himself for the nourishment and
comfort of his soul.

Q. Why was it said that Christ, and this benefit of his passion, is not only
represented and offered, but verily exhibited and given unto us in this
Sacrament?

A. Because this Sacrament is not ordained to be a bare and naked sign, or as
a picture that puts us in mind of one that is absent, Romans 4.1^ 1. Cor. 10.16
but to be a seal also, with and by which the Lord does verily convey and
bestow Christ upon us, and confirm and make sure to us this benefit of his
passion.

Q. Is Christ then indeed present in this Sacrament? Whether Christ be indeed
present in this Sacrament, and how.


A. Yes verily: Christ himself is not only signified and represented, but
truly present, given and received in this Sacrament; yet not corporally, Ioh.
6.63.
but spiritually and sacramentally present: nor offered by the minister unto the
body, but by the Lord to the faith of the worthy receiver.

That Christ is not corporally present.
Q. How may it appear that Christ is not corporally present in this Sacrament?

A. First, 1 Cor. 10.3.4.
because the Sacraments which Gods people enioied under the Law, were in
substance the same with our Sacraments; and in them Christ was not corporally
present, but only spiritually and sacramentally.

Secondly, we receive no other thing, nor in any other manner in the
Sacrament, then the Disciples did in the first institution thereof; and we are
sure that Christ's body and blood were not corporally received by them, but
only spiritually and sacramentally.

Thirdly, Ioh. 13.1. and 14.2.19.25.28. and 16.4.5.7.16.28.
as our Savior did often foretell his disciples that (in respect of his bodily
presence) he should leave the world and go unto his Father, Luc. 24.51. Act.
1.9.10.11.
so he was indeed in the sight of them all taken up into heaven, and God (that
cannot lie) has Act. 3.21
told us that the heavens must contain him until the end of the world. Mat.
24.23.
So that if any shall say unto us now, since the time of his ascension, here is
Christ; or there he is, we are straightly charged not to believe it.

Fourthly, we are sure Heb. 10.5.
that Christ has but one body, and that his body even since his resurrection
is a true body, and Mat. 28.6.7. Mar. 16.6.7.
such as cannot be in many places at once, and Mar. 16.7. Luc. 24.39. Ioh.
^^.20.27
that it fills a place wheresoever it is, and may be both seen and felt, and
therefore it is not possible that he should be corporally present, whersoeuer
this Sacrament is administered, nor corporally received by every one that
receives this Sacrament; and if it be impossible that his glorified body
should be in many places at once, or in any place where it can neither be seen
or felt, then much less can his crucified body (whereunto yet our faith is
directed in this Sacrament, and not unto his glorified body) be so.

Lastly, as it is not possible that he should be corporally present or
corporally received in the Sacrament, so if it might be, yet were it no way
needful or profitable for us that it should be so. For as Ioh. 7.39 and 16.7.
and 20.17.
all the benefits that the Church receives by Christ, have been far more
plentifully communicated unto her since his ascension into heaven, then when
he was corporally present with her upon earth, in which respect it was
profitable for her to lose his bodily presence: so Ioh. 6.62.63.
the spiritual presence of Christ, and our feeding on him by faith, is far
more effectual to the comfort and salvation of our fowls, then any bodily
presence and feeding could possible be. Why the bread and wine is called the
body and blood of Christ.


Q. Why then is the bread called the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of
Christ?

A. First, because the Lord has Genesis 17.10.11. Exodus 12.11. and 24.8. 1 Cor.
10.4
ever bin wont in speaking of his Sacraments, to give unto the outward sign,
the name of the thing signified thereby.

Secondly, the reason why the Lord so speaks of Sacraments, is to show how
certain and near that spiritual presence and union is, that by the power of
his spirit is made between the sign and the thing signified (how far soever
they be distant in place, the one from the other) and that as verily, as the
one is offered and given to the body, so certainly is the other offered and
given to the soul of the faithful receiver.

Thirdly, this manner of speech is more plain and effectual to lift up our
hearts from the earthly elements unto the consideration of the heavenly matter
represented by them, then if he should have called them only the signs of his
body and blood.

Q. As you have showed me how Christ and his passion, How our Communion with
the faithful is thereby represented and confirmed.
and the benefit we receive thereby, is not only sensibly represented, but
particularly offered and applied, and verily exhibited also unto us; so tell me
now how that Communion which we have with all the fait^full and the mutual
love that should be in all Christians, one toward another, is represented and
confirmed to us in this Sacrament.

A. First, we are partakers of no other elements here, 1. Cor. 10.17.
then all the rest (not only of the same congregation where we receive without
respect of persons, but all the faithful thorowout the world) are partakers of:
which was one cause why our Savior made choice of bread and wine, which of all
other creatures are most universally used thorowout the world, for the
nourishment and comfort of the body.

Secondly, this Sacrament by the ordinance of Christ is to be administered in
the most public congregation; and Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22.19. 1. Cor.
11.24.

That this Sacrament is to be administered publicly.


the sacramental actions to be performed by the minister (as near as
conveniently they may be) but once for all that receive together.

Q. How may it appear that the Lord ha^h ordained this Sacrament should be
administered publicly, Genesis 17.26.27. Luc. 59. 2. Chro. 30.35.13. and 35.18.
Mat. 3.5.6.13. Luc. 5.21. Act. 2.42. and 20.7. 1. Cor. 11.18.10.
and not in private?

A. First, it has been the practice of Gods church, commended in the word, to
celebrate the Sacraments in solemn assemblies.

Secondly, Exodus 12.6.47. Deuteronomy. 12.5.6 Leu. 17.3.4
the Lord has commanded his Sacraments should be so celebrated, and 1. Cor.
11.22.33.34.
not otherwise.

Thirdly, the sacraments are Romans 4.11.
seals of the covenant of grace; which is not appropriated to any few, but
Pro. 8.23. and 9.3. Mar. 16.15. Act. 2.39. 1. Job. 2.2. Mat. 26.28.
is offered in common to the whole Church; and 1. Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27.28.
Ephe. 4.5.
wherein all (how far so^uer they differ one from another in worldly
respects) have equal interest; and therefore as they do concern the public
privileges of all, they must needs be actions of a public nature, and
should be publikelie administered.

Fourthly, in the use of the Sacraments, we Genesis 17.11. Exodus 13.9.
make profession of our faith, and Exodus 12.14. 1. Cor. 11.26.
celebrate with praise and thanksgiving, the remembrance of the great benefit
of our redemption; both which duties are then performed Psalm. 22.22. and
40.9.10. and 149.1.
in most acceptable manner unto God, when they are done in the most public and
solemn assemblies of his people.

Fifthly, the dignity and reverence due to the Sacraments requires that they
should be administered publicly in the assembly of all Gods people, and with
the prayers of all.

Lastly, it may appear that in this Sacrament the Lord requires this
solemnity more then in any other he has given at any time to his Church;
because in it he has instituted such elements, as might be common to the
whole Church; and Mat. 26.26.27. Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
brake the bread, and powered forth the wine but once in the sight of all, and
spoke the words of institution but once to them all together; and ordained it
for this end (among others) to testify and confirm the mutual love that
should be in all the faithful one toward another.

Q. Do you then condemn all such, as being unable to come to the
congregation, do desire this Sacrament to be administered to them in private?

A. No, but first al Christians are to be taught, that they may not put off the
receiving of this Sacrament till their sickness, but receive it when they may
with the rest of Gods people in the public congregation; and that it is their
ignorance and infirmity to desire it in private.

Secondly, if at any time (upon extraordinary occasion) the Sacrament be
administered in a private house, yet ought a sufficient company of the faithful
to be present, and to communicate in it, and that not without the ministry and
preaching of the word.

Reasons against private Communions.
Q. How are Christians to be dissuaded from the desire of the Sacrament in
private?

A. First, by the consideration



Thirdly, because they shall

Lastly, because it is 1. Sam. 4.3.10. 2. Sam. 15.25.
folly Exodus 11.16.
the other side we are to assure our selves, that the Lord both can and will
help and comfort us without the outward means, when we cannot have them in
such sort as he has ordained, but are deprived of them, not by our own
negligence, but by the hand of God.

Q. As you have showed at large how our communion with Christ and his Church is
both represented and confirmed to us by the bread and wine, the breaking and
pouring forth, the giving and receiving of the same in this Sacrament; so tell
me now whether all bread and wine that is broken and powered forth, given and
received, may not as well serve to represent and confirm these things unto us
as these elements and actions that are used in this Sacrament.

A. No: for bread and wine hy nature serve only for the nourishment and comfort
of the body; neither are they at all effectual to yield any strength or
comfort to the soul, being used any where else but only in this Sacrament.

M. How are these elements and actions in the Sacraments made more effectual
to represent and confirm these spiritual and heavenly things, Of the
consecration of this Sacrament.
then the same elements and actions used any where else?

A. By being consecrated and put apart from that use they served to by nature,
unto this holy and spiritual use.

Q. How are the elements and actions in this Sacrament thus consecrated and put
apart from that use they served to by nature, unto this holy and spiritual use?

A. Partly by that which Christ himself did in the first institution of this
Sacrament, Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22
and partly by that which the Minister of the word of God and the congregation
do, 1 Cor. 10.16
whenever this Sacrament is administered according to the institution of
Christ.

Q. How did Christ himself consecrate these elements and actions unto this
holy and spiritual use?

A. First by Mat. 26.27. Luke 22.19 1 Cor. 11.24.
the thanksgiving and prayer he made unto his father, at that time when he
first instituted this Sacrament.

Secondly, by instituting and ordaining these elements and actions in this
Sacrament to serve unto this end, not only Mat. 26.26.27.
using them so himself, Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.25.
but commanding his Church to do so also, and Mat. 26.26. this is my body. Mat.
26.28. this is my blood.
promising unto us his gracious and effectual presence in the use of these
elements according to his ordinance.

Q. How do the Minister of the word of God and the congregation consecrate
these elements and sacramental actions.

A. First, 1. Tim. 4.5
by declaring the institution of this Sacrament, and how Christ did consecrate
and put apart these elements and actions to this end and use, and using 1. Tim.
4.4.
them according to this his institution.

Secondly, by giving public thanks unto God, both for the work of our
redemption by the blood of his son, and also for making it known; offering and
assuring it unto us not only by his word, but most plainly and sensibly by
this Sacrament.

Thirdly, 1. Tim. 4.5.
by earnest prayer unto the Lord, that he would be present with, and bless
this his own ordinance, making it effectual to those ends that himself
appointed it for.

At whose hands we are to receive this Sacrament.
Q. But why do you mention the minister of Christ when you speak of the
consecrating of this Sacrament? Is it any matter who does consecrate it, or
deliver it, or at whose hands we do receive it?

A. Yes verily: for first, as it is not lawful for any person without
commission and authority from the King, to use and apply the Kings seal to
convey any assurance in worldly matters: so it must needs be a great sin, for
any (having no calling and commission thereunto from Christ) to take upon him
to administer this Sacrament, Romans 4.11.
being the public seal of the King of Kings, and of the common, wealth of
Israel.

Secondly, God 1. Chr. 13.10.11. and 15.12.13 2. Chro. 26 16-20.
has been wont seuerly to punish such as have taken upon them to deliver his
Sacraments without his calling and commission; and 2. Chapter 13 9.12.15.
has also been much offended with the people amongst whom this fault has been
committed.

Q. How may this appear, that only the Ministers and Preachers of the word of
God, have a calling and authority from Christ to administer this Sacrament?

A. First, because we find Genesis 6 14 compared with 2. Pet. 2.5. Genesis 17.23.
compared with Genesis 20.7. Deuteronomy. 33.10. 2. Chro. 35.3.6. Mar. 1.4. Mat. 28.19
that all the sacraments which God has at any time instituted in his Church,
have been committed by him unto such as were Ministers and Preachers of the
word, that by them they might be delivered unto the Church. Insomuch as we
read, the people of God 2. Chr. 30 3. and 35.3.6. Ezr. 6.19.20.
could not celebrate the Passover till such time as the Priests and Leuits (who
were appointed of God both to teach the people and to sacrifice, and minister
the other Sacraments) were sanctified and prepared unto that service.

Secondly, only the Ministers and Preachers of the word, are by reason of
their special office and function, 1. Cor. 4.1.2.
called in the Scriptures the Lords stewards, and disposers of his mysteries
unto his Church.

Thirdly, they only are said 2. Cor. 5.20. Exo. 4.16.
to represent the Lord and to bear his person and be in his stead unto us in
the matters of his worship; as the Magistrate does in the civil government and
affairs of this life: and so are both his mouth unto us to deliver us his
word, and his hand unto us to deliver us his Sacraments. And Ioh. 4.1.2 Ephesians.
2.17. Luke 10.16.
that which is done by them in these matters according to his word, is said to
be done by the Lord himself, because y he has promised to be present with
them and to work with them, ratifying from heaven his own ordinances in their
ministry.

Q. Does then the worthiness and efficacy of the Sacrament, Whether the
worthiness and efficacy of the Sacrament do depend upon the goodness of the
Minister.
depend upon the goodness of the Minister that delivers it unto us?

A. No: but it depends wholly upon the ordinance of God, and upon the truth
and power of Christ that did institute it. Yet must it needs make much for the
security and comfort of a Christian to receive it from such a one as he
knows has authority and commission from Christ to deliver it unto him.

Whether it be needful that the word be preached at the administration of the
Sacrament.
Q. As you have showed the necessity of a Minister and Preacher of the word in
the administration of this Sacrament; so tell me whether it be needful that
the word should be always preached at the same time when this Sacrament is to
be administered.

A. Yes verily: for though to them that have already believed through the
preaching of the Gospel, it may be a true Sacrament and seal of Gods
covenant, though the word be not preached immediately before it, being
administered by a true minister of God; yet is the ordinance of God in some
degree transgressed, and the comfort that Gods people should receive by this
Sacrament greatly hindered, if at any time the Sacrament be administered and
that duty neglected.

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, Mar. 1.4. Act. 19.4 and 10.37. Act. 8.12.35.37.38. and 10.34.47. and
16.14 15.32.33. and 2.41. Act. 2.42. and 20.7.
because we find that it has always been the practice of Gods Church,
commended to us in the holy Scriptures to have the word preached at all times
when they have been assembled to receive the Sacraments of the new testament.

Secondly, seeing this Sacrament can never do us good till we have attained
unto a true faith, which ordinarily is wrought by preaching; it must needs be
most fit and profitable, that whenever the people of God are to receive this
seal of the covenant of grace, they may have the covenant it self (whereupon
the force and efficacy of the seal depends) published, opened and applied
unto them; considering the great need we all stand in (at that time
especially) to have our faith quickened and stirred up in us; and that no means
can be so effectual to quicken it, as that whereby it was first begotten.

Q. After that the bread and wine have been thus consecrated by the minister of
Christ, are they not then by virtue of this consecration changed from that
which they were before? Whether after consecration the elements be not
chauged.


A. Yes: but they are changed only in their use, not in their nature; because
here they are not used to that end, that other bread and wine are used for;
namely, to the nourishment and comfort of the body, but to a holy and
spiritual end; but the substance of the bread and wine remains the very same
after the consecration that it was before.

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, because the Scripture 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.27.23. Mat. 26.29
calls them bread and wine even after they were consecrated.

Secondly, it can be no Sacrament unless such an outward sign remain as i^
by good proportion fit to represent the nourishment and refreshing we have by
Christ; which the substance only of the bread and wine (and not the accidents
thereof) is able to do.

Thirdly, if the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the body and
blood of Christ, A^t. 2.31
it were not possible that by long keeping they should putrify and corrupt.

Fourthly, if the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the very
body and blood of Christ, then the reprobate which receive this Sacrament,
should also eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, Io^. 6.54 56. 1. Io^.
^.12
which is impossible, and contrary to the holy Scriptures.

Q. If any of that bread and wine that stood on the Lords table when the
elements and the whole action was in this sort consecrated as you have said,
That that part of the bread, and wine which remains after the administration,
does not differ from co amon bre^d and wine.
do remain after the administration of the Sacrament is ended, does it the^
differ from common bread and wine, or is it more holy by virtue of this
consecration?

A. No verily: for seeing the consecration (as we have heard) changes them not
in nature but in use only; and one part of the consecration stands in using
them according to Chrsts institution; no more of the bread and wine can be
holy, then is given and received in the Sacrament.

The use of this first Grace which by due examination is to be found in every
communicant.
Q. As you have showed at large that none can receive this Sacrament worthily
but such as find in themselves an unfeigned and earnest desire to it; and
declared also the reasons that should move us thus to desire it: so tell me now
what use is to be made of all this doctrine.

A. It serves principally for reproof of two sorts of people.

First, them that (not being withheld by sickness or like necessary
impediments) do either out of too base an estimation they have of this
Sacrament, or out of a careless neglect to prepare themselves unto it, absent
themselves from it, when it is administered in the congregation whereof they are
members.

Secondly, such as receive it some times, yet without a sincere and right
desire of it or any appetite unto it at all; but either for that they would
thereby escape the danger of laws; or because they would conform themselves
to the custom of the place where they live; or upon a superstitious persuasion
that it will purge them from all their sins and infuse grace and holiness into
their souls. Whether we be not bound to receive this Sacrament, as often as it
is administered.


Q. Is every Christian then bound to receive this Sacrament every time that it
is administered in that congregation whereof he is a member, unless he be by
sickness or some such like necessary impediment kept from it?

A. Yes surely: for it is no less necessary to receive this Sacrament when we
may, then it is 1. These. 5.19.20. Heb 2.3.
to hear the word preached when we may; or then, Act. 2.41 and 8.12.36 and
16.33. and 22.16.
it is necessary for them that are converted to the faith, for themselves, and
for Christian parents for their children, to seek and desire the Sacrament of
baptism upon the first opportunity that God shall offer unto them. That it is
a dangerous sin to neglect the receiving of this Sacament.


Q. How may it appear to be a sin of such danger to neglect thus the
receiving of this Sacrament?

A. First, the Number. 9.7 2. Chro. 30.1.5.21.26. and 35.7.18 Luke 2.41.
zeal and desire that Gods people under the Law showed unto their Sacraments,
the pains and cost they were at to enjoy them being by the holy Ghost
commended to us in the word for our imitation, should make us ashamed of our
coldness and careless neglect of this Sacrament; which in respect Mat. 11 11.
both of the cleerenes of it, and Heb. 3.5.6. compared with Heb. 11.28.
of the person that did first institute it, is far more great and excellent
then they were.

Secondly, the Genesis 17.14. Exodus 4.24.26. Numb. 9.13
great severity of God in threatening and punishing the neglect of his
Sacraments under the Law, is recorded in the Scriptures to admonish us, and may
assure us, that he will much less bear with the neglect of this Sacrament.

Thirdly, this neglect of coming to this Sacrament when we may, argues our
shameful unthankfulness for the great benefit of our redemption by the death
of Christ, which in this 1. Cor. 11.26.
Sacrament (which is therefore called the Eucharist) we are appointed to
celebrate the remembrance of, with solemn praise and thanksgiving.

Lastly, it argues a profane and open contempt both of the commandment of
our Savior Christ, who has charged us to come, and to come often to this
Sacrament; and of those inestimable benefits which he offers us in it; and of
the Church and people of God, from whose fellowship we do thus divide and
excommunicate our selves. Esa. 7.12 13. Mat. 22 7. Luc. 14.24. Heb. 2.3.
Which sin we may be wel^ assured the Lord must needs be highly offended with.

Whether want of Charity, or other worldly distractions be a sufficient excuse
for not receiving.
Q. But if a man find himself through uncharitableness or worldly
distractions unfit and unprepared, is it not much better for him to abstain
than to come to this Sacrament?

A. Indeed, no man ought to come that finds himself unprepared: But this is no
excuse for them that do not so much the more carefully endeavor to prepare
themselves: For,

First, they that choose rather to deprive themselves of the benefit of this
Sacrament then they will freely forgive such as have wronged them, or seek
reconciliation, or take pains to prepare their hearts unto it; do show
manifest contempt of Gods mercy, and Acts 13.46.
judge themselves unworthy of Christ and all his merits, and shall one day be
judged despisers of their own salvation.

Secondly, while by uncharitableness and carelessness to prepare themselves,
they refuse this Sacrament, they can have no hope that either Iam. 1.20.21. 1.
Pet. 2.1.2
the word or Man. 11.25, 26.
prayer should do them good: and therefore by this reason they may as well
abstain from heating or reading the word and praiing, as from this Sacrament.

Thirdly, they that feel that they are not only void of malice themselves,
but also unfeignedly willing to use all means of reconciliation with such as
do malice them, 2. Cor. 8.12.
ought not to suffer the hatred of others to keep them from this Sacrament;
but 1. Sam. 30.6.
rather the more they are injured by men, the more need they have to seek
comfort in the Lord by this his holy ordinance.

Q. As you have showed the sin of those that willingly absent themselves from
this Sacrament when they may receive it, The great fault of the^ which receive
this Sacrament with out any desire or sincere appetite.
so tell me how they may also appear to be in great fault that use to receive
it, but yet either without any desire and appetite unto it, or without a
sincere and right desire.

A. First, because as Deuteronomy. 28.47. 1. Chro. 28.9. Psalm. 2.11. 2. Cor. 8.12. and
9.7. Acts. 2.41. Romans 12.11
in all the service we do to God, it is required that we do it not
grudgingly, or as of necessity, but with cheerfulness and ^eruencie of
spirit; so is Deuteronomy. 12.12. and 16.15. 1. Sam. 1.7
it especially required that we come to this heavenly banquet with appetite
and delight because of the great benefits that we celebrate the remembrance of,
and which are offered and confirmed to us in it.

Secondly, if our desire do rise from any other ground then from the
consideration of those reasons we have already mentioned, as either from the
Commandment of our superiors, or the desire we have to be neighbour-like, or
from this conceit, that the deed done will purge us from our sins, we do not
serve the Lord in coming to this Sacrament, but men, and our own selves:
Whether Magistrates may not command and compel their subjects to receive this
Sacrament.
and so make our selves guilty of an heinous profanation of this Sacrament.

Q. May not then magistrates and other superiors command and compel such as
live under their government, to receive this Sacrament, if they shall discern
them to be careless of it?

A. Every one that is in authority may and must also Exodus 12.26.27. 2. Chro.
17.7.
use all means to persuade all such as are under him to a a desire of this
Sacarment, and Genesis 18.19. 2. King. 23.21. 2. Chro. 14.4. and 33.16 and 34.33.
command and compel them also to receive. Yea he must 2. Chro. 15 13.
judge them unworthy to live in any Christian family or commonwealth that will
not receive it: but he may not compel any to receive, whom he knows to be
altogether vninstructed and unwilling, because (besides the profanation of the
Lords holy ordinance that is caused thereby) the man that receives
unwillingly, shall undoubtedly receive his own condemnation. The second grace
that by examination we are to find in our selves, is knowledge.


Q. Hitherto you have declared, how all that would come worthily to this
Sacrament, must find in themselves a sincere and right desire unto it, which
(as you have said) is the first grace required in our preparation thereunto;
tell me now, what is that knowledge which you mentiond as the second grace that
every man must find in himself that would come worthily to this Sacrament.

The first part of that knowledge.
A. First, every one must have that measure of knowledge in the Law of God (the
sum whereof is contained in the ten commandments) as may serve to discover
unto him not only in general the corruption of his nature, whereby he is
quite fallen from that holiness and righteousness which God requires of him,
and become prone to all evil; but also some special and particular sins he
has committed, and the intolerable curse of God due to him for the same.

Secondly, The second part thereof.
every one must have that measure of knowledge in the Gospel, as may serve to
make known unto him, and certainly to assure him of the sufficiency both of
that remedy that is to be found in Christ against all his sins and the
curse of God; and also of the means whereby that remedy is to be made his
own, namely, a lively faith.

Thirdly, The third part thereof.
every one must have that measure of knowledge in the doctrine of this
Sacrament, as may serve to make known to him those helps which God has
ordained in it, both for the representing and making known of Christ and his
merits to all that receive it, and also for the applying and confirming of them
unto himself.

That the knowledge aforesaid is necessary to the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament.
Q. How may it appear that this measure of knowledge is necessarily required of
all that come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. First, because Pro. 19.2 1. Tim. 2.4. Act. 26.18
knowledge is the foundation and beginning of all saving graces: neither can
any man receive any comfort by Christ or any of his ordinances, unless he be
first enlightened with the knowledge of the truth.

Secondly, because til a man Romans 3.20. Mat. 9.12. Gal. 3.24.
by the knowledge of the Law have his sin, and the curse of God due to him
for sin, effectually discovered to him, and Ioh. 4.10
by the knowledge of the Gospel the sufficiency of that remedy that is to be
found in Christ against all his sins and the curse of God, he can never
desire nor esteem of Christ. And til a man by the knowledge of this Sacrament
can discern the helps he may have in it for the quickening and increase of his
faith, he can never desire it, nor come with appetite unto it.

Thirdly, seeing 1. Cor. 1.1 28.29.
none can receive worthily but he that is able to examine himself, and Iam.
1.23 24. and 2.12. John 12.48.
the only rule whereby a man is to examine himself is the word of God, which
consists of these two parts, the Law and the Gospel; it must needs follow
that he which wants that competency of knowledge which I have spoken of, can
not choose but be an unworthy receiver of the Lords Supper if he presume to
come unto it.

Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine concerning the necessity of
knowledge in them that desire to come to the Lords table?

A. First, to teach us that before the Communion be administered to any people,
or they urged to receive it, Mat. 28.19.
there should be care had, that they be first cathechised and instructed; as we
never read that either John the Baptist or any of the Apostles did minister the
Sacraments to any people whom they had not first preached unto and instructed.

Secondly, to discover the sin and fearful estate of the greatest part of
communicant, in this land, who though they be utterly ignorant in the
principles of Religion, and want the means of knowledge, and be void of all
love and desire of knowledge or the means thereof: Eccl. 4.17.
yet will by no means be kept from receiving this Sacrament, at Easter
especially. Which one sin, in so general a profanation of this Sacrament, 1*
Cor. 11.30.31.
were sufficient to bring upon the land all those grievous judgments that have
been, and are still upon it; though it were guilty of no other sin besides.

Q. As you have showed the necessity of a desire to this Sacrament, Faith, the
third grace necessary for preparation.
and of knowledge also, in every one that would come worthily unto it; so tell
me now what that faith is, which you said was the third grace that is
necessarily required to the preparing of us unto this Sacrament.

A. No man can receive this Sacrament worthily unless he have a true
justifying faith, and be undoubtedly assured that Christ with all his merits
do belong unto himself.

Q. How may it appear that none can be worthy or fit to receive but they that
have this faith?

A. First, because this was necessarily required Mar. 16.16. Act. 8.37. and
16.31-34.
of all such as did desire to be baptized.

Secondly, this and all other the Sacraments are appointed of God, Romans
10.14.17.
not to begin, but to confirm faith where it is already begun, and Romans 4.11.
are therefore called seals of the righteousness that is by faith.

Thirdly, as Heb. 4.2.
the word of God which we hear can not profit us at all, unless it be mixed
with faith, so much less can any profit by this visible word that wants
faith which Ioh. 3.14 15. and 8.56.
is both the only eye whereby we may discern the Lords body, and the Ioh.
1.12. and 6.35.36. Ephe. 3.17.
hand and mouth whereby we receive it, and feed upon it.

Lastly, it is not possible that any should have that right desire to this
Sacrament which we have already showed to be so necessary to our worthy
receiving of it, that is not by a lively faith assured that Christ with all his
merits do belong to him. How a Christian may be assured that he is one of
Christ's little flock.


Q. But seeing it is evident by the Scriptures that John 17.9.
Christ with his merits do not belong to all men, but to Luc. 12.32.
a little flock, and that Mat. 7.14.
the greatest part of the world and Mat. 2.214.
even of those that live in the profession of the true Religion shall receive
no benefit by him, how can any poor sinner (that knows himself to be as
unworthy to receive so great a gift from God as any other man) attain to this
undoubted assurance, that he is one of that little flock that Christ died for?

A. The faith of Gods elect is no vain fancy nor uncertain hope, but a
certain assurance, because it is Romans 10.8.
grounded upon the word of God, which is Psalm. 19.7.9.
infallible, and wrought in the heart Gal. 5.22. Romans 8.16.
by the spirit of God, Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18.
that can not lie. What motives there are in the word to persuade a Christian
that he shall be saved.


Q. But how is any particular man able to ground this assurance of his own
salvation upon the word of God? Or, what motives may a man find in the word to
persuade him undoubtedly that he shall be saved, and that Christ with all his
merits do belong to him?

First, that Christ Jesus has by his death and obedience Esa. 53.5.6. and
40.2. Mat. 17.5.
fully satisfied the justice of God and purchased eternal life for all that
can believe in him.

Secondly, that Christ with all his merits Mar. 16.15. Act. 2.39.
are by Gods ordinance in the ministry of the word offered indefinitely to
every one that hears the Gospel, and Esa. 61.1-3. Mat. 9.12.13.
specially to every one that (out of the feeling of the burden and danger of
his sins) can thirst after him.

Thirdly, that Mar. 1.15. Mat. 22.9. Luc. 14.21.23. Mar. 11.24. compared with
Mat. 6.12. 1. Pet. 1.13 1. Ioh. 3.23
every one that hears the Gospel (specially every one that feeling the
burden and danger of his sin can thirst after Christ) is straightly charged and
commanded by the Lord in his word to believe that Mat. 11.28.
Christ and all his merits do belong to himself.

Lastly, that Ioh. 16.9. Mar. 16.16.
no sin or rebellion that a man can possibly commit against God, is accounted
so heinous in his sight, as infidelity, when a man will not believe that Christ
belongs to him, 1. John 5.10.
because in this he makes God a liar, as if offering his son to him in his
Gospel, and comma^ding him to believe, he should not mean as he speaks.

Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine touching the necessity of a
lively faith for the receiving of this Sacrament vvorthilie?

A. First, to persuade every one that professes himself to be a Christian, to
labor for a lively faith: which, Ier. 9.24. Act. 16.34. Romans 5.1.3. Luc.
2.29.30.
as it is the root and foundation of al true comfort both in life and in death,
so without it Heb. 11.6 John 15.4. Acts 15.9. Tit. 1.15.
it is impossible that either this or any other service we do unto God (seem
it otherwise never so good) should be acceptable unto him, or profitable to
our selves.

Secondly, to teach us, that (because this Ephe. 2.8. John 6.44. Ephe. 1.19.20.
faith is the mighty and supernatural work of God, and we are of our selves
by nature every whit) as if not more unable to believe in Christ aright than to
keep all Gods commandments, it stands us upon to make high account of the
ministry of the word preached, which is To. 1.16. and 10.14. 1. Pet. 1.23.
the means that God has chosen and appointed to show his mighty power in,
for the begetting of faith in the hearts of his elect, and in the use of that
holy ordinance of God to cry earnestly unto him for his blessing upon it.

Thirdly, to discover the fearful condition of them, that living altogether
without the ministry of the word preached, and wanting it willingly, or having
never profited by it at all; do yet ordinarily receive this Sacrament: whereas
no man (without an extraordinary and miraculous work of God, and such as Josh.
5 12
he has never been wont to work, when the ordinary means might be had) can
be worthy and fit to receive the Lords Supper, till he have first enioied the
ministry of the word, and been an ordinary and fruitful hearer of the same.

Q. You have showed the necessity of the three first graces, which you said
were required to make a man worthy and fit to come unto the Lords table;
Repentance the fourth grace necessary for preparation.
tell me now what that repentance is, without which, you said, no man can
receive worthily.

A. No man can come worthily unto this Sacrament, What repentance is.
unless he have first unfeignedly repented: that is, Pro. 28.13. Esa. 55.56
Iona. 3.10.
both cast off all his known sins (upon 2. Cor. 7.10.
a hearty sorrow that he offended God by them, and an Eze. 18.31. Romans 12.9.
unfeigned detestation he bears to them) and 2. Cor. 7.11. Psalm. 18.23
also fully purposed and resolved with himself never to return to them again.

Q. How may it appear that none can be worthy or fit to come to the Lords
table, Reasons why repentance is necessary hereunto.
till he have thus repented?

A. First, because we find that under the law none might be admitted to the
Passe-ouer, that had Ezr. 6.21.
not separated themselves from the filthiness of the heathen, and Number. 9.6 2.
Chro. 23.19 and 35.15
cleansed themselves from al legal pollutions.

Secondly, because Hag. 2.13.14. Tit. 1.15. Heb. 10.22
the conscience defiled with any known sin, corrupts all the holy things
of God unto us.

Thirdly, because Mar. 1.15 Mat. 21.32 Act. 3.26. and 5.31.
it is not possible that any man should have a true and lively faith and
assurance of the forgiveness of his sins, that has not thus unfeignedly
repented.

The use concerning the necessity of repentance.
Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine concerning the necessity of
repentance?

A. To persuade every man to labor and take pains with his own heart, both to
find out and know his special sins, and to bring his heart to this unfeigned
repentance for them, especially at that time when he prepares himself to come
to the Lors table. Because as without this repentance it is not possible that
we should come worthily unto it; Iam. 4.8. Ge. 35.2.5. Iud. 10.16 1. Sa^. 7.3.4
Iona. 3.8.^0
so it will make whatsoever service we do unto God far more acceptable to him
and fruitful to our selves, when before such time as we draw near unto God
therein, we do first (out of that child-like fear and love we bear unto
him) cast away such sins as we know by our selves.

Q. What principal points are there in Gods word, Motives to repentance.
by the meditation whereof our senseless and profane hearts may be moved unto
this repentance?

A. It will be profitable for us to consider of these points following:

First, that for the transgressing of Gods commandment, even in a small thing,
not only Romans 5.14.19.
our first parents and all the race of mankind were deprived of eternal
happiness, and of all grace to do well, and became subject to everlasting
damnation in the life to come, and infinite miseries in this life, and unto
such a corruption of nature as whereby they are made prone to all manner of
sin; but 2. Pet. 2.4
also an infinite number of Angels (the excellentest creatures that ever God
made) did not only lose their happiness, but became the most miserable and
accursed creatures of all the rest.

Secondly, Romans 1.18 1. Cor. 10 5-5. 2. Pet. 2.6.
the fearful plagues that for sin God has brought both upon sundry
persons, and parts of the world in old time, and Psalm. 7.11 2. Ephesians. 3.5.
does still every day; and also 2. Pet. 2.5
upon the whole world in the general flood; upon Romans 11.21.22. 1. The. 2.16
the Jews, whom of all other people he once loved best; and upon 2. Sam. 12
10-12 Psalm. 51.8. Job. 13.26.
many of his most dear children: which all are 1. Cor. 11.10.
recorded in the word and executed in our sight and hearing, for us to consider
and profit by.

Thirdly, the Zach. 12.10. Esa. 53.3-5 Mat. 26.37.38. Luke 22.43 44. Mat. 27.46
Heb. 5.7.
unspeakable and infinite torments which the son of God in his passion
endured for us, as well in his soul as in his body, 1. Pet. 1.18.19. Gal.
3.13. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
without which we could never have been redeemed from the least of all our
sins, nor from the intolerable wrath of God due to us for the same.

Newness of life the fifth grace necessary for preparation.
Q. What mean you by that newness of life, which you said was the fifth grace
that is required of them that would come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. No man can be fit to receive this Sacrament that does not unfeignedly love
the Lord and his holy word; and that is not only willing, but able also in
some measure to obey him in all things, being fruitful in all good works,
especially in the duties of his special calling.

Reasons why it is necessary.
Q. How may it appear that there is such necessity of this newness of life
which you have spoken of?

A. First, because we find that under the law none might be admitted unto the
Passe-ouer Ex. 12.48
unless he were not only circumcised himself, but did circumcise also all
the males that did belong unto him.

Secondly, because no man is within the covenant of grace (and consequently,
this Sacrament which is the seal thereof, can belong to none) but Ier. 31.31.
Eze. 36.26 27.
such only as to whom God has given a new heart and a new spirit; and in
whose hearts he has written his Law, and put his spirit within them, to cause
them to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments and do them.

Thirdly, because no man can say he has a true faith (without which, as we
have heard before, this Sacrament can do us no good) unless he feel it Gal.
5.6.
working in him by love Luke 1.6. Act. 24.16
a conscience of all Gods holy commandments; and not only a desire, but M^^.
3.10 2. Tim. 1.7 2. Cor. 5.17
some ability also and strength to do his will, Psalm. 1.3.
especially in the duties of his special calling.

The use of the doctrine concerning the necessity of newness of life.
Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine, concerning the necessity of
newness of life in them that would come worthily to this Sacrament?

A. To show that the desire that most men have to this Sacrament, as also their
knowledge, faith, and repentance, is counterfeit and hypocritical, and
consequently their coming to this Sacrament dangerous and damnable, because
that howsoever they profess these things, yet are they altogether void of the
practice of piety and righteousness, and perform not any duty constantly and
holily, either unto God in the exercises of his religion public or private, or
unto man in the particular duties of their calling, or in the general duties
of justice and mercy.

Q. What is that charity, Charity the sixth grace necessary for preparation.
which is the sixth and last of all those graces, which you said were
necessary for the preparing and making of us fit and worthy to come to the
Lords table?

A. No man can be worthy and fit to come unto the Lords table, that does not
unfeignedly Col. 3.13 Mat. 18.35.
forgive all that have any way offended him, Romans 12.19. 1. These. 5.15
and cast off al purpose and desire of revenge: 2. that is not willing (in love
and obedience to God, and desire to win his neighbor unto peace) to Psalm.
34.14. and 120.7 Mat. 5.23.24.
seek reconciliation with all such as he has been at variance with, yea
Genesis 13.8 1. Pet. 5.5.
though they be his inferiors, and Mat. 18.15.
though the offense began on their part: that 3. does not 1. Th. 3.12
love all men (even Mat. 5.44.
his enemies) and that 1. Ioh. 3.18 Ephe. 4.32. Romans 12.9.
not in word only but in deed and truth, being ready by all means to do them
good: 4. that does not bear an Mat. 12.50. 1. Ioh. 3.14
entire and brotherly affection to all the godly, Psalm. 16.3
abounding so much the more in love to them as he sees the graces of God to
abound in them. Reasons of the necessity thereof.


Q. How may it appear that this charity you speak of, is so necessary as that
without it none can receive this Sacrament worthily?

A. First, because it is Mat. 5.23.24. 1. Tim. 2.8. 1. Pet. 3.7. 1. Pet. 2.1.
Iam. 1.20.
of^ said in the holy Scriptures, tha^ no service we do to God can be
acceptable unto him or profitable to our selves, while we be out of charity
with our neighbors.

Secondly, above all the parts of Gods service, Charity is principally
required in the receiving of this Sacrament, because as 1 Cor. 10.16.17.
we do herein make open profession of our union with Christ and with his
Church: so one principal end for which it was instituted, was to confirm and
increase our love one toward an other. Yea what benefit soever is offered
therein unto us Ephesians. 3.6. and 4.16.
we can no other way be capable of, then as we are united and knit together as
lively and feeling members to the whole body of Gods Church. Which also was the
cause why our Savior in the institution of this Sacram^nt and administering it
to his Disciples, John 13.14.34.35.
labored with the^ in nothing so much, as to confirm them in love and
charity one with another.

Thirdly, it is not possible that any man should 1. Cor. 13.2.
have true faith that wants charity, or Mat. 6.12.14.15. and 18.35.
be assured that God has pardoned his sins, that is not able to forgive
them that have offended him.

The use of the former Doctrine.
Q. What use is to be made of this doctrine, concerning the necessity of
charity in all them that desire this Sacrament to their comfort?

A. To persuade every Christian (as at al other times, so) specially then when
he prepares himself to come to the Lords table, to strive against his
uncharitableness, and seriously to labor to bring his heart unto this love
that ^ath been described.

Q. But seeing we are all by nature void of hearty love even toward them that
never wronged us, Motives to persuade to forgive wrongs.
and marvelously prone to suspect, backbite and malice all men* yea, we are
unnatural, unkind, and unthankful even toward them to whom we are most
nearly bound, tell me by what means we may be persuaded to forgive, and
bear this hearty love to them that are our enemies?

A. It shall be profitable for us to consider of these things following.

First, that that which we have to forgive the greatest enemy we can possibly
have, is Mat. 18.24.28.
nothing in comparison to that which we desire and hope the Lord will forgive
us. And that the Lord Mat. 6.15 and 18.35.
will never remit to us that were his enemies the ten thousand talents we owe
to him, if we be not able to remit to our brother the hundred pence that he
owes us: and that if we did rightly believe and consider how merciful and
kind the Lord has been to us, and how much he has forgiven us, Mat. 18 33.
1. Ioh. 4.11
we could not choose but readily and cheerfully forgive, and love our greatest
enemies.

Secondly, that the man whom we so hate, Genesis 50.17. Mat. 18.33 and 24.49.
is our fellow servant, professor of the same Religion with us; yea, Genesis 13.8
Act. 7.26. Mal. 2.10. 1. Pet. 3.7.
our brother that has the Lord to his father, and the true Church for his
mother as well as we; and is fellow heir with us of the grace of life. And
(admit he be yet a^ most wicked man, and uncalled) yet he is one who^ we see
the Lord our God Mat. 5 45 Romans 2.4.
vouchsafes many favors unto, and whose conversion he seeks by all means;
yea Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
whom he has so dearly and tenderly loved, that he spared not his own
son but sent him to endure infinite torments in soul and body even for him:
and that there is no grace in us, nor love unto God, 1. Ioh. 5.1
if we cannot love them that we see are so dear unto him.

Thirdly, that our enemy Esa. 10.5 and 45.7. Lam. 3 37. Ioh. 1.21. 2. Sam.
16.10.
is but the Lords instrument: and the wrongs he has done us are not permitted
only, but sent from God; and that though our enemy has no just cause given him
to deal so with us, Psalm. 39.9 and 119.75.
yet the Lord has: and that therefore when we can discern the Lords just hand
in the wrongs are done us, and receive that spiritual profit which Gods
children have always received by his corrections, 2. Sam. 16.10. Job. 1.20.21
we shall have no just cause to rage against him whom the Lord uses as his
instrument to humble and reform us by.

Fourthly, that Eccle. 7.23.24. Gal. 6.1.
we our selves have either wronged others as much as our enemy has done us,
or at least we have been prone to do it; and 2. Chr. 28.10.
how can we so much abhor an other for that fault which we our selves are
so subject unto?

Lastly, that the hurt we have received from our enemy, or that we can do to
him by private revenge, is not comparable to that which we shall do to our
selves if we continue in malice. For, besides that we do thereby make God
our enemy, and Pro. 24.17.18. and 25.21.22. and 20.22. Number. 12.3.9.10. 2. Sam.
16 12.
cut our selves from all hope that he should take our part, and revenge our
quarrel, we do also deprive our selves of all benefit by the word and
Sacraments and prayer (as I have above showed) yea we cause them all to turn
into poison unto us. And what desperate folly were this in us, Whether a
christian is to love and think well of all men.
to kill our selves that we might hurt our enemies?

Q. Is it then the duty of a Christian to love and think well of all men?

A. No verily: for 2. Chron. 19.2. Psalm. 139.21 Pro. 29.27
he may and ought to hate the enemies of God; and Mat. 7.16.20. 1. Cor. 5.12
Pro. 17.15 Psalm 15.4
to censure and judge the tree by his fruit, disliking and thinking evil of
all such as by their deeds declare themselves to be wicked men. Yea, Psalm.
26.4.5. Romans 16.17 2. These. 3.14 15.
he may not only shun all voluntary familiarity with them, but 2. Chro. 19
2. Pro. 25.23. 3. Ioh 10. Job 8.20. Mar. 3.5.
also by countenace and other means witness his dislike, and show himself
strange unto them: so that he be privy to himself in the vprightnes of his
heart, that he misliketh them for Psalm. 69.9. and 139.21.
their sins against God, not for the wrongs they have done to himself; that
1. Cor. 13.6
he takes no pleasure to hear or speak of their sins; Psalm. 119 136.139.158.
but can mourn for them: and that he Pro. 17.5 and 24.17.18 Ioh. 31.29.
reioiceth no^ in, nor desires their hurt, but is Psalm. 35.13.14. ^er. 18.20.
able heartily to pray for them; and both ready and desirous to show Mat. 5.44.
Gal. 6.10. 1. These. 4.15
them kindness when he can see any cause to hope that it may do them good and
win them unto God.

Q. But (because in describing that Charity that is required in all that would
receive this Sacrament to their comfort, How far forth we are bound to
forgive iniu^ies.
you said we must unfeignedly forgive all that have any way offended us, and
cast off all purpose and desire of revenge) tell me how far forth we are
bound to forgive them that have wronged us, and whether it be utterly unlawful
for us to seek our remedy against such as have done us injury in our person,
or goods, or good name?

A. First, as it is unlawful for a Christian Pro. 16.33. and 19 11 1. Cor
13.4.5 7. Gal. 5.22 23.
to be easily provoked unto wrath or dislike of his neighbor; so after that
he is justly provoked, Iam. 3.17. Romans 1.30.
he must be easy to be appeased, and Romans 12.18.
desirous of reconciliation, Mat. 18.15. Luc. 17.3.
willing to use all good means whereby we may win him; yea, he is bound in
whatsoever wrong he has received from any, so to forgive it, as he can love
the party, and think as well of him as he did before, Luc. 17.3.4.
so soon as he shall show himself sorrowful and penitent for the wrong he
has done.

Secondly, in case the party that has wronged him, will not be brought to see
his fault and show himself penitent, though he may justly dislike him, yet
Mat. 5.43 44. Romans 12.17
may he not hate or recompense evil for evil unto him, but Mat. 5.39. Job
31.30.
rather endure this or more injury at his hands, than to do, or speak, or
desire ought against him in private revenge.

Thirdly, in case the wrong have been such as whereby he is not only
offended, but hurt and endamaged also in his person, or goods, or good name, it
may be lawful for him to seek his remedy against him that has done the
wrong, at the hands of the lawful magistrate. For as the magistracy and law 2.
Chron. 19.6. Romans 13.14.
are the ordinance of God, so it may be lawful for a Christian (in the
necessary defense or repair of his person, goods, or good name, which God Ephesians
5.29 1. Tim. 5.23 23. Prou. 6.6.11. and 10 4. 1. Tim. 5.8. Job 27.56. Pro. 22.1.
has bound every man to maintain and have care of) Exodus 22 1.15. Act 16 37.
and 22 25. and 2^ ^7.24. and 25.10.11.
to take the benefit of it: provided that he observe those cautions and rules
which God has given in his word to direct us in this case.

Q. Which be those?

Cautions and rules to be observed in going to law.
A. First, that we must not go to law with any, but in case of necessity:
that is, not 1. Cor. 6.2.
for t^ifles (but only when the wrong is so great as if we be not righted by
law, we can not conveniently serve God in our calling^) 1. Cor. 6.5 7. Mat.
5.25.
nor till such time as we have first assaied all other good means of peace and
agreement: for a Christian Pro. 20.3 and 19.11. Phil. 4.5.
may not love contention, but account it his wisdom and glory to pass by
offenses.

Secondly, that before we seek remedy of our wrongs by the ordinary means,
we 2. Chro. 16.12. by proportion.
seek first to the Lord, and Deuteronomy. 28.29. Lam 3.39.40.
so acknowledge his righteous hand in the wrong that is done us by our enemy,
as we may be moved to make peace with God, and to profit thereby.

Thirdly, that the end we aim at in going to law, be not the hurt of our
enemy, but the glory of God which shines in the execution and manifestation
of justice by this his ordinance: and when we thus acknowledge him Psalm. 3.3.
the only maintainer of our persons, goods and credit, and Psalm. 94.1.2.
auenger of all wrongs, and dare 1. Sam. 35 31 33.
not revenge our selves; and 2 the necessary defense and maintenance of our
selves Romans 13.8 1. Tim. 5, 8. 2. Cor. 12.14 Ephe. 4 28.
and such as God has charged us to have care of; and 3. the Eccle. 8 11
reformation of the party himself and of Deuteronomy. 13.11. and 17.13
others by his example.

Fourthly, that we both begin and follow our suits in law Heb. 13.5
without covetousness, Ephesians. 4.31
or using no bitterness Chro. 22.26.27. Deuteronomy. 24.6. Esa. 58.3. Mat. 18.28
and extremity against the person of our adversary: and labor neither Deuteronomy.
24.17. Pro. 17.23.
by briberie nor by any other means to corrupt or hinder justice, but so seek
our own right as it may appear we are not void of love and compassion and
desire of reconciliation with our adversary.

Lastly, that when we have used this ordinary means that the Lord has given
us for the righting of our selves, and find no redress, we must rest Phil.
4.5. Iam. 5.7*9
with quietness and meekness therein without fretting, or desire to right our
selves by private revenge, knowing assuredly Psalm. 39.9 2. Sam. 16.10.
that the Lord has thus ordered the whole matter either for our correction, or
for the exercise of our patience and charity, and that Psalm. 94.20-23. and
37.5.6. 1. Pet. 4 19
he will be revenged of such an enemy, and deal far better for us (if we
can commit our cause to him) then either our selves or any magistrate could
have done.

Q. You have showed that none can be fit to receive this Sacrament, unless he
can find in himself those six graces that are mentioned by you: tell me now,
is this all that is required for our preparation to this Sacrament?

A. No: for those that are regenerated, and have both says, and repentance,
and true charity, 1. Cor. 11 30.32.
may receive this Sacrament unworthily if they be not careful to renew and
stir up these graces in themselves at such times as they intend to come unto
the Lords table.

Q. How our faith is to be renewed, ere we come to the Lords table.
How must we renew our faith when we prepare our selves to come to the Lords
table?

A. We must take pains to bring our hearts,

First, to a Mat. 9.24
sight and sense of our infidelity, and weakness of faith.

Secondly, to Luke 17.5.
a true care and desire to be confirmed in it by receiving this Sacrament.

Thirdly, to an unfeigned resolution to use all other good means whereby it may
be strengthened, and To. 16.17
to shun the means that may weaken it.

How repentance is to be renewed before we come there.
How must we renew our repentance when we prepare our selves to come to the
Lords table?

A. We must labor to bring our hearts, first to Ier. 3.13.
a sight and sense of our particular sins, specially those which we have
fallen into, since we last renewed our covenant with God in this Sacrament.

Secondly, 2. Cor. 7.1.
to a true care to cleanse our selves from them by sincere repentance, and
desire to obtain both further assurance of the pardon of them, and strength
against them by receiving this Sacrament.

Thirdly, to Psalm. 119 10^. and 85.8.
an unfeigned resolution not to fall into them again, but to shun all the
shows and occasions of them, and to serve God with more conscience and care
then heretofore.

Q. How must we renew our charity when we prepare our selves to come unto the
Lords Table? How our charity is to be renewed.


A. We must endeavor to bring our hearts, first, to a sight and sense Iam. 4.5.
of our great want of true love, and pronenesse unto malice and contention.

Secondly, to Romans 12.18.
a true care of reconciliation with all men, and willingness to seek it, and
desire to receive strength by this Sacrament against our uncharitableness, and
to be confirmed and increased by it in our unfeigned love to all men, specially
to the children of God.

Thirdly, to Psalm. 119.57.112.
an unfeigned resolution to continue in that unity and love that we make show
of at our coming to this Sacrament.

That weak Christians are not to forbear communicating in the Lords Supper.
Q. You have showed what those graces be which every must find in himself that
^h desire to receive this Sacrament with comfort, and that it is not sufficient
to have them, but that a man that has them, must also labor to stir them up
and renew them in himself at every time when he prepares himself to come to
this Sacrament: tell me now, what do you think of them, that (though they do
find those graces you have mentioned to be in them in some measure, yet) do
feel them to be so weak and imperfect, and the contrary corruptions so
strong, that they are much troubled with the sight and sense thereof, may such
presume to come to the Lords Supper, with any assurance that they shall receive
it worthily?

A. They may, if they can find that those weak graces that are in them are
joined 1. with a desire to grow in grace: and 2. the imperfections that they
find in themselves be such as they can unfeignedly grieve for, and strive
against: and 3. that the flesh and the corruptions thereof are in them Ephe.
4.22
as the old man, dying and decaying continually, and the spirit with the fruits
thereof like Ephe. 4.24
the new man, always growing and waxing stronger in them. Yea such as these
(notwithstanding their wants and corruptions) are of all others the fittest to
come unto this Sacrament. Mat. 25.31 24.


Q. How may that appear?

A. First, because the disciples whom our Savior himself admitted to this
Sacrament in the first institution thereof, Mat. 26 40. Mar. 14.40 Luke 22 49
Luke 24 11 Mar. 16.13.14. Luke 24.45 John 20.9.
were at that time far from perfection, and full of infirmities.

Secondly, the Lords Supper is ordained Romans 4.11.
to confirm our faith, and all the fruits of it, (which we should have no
need of, it any grace were perfect in us) and to be the Sacrament of our
spiritual nourishment, which none can be so fit to receive as they that (out
of the sense of their weakness and readiness to faint) do most feel the
need they have of it.

Thirdly, if none might receive it that feel corruption and want of grace in
themselves, then had it been instituted altogether in vain, seeing 1. Cor.
13.9.12. Gal. 5.17.
the best of Gods children while they live in the flesh, are regenerated but in
part. And this does infallibly argue a man to be in the state of grace Mat.
5.3.4.6. Romans 7.15-25.
when he so feels his corruptions and wants, that he can grieve for them, and
strive against them, and unfeignedly desire to grow in grace.

Prayer to be used both before and at the time of communication.
Q. You have showed what the points be wherein we must examine our selves
before we come to the Lords table: but is this all that we must do in the
preparing of our hearts unto this Sacrament?

A. No: but we must also both in secret, before we come unto the public
assembly, and when we come there, ioining with the congregation, make humble,
faithful, and earnest prayer unto God, as for the pardon of all our sins,
specially our coming so often heretofore to his holy table with unprepared
hearts; so for his blessing upon that endeavor which we have now used for our
preparation, and for his gracious supply of whatsoever has been wanting
therein, and assistance in this holy action that we are to take in hand.

Q. Is it also necessary to our preparation, That it is not necessarily
required to rec^iue the Sacrament ^asting.
that we come fasting to this Sacrament? or do^ they sin, and make themselves
unworthy receivers of it, that do eat or drink any thing before they come
unto it?

A. No verily: for though it be fit for such as may conveniently do it,
without hurt or danger to their health, to come fasting to this Sacrament, yet
seeing there is no commandment of God that does in^oin^ it, and both at the
first institution, and long after in the Primitive Church it was wont to be
received after other meat; and the kingdom of God stands not in meat and
drink, (for neither if we eat, have we the more, neither if we eat not, have
we the less) therefore to put holiness in this, or to esteem it necessary
to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament, is mere ignorance and superstition.

What things be further required at the time of communication.
Q. Hitherto you have declared how we must prepare our selves before we come
unto it, if we desire to receive this Sacrament to our comfort: tell me now
what is required of us during the time of the administration thereof?

Outward things concerning the body.
A. Some things, that concern the outward behavior and actions of the body,
and some things, that concern the inward affection and disposition of the heart
and mind.

Q. What be those outward things that you say are required of us during the
time that this holy action is in hand?

A. First, (as Eze. 46.10
at all other times when we are to join with the congregation in Gods
service, so specially) when we are to receive this Sacrament, which is 1. Cor.
10 16.17.
appointed of God to be a sign and seal of that most near communion and
fellowship that we have with all Gods people, we must be careful 1. Cor
11.17.18.20.33. Act. 20.7.
to come all together to the beginning of Gods public worship, and to tarry
all together till the whole action be finished.

Secondly, as in all other the parts of Gods public worship the congregation
Act. 1.14. and 2.1.46.
must join together as one man, and none may either by private devotion, or
any other way, withdraw themselves from that which is publikelie done; so in
this part of Gods worship specially, every one must give diligent attention to
that that is done, not only when he himself is ready to receive, but during
the whole action, and even behold and look upon both the elements themselves,
and all the sacramental actions which are by Christ, ordinance used in the
administration of this Sacrament, because Exo. 24.8
God has appointed that to be a mean to stir up and help our faith in this
action.

Thirdly, as in all the public worship of God Mat. 18.^0.
where the Lord is in a special sort present, much Leu. 19.30. Psalm. 5.7. 1.
Cor. 11.10. and 14.40.
outward reverence and seemly carriage of our selves is required; so in this
whole action, and then specially when our selves are to receive those holy
signs of the body, and blood of Christ we must use such behavior and gesture
of our body, as may be free from superstition, and yet fit to stir up and
express that inward faith and thankfulness which is required in the receiving
of that which God then does offer unto us.

Fourthly, as the works of mercy Neh. 8.10.12. 1. Cor. 16.2.
should always be joined to the works of piety, because they do much further
the fruit and comfort of all the parts of Gods worship; so especially ought
every one when he has received from God such pledges of his love in this
Sacrament, according to his ability, and in testimony of his thankfulness
unto God, and love to men, Heb. 13.16
to offer unto God with cheerefulnes the Sacrifice of alms, for the relief of
the poor members of Jesus Christ.

Inward things conserning the soul.
Q. As you have showed what is required of us during the time of this holy
action, as touching the outward duty and behavior of our bodies, so tell me
now what should be the meditation and disposition of our hearts at that time?

A. First, when we see both bread and wine standing upon the Lords table, which
the Minister of Christ has consecrated and put apart to this holy use, then
must we with joy of heart call to mind and consider, that Jesus Christ was
Ioh. 6.27 and 10.36. and 17.^9.
sanctified and put apart to be the only and all-sufficient means of
nourishing and preserving us in the state of grace, strengthening and
refreshing our souls in all temptations.

Secondly, when we see this bread broken and this wine powered forth by the
Minister of Christ; then must we think Zach. 12 10.
seriously with grief and indignation of heart, of our own sins that
pierced Christ, and imposed such necessity upon him to suffer so infinite and
unspeakable torments; and withal of the infinite justice of God and his anger
against sin that could never have been appeased but by this means.

Thirdly, when we see the bread thus broaken, and the wine thus powered forth
to be offered by the Minister of Christ unto us, and hear him in Christ's name
command us to take, eat and drink it; then must we with joy and thankfulness
of heart meditate of Ioh. 3.16. Romans 8.32.
the wonderful love of God toward us, not only in not sparing his own son
and giving him for us, but also 1. Ioh. 3.23.
in offering him unto us and commanding us to believe in him.

Fourthly, when we take the bread and the wine at the Ministers hand, and do
eat and drink the same; then Esa. 64 7. Psalm. 42.11.
must we stir up our souls by faith to lay hold upon, and apply to our selves
all the merits of Christ's passion; fully assuring our selves that by those
unspeakable torments of his own son, the anger of God is fully appeased, and
his justice satisfied for all our sins: and so io^fully feed thereupon, that
we may feel our souls not only fully Ioh. 6.35
satisfied thereby, and Mat. 11.28 Ioh. 6.33.48.51.
strengthened and refreshed against all tentations; but also Ioh. 15.4.5.
quickened and enabled to walk in all holy obedience unto God.

Fifthly, when we behold all the rest of Gods people in the same congregation
communicating with us in the same elements and Sacramental actions without all
difference or respect of persons; then must we call to mind and consider how
great a corruption it has been in us 1. Co. 11.22. Mat. 18.10
to despise the Church of God or the least member thereof, and to have been so
unkind unto them, so prone to malice them, and hard to be reconciled unto them
Romans 14.15. 1. Cor. 8.11
whom God our heavenly father, and Christ our blessed Savior have so dearly
loved and done so much for; yea, we must stir up our hearts to bear a loving
and kind affection, as to all the people of God, so specially to them that we
do now communicate withal.

Lastly, when after we have received, we give somewhat according to our
ability for the relief of the poor; and join with the whole congregation in
prayer and singing of Psalms: then must we stir up our selves to do all this
with feeling and joy, and thankfulness of heart, as unto God that 2 Cor. 9.7.
loves a cheerful giver, and Ioh. 4.23.24.
is a a spirit, and will accept of no service but that which is done in spirit
and truth: so offering unto him the sacrifice not Heb. 13.16
of alms only and Hos. 14.3.
of the calves of our lips, Romans 12.1
but of our own bodies and souls, in thanksgiving for this inestimable
benefit of our redemption, and for his fatherly care (by ordaining this
sacrament) to apply it unto us, and to confirm our faith in the same.

Q. What is the cause why Joy and cheerfulness. required in communicating at
the Lords table.
in all the parts (almost) of that inward disposition that is required of us in
this holy action you make mention of joy? Can we not rightly celebrate this
heavenly banquet without inward joy and gladness of heart?

A. No verily, for as in the ^. Cro. 30.21.^6.
celebration of the Passover, and Deu. 12.12 and 16.15. Neh. 8.10. 1. Sam. 1.7.
of al those solemn ^easts that were kept under the Law the people of God were
commanded to rejoice and to stir up themselves thereunto by all good means,
Psa. 27.6 and 126.2.3. and 92.1.4
because no man can indeed be rightly thankful unto God for that blessing
wherein he does not rejoice; so in this Sacrament especially wherein 1. Cor.
11.24.25.
we are to celebrate with thanksgiving the memory of a benefit that is
incomparably greater then ever the Church received under the law, this joy and
gladness of heart is necessarily required at our hands.

Q. You have showed how we must prepare our selves before we come to the Lords
table; What things to be performed by us after communicating.
and also what disposition of body and mind is required of us at that time
when this holy action is in hand; tell me now what must we do after we have
received, to confirm and increase the comfort and fruit of it in our selves.

A. First, so soon as we are come home from the public assembly, we ought
in secret to consider and bethink our selves seriously what we have done, and
how we have sped; what joy and comfort we have felt in this Sacrament, what
increase of faith, and resolution to lead a holy life, we have received
thereby: because we may be sure that no man has received this Sacrament
worthily, nor fed upon Christ in it ( Ioh. 6.55
whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed, and Mar. 5.28 30.
whom none ever touched with a true faith, but they received virtue from him)
that has received no refreshing nor strength by it.

Secondly, if we can find no such comfort and fruit that we have received by
it, then must we examine diligently whether we may not justly charge our
selves to be the cause thereof, because we came not unto it with that
preparation of heart as has been described. And if we find the cause wholly
in our selves, then Lam. 3.39.40. 1. Cor. 11.3^
must we presently humble our souls before God in fervent prayer and unfeigned
repentance for this our grievous sin, that so judging our selves for it, we
may not be judged of the Lord.

Thirdly, if (upon diligent examination of our hearts) we can find, that this
our want of comfort and fruit, which we are unfeignedly grieved for, arises not
thus from our own sin, but that we brought with us unto the Sacrament (in
truth and sincerity, though in much weakness) that preparation of heart that
has been described; then have we no just cause to 2. Chr. 30.18.19.
be dismayed in our selves, but (after that we have humbled our souls before
God in prayer, for the sanctifying and removing of this his correction, which
for our trial, and other causes, best known to himself, he sees good to
exercise us by) we may comfort our selves in this, that such Esa. 63.27
hardness and senslesnesse of heart, which we thus feel and bewail in our
selves, is a certain sign that we are in the state of grace, and (our
conscience bearing witness with us, that we came rightly prepared unto it) we
have undoubtedly received comfort and fruit by it, Psa. 97.11
which we shall also feel hereafter, though we do not see for the present.

Fourthly, if (upon this examination of our own hearts) we can find, that we
have sped well at this feast, and that the Lord has so welcomed and
entertained us at it, that we are come from it well refreshed and strengthened
in our faith and love, and in our resolution to lead a holy life; then must we
presently in hearty prayer give thanks unto God for this his unspeakable gift,
1. Cro. 29 18.
and crave of him the continuance and perfecting of his own work which he
has wrought in us.

Lastly, the benefit we have received by this Sacrament, and comfort in the
sense of Gods love and favor to us in Christ, as it must provoke us to come
often to this banquet, so must it make us careful Psalm. 116.14.18. Eccl. 5.3 4.
to perform our vows we have now made unto God in the presence of all his
people, by laboring to express the Eze. 10.11. Psalm. 5.23. Psalm. 106.2.3.
truth of our thankfulness, both in taking heed that we return not again (as
the dog to his vomit) unto any of our sins which we have professed
repentance of, as also in indeuouring to honor God by a holy obedience to his
will, in our whole conversation, all the days of our life.

Soli Deo gloria.

