A BOVLSTER LECTVRE.


This wife a wondrous racket means to keep,
While the Husband seems to sleep but do'es not sleep:
But she might full as well her Lecture smother,
For entering one Ear, it goes out at the other.
London. Printed for R. Best and are to be sold at by (...) Houlbourns.

Ar't asleep Husband? A BOULSTER LECTURE; STORED With all variety of witty
jeasts, merry Tales, and other pleasant passages; EXTRACTED, From the choicest
flowers of Philosophy, Poesy, ancient and modern History. Illustrated with
Examples of incomparable constancy, in the excellent History of Philocles and
Do^iclea.

By Philogenes Panedonius.

O nox longa! --
Hor. LONDON, Printed by R. BISHOP, for R. B. or his Assigns. 1640.

TO all modest Dames
From TWEDE unto THAMES,
Who prize their good names above Nectar;
With a Paphian kiss
Do I tender them this
To silence a Canopy Lecture.
TO you, this Book may well addressed be
Since none from Bolster Lectures is more free:
Be you then patroness without offense,
And with a smile return me recompense.
TO HIS DAINTY DOXES.
DAINTY fine Creatures, -- I will not swear, in good faith you be; But -- if
in your censure you prove sweet to me, I little care, believe 't, how sour you
be. One thing I must tell you, the World has a strange opinion of you: But let
not this trouble you: for the most of those that sojourne in it, are Walking
Pictures, or Puppy Motions. So you live without Scandal, let the Constable of
the Ward snore, and Diogenes walk all the night over with his Candle. Though
he find Works of lightness in Houses of darkness: Single Skirmishes in
blind Alleys, Back-stayres, and long Entries: whole bunches of Cornucopia in
his newfound Eutopia: Cleave you like Ticks to your own, preserve your
renown, and sing Hey down a down, to the honor of our Town.

Thus, neither to all, nor to many, but to very-very few, and those of that
Crew, who are loyal and true, bids Musaeus

Adieu.
THE SVBIECTS whereof it treats.
1 THe Excellency of Women in their Creation. 2 Their imitable virtues,
illustrated with Examples. 3 Their moderation of Passion. 4 Their Continency in
assaults. 5 Their modesty in Countenance, Habit, and expression of their
Affection. 6 The violence of some Women used upon such as were Corrivals in
their Choice, enlarged with memorable Examples. 7 Their modest defense, to
allay those passionate extremes discovered in the former Subjects. 8 Their
witty Aphorisms, Apo^hegmes, and Answers. 9 Their eminent Labors: And how
they were Assistants in the exquisitest Works that have been formerly
composed, either for History, or Poesy.
Every one of which Subjects you shall find interveined with choice variety of
pleasing Tales, and delightful Stories, to comply with the Fancy of the most
curious and censorious Reader.

A TABLE, OR Apt Disposure, both in number and Order, of all such material
Points, Tales, and Stories, as are here related, or familiarly couched in this
BOULSTER LECTURE.
SECTION I. First, of the Excellency of Women in their Creation. Page 1.
Under which Subject (to allay a fastidious hour, and sweeten the Sequel of a
more serious Story) are these Tales contained and continued.
1 THe Answer of a lukewarm Husband to his Neighbor, being asked how his
Wife did: Assuring him, that for his part, he was sick, because his wife was
no ^^ker; And what an heavy doleful house he had; grounding their sorrows
upon two contrary fears. Page 4 2 The Scholasticall Wooer. 6 3 The amorous
Graduate, or the Pedanticall Suitor. ib. 4 The Story of Apelles and Campaspe. 9
5 Zeuxis his incomparable Art in the delineature of Crocous daughters. ib. 6
Several Posies derived from several fancies, writ in a Window with a Diamond.
10 7 The Tale of the Maid, who after a long and strait siege, was enforced to
expose her honor to the barbarous violence of an insulting Soldier. 11 8 The
ancient Vestals votive Order, and with what austerity they preserved their
honor. And of that heroicke Princesses resolution in defense of her honor. 12
9 The ^ale of a Shrow, and how she encountered her Husband, meeting him
amongst other Goodfellowes at a Tavern door. 13 10 The Answer of a shroud
Girl upon occasions of displeasure taken at her husband. 14 11 Fields bring
forth miscellaene grains, and all ages women of mixed conditions; instanced in
our Roman Matrons. 15
Four distinct motives to affection.
1 Beauty; whose opposite is Disdain. 15. and 16 2 Agility of body; whose
opposite is Liberty. 15. and 16 3 Quickness of wit; whose opposite is
Distaste. 15. and 16 4 Gentleness of speech; whose opposite is Dissimulation.
15. and 16
OF BEAUTY.
Under which Branch, are these Stories shrouded.
1 THe passionate Amorist his Canto. 18 2 The resolute Gentleman's Passado. 19 3
The Western Pedlers Daughter; who fed her Suitor with Consideration, till too
long delay brought her to a Conception. 21 4 The Story of that great Favorite
Flaviano, and why he disliked his Wife. 22 5 Fancy is not always grounded on
beauty: instanced in the Pastoral of Nais. 23 6 Socrates Glass. ibid.
DISDAIN.
Under which Branch are these Stories shadowed.
1 THe noble Disposition of that brave Lady Marcelles, in the discovery of her
affection. 26 2 Caesar accounted greater in Cleopatra's victory, than in the
discomfiture of her Anthony. 27 3 Memorable Examples of Continency in both
Sexes: and of the incomparable beauty and chastity of Sputimia. ib. 4 The
glorious Act of the incomparable Chiomara. 28 5 The excellent Saying of a
religious Votaresse. 29 6 The Tragic Disasters of three unfortunate Italian
Lovers. 30 7 A pitiful passionate Letter of a rejected Lover to his
Mistress. 31 8 A desperate adventure entertained by a passionate Lover. ib. 9
The resolution of a discreet Lover in the disdain of his Mistress. 32.33 10 A
Tale of a wanton Widow, and her answer to a stale Batchler, and importunate
Suitor: with the Batchlers witty reply in disesteeme of her fancy. 35.36
AGILITY OF BODY.
Under which Branch are these Stories couched.
1 IN the Empire of Monomotapa bounding upon the kingdom of Congo, among all
the rest of the Emperors Soldiers, the most valorous in name are his Legions
of women. 38.39. etc. 2 The Licentious practices of the insatiate Messalina in
her Antonine Baths. 40 3 Cleopatra's pearl broaths. 42 4 Where a strong
Constitution accompanies a promising feature, there needs no potions to procure
Love, nor powders to enable nature. 43
LIBERTY.
Under which Branch these Stories are closed.
1 OF Liberty in Restraint: and of Restraint in Liberty. 44 2 Of the nimble
Monkey in Cheapside. 45. 3 The Tale of the Maid, when her mother found her
suspiciously in a corner with a young man: and how she fitted her mother, and
kept trice with her Lover. 46 4 The ^ale of the Good Wife, when her husband
found her in bed with a Neighbor. ib. 5 The Tale of the Court-Gentlewoman, who
was found in a long dark Entry with a young Cavaliere. 47 6 The Tale of the
Bridegroom, first night he was married: and her Bridal Curtain Lecture. ib.
7 The Widows twitting of her second Husband with the abilities of her first.
48 8 The arrogant Widdowers proposal upon terms of marriage: and the Widows
peremptory answer to his unequal demands. 48.49 9 The discreet patient
Cuckold. 49.50 10 The converted Curtezan. 50, 51 11 The Tale of the merry
Miller and his wanton Minton. 52 12 The Spirit in the Vault, or the
Curtaine-confession of two wanton Wenches to two suspicious Husbands.
52.53.54.55. and 56 13 The Tale of a delicate Student, who made his Bed his
Study: And how his Bedfellow requited him with like curt'sy. 56.57 14 The
Humerous Lady; with her inglorious end suiting well with her distempered
quality and disdainefull life. ib. 15 The Northern Girls answer to a subtle
Opposer. ib. 16 The reply of a Barbers Wife to her Husband upon finding her
in the suds. 58 17 The answer of a witty Woman to a discursive Husband; who was
more active in his liberty of discourse, than performance of any due
benevolence. ib. 18 A Widows answer to One who came to speak with her
Husband, after he was dead. ib. 19 The answer of a good Wife to her Husband,
occasioned upon the relation of the nature, quality, and disposition of a
Turk. 58.59 20 Of the Women of Sio. 59, 60 21 The Tale of a fat Farrier and a
bounsing Hussy, delivered in a merry Epigramme. 60, 61 22 The Tale of an
Atturney's Clarke. 62, etc.
QUICKNESS OF WIT.
Under which Branch are these Stories ranked.
1 THe Tale of that finitive Girl in excuse of her Lady. 68 2 Of the Curats
Wife in behalf of her Husband. ib. 3 Of the soft-temper'd Gentleman's answer to
a Ladies demand, when he thought his Wife would be brought abed. ib. 4 The
arrogant opinion of Velleius the Epicurean. 69 5 Feminine Disputants should be
silenced Ministers: they flow in words, but drop in matter: but no less
infinitely erring in the first, than barren in the latter. 17 6 The eloquent
Lady, who though a foul Delinquent, caused her Audience to melt with
compassion, and hold her innocent. ibid. 7 A resemblance in our variety of
wits, to diversity of Soyles. p. 71
DISTASTE.
Under which Branch are these Stories displayed.
1 THe Tale of a wenching Companion, who could not fare well, but he must cry
roast-meat. 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, and 81 2 A Story related to like
purpose, happening in our own time, and in our own Clime. 81, 82, and 83. 3 The
Tale of a wanton witty Dame, who advised her Sweetheart, to secure them the
better from her Husbands presence, to attire his Servant in a Bears skin, etc.
which Story is commended to the relation of a Poem. 84, 85, and 86. 4 The fury
of a jealous Dame unto her Servant, upon finding some favors bestowed on him,
in her Maids Cabinet. 86, etc. 5 The Tale of the Woman who accused One before a
Justice for a Rape. p. 87. 6 The Tragical intention, but Comicall conclusion
of a Gentleman, who employed in Service abroad; and having a very beautiful
Wife, desired to be satisfied how she behaved her self in his abscence, etc.
p. 87, 88, etc. 7 The easy Credulity of a lightly-perswaded Gentleman, who
chused rather to incur the worst of infamy, than harbor the least suspicion
(though he had sufficient occasion) of his Wifes honesty. 89, 90, and 91. 8 The
Tale of a Ioviall good fellow, who armed himself with barley broth against
his Wifes shrewd tongue. His fearful vision in his midnights wandering: his
encounter with his Wife at his home returning. All which are lest to the
faithful relation of a pleasant Poem. 92, 93, and 94. 9 Of the Man, who being
taken tardy, feigned himself pursued by a Spirit, which caused him to fly for
succor to his Neighbors bed. 94 10 The tale of an University Virago. 95, 96
11 The Answer of a brave Blade, being in company of a bevy of joviall Wenches,
who had whitled him well with liquor: and how he retorted the demand of a
braving Blouse too too enquisitive after his actions, to her own dishonor.
95, 96 12 How a sociable Good Fellow finding his Wife laid speechless,
returned her ample recompense for her sullenness. 97 13 The Answer of a witty
Wench to One, and that a familiar One, who asked her the reason how it came to
pass that her Children should be so like their Father, when all the World knew
that they had many Fathers, etc. 98 14 Of a trifling Girl who was cracking
nuts; and of another ill-nurtur'd Tomboy who fell to catching of Flies, while
her Sweetheart was preferring his Suit. 98 15 How Alcibiades drowned Eupolis
in the Sea, because Eupolis had drowned his fame so often upon the Stage. 100
16 The Story of the Gentleman and his son being Corrivals to one Lady; and
of the Impreses they writ with Diamonds in a Window. p. 101
GENTLENESS OF SPEECH.
Under which Branch are these Stories digested.
1 WHat excellent fruits, this Gentle Speech graced with a pleasing presence
have produced both in affairs of peace and war. 104 2 What passionate effects
that sad relation of Aeneas wrought in the heart of the Carthaginian Queen.
ib. 3 Of the princely presence and unaffected Eloquence of Sophonisba. 105 4
The excellent Commendation of a Peer of this Kingdom, for ability of
discourse and persuasion of argument. ib. 5 The deserving praise of a
Burgomasters Wife. 108 6 The Bridegroomes funeral, or the Bridall-Bra^le. 108,
109, and 110 7 Zantippes Story with other Vixons of the like quality. 111 8
Aphorisms extracted from Hippocrates, and applied to our present purpose. 112
9 How a Woman was wa^ned from her inbred Condition, and with kindness won to
a sweet disposition. 112, 113 10 A Tale of a Falconer. ib. 110 11 The strange
opinion begot out of Custom, which the Muscovian women have of their Husbands,
if they do not beat them: And of an heavy design arising thereon. 114, 115,
and 116. 12 How kisses came first from Trojan Dames, hoping by that means to
pacify their incensed Husbands. 1^6, etc. 13 Excellent Directions for our
form of Speech. 117 14 The prattling of a Fondling to her Husband: And of the
Millanoises his confession, that his Wifes toungue had ever a charm in
readiness to unloose his purse 118
DISSIMULATION.
Under which Branch are these Stories discovered.
1 THe sundry Resemblances of Dissimulation to diverse Creatures. 119 2 The
nimble Device of a witty Wife, to delude her Husband. 120 3 The like instanced
upon several occasions. 121 4 Dissimulation expressed in Subjects of Passion:
and returned in the Tale of a passionate widow at the Burial of her Husband.
122 5 The Answer of a Good wife to her Husband, in pointing at a Cuckold. ib. 6
The like upon Thames, occasioned upon the same Subject. ib. etc. 7 The Answer
of a young Bride to her Bridemaid upon her marriage night. 123 8 A single
Woman's answer to her Confessor. 124 9 Historical passages of Thomyris,
Penelope and Hypermnestra. ib. and 125 10 The Story of the Hesperides, with
their Emblem. 126 11 Of a subtle Coy-Ducke, who dissemblingly from her
credulous Husband shrouded her stain, till a more public discovery exposed
her to shame. ib. etc. 12 The constant loyalty, and faithful s^crecy of a
noble Italian Lady: and how the concealing of her love, became the deprivall of
her life: which likewise procured his death, whom she did entirely love. 127,
128, etc. 13 A familiar manner of Wooing betwixt two home-spunne Lovers. 129,
etc. 14 When Affection comes in place, Portion is ever to take the second
place. 131 15 Love is not to be strangled, but easily repelled, and by
distance allayed, and not only distanced, but with employments wearied. 132 16
The Spee^h of a brave Spartan Lady, upon report of a disloyal act done by her
indeared Servant. ib. 17 Those who can pretend fancy to a Lover, and reserve a
Corner of their heart for another, are resembled to Paphlagonian Partridges,
that are said to have two hearts. ib. 18 The nature of the Juniper; resembled
to a loyal Lover. 133 19 Women should not be to free nor open in the
impartment of their fancy: instanced in a Lady, who after her inconstancy,
engaged her fancy to her rejected friends discovery. 134 20 A pretty Tale of a
discontented Coople, who, to mend the matter, jointly resolved to be married
again. 135, etc. 21 The choice of a merry Greek touching his four
Mistresses; clozed in an Epigram. 137, etc. 22 The brave temper of a Biscoy in
the expression of her Love. 138 23 Of dissembling Widdow-mourners. ib. and 139
24 The Story of the Indian woman. ib. and 140 25 A conceited Treatise composed
by an Italian, entitled, A Supplication to Candlelight. ib. and 141 26 Choycest
Cates cloy the soonest. 142 27 Of a Wanton Florentines free invitation of fresh
Servants. 143 28 The ch^ste and temperate Sovereignty of an honored Lady.
ibid. 29 Contempt or Selfe-opinion, the sole estrangers of affection; made
clear by an experienced relation. ib. and 144 30 Theodora's her divine
discourse to a loose Lover. 145, etc. 31 To our amorous Surveyors of Belcone's,
and professed Courtiers of casements; with the story of a deluded Gallant in the
quest of his Mistress. 146, 147, 148, 149, and 150 32 The like story (but
interlaced with sundry choice passages) of a young Prodigal, who found his
own wife in the habit of a Curtezan. 150, 151, 152, 153, and 154 33 The famous
story of Isabella, wife to Luchino Visconti Lord of Millaine; her pretended
Pilgrimage purposely to visit her dear servant Ugolino: which caused the
Millanoise to lay siedge to Mantua, though afterward removed by the mediation
of friends. 155, 156 34 An excellent modern story of a young Gentleman and his
Lady; how after a long division, by a strange occasion they became reconciled,
and made one in affection. 156, 157, 158, 159, and 160 35 The Character of a
Gentleman Usher. 161, etc. 36 Evil society the stain of Gentry. ibid. 37
Pleasure and Profit make up the best Music. 167
SECTION II. Imitable virtues in Women; illustrated by Examples.
Under which Subject are these Stories contained and continued.
1 HE descends to a serious survey or diligent display of every Cardinal
Virtue. Wherein he finds rare feminine instances in each kind: and such as
may deserve imitation of the Stronger Sex. 168, etc.
PRUDENCE.
Under which kind, are these Stories connexed.
1 OF the City Cockney, who expected a continued penthouse in all her
Country-journey. 169 2 The discreet and prudent carriage of Thomyris, in her
besteading of the Massagetes, and discomfiture of Cyrus: the wise mannagement
of her estate, in the whole course of her reign. Her witty Inscription upon
her Tomb. 170, etc. 3 The wise and peaceable Government of the stately
Semyramis. 172, etc. 4 The glory of the Amazonian state under their invincible
Penthisilea. 173, etc. 5 The wisdom and resolution of that excellent
Sophonisba. 174, etc. 6 Of Berenice; Nicaula, the Sabean Queen; Sheba's visit
of King Solomon; The prudence of royal Hester, in preventing her peoples
danger; And of Abigail in pacifying David's anger: winding up this link with
the living fame of our renouned Eliza, who made her Kingdom (this hedged
Garden) an Elisium. 176
JUSTICE.
Under which link are these Stories in wreathed.
1 Justice an Abstract of all other virtues, illustrated by sundry memorable
Sentences, delivered by such women as were held not only professors but
practisers of that virtue. 178 First, of the Thracian Lady. ibid. Secondly, of
the Alban Lady. ibid. Thirdly, of the Emperesse in her patronage of Justice.
ib. and 179 Fourthly, of a just Mother in the censure of her daughter. ib.
Fifthly, of the resolution of those Almaine Sisters. 180 Sixthly, the like
example of a noble Gentlewoman in our own Coast. ibid. Seventhly, the noble
disposition of a modest Matron. ibid. Eighthly, the advice of the Sabine women.
ib. and 181 Ninthly, the impartiality of Aurelia in her husbands election. ib.
Justice, when corrupted, may be compared to the Celedonie stone; when equally
dispensed, compared to the Selenite stone. ibid. and 182 In the Emperor Basils
time was found neither Plaintiff to accuse, nor Defendant to answer. ib. The
Princess Decree against litigious Plaintiffes. ibid. Justice resembled to the
Evening Star. ib.
TEMPERANCE.
Under which link are inchaced these Stories.
1 THe excellent saying of a Lady in the attemperature of her affection:
occasioned from Livia's and Lucilia's different passions. 184 2 This virtue
pitcheth mainly upon three Objects. 1 Irascible. ibid. 2 Concupiscible. ibid. 3
Intelligible. ibid.
3 For Commanders in the first, are instanced Architas, Chilo, and a noble
Lady. 185 4 For Commanders in the second, a discreet Ethnic Lady; the
incomparable Armenia. 186 5 Their command over their desires in contempt of
Honor, Habit, Appetite, instanced in many excellent Ladies: not without just,
reproof of that famous Italian Domenico Silvio his wife, who preferred
luscious fare before her fame, light consorts before her honor. 187, etc. 6
The Romans made Recluses of their own Howses. 190 7 What temperance the
ancient Romans observed in their abstinence from wine. ibid. 8 The diversion of
their passion; their zeal to reputation. 191 9 For Commanders in the last, He
refers them to his Eight Section, wherein their witty Aphorisms are contained.
192
FORTITUDE.
Under which link are inchained these Stories.
1 OF Epicharia, that famous Libertine of Rome. 193, etc. 2 Of Leaena, though a
prostitute, secret and resolute. ib. 3 The speech of a discreet Gentlewoman.
195 4 The exhortation of a person of high quality, and one of our own Country,
addressed to her husband about the death of his son. ibid. etc.. 5 What women
aptest to retain secrets. ibid. 6 The strange cautious flight of Geese in
their passage from Cilicia over the mountain Taurus. 197 7 Dionysius his
strait command for beheading Bryas. 198 8 A sweet consort the only allayer of
grief and augmenter of comfort: their secrecy, their husbands safety, ibid.
etc. 9 The speech of a discreet Grecian, touching secrecy of counsel. ibid. 10
No better Innes for Curtain conference to lodge in, than at the Signs of
Harpocrates and Anacharses. ib. 11 Excellent instruction in matters of Secrecy.
201 12 Milo was not half so strong in bearing a Bull; as Stilpho in opposing
his own will. ibid. 13 The Wife of Bath, upon whose Tale, the Author at request
of some noble Friends, has lately annexed his illustrations, was nothing nice,
in telling the World what liked a Woman best. ib. 14 How wittily a Gentlewoman
covered her jealousy. 202 15 How commendable it is for women to decline their
minds from an apish imitation of fashions. ib. 16 The humerous Lady; who ever
wore the best clothes, when she came lea in sight. ibid. etc. 17 When
opportunity and youth meet together: the Combat makes a glorious Conqueror,
instanced in Penelope. ib. 18 What Women, and those of noblest rank, to their
lasting glory, have in our own Country, by their continued widdow-hood,
honored their Husbands memory. 204 19 The devout Meditation and constant
resolution of a young Gentlewoman: with a farewell to all vanity upon her
Conversion. 205, etc.
SECTION III. Their Moderation of Passion.
Under which Subject are these Stories presented.
1 THe unexemplary Disaster at Cannae. 210, etc. 2 The patience of Octavia,
Porcia, Tanaquila, whose well-composed temper raised her Tarquin from a subject
to an Emperor. ibid. etc. 3 The temperate moderation of Caecilia and Cornelia.
ibid, etc. 4 Instances of our own, in a most loyal Wife, who was distasted by
her Husband only because she was his wife. 215 5 Women may be too insensible
of injuries, as well as too apprehensive. p. 216 6 Houses are neither to be
governed by Shrews nor Sheep. ib. 7 A legendary Story of a patient Votaresse.
ib. and 217, 218, and 219 8 A Discourse of such Women who thought they had
Spirits stout enough to revenge, and Power enough to second that revenge, yet
held they it their highest honor to moderate passion with a recollected
temper. ib. 9 A Colonels attestation of his wifes calm disposition. 220 10 A
Virago, quite of another nature. ibid. 11 The Syracusans strong testimony of
his Wifes temper. ib. 12 Loss of estate more sufferable than loss of good
name: instanced in the resolution of a noble Roman Lady. 221 13 A Gentlewomans
answer to a perfect Courtier, laying siege to her honor. 222 14 Mildness
begets in women, a near resemblance with that well-disposed feminine Monarchy
of Bees: they have honey to sweeten their stings. 223 15 No virtue more
ennobles a rational soul than this Moderation of Passion. ib.
SECTION IV. Their Continency in assaults.
Under which Subject are these Stories related.
1 SOPHRONIA'S modest answer to a Wanton Suitor. 225.226 2 Scipio commended for
returning to Allantius his Spouse, after such time as her beauty was presented
to him for a booty. ib. etc. 3 The like of Alexander, for sparing Darius wife
and his three Daughters. ib. 4 What a firm tie Conjugall love held, even among
Ethnicks. ib. 5 The Tragical story of Camma wife to Synattus and Synorix. ib.
etc. 6 The resolute answer of a Noble Captive to a General: And what a
fortunate issue crowned both their desires. 229, 230 7 The constant affection
of a virtuous Maid: with her Answer to her father touching her Choice. ib. etc.
8 The story of those dainty Dalmatian virgins: showing with what continency
they resisted the assaults of their commanding Enemies. ib. and 233 9 The like
of those Scythian women, who after their Husbands discomfiture, chused rather
to expose themselves to death and danger, than forfeit their honor. ib. etc.
10 Instances in Women, who wained their fancies from those whom they once
loved: And this he confirms with a pleasant Story happening betwixt two Lovers
upon the yielding up of Brada. ibid. and 235, 236, 237.
SECTION V. Their Modesty in Countenance, Habit, and Expression of their
Affection.
COUNTENANCE.
Under which Subject are these Stories ^mopiled.
1 NOne can say they have modest minds, so long as they have immodest eyes. 239
2 Light Habits suite not well with grave hearts: nor wandring-eyes with settled
minds. ibid. 3 He inveyes against painting, poudring, purfling: and
strengthens his reproof with the testimonies of S. Hierom, S. Cyprian, S.
Ambrose, S. Nazianzene, Clemens, Pet. Martyr, Tertullian, Scultetus, Petrarch,
etc. 240, etc. 4 A pleasant passage betwixt a Bedlamer and a fantastic Girl.
242, etc. 5 Lacides Prince of Argos, accounted lascivious for his sleeke
looks, and mincing gate. 244 6 So was Pompeie for scratching his head with one
finger. ibid. 7 Augustus discovered the dispositions of his daughters, by the
places where they frequented; the company with which they conversed. ibid. 8
The directions of a Roman Matron to her daughters. ib. and 245 9 The composed
Countenance, and constant ^^desty of a young maid, both in the presence and
absence of her choice. 246 10 The modesty of that incomparable Aemilia. 247
HABIT.
1 THe Habit of the body, the Anatomy of the mind. 248 2 The answer of a Lady
of this Kingdom to a Peer who came to visit her, asking her why she appeared
still a mourner? ib. and 2^9 3 The Answer of an Outlandish woman to one of our
own Natives, touching following of fashions. 250. 4 A Divine Answer returned by
an excellent Lady to an impertinent Objection. ibid.
EXPRESSION OF AFFECTION.
1 THe Expressive and most Emphaticall Speeches of Aurelia, Sulpitia, and that
brave Burgundian Lady. 251 2 A rare expression of affection in a young Maid:
and how in a disguise following her Lover she dyed of a fever. 252 etc. 3 A
passionate story of a deeply inamoured Girl. ib^^. 255 4 The modest affection
of majestic Marcella. ibid. 5 A woman should neither be too forward, nor
(...), nor too easy in the expression of her fancy: shadowed in two posies.
256, etc.
SECTION VI. The violence of some Women used upon such as were Corrivals in
their choice: with Examples.
Under which Subject are these Stories recorded.
1 ITALY, a tragic Theater of such Presentiments. 258, etc. 2 The jealouse
Lady, who stabbed her Favorite. ib. and 260. 3 The Ladies Duel. 261, etc. 4 The
cunning plot of Madam D'Alveare, to discover her Servants familiarity with
another. 263, etc. 5 The Corrivals bloody banquet. 268.
SECTION VII. Their modest defense.
Under which Subject are these Stories confined.
1 THe different affections and effects of Lucilia and Livia; Phedra and
Dejanira. 271 2 Good intentions many times produce heavy events: and now and
then mischievous plots, Comicall ends: with instances of the latter, in
Olympia's unjust suite to her son Alexander: And Mandanes Dream. Of the
former, in ^litemnestra and Aegystus: unfortunate Agrippina in the hopes she
conceived, and breeding she bestowed on Nero. ib. 272, etc. 3 Of an over-kind
Duck, who killed her too ticklish Sweetheart with kindness. ib. 4 A Review of
all such Tragic Examples as were presented in the last Section. 274 5 Their
just Apology in defense of their Continency and Constancy. 275 6 A custom
amongst the Romans of breaking their Bride-waines. ib. 7 Plato's difference
betwixt two kinds of Venus: with the application of that Fiction, and Moral to
all modest Women: in the regulation of their Thoughts, Words and Actions. ib. 8
The Counsels of mellifluous Bernard and sententious Seneca, with all instancy
recommended to them. 279 9 By making Heaven their Object; whatsoever is less
than Heaven, becomes their Subject. ib. 10 We should be Pythagoreans to all the
World, and Peripatetians to Christ. ib. 11 The young Gallants encounter with
his wanton Mistress, in Erasmus. ib. 12 A view of such Errors wherewith Women
are taxed: As their Ambition after honor, pleasantly instanced: with an Other,
who desired rather to have her husband nimbly agile, than aged and honorable.
Their frequent to Court-Maskes and other public State-shows. Their Working
affection upon any moving action. Their proclivity to change their choice;
wherein occasionally Bodin is confuted. Their short and feigned funeral
tears, over their Husbands Graves. Their Unbounded desires. Their easy
inclination to temptation; an Objection assoiled in the very first Section.
Their longing affection after a promising proportion. Their inconstancy in
their desire of Change; with their jealousy in the enjoyment of their Choice.
Their perspective Pattentary Sedands, wherein they desire rather to see than to
be seen. All which groundless aspersio^s and corky objections are so clearly
refell^d* as these Timonists or feminine T^tters are enforced to come off with
dishonor: with an acknowledgement of their error, a disclaiming of their
Censure. Their easy simplicity an excuse to their error: how misconstruction,
rather through ignorance th^^^ malice, makes them subject to mistakes: with a
merry example to that purpose 279, 280, etc. 13 A (...) vindicating of them
against their (...), who tax them of pride: by bringing in their toys* tyres,
and dressings* w^^ples, wyres, and curlings; (...), poudrings, and purflings
upon the stage. 289 14 The (...) of Lessius and Alagora, in (...) women may use
painting and (...) without sinne^ in which (...) himself spa^^ng, to (...) ib.
and 290 15 the Authors opinion is, that none of these Critics would so
injuriously hate, nor maliciously write against women, but that they have been
lightly hurt, or wantonly wounded by some women. 291 16 He closes this Section
with a twofold exhortation: the one, to encourage women to slight these
malicious affronts squeaz'd from the pen of Calumny: the other, to ad^vise them
to stand upon their guard, seeing no place can be so free from occasion, as to
promise it self security. ib. etc.
SECTION VIII. Their witty Aphorisms, Apothegms, and Answers.
Under which Subject are these Stories contracted.
1 WOmen recorded for their wisdom in allaying their Husbands affliction. 294
2 Others for their brave composed spirits, in scorning to stoop though they
were crushed with affliction. ib. etc. 3 Others so far from coyness, as they
run into all hazards, to seize themselves of the Object of their affection. ib.
4 Others such loving kind Turtles, as they could not endure the absence of
their own: nor conceive any defects or infirmities in their own. 297 5 The
loyal answer of a loving Bride to her Husband, occasioned upon our late
distractions in Scotland. ib. 6 A discourse of Aphorisms, arising from
Anacreontick Spirits; illustrated by Instances. ib. 7 The strange question of a
Trades-mans wife at a Gossips feast. ib. and 299 8 The Tale of a reverend old
Bencher, and his Shreeking Lady. ib. 9 The pleasant importunity of an amorous
Tomboy, to her Sweetheart. ib. 10 A witty Girls Receipt to a broken
Tradesman. ib. and 300 11 The hot-brained Calacute, and his jealous humor:
with his Ladies religious answer. ib. and 301 12 The desperate Malcontent.
ibid. 13 With these stories, He retires from the Booths of Suburra, and
repaires to the Temple of Viriplaca. ib. 14 Others who extracted from those
indented lines of their decayed Beauty, Emblemes, and Lectures of mortality.
302 15 Instances in the first; Theogena wife to Agathocles; and Sulpitia. 294.
etc. 16 Instances in the second; Lovely Lydia, and brave-Spirited Martia. ib.
and 296 17 Instances in the third; Marcella and Chariclea. ib. 18 Instances in
the fourth; Caja Tranquilla, Ruth, Armenia, and Hieros heroic Consort. 297 19
Instances in the last; Bellingeria and Eugenia. 302 20 Aphorisms, Apothegmes,
and Answers of an other nature; beginning with that pertty pert Girls answer
to her Mother. ib. etc. 21 That bold Wanton who left her child to the care and
charge of the Parish. 303 22 That witty wenches shrewd answer to a cassock'd
Dunses encounter. ib. and 304 23 That good-wifes reply to her Husbands
pretended progress. ib. 24 The Good-wises answer to a Chymick Doctor. ib.
SECTION IX. Their Eminent Labors; And how they were Assistants in the
exquisitest Works that have been formerly composed, either for History or
Poesy.
Under which Subject are these Stories concluded.
1 WHat happiness attends those men who cast their Lots in fair fields: and
what infelicity accompanies the contrary. 306 307 2 A Catalogue of such
creatures, whose sweet nature and choice temper have both with modesty and
majesty tendered their Consorts a Boulster Lecture. 308 3 Zenobia, beside other
Princely Tasks, made an abridgement of the Alexandrian, and all the Oriental
H^stories. ib. ^09 4 What inward beauty upon their Sex, bestowed that virtuous
Cornelia, mother to the victorious Gracchus; Portia, Brutus his wife; Cleobula,
daughter to Cleobulus, one of the seven Sages of Greece; the daughter of
Pythagoras; Theano daughter to Metapontus; Phemone, that mysterious Sibill, who
first gave life to an Heroicke verse; Sulpitia, Calanus his wife; Hortensia,
daughter to the famous Orator Hortensius; Edesia of Alexandria; Corinnathia,
who contended for the Laurel with Pindarus; Paula, Seneca's wife;
Argengentaria Pollia, or Polla, wife to Lucan; and his assistant in his highest
and heroick'st composures? 309, etc. 5 Such as these might make good Companions
to pray, play, and converse with. 312 6 Mouth-lovers are but Month-lovers: when
their Honey-month is done, their love-threed is spun. ib. 7 Modest Matrons will
admit no youthful parliance: nor stoop to any uncomely dalliance. ib. 8 Those
loves quickly expire and dye, which receive their only infusion by the eye. ib.
9 Lovers easily deluded, when by their Sense only directed. ib. 10 A Curtezans
Anatomy-Lecture. 313, etc. 11 Love grounded on Sense, produces jealousy;
jealousy revenge. 315 12 These very modern times afford Ladies, so highly
enriched with unequalled abilities both by Art and Nature as they have
deservingly acquired, and constantly retained that select style of THE WITS.
Their desire is, to have their Muses rather buskined than busked. Sweet and
dainty Airs, their choicest cares. 316 13 Others we have, though not
altogether so happy for strength of fancy, yet no less useful in another
faculty: by reading Principles of House-wivery to their well ordered family.
ib. and 317 14 These welcome their husbands home with a smile: and entertain
his friend without a thought of ill. ib. 15 To gain themselves more
improvement, they task themselves to some imploiment. ib. 16 They read not to
dispute, but to live: not to talk, but to know. ib. 17 A man ill-married, (and
finding in himself a willingness to suffer) may boast that he possesses in
the person of his wife, all necessary qualities to be put into the List of
Martyrs. 318 A man well-married is so far from that opinion, as he has a
Consort ever ready to afford him sweet Music without Division. ibid. 18 In the
conclusion of this Section, he exhorts Ladies to retain a memory and
resemblance of those he has described: and he shall acknowledge this his
Labor and Service addressed to them, highly requited. ib.
1 Menippus his Madrigall, to his Coy-duck, Clarabell. 2 Loves Festival at
Lusts Funeral.
Ar't asleep Husband? A BOULSTER LECTURE, Stored with all variety of witty
Jests, merry Tales, and other pleasant passages; extracted from the choycest
Flowers of Philosophy, Poesy, ancient and modern History.
SECTION I. The Excellency of Women in their Creation.
DIscourses taking life from purest and refinedst Subjects, beget ever in the
Reader most affection, in the Hearer most attention. Now, what Subject more
pure than that which is of the most affable nature, amiable feature, and
pliable temper? A smooth thin skin promises (says the Philosopher) a free
and ingenuous disposition: And where shall we find this philosophical Idaea,
but in a woman? This caused the Oracle to give sentence in a business which
highly imported the Spartan State: that the approaching calamity of their
principal City could not possibly be diverted, but by scattering the purest
dust upon their Altars, which all their country afforded. Upon which Answer,
it was long debated, what dust the Oracle meant by, to expiate the fury of the
Gods: where, as it ever falls out in affairs of that nature, as many men, so
many minds: Some, and those were rich Groundlins, who preferred Wealth before
Wit, and esteemed Gold for the most absolute Good; were of opinion that the
Oracle meant by the purest dust, the foil of Gold. Others, that no purer dust
could be scattered on their Altars, than the ashes of such honest and pious
Patriots, who had exposed themselves to whatsoever Fortune could inflict upon
them, to secure their Country, and become her safety who bred them. Other
mettall-men there were, who closed with that relation of Plutarch; who
reports, that when Dionysius the Tyrant asked the Wisemen of his Court, which
Copper was the best, Antiphon answered very readily, that in his opinion, that
was the most excellent, and the dust most restorative, whereof the Athenians
had made the pictures of those Tyrants, which, for their Countries delivery
from such an insupportable tyranny, Armodius and Aristogyton had dispatched to
their succeeding glory. But in the end, making recourse to the most esteemed
Sage in all Greece, they were told, that it was the Dust of a Virgin; which was
no sooner scattered, than their malady was removed. What excellent Cures have
been produced, what happy deliveries effected by these means, may appear
every where in the Poets: As in Andromeda, Polyxena, Iphigenia. This confirms
that pure mould of a Virgin: that refined dust, or substance of her
Composition: reflecting ever upon the Excellency of Women in their Creation.
Yet, it may be objected, Man deserves precedence, because in his Creation he
had priority. It is confessed: yet might Woman seem (if we may safely incline to
the opinion of some Rabbis) to have a preeminence in the manner of her
Creation: For whereas Dust gave Man his Composition; Woman took hers from Man's
perfection. Yea, but the Matter she was made of, foretold what she would
be. She was made of a Crookt Subject, a Rib: and out of her crooked
disposition (will some say, who stand ill-affected to the Salique state) she
will not stick to tyrannize over a sheepish husband, and give him rib-roast. A
poor Objection! An equal and ingenuous exposition would rather frame this
conclusion: That the Subject whereof she was made, begot not in her a
crookedness, but pliablenesse of nature: ever ready to bend her will, and
apply her affection to the mould of Man: not cruelly to domineere, but
constantly to adhere to her Mate. Well did that wisest of Kings observe this;
when he so definitely concluded: Where a woman is not, the house groans. This
differed much from the opinion of that hard-hearted man, whereof I have
sometimes heard this Tale; Who being one day asked by his Neighbor, how it was
with him at home, and how his sick wife did, made this answer: Surely,
Neighbor, the case is pitiful: my wife she fears she shall die, and I fear
she shall not die, which makes an heavy doleful house. Thus grounded they
their sorrows upon two contrary fears. That divine Plato, whom even in his
cradle Bees fed with honey, to give a presage to his sweet Philosophy; retained
a better conceit of so necessary a Consort: When he closed his Desires in this
Orison So I may have but my eyes to read with, a mind to conceive, a memory to
retain whatsoever* I shall read or conceive; and a Woman to serve me, that
what necessity shall injoyne, I may seasonably receive, what fortune soever
encounter me, though she assail me, she cannot soil me; though she assault
me, she cannot foil me. He is a weak Proficient in Philosophy, who enjoying
the freedom of his inner house, cannot smile at adversity. When Philogenes
heard, how without society the world was a wilderness; The Maxim is true,
said he, if you mean a mixed society; without which all Society would soon
become a wilderness. But will some harsh Timonist or Women-hater, say; Well
had it been for the world, if there had never been an Eve in the world; it was
her Consent that brought a stain to the perfection and integrity of our state.
Yet for all this, if you will believe that ancient Cabalist, who showed
himself an exquisite discourser and discusser of conjecturall Causes; he will
tell you, that in his opinion, the Woman showed not so much levity in
consenting to the Serpent; as the Man did facility in giving ear to the Woman.
She expostulated the cause with the S^rpent, e're she consented: Whereas he,
without any more ado, weakly received, what she so unhappily offered.
Howsoever, neither of them are to be excused; the one in not resisting the
Serpents subtilty (an act, no doubt, of greater difficulty;) the other in
inclining to the Woman's persuasion, which might have been prevented with more
facility.

What an excellent State accompanies the presence of a goodly Woman? What
attractive beauty in the eye? What an admirable disposure in the contexture of
every part? So as I cannot sufficiently wonder at the stupidity of that mere
Scholasticall Wooer; who being in the way of preferment, received a very free
welcome from a Gentleman nearly neighboring, whose aim it was to bring him
into acquaintance with a kinswoman of his, hoping it would be a competent
advancement for her, by matching them together. All access, which promised all
good success, was admitted him; with such opportunity, as might have induced
another Zenocrates to enter into a parley of love. But hear how this amorous
Scholar acquitted himself, as if his Soul by a strange transmigration had
passed into that dull Zenophanes, or Zenophanes into his, in thinking love to
be composed of Earth! One winter-evening was this Quintilian with that lovely
Damsel left together; purposely (if there were left any beatings of love in
his pulse) to break the matter unto her. She, poor wench, long expected from
this Predicament of fancy some pleasing encounter or other; but nothing was
done by this dumb Orator. Stillness there was on both sides, without the
least motion; till such time as she playing and toying a little with her foot,
appearing a little out of her skirts; she received from her affectionate
Scholar, after some fearful pumping, this lovely piece of Rhetoric: Surely
Mistress, you have a goodly fair foot, God be praised. How meanly was beauty
bestowed, to become an object to his dull fancy, who knew not how to value it?
Though, no doubt, with that excellent Geometrician, he could well enough gather
by the proportion of her foot, the entire feature; which would wound him as
deadly to the heart, as Achilles was wounded in his heel. Nor had that great
Graduate any more respect to beauty, when he entertained it with so dis-joynted
and unbeseeming a treaty* as being one evening left with a select company of
noble Ladies, to bestow some hours in such delightful discourse, as might not
cloy the curious palate of so prepared an Audience; suddenly, as one newly
awakt from an Endymion slumber, he accoasts their gentele ears with this
improper Dialect: I have read much Greek, yet read I never what was Greek for
a pair of tongues. This unexpected passage was returned with a general jeere;
but having the grace not to understand what they laughed at, he held on in his
old Philosophical dumpe, while his impertinent Greek phrase made them merry
Greeks all that night. Truth is, to a competible eye nothing more intimately
moving than Beauty; nor any Lecture working more to mortality, than deformity.
For these Anagrams to good faces are such impressive stamps; as some have made
of them wonderful use. Deformiores afficiunt, quo formosiores minus alliciant.
They affected only to converse with Deformity, that they might have less
familiarity with Beauty. Now, if such use might be made of the rubbish, what
might be expected from a purer metal? Reflect then a little upon this Idaea;
imagine with your self that such a piece were drawn and presented to the full
body, which might as really enamour and captivate the Senses; as ever Io,
Danae, or Semele, did their Jupiter; or any other amorous feature entranced a
poetical Lover. It is the eye that conveyes love to the heart; Curious Models
to dull Spectators, move small admiration, and consequently leave but a weak
impression. To see a Campaspe portrayed in her colors; her veins ^nazured;
her sweet smiles shadowed; her ^ove-enthralling eyes sparkled; and all these
with a native Art, and artfull color displayed, would make their Apelles to
do what he did: Whence we read, that Alexander, that worlds Monarch, not
only affecting, but admiring the Art of Apelles; to parallel his skill with an
equal subject; commanded him on a time to paint Campa^pe naked, who was then
held the beauty of that age; which Apelles having done, his Pencill purchased
him a pensive heart, fal^ing in love with her who was his Picture, and whose
love he despaired to compass ever: which Alexander having perceived, he gave
him her. The like incomparable Art was shown by Zeuxes, upon the beauties of
Croton's five Daughters; which Pictures took more hearts, than his Grapes had
before deceived Birds. But lest that Apelles, of whom I have spoke so much, as
one regardlesse of his own praise, should find fault with me, as sometimes
he did with Protogenes, for that he could not hold his hand from the Table; (A
right English fault, I must confess, whose fate and fault it has been ever,
not to leave their work when it was well, nor their game when it was at
fairest:) I intend to pass from the Picture to the Feature: making mention of
such remarkable occurrents, as hold good relation to our Discourse: and what
may tender any conceiving Reader, variety of delight.

I have sometimes read written in a window with a Diamond, by one, it seemed*
who was not settled in his Choice, but like a wanton-wavering Wooer, had fixed on
many Objects, but on none such as yet he could like; these lines: If I might
choose, I know not which were best,
She that is naked, or is neatly dressed.
Which lines in another pane of the window directly opposite to the former, I
found thus answered: If I might choose, I Would have her such an one,
As she was first created, bone on bone:
And in that naked-native posture have her,
When th'Serpent with an Apple did deceive her.
It seems he would have had her as she was in her integrity and perfection:
but at that time, I must tell him, though she were naked, she nor any other
could not then discover it. Her unspotted Innocence became her garment of
Purity and brightness. No Fig Leaves then needed; nor any Covert to shroud her
from his sight, whom she afterward offended. But it may be his wanton thoughts
gave themselves more liberty. His wish was to have one naked, to enjoy without
delay, what his heart so much affected. But loose desires are to be barred by
and maine from true Loves lists. Sensual Love finds ever the shortest period
in pleasure. That only promises a continuate delight, which grounds her
affection on Reason rather than Sense. Where, though Sin can never be without
a short perfunctory delight, yet may there (probably) be delight arising from
the proclivity of Sense, without much Sin. Which makes me call to mind a Tale
which I have heard, not altogether improper for this Argument; and it was this.
There was sometimes a Maid of admired beauty and approved fame, who, after a
long and strait Siege of a garrison Town wherein she dwelt, became exposed
with other Virgins to the violence and fury of the Soldiers. One of these,
having deflowred this Maid, demanded of her how she felt her self? Oh, quoth
she, never had poor distressed Maid more pleasure with less sin. Meaning,
that as the Act was far from her consent, so it was free from sin, which is
ever accompanied with consent. For whatsoever is forced, is from the Will
estranged; without which, sin cannot properly be said to be committed. This
the Ancient Vestals received for authentic: Who, though they were by the
strictness of their votive Order, never to infringe that sacred Vow which they
had professed: nor consort with any, that might beget suspicion of a loose
affection: yet if the extremity of War should engage that encloyster'd
Society to the Soldiers fury; they were exempted from censure; adjudgeing
their resolves to be pure; inviolated their Vows, though enforced acts had
distained their honor: yet were they not to return to their former Order: for
they held Vesta dishonored by such a Sister.

But you, brave English Ladies, whose happiness it is to close both your
actions and affections in one pure Orb; you, whose immixed thoughts, cannot
partake of an irregular love; nor can sort with a subject of lightness; nor
labor to attract a strangers love with a luring eye; nor imparadise a deluded
Amorist with a dissembling favor; nor confine a light Passengers eye to a
loose-displayed breast; nor soveraignise over a captived Lover, in holding his
aie mees your best melody; nor to open your windows to get suitors; nor to
offer your first Sacrifice to your Glass, or Cerusse box. You, I say, who hold
Reputation such an unvaluable Gemme, as an Empire should not command it; nor
the extremes of Fortune, even unto death, impeach it. You, who with much
confidence can say with that Heroic Princess, I know how to dye, but not to
lose mine honor. You, in whose chaste breasts, as in precious Cabinets of
selectedst virtues, are stored all graces: such, who hold in their highest
scorn to converse with a light favorite, or to be solicited in such a Suite
as may detract from your honor. You, I say, are those fair and noble
Patronesses, to whom I address this Lab^ur. You are none of our Curtain
Lecturers, who disquiet the rest of your Husbands. Nor know you how to call
them up into the Garret, to give them gentle correction. You have a better, and
far more gentele way to reclaim them. Mild and temperate be your
Reasonings; wooing and winning be your tears; and after a virtuous and
well-composed treaty, you are ready to close with them upon such fair terms,
as the penance you enjoyne them is no suffering; for your sweet-tempered
Natures choose rather to suffer with them. Far unlike to that Shrow, who
meeting her husband amongst other good fellows at a Tavern door, and seeing
him bear the Badge of that red-fac'd Ensign from whence he came; after many
words of disgrace and reproach, willed him to go mend his color, pale-faced
Rascal as he was. No; your education has better improved you; your inbred
graces more highly ennobled you; your tender care of your husbands esteem so
truly informed you, as you prize nothing more than to preserve it untainted;
or if at any time questioned, constantly to defend it. In which respect, you
differ far from that shrewd Girl, who having taken occasion of displeasure
at her husband, told him plainly one day, That since he had played her that
prank, he would confess ere long, that the Sign was in Aries when they two
were married. But for you, unblemished Beauties, who hold nothing comparably
precious to a continent Soul: as your minds become devoted wholly to
goodness: so you must give me leave to interveine my Discourse with others of
your Sex, who fall so far short of your perfection, as it might seem strange
to reason, that one and the same Mould should produce Subjects of such
different Natures. For as much then, as Contraries, when most opposed, are best
discovered: And that Venus Picture never showed more beauty, than when it was
accompanied by Nais deformity; to revive the living memory of your Honors, we
intend to bring upon the Stage (though closed from vulgar eyes by a Curtain)
the too forward discourses of such, who distemper their Husbands quiet with
their Conventuall Lectures, and that at uncanonicall hours, to the great
disturbance of private peace, and ill example of all young-married Couples. Nor
can this be holden for invective: The reproof of those that are evil, cannot
but highly improve the behavior of those who are good. And in all ages, as
Harvests have their Miscellaue grains, so have we ever had and must have,
severally-mixt Conditions. Rome had many eminent families; from whence were
derived Matrons adorned with exquisite virtues. Octavia, Porcia, Caecilia,
Cornelia, all famous Matrons, whose succeeding virtues were left for imitable
mirrours to their Successors. Yet in that Age, wherein Moral goodness was in
most request, and wherein nothing was esteemed better, than to live and dye to
their Countries honor; that flourishing City, the Princess of many renowned
States, had an impatient Flavia, as well as a discreet Octavia; a wanton
Laelia, as well as a Continent Cornelia; an immodest Semphronia, as well as a
shame-fast Scribonia; a Faustina, as well as a Cinna; a Messalina, as well as a
Cincinna.

Now to insist more usefully on this Subject; we have proposed to our selves to
enter into a Discourse of four distinct Motives to affection: which in their
own nature beget affection; but inverted, express to life their owners
disposition. The first shall be Beauty; a Pearl in the eye, and a Pinion to
the heart: The second, Agility of body; which begets in the owner a desire of
liberty. The third, Quickness of Wit; which, being not well seasoned,
oft-times breeds occasion of distaste. The fourth, Gentleness of Speech; an
excellent Ornament, and worth entertaining, if it be not shrouded or palliated
with dissembling.

To the first then, because every graceful accomplishment or perfection
falling from it self, declines from what it was, and presents some dangerous
imperfection which before it had not, we oppose Disdain, being found for most
part an individual Adjunct to Beauty.

To the second we oppose Liberty: for what youthful bodies, unless
Mortification has confined and impaled their affections, by devoting them to
retirement, in affecting a Collegiat or Cloystrall life in their very first
ripenings of Nature, but being of Ability, they desire Liberty?

To the third, we oppose Distaste. For Quick and prompt Wits, if they be not
with discretion seasoned, they become so freely licentious, as they lose more
friends than they purchase.

To the fourth and last, we oppose Dissimulation; a quality whereto our Whitest
tongues are commonly subject. Of each of these we purpose to Discourse in
order, ever giving Beauty her due character, when she is Virtues follower: And
to allay more serious discourse with other pleasing passages of wit: you shall
find each of these Subjects accompanied with choice Tales* such as may beget a
modest laughter; and from equal judgments receive a fair Censure.

BEAUTY.
BEAUTY is a pleasing Object to the eye, MOTIVE 1.
improved by the apprehension of Fancy, and conveyed to the heart by the Optic
part. If the Owner that enjoyes it, know it: it begets in her a dis-esteeme and
contempt of inferior features. None can serve Echo but Narcissus. What a
scornful eye she casts upon common persons, or a Plebeian presence? She
could find in her heart to be angry with the wind, for dealing so roughly
with her veil, or ho^sing up her skirts; and scourge those Aeolian scouts for
being so saucy. She wonders that Venus should be for a Goddess recorded, and
she never remembered. When she sees our countrey-Beauties, with a scornful
pity she looks on them, and returns her judgment thus: "Alas, poor
homespun beauties! A civil requisite curtsy she will not deagne to bestow on
more deserving lips than her own: with a seeming averseness she forgets that
winning salute of those Noble Trojan Ladies; holding it too high a favor to
afford a lip to the compleatest Lover. This that passionate Amorist well
discovered in this Canto: Beauteous was She, but too coy,
Glorious in her tyres and toys,
But too way-ward for that Boy,
Who in Action Spheard his joys.
Love-tales she could deagne to hear,
And relate them week by week,
But to kiss when you came near,
Lip was turned into the cheek.
Beauty that is too precize,
Though it should attractive be,
Darting beamelins from her eyes,
'Twere no Adamant to me:
She it is I only love,
She it is I only seek,
That do'es bill it like a Dove,
And will make her lip her cheek.
Honor is a rising bait,
But not rudely to be pulled;
Give me Her at any rate,
Who loves to be kissed and culled:
Country Ducks scorn to be nice
To those Swains their fancy seek,
Though their honor they do prize,
Lip they tender, not their cheek.
Thus can Sheepheards Swainlings love,
And express what they desire;
Live to love, and love to prove
Height and h^at of Cupids fire.
When a Sill^bub they make
While their youngsters woo and seek
For their love, they may partake
Of their lip as well as cheek.


Now did that incensed Gentleman show less passion upon the like re-greet from
a disdainful Lady* whose long practice in painting, and delicate tooth
together, had so corrupted her breath, as Cocytus could not have a worser
savor. A Lady gave me once her cheek to kiss,
Being no less than I my self did wish:
For this I Will say, and bind it with an oath,
Her cheek tastes sweeter far than do'e's her mouth.
But there is nothing so much discovers the vain Pride of these Beauties, as
a coyness to their Servants in their wooing and winning. If they affect you,
that affection must be so shrouded and shadowed, as Lynceus eyes could not
disclose it. Walk from them, their eyes are on you; walk to them, their eyes
are from you. There is no argument, be it never so well-relishing, nor sorting
with their liking, that they will give ear to: no posture, be it never so
graceful, they will afford an eye to. Opposition suiteth best with their
condition. To a stranger they will show themselves familiar; to you, whose
intimacy has got a room in their hearts, they will seem a stranger. If you
appear merry, it must be expounded trifling childishness; if grave, Stoic
sullenness. It were a gift above apprehension, in every particular to fit
their humor. And yet they must be humored, or they are lost for ever. This
would make any man think, if he cast his cards aright, that a man's only sweet
Bedfellow, were a Bed without a fellow. But that would spoil all humane
society: better an inconvenience than a mischief: better one perish, than a
multitude. Beauty is no such Phoenix, as she can generate from her own ashes.
Suppose her then (disdainful thing) resolved to take one (though with a queasy
stomach;) and such an one, as of all her choice she could not entertain a
worse. And this youth she rather affects, because all her friends dis-relish
him: For she measures not her Love by others discretion, nor her fancy by the
line of others direction. She is too wise to be taught; and if she repent, it
shall be at leisure: and if she have cause to put finger ith'eye, she will
choose rather to dye, than discover it to any other. Yet for all this, through a
seeming indifferency and coldness of affection, the marriage-day must be
protracted by them, till they cannot endure Whale-bone, becoming as Pregnant
as Nature could make them. This makes me remember the Tale of the Western
Peddler; who, having one daughter, was sought after by many amorous Suitors: but
one amongst the rest she preferred in her choice: feeding his longing appetite
with hopes, and following her fathers course, who had got in his time as much
by Consideration as Principal; told him ever and anon that she would consider
of it: till at last her Consideration falling into a Conception, and being
asked the selfsame question, she never returned any other than that she would
still take it into her Consideration: Oh, quoth her Suitor, being guilty of the
Bill* consider your pregnant present state, and your Consideration, Comater,
comes too late.

But of all others, there is nothing to be admired more in this their trifling
with Love, than those nice conditions they stand upon; which, though their
hearts stand indifferent, whether they be ever observed or no; they will
peremptorily conclude, without assent to such conditions, no Bargain. Now, the
principal Article must be, that He who is pricked to be the man, must hold his
Distance: Too much familiarity breeds contempt; and to avoid this: He must
observe a kind of reverend state in her presence; Give her way in all arguments
of discourse: And for as much as her brave disposition retains in it self
thoughts of Majesty, she must have her Side for her self and her women, or
what Male she pleases; divided Beds; seasons of repairing one to another; that
every new visit may seem a fresh kind of wooing. In which Encounter, as he is
to show himself importunate in his Suite, so is his spouse to show her self
reluctant to his desires. But the issue proves fearful: for her long practice
of Sovereignty over his weakness, brings this Fair one to that pass; as she
begins to distaste him. Though the man be tolerable for his part, and of
promising satisfaction, she cannot brook him; yet if you should ask her the
cause, it is only this; He is her Husband. Like that great favorite Flaviano,
who having taken to wife a noble Florentine Lady; grew in short time to dislike
her: and being asked the reason why he could not affect her, being every way so
brave and complete a Lady? I grant, said he, her parts deserve love; and as I
live, there is none breathing that I could more constantly love, did she not
bear that name which I so much loath: and being further demanded, what name
that was? O, replied he with a sigh, A Wife!

Neither for all this would I have you to mistake me, as if I restrained
affection only to Beauty: for I have known Fancy taken as much, though not so
often, with Deformity, as ever it was with Beauty. Yea, One in whom not so much
as the least glympse or show of favor appeared, has wrought no less
impressive Effects in the heart of a deluded Lover, than if she had been the
Astrophel of the age; which the Poet seems to confirm by his own personal
experience: Nais I love, and most men wonder why,
For none sees ought worth love in her but I.
To close then this first Subject; as it was Socrates rule to his Scholars, to
present unto them their outward physnomies in a Glass: where, if any of them
were of a pleasing and amiable complexion, his exhortation to them was, that so
good faces should not be blemished with the moles of Vices; but as they were
outwardly beautiful, so they should be inwardly graceful: But if any of his
Scholars chanced to be hard-favoured, his advice was, that they should supply
that deformity with an inward beauty. Be it your care on whom Nature has so
freely bestowed her bounty; by adorning you with a graceful presence, to
second it with those inward graces, which give accomplishment to the best
beauty. And though the purest cloth may have his brack; the preciousest pearl
her flaw: if any such inherent blemish darken those inward graces, be it your
endeavor to rectify that error by a timely censure: that bestowing more cost
on the Instrument, than the Case; on the pith, than the rind: That Gemme which
before seemed blemished, may be so polished; as others induced to imitate your
pattern, like lines leading to one center, may desire nothing more than to be
your Followers, in whom they see both an inward and outward Fair so
harmoniously closing together. And so I descend from this attractive object of
Beauty, to that humor, or opinionate error, which most commonly accompanies
it, and ever detracts most from it.

DISDAIN.
THe several pass^ges through-out this entire Section, are partly extracted
from Ariosto, Tasso, Boc^act, Rheginus, A^^aeus, etc. And intend^d by them to
cast a glowing shame upon those times wherein they lived: and on those persons
at whom they aimed. Meaning by these lighter Stories to reprove their
lightness; and not to introduce any corruption of manners. This it was that
reduced those Epyrotes and Laconians to such strict civil Order, by presenting
those Obscrenities of the time in so free a posture, as by a discreet
recollection of themselves, they became ashamed of their Error: which
Retractation in few years highly conduced to their honor. And this it was
which the Poet so nearely struck upon in these enlivened airs: It is our best
of Art, sometimes to write
Light lines to tax such persons as be light,
And with a glowing and vermilion shame
To make them be more cautious of their fame:
Which once impeached can hardly be regained,
So deep a dye holds reputation stained.


DISDAIN is an humor bred from an overweening opinion or self-conceit of
some extraordinary worth, OPPOSITE 1.
arising from person, place, or power. Personal, as from outward gifts, or
inward graces; Local, as from office or dignity; Magisteriall, as from power
or authority. Of the First are we only to discourse; for Official or
Magisteriall Government suites not properly with our feminine regiment.

It was an excellent argument of a noble disposition in that brave Lady
Marcelles, who gave this attestation of her Sex and Country, to her own fame
and National glory. It is not the property of an Italian Lady, to answer Love
with scorn, or fancy with Disdain. If our Servants oblation be love, we can
sacrifice to them the like. This Lady, though admired for her beauty, scorned
with Disdain to entertain fancy; or to glory in the distress of a
dispassionate Lover: or to relate amongst creatures of her own Sex what
disgraces she had put on her discarded Servant. In which Triumph both former
and present times have been sufficiently practiced. Our renounedst Heroes have
found store of such coy Mistresses. Fulvia knew how to domineere over her
Pompey; Cleopatra, in the infancy of their love, over her M. Antony; Cressida
over her Troylus; Hellena, (to the subversion of a populous State) over her
Menelaus; Phedra over her Theseus; Omphale over her Alcides. These knew the
strength of their beauty; and what power there was in one amorous glance to
inchain Fancy. These were so far from avoiding occasion to tempt, as their
only exercise was to catch wandering eyes; and to lay baits by adulterate
beauties, how they might surprise an effeminate Servant, and make his life a
perpetual servitude. Although, they encountered with some, from whom they
received a repulse with shame. For even that princely Cleopatra, who had all
the Art to procure love: and whose presence retained that winning Majesty, as
State contended with Beauty, and closing together, promised no less than over
the victoriou'st Monarch a commanding Sovereignty: when she, I say, after the
discomfiture of her Antony, and her then approaching period to her former
glory, kneeled at the feet of Caesar, laying baits for his eyes; but in vain;
her beauties were beneath that Princes chastity. Others we might here instance;
who were so far from Disdain; as rather than they would be an occasion to
tempt another by means of beauty, they chused to disfigure themselves to
remove all motives to Fancy. And of this Moderation, (or if you please to
bestow on it so graceful a Title as Mortification) we might here produce
examples, and those memorable in both Sexes. Incredible is the Story which
Valerius Maximus reports of that young man Sputimia, whose beauty did so
incomparably become him, as it occasioned many women to lust after him: which
this noble youth no sooner perceived, than he wounded his face, that by the
Scar he sustained, his beauty might become more blemished, and consequently,
all occasion of lusting after it, clearly removed.

The like resolution showed many noble Ladies, during those raging
persecutions, where neither viduall, conjugall, nor virgin estate, were they
never so much strengthened with modesty, nor magnanimity, could oppose
themselves against Soldiers fury, nor Tyrants insolency. Where, woe shall
find some flying, in defense of their honor, to desert and remote caves;
choosing rather to become a prey to wild beasts, than to expose their
unblemished honor to the Barbarous cruelty of savage Miscreants. These found a
hand ever ready to strike, to prevent a stain: preferring an honorable death
before an ignominious life. This might be instanced, with much admiration, in
that one act of the incomparable Chiomara, a constant Consort to an unfortunate
Prince; who upon discomfiture of the Gallo-Graecians (a Province so styled from
her mixed inhabitants) being ravished by a Roman Captain, gave a memorable
example of conjugall virtue; for she cut off the fellows head from his
shoulders, and escaping from her Guard, brought it to her Lord and Husband.

Others we shall likewise find, purposely to preserve their honor,
discoloring their faces, to make them seem more deformed to the insolent
Soldier. There was nothing more hateful to them than that beauty, which might
probably engage their persons to an act of infamy. To these I might add that
excellent saying of a religious Votaresse, who understanding one to be much
inamoured of her, called him aside and told him: Sir, I honor you so much, as
I have chosen rather to suffer, than by my beauty to make you a prisoner:
Wherewith discovering her face, in complexion much altered, by some colors
which she had caused to be laid upon it: he vowed to relinquish his suit,
imagining that she had poisoned her face, to waine him from his affection.
This he had no sooner said, then she ran to a spring near adjoining to wash
it off: See, said she, I am the same I was; but you are much better: for now
you are brought to see your error, in being so much taken with a skin-deepe
beauty, which only consists in dye and color.

But, howsoever that memorable Marcelles, of whom we formerly made so
honorable a mention, seemed in defense both of her self and Sex, to inveigh
against Disdain; holding it the most unwomanly quality that could be, to have
an heart steeled against the persuasions of an affectionate Servant: Ariosto,
that ingenious Poet, can inform us sufficiently of many hard-hearted Ladies in
Italy; who prided themselves in nothing more, than to make their unhappy
Lovers, Tragic Subjects: while Some of them raved with Orestes, transforming
Fancy to a phrensy; and amongst many other, whose heavy Fates brought them to
unhappy ends; he brings in three distressed Lovers murdered with Disdain: The
first, as well as the rest, under a borrowed name, he calls Infeliche: who to
discover his infelicity, and make his name and fate partake in one qua^ity, is
presented weeping, and so long till he has left no eyes to shed a tear. The
next, is his Inamorato, whose Disdainful choice brought him to that disaster,
as he vowed with an intentive fixing of his eyes upon the Sunbeams, day by
day, never to look off that Object, till the reflex of the Sun had consumed
his sight. The third, his Desperato; one who scorned to protract time, or make
truce with Death: for upon his Ladies scornful answer, as one Despairing of
all future fortune, because estranged from her favor; he leapes headlong from
a Rock; which gave a period to his unhappy love.

Disdain then, it seems, has soveraigniz'd in every country: while poor
distressed Lovers, rest of all hope, abandoned health, rather than live a
languishing life. So as, being so far embarked in this subject, I must needs
in this place acquaint you with a Letter, writ, it may well seem, by a
perplexed homespun Lover; who impatient to admit any other complement in his
lines, than what might to life best depaint his sorrow, proceeds thus:
DEarest Duckling, be it known to you, and to all People, that I have pissed
blood three days and three nights since I last saw you, and received that
unwomanly relentlesse answer from you: so as your harsh and untoward quality
was the only cause (blinke-eyed Cupid forgive you) of this my misery and
malady. Let it now suffice you, that I am utterly undone by you: while I live
to subscribe (and loath am I to live such a Scribe)

Your most unfortunate Servant.




No less ruefull was the case of that pitifully-complaining Lover, who
discovered his Judaicall passion in this manner: I loved a Wench, and she a coy
Precisian,
Her scorn of love brought me to Circumcision;
If Circumcision be the way to woo,
I would my Wench had my Praeputium too.
But since my Choice makes me an hapless man,
England adieu, I Am now for Amsterdam:
Where I may find what here I cannot move,
Affection in a Family of Love.
Though afterward repenting himself of such a rash resolution, he salves it
with this conclusion: Yet my Coy-duck, take my resolve with you;
" Loss of no Jewel can make me turn Jew:
But if you will have a Circumcised one,
" My foreskin only shall be yours or none.
The Lowest, but not unloyall'st of your Servants.


Far less hot in his Love, but more discreet in his Choice, appeared that
Seignior; who having pretended love to a Shrow, though she seemed a Sheep,
fell so highly in her books, as in the end she became a Soliciter to her
Suitor, importuning him much to marry her; to whom in a poetical strain he
returned this answer, covertly shadowed under the person of another: My Wench
over me presuming to have power,
Willed me go with her hand in hand to the Tower.
For what, said I? To cloze our marriage rite;
No, to see the Lions, 'twere a better sight:
For the Lion, Tigre, Leopard, Panther, Bear,
Are all meek Creatures to my Minivere.
Closing the aversion of his love with this resolve: I Would rather cope with Lions
in a Grate,
Than in a Bed with my imperious Kate.


One more I will only here insert, and so descend to the next subject: which I
have occasionally heard related of a wanton widow, who scornefully and in a
jeering way, disclosed that Disdain which she lodged in her heart. An ancient
Batchler, who had been ignorant before, what the working of Love was, or what
effects it produced; having had formerly good access to her house in her
husbands time; which promised him, as he thought, no less success now after
his death: made one day suite to this widow; she, neither gave him great hope,
nor any just cause to despair. And thus his cold suite continued, till she
falling aboard with a more amiable and affectionate Suitor; one, whose
rising-youth both seconded her expectance, and promised more performance: One
day, amongst the rest, upon more familiarity betwixt them, she began to
acquaint him how such a Batchlers-button had her in chase, and if his arguments
did not dissuade her, for ought she knew, she meant to make him her Choice.
This she never intended, for her affection begun now to be free toward this
active youth; and to scorn nothing more, than a doublet with a Monsieurs
Belly; a pair of Trunkhose; an inclining hamme, and a mouted beard; for so was
this old Batchler accommodated. Notwithstanding all this, her young choice
feared much to suffer a defeat; which to prevent, so soon as he came to his
chamber, rapt with a poetic fury, or amorous fancy, he addresseth these Lines
unto her: DORICLES to DULCINA.
Dear, where is thy discretion to engage
Thy matchless beauty to decrepit age?
Dew-dropping Violets hang down their head,
When their prime Leaves are too much moistened;
But thy pure-featur'd Orb shall never find
Any such pearled moisture in a Rind.
Believe me, Sweet, no color may beseem
Thy Virgin-veile worse than a Frost on green.


This Letter sent and delivered to her hand, who had already devoted her heart;
the selfsame day she chanced to leave it upon the drawing-cupboord, while she
went into her Orchard to take a walk: Her over-worne wooer, as one impatient
of longer delay, came, as it happened, that same time into her chamber, as he
was formerly accustomed to do; where finding this Letter open, and directed
with an amorous inscription, he dispensed so far with civility, and her
patience, now in her absence, as to peruse the contents: which did not a little
nettle him: howbeit, to shroud all things with as much secrecy as he could, he
held it discretion; and to discover no passion, till he saw further occasion.
While he stood thus conversing with his own thoughts: The Mistress of his
thoughts came in, never so much as suspecting the discovery of her friends
Letter. After some conference betwixt them, he renewes his suite, and with the
best Rhetoric that the Terms of Law could afford, he enforces his love-plea;
but his long impertinent preamble was soon cut short with this tart answer:
Sir, quoth she, for you to spin Penelopes web, is to no purpose: it were well
you fixed your affection some other way; for I must freely tell you, I have
vowed that no Gray-horse shall ever stand more in my stable. To which
unexpected answer, he returned this resolute reply: And I vow, fair Mistress,
that I prefer this conceit before your self. Which said, without more
sollicitancy of love, he took his leave. But coming home, and remembering the
Letter, which he verily thought was the argument which gave life to her
answer; he held it fit, under an unknown name, to return that young Gamester
a reply; which, after many invocations of his Melpomene, the fittingst consort
for loves melancholy, he addressed in this modest manner: SENE^IO'S Answer.
Thou that of youth do vainly boast,
Know, Buds are soonest nipt with frost:
Though thou be fresh, more fair than I;
Yet stumps do live, when flowers dye.
Though thou be young, and I be old,
Though thy veins hot, and my blood cold,
Though youth be moist, and age be dry;
Yet Embers live, when flames do dye.
The tender Plant is easily broke,
But who can shake the sturdy Oak?
Think thou thy fortune still does cry,
O fool, to morrow, thou may dye.


But having thus far discovered the effects of Disdain; and displayed the
danger of this Humor with variety of instances, to afford more solace to the
Reader, I purpose now to descend, in the same methodicall way, to the rest of
the Subjects, as they shall arise in order.

AGILITY OF BODY.
AGILITY of body proceeds from a quickness or vivacity of spirit, MOTIVE 2.
enlivened by a sweet and equal temperature of the Humors. This appeared in
the exact temperature of that Universal Monarch, the invincible Alexander:
whose body was of that excellent composition, as like a sweet perfume, or some
odoriferous confection, it sent forth a sweet smell wheresoever it was. The
like we read of that beautiful Alcibiades, whom Plutarch reports, to be the
best favored Boy in all Athens; one of such Agility, as he bore away the prize
in every mastery: of a winning complexion, and performing constitution. Albeit,
he was never more outwardly beautified, than he was by too free and frequent
consorting with his Curtezan Timandra, blemished. His fair face begot him a
foul fame. His Agility of body, the gage of infamy. Agile and active women we
read of in all Ages; such as even in in public managements of war, showed
themselves both for spirit and action to surpass the effeminacy of their Sex.
This might we instance in that warlike Semyramis, the puissant Thomyris, the
undaunted Menalippe, the courageous Antiope, the heroic Hippolite.

In the Empire of Monomotapa, bounding upon the Kingdom of Congo, among all
the rest of the Emperors Soldiers, the most valorous in name are his Legions
of women, whom he esteems very highly, and accounts them as the very
sinews and strength of his military forces. These women do burn their left
paps with fire, because they should be no hinderance unto them in their
shooting; after the use and manner of the ancient Amazons, that are so greatly
celebrated by the Historiographers of former profane memories. For their
weapons, they practice bows and arrows: They are very quick and swift,
lively and courageous, very cunning in shooting; but especially and above all,
venturous and constant in fight. And that their Prowess might be seconded by
Policy: In their battles they use a warlike kind of craft and subtilty: For
they have a custom to make a show that they would fly and run away, as though
they were vanquished and discomfited; but they will diverse times turn
themselves back, and vex their enemies mightily with the shot of their arrows.
And when they see their Adversaries so greedy of the victory, that they begin
^o disperse and scatter themselves, then will they suddenly turn again upon
them, and with great courage and fie^cenesse make a cruel slaughter of them.
So that partly with their swiftness, and partly with their deceitful wiles,
and other cunning shifts of war, with which long custom and continuance have
made them familiar, they are greatly feared in all those parts near which they
inhabit: retaining in them those masculine spirits, as they hold it not
sufficient only to defend their own, unless they enlarge it by their Enemies
spoil.

They do enjoy by the Kings good favor certain Countries where they dwell
alone by themselves: and sometimes they choose certain men at their own
pleasure, such as best likes them both for favor and feature, with whom they
do keep company for generations sake: So that* if they bring forth
Male-children, they send them home to their fathers housen: but if they be
Female, they reserve them to themselves, and breed them in the exercise of
war.

So lightly do they affect any sensual pleasure, as they would not admit it,
were it not to preserve Society: and to continue their flourishing Feminine
government to a succeeding Posterity.

But we are to find other exercises for these Agile Bodies; yet modestly; not
such as that Soil to her Sex, the insatiate Messalina practiced in her
Antonine Bathes. These would strike a glowing shame in a chaste cheek. Nor
will we receive into the List of our Discourse, the least mention of any
hard-hearted woman; for our Pen is addressed rather to pencile their praise,
than detract any way from their fame. For what, though some women have bestowed
their Agility only upon Cruelty, tyrannizing above the softness or delicacy
of their Sex; Every Lark may have his crest (to use that old proverb of
Symonides) but every wench has not the same mole, though the same mould. What
though Orpheus were torn in pieces by women? Hippolitus guiltlesly m^rdered by
a woman? Hercules poisoned by a woman? The Capitol betrayed by a woman? Few or
none of all these acts, but with an e^sy exposition, might admit Apologies. For
first, what those women did to Orpheus, might upon the first glance seem
cruelty; yet he may thank himself for effeminating their youth with his
melody; the only moving Scene which brought on his Tragedy. Next, for Phedra,
though her f^^t admit the worst Apology; had she not loved so much, she had not
become so wild. The lover is ever blinded, nay madded with affection toward
the object beloved. It is not given to us, to love and to be wise. Discretion
is admitted for a Directrice in all affairs, excepting love: yea, though the
Object of her love was unjust: Love has always challenged a privilege in
acts of Justice. Thirdly, for Deianira's poisoning of her dearest Hercules;
alas, if there were poison in too much affection; she was guilty of it: render
her, as she was, deluded. Glad would she have been to enjoy him solely, by
weining him from his unlawful love of Omphale. There was no venom in this.
Though the issue proved fatal; firm was her faith, her love loyal. Lastly,
though that treacherous Tarpeia might be as strongly charged with Censures, as
she was pressed down with Targets: All Historians are not of one opinion,
touching the moving cause of her Treason. It was not hope of gold, nor of
bracelets, but the affectionate embraces of an amorous youth, who had already
surprised her heart, and why not then by her means, as well the Capitol?

Nor is it discretion, as I conceive, in man to reflect upon these, by way of
aspersion. None ever of their Sex committed so foul a crime, as to burn
Diana's Temple, and that was done by the masculine spirit of an Herostratus.
None amongst them so treacherous, as to betray their own Lady, to usurp an
unjust sovereignty; yet was this done by a Nabarzanes. None so cruel, as to
embrue their hands in the blood of their own Alliance for filthy gain; yet
was this done by Pygmalion upon Sycheus. Idaea, indeed, was cruel in
persuading her Phineus, Aegenors unfortunate son, and Arcadies unhappy Prince,
to put out his childrens eyes, which he had by his first wife Cleopatra: but if
she were cruel in persuading, he was more unnatural in consenting. Tullia,
indeed, showed her self an unnatural child, in causing her chariot to be
hurried over the dead corpse of her discomfited father: yet was her usurping
Tarquin as unjust, to plant his Empire in blood, which shortly expired to his
dishonor. In these then, let us hold both Sexes, as equal delinquents.

But these Agile bodies are none of those Bona-roba's that we are now to
converse with: Cleopatra's Pearle-broths, and licentious bankets become our
Subjects. We must present such active spirits, as were those of Penthisilaea's
and Antiope's, who in an amorous encounter would mee^ their brave metall'd
Macedons, and return with equally-conferred favors, equal honors.

These were Ladies, who had never taken Physic to restore their decayed
strength, nor been in custom with their Apothecary for a Potion to procure
love, or a Powder to enable nature. Nature had given them that strength, as no
Art could improve their state. Suppose them then coming in paires, to receive
their first fruits. But you must imagine them withal, taking the air, tracing
the fields, and traversing the diapred meads, where they are as ready to take
as give: To take a Green-gowne, as to give a Sillibub: for if you should bar
them of Liberty, they could find small employment for Agility of body.

LIBERTY.
LIBERTY points at two Objects properly, OPPOSITE 2.
Mind, and Body. The former, the better, because purer. For restraint of Mind
is a miserable servitude. For the other, many suffer restraint of Body, who
fully and freely enjoy inward Liberty. This the Noble Pibrach proves in his
Paradox of Liberty, with the benefit of imprisonment to a Mind winged with
Contemplations heavenly. Which that restrained Lyrick no less merrily chanted:
Good men and true, will you be pleased to come
And see a man laid in a living Tomb?
Come, you shall find me here, and finding see
My cause is good, how'ere it fare with me.
For I am none of these that e're did feed
(Like Bankrupt Brats, who break before they need)
On others substance, and do make a prey
Of simple Snakes, that are more poor than they.
Annexing these as a sovereign receipt to his undeserved restraint: Nec me
meavincula terrent.
He that thinks I Am restrained, whos'ere he be,
Let him know this, I am as free as he:
For though my Body be restrained, I find Carcere clausa suam modulatur
avicula sortem.

-- Sic Carcere canto.



An unrestrained freedom in my mind;
" Birds in a cage sing with a sorry heart,
" But I do feel no such thing for my part.


We are to hold then many free, who are bound; many bound, who are free. Those
who are engaged to Earth, hold nothing more miserable, than to suffer restraint
of body; the reason is, all their Lights and Liberties look outward: whereas
those, who make Heaven their Haven, find no calm but in a composed mind: no
freedom, but in their Inner-roome. But the Creatures, whereof we are now to
discourse, being carried away much by Sense, crave nothing more than outward
Liberty; without which, how should they enjoy the benefit of their darling
Sense? For they hold Agile bodies no fit stuff to make Hermits. But admit,
they should be coop't up, the Cat, for want of a Consort, will play with her
own tail. As that nimble Monkey in Cheapside did; who playing her Tricks.
above, while her husband was selling his trinkets below: made an assay to lay
her heel on her neck; which she did; but like the Weasil in the Fable, could
not get it back again: till at last, after long struggling, falling out a bed
upon the floor, her husband affrighted with the noise, caused his Foreman to
run up stairs to know what the matter was: who returning back, assured his
Master, that she was either bewitched, or turned into an Ou beast.

Liberty is the very key that opens to Opportunity: which must be had; for a
kind natured wench will see light through a small hole; yea, and with twirling
of their Apron-string, have as ready an answer, if at any time taken napping,
as if a longer time had given them provision.

The Tale of a countrey-maid, (for our Stories must fix on all Sexes, States,
and Places) falls pat to this purpose: Who, when her Mother found her
suspiciously in a corner with a young man: O mother (quoth she) I knew where
you would seek me!But she fitted her mother afterward with a pennyworth; for
being hopeless of all opportunity, by reason of her mothers jealousy, she
comes in running one day crying, -hey Ginger, hey -- What means the Girl,
quoth her mother? why, Swine are in our Pease, mother, -- hey Ginger, hey. The
Mother suspected nothing, but bade the carrian make haste with a wenian; which
she needed not, for she and Ginger went to meet her sweetheart in a
Pease-rigge, where, no doubt, before she returned, she found them fully codded.

The like Tale there is of a Good-wife, who being found by her husband in bed
with her Neighbor; told him, that she did it for love of him, to save him a
labor, and withal, to know whether other men had a stone at rigge, as he had,
which made her suspect him for a Monster. Boccase.


The Tale of the Court-gentlewoman (to make a fair survey of Ci^y, Court, and
Country) may take place in the next Story: Who being found in a long dark
entry with a young Cavaliere: Her answer was, That in good-sooth, there came
such a dampe before her eyes, such a beating in her Pulse, such a working on
her Sense, and such a shaking Palsy through every part, as she verily thought,
it was some Spirit that wrought on her weakness: neither durst she cry, lest
she should scarre the Spirit.

But of all Stories, there was no Activity, sure, a wanting in those two
joviall Bridallers; neither justly could the One find much fault with the
Other, having been, by all probability, both guilty: This Bridegroom, first
night he was married, after such time as he had given his Bride that Nuptial
benevolence which was requisite; presently, turning himself on his right side,
fell a praying: His Bride intending Action more than Devotion, addressed her
self to him, in this Bridal Curtain Lecture. Sweetheart, why turn you so
soon from me? are you so soon weary of me? Pray thee chick, what art' doing?
Praying, Con^y, said he. For what, Pigs-nie, said she? For his welfare,
replied he, who made me so good way. What other answer she made to this frumpe,
I have not heard, saving only this: Go to, husband, it seems you are cunning.

You were told a Tale in our Discourse before, of a wanton Widow, and her
answer to a stale Batchler, and importunate Suitor: His resolute reply upon her
repulse: With the occasion of that Widows answer from a Poem writ by an
amorous young Gallant (which he likewise answered) who dissuaded her to lie
frost upon green. Viduae, defuncto primo conjuge, comitantur oculis funera
siccis.

Viduales lachrymae cito numerandae.


And sure that Widow was a feather of the same wing, who finding nothing so as
she expected, at least, what her Agility of body required, twitted her second
husband with the ability of her first, telling him, that she had a husband
would have made a chamber pot roar.

That arrogant Widdower discovered himself too speedily, to become a speeding
wooer: who encountering a rich Widow, and one of a sufficient pleasing feature,
to beautify her fortunes: Told her, that he could well find in his heart to
make her his Bride, but he thought good first, to impart to her three things,
which she might look to find from him, if ever she enjoyed him: and to
acquaint her all the better with his humor, they were these. First was, that
whether he had cause or no cause abroad, She might be sure of a Bridall-brawle
when he came home. Second was, He would eat his meat alone. Third was, He
would lie with her but once in the month. Why, these are tolerable humors,
answered this witty Widow: And so you will give way to other three things
which I shall desire, this shall be no occasion of breach betwixt us. Whereto,
when he had promised his free assent, were they of what condition soever: Sir,
said she, whereas you say, you must needs brawle when you come home: you shall
not need, for I will prevent you. Secondly, whereas you must eat your meat
alone, do so, and spare not: but I must tell you, you shall then feed on my
reversions; for as I satisfy your humor, so must you satisfy mine too, and
give me leave to be your Taster. Thirdly, whereas you will but lie with me
once a month, take your pleasure; but I must tell you withal, if you will not,
another shall: for I shall have a months mind to another. This answer so
miserably perplexed this humorous Wooer; as he took leave of his Widow, and
never revived his Suit after that time to her.

He showed himself a discreet Capricorn; who being made acquainted by an
intimate Servant of his, that his wife abused his bed: and if he pleased, he
should with his own eyes see such a Cumrade of hers embracing her in naked
bed: Servant, said he, Such a Sight cannot please me well; yet shall it please
me to discover her shame, and with her shame quicken my revenge. The
opportunate hour being come, whereof his Servant had given him notice, by a
private passage, and without company he rusheth suddenly into the chamber,
where he saw too personally presented the act of his dishonor: yet showed he
such an incomparable temper, as calling his astonished Brancher unto him,
without more passion, thus accoasted him: Sir, I shall take a course with you:
and with that he shuts him in his Closet; and calling his Servant to him,
grievously chid him; and withal told him, how he had abused him, in making him
jealous of his wifes honor without just cause: For, see, quoth he, how she
poor Girl lies alone without a Bedfellow: whereas thy lavish tongue
suggested to my too credulous ear a conceit of that which I now see, poor
innocent Soul, was the least of her thought! And to confirm the strength of
this seeming passion, he puts his man from him, and would by no persuasion
after that time entertain him. Thus salved he his wives credit by relinquishing
his servant; and abstaining from inflicting the least revenge upon her Minion
confined to his Closet. Only, He ever after that time divorced her from his
bed: but in all other respects used her as a loyall-affectionate Bride.

He was molded to as good a temper, who pretending one day an occasion of
going from home, purposely to try some conclusion of his wifes private
affection: coming secretly home about dead time of the night, found what he
had more reason to suspect than expect; his room supplied by an active Youth;
whose Batchler life made him more ready to incroach upon others possessions,
than closed either with his honor, or the Owners reputation. His wife steeled
with re^olution, as well as freedom of affection; tells her amazed Husband,
that what was done could not be undone. O thou unsatiate One, quoth He, if
indifferent benevolen^e would have served thee, I am sure it was never a
wanting thee! It is true, Husband, said she, but the body may be sooner
wearied, than the desire satisfied, or the sense sated. The appetite is best
pleased with variety: whereas, the daintiest Viands ever dished to us, beget
satiety. But be advised by me, Husband, and all shall be amended: For your
horns, Sir, it is far better for you to shroud them, than to blow them:
Cover these, and my continence of life hereafter shall amply redeem my honor:
With which promise, Her Husband (good man) became so well contented, as his
patience begot in his wife a love to goodness: So as, the Comic conclusion of
their life clozed with much happiness.

That good-wife was of a merry humor, who, after the Miller had taken his
moulter, and by all likelihood had done her a pleasure in grinding her too
near the Louder: could not contain her self, but returning back, and
finding her Husband at home, cried still -- With o the lusty Miller! Her
Husband mufing much at his wifes mad humor: Sure I believe, said he, the
Miller has done thee: yes, I warrant you, Husband, quoth she, and would have
done you too, if you had been there. And as she begun, so she continued her
canting humor; With o the lusty Miller!

That confident good man received Satisfaction to the full of his wifes
demeanure; who praising her one day above comparison, to one of his Neighbors:
He advised him not to be altogether so opinionate of her honesty; but rather to
try some conclusion whether she was in deed, what she appeard in show: For,
said he, many can subtilely shadow their shame, and delude the world with a
color, and yet keep a bit for their Friend in a corner. Be counseled then by
me, and I will teach you a way to resolve you of all doubts; and it shall be
thus. At night when you are in bed with your wife, you shall ask of her, if
ever she had use of any man beside your self; and if she deny it, as there is
scarce one of a thousand that will at first confess it, leave the rest to my
device; and if she do not discover it, being guilty of it, discard me for
ever: nay, I will never conjure more, but burn my books to save you a labor.
This Device her Husband approved; and now when night approached, he puts those
Interrogatories to her, as he was directed: Demanding of her, if ever she knew
any man but himself? Who I, Husband, quoth She? I hope you have no such
opinion of me. No, Duck said he; but I desired to be resolved: I may set my
rest then on this, thou never wronged me! Never, quoth she. Yes once, answered
her Neighbor, being purposely shrouded in the Chimney-corner. She, poor
Soul, being surprised with fear at the voice she did hear, ingenuously
confessed, that the Spirit said true: and that she had indeed once transgressed
the bounds of modesty, but it was only to purchase his liberty. For your
hard-hearted Creditor, careless of your ruin, having laid you fast upon an
Execution, came unto me and promised me your freedom for one nights Lodging.
Why, says her Husband, this transgression argued an Act of affection; and
deserves a kiss beside a pardon. Well, Chick, said he, thou never then
offendedst in this kind but once, No, never but once. Yes twice, said the
former Devil in the vault. Trust me, Husband, it is true, quoth she, and if
the Spirit had not put me in mind of it, I had quite forgot it. But this too
was rather for your love than any lust. For one day when a roguish Sergeant
came to arrest you, after I had conveyed you up into the Garret, to save you,
and satisfy him, I lay with him: but all this was rather to secure you, than
any desire I had to him. Why, all this, said her Husband, highly contents me.
Thou never then wrongedst me more than twice? Trust me, Husband, never but
twice. Yes thrice, said that Neighbourly Familiar in the Chimney-corner. Nay,
if thou were all the Spirits in Hell, said his wife, thou lie, for I never
wronged him that way but twice.

The next day, after this Spirit had returned to his shape, he laughed above
measure, to remember how he had served his credulous Neighbor: Which to
requite, you shall hear how he used this jeering Spirit in the like nature.

Neighbor, said he, I commend your device in discovering my wifes folly: and
now I am f^e^d of my jealousy: I pray you, let me now play the Spirit to your
wife, as you have done to mine. With all my heart Neighbor, said he, and I
thank you too: but I am confident there is no voice out of a vault will detect
my wife of any vice. But pursue your plot, I shall give you free ingresse and
egresse, as you gave me.

The very next night he conveyes himself privately betwixt the Arras; whiles
He, who presented before the part of a Spirit* is now to converse with a
parcel of his Flesh; Asking her, whether she ever lay with any one but
himself? To which question she as peremptorily answered, that she had never.
Yes Once, Ecchoed that under-pentis'd Spirit: at the noise of which voice, this
conscious Bona-roba trembled and confessed, That she had once indeed layne with
a Beggar, to whom she out of mere charity had given Harbor; and he poor
thankful man, to requite her, desired to return her one curtsy for another.
This Beggar stuck deep in his stomach, but whether he could or no digest it,
there is no remedy, he must bear it. Yet to be resolved better, he proceeds
further: I hope wife, you never did this but once; Never but Once. Yes twice,
hallowed the Spirit. O the memory of these Spirits, said she! Truly, I had like
to have forgot it. I must confess, I had one time doings with a Peddler; and I
gave him a dozen of Tin Buttons of your doublet for his labor. These were
but mean Tradesmen for thee to truck with, said her Husband. But Thou did
never trade after this manner more than twice? Never but twice. yes thrice,
bellowed the Spirit; yea thrice, and thrice, thou moppe-fac'd Incubus (quoth
she) and more than all you Haggs have Horns in your lower region. And with
that, whipping out a bed, as if this Spirit of phrensy had wrought some strange
operation in Her body, and drawing near to her Close-stoole which stood
shrouded under the Arras; instead of it she fell upon the Spirit, on whom for
want of her stool of ease, she eased her self sufficiently, till that ayry
Spirit resolved it self to a substantial body.

He showd himself a soft delicate Student, who being in bed with his wife
called for his Book. Which his Wife observing, called likewise for her Wheel.
Why, what do you mean said he? To fall to my Work, as you do to your Book:
And may you speed as I spinne. Mean time, I have spun a fair thread to become
his Bride, who makes his Study of his Bed. But if you had made right use of all
the Problemes you have read, you might have found that a Study was a place for
you to conceive in; but a Bed for me. I could wish you Husband, to turn over a
new leaf, lest I in time turn Haggard and check at your love.

Which caused this effeminate Scholar, for fear of his Wifes displeasure,
never to to suffer his Book communicate with his Bed thereafter.

It was sometimes my fortune to be known to a brave-domineering Lady, whose
Will was her Law, though there was no Law in her Will. For her only sweet
humor, was ever to be out of humor: being never better pleass'd, than to be
displeased. Her Mess was ever served up with store of Ponts. Her best Clothes
were sure to be worn on Worst-dayes: and if any Neighbor of quality came to
visit her, she would feign her self feverish and out of temper. This humerous
Madam, as one cloyed with commanding, and now after the death of her noble
Spouse, twitted with the dishonor of her second matching: When she could not
revenge her self of reproach, took revenge of her self; by dying no less
estranged from remorce, than she lived at distance from repute.

It was a pretty apish answer of that Northern girl; who being asked by one,
how She, being so small and slender, durst adventure on a Man so strong and of
so large a stature? O, quoth she, a little Worm may lie under a great stone!

It was a shrewde reply which that Barbers wise returned her husband; who
finding her scowling, louring and all out of temper, and inquiring the cause of
that lumpish humor? Good man, said she, you need little be so inquisitive
after this: for whom, I pray you, had you ever under your hands, that you
brought not into the sudds? It Is true, wife, but I never lest them in the sudds.
O husband, replied she, but I should soon leave these sudds, would you but
once leave me!

A wanton discursive husband, when he had rioted so freely in his talk, as
modest ears grew weary in the discovery of his youthful liberty; his wife
being then and there present: O husband, quoth she, were you as free in your
Course, as you are in your Discourse, you would make an excellent Courser to
breed on!

That Widow was in a merry-mourning mood, who having been Surviver to many
husbands: and being asked by one, who upon occasion came to inquire of her
husband, who was likewise lately dead: Which of my husbands, Sir, do you mean
of? For I can assure you, Sir, at this time, my Husbands are all alike able to
dispatch your occasions.

And seeing Birds of one feather will flock together; That Tale which I have
sometimes heard of one, will pass well enough for current amongst the rest. A
late-arrived Traveller, who had authority to speak of strange things, by the
privilege of his Charter, relating the nature, quality and disposition of a
Turk: and how his usual Course was to have four Meals a day: and every day
to noone it with his wife. The good woman hearing this in the presence of her
husband, and impatient of holding any longer: O husband, quoth she, you would
make an ill Turk! Not al-altogether so, answered her husband; Give me but so
many meals, and thou shall find me one of the strongest Turkish Males that
ever English Gennet bore.

Should I here relate the servile condition of those Women of Sio; Whose
Husbands prefer base lucre before their Wifes honor: prostituting their
bodies to shame, in hope of gain: as I should display the one full of agility,
so should I deblazon the other hunting after base commodity. But as the Eliots
were wont to bring forth their Slaves drunk, and acting all their obscene and
brutish parts, purposely to deter their children from the like filthiness;
and implant in them a native horror to such unmanly looseness: so I will give
you here a touch of the slavish condition of those inhabitants, to weine the
most mercenary Palliard from the like qualities. You are to understand then,
That the Women of Sio are the most beautefull Dames of all the Greeks in the
World, and greatly given to Venery; Their husbands are their Pandars, and when
they see any Stranger arrive, they will presently demand if he would have a
Mistress: and so they make Whoores of their own Wives, and are contented for
a little gain to wear horns: such are the base minds of these ignominious
Cuckolds. A base traffic for money, to make a barter of Honor. There appeared
far more freedom of spirit, and no less agility of body in that fat Farrier
and his bounsing Hussy; who meeting in a Forest, and both addressed for
pleasure: after long parliance, concluded to preserve the wenches modesty, who
seemed loath to do ought uncivilly; that he should blow her down, for
otherwise she would not incline to his motion: But how the Forrester composed
this Controversy, I leave to the Poet to deliver to you in this Epigramme for
me.

M^la^nd. Epigram. lib. 1.
Since Smug (a wanton Farrier) there was,
Who made appointment with a Country less,
That against the time from market she'ist return,
He would keep toutch and do her a good turn.
The place where these two lovely Mates should meet
Was a vast forest unfrequent'd with feet
Of any passenger, save such as were
Rangers so'th' chase, amongst which a Forrester
Upon occasion chanced to come that way,
And heard, Eve-dropper-like, what they did say;
Their place of meeting, with the maids consent,
Which he resolved as quickly to prevent.
And being under shade securely sconst,
Which place he had elected for the non'st,
He stays to see the return of this same Less,
Which (as she wished) did quickly come to pass:
For Maids that know not what it is to consent
To a lost Maidenhead, nor what is meant
By giving of a green-gowne, sooner will
Assent to ill, because they know no ill,
Than such as have of active pleasures store,
For well were they experienced in it before.
Yea, such will never deal unless they smell
^ome hope of gain, or like the Trader well.
At last the Maid having her market made,
(Perhaps far sooner than her Parents bade)
With clothes tuckt up returns with speedy pace,
Down by the Forest to the appointed place:
Where Smug the Farrier lay all this while,
That he the Maid might of her gem beguile.
If you had seen what meeting there was then
Betwixt these two, you would have vowed no men
Of any rank or order were so good,
As Lemnian* Lemmons unto womanhood.
So humble was the Horseleach, as to please
The shamefast Maid, he often fell on his knees,
While pattring paltry Love-spels on her lips,
Down fall his breeches from his naked hips:
And all this while, poor soul, she stood stock still;
Not thinking (on my conscience) good or ill.
At last the jolly Smith (when all was shown,
That he could show) willed the Maid to to lay her down
Upon a shady bank, which with all sorts
Of flowers was checkerd fit for Venus sports.
She (though she were resolved no ill could be
By lyng down) yet in her modesty
Would not unto his motion so assent,
Yet let him blow her down she was content.
The short-breathed Smith (for he was wondrous fat,
And stuffed withal) makes me no bones of that,
But Aeolus-like, puffs up his cheeks well-growne,
And he no sooner blows than she was down.
The Forrester, who all this time had stood
Under a shady covert of the wood.
Steps in, when the Smith his smelting should begin,
Saying, all Wind-falls they were due to him. The Wind-fall.

Many such Smiths our Anvile-Annals show,
And present times may show as many now.
To inlay this our Lecture with mixed stories, I shall add one only Tale of a
spritely Male, who, for love of a Female lost his Maile, and afterward run
post-naked down Sautry-laine.

There was an Atturneys Clarke, who coming along with his Master by
Stanegate-Hole, (or the Pursers prize) and hovering a little behind his Master,
purposely to ease himself: tied his Gelding to a Stake in the Hedge, and went
over into the Thicket adjoining: where he no sooner entered, than he perceived
a dainty young wench, of an amiable presence, cheerful countenance, and a
wooing eye, beckning unto him, as if she affected nothing more than dalliance:
The Clarke, whose heat of youth prompted him on, though his Masters speed
called him back, friendly and freely accoasted her, preferring his own sport
before his Masters speed. But while they were clozing up their youth-full
bargain, two lusty Takers leapt out of a Brake and surprised him, calling him
to a sharp account for the dishonor he had offered their Sister: He, who
had no time admitted him to put in his plea, besought them that he might be
dismissed: which Motion they inclined to, but by no means till he had paid his
fees. To be short, they stripped him naked to his skin; seized on his
Port-Mantua: and tying his hands behind him, mounted him Mother-naked as he
was, into his Sadle. His Gelding, missing his Masters horse, fell a galloping
and neying after him. The Master with an other fellow-traveller, hearing such a
noise and clattering behind them, though a good distance from them, looking
back, might see one in White with great speed pursuing them: They imagining it
to be one in White Armor, put spurrs to their Horses: where all along
Sautry-laine, this eagre chase continued: the man harmelesly following; they
fearfully flying: till they got to Stilten, where they thought themselves
happy in such an Harbor: where they reposed, till that Armed-man appeared a
Naked-man; whom we will leave to the correction of his Master: to whom he made
a free discovery of his misfortune, and consequently deserved more favor.

With which Tale we will close this Subject of Liberty, descending to the
next, though confined to a narrower Scope, yet of more ingenuity.

QUICKNESS OF WIT.
MOTIVE 3.
QUICKNESS OF WIT, consists in a pregnant present conceit, arising from an
happy fancy or strength of apprehension, having an answer ready to any
objection: or a pleasing delightful humor in bandying jests one to another.
Which are divided into Festive, or Civil: Both, if seasonably used, and
without danger of any personal toutch, freely received; Though the Orator
hold, that the former is allied to vanity, one degree nearer than the latter.

These Quicke-wits are best expressed in present extremities. I have known some
wits of our time, held it their greatest honor, to contest in arguments of Wit
with Women: Nor have they held it less honor to gravel them. The conquest
was not so virile, that it should retain any such esteem: But in these
Duello's of wit, I have observed some of these selfe-opinionate ones, fail so
far in their expectance, as they ever merited least praise, where they were
most confident of an undoubted prize. A just judgment! That wherein Wits are
most presuming, they should ever appear most failing. It is true, what the
Apologue sometimes observed; Epimetheans are to be found in every place, but
it were rare to find any one of all Prometheus race. To foresee what may
befall, is an eye surpassing the lower verge: yea, we shall find the
pregnantst piercingst wits many times most blinded in what imports them most.
Apt to pry into others secrets, but neglectfull of their own* A censorious
quick-sighted Argus to others Counsels: A blind Tyresias in the Survey of
their own. It is a rare felicity to enjoy a quick-wit, and to have Humility to
manage it. More have perished by it, than procured them safety from it. Ripe
early Wits are soonest blasted; as rarest beauties quickliest blemished.
Wherein those are ever most erring, that are most given to talking: especially,
in observances, regreets, salutations, complements: which, many times fall out
unhappily to those who most affect them; and following the current of
Court-Rhetorick, mistake the terms: or through ignorance of the true Dialect
of Speech, fall into ridiculous absurdities, by mistaking words, or inverting
the use of them; familiar errors to most of our affected Speakers. This may
necessarily seem to introduce the Tale of that Finitive Girl^; who coming
down from her Lady to a Gentleman; and desirous to excuse her Lady, that she
could not presently be at leisure to receive his Message; requested him, that
till her Lady was ready to dispatch him, he would be pleased to go along with
her and take some procreation in the Garden. Which could not choose but puzle
him as much to answer, as she poor wench, was simply forward in her liberal
offer.

Nor had that Curats wife any ill meaning, how ere her words might be
misconstrued, who coming to her Land-ladies house, and being asked of her; How
happens it that all this while you have no children Neighbor? Verily, quoth
she, I know not, but by the motion of the spirit we do both our endeavor.

Nor did that soft-temper'd Gentleman, show any great propriety of speech, nor
pertinency of answer, when coming to the house of a neare-neighbouring Lady,
and being demanded of her, How long his wife reckoned, and when she would be
brought abed? For want of a better answer, suffering both in his tongue and
conceit a fever, made this reply; Even when your Lady-ship pleases.

But to speak generally of quick-wits, they are naturally bold: which many
times endangers the owners discretion. There is no Discourse, wherein he will
not have an Oar. No Argument, wherein he holds not himself fit to be a
Moderator. Yet, in this he so far over-shoots himself, as he finds it more
prejudicial for man to be accompanied by self conceit, than to be endued
with a mean, but humble conceit. It was the Saying of a daring Stoic, that
he was in all things so well resolved, as there was nothing wherein he so much
as doubted: Which was likewise the arrogant opinion of Velleius the Epicurian.
His confidence had so strengthened him, as no opinion of error could surprise
him: Imagining his knowledge to be liable to no error, so firmly and
irremoveably sixth was he to an opinionate humor. But he who fools himself
with such an arrogant confidence, ever fails most in his expectance. He is most
wise, who is lest opinionately wise. For he that seeks to be more wise than he
can be, shall be found to be less wise than he should be.

But now, whereas many women have singular quick-wits; it is very rare for any
such to have them, and not to know them. It is commonly seen therefore in
public Assemblies, how apt they are to give occasion of discourse: and how
willingly they embrace any Argument to exercise their Wits on. And in this they
have a great advantage of the stronger Sex: For whatsoever they object by way
of reason, receives a more favorable construction, than others may probably
expect. For indifferent things delivered, where little is expected; begets more
admiration in the hearer, than where more solid Arguments are handled, but by
such where nothing less could be expected. Indeed, the greatest error that can
be found in these feminine Disputants; you shall observe some of them (ever
teserving our best esteem for the discreetest and selectedst ones) to flow in
words, but drop in matter. Copiously shall you find them worded; but for
matter penuriously stored. Howbeit, their very presence ever accompanies their
discourse with an applausive grace.

I have in my time seen a Woman brought before a Judicial Seat; where she
was accused of enormious crimes: and such, as before she labored to vindicate
her own honor, begot in her Spectators an hateful horror: yet no sooner had
she delivered her own misfortunes; the undeserved extremities of her
Adversaries; the disrespect she bare to life; the tender care to redeem her
fame; than she begot tears in those who before did spite her: a noble
Compassion in such, who before did hate her. Now, if a quick-wit, prompt
speech, and prepared spirit wrought such effects in actions of that quality,
what might they produce in affairs of true worth and magnanimity?

It is true, what an excellent Moralist well observed: that it fares with
wits, as with diversity of Soyles. Some are naturally so fruitful, that if
they should be manured or marled, they would grow over with weeds. Many such
luxuriant Wits there be; who, the more they are fed, the more are they
famished. These must be kept Sharp, or they will not mount. Others there be,
who must be forced, or they are starved, but these partake not of such whereof
we have here discoursed.

To dwell longer on these I shall not need, seeing the Trial of wits will
sufficiently inform you. We will descend then from those benefits accruing to
quick-wits discreetly managed, to those distasts they beget by being too
lavishly vented.

DISTASTE.
OPPOSITE 3
PRECIOUSEST things have ever the worst keepers: which proverb is made good
even in this Subject. There was never good Wit, says the profound Stagyrian,
without some mixture of folly. Nay, the best Wits have the vicioust parts.
Dangerous tools to be in mad men's hands.

Let us reflect a little then upon that Noble Sex, whereto we are to address
our discourse: and in these rich Mineralls of Wit, observe if those purest and
precioust metals are not blemished with some foil. Quick and piercing be
these feminine wits: which being well disposed, incomparably beseem them. For
as that Relater sometimes delivering a passionate Speech, expressed every
passage so emphatically, as he begot a general Compassion in his Hearers;
till, in the end, Concluding his whole discourse, he demanded of them what
they thought of such an Orator? Their answer was, they could admire nothing
more. Nor can you do ought less, replied he, coming wholly from the sweet
pen of a Woman.

Every Action, says the Philosopher, has two helves or handles. And we shall
find these two metalld wits strike upon the same Shelves. The one more apt for
projecting, the other for discoursing. This tart; That dangerous. As for our
old Beldame wits, we will let them rust in the sheath: Their Plots are ever
casting for Husbands for their Daughters: or how they may gather a little more
useless trash into their knapsacks: which they enjoy with as much content, as
those who live in continual want. Our Stories must take life from more
youthful Madeona's. Such, as to purchase the persons whom they loved; and
whose fidelity they had sufficiently approved; took upon them disguises, that
they might enjoy the fruits of their affection with less suspicion. Others
becoming Pages to those who were foes to their Lovers; to make those whom they
loved, happy Conquerours. Others exposing themselves for Slaves, to secure
their Sweet-hearts States. Of which sorts, you may furnish your selves with
Instances plenteously both in our ancient Roman and our latter Italian Stories.
All which, as they pitched upon love, so closed they for most part with Comic
ends.

But of all others, there are no Plots more desperately dangerous, then those
which are grounded on Jealousy: which in all ages has brought forth such
implacable Revenge, as nothing could find it a period without blood. But our
desire is not to rivell your eyes with tears; nor to close our Curtain
Lecture with a funeral pile: But to furnish you with fresh Messes of merry
mates, where the effects of Jealousy or Revenge shall wind themselves up in
mirth. I will begin with the Tale of a Wenching Companion, who could not fare
well but he must cry roast-meat: For having received a fair and free
entertainment from three several witty Wantons in his Parish; it could not
suffice him to enjoy them but he must boast of it, and so defame them. These
three merry Gossips practiced one day how they might pay him home in his own
Coin: and how they might each of them affright him most, and harm him least.

The first, being a Barbers wife, was long in the suds, till she had wrought
what she had so long sought; which the better to bring to pass, with an
affable invitation she cheers her youngker, and wills him not to break with
her: for such a day would her husband be employed in trimming some Burgess
against such a festival day, and no time more opportunate for his safe
ingresse and ^gr^sse. The time is observed, all things ^^^ted: but while these
two amorous factors are in naked embraces, enjoying each other, by a private
practice with her Maid, in comes the Barber. He perceiving nothing, chid his
Dame, for spending so much time in her bed; bidding her arise for shame, for
(said he) I have trimmed two gentlemen already: yea, Husband (quoth she) but
I would know him that trimms you. -- But you promised me, one day, Husband, to
pair my toes, do it now for me, and I will rise instantly. The good simple
Barber, conscious of no such things as his wife had practiced, began to give an
edge to his razor, while his witty wife whisphering underneath, willed the
Currier to put out his feet, and to fall low in the bed, for fear of discovery.
Which the poor trembling Snake did accordingly. -- O cut me nearer, quoth the
Barbers wife: till he went so near the quick, as the Palsie-shaking Cavalier
feeling more than he durst find fault with, to free himself from fear of
further torture, bit the Barbers wife into the shoulder. This procured a
shreeke from the wife; and caused the Husband to lay aside his tool. So taking
along with him some Camphier Bals for which he came thither, he left this
shaking Shark with his Subtle Siren together: the one trembling for fear; the
other laughing at his fever.

The next was of the Lemnian Order, a black-Smiths wife; One, who could forge
and hammer any thing cunningly, to compass her pleasure. And she must play
her Pranks too; which the better to effect, this Lady Venus pretends that her
Vulcan is to play the Farrier abroad, and therefore privately invites this
Martial younker to her house, to play the part of a stout and stiff Warrior
at home. Such a pleasing occasion requires all expedition: Love loosens
fetters, and transforms feet to feathers to seize upon such a purchase. The way
he finds easy; his free access promises all success: He is not only
admitted, but permitted to do what he list. But an unexpected storm alters
this Calm: while these two lie billing like two loving Payres, she hears her
Husbands boisterous tongue below the stayres: It is high time then for her now
or never to ply her anvile, or feel the fury of her Farrier: which to prevent
(no wit comparable to a woman's at a dead lift) she opens a Chest which stood
close to her bed; and puts in her Paramour by the head and shoulders: and locks
it fast, when she has done: Up comes the Husband, chasing like an Horse-leach,
and fretting like gumm'd grogran, to find his wife in the Cloth-market at that
time oth' day. But poor wench, she feigns herself sick, giving such a
passionate grace to her counterfeit groan, as her simple Actaeon imagined her
to be sick indeed. He, to comfort his sweet Dulip, asks her what she would
have, and where her pain held her most? O, at my stomach, Husband, at my
stomach; I find a great loathing at my stomach. -- Where Is the Aqua vitae
bottle, said the Smith? that will either recover thee or nothing. O, in that
Chest, Husband, but I know not where the key is; the grief of my stomach h'as
made me quite forget my self. Marry, quoth he, but I will break it up with my
hammer and pincers; -- I will not loose my Coy-Duck for a little labor. As
they were thus communing, and he preparing his tools to break up the Chest,
or this Paramours Cabin, you may partly imagine what a pitiful perplexity,
that inchested Lecher was in: Which he discovered, for being not able to
contain himself any longer, the chinks of the Chest disclosed his fear by
the distillation of his Water. Which the disssembling sick Dame perceiving; Oh,
quoth she, Husband, you may now save that labor, for by the jogging you have
made, you have spilt all the Water: and I thank God, I am at better ^ase then
I was.

This highly cheered the good man to see his wife so well recovered: while she
after the departure of her Husband releaseth the prisoner; who came forth like
a drowned Rat, and without scarce taking leave of his jeering Minion, run down
stayres in a pelting chafe, vowing ever after to be more wary of preferring
such a Didapper to his Choice.

But carnal repentance holds no long residence. The third merry Gossip, being
a Feather of the same Wing, and had purposed to render her Wanton Tell-tale the
like Wage: sends one Evening to this Flyblowne Flesh-Fly, acquainting him how
her Husband, (being an Excellent Painter, and such an One as not a Rush-bearing
or May-Morish in all that Parish could subsist without him) was to go a good
way (as she pretended) stay a long time from home about setting forth of a
Pageant; so as, he might enjoy the freedom of her love securely, without the
least suspicion of any within her family. The Joviall youngker forgetful of
his late fear, and desirous to second her aim, whose love was his lure; with
winged speed fits himself for this Loves adventure: where he no sooner
arrives, than he is received with all expressions of familiarity and privacy of
favor. Though she were a a Painters wife, and one practiced much in adulterate
varnish, he found her affection laid on with such Colors, as they were in
grain and admitted no stain: for nothing was denied him, that could be
desired by him. He found more agility and quickness in this amorous Creature,
than ever Pygmalion could do in his artfull (but as then un-enlivened
feature.) Prometheus his fire had infused such heat; as never more active nor
virile love accompanied Ida's seat, nor Eryca's grove, than that love-entranced
Myrmidon did enjoy in the seazure of his Pegge Painters love.

But were there no flaw in a Picture, Art might worthily admire her self, and
esteem her work an Architype of Nature. Men would in time become Zanies and
surfeit in the Sweets of pleasure, if there were no Alloes to immix it self
with it, and allay the quality of it in some measure. This that sensual
Amorist felt, heard and understood; when ready stripped to imbath himself in his
Stove (or if you will) Stue of delights: that perfidious Phidias (for so no
doubt our youthful Gamester held him) was heard below: what a pickle then may
you imagine this sou^'t Gurnet was in, at the resound of his voice? But some
present course must be taken, to secure this unfortunate Goat, or there is no
more life to be expected, than in a Picture which Art only formed. But a
device this Wanton has in readiness, to revenge her wrong; and with some
fear to her Bedfellow, shroud both their lightness. The Plot is this: She
wills him stir his stumps; and follow those directions she prescribes him.
He must now of a living Creature become a dying Picture: he must hang behind
the Door for something, and be as mute as if he hung there for nothing.
Mother-naked he hangs there by the Arms; while the Painter, who knows little
of the Drift or practice either, enters the Chamber, and contrary to the
custom of the Country, begins to read his Wife a Curtain Lecture; but she,
tender of her honor, puts up all with patience: telling him withal, that
though she loved to take her ease, it was not altogether without pro^it; she
could bargain in her bed, that would pay for washing her sheets. And to make
this good, look (quoth she) behind the door, what a Picture I have bargained
for at the second or third hand! Tell me now in good sadness, did you ever see
any one nearer to life? Peruse every vein, sinnew, member, artery; and then
resolve me, if ever you saw an exacter piece of Symmetry? Trust me, said the
Painter, the Work is very lively, only I find one disproportionable part, which
our best Artists have ever held a great deformity. Now, the only blemish which
I find in this Picture, is, that the one Codde hangs longer then the other;
which I shall rectify forthwith. The Aguish-supposed Picture, fearing much that
the Painter was fetching his knife or some other Instrument in use, to correct
that error; which if he did, he were undone for ever: just as the incensed
Painter turned his back, leapt the the scarred Skaledrake from off the hinges
of the Door: running naked through the open street, to preserve his Genitories
from the stake.

Now, I will not ask you, which you verily think of all these put him in most
fear, and harmed him least; for so you may suspect me that I relate these
purposely to sell you a Bargain. No, the discovery of these sleights was only
to set forth the Levity or want of Secrecy in those, who should be most strong:
with the strength of their Revenge, whose Sex argues them to be most weak.

A Story to like purpose in our own time and in our own Clime I have heard;
and it was thus. A loose Libertine, who cared little for engaging his honor,
so he might be Master of his pleasure. Amongst many others, to whom his
irregular desires, had tendered love and service; it happened that there was a
Gentleman's wife of good account and approved fame, whose affection he strongly
solicited: Many repulses he received, but his impudence put him on afresh;
renewing still his siege, hoping in time to become seazd of the Hold. At last,
when she could by no means dissuade him from his uncivil Suite, she
seemingly consented to his request: yet acquainting him withal, that her
Honor was such a precious Gemme, as she desired to have the Fame of it
preserved, though it were privately blemished: If then he meant to enjoy her,
he must be conveyed secretly into her Chamber: which he, with much
willingness inclined to. The Night is appointed; the manner of Conveying him
contrived: a Trunk provided; to seize him of what he so incomparably desired.
Mean time, she acquaints her Husband with the whole Plot: Who infinitely
longs for the approach of that Night, to discover to his shame, his odious
lust: as the wanton Lecher was impatient of that tedious day, to enjoy the
shaken fruits of his ranging love. The Porter receives his hire, and directions
from her: willing him to set the Trunk upon end against the Wall: and in such
manner, as his feet might stand upward, and his head downward.

Long, may you imagine, did this incoffin'd Puffin lie there incased, before
he was opened: at last the Husband comes in, and looking about him, demands
whose Trunk that was? A Friends, answers she. What Friend, said he? No friend
should have any Trunk or any such matter in my Chamber, but it were fitting
that you made me first acquainted what it were, and for what end it came
hither. For I have been partly made privy to your tricks before, Minion, quoth
he, seeming enraged: I will therefore make bold to see what trumpery you have
here; and break it open, if I may not receive so much favor from you as to
have the key. She seemingly dissembled all things, beseeching him to be
content, and spare the Secrecies of that Trunk: but the more her subtilty
importuned him: the more did her delays seemingly provoke him. To be short,
the Trunk is opened, where this loose Lecher could not inwardly be more
polluted, than his fair Satin Suite (whose inside partak't entirely of
Satan) was found hatefully scummered. Now, with what dishonor he was kick't
out oth' Chamber, I leave it to you, if you had your wives besieged in like
manner, to censure.

But amorous ears, no doubt, would be more delighted with hearing Devices of
an other nature: as for instance, to hear the Party beloved cast a bait how
she may deceive a suspicious eye, to cloze her own content, and crown the
long-wished desires of her lover.

That Tale of a wanton witty Dame will sound well in such ears, who advised
her Sweetheart, to secure them the better from her Husbands presence, to
attire his Servant in a Bears skin; being a Beast, which of all others he
most feared and hated. The Story I commend to the relation of this Poem.

A wily wench there was (as I have read,)
Who used to Capricorn her Husbands head;
Which he suspecting, lay in privy wait
To catch the Knave, and keep his wife more strait.
But all in vain: they day by day did mate it,
Yet could his four eyes never take them at it.
This subtle wench perceiving, how they should
At last prevented be, do all they could:
For now Italian-like, her Husband grew
Horne-mad (I wis) and kept her in a Mew:
Invent'd a trick, which to accomplish better,
Unto her friend she closely sent a letter,
And thus it was; " Friend, you shall know by me,
" My Husband keeps me far more narrowly
" Then he was wont; so as, to tell you true,
" You cannot come to me, nor I to you.
" Yet spite of his eyes and as many more,
" We Will use those pleasures which we used before:
" Only be wise, and second what I wish;
" Which to express (my friend) know this it is.
" My Husband, as he hates the horn to wear
" Of all the Badges forth, so fears he the Bear
" More then all other Beasts which do frequent
" The Heathy Forests spacious Continent.
" If thou will right me then, and pepper him,
" Cover thy Servant in a false Bears skin:
" And come to morrw, as thou used before,
" Tying thy Servant to my Chamber door.
After this quaint direction he attired
His man in Beare-skinne as she had desired;
Entering the Chamber, he received is
With many a smile, back-fall, and sweetened kiss:
For they are secure of all that was before,
Having a Bear that kept the Buffe from door.
The Wi^tall fool no sooner incling had,
Then up the Stairs he ran as he were mad:
But seeing none but the Bear to entertain him,
A Cuckold with a witness.
Of Horns he never after did complain him.
There be other extremes of love which fall by degrees into mortal hate:
hammering upon nothing more than revenge: and these tragic effects are ever
hatched from jealous spirits: which the Tragedian seems to discover in a
passionate admiration: How boundless is the height of woman's hate! This that
jealous Dame published to all the World; when finding one day in a Cabinet of
her Maids, diverse especial Love Tokens and affectionate Favors, which she
had bestowed upon a Servant of hers who s^ood strongly interessed in her love;
became so violent in her hate toward him, whom before she preferred before
all the World; as the very next time, that he presented his service unto her,
he was pistal'd by her, without ever so much as expostulating with him the
ground of her distaste.

Nor will we leave this only here: As mortal, though less fatal was that
woman's malicious pursuit of revenge, (to give an instance in actions of baser
brood) who accused one before a Justice for a Rape. The discreet Justice
perceiving that the ground of her accusation proceeded rather from malice than
any just cause, wished her to be well advised before she impeached him of
such a Crime: for, said the Justice, I am half persuaded, in regard of the
honest report and repute of the man, that he is clear. -- But tell me in
good earnest, said the Justice, did he ravish thee indeed? Yes, quoth she,
I Will take my Corporal Oath of it, though your Worship will not believe it,
that he has ravishd me twenty times at least, before ever I came before your
Worship.

Those who are addicted to melancholy, are ever esteemed most witty: and these
most subject to Jealousy: On which humor, of all others* the Devil (as Guido
observes) works for his own purpose most powerfully. This might appear by
the Story of that perplexed Gentleman; who being employed in service abroad;
and having a very beautiful Wife, desired to be satisfied how she behaved
her self in his absence: To be resolvd herein, he makes recourse to a
Negromancer; Who, after some little time, showed him a Glass, wherein he
presented to his view, his Lady in full proportion, and a young Cavalero with
his breeches down entering her Chamber: This amazed him much, for as he was
naturally addicted to jealousy, so this so fully confirmed and strengthened
his conceit, as he could scarcely contain himself from picking at the eyes
of his Lady presented in the Glass: And to second his conceit with revenge,
he begs leave of the General, that he might obtain so much favor as to leave
the Garrison for a season, and return home into his Country, to dispose of
sundry affairs which at that time required his personal attendance. Way being
given him, he returns home: where, though passion would scarce admit a
parliance, he thought good to call his wife aside; and with much abruptness of
speech, fire and fury in his eyes; he asks her what Company she had in her
Bedchamber such a day? She at the first, much amated, yet knowing her own
innocence to be without the reach of scandal, at last recollecting her
dispersed and distracted thoughts, she called to mind who at that time
accompanied her: Upon which recollection, she returned him this answer: O Dear
Sir, let not the Devil delude you; I well remember, how your own Brother,
that very day, came into my Chamber, and that I laid a plaster upon his
boil, which was on his thigh. This so well satisfied him, as his fury was
turned to affability and sweetness: repenting him sore, that ever he inclined
to give ear to such an hateful suggestion. So as, albeit he had brought her
into a private-desert grove, where he intended a fatal revenge; he not only
freed her person and untainted honor, but retained a constant opinion of her
noble carriage ever after.

This Story I inserted, to deter such from giving too much trust to these
Sorceries: For what was the Devils sole practice or aim in this false
deceiving Glass presented to that deluded Gentleman; but to suggest to his
jealous thoughts grounds of revenge? He was ready enough to show him occasions
to increase his jealousy: but not to discover to him what person it was, to
whom his Lady showed her self so familiarly. He was ready to present to his
sight a youthful active Cavaliero, and that in an uncivile posture, entering
his Ladies Chamber: but never the love nor affection she bore to himself, in
this office she did to his Brother.

He was not half so much distempered with jellows; being far more easily
persuaded, though he had less cause to be so quickly satisfied; who riding
one day a Hunting, suddenly and unexpectedly receiving News that his Wife was
brought abed, could not choose at the first but break out into some passion;
thumping his breast, and doubting still that his Dogs, Actaeon-like, would not
know their Master, cried out, till the Field re-ecchoed again, I am
dishonored, I am dishonored. One (and such an One very likely as had a finger
in the pie) seeing him in this mad mood; begun to chide him, bidding him be
content for shame, and not to make the whole field witness of his folly; for
what is the matter, said he, that brings you to this distemper? Why, my wife
(quoth he) is brought abed. And why should she not, answered he? Because it
is too soon (said this honest Goos^in:) all the world knows, it is not above
twenty weeks since we were married: the Child then can by no ways be mine.
No more is it (said his friend) it is as much your wifes as yours. But, pray
you Sir, tell me* will you publish your self a Ninnie to all the world! Is it
not twenty weeekes since you were married, and twenty weeks too since she was
married; and do not these two put together make up forty weeks? Tell me
then* how are you Unhonour'd? Which reason: this tractable Trout had no sooner
heard than he became well persuaded: humbly beseeching his Friend to excuse his
error, and not to publish to the World his folly: which he promised to do
upon hope of a further favor; conditionally he would not suffer himself to
be misled by any such jealousy.

But to return to our former Discourse, and the Subject whereof we now treat;
As our Quickest wits are many times apt to minister occasion of distaste: so
we may distinguish these occasional grounds of distaste into three particular
or distinct Motives. Some whereof might seem so free from giving occasion in
this time, as they may admit an exemption, and from so general a rule a
regular exception: yet shall we make it appear that even from Silence, wherein
is many times shrouded a great measure of implicit Sense, distaste may be
taken as well as from Speech. For a Sullen clowdy humor can never sort nor
suit well with a candid nature. But to our division: Distasts of this kind may
derive their being or essence, from Speech, Silence, or Impertinence. The
first, in speaking more than they should; The second, in not speaking when they
should; The third, in impertinent action, by declining from doing what they
should.

Now, forasmuch as Instances give the clearest light and perspicuity to all
Subjects: our care shall be to illustrate these by examples: that what we
propose, by way of opinion may be confirmed in each of these by some exemplary
person.

SPEECH.
FOr the first; the Tale of that joviall good fellow, falls fit for our purpose;
who to arm himself against his wifes shrewde tongue; amongst many other
nights of good fellow-ship, stayed, till after midnight playing the Cup-shot:
and how he was encountered by the strength of his Fantasy and distempered
quality with a supposed Spirit, and how he reasoned with it: all which I leave
to the faithful relation of this Poem.

A Man there was, who lived a merry life,
Till in the end he took him to a Wife;
One that no image was (for she could speak)
And now and then her husbands costrell break:
So fierce she was and furious, as in sum
She was an arrant Devil of her tongue.
This drove the poor man to a discontent,
And often and many times did he repent
That e're he changed his former quiet state,
But alas, repentance then did come too late.
No cure he find to cure this malady,
But makes a virtue of necessity,
The common cure for care to every man,
"A pot of nappy Ale: where he began
To fortify his brain against all should come,
Amongst which the clamor of his wives loud tongue.
This habit graffed in him grew so strong,
"That when he was from Ale, an hour seemed long,
So well he liked the profession: on a Time
Having staid long at pot, (for rule nor line
Limits no drunkard) even from Morn to Night,
He hasted home a pace, by the Moone-light:
Where as he went, what fantasies were bred,
I do not know, in his distempered head,
But a strange Ghost appeared, and forced him stay,
With which perlext, he thus began to say:
" Good Spirit, if thou be, I need no charm,
" For well I know, thou will not do me harm;
" And if the Devil; sure, me thou should not hurt,
I wed't thy Sister, and am plagued for it.
The Spirit well approving what he said,
Dissolved to air, and quickly vanished.
For Guido reports that there are Spirits of such a merry Genius, as they are
infinitely delighted with such pleasant Conceits: As there be others full of
melancholy and discontent, who to vaste Tombs, silent C^ves, and dark
Charnell-houses make their usual frequent.

Nor is it easy to determine what affinity this Spirit had to his, who being
found tardy, said, he was troubled with a Spirit, and so hotly pursued, as for
fear he was forced for want of other succor, to fly for shelter to his
Neighbors wife.

To aggravate the distaste arising from these active feminine tongues, who will
rather suffer the worst of Spite, than allay their Spleen: I might here relate
the Tale of that University Virago (for the Civilest places are not exempted
from these Tetters;) a Girl of a stout stomach, though of a soft and pliable
temper: Who, walking the streets one night, either to take fresh air, or in
hope to encounter with some flush Heir; chanced unhappily to meet the Major:
who standing upon the punto of his authority, after he had unpin'd the
Casements of his eyes with much difficulty, being close cemented together with
rising so early; at last ask't her what she was? One, quoth she, of the
feminine gender, and a Scholar. What, said he, A Scholar in a Wast-coate?
yes, quoth she, this poor Flanning Wast-coate h'as answered and dare answer
oftener under Batcheler, than those larded-Sattin fore-skirts of yours, durst
ever yet in defense of your honor. But the tart Oratory of this wast-coate
brought her to a lodging in the kid-coate.

There be other Talkative Girls, who priding themselves a little too much in
their glibbe tongues, many times in casting about to catch others, are caught
themselves: which I might take occasion here to instance in the answer of a
brave Blade, who being in Company of a bevy of joviall Wenches, who had
whitteld him well with liquor; One amongst the rest finding him apt enough to
discover his thoughts, importuned him much to tell them what was the worst
thing which he in his Conscience thought, he had ever done all his life time.

He, unwilling to satisfy her demand, though seconded with great importunity,
told her expressly; That though they had made him as right as their leg to
their purpose, he would be loath to make them his Secretaries, who could not
keep their own Counsels: But for her especially, he never meant to make her
his She-Confessor, who was as open as a Sieve, that could not hold water. At
last, overcome with her instancy, he told her roundly, that since she would
needs out of ancient familiarity, injoyne him to such a discovery:

He must ingenuously confess, that the worst thing that ever he did in his
life, and that which troubled his Conscience most, was getting her with child
(directing his speech to her that so importuned him) and causing her to lay it
upon his Neighbor, such an one.

This unexpected answer made the rest of her Gossips bite the lip: but for
his inquisitive Comater, she vowed, so long as she knew him, never to ask him
any questions.

SILENCE.
AS Speech occasions Distaste by speaking too much; so does Silence in speaking
too little: This might be instanced in the discontent which a Sociable good
fellow took in his wifes Silence: Who had intended, it seems, to requite her
Husbands unthriftinesse, with an humor of sullenness. He, as it was usual
with him, coming home at an unseasonable hour; asked of his Wife many
questions, but received no answer to any. Having tried many Conclusions to
receive one comfortable tone from her, but all in vain; at last he resolved
of a course to bring her to her tongue again, and it was this: He gets the key
of the Sexton, and goes into the Church: where he towls the Bell, as is usually
done for such as are dying. Some of the inhabitants come in, purposely to
inquire for whom it was that the Bell was towlling? It was answered by this
Conceipted youth, that it was for his Wife, who was lately laid speechless.

Which report, no doubt, would in time loosen the strings of her tongue, and
make her Husband know that she was recovered: and cause him confess as much to
his torment.

Albeit, in many questions Silence deserves to be approved and preferred:
especially in such where the resolution of those questions propounded, may
trench highly upon the Speakers credit: This, that forward answer of a witty
wench little considered; who had been long known to be no Niggard of her
flesh, to One, and that a familiar One; who asked her the reason how it came to
pass that all her children should be so like their father, when all the World
knew that they had many fathers? O quoth she, I never take in any Stranger,
till I find my vessel full fraughted!

IMPERTINENCE.
FOr the last, though not the least, where distaste is ministered by
Impertinence of action, or a diversion from what it should intend, we might
here bring upon the Stage, That trifling Girl, who fell a cracking of nuts,
while another was taking pains to pick out the kernel of her virginity* with
his surly answer to her: Is it time to crack nuts? Mind that thou art doing
with a murraine.

Or that ill-nurtur'd Tom-boy; who like one of Domitians daughters, was
catching Flies, while her Sweetheart was preferring his Suite. Thus have we
no less plainly than fully discovered those various delights and benefits
arising from Quickness of wit, well seasoned: with those distempers and
distastes which usually accompany them, when too freely exposed. For these
roving wits, as they ever strive to wound others, so they never come home
unbaited.

But, as that divine Plato sometimes said, The Lover is ever blinded with
affection toward his beloved; So, even in these inward graces, many become so
affectionately doting on their own parts and abilities, as no conceit how
present or pregnant soever delivered by another, may pass for current, if they
may be Censors. So highly are they enamoured of their own, as they dis-esteeme
all others. These presuppose an exuberance of wit, which indeed, many times
draws nearest soaking, when it should be, in regard of the occasion offered,
plenteously flowing.

But these presuming wits are ever safest when they are stillest: being
generally transported, or extased rather, with a confidence of their worth: as
there is no person may evade them, wherein they will not take occasion to use
the dexterity of their wits, and assume to themselves more freedom than is
granted them.

It is a rule worth remembering: Play with me, but hurt me not;
Jest with me, but shame me not.
Which that divine mellifluous Father well observed, when he said: Jests are
no less suspicious to me than anger; seeing by jesting I have many times
escandalized another. A great care and circumspection then is to be used in
experiments of this nature: lest by venting their jest, and loosing their
friend, they incur Eupolis fate: who having many times brought that warlike
wanton Princely Alcibiades upon the Stage, dandled on the lap of his Timandra;
at last received, for those many bitter Scaenes wherein he had personated to
life that noble Prince, this closing Act from the command of Alcibiades: Thou
have many times, Eupolis, drowned my fame upon the Stage, I will once drown
thee in the Sea. -- And so sent him the way of all fish.

But indeed, there is no Argument wherein these prompt and nimble wits are
better shown than in these subjects of Love: especially, where one Object
begets an amorous Contest: and breeds Corrivals in pursuit of one Mistress.

Which encounter admits no order; nay, admits no privilege nor prerogative to
nature, so it may procure that matchless booty, the purchase of beauty to her
Lover.

This, if I had a purpose to enlarge my self any further in this subject,
might be instanced in the Story of the Gentleman and his son, both Corrivals
to one Lady: and of the Impresses they writ with Diamonds in a Window
privately, but expressively. Where the Son perceiving his Father to be far
in love with her, whom he so entirely affected: and to whom, if the presence of
his Father had not interposed, he might have been before that time espoused,
wrote this Impresse with his Diamond: Secreta mea mihi. Which posy his Father
one day finding, by way of answer, wrote this* Et stultitia tua tibi. Which his
Son chancing to read, clozed the conceit with this fancy: Nec tibi, nec
mihi, sed dividatur. Which words might have relation either to the Party by
them equally loved, or to the Impresse before; wherein either for Love, or
Folly, they might be equally shared.

But descending from these, I pass to the next Subject; wherein Gentle speech
must take your ears, as Objects of beauty have taken your eyes: both which
introduce a living Oratory, to work the powerfuller effects upon your fancy.

GENTLENESS OF SPEECH.
MOTIVE 4.
GENTLENESS OF SPEECH is an affable treaty or conference one with another. Or,
a winning kind of Rhetoric, which of all others, purchases most friends with
least cost. An excellent grace it gives to Hospitality: especially, where a
welcome accompanied with a cheerful countenance is delivered with the mouth:
and an entertaining eye becomes ready to usher in that speech. Where two meek
men meet together, their conference (said Bernard) is sweet and profitable:
where one man is meek, it is profitable; where neither, it proves pernicious.

Many Motives be there to induce Fancy, which well tempered, work upon no
blind love, such as a deluded eye doats most upon, but a clear and
well-grounded affection. Such were those exterior goods or embellishments,
which begot love in the beholders of those Sabine beauties: which so enamoured
the Romans in the infancy of their foundation, as they begot a succeeding
alliance in their posterity. Egnatius in Catullus is brought out showing the
whiteness of his teeth. Lacides with sleeke looks, and mincing gate. Pompey
scratching his head with one finger. But as the wind Caecias draws unto it
Clouds; so did outward postures beget sinister conceits: for Lacides could not
use that sleckenesse without suspicion of lasciviousness: nor Pompey, that
affected scratching with one finger, without opinion of wantonness.

White teeth imply a strong constitution; rolling eyes, like Lais Lamps, heat
of affection; with a pure Sanguine, which is ever accompanied with a beautefull
complexion. That which Euryala, Nurse to that subtle Greek, praised, when she
washed the feet of Ulysses, was Gentle Speech, and tender flesh: both
referring to two several Senses; the one to the Ear: the other to the Toutch.
Now to express the singular effects of the former, whereof we are here to
treat: There is nothing that ingageth more the affection of the Hearer than
affability of Speech. I have known a great and eminent Person in this
Kingdom; who, how undeservedly, I know not, having incurred the distasts of
some Societies, touching some indirect passages, as they conceived, whereby
they stood highly injuried: upon Conference with them, and declaring his
innocence, not only freed himself of their prejudicate opinion: but gained
their good esteem and affection. Nor is it almost credible what excellent
fruits, this Gentle speech graced with a pleasing presence have produced both
in affairs of peace and war; at home and abroad.

It is the Wise man's observation: Soft speech mitigates wrath. We read of few
so barbarous (if Commanders) who could not find an heart to receive a
compassionate tear: nor an ear to a fair submission.

Though Affranius, hearing his effeminate Son cry out -- Alas me wretched! hate
such a weak servile condition in his Son, as he seconds it with this severe
reply: To thy bas^ spirit I am suc^ a foe,
If one part grieve, let the rest afflict thee too.
We shall find even in Strangers more pity than in such fierce Fathers.

For in our Surveys of ancient and modern Histories: we shall find ever some
Princely compassionate Spirit, though a Conqueror, suffer in his Conquest.
What passionate effects wrought that sad relation of Aeneas in the heart of
Queen Dido? How soon were those words (those Emphaticall words) setting forth
the Trojans misery, conveyed to the heart of that affectionate Lady? But indeed
in passages of love; when occasions of distaste chance to be bred betwixt the
parties: upon a fair and free parliance (if that happiness may be admitted
them) how quickly are minds, before seemingly aliened, reconciled? Their former
hate begins to resolve it self into amorous tears. So strong is the force of
Gentle speech; seconded with easy reasons: which work well enough in the ear
of Love: who, melting in affection, is as willing to be attoned, as the party
to move it.

Whosoever should but see to life personated that Princely Sophonisba, whose
attractive Majesty and unaffected Eloquence, interessed her self more in
hearts, than any Princess of her time; would conclude hence, that a sweet and
debonaire Speech works wondrous effects; as might appear in those moving
Speeches of hers, which so tenter'd her Hearers hearts, as ^hee herself could
not suffer more upon reflex had to her own wrongs, than they did in
commiserating her wrongs.

It was an excellent commendation which I have sometimes heard given to a Noble
Peer of this Kingdom. That none ever came to him, how irresolved soever, but
came away from him well satisfied. This was a great felicity: that none, were
he never so disaffected to him upon his Entry: but departed so well contented,
as he won his opinion, whom he before highly distasted.

True it is, that vulgar Eyes and Ears are only taken with outward Objects.
They stand not upon sounding or examining the vessel: so it make a noise, they
rest satisfied. A courteous answer or affable salute affords them sufficient
measure of content: and makes them render an approvement of his affability to
the World. This is very rare to be seen in the countenance of such who are
advanced to high places. These can put on a stern awful brow: and make
appear very legibly, how their State is changed.

A poor State that begets pride! An undeserving honor, that moulds in the
owner a supercilious aspect; a difficulty of access; a fantastic circular
gate; and a surly uncivile speech! Weak habilliments of honor! But far
weaker Supports to bear that Colosse of honor up, if he should decline.

I have observed an excellent temperature in this kind, in many of our Ladies:
whose pleasing countenance, and affable salutes freed them of that censure
which those disdainefull women worthily incur, who hold it the best posture
of State to dis-value those they consort with: and as those, who are
transported with an opinion of their own worth censure nothing worthy hearing,
but what their selecter judgments approve. Dainty Idols to doat upon! These
had need furnish themselves of witty Husbands; or the Honey-month will be soon
done with them. Whereas those, whom we formerly touched; resemble Lights
shining in an other Orb.

If their Husbands be pleasant, they rejoice in his pleasure. If he suffer in
any overture which he neither expected, nor his actions deserved; they bear a
part in his Lachrymae. Husbands to such wifes are made happy in their choice:
and have good cause never to wish a change. For they may consort with those
they affect, without fearing of being called to an Evening account. If their
days expense should chance to be too immoderate; they need fear no fingers
but their own, to dive into their pockets, or to make privy search for more
than can be found. These need not fear to have their shoulders besprinkled
with Zantippee's livery: or to have their breakfast changed into a Morning
Curtain Lecture: Or to receive discipline for their last nights error: Or to
wear their Night-Capps after the old fashion, with both their ears through
them: Or dream, that their pillows are stuffed with horne-shavings. These can
play the merry Mates with their wifes, and never laugh till their hearts ache:
and hear a horne-pipe played, and never rub their brow antlers. If they come
home late (though sooner were better) they are entertained with a cheerful
welcome: They find no Pouts in their dish: nor amongst all their necessary
utensils one Chafing Dish. Out of this precious Mine, was, surely, that good
Burgomasters wife cut out, who ever met her Husband at the Portell with a
gentle word in her mouth; a sweet smile on her lip; a merry look on her
cherry cheek; a pair of slippers in one hand: and in the other, a rubber (not
at cuffs) but a Towell to rub him after his travail: whereas that old beldam
Thestylis would have exchanged that rubber with an halter, if she might have
had her will, rather than be bound to such a Task. And to such an one, without
all doubt was he matched; who in a pensive plight, all full of discontent,
published to the World, from whence he desired a speedy dismission, his hard
Fortune in this Bridal Brawle.

Married! whereto? to distaste;
Bedded! where? all grief is plaste;
Clothed! how? with Woman's shame;
Branded! how? with loss of Name;
How wretchelesse is that Man that is disgras't
With loss of Name, shame, grief, and all distaste?
Imprisoned! how? to woman's will;
Engaged! to what? to what is ill;
Restrained! by whom? by jealous fear;
Inthrall'd! to whom? Suspicions ear;
How hapless is that wretch that must fulfill,
A false, Suspicious, jealous woman's Will?
Taxed! for what? for modest mirth;
Exposed! how? a Stale on Earth;
Surprizd'! with what? with discontent;
Professed! as how? times penitent;
How can that forlorn Soul take joy on Earth,
Where Discontent and Penance is his Mirth?
Threated! how? as never was no man;
Fooled! by whom? a foolish woman;
Slav'd! to what? to causeless Splean^;
Sprite-affrighted! when? I dream;
How should The Infernal Prince more Furies summon,
Than lodge in such a Spleenefull, Spiteful Woman?
Cheered most! when? least at home;
Planted! where? in the Torrid Zone;
Chafed! how? with oil of tongue;
Hardened! how? by suffering wrong;
How wretched in his Fate who is become
Contented most, when he is least at home?
Urged most! when? she is near;
Vsher'd! how? with fruitless fear;
Shielded! when? when I do fly;
Cured! with what? with hope to dye;
How curelesse does that cure to sense appear,
Whose Hope is Death, whose Life is fruitless fear?
This wench had been a dainty dangling fruit for Timon's fig tree. And very
likely it is, that with one of this Aerie that Falconer had encountered, or at
least it were to be wished, he had been so matched: who coming to a Wedding
with an Hawk on his fist, and being asked to what end he came thither, being
a Marriage-meeting, and no place for pouting, with his Hawk? answered,
Purposely to know how many Marriages would reclaim an Hawk. Nor did he
doubt, but if such occasions had power to tame a wild Batchler, they would in
time reclaim his Haggard. Yet, for all this, his discretion by a wise
moderation of his passion, might, no doubt, have rectifide much this
whirly-gigs disposition: for a good Jack will make a good Gill. Nor will
inveying, reviling or abusing of a Vixon, bring her to a good temper: for such
usage would quickly make her madder. This was the cause that moved Socrates to
forbear his wife Zantippe, though a froward woman, because he thought he might
better converse with others. Thus wise men, who are regulated by reason, and
with the rule of discretion, can moderate passion, when they are matched to
such Necessary Evils, can make a Virtue of a Necessity; prepare them by such
trials, with more constancy to suffer all extremes. Nor can there be made any
question, but such Corrasives as are applied nearest us, and upon the Vital
parts, work the sensiblest effects. And who more near than our own
bosome-consort: whose cheerful aspect makes all those Planets of her family
successive and auspicious: as contrariwise, her malignity begets in all those
inferior Lights, the like disposition. In the description of an Oeconomick
State, Aristotle expresses himself most Philosophically, when he renders it
thus: A Private family (says he) may be properly called a little City; and a
City, a great Family: where like a City without a Wall, a House without a
door, a Ship without Helm, a Pot without a Cover, and a Horse without a
Bridle: so is a Family, when guided by a passionate violent man, and he
matched to a waspi^h unquiet woman. Many excellent Aphorisms are contained in
Hippocrates; amongst which, this: Eight things (says he) make man's flesh moist
and fat: the first, to be merry and live at hearts ease; the second, to sleep
much; the third, to lie in a soft bed; the fourth, to fare well; the fifth, to
be well apparelled and furnished; the sixth, to ride always on horseback; the
seventh, to have our Will; and the eight, to be employed in Plays and
Pastimes, and in things which yield contentment and pleasure. Yet work all
these to a remediless consumption, when the Wife is transformed into a Fury,
and makes it her days Task, to put all things out of order.

Howsoever, a great measure of discretion is required in an Husband; first, to
know the nature and temper of his wife: secondly, in the carriage or demeanure
of himself toward her accordingly. You see, how the same Sun works several
effects upon Wax and Clay: for it softneth the one, and hardneth the other.
Let him apply this to his own condition: by disposing himself toward her, to
whom he stands engaged, nay religiously devoted by an inviolable tie of
affection. I have heard of a domestic combat betwixt two, who afterward
became such loving affectionate Turtles, as nothing could displease the one,
what the other affected. But before this continued peace could be procured, or
these Civill-warres quenched: many domestic bickerings and skirmishes were
there, who might wear the buckler, and return quartermaster.

The more he labored to soveraignize; the quarrel ever became more
implacable; for she ever ended that days conflict with this peremptory cloze:
Trust me, Husband, this will not do it. At last, as later considerations prove
ever wisest, he recollected himself: beginning to expostulate the cause with
himself in this manner. How long shall I entangle my self in this intricate
Maze of endless miseries? To what purpose is it, that I contest with my own
flesh? Raise a Pad in the straw: and awake a sleeping Lion? It may be her
disposition is more generously tempered, than to be thus haled. Turn then the
Scale; and let her enjoy the freedom of her self. This will relish better to
any well conditioned nature: than ever to be contending for mastery: and make
the whole Country ring with our folly. Upon which resolution, they closed
together in such an equal Concord and Harmony of their minds: as they were
never known to be angry both together: The one giving way to the others
passion, with such sobriety and discretion; as they never afterward needed any
neighbourly Mediation. This I have the longer insisted on, because I am not
ignorant how many surly and rough dispositions do abuse by their harshnesse
the easy and well-tempered Natures of their unhappy Consorts: which might be
instanced and illustrated with many Tragic and doleful examples, both in our
own and other Countries: where weak and fearful natures were so
disheartened, as they inclined to strange melancholic fits, and such incurable
distempers, as they were never rest of them, till their tedious life left them.
Others of higher Spirits, but of more vindicative natures, impatient of longer
suffering, have woven up the Tragic Scene of their miseries with the ruin of
their cruel husbands.

The (...) conditi^n of the M^sco^ian Women.
Indeed, were all Women of that servile condition, whereof the ingenious Barcley
in his Mirror of Minds, reports those women to be of; who cannot be persuaded
that their Husbands love them, Barclay's Icon animorum. Cap. 8.
unless they beat them: Correction then would be found the only introduction
to affection: But these Nations are more Civil; and our womanish Spirits more
Virile, to endure such affronts. It is worthy our observation to relate what
happned to one Jordan, in his marrying in those parts; being a native German,
and one who had accompanied Barcley in his Travail. He reports it thus: Being
in those parts, one Jordan, a German, and who had kept me Company in my
Travail: fell in love with a woman there, and married her: Demeaning himself
to her, as became a loving and respective Husband; but the more she was
tendered by him, the more she seemed to be discontented with him. No
dalliance, nor all the tokens of love or affection that he could show to her,
could either win or waine her from that discontented humor, to which his too
much kindness had brought her. At last, seeing that the more he labored to
content her, the less she seemed to be pleased; he takes her aside one day,
demanding of her the reason of her distaste? O Sir, says she! how should I be
well pleased when you show no argument of love toward me? Not of love, replied
he! what more Signs of respect can I show you, than these I already do? I am
sure you want nothing. Yes, Husband said she, I want Correction: And if you did
truly love me, you would beat me: as you see other husbands in these parts use
their wifes: for I must freely tell you, for all your professions of love and
respect toward me, till you begin to beat me, I shall never be persuaded
that you love me. This could not choose but beget admiration in him: yet, least
he should lose his Wifes good opinion, at last he began to follow the
Countrey-fashion: and to give her such correction, as might sufficiently
persuade her of his affection. Although, in the end, his disciplinary Love grew
to be too bitter: For he brake her neck before he left her.

But no modest ear can endure any such breake-necke-love: Wives are not to be
made Slaves but Companions. And as their constitutions are soft and delicate;
so should their usage be mildly tempered and affectionate. Sweet and gentle is
their Speech; albeit, no Rule so general, but admits some exception; full of
rich delight is their Fancy. No storm of adversity so violent, but their
pleasant society will allay it. No loss so heavy, but by the enjoyment of
them, supplied. Those dispersed Trojan Dames, how soon had they pacified their
incensed Husbands, with a winning kiss, and a friendly salute? Their anger was
soon done, when they saw those pearled tears distilling: those amorous arms
spread abroad to embrace them: those pretty witty prattles they had to
entertain them.

These were such harmless careless Charms; as they wrought far stronger
on the affection, than any other forcible Conclusion.

Now, as I have formerly observed, seeing there is no Society that can possibly
subsist without speech: diverse qualifications are to be used, whereby that
Cement of society may be better seasoned: and in all Companies better accepted:
which I will divide into these two necessary precepts. The first is, to know
what you are to speak. The second is, to know when you are to speak. In the
former, is Deliberation; In the later, is Moderation necessarily required. He
that knows how to speak well, knows also when he must hold his peace:
which may serve for an excellent Rule to the Later. Think an hour before you
speak, and a day before you promise: and this may usefully serve for a
direction of high importance to the Former. These observed, many errors
incident to indeliberate speech, may be prevented: which our too free and
glib-tongued Dames are usually subject to. I have noted a kind of pleasing
Dialect used by our City Dames to their Husbands: and delivered in that loving
familiar way, as it infinitely became them: a kind of fondling speech, (as I
may properly term it) or apish toying, neither unpleasing to their Husbands,
nor unusefull to themselves: as thus: -- trust me, Chick, thou shall not. --
Now, pray thee, Prick, do not. -iffaith, you are a sleake youth. -- you played
the wag with me last night. -- well, God forgive thee. -- wiltst buy me this
toy, my Pigsny? These pretty prattles make me remember that free and ingenuous
confession of that rich Millanoise, That the strings of his purse were never so
hard tied, but his Nansy had a Charm to loose them. Which brings us no less
properly than occasionally to fall upon that dangerous Attendant to Gentle
Speech, which we formerly particuliz'd, to be Dissimulation: a smooth Orator,
and such an one, as makes her own end, the sole Object of her Endeavor.

DISSIMULATION.
DISSIMULATION is most in Semblance, least in Substance: OPPOSITE 4
Seeming most, what it is least: Most in profession, Least in expression. For,
Hows'ere they be, thus do they seem to me,
They be and seem not, seem what least they be.


Sundry proper Emblemes have our Ancients fitted them withal: Some whereof
have Emblematiz'd them by Sodoms apples; fair to the eye, false at the heart:
outwardly, promising juice; inwardly, proving dust. Others to the Crocodyles of
Nilus; who never weep, but they intend to wound. Others to the Hyene; who
counterfets the voice of man, purposely to prey on man: and requite humane
hospitality with savage cruelty. Others, to the Harpyes, those three monstrous
and ravenous birds, A^llo, Ocypete, and Celano, having maiden visages, but
inhumane usages. Others to the Sirenes, the three daughters of Achelous and
Calliope; who on a Promontorie or prospective rock of the Sea were wont to
sit, and by their sweet songs and amiable countenance, to draw passengers unto
them, whom they slew. Thus labored our ancient Emblematists to deblazon them;
that like perilous shelves, others might be aware of them. But certainly, as
the Fish Sepia is bewrayed by a black color which she casts out to cover
her; So these, though Tiberius-like, they glory in nothing so much as in
cunningly cloaking their purposes with fair pretenses: going invisible, and
deluding vulgar opinion with a Seemi^g good: they must come to be unmasked,
and then that vizard or disguise which before kept them from discovery, shall
publish to the World, that as all humane wisdom is vanity, so no vanity lighter
than that opinion which grounded it self on dishonest policy. This was wittily
glanced at in the Apologue: who could not endure that mouth, from which cold
and heat proceeded at one time.

(...);
Who make thy tongue a stranger to thine heart,
I hate thee worse than Hell, whos'ere thou art. (...). Homer. 11.

Now there be several kinds of this glozing evil: some whereof, are more
pleasing than greatly noxious: more delightful than dangerous. For we shall
meet with some pretty harmless dissemblers, who are so far from plotting or
projecting mischief, as they intend nothing less. Their Ambition is to
purchase some trifling toy, or to wind themselves into their Husbands good
opinion, by pretending most what they affect least: and by relishing least,
what they affect most. Like that good witty wife, who affected liberty but
might seldom enjoy it: and therefore did seemingly dis-affect it; that she
might oftener procure it. Of all things, Husband, quoth she, there are no
pleasures I so little care for; as these Stageplayes* they are the tediousest
Shows to me, that are in the World. And this moved her Husband, who was of an
harsh cross nature, to carry her abroad to Plays, which she most affected,
though seemingly least desired. Another, who had a Months mind to see the
Booths, Jew-trumps, Hobby-horses, and other Trinkets in Bartholomew Fair, told
her Husband, that she wondered (pretending Puritanisme) how people could be so
naughtily given and profane as to feast in such Booths and Brothels of sin,
which her tender Conscience even yearnd withal. Which her Husband, no sooner
heard, than to the Fair they must go: laboring to cross her in that, which
indeed contented her most. But you shall find another merry Wanton, quite of
another humor: Her aim is to purchase her pleasure under a virtuous color.
Her Husband, purposely to raise a rent; will have a Tenant: and many are
proposed, but none as yet admitted. A Lodger he must have: and she prefers
One in her thoughts: but of all others, when he is in quest, she is ever at
furthest distance. This puts on her jealous Husband, who would be loath to be
directed by his wife in the Choice of his Tenant, to admit of him whom his
cunning wife seemingly most dislikt, but really most approved.

Now, this Dissimulation is most expressed in Subjects of Passion: as I have
heard a Tale of a passionate Widow (for reverence sake, to begin with the
antientst degree first) who could not content her self, but she would needs
be buried quick in her Husbands grave. O, content yourselfe, said one of her
ancient acquaintance; you are ordained for another end. But all this nothing at
all seemed to assuage her sorrow: for falling into a trance, after such time as
she had continued a space as one senseless; coming at last out of it; the
very first words she uttered were these; Well, I will ever be of that mind, it
is better to marry than to burn. That good wife, (to instance in the next
Order) had a ready answer and a dainty Color to palliate the love she bore to
a Friend in a Corner; who, when she heard her Husband take notice of One of her
inward acquaintance, and pointing at him in the street, using these words: --
There goes a Cuckold! With speech gentle, but not wholly free from guile nor
gall, she replied: Trust me, Husband, you are such an other.

Nor was that good wench void of all good nature, but very tender (it seemed)
of her Husbands safety; who hearing him unadvisedly, as he was passing over
Thames with other company, (as one who wished not his own good) beseech God
very heartily, that all Cuckolds were thrown into Thames! She kind heart, made
answer: "Husband can you swim? Poor Girl, she doubted much his drowning;
and therefore desired to be resolved, whether he could prevent it by swimming?
That young wife meant, no doubt, simply; who, when one of her Bridemaids told
her the same day she was married, that she verily thought, that never any day
would seem longer to her than that day: Well, Sister, said she, and if the day
seem long, I hope the night will seem as short. But you are cosin'd, Sister,
says she, to her Bridemaid: For I vow to thee, so I may but enjoy him whom I
have loved and now married ( always provided that he had what a man should
have, and I my self satisfied, that he stood so furnished) if I should live
and dye a maid, in the same mind that I now am, I should never repent of it.

Alas, poor fool! many provisoes were there before she could well incline
unto it, yet would she seal to it, provided that he were well furnished. What
variety of evasions this Fondling had, dissembling with her own thoughs: and
pretending what she least meant, that she might appear to her Bridemaids more
indifferent than she was, for that which she most dreamed of? A pretty kind of
harmless shift! being, what stands most with a maids modesty, and
consequently in civility, merits her Apology.

No less simply than freely, did that single woman (for maid she cannot
properly be termed) answer her Confessor; who, after she had discovered to
him a long Bead-roule of loose wanton pranks which ^hee confessed her self
culpable of: Her Confessor began sharply to reprove her: laying open unto her
the haynousnesse of those sins: and telling her, that whooredome was such a
sin as highly displeased God. I am more sorry, said she, for I am sure it
pleased me.

There is another kind of dissimulation too, which is so far from incurring
any grounded offense, as it deserves high approvement. And this is, when Beauty
is not only wooed, but seemingly won, to produce some good effect; by his
means who imagines himself master of the prize. Of these, to omit instances
in Sacred Writ, we shall find our Stories plentuously stored. The redoubted
Thomyris could practice this feate, to expedite her Sons revenge: and restore
her Countries fame. This did that chaste Penelope, deluding her numerous
Suitors with hopes of success: only to spin out time: and with her
never-finished web to keep them ever in suspense. This did that wise but
unbeleeved Cassandra; who, seemingly inclined to Apollo's suite; that he
should enjoy her; if he would bestow on her the gift of prophecy: which, when
she had obtained, she denied him that which she had seemingly granted. But the
preservation of her Chastity impaired the Credit of her prophecy: being never
believed, were it never so true that she related. This pious act did that
memorable Hypermn^stra, who pretending nothing less than what her virtuous
aims directed themselves wholly to; saved her husband Linceus, from that
fatal massacre, committed by her Sisters, in slaying their husbands. Nay, it
has been the safety of many flourishing estates to dissemble Vertue^^ and to
comply with the times; ever expecting some fair opportunity to put in
execution, what their addressements for the public led them to.

This wise and commendable kind of Dissimulation, some of our witty Wenches
many times use; in putting on a Countenance of Disdain, at least, of
strangeness toward those whom inwardly they unfeignedly affect. Nor have
these Sleights produced insuccessive effects to their desires. For by this
means, have they enjoyed, what their simple inclining affection would never
have made them Mistresses of. For profer'd fruit is sedome tasted: and if
tasted, not half so well relishing, as if restrained.

Those golden Apples which the Hesperides, those three watchful Daughters of
Atlas so carefully kept; were more preciously esteemed, because they were by
such vigilant beauty guarded Forts which open to their Beleaguerall. passages,
unless the miseries of a long Siedge have brought them to that pusillanimity,
promise no rich booty: nor to the winner any glorious victory. The way then for
beauty to be prized, is to be rarely seen: and when seen, so indifferently
seeming to be seen, as it desires to retire so soon as it is seen. This is
the load-starre to affection, to ^eeme estranged from the least thought of
affection: and to fix least in that Object, which h'as most interest in her
heart. This that subtle Coy-duck had learned to an hair: when, if any time
she were invited with her jealouse Husband to a public Feast; she would
always fix her eye upon the antientst and reverendst in years at the Table:
whereas the eye of her inward affection was elsewhere spheared: assuring her
Husband, withal, that no Sight was more seemly in her eye, nor conveyed more
reverend love to her heart, than a grave Old Man, who had already spunne the
entire web of his Follies: and could discourse with all sobriety of what he
had seen in the World. And this neat kind of dissembling pleased her
credulous Husband out acry. For he believed, good man, that there was a through
fair betwix his Wifes mouth and her heart. Whereas, Meander had never more
windings, than she had dainty sleights and devices, to delude his facility: and
to shrowde from the World her private affection to youthful liberty. Till in
the end, found where she lest suspected: and closely infolded in the embraces
of a loose Lover, whom she entirely affected: she begun to relinquish shame,
and in a public manner to contest against her Husbands disability: And how
her modesty had so long restrained her: but seeing no hope of remedy, she held
change no robbery: and that no Censure should thenceforth abridge her liberty.
This Dissimulation produced a dangerous issue; such as a virtuous breast cannot
harbor; we will therefore divert from this, and return unto the former: being
such a modest bashful kind of punishing their desires: as, many times, that
too much retiring or restraining of their Lovesick thoughts, procures no small
distemper to those who love and would not be thought so. As it happened to that
noble Italian Lady; who, loath to impart the ground of her love: or to make any
other, Secretary to her own breast: fell into such a languishing sickness, as,
though the expertest Physicians of those parts consulted about her; laboring
by all the means they could use, and all the receipts they could apply, not
only to discover the source and occasion of her grief, but allay it: yet all
their experiments were in vain: they could not find out the Cause: till she
at last (drawing near her last) discovered it: For when her vital parts began
to be so enfeebled, as they surceased to perform their office, and all hope
of recovery perished, in the presence of her Dearest, whom, till that dying
period, she never made least show of, to be her Dearest, she took leave of
all the World with this Dispassionate cloze: Adue, my dear Leontius. Which
words were the last she ever spoke. But what deadly effect those words brought
forth in her Leontius; the Story amply relates. For if the words of dying men
be precious even to strangers: how impressive the voice of one we love, calling
and beckning to us from the deathbed! O what a passionate conflict, what a
soule-dividing combat do those words raise! How strongly does grief and
affection, like Sisiph^s loving Twins, strive to enclose them! knowing that in
a short space, a very short space, that tongue, the Organs whereof yet speak,
and move attention by their friendly accents, amorous interbreaths,
teare-trickling adieus, was to be eternally tied up in silence; nor the sound
of their words salute our ears any more. This it was, which brought
heart-sicks Leontius, to his bed of Earth soon after her. For recollecting
with himself, how his love was the sole cause of her death: like an
affectionate Mate, who well deserved so faithful a Mistress, after her
Obsequies finished, he immured himself from all society with the World, where
he enjoyed himself, till his many pensive dis-consolate hours brought him to
her whom he loved above himself. But these are too heavy for soft ^ares. That
Love deserves approvement which is till death: but that Love requires a
seasonable restraint which may occasion death. Those two Lovers are more for
our purpose, who one day falling into a piece of Country-love-Complement,
proceeded thus: O Iug, how do I love thee! Nay, you know best, said Iug; but
sure am I, I shall never dye with loving you: No, Iug, said he! But I warrant
it, thou would, if thou had an handful of me. A proper handful, quoth
she. I should be much better for a bit and a buffet with it. Nay, faith, wench,
I would never buffet thee, but as my Neighbor Grisedale did Guddy Tringles.
Nay, Oswold, quoth she, you are cousin'd, I Will warrant you. Pray you say, why
should you think I love you? Did you ever see me cast a sheeps-eye at you? Or
did my Nose ever bleed when I was in your Company? And, poor wench, just as
she spoke this, to show her true heart, her nose fell a bleeding. How now, Iug,
said he? Who is in love now? Not I on mine honesty. -- Howsoever Oswold, you
may marry me when you list, but I will never say I love you.

When a man bleeds at the nose, and through abundance of blood is brought in
danger of his life, the Physician lets him blood in his arm to turn the
course of the blood another way. Let us apply this Physical experiment thus:
If Love issue out in too violent a stream, it is to be cooled by a temperate
expostulation with Fancy: by discussing the probability of those grounds of
affection which have taken seizure of the heart. Or else by fixing our eye upon
some more attractive Object, divert the course of that madding passion.

But against these two it may be objected: For the first; that is a cool Love,
indeed, that will admit of any such expostulation: for this would imply
discretion; such should be as far estranged from Love, as youth from
affecting the gravity of age. Loves axiom is this: None can truly love and be
wise. And must affection then be regulated by deliberation? Must we examine
what reason we have to love, when Love even to this day has been ever
impatient to converse with reason? Must we discuss what probable inducements
we have to love; when there are no such arguments suffered to be disputed of
in the School of Love? Must we fall to betray Love, in asking Friends and
Parents what they will give? Or stagger at our choice, or study a change; when
our choice ranks not with us in blood; or Fortunes, or disparity of years; or
difference in other Tenets, which more concern us? This were cool Love! And
yet should Love be so moderate, if rightly seasoned: For to make choice by the
eye without relation to Reason, makes a ^oole of affection: But what receipt
against love when it breaks forth into extremes? Absence from the Object you
love Yea; but Love is more vehement, when deprived of her Object. It is, where
Reason gives reins to Fancy. For then is the Party beloved ever made the
Object of the Imagination. This begets an obstruction in the stomach* a
malignant quality in the appetitive part. This estrangeth the Eyes from
sleeping: Because the representment of the person loved keeps the Senses ever
waking. This distracts the eye, and makes it look wildly: never minding that
whereon it fixes, because taken up wholly with that it fancieth. And for that
(as one well observes) Love is not to be strangled, but easily repelled, and by
distance allayed; and not only distanced, but by employments wearied. The way
to remove an inconsiderate Love from taking too deep rooting in you, is to
prevent the way of thinking of the party you love. Like that brave Spartan
Lady, who when she heard of a disloyal act done by one whom she held dear;
would not suffer her thoughts to entertain him; saying: He shall never lodge
in my bosom, that can teach his thoughts to become disloyal. Had the
Carthaginian Queen learned this lesson, she had never harbored a Servant so
injurious to hospitality, as to requite her too much love with such impiety.

Now, for the latter Objection; how should we, will you say, fix our eye upon
any Object more attractive, than his person to whom we have engaged our heart?
If we were, indeed, like those Paphlagonian Partridges (whereof our Natural
Historians report that they have two hearts) then might we have one for an
apparent Friend, and an other for a Friend in a Corner. But as a heart divided
cannot live; no more can any Object really attract the eye, but what the heart
does unfaignedly love. Where the treasure, there the heart; but no treasure
like Love to enrich the Treasury of the heart. The heart guides the eye: and
can we turn our eye from that Object which guides the heart? This were to
dissemble with love: and disesteeme that which we most honor: despice that we
most tender: all which would exact revenge one time or other. This were too
subtle love to come from a true heart! And yet, if you desire to prevent
erring, you must in this manner mould your affection. Love by degrees, was a
Sages Counsel: lest by bestowing all your love in wooing: you leave none when
you come to marrying. It is said of the Juniper tree, that of all other trees
it makes the hoatest coal, and the coolest shadow: The coal being so hot,
that if it be raked up in ashes of the same, it continues unextinguished by
the space of a whole year. Be you such sweet Iunipers; Woooers are but
Shadows, says the Poet; be your shades cool; but your coals hot. When you
are once come to the height, heat and true fervor of love: let no steames of
foreign fancy darken it: no storms of adversity weaken it. Yet let the
Introduction to Love, after you perceive a likelihood of proceeding, be so
managed; as your too much coyness occasion no discouragement. For by that
means may you timely avoid, what your disdain may otherwise deservingly
inflict. But of all others, beware of Love Letters; for they are such
Injunctions as you cannot appeal from. With such reservancy then become
Warders of your (...) uningaged hearts, as your Favorite (...) never show
witnesses against you under your hands.


I knew one, who, excepting this Error, demeaned her self in actions of
discretion and modesty, above the reach of scandal or reproof; But betraying
her love to the secrecy of Pen and Paper; and falling afterward to
inconstancy, engaged her self to her forsaken Friends privacy. Who so tendered
her esteem, that till such time as she had made an apparent breach and
violation of her vow, by relinquishing her former choice, and bartring love
with an indiscreet exchange, never disclosed those sacred-secret ingagemenes
she had made; but with a constant defense of her honor, labored ever to
cover her shame.

And this is the worst kind of dissembling in affairs of love. For to
dissemble or double with ones Faith, is a dangerous equivocation: being such,
as makes the Party which showed inconstancy, of all others, most miserable in
their affection. For it is not the outward rite only which consummates a
Sponsall love: For if their hearts be not linked, before their hands be ever
joined: their house music is very likely to close in discords.

As I have sometimes heard a pretty pleasant Story, of two, who after such time
as they had been a (...) ^hile married, fell into such debate an^ vari^nce, as
all such as neighbored near them* were wearied with them: but their next
Neighbor worst of all, for it was his hard fortune, good man, to ride for
them. After they had continued thus for a good space, in these Civil broils,
without any amendment: One Evening, being in bed together, says the Husband
to his Wife: This is a wonderful thing, that we must after this manner all the
year long make our House a Fencing-Schoole: Sure, Meg, quoth he, we were not
rightly married, or else we should have lived more peaceably together: for we
have not any two Neighbors that so fearfully baste one an other. What
think thou, Wife, if we be married again, and see if that will mend the
matter? The Wife easily consented to his motion; and held it fitting, saying,
she would do any thing for a quiet life. With all speed then runs her good man
to a Sir John; who, as he could read on no book but his own: so he was of no
such deep reading as to know whether Re-marrying were lawful or no.

A new Bridall-feast is provided; Friends invited; nothing wanting to perfect
what they both intended. At last, coming to the Church, Sir John falls to
work; where he goes on still and without interruption, till he came to Who
gives this woman to be married, etc. and holding her by the hand, looking
ever when some one or other would do the office of a Father, to give her: No,
says the mad Bridegroom, none shall give me her; take you her, Sir John, as
long as I have had her; and if she be not worthy taking, why would you give me
her?

But to dwell a little longer on this Subject, now in agitation; as pure love
can admit no dissembling: so are young women to be cautious where they fix
their love. Many shall they encounter with all, who profess affection to all.
But their drift closes ever with such a Curtsy, as may hazard their honor.
These are our Libertine Batchlers, who choose rather to graze in Common
pastures, than Enclosures. Yea, many of these will boast of your Favors: and
i^ public places speak liberally of (...) (...) will do before their sweet
Husbands departing; With -- Hey ho -- what shall I do dear Love, if you dye?
Marry another (says the Comedian) before one stitch of his shrouding Sheet be
broken; or those flowers which stuck his Corpse, bewithered; or one Wormling
entered his Coffin. Yet will these cunningly disguise their solace, and with
tear -- blubbered vizards close up his eyes, and infinitely rejoice in that
last office. Then must they at his interment seemingly desire to be buried with
him; rave, and look distractedly, as if fancy had brought them to a frency;
leap into the Grave; and perform all these pageants with such a
completegrace; as not a Neighbor attends them, but suffers with them:
commending their simple hearts, for leaving with such unwilling hearts their
faithful Husbands.

But this sorrow is nothing so sincere as the Story of the Indian women
discovers the lovely and lively effects of their mourning. Who upon the
interment of their Husbands, strive (by way of an amorous Encounter) in
relation of their deservings to him, and his expressions of love to them, which
of them may have the honor to be buried with him. The Body of the Story
presents it self thus: The women of India, when any of their Husbands dies,
are wont to fall in contention through the vehemence of their affection, which
of them (for they have many Wives) he loved best in his life: She that
wins, being very joyful (and solemnly attended by a great Company of her
Friends and kinsfolk following her) is cast into the fire with her dead
Husband.

But were these, whereof we now discourse, put to that Election, a short
strife would end that contention. They must live by the quick and not by the
dead: and a living Dog is better than a dead Lion.

But the wantonnest of these cannot be so light, as their Gentleman Usher is,
for most part loose: whom to the end we may here portray in his own Colors,
and to life the better, we have delivered in a Character; which without any
other discovery will present you him in his feature. Yet before we go on in
this lively delineature of so dangerous a Piece: Our purpose is to propose some
reasons why we have here brought him upon the Stage: and with what propriety
he falls upon our discourse; which may appear in a more copious and
perspicuous manner in this our prepared relation hereafter.

There is a conceited Treatise composed by an Italian (as what wits more
pregnant or present) entitled a Supplication to Candlelight: discovering the
abuses committed and curtained by the silent and secret Shade of Night; where
it might be demanded, as God in Esaias did sometimes ask the devil our
watchman, Custos, quid de nocte? What see thou? what discoverest thou? Though
Lantern and Candlelight hang out; though the Bel-man traverse the street;
though the Constable and his rugged Gowne-men after a nod or two, take care for
discharge of their place and punishment of vice, to put out a peremptory
Question to a Night-walker, from whence came you? or, whither go you? whom do
you serve? or, what business have you so late? yet it seems they have no
Commission to examine Coacted sin: These may hurry along by their Noses: and
shroud a loose Gentleman-usher with as light a Curtezan in a running-Brothell
from those conniving eyes of Endymion and his brotherhood. And this light piece
must be conducted to his Lord, while he is to be admitted to his Lady; to
present both their Actions on the stage of Folly. With what a commanding
posture rides this Foot-cloath sin? How apt to forget his composition; and
how confident in the privilege of greatness? These, generally, have their
Purveyors to furnish them with such stuff as may content their liqu'rish
appetite, and feed their intemperate desires with fresh fuel. In every Solemn
or Festival Show, these Forragers take their stand: eying what beauties are of
most attractive quality: then inquire they of their places of habitation:
Occasions they take to converse with them: and in short time so to win in
upon them: as they begin to commend their Masters suit to their too easy
attention: and with long battry, according to the strength of the Fort, so
seize on their affection, as they make entry to their Lords admission: clozing
their indirect aims with an unlawful Conclusion. These Contractors for
blemished honor; or those obscene Palliards, who prefer their traffic in
sin, before the treasures of Sion: were sit attendants for that wanton
Damasella, who portrayed the affection of her heart in as light an Imprese;
writing these lines with her Diamond in a Window: The choicest Cates ^oon'st
^loy the appetite,
One is too st^le a dish to feed delight.


Her Choice, it seemed, affected nothing more than Change. She could not
conceit how any love could possibly be so pure, as to be confined to one
Object: or so firm* as to restrain it self to one Friend. Her Barge stood
engaged to many Owners: Whosoever would hazard their fame upon the adventure,
might find her as ready to impaune her honor: This was the condition of that
Wanton Florentine, whose direction it was to some of her closest and secretst
reteiners, to invite such, whose personages promised performance, to their
Ladies house: for whom she had a private Garden-house, where she would as
freely impart her Courtesies, as if one hour had made them commanders of her
affections.

This was far from that chaste and temperate sovereignty, which that ever
honored Lady bore over her desires: who being one day highly advanced for
those exquisite parts which did accomplish her: and that incomparable beauty
which made all others inferior to her: answered her Husband, upon the recital
of those indowments, in this manner: Trust me, my Ephestion, if there be any
thing that may merit love in me, I shall only value it so, because it
pleases thee.

Now, there is nothing that estrangeth affection from the party whereto it
stands religiously engaged; but either Contempt of that Object which it ought
to love: or selfe-opinion in conceiting it self too worthy of that Objects
love. For the former; many Tragical instances might be produced: where the
Parties Contempt begot in the Owner such Discontent: as nothing could heal it,
but what did seal it with blood. Which distaste, as it is privately grounded,
so these dangerous Agents, for most part aggravate it: Suggesting to them other
beauties, or promising personages to to alien their affection from their own.
Now, for selfe-opinion; it is such a working illusion, as it presents myriads
of fancyes to the imagination. For if it be in the Woman, it begets in her
such a disdain: as first, she entertaines her Husband with a rare access:
She prescribes seasons, which, good man, he must observe, or keep his
distance. But a short time makes a perpetual Progress betwixt them. Beds must
be divided: A Countenance of strangeness entertained: The Baths must be
visited: Private Friends admitted; Now, Gentlemen-ushers provided, such as can
be secret, and with resolution perform their arrand. Her Doctor must tell her,
and in the presence of her Husband; that living apart for a season would be
infinitely useful and behoofefull to her weak Constitution. And he believes
all; puts up all; prays for his wifes needless recovery: while she, kind
Ducke, wants nothing but fresh employment for her Libertine Fancy.

Long would it be, ere she would give that repulse to an importunate Suitor
(if his presence deserved the style of a Lover) which that virtuous Theodora
did to an eminent personage: whose inward parts, as they were exquisite, so
were his outward highly accomplished. Who, being long time solicited, but
never vanquished, at last, by her virtuous instructions, she so won in on him,
as he began to conceive a remorce; and to turn the course of his affection
to a virtuous admiration. This, when that Noble Lady perceived, to strengthen
those good motions in him, which formerly had been so far estranged from
him; One day, after such time as they had long discoursed together, but in such
manner, as nothing was less intended than actions of dishonor: and he, taking
a Lute in his hand, had played Lacrymae unto her: she forthwith, returned that
Lute-lesson with a fair requital in this pious direction: Lacrymae should not
only be in the eye, but stamps of more retentive sorrow in the heart: A
Pilgrims passage is such a passionate progress, as it cannot be pursued
without Sobs: nor continued without Sighs. I have found sufficient occasion for
that Music: nor can ^ eye that place, which may afford other Melody. A
continual Sinner, and a rare Sigher, promises small comfort hereafter. Our
days are but few and evil. Not an hour without some Crime to accompany it.
Let the Soul never receive her surfeit of sorrowing, till she h'as first found
in her self a loath to sinning. As your toutch makes this Instrument speak
tears; So let tears of Devotion trickle upon the Strings of your Heart. This
will make you a noble Lover, and more enamour you in the Contemplation of your
Maker, than ever you were taken with the deceiving fancy of any Creature.

Now, if this Selfe-opinion domineere in the man; how quickly dis-affects he
his Choice? No House more estranged from him, than his own. No Bed more
dis-relishing, than what should be most pleasing. If he at any time make his
Gallery of the Street: his eyes are so far from imitating the Swanne in
fixing them on his feet, to bring him in a dis-esteeme with himself, as they
gaze upon every Belcone. Not a window opens; nor a painted face looks out; nor
an enforced smile; nor leering eye; but these injoyne a Salute from him: an
amorous humble Cringe to an unknown face: a formal curtsie, to a borrowed
beauty. This Object sets his unfortunate Genius a work. He h'as taken precise
notice of her lodging: although her moveable estate will not suffer her to
sojourne long in a place. And he resolves to lie siege to this easy-wonne
Fort, and to call her to Parliance by Paper-pellets. To the Sovereign then of
his thougts, whose short acquaintance might in modesty impose a silence, he
addresseth his letter, like a soone-taken Lover: His Page must deliver it; but
so weak and imperfect was his Masters direction: and so little to life this
Maddona's description, as many times, foolish Boy, he miscarries in his arrand.

As it sometimes happened upon like occasion, when an amorous young Gallant, and
a professed Courter of Casements: having taken especial notice of a young
beautiful Lady, who, as he thought, deserved as much love, as any earthly
beauty could possibly merit: and collecting by her eye, that there was no
aversion in her from fancy; sought by all means to become partaker of his
hopes; which all the better to expedite, he sends his Page with a Letter to
intimate the constancy of his zeal to her; and how he preferred her affection
before any contentment whatsoever. This unfortunate Boy, whose heedlesse care
to his directions, made his Master as hapless in his affections, comes to this
Gentlewomans Lodging, where he delivers his Letter, but to another hand than he
was directed to by his Master. Howsoever, the ancient Matron, who not only by
the benefit of the room that was dark, but with her cypress hood veiled,
perceiving well she could by no means be discovered, or distinguished; not
only received his kind amorous Letter, but returned by the Page another:
acquainting his Master, that, albeit nothing was more precious to her than her
honor, and how many spies were over her in regard of her strict charge, which
was given the Matron of the House by her Father: if he would privately come to
such a place such an Evening, and return her some valuable pledge of his
professed affection, she would dispense with what she tendered most, to
second his desires. How acceptable this Letter was to this frolic Gamester,
we need make small question: But tedious seemed the hours till this Evening
came: which winged his loose thoughts with all speed, to approach the place of
meeting. And to the end, he might with more freedom enjoy the Object he
sought; he had furnished himself of a rich Juell, to engage his affection unto
her; and to confirm what he had professed in his respect to her, whom he so
highly honored. The experientst old Madam, who had more ways to the wood than
one; faithfully observes the time: and in such a disguised way, as she might be
the Grecian Helen for ought that he could see. A sweet perfumed Room; a rich
bed; and so closely curtained, as old age from youth could not be discerned.
Nor needed he to fear her coyness; though she pretended at first a kind of
apish niceness. For the long Custom and habit of sin had so inured her, as
nothing less than modesty or shamefastness could possibly become her. Having
now received the Gentleman's Juell, which she preferred before all his
dalliance: she entertaines him with as free and liberal an embrace, as her
icy-cold arms could afford. But scarcely had he entered that Brothell-bed, or
enjoyed his seere and meldew'd Mistress; but a fearful cry of fire breaking
forth with much violence in the very next Lodgins, with scaling Ladders raised
to every Window, prevented the unfortunate Gamester of his decayed pleasure.

The unweldy Beldam, not willing to dye before she were better provided for
it: leaving her Mufflers behind her, crawles with the best speed she can from
her shuddring Gallant: who seeing, by the light of the flakes of fire, and
multitude of Toarches without, the bald Scalpe of his Chopfalne Bedfellow: made
no less haste in flying away from that Hag, than she did to escape from the
fire. Nor could they without, cry faster Fire, Fire: than he within cried, A
Fiend, a Fiend. Nor had he power to get out of the Chamber, so surprised he
was with terror. Till all fear of fire being removed, and all occasion of
further dispersing it, prevented: The Constable of the Ward being desirous to
know what raised that cry; entered the room, where he found this
halfe-distracted Gentleman, running up and down the Chamber: and this decrepit
Chrone, shoulder-shut with a fall, lying all along behind a Trap-doore. But
when the Constable had heard every passage, upon the Gentleman's relation, who
uttered nothing without much distraction; to cool her fancy, and temper his
frency; he made bold to bestow them both in convenient Lodgings for such
unseasonable Tradings. Which egregious disgrace so reclaimed him, as loose love
for long time after was a stranger to him.

The like Story might be here related of a young Prodigal; who, after such
time as he had betaken himself to a Choice: One d^scended of a noble family;
and adorned with excellent Ornaments to accomplish that descent: growing weary
of the enjoyment of one beauty: and affecting nothing more than change: after
many modest Curtain. Lectures which his wife had from time to time delivered
unto him, to decline him from that loose course which threatened to him and his
posterity an approaching misery: fell to that debaucht and exposed riot both in
the Choice of his Company, and prostituting himself to all inordinacy: as it
begune to lessen the respect and affection of his wife unto him: holding equal
distance with him, as he to her.

It chanced one time, that this Night-walker traversing the Streets: and with
other Associates exposed to the like looseness, entering an House of
good-fellowship, where any light Commodity might be purchased for money: the
Protectresse of that brittle Society, to discover her Office and quality;
demanded of these Cavalieros if they would have a Withdrawing room and a
Mistress? By all means (said these Gallants) for what end came we hither?
And having bestowed them in several rooms; Every one was readily furnished
with his light Curtezan. But this prodigal young Gallant, on whom the Subject
of our Discourse is here Sceaned, had of all others most property in his: for
she was his own wife. What a strange kind of passion or Antipathy this
intrview begot, I leave to the strength of your imagination; who can to life
present two such Objects, as if you had been in presence of them. Long was it
ere the one could utter one word to the other: with glowing blushes sometimes
disclosing passion, sometimes shame. Affection was far from giving way to any
amorous encounter: and though Looks might speak, their Tongues had quite
forgot all Dialect. At last, after a long continued silence, in an abrupt
dis-joynted manner, her Husband addresseth himself thus unto her. Ha, Minion,
have I found you? Have your many Curtaine-Lectures edified you thus? Have I
found your way of trading? and are these the fruits of your teaching? well!
go on. We are now both so far entered the high beat-path of folly; as it
were madness for us to hope ever to wipe of our dispersed infamy. No Sir,
quoth she: To despair of recovery, were to conceive a distrust in Gods mercy.
But believe it, Sir, howsoever you esteem me, I am not what I seeeme to be.
These are no places I affect; nor trading I conceit. I am what I have been
ever; careful of the tender of mine honor. Now, the occasion of my coming
hither, was the knowledge I received, how this House was your familiar
Rendevou. A place which you mightily frequented: and where your fame stood
dangerously engaged. Your person I described to the mercenary Governesse of
this hateful family: that if I might be exposed to any, it should be to such
an One as I described: which upon hope of sharing with me, she promised. Now,
Sir, reflect upon your self, in me: how odious would these foul actions of
loosnesse appear in me? how contemptible would they make my person appear to
any modest eye? And are these such inexpiable crimes in the Weaker Sex: and
must they be esteemed such light Errors in you whose strength is greater? Is
modesty too effeminate a quality for man to retain? Is the Spirit of man to
be employed in that most, which detracts most from man? O, recollect your
self, Sir! and you will see, nothing can more transform you from your self:
nor blemish your inward beauty; nor enslave you to servile fancy; nor deprive
you of future glory, than affecting of these Consorts of sin and shame. The
only conduct that these will afford you, is to the Hospital, where they will
leave you. Be pleased to put off your self a little: and with a single eye to
observe their light Embraces: Proceed these, think you, from a resolved love?
Will they not for base lucre, show as much kindness to their next Suitor? And
can there be any true affection, where the Party makes no distinction? Nay,
tell me, would the faithfullest acquaintance you have amongst all these,
relieve you, if your Fortunes had left you? Or afford you one nights Lodging,
if want surprised you? Have they not got the art of professing what they least
intend: and sacrificing love where they have none to bestow? Return then to
your own house: and find that in a lawful love, which you shall never enjoy
in hateful lust.

This advice delivered by so deserving a Creature, and in so winning a manner,
might have wrought singular effects in any pliable or well-disposed Nature: but
so strongly steeled was his relentlesse heart unto these, as with a
disgraceful and uncivil kick he pusht her from him: vowing, withal, to
publish her shame to all the world, if she desisted not after that time to
solicit him, or personally to repair unto him.

So strongly had those loose and light Consorts seaz'd on his affections: as
stolen Waters seemed to him the sweetest. A conjugall joy, was a servile yoke,
which his misery afterward felt: being both by friends and fortune left. For
having offered the remainder of his decayed estate to that Common Sewer: he
dyed a miserable unpittied Beggar. Whence we may collect and confidently
avouch: That a great office is not so gainefull (though too many at this day in
their rising revenues to their injurious owners highly useful) as the
Principall-ship of a College of Curtezans: no Merchant in riches may compare
with these Merchants of Maidenheads, if their femall Inmates were not so
flitting.

This may appear in those useful Collections gatherd out of the History of
Italy: the truth and authority of which testimony, if we may credit; Rome
wants no jolly Dames, specially the street Iulia; which is more than half a
mile long, fair building on both sides; in manner inhabited with none other
but Curtezans; some worth ten, some worth twenty thousand Crowns, more or
less, as their reputation is: And many times you shall see a Curtezan ride
into the Country with ten or twelve horse waiting on her.

But to look back upon our discourse: As there is nothing more dangerous to
youth than selfe-opinion; so is it a cure of greatest difficulty, having taken
once seazure of a Woman. This that flowrishing State of Mantua was in great
hazard to have felt: when Isabella wife to Luchino Visconti, Lord of Millaine,
a very fair woman; feigned to her Husband, that she had made a solemn vow to
go in Pilgrimage to Venice: and under that color, obtaining license, she
took Mantua in her way; where she lodged in the house of the Gonzagi, ancient
friends unto her Husband. And after she had supped, sent secretly for Vgolino;
unto whom she declared, that for the fervent love she bare to him, she had
taken on her that journey: beseeching him, in lieu of her entire affection, to
keep her company unto Venice.

This Loves-intended-Pilgrimage came to the ear of Luchino; who provoked
therewith, laid siedge to Mantua; albeit, finding the friends of Vgolino
innocent of the fault: and that Guido his father did his best to correct him,
Luchino through intercession, raised the siege.

Fitting for our purpose is that Story which our modern age brought forth,
being in effect thus. There was a dainty beautiful young Lady, who,
selfe-opinionate of her own worth, after such time as she had been a space
married, fell in dis-esteeming of her Husband. He, having sought by all means
to regaine her good opinion, and to ingratiate himself in her respect, which
his own parts well enough deserved, howsoever he stood in her books
neglected: could by no means receive a pleasing countenance from her. Which
distaste wrought so strangely and strongly on his spirit; that could never
stoop to baseness: nor engage his noble thoughts to an ingenerous revenge:
(though many visible Motives might justly inrage him: and cause him transgress
the bounds of patience;) as he resolved to betake himself to Travail: that so
by distance of place he might in time banish from his thoughts the cause of
his discontent. But long had not he there remained, a banished man from his
Country; but desirous to see some other Nations, and so by improving his
knowledge, learn to forget his grief: then being embarked in a Merchants
ship, bound for such a Coast, they were so encountered by contrary winds, as it
happened that they arrived at a small Port-Towne, within his own native
Country, where his Lady at that time resided, by occasion of some Fortunes
lately to her descended. She, who, kept a liberal Table in the absence of her
Husband, dis-affecting nothing more than privacy: hearing how a Ship was there
lately arrived, and diverse Strangers of seeming quality entered the Haven:
Caused the Groom of her Chamber to address his way to the Port: where, if he
found any one of graceful presence or personage, to invite him withal
unsuspected privacy to her House. Her command is observed: and to second his
Ladies desire, he finds none more likely to tender her content, than her own
Husband.

But before such time as her Servant, sent forth upon this message, would
return his errand; he seriously eyed that Stranger: perusing his complexion
and favor, which discontent and his late absence had so estranged from his
knowledge, as at first he could not know his Master. But at last, becoming
assured that it was no other, and desirous to do him a pleasure, as became a
faithful servant to so respective a Master: yet without so much as discovering
himself, or acquainting him with any plot he had; he privately at first
returns his message from his Lady: but withal, desires him, as he tendered a
Ladies honor, to use all secrecy: that his Ladies freedom in her respect and
entertainment to him (if any such curtsy should appear) might be free from
all discovery. This the Gentleman promised, though wholly ignorant what was
intended. Meanetime, her honest Groom returns an account of what he had done:
acquainting his Lady, that a Gentleman of as proper parts, graceful presence
and hopeful performance, was that Evening landed* as ever his eyes beheld. And
withal, how he had taken occasion to deliver her message unto him: and with
what modesty it was by him accepted: and how to prevent suspicion, his desire
was with all privacy to be admitted by some back way unto her Chamber, and
without Lights (fearing above all things the discovery of his Master.) Easy
admittance is granted, a private way over a Moate, environing the house, is
prepared; nothing neglected, that might promise to this seeming stranger free
entertainment. Nor is her servant remiss in ought that may facilitate his
lawful affectionate desires. One thing only he conceives himself to have
omitted, which might conduce highly to the effecting of his plot. He perceives
a Diamond-ring upon his Masters finger, well known to his Lady by a private
Posy: This, he wishes him, upon his mounting the Stayres, and entering into her
Chamber, at his departure, to bestow upon her. For, said he, our Ladies in
these parts never receive any strange Servants, but they expect some token of
their Love should be left them, to renew their affection upon next
acquaintance: and give them more confidence of their secrecy.

This Lady longing for the embraces of so accomplished a Guest, as her Servants
relation had described him: with a countenance as clear, as the room was
close, had long before this prepared a welcome for him.

Albeit, upon his entry into her Chamber, he found no person there to
entertain him: Only a Lamp darkely burning; which showed him sundry choice
and dainty Succots, with other quaint Junkets: wherein, no doubt, Art had
shown her self such a Confectionesse, as nothing was there awancing which
might enliven Nature, or Italian-like, inflame vigor. Having taken a taste of
such Pla^es as best liked him: a Fair Canopy-Bed, with Curtains close drawn,
invited him to take a further taste of what better entertainment was prepared
for him. And having made himself unready, and drawing the Curtain a little
aside, he might perceive a Creature in the Bed, but seemingly covered with
clothes, as one unwilling to have her own eyes witnesses of her too much
freedom. Which the rather quickened in him an ardour of affection: so as like a
bold Stranger, he addressed himself to that forward and lawful encounter. The
Comic effect whereof, upon discovery of him by the ring, produced (to omit all
other circumstances of dalliance) a constant reconciliation betwixt them. All
which was brought to pass principally by her Gentleman Usher. But all of them
are not of one stamp, as you may perceive by this Character.

A GENTLEMAN USHER
IS his Ladies Creature; One who stands much upon his dimension and posture. A
tall man he is of his Legs, and no less it behooves him to be tall of his
Hands; being engaged to such desperate Encounters for the Wall. Pretty fool!
He carries his Ladies Misset most gracefully, which she loves so tenderly, as
she is ever putting him in mind of his charge: Prey thee Puny, do not squeze
my puppy. Continuance of employment makes him in time grow more familiar with
his Mistress; Which makes her chastise the Sauce-boxe with her glove; mean
time, the man knows her mind. He bestows so much time in the pointing of his
Stellettopeake, and poudring his Locks, as he leaves little or none for his
Orisons. He makes his whole Pilgrimage on earth a continued Peraembulation: and
having learned to pace from his youth up, he can never show himself
commendable but in that garb. He had an excellent shaped Leg, and a
sufficient Calfe, but every thing is worse for wearing. If to reserve more
state, the house be divided, and his great Lords rooms from his Ladies
severed; he is sure to be one that must lie on his Ladies side. Should he fall
of in his posture, through debility of nature; her Page must be preferred
before her Usher: and the reason is, a Cock-Sparrow is more active than a Bald
Bussard. He h'as a notable volubility of tongue; which he tips with such
formal protests, as he will engage him yours, before ever he know you. He
knows how to play the Secretary; and is oftimes put to it. Blush he will not,
lest it should unrivet a Secret in his message. He reserves no time for
reading, he bestows so much on walking; unless it be some wanton Pasquill, a
sociable account whereof he makes his Pastime. He h'as at all times ready
access to his Lady, which procures him better success in his Suite to her
Lord. He must make no love to the Maid, lest it beget a jealous suspect in the
Mistress. Affection cannot brook Corrivals. If his Lady grow sickish, and
desire to take fresh air, the Coach must he mount and jogge along with her;
where the Curtains must be drawn, lest the light discover her, or the air
distemper her Here they couch as silent as a Charnell-house, but that mansion
of frailty they never remember. The height of his employment principally
consists in ushering his Lady to the Church; where it is admirable, with what
punctual observance he conducts her to her Pew, kisseth her book, as if he
had sworn by it; and to prevent all rash intruders, he stands at the door,
like a pious-pretending Pimpe, as if he were to keep Centinall there for ever.
And this he conceits to be one of his most tedious taskes; because Subjects of
that nature do not altogether please his taste. It is rather his Element to be
versed in the perusal of Play-bils, which he presents to his Lady with great
devotion; and recommends some especial one to her view, graced by his own
judicious approbation. His choice she admits: to the Playhouse she resorts:
enters a prime box, and upon cloze of every Act, gracefully whispers in her
Vshers care; commends their action, and now and then at some amorous-moving
passage, plays at Cent-foot purposely to discover the pregnancy of her
conceit. At Night, if her Gentleman hear of a Court-Maske, Show, or some other
Presentment of State; Cupid be their Guide, winged is their Speed, eager is
their Spirit, swifter is their Pace; so they may enjoy the Object that may
please, and cloze their days prelude on Earth, with an Evening interlude of
Courtly mirth. But here, this Gentleman Usher must show himself rough, that he
may get his Lady better room. He must puff and look big, and swell like a
pageant of State. A soft spirit would bar them both of all entertainment. By
this his Lady h'as got a place, which was his Master-prize. The Presentment
done, he must Usher her home; which performed, a curious Knot of valiant
Skinkers must Usher him. The Cellar is their Center; where they must drink
deep their Ladies health to do them honor; though a lasting surfeit reave
them of all health for their labor. Here he inhabits till he take a nap in the
Cellar, or the napry Drawer become his Gentleman Usher to waft him to his
Chamber. Now for his Place, though his revenues be but small, his vailes are
great. His Ladies Purse is his portion, which supplies him so long as he keeps
Counsel. Her Countenance is his greatest purchase, so as, by the loss of her
favor, he dies a Beggar. The fortune of a younger Brother called him to this
place; since which time, he h'as ever walked most uprightly in his Vocation.
But if the Master be a Tradesman, the Foreman of his Shop supplies this
place, whereby he is made for ever. For if this reverend Trunke-hose turn up
his heels, whosoever stumble on his Grave, his Foreman Usher is in fair
possibility, to enjoy his grath. One of the greatest of his fears is Corns on
his toes: His Mistress cannot endure halting; nor the condition of his place
lumping. Vulcans polt-foot befits not an Usher, nor his smug-looke a smooth
retainer. His comfort is, as he begun with a small stock, so he cannot fall
from any great state. As his risings were light, his height low, his
continuance short, so his fall cannot be great. Truth is, if he live to be his
Masters survivor, (provided that he flowrish in strength and ability of nature)
he may prosper. But for most part, his Master out wears him, as he in his
time outwrought his Master. The Meermaid h'as left him, but not without
Consorts to attend him. Aches, Crampes, and Ring-bones are his incessant
Associats. And now he walks more upright than ever he did, for he cannot
stoop, should a Diamond lie in his way: He remembers the follies of his youth,
with -- O the reins of my back! He needs no other rack, this will make him
discover all. He is much troubled in his Sleep, and awakes with an ache, which
he utters in a shreeke: -- O my Mistress! It Is a wondrous thing to see how
this spruce youth is metamorphosed! How his wild-luxurious beard grows
unkemb'd, his lard-twilted doublet goes unbutton'd, and his Eve-dropping nose
flows like a common Sewer, and would bestow it self on any one that would
wipe it. Well; he cannot possibly stand long; for his very legs, those proper
Supporters of his youth, may now truly cry out with aged Milo; they cannot
bear a Calfe. It might be doubted, that death were better provided for him,
than he provided for it, did not poverty bid him embrace it, and a Miriad of
infirmities summon him to it. There is hope of him, for the flesh had left him,
before he left the World.


But we have insisted too long on these; let it be sufficient, that as there be
some of those who retain this name, properly ranked in our Character: So be
there those, whose better parts merit all approvement: But one Swallow makes no
Summer: the Object of pleasure many times makes shipwreck of honor: whereas
others, for whom we will ever reserve our deservingst approvedst thoughts, will
rather choose to leave their Coat in the hand of a loose Mistress, than lose
their honor. That Maxim, indeed, is too holding: if we be companions to
Ostriges, we shall savor of the Wilderness. Nor, is there any Rush without
Mire: yet a Myrtle will show it self a Myrtle amongst Nettles. And such we
have of these; whom neither occasion can corrupt; opportunity deprave; hope of
fortunes delude: nor any indirect way decline from professing themselves just
in discharging that place, wherein they stand necessarily interessed.

Now, in our diversion from these, we are to descend to Subjects of higher and
more serious importance: yet such, as reflect ever upon the femall Sex,
wherein pleasure and profit, which ever make up the best Music, shall hand in
hand accompany you; to second your expectance with such variety, as our
Discourse may amply recompense a retired hour with double interest to
Posterity.

SECTION II. Imitable Virtues in Women.
EXAMPLES.
VIRTUE is of such a rare quality, as she can neither be over-priz'd, nor
over-prais'd. Nor can this Princess, whose beauty is her own, without
borrowing; and whose honor is essential in her self, without deriving, show
more true worth than when she deignes to lodge in that bosom, which may
seemingly dignifie her least; though, indeed, by a modest improvement of what
it has received, it magnify her most. For to descend to the quality of every
Th^se four Cardinal Virtues are resembled by S Ambrose to those four Rivers
which issued from the four borders of the Garden of Paradise. In li^de
Paradiso. c. 3.
Cardinal Virtue: we shall find rare instances in each kind; and such as may
deserve imitation of the stronger Sex. And first of the first.

PRUDENCE.
SOME jeering Swetnams, PRUDENCE.
whose strength of pen and ability of brain only consist in inveying against
Women, will not stick, perhaps, to laugh, when they hear us speak of
Prudence, and attribute a great portion thereof to a Woman; and will say, Truly
we have heard of some women called by the Name of Prudence, but endued with
Prudence there is scarce one amongst them, no not One. A weak inve^tive! It is
sufficient, will these poor Critics say, for women to have so much wit as to
go out o'th'raine: and some of them not so wise, neither: but like that simple
She-cockney, imagine all the world to be a City, and every way they travel,
such a continued Pent-house, as they need neither Cloak nor Hood to shroud
them; so well h'as the worlds Archi-tect provided for them.

But how far these err, we shall quickly discover; by those memorable and
surviving monuments of Wisdom; which Women not only of former ages, but even
in our own times, have expressed, and to posterity recommended.

And first, to take our instances from a far; how much did the Prudence of
Tomyris bestead the Massagetes; when by her own policy and dexterity of wit,
she discomfitted the powerfullest and redoubtedst enemy that the World then
had? In what a deplorable estate was her Country; when nothing but fire and
fury assailed them without: want and famine within? When their strongest Forts
were quite demolished? Their fruitful fields wasted? And their people, by a
fruitless resistance of a victorious Foe, consumed? Nay, reflect upon the
miseries of this desolate and disconsolate Queen! how her son by an
improvident and remiss mannagement of his affairs, became a Prey to the
Enemy: his Army vanquished: himself slaughtered: all things disorderly
scattred and confounded! Yet, was her spirit still the same. She well
considered, if in that disaster her courage should quail, what could probably
follow but an irreparable Subversion? Though few or none then were left to
afford her remorce: neither was her Spirit so weak, nor Wisdom so small, but
they had power enough to study a revenge. Which she effected with such expedite
policy; as she not only freed her distressed Country of that threatening
calamity: but imbrued her hands in the blood of her Enemy, to revenge that
cruelty which he had not long before inflicted upon her own blood. Nor did this
Wisdom of hers only appear in the Government of her State: but in the
composing or moderating of her own affections. For whereas, her command had so
far enlarged it self, as many neighboring Prin^ces stood in fear of her:
doubting that their more confined dominions might be swallowed up by her
Greatness: Her Noble Spirit scorned to take advantage of others weakness: or
to soveraignize over those who never gave her occasion of offense. In a word,
as it was her care to preserve her own; so it was her Princely scorn to invade
another. This moderation she showed excellent testimonies of, in her death
as well as life: When she commanded, that this Inscription should be engraven
upon her Tomb: purposely to make a trial, as it were, whether the same height
of spirit succeeded to Princes of following times, which sometimes possessed
her royal breast. The Inscription was this: Who ere thou be that shall have
the fortune, amongst other rich booties of thy Conquest, to dig up this Stone
(meaning that Monument which covered her) know, that thou shall find an
infinite mass of treasure, fit to enrich thy princely honor, under it. But
what found that victorious Monarch under it? Nothing less than he expected. No
gold; but such a golden sentence as incomparably surpassed all Treasure that
could possibly be buried under it. For when he had carefully removed the
Stone, he found this engraven under the bottom of it: None but miserable
Covetous men would violate the Obsequies of the dead: or with profane hand
disturb the quietness of those that sleep in the dust.

Many other excellent virtues was this Noble Princess endued withal: which
for brevity sake I must omit: passing to others of her Sex, who not only
equalled, but far exceeded the most eminent Personages of their time in the
prudent Carriage and Dispose of their affairs.

This that stately Semiramis showed in the wise and peaceable government of the
Assyrian state after the decease of her Husband Ninus. What excellent Laws
were by her enacted? What Principles of State recorded? How free she kept her
kingdom from division? How safe her utmost Coasts from invasion? With what
policy, she sought to remove from her self and people, all opinion of
effeminacy: and produce in others a conceit of their magnanimity: when she
commanded all without distinction, to wear Tyars upon their heads: and to put
on them women's apparel; purposely to cover their effeminate parts: and by an
Amazonian imitation to beget a confidence of resolution in her Neighbors? How
careful she was to insinuate her self in the zeal and affection of her
Subjects? What a wise course she took to effect it? And in what short time did
she confirm it? Admired she was by those to whom only report of her Wisdom
had made known the greatness of such a Spirit: enriched with such
transcendent gifts: as it was not easy to determine whether the height of her
Spirit for atchieving, or strength of judgment for contriving more exceeded.
To sum up all in One; and all this in an imparalel'd One: had not one stain
blemished her beauty, she had been a Princess of incomparable majesty.

Nor did that glory of Amazon, the invincible Penthesilea fall short in those
accomplishments fit to manage a State: and to leave presidents both of Wisdom
and Courage for posterity to imitate. How well she rectified the disorders of
a distracted Empire: and in every Design expressed her self glorious to the
improvement of such a State, and the advancement of her honor! This might be
illustrated by one Instance: For at such time, as Neighboring Princes
dis-valued their Feminine Government: and every one labored to enlarge their
Dominions by the Subjection of that State: She not only preserved her own
from the injurious usurpation of foreign Powers: but won of those, who were
hopeful to make a prey of her. Nor was she only careful to establish the
foundation of an Empire for an age: but to recommend such useful Laws and
Constitutions as might settle a prosperous State to their Successors. Many
famous Battles did she fight: and those with the renownedst and most victorious
Princes that then reigned. Yet seldom or never was she discomfitted: But if at
any time it chanced that she should suffer, her moderation and discretion so
temperately bore the loss, and so diligently labored a redress; as the
second day made amends ever for the former repairing her losses both with
advantage and honor. All which I refer to those Stories, which with most
probability and authority discourse of her.

What wisdom that excellent Sophonisba manifested to the world, in the
discreet carriage of her affairs: if it were needful here to relate, we might
apply this Subject, in the instancing of her virtues. Who so nobly demeaned her
self in the daringst affronts of fortune: as never more true resolution or
constancy of spirit appeared in the most virile and heroicke tempers that ever
the world became possessor of.

Extremes could not amate her: nor distractions of State so divide her from her
self: as, when her advice was sought, she could show the least perplexity in
her well digested thoughts. Her own safety was never so dear to her, as the
Security of the State public. And when any of those ancient Counselors or
Conscript-Fathers, who were to sit at the Stern; seemed troubled: or showed
the least irresolution, she would usually interpose her self: and chide their
weakness in this manner. Is it fit, grave Fathers, that your advice should be
to seek, when the State is ready to sink? Will dejected spirits cure our
distempers? Must Fathers turn Children, and put finger in the eye, when
imminency of peril menaceth the States ruin? Has your Country made choice
of you, to embathe her wounds only in tears, and to labor no redress to her
griefs? O, let not wisdom only appear in your habits, but disposition of
your hearts! A passionate tear is but a weak Countermure to repel the Engine
of a Foe. Let it be our Task, who are women, to intercede by Prayers and
Tears: yours, to remove danger with Courage and Advice. We are neither so
abandoned of solace in hope, as to lie down and dye: as if our present
condition had estranged us from all hope of recovery. Be what you seem, or we
must seem more than we be. Present danger requires dispatch: let not
opportunity lose her self by delay.

Next her, I might here instance the brave Berenice, a woman of incomparable
beauty; alacrity of Spirit; strength and maturity of judgment. Next her the
Sabean Queen, that wise Nicaula: a Princess so highly taken with the fame of
Salomons wisdom: as she left her own Country to be one of his Auditory:
leaving him with this attestation of him: I believed not the words, until I
came, and mine eyes had seen it: and behold, the half was not told me; thy
wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame which I heard. Nor could so diligent
a pursuer of Wisdom, be in her self ignorant of so inestimable a blessing.
Never did State enjoy more freedom; nor abound with more wealth; nor partake
so continued a peace; than Sheba's State enjoyed. Nor could ought less be
expected, where such a Lover of Wisdom reigned. For if Plutarch commend Plato
so highly for coming forth of Asia into Cilicia, for no other cause, but only
to see his dear friend Phocion: what commendations might this noble Princess
seem to deserve, who, though a Woman, left her own Nation to hear the
Wisdom of Solomon? Should we, next these, take a more exact Survey of the
divine Prudence of royal Esther; whose discreet behavior purchased Gods
people so happy a delivery, even in their imminentst danger? Or of that wise
Abigall, whose discretion declined David's fury from her churlish Nabal? We
would so highly admire such precious Mirrors, for their piety, policy and
discretion, as we should account them wisest and deservingst, who drew nearest
them in imitation.

Neither shall we need to travel so far for instances: but that those
flowers are ever esteemed best of, that are brought from foreign borders: For
Princes we have here enjoyed of our own; whose names retain in all places of
Christendom a memorable testimony for Wisdom.

Witness the living fame of our renowned Eliza, who made her kingdom an
Elysium. Being of a Majesticke presence; judicious advice; constant resolve;
terrible to her foe; affable to her friend; a gracious preserver of peace; a
courageous advancer of War for honorable ends. Of a rare memory; a rich
fancy; for dispatch happy: and in present dangers fullest of noble spirit and
alacrity.

And these shall serve for Instances in the first.

JUSTICE.
JUSTICE.
THIS divine virtue, which is an Abstract of all the rest, that noble Thracian
Lady well expressed; when, unurged, she professed: That if she were conscious
to her self of any Crime deserving death: her own actions should not need to
receive any other sentence than her own. So impartial a Judge would she
demean her self in her own particular; as not the severest Court should
pronounce upon her an heavier Censure.

When that just Alban Lady heard what Demadis saying was, that Draco's Laws
were written with blood, and not with ink: Far be such Rubricks, quoth she,
from our Calendar: Let mercy and truth kiss each other. That royal Empress
showed her self a Patroness of Justice: when on a time the Emperor her
husband had presented to him the Names of sundry Delinquents; to receive from
him his pleasure how they should be disposed of: which, as one minding more a
game at Tables, than pronouncing judgment on those offenders, he commanded
without any further deliberation, that they should suffer death. O, quoth that
worthy Empress, let not my Lord be so forward in pronouncing judgment upon
an untryde delinquent? the life of a man is to be valued above a game at dice.

Just was that Dame toward her own; when hearing, how her daughter had
violated that Order whereto she was Vestally devoted, she came before the
Senate, and beseeched them for Justice: who, when they had understood the
quality of the Offense, and how the offender was her own Daughter: They made
answer; you need little doubt of Justice, in a Crime of such a nature: yet
might this personal offense have well deserved a Stranger rather than a Mother
to be an Accuser. O, answered she, but Nature must forget her self, when
unnatural Children forget God. She was my daughter so long as she preserved
her honor: my part is now quite lost in her: Be it your Justice to vindicate
the Wrong which my blood has received from her. Else shall I conclude, that
your unjust mercy is to me a cruelty, which Vesta will revenge to redress her
injury.

Excellent was that resolution of those Almaine Sisters, who professed in a
public Place of Judicature; That they would rather suffer the utmost
extremes of want and misery, than share in the Fortune of any other unjustly.

The like example might we her produce of a noble Gentlewoman in our own
Coast: who by the prodigal and dissolute Course of her Husband, falling into
great poverty: was so far from inclining to any thought of Baseness; as when
her powerful friends, commiserating her present Condition, wished her to
enquire of something that might raise her Fortunes, and they would use means
for procuring it: O, quoth she, I know well how to shape my mind unto my
Fortune; but I hope my thoughts shall never know how to scrue themselves into
an others possession.

What shall it benefit me, said that noble Matron, to enjoy what belongs unto
another* and betray my Fame, which I should prefer before all other? I cannot
live, and be unjust: for life consists not in being, breathing, or performing
any outward action: but in a pure and undefiled Soul, raising her thoughts to
an higher Motion.

When the Sabines had suffered that infinite injury, in being deprived of the
beauty of their virgins: though they might (probably) have taken fit
opportunity for revenge: O, said those ancient Matrons, let us first see how
these Strangers use our Daughters! if they demean themselves lovingly unto
them, it were unjust for us to take revenge of their Husbands for the Love they
bear to their Wives: Honest Love should be rewarded; dishonest revenged.

In that Election of Consuls, when the virtuous Aurelia understood that her
Husband sought indirectly for voices; O, said she, This argues in you a
diffidence of your own worth: desist then from standing for such an honor,
which your personal actions can not merit, nor these mercenary votes and
voices obtain, without detracting from another.

Justice, when perverted, may be compared to the Celedonie stone, which
retains her virtue no longer than it is rubbed with gold: but when employed
to the preserservation of the State, and dispensation of what is just to every
one, being neither induced by amity, incensed by enmity, nor corrupted with
hope of commodity: this divine virtue may be compared to the Selenite stone; a
precious gemme found in Arabia, which is of this nature and property, that when
the Moon increases, it likewise increases in beauty: but when the Moon
decreaseth, it lesseneth of her splendour and glory. It retains likewise
another quality; and it is this: Being tied to any Tree, it makes it fruitful:
The application will appear both proper and useful. When Changes in the State
are most frequent; when Command seems to soveraignize most on these smaller
and inferior Lights: then is she most constant: in her beauty most
resplendent. Neither can Might over-sway her: nor a despicable Plaintiff
dis-relish her. She ever shows most Constant; when times seem most wavering
and fluctuant. Nor is any branch so seere; any member so fruitless, in the
whole body of the State; which her application cannot make fruitful: so
sovereign is she in her self, so commodious unto others.

Happy, will some say, were those days wherein Basil the Emperor of
Constantinople lived; that whenever he came to his Judgment Seat, found
neither Party to accuse, nor Defendant to answer. Here needed no Conscript
Fathers to sit upon trial of Causes: no fear of Corruption, because that
Halcyon peace admitted no occasion: What will thou give me, was no
Interrogatory in those days. And yet me thinks that noble Princess, in the
moulding of Justice, and fair carriage of all business; made her State no
less happy; who decreed: That if any plaintiff exhibited a Bill against any
person, and could not prove the justness of his Action; he should pay treble
costs to the Defendant: and besides his pecuniary Mulet, receive such corporal
punishment as the quality of the complaint deserved. This made commencements of
Suites as rare as the former; by reducing the State to such an exact Order; as
neighboring Princes had her in admiration: taking Presidents from her of
State-Government, to second her Rules in a serious imitation.

Thus have you heard how this Virtue, which our Philosophers have resembled to
the Evening Star for beauty; has been so carefully observed, and constantly
preserved by women: as they addressed their endeavors to no Object more
seriously, than how they might improve her glory. Let us now then see what they
did in honor of Temperance; a Virtue which seasoneth and relisheth the rest
with her presence.

TEMPERANCE.
TEMPERANCE.
EXTREMES are those Shelves on which Virtue suffers. Livia dispatched her
husband, because she loved too little; Lucilia, hers, because she loved too
much. But that noble Lady observed a fair and equal temper betwixt both
these: when she proposed this Conjugall Rule unto her self: As I made a
Contract with mine heart not to change, where I made my choice: so I resolve to
retain that command over my affections; as neither my too much loving him,
shall feed in me jealousy: nor my too much coolness beget in him a conceit
of my inconstancy. This Virtue fixes mainely upon three Objects; the
Irascible, when Passion labors to soveraignize over Reason. The Concupiscible,
when outward Motives produce in those divine Organs of the soul, some discord
or distraction. The Intelligible, when the light of the understanding becomes
darkened, by some light Object of Vanity interposed. For as the Eclypse of the
Sun is occasioned by the interposition of the Moon; So is the Light of the
Soul Eclypsed (in resemblance of the Moon) by the interposition of the Earth.

For as the Moon does never Eclypse but when she is at the Full: so the Mind
is never so much obscured, as it is with the superfluity of riches. And again,
as the Moon is the furthest off from the Sun which gives it light, when it
is at the Full: So a Man when he is fullest of Riches, is furthest off from
that equity and justice, which ought to give him light, in all his proceedings.

For the first; The Saying of Archytas is much commended (nor deserves it less
than to be highly approved) who being angry with one of his Hindes, said: O how
would I have beaten thee, had I not been angry with thee!

The like commendations deserves that well composed temper of that Sage Chilo;
who observing his Brother to be discontented, for being rejected in standing
for Ephorus, and himself elected: wished his Brother not to take his repulse
impatiently: for I must tell you, said he, that you were altogether unfit for
the place: seeing, your high-unbounded Spirit cannot bea^e the height or burden
of an injury, but I can.

Nor was that Noble Ladies temper to be less admired; who professed in a place
where her innocence had borne more than humane patience could well suffer: I
have learned, quoth she, how to suffer, but never to suffer my self to give
way to anger.

Secondly, for the Concupiscible part; that Lady, though an Ethnic; had been
fruitfully Schooled in Morality, by confining her desires to bounds of such
equality; who with much confidence affirmed: I have made a constant League with
mine eyes, never to fix on that Object, with desire, which I may not with
Lawfulness enjoy.

Armenia, a noble Lady, being bidden amongst other eminent personages, to King
Cyrus Wedding, went thither with her husband. At night when they were returned
home, her husband asked her, how she liked the Bridegroom; whether she
thought him to be a fair and beautiful Prince or no? Truth, says she, I know
not: for all the while I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon
thy self.

So well had she limited her affections; as she would not suffer her eyes to
wander: nor to be deluded with the glances of an unlawful Lover. For eyes are
those Tarpeja's, or privy Conspirators, which lay the Fortress of the Soul
most open to advantage. Nor would the Heart give way to an unjust Love, if a
leering eye threw not out first a Lure. For this end h'as that wise Creator
made it a Sense of Sorrowing, because it is a Sense of Sinning. That a Conduit
of tears, might better rinse that kennell from whence the occasion sprung.

Nor have these Feminine Wonders expressed less command over their desires in
contempt of honor (an attractive bait to that Sex) in their dis-esteeme of
riches, or pomp in apparel; dangerous Motives to unsettled Souls. Where you
shall find one so respect less of Honor; as being offered her, she finds
this answer to her amorous besieger: I have ever preferred the honor, which a
precious fame bestows on me, before that painted adulterate honor which any
wanton favorite of the time can purchase me.

Here shall you find an other so indifferent for Fortunes; as her attestation
is this: No poverty can amate me, so I enjoy my self: They cannot but have
sufficient, who are sufficient to themselves: Whatsoever is without us, should
not transport us too much by enjoying: Nor deject us too much in the losing: No
true State, but the inward Store.

What excellent Rules were these to mould the mind to every condition,
according to that philosophical Maxim: Learn in prosperity to be silent, and
not transported; in adversity to be patient, and not dejected; in neither to be
discontented; in both, discreetly and philosophically affected.

Here shall you likewise find an other so humbly minded; for outward Habit so
indifferent: as she professes; No Habit can beseem beauty, but what suites
with decency. This might be instanced in those Virtuous Votaresses, who were so
little taken with any outward wear: as they hated nothing more than such light
phantastik attyres, which lay baits for others eyes. Modesty they only
affected both in behavior and dress: which begot them more honor, though
less opinion in the eye of lightness.

That Habit, said the Roman Citizen to his
Wife, does well become thee:
Trust me, quoth she, I did not hold it so,
till I heard it from thee.
But, whereas this Subject of Temperance, whereof we now treat, is most
expressed in abstaining from luscious fare, precious liquors, amber-broaths;
with other foments of sensual delight, we shall find what rare and
incredible austerity many noble Dames used in their practice of that restraint.
Where some became so abstemious in that kind, as they observed Lessius Diet: in
proportioning themselves such a weight or measure, as might sparingly suffice
but never surcharge Nature.

Far short of this Temperature came, indeed, the Wife of Domenico ^ylvio;
whom our Italians report to have been so delicate a Woman, that she would have
dew gathered, and in precious vialls conserved, to imbath her self withal,
with other rich perfumes and choice confections: and yet see the end of all
these delicacies! e're she dyed, her flesh did rotte, that no creature could
abide her: so much had loose effeminacy corrupted Nature.

For this one, this exemplary enormious One, I could instance many of her Sex,
whose noble minds were so far aliened from such delicacy, as they would
hardly suffer themselves to be invited to any Public Feast, least they might
occasion others censure by their abstinence. Others in a retired privacy, (too
monastic a course for our Gentry, whose education has begot in them more
desire of liberty) have embraced reclusive life's; contenting themselves with
such homely provision as that remote Place or Desert could afford them, where
they had taken their Plantation.

The Romans, indeed, even at this day* make Recluses of their own Houses; and
whether out of jealousy or some other innate quality, will not suffer their
Wifes to go abroad, either to Church or any place else, and some of them
scarcely to look out at a Lattice Window; whence that Proverb came up: In
Roma vale piu la Putana,
Che la moglie Romana:
In Rome the Harlot has a better life,
Than she that is an honest Romans wife.
Nor was ancient Rome less cautious of preserving the modesty of her Women: by
preventing the use of that which most indangers Temperance; whence came up that
Custom, for kinsmen to kiss their kinswomen, to know whether they had drunk
wine or no; and if they had, to be punished by death, or banished into some
Island. Nor was there any respect or restriction, if we may credit the
testimony of Plutarch; who says, that if the Matrons had any necessity to
drink wine, either because they were sick or weak, the Senate was to give
them license, neither were they permitted within Rome to have that liberty; but
out of the City.

This restraint those Noble temperate Ladies little needed, who held it an high
derogation to their honor, to consort with any wine-bibber: or such, whose
liberty had made them subject to any such ingenerous distemper. Excellent to
this purpose was her saying: She knows not the true estimate of her honor,
who dare expose it to danger. Nor was her Resolution less useful, though,
perhaps, too general; who hearing her Waiting-Maid to be distempered with
liquor: Waiting woman, quoth she, you may call her; Maid you cannot, being
subject to such distemper.

In a word, hear what those brave Roman Ladies held of Temperance: We had
rather, said they, suffer the extremest assaults or braves of Fortune, than
lose the least grain of Patience by giving way to Passion. A deserving
Memorial! which carefully retained, may regulate in us those straying
affections which usually distract the mind; enfeeble the spirit; and make the
noblest Creature by this ignoble servitude, more savage than any other.

Thirdly, for the Intelligible part; what quickness and pregnancy of conceit
has appeared in women, may be collected by their ready Answers; and upon more
deliberation, their weight of reasons: whereof I shall here in this place
speak but little: having occasion to treat more amply of this Subject, in
that Section wherein I am to speak of their Witty Aphorisms, which long
preceding times have recommended to Posterity. Where you shall find such a
complete Structure both for height of wit and depth of understanding; that as
Cicero sometimes said of Galba's leaden and lumpish Body: His wit had an ill
lodging. So without offense might it be spoken of those in respect of the
weakness of their Sex: They had rich stuff for such weak houses. So
preciously were they stored; so richly beautified; so completely furnished with
all intellectual graces, as shall appear in his due place. And so we will
descend to the last of our Cardinal Virtues: Even that which may seem most
estranged from their Nature; yet through the strength and vigor of their
spirit, enlivened in the highest measure.

FORTITUDE.
SOME will merrily say, FORTITUDE
We like not well that you should commend Fortitude in a Woman. We have
Zantippe's enough in the World, who can break the pate of a Philosopher,
without ever studying for a Plaster. Their strength and spirit should consist
in Tongue: for them to be provided of any other armor, was never so much as
intended by Nature.

It is true; Nor is it our purpose to present them here playing their Prizes:
but to express their resolutions in time of danger, wherein they came ever off
with their Countries safety and their own honor.

Though my Sex proclaim me weak, said that Noble Matron, I have a spirit in
me can supply that want. Yet should the rigidst Censor be more charitably
persuaded, than to think that she would employ this noble spirit of hers in
trying mastery with him to whom she was to acknowledge a superiority.

Epicharia, that famous Libertine of Rome, though she complied well enough with
her Husband; expressing that obedience, which became a loyal Wife, patient in
suffering; meek in remitting; kind and loving in all offices of affection;
yet made privy to a Conspiracy against Nero (that prodigy of Princes) would not
disclose the Plotters thereof, though tormented with cruel punishments. She
chused rather to suffer the exquisitest torments that could be invented by the
hand of Cruelty, than to discover them who labored to suppress his tyranny.

Leaena, though a Prostitute, was endued with a brave spirit, who conspiring
with Armodius and Aristogiton, her familiar acquaintants, against the Tyrant
Hippeas, stood not aghast at the death of her Friends (though torn with
extremest torments) but holding it baseness to reveal the Accomplices, bitte
in sunder her own tongue, and spit it out in the Tyrants face.

But you will say, these were too fierce and furious spirits to be enclosed in
effeminate Caskes; we will therefore give you a touch of such, whose moderate
and well-tempered dispositions expressed their worth, even in a princely command
of their desires in outward things: scorning to lament for losing what they
could no longer possess: yea, so little joy conceived these on Earth, as they
equally rejoiced in forgoing or enjoying whatsoever they possessed on Earth.

It was a fair and imitable resolution of that well-affected Gentlewoman: The
extremity of Fortune I shall little fear, seeing the worst she can do me,
cannot make me base.

Nay, even in the deprivall of those blessings which more nearely concern
them; and such as should touch Nature even in her bowels: have some of them
shown such constancy of spirit, as they were ready to minister advice and
comfort to those, who in respect of their Sex and Place whereto they were
called, might more properly have seemed to perform that office to them. This
might be illustrated by a domestic instance of our own. A person of high
quality and rank, no less than a Counselor of State, hearing the report of
the death of his Son, fell into such a passionate overflow of sorrowing, as
he would scarce admit any one for the present to have access unto him, or to
minister any arguments of comfort to him: This his discreet Lady well
observing, thought it best to supply that Office her self, which others had so
fruitlesly labored to put in practice: So as one day, she begun thus to
expostulate the grounds of his sorrowing in this manner. Good Lord, Sir, has
your wisdom so much forgot it self, as not to reserve one minute for
recollecting your dispersed thoughts? Are all these tears for the loss of a
Child? Me thinks, my portion should be as great in that loss, or else I fall
off from the proportion of a motherly love. But I conceive, Sir, and this no
doubt, your Wisdom will see into; That as we first received him, so we have
but rendered him back to him from whom we had him. Again, Sir, should you but
consider how ill these tears would beseem you, if the State should look on
you: you would soon take truce with your eyes, and teach them not to darken
that Light, which should employ it self in direction of the State. Who knows,
but that our child's death now in his prime, prevented him from seeing and
suffering many miseries in his time? The sewer his years, the fewer his
tears. Let us then with patience recommend him to him who first gave us him,
and now has taken him: lest through impatience we offend his Majesty; who if
he chastise us, it is but justice: and if he spare us, it is his mercy.

But this Fortitude, which we here treat of, consists most, in respect of the
Subject we now handle, in a Constancy of reteyning what is privately committed
to them; next, in opposing whatsoever relisheth most with their affections.
Truth is, though some too Satyrically compared a Woman to Danaus tubbe; fitting
her with no better Emblem; but as that Tubbe could hold no water, no more
could she retain long undiscovered any secret or counsel committed to her:
yet may some of them, the worse sort I mean, be properly compared to Sieves,
who let go the best, but keep the worst: as the better sort may be resembled
to Fanns, which let go the worst, and keep the best.

There are many chattering Iayes, that have no feathers: who cannot hear of a
Storm, but they must make the whole Forest known to it. It is said of Geese
(Birds, whose very appellations design their simplicity) that when at change
of seasons, they pass from Cilicia over the Mountain Taurus, which abounds
with Eagles: fearing their own Secrecy, they carry Stones in their bills, for
fear their cry should discover them to their Enemies. Reason, whose portion is
our beauty, and whose gift our Makers bounty, should teach us that, which
Nature has instructed them; lest by declining from the rule of Reason, we
become inferior to them who never had the use of Reason. For there is nothing
which so highly disparageth a reasonable Creature, as by too prodigal a
discovery of himself, to lay himself open to the trust of an other. So as, it
may be positively averred; There is nothing that betrayeth a man so much to
ruin as his own credulity. Had that strongest of men seasonably foreseen
this, he had never been betrayed by a Dalilah. Yet have I heard some, and
those cautious enough in other affairs, lay down this for a Conclusion: That
they would never entrust them with their bodies, to whom they durst not
communicate their Counsels. Which can hardly be without danger: but being an
Error of Love, and no Love of Error, deserves a milder Censure. An alluring
she-Gossip is a perilous Jngle to siftout a Secret: and a rare constant Spirit
has she, who amidst freedom of mirth, reteines a power in her self to
conceal it. Nor (indeed) can such merit ought less than sharp reproof, who
with the abuse of a minutes liberty, to engage a strange ear to their
attention, will expose the Secrets of so dear and near a Consort to Censure
and Detraction.

Dionysius gave straight commandment, the head of Bryas, one of the Gentlemen
of his privy Chamber, should be cut off, for telling Plato, who had demanded
of him, what the Tyrant did, That he had stripped himself by reason of the
heat, and was painting in a Table: So tender were Princes of their actions,
even in affairs of indifferency: for had Dionysius been never worse employed,
his reign had never incurred the title of Tyranny.

Husbands, who are Princes in their own Families, are to be strict Censors of
Such, who are apt to discover what they hear: and to enlarge it too, in hope
to gain more atttention from an itching ear. Nor, in very deed, do such men
deserve less rebuke for their facility, who so freely impart themselves to
those, be they never so near them, nor seemingly tender over them, who have
no ability to conceal what in Counsel is committed to them. As we use then to
try Vessels by their sounds, so were it good for us to try before we trust.
For if She, whom you have made choice of, have such a retentive faculty, as
she holds not her own reputation at an higher estimate, than your secrecy: As
she is your Bosome-friend, so let her be your Secretary. For if that which you
impart to her, tend to your comfort; her Communion will augment it. No single
Instrument be it never so singular, can render the ear so full Music, as a
Consort. Again; is it any occasion of discontent? Her sweet society will allay
it; by cheering it, if she cannot cure it. Many such excellent Creatures shall
we find in the world; who affect nothing more than to share in their Husbands
misfortunes. To be most of all his, when he is least his own; Bearing the
countenance of his Fortunes in their face.

And these be they, who well deserve to be retained in Counsel by their
Husbands: because they prefer his Comfort before their own, or equally as
their own: and value his Secrecy as their own Safety.

As for others, who are too open-hearted, to have any thing in Counsel to them
imparted: Let their Husbands imitate that discreet Grecian of former times, who
being told that his breath did smell, answered; It was by reason of the many
Secrets, which had a long while lain rotting and putrefying within him. And
may they ever rot in them, rather than communicate them to such dead flies, who
will corrupt whole pots of the preciousest Ointments. Let their Bosoms (those
divine Recluses of Secrets) be like the Lions Den in the Apologue; toward
the mouth whereof the prints and prickings of sundry sorts of Beasts might
easily be discerned, but from thence none at all.

Let them always, even in their Curtaine-conference, talk with Harpocrates,
at the Sign of the finger on the Mouth: and learn of Anacharsis that the
Tongue has need of a more strong restraint than Nature. And that there is no
greater argument of true Fortitude than to conceal from others what were
fitting to be concealed; and with a religious piety to retain, whatsoever is
by others in secrecy recommended.

Let them not be so curious with them of Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 King.
20.13.
in the search of other men's Secrets; nor yet too careless with Hezekiah, in
the discovering of their own. Morality gives them a prohibition for the One,
and a Precept for the Other: Seek not to others Councels to be known;
But known, conceal them as they were thine own.


Now, for the other particular, consisting mainly in a strong and resolute
Opposing whatsoever relisheth most with their affections: There is no point of
Magnanimity of higher degree or nobler quality than this.

Milo showed not half so much strength in bearing a Bull; as Stilpho did in
bearing what most opposed his Will.

That Wife of Bath, upon whose Tale, at the instancy of some peculiar Friends,
we have by way of Comment, lately annexed some Illustrations, could tell you
well enough, what would please a Woman best. Now, when that Will or sovereignty
of Command receives her Countermand from Reason: so as the Course becomes
diverted, by declining from what the Party most affected: what a brave ^onquest
is this; and how well do the Professors thereof deserve a virtuous esteem?

She well expressed this in her self, who though naturally jealous, and
(perchance) had sufficient Cause given her to be so, being in Company where
she heard at large of those joviall pranks of her Husband, was so far from
inclining to passion, or falling into any humor that might give them occasion
of suspecting her jealousy; answered: Content your selves, I do not hold my
self so unworthy of his love, as to have the least Conceit that he will be
kind with any other.

It were no less rare to observe some of our women; who stand most affected to
curious Apparel; and to comply with the Fashions of the Age; to decline wholly
from that humor; by affecting plainness: and with an entire distaste to all
garish vanity, to entertain no other habit than what might best suit with the
modesty of their sex.

Nor would I have this to proceed from sullenness: as I have sometimes noted
in a phantasticke Lady in this Kingdom: who in her private Chamber or Garden
would accommodate her self like a complete Gallant: but if any Neighboring
Gentlewoman came to visit her, she would put on her meanest Apparel, saying;
Such stuff was good enough for such course Guests. No; such Malevolee's are
made to grind and grate the hearts of their Husbands: by affecting nothing
more than to cross them most, whom they are bound to oppose least.

Those, whom we here propose for Patterns to imitate; have set their rest on
this resolution: Never to give way to their own Wills: but if they desire
liberty; to curb those straying desires with a convenient restraint:
remembering, how Dinah by gadding lost her honor.

If Luscious Fare; to moderate them by an imposed abstinence: holding
Cleopatra's banketting an introduction to her wantoning. If entertaining of
amorous servants; to shut their doors from any such admittance; knowing how
that Vestall Virgin impeached her fame by too freely admitting and conversing
with Crassus.

Now, this noble resistance is best expressed, where opportunity is most
frequent, and the strength or vigor of nature most predominant. It was an
ample addition to Penelope's honor, to have an Husband so far distanced from
her; to be encountered with such confluence of Suitors; to live in the prime of
her youth divided from her Mate, and to preserve her fame so unblemished: as
those who were most confident of her affection, could never so much as justly
boast of any favor received from her, the giving or receiving whereof might
trench upon her honor.

Some women, and those of noblest rank, have we here had; who not only
declared to the world their true fortitude and virtuous resolution in the life's
of their Husbands; who in martial affairs and other public services, lived
long time divided from them: but even after death, retained such constant
Memorials of them: that though they wanted their Persons, they kept their
Portratures ever near them. Nor held they this sufficient, unless by a
perpetual Widdowhood they had preserved their Names in them. Their rooms bore
the habit of mourning; Funeral Lamps were ever burning; No musical strain to
delight the Ear; No object of state to surprise the Eye. True Sorrow had there
her Mansion: nor could they affect any other discourse than what to their
Husbands actions held most relation. Each of these with good Cornelia could
play the Mourner, and breath out their passions in this manner: Pompey's my
Husband whereso'ere he be,
None in Cornelia h'as a share but he.


But to instance this resistance of Will in One for all. That discreet young
Gentlewoman deserved so well in this point, as we cannot without injury to so
meriting a Subject, omit her. One, for descent ranked with the best: of
excellent natural parts, and those enriched with such gifs of Grace, as very
few equaled her, none surpassed her.

This Gentlewoman, having received singular breeding, and all liberty she
could possibly desire: Falling one day into a serious Consideration of her own
state; debated the matter with her self in this manner. I have thus long
lived, and enjoyed what liberty or pleasure I desired. Young I am in years:
yet though my years be few, many are mine hours of fruitless expense.
Delicacy I affected, and none ever was more cockered. Public places of
meeting I frequented; and from these have I ever returned more depraved. How
tedious was an hour employed in devotion? How short, bestowed in any light
recreation? How many Mornings have I sacrificed to my Glass? With what winning
looks have I opened my windows; while the Windows of mine own body let in
sin? With what Care were my breasts laid out, to take a wandering eye? How
pleasantly to my light ear sounded any amorous discourse? What a Wardroabe of
vanities had I in store to catch a vain Passenger? How happy were I, if I
could but find one day that might justify her plea for that days employment?
Was it not mine highest ambition to be impaled with multitude of Suitors? Was
it not my glory to triumph in their repulse: and to supply their decrease with
an admittance of fresh Servants? Have I not expressed most scorn where I
received most love? Have I not solaced my self with their sighs: and highly
prided my self in putting on a Countenance of disdain? Was there any dress
so fantastic, which did not quickly take me? Did any habit less please me,
than what seemed most graceful in the eye of modesty?

What rests then, but that thou redeem the time? Put off that Habit of
Lighnesse which thou have so long affected: address thy thoughts to win
nobler Suitors than thou have hitherto desired. Thou art but yet in thy Prime;
defer not one hour longer from rescuing thine honor. Blush at those
sensual delights which have so long taken possession of thee. Let it be thy
greatest scorn to blemish thy Souls glory, with making an Idol of a light
portion of earthly beauty. And though thy youth will hardly admit so strange an
over-ture: let it be thy Task to prevent occasion, and to subject Sense to the
command of Reason. The more difficulty which attends the Task, the more
glorious shall be thy victory. One minute is too long, to adjourne such a
purpose: Bid adieu then to thy darling pleasure; and that for ever: so may
thou enjoy those will last for ever.

Nor was this Noble-femal Convert slower in performing than she was in
promising. For desiring a small portion from her Friends, to support her with a
Competency of livelihood: with a constant resolution she bad farewell to those
mis-spending pleasures which she formerly so tenderly loved. embracing a
private retired life, where she bestowed many precious hours in Devotion to
her own Comfort and others direction. A rare President in this Age, for one in
the very flower of her age, to change the condition of light love, with the
profession of a strict life.

Thus have we made appear unto you what excellent Professors, and Practisers
Women have been in all these imitable Virtues, with store of choice Examples
in each of them. From these we are to descend to their Moderation of Passion,
wherein, as in all the rest, we intend to be as brief as may hold with the
quality of the Subject whereof we are to entreat.

SECTION III. Their Moderation of Passion.
TO vindicate their weak Sex from what they are most taxed: and clear them
in the testimony of Opinion of that wherein they stand most censured, might
seem to some supercilious Eye a task of maine difficulty: And yet such a
Province are we to enter, and to accomplish (if our hopes fail us not) to
their demeriting honor. Nor do we assume this Task, to ingratiate our self
with that Sex: For our decline from youth has wained our affections from all
such Objects: but to bestow upon such as deserved well of Opinion, their just
character, reward and guerdon.

It is our common English proverb, The Worm will turn again: and weak
women, who have no other armor to shield them, no other refuge to shroud them
but a few hasty words, or passionate tears, must needs plead their innocence,
when injuries shall assail them, with such supplies as Nature has afforded
them. Yet even in this defensive provision, I shall instance some so rarely
moderate; as discretion enjoined them silence in the one, and resolution a
masculine patience in the other.

At that unexemplary disaster at Cannae, when the utter ruin and overthrow of
the Romans rung in every place (not to mention the well-composed temper and
resolution of the men themselves) with what moderation of p^ssion did those
Roman Dames bear themselves? Far were they from shedding effeminate tears,
or exclaming against Destiny, or demeaning themselves in any thing unworthily.
No, their spirits were inflamed to better and higher designs. Let not there
Occurrents amate you, said they to so many as survived that slaughter; if you
want of your own Sex to supply you; behold your second-selfes ready to dye
with you. Perish you cannot without us, you may with us. Hearts we have that
shall not fail you, so long as you fail not from doing what may become you.
On then with resolution, and let Apulia know, where you suffered this disaster,
that Rome can want no Soldiers so long as she has women to defend her honor.

Yea, should we relate what incomparable moderation of passion, those famous
Roman Matrones expressed in their great trials of patience, we should find it
more easy to admire them than imitate them. Though Octavia suffer in the
highest measure; she can pass over her indignities with a sweet smile: and
slight her too good grounds of jealousy, with a winning Letter, wishing only
her Husband to be tender of his honor.

Porcia can suffer in a noble manner for her endangered Lord, yet scorns in
tears to manifest her love. Her study is to second him with advice, to prevent
danger, come off with honor, and leave to posterity a memorable testimony of
his valor.

Tanaquil, that noble Lady, wife to Tarquinius Priscus, can in the lowest ebb
and defluence of Fortune, encourage her Husband to noble attempts: saying, it
was not the property of a brave spirit, to lose any part of his courage for an
adverse encounter, or put finger in the eye for any disaster* but to arm
himself with resolution so much higher, as the insulting braves of Fortune
have brought him lower. Nay, consider, quoth she, how Fortune owes you, so much
as she has taken from you.

By which advice he became so strengthened, and by her persuasions so encouraged
as of a private Tuscane, he so discreetly and moderately behaved himself, that
after the death of Ancus, he was created King of the Romans.

That temperate Caecilia, how wisely she moderated her passion in those
extremest gusts of Fortune, may remain a singular instance in this kind.
Danger could not beget in her a shivering fear; nor her present suffering one
trickling tear. She found nothing worth prizing but her honor; which
preserved, she could with all indifferency entertain any encounter: To lose
that which I never had, quoth she, I cannot: and to grieve for the loss of
what I once had, I will not: Seeing, as my Predecessors once enjoyed what I now
have, so must my Successors have what I now enjoy. Hence do I gather a
moderation of passion in either.

Cornelia, whose very name merits a title of succeeding honor, showed no
arguments of unbeseeming passion in the very height of her affliction; knowing
how to value the quality of grief. Though not the least beameling of comfort
appeared, she retained such a noble spirit; as not a Roman Lady but admired
her; nor any Annall writ in her time, but records the memory of her. Nothing
could trouble her but Septimius treason: and this appeared more nobly in her.
For nothing can be more odious to any Heroic mind than the ignominious act of
a Traitor. And what worse than to see a servant betray his Master? To see one,
whom her lord had relieved; with many favors graced; and to immerited honors
advanced; deprive him of life to whom both his life and Fortunes stood engaged!

To this virtuous Lady, whose many misfortunes had taught her sufficiently how
to moderate passion; and with a discreet check to discourage the proffer of
any light affection, might those Lines be aptly applied, exhorting those young
Ladies to follow the steps of so noble a Grandmother.

For you, young Ladies, you have a pattern too,
One, whose religious life will teach you how
To manage yours: and this is your Grandmother:
It were piacular to name another.
Nor is there any such necessity to fetch our instances from Tiber: Excellent
women have both former and present times afforded within this hedged Garden,
whose admirable temper, to their never-dying honor, has deserved no less
praise. Such, who could smile at misery, and with such a composed grace
entertain the storms of Fortune: as none that saw them, could do less than
highly condemn her of inequality of judgment, or want of sight, (to her a
proper attribute) to bring them down to the lowest part of her wheel, who
deserved for moderation of passion, with other arguments of discretion, to be
ranked with the highest in the Commonwealth.

Nor, indeed, can this moderation of passion, whereof we now treat, receive
more approvement from any person, than such an one, who sometimes has enjoyed
the fullness of earthly happiness; and afterward fallen into the extremities
of want: Or such, who though they partake in all freedom and fullness of
fortune; seconded by powerful Friends: rewarded with deserving honors: yet
find an Eclypse or contraction of light in all these, by some private
discontent; which by strength of Assistants is in their power to redress by
revenge, but out of their nobleness of spirit will not. This I could
illustrate by many notable examples: where we shall find one amiable enough
for a Consort; and too accomplished for a Prostitute, by him dis^valued, where
she should be most honored: disgraced, where she would be most approved. Nor
can this unhappy man allege any cause why he should not love her, but because
he is tied to love her; Which tie and title of wife does so vex him, as she
can devise no way to please him: yet is not her diligence any thing remitted;
nor her desire to give content fore-slowed. Divided Beds cannot distemper her:
she hopes in time to win him to her, and waine him from those, who have aliened
his mind from her. Nothing discontents her more than to be discontented:
Whatsoever shall happen, she stands prepared.

O, but will some say, such a woman may be called rather a Picture than a
Mirror! An Image made up of Rye-dow. One who is either so simple, as she knows
not the quality of a wrong: or so sheepish, as she dare not say her soul is
her own. And such are neither fit for Wives nor Mistresses. For as Fools
cannot at any time be troubled with mirth, because nothing that good is, can
happen unto them: nor perplexd with grief, because nothing that ill is, can
seem so unto them; being as incapable of the one, as insensible of the other:
No more can those apprehend the weight of an injury, either through weakness
of spirit, or stupidity. Whereto I answer; that we receive not here into the
list of our Discourse any such Stoicall Apathists, who are insensible of
passion: For such were strange Stocks to graffe on. Yea, the O^conomick well
observes, that a Family through want of spirit in the Governesse, is no less
disordered than by too much spirit disquieted.

In a Legendary Story is mention made of such a Saintly Sufferer, which for the
rarity of the relation I have here inserted.

There was sometimes One, who weary of the World, desired to waine himself
from all secular cares, The like mortification ap^eared in that Virgin Eugenia,
during the ^ontificate of leut^ cri^^.
and betake himself to a religious privacy: so as, within short time he was
received into the Covent. Now it happened one day, that this religious man
walking alone in the Garden, seemed as One much discontented: which the Abbot
observing, came unto him, demanding the reason of his heaviness: willing him
to impart unto him the occasion of his grief, as became an inferior member of
the Society to d^e unto his Superior.

Nothing, reverend Father, answered he, concerning my own particular: nor does
it repent me to have entered into this Religious Order: For I find more
comfort in one hour within these Walls, than ever I could in all those
possessions I enjoyed in the World. But I must tell you, Father, that I have
one only son, which I left behind me, and very dear was he unto me; now I
am much perplexed in mind about him: for I know not how the World may deal with
him. Tender are his years, which adds to the measure and number of my cares.
Nor am I so confident of their trust, to whom I recommended him, as to free me
from that piou^ jealousy which I harbor in my breast touching him. Advise me
then, dear Sir, what course were best to take, that my care may be settled: and
his safety provided, on whom with equal hopes and fears the troubled thoughts
of a father are many times fixed.

Is this your cause of heaviness, said the Abbot? To rid you from these cares,
and increase your hope in his succeeding years, send him to me, and see what
effect will come of it.

According to the Abbots direction, he causes his son, who, indeed, was a
daughter (which he dissembled for some reasons) to be sent for. Who, after some
time of probation, was admitted to the Society. Now it chanced, that the
daughter of an eminent Person, not far distant from that Abbey, was got with
child, and for some private respects to her self best known, desirous to
conceal the true Father; laid the child upon this supposed Brother (who was
indeed a Sister.) This Saintly creature was so far from defending her own
innocence, as she took unto it, as if she had been the true father which
begot it. The rumor hereof so highly incensed the Abbot; holding it to be a
great scandal to his Society, to have any one under his charge, conscious of
such impiety; as he straightly commanded that this adulterous person should be
expulst the House: and to receive no relief, but such as common-Beggers were
wont to have at the gate.

This Censure she receives with patience, without least discovery of her
innocence: And though diverse of the Fraternity interceded the Abbot in her
behalf: acquainting him with the piety of her fore-past life, with the patient
suffering of whatsoever his Reverend authority had enjoined her: yet would not
the Abbot relent, nor remitte any part of her punishment: nor ever be persuaded
by all the means that could be made, to receive her again into the Covent.
Thus continued this simple innocent soul, free from that sin, yet exposed to
all shame: relinquished by her self, because undefended: nor justifide by her
father, because he had vowed that her Sex should not by his means be
discovered. Till at last, Death imposed an end to her misery, and published to
all the World her innocence.

The report whereof so highly perplexed the Abbot: as he with the whole Covent
continued a long time sorrowing: not without admiration of her Patience:
recommending her Memorial to posterity for a recompense.

This example when you read, I imagine, you will smile at; and say, this wench
had a kind heart that could so meekely suffer for another offense: which
argued in her, rather a senseless stupid disposition, than any discreet
Moderation of Passion. -- And would you have us turn such young Saints, and in
the end become Old Devils?

No; (though this unexemplary president might deserve more admiration than
political approvement) we propose such whose Conceits are apprehensive
enough, to weigh the quality of a wrong; Spirits stout enough to revenge; and
power enough to second that revenge: yet are endued with so noble a temper, as
they held it their highest honor, to expostulate the cause mildly; rather than
with fire and faggot to menace a revenge, where they owe an obedience: and
ought to overcome extremities (so they be not above humane sufferings) with
patience.

Such an one as one of these, had that brave Colonel; who professed, that
though he encountered with broils abroad, he never found any brawlles at home:
though he bicker'd with Storms by Sea, he enjoyed a Calm still by Land. Not
like that fierce Virago, who being married to a Soldier; ever used to welcome
her Husband home with a powder; and being one day, in a more temperate mood,
asked by him, why she used such liberty with her tongue, as after that manner
to entertain him still with such hayleshot? O, quoth she, I hold it good
discretion, to inure you to what you must suffer: Seeing your cares are so well
acquainted with the noise of the Canon abroad, you may well enough endure a
little haile-shot at home; Words break no bones, husband; would to God, your
Enemy would use you so.

That Syracusan General gave a strong testimony of his Wifes temper, when in a
public meeting, he protested: That he had in all his time found it far more
easy to discomfit a commanding Foe, or demolish the strongest Fort, than to
overcome his Wifes patience.

Albeit, there are many, whose discreet and well-composed temper can suffer all
injuries; embrace poverty with a pleasant smile: receive any dis-respect from
their Dearest with incredible patience: yet, when their own Fame shall come to
be questioned; they hold that too precious a prize, too high a stake to be
hazarded. This was that noble Roman Ladies resolution: Let me suffer, quoth
she, in the height of Fortunes Contempt; Let that ambitious One, whom I most
malign; receive those honors I should enjoy; embrace that person whom I love
best. Should I be enforced to beg relief from her hand, where I conceive the
constantst hate: Should I encounter with all the extremities that adversity
could lay upon me: All these were nothing; so I may preserve that Fame
untainted, which I have hitherto preserved. Fortune can but take from us what
is hers: it is our actions only, or others injurious obloquie can deprive us of
what may be truly and properly styled ours.

No less absolute was she in the Command of her Passions; who being one day in
private discourse with a Gentleman of excellent winning parts; and one whose
glib tongue could win ground upon least advantage: was demanded by him, how
she could brook to hear her Husband to be such a general Courter of fresh
Mistresses: and to boast of their Favors in her presence? O, Sir, quoth she,
all this is but to Court me with more formality when he comes to me! I find
no fail in his love, why should I then distaste what he likes? If he had more
serious employments to bestow himself on, I little doubt but he would as much
slight the Courting of a Light Mistress, as he now affects it for want of
better employment. If others bestow their Favors on him, and he reserve his
best Favor for me; it were my weakness to suffer others respects to him, to
beget a jealousy in me. I neither retain that mean conceit of my self, as
to conceive the least thought of his Loving of any one better than me: nor have
I any such opinion of his inconstancy; as to imagine him desirous to prefer
any one in his esteem before me.

Thus have you heard their excellent temper in Moderation of Passion, with what
indifferency they could bear the braves of Fortune; with what innocence they
could bear the weight of injuries. How their Fame was the only Touchstone of
their patience: which secured, nothing so extreme, which they have not with
resolution encountered, and with constancy subdued.

Which mildness begets in them a near resemblance with that well-dispose
feminine Monarchy of Bees; Rex Apum non ^abet aculeum ^um quo potest pungere
sicut coeterae Apes. Plin.
for as the Natural Historian observes, that their King has no sting as other
Bees have, reteyning such an offencelesse quality, as he cannot sting any,
sufficing himself with a Princely Clemency, to supply the place of
Sovereignty: So these hold it power sufficient to have had the power to
revenge: and by their inferior Subjects to repel the insolence of a bold
intruder; holding it a derogation to their honor, to become a personal
revenger.

Certain it is, that no virtue more ennobles a Rational Soul than this
Moderation of Passion: Nor deserve they either to manage any public or
private charge; who cannot restrain these insulting motions, which so
miserably captivate the better part: as by giving way to appetite, man though
he retain the name, he loses the nature and prime privilege of man. He only,
and none but he deserves to be honored, who is with goodness endowed. For
foot-cloath honor, it is but an Eye-object: it may exact of an humble
Passenger a low Congy or Salute: Solusbonus est ^ono^and^s. Arist. 4. ^t^.
but his Horse, for ought that I know, being so richly covered, deserves as
much honor as he that rides on it. And no doubt with a little help of a
Cynicks Lantern, it were very easy in this Silken age to find with
Aristippus, Stones sitting on stones, and barbarous Asses riding on Barbary
horses. But we have other Surveys to take in hand: being now to descend from
their Moderation of Passion, to their Continency in assaults; even to Those,
where they bore most loyal love and affection.

SECTION IV. Their Continency in assaults.
OPPORTUNITY is a dangerous attendant for youthful Love. And yet shall we
present to your eyes; such noble Commanders of their desires: as neither
opportunity of place, nor importunity of person, though affection had entered
far into their bosom, could make them dispense with honor.

Long had that Roman Sophronia been importuned by a deserving Suitor; one,
whose youth might deserve Love: and whose beauteous personage might have seaz'd
of store of Mistresses without much sollicitancy: One in whose eyes love
sparkled: seeming to merit admittance without parliance. Yet finds he his
Sophronia of another temper, than to prefer her pleasure before her honor:
She can address him this answer: What straying eyes have you observed in us?
What loose passage has there fallne from us, or wherein have you seen any
argument of Lightness by us? That you should be so weakly opinion'd of us? Do
you know our Family, and c^n you conceit us forgetful of our Fame? Trust me,
Sir, either light thoughts have so mis-guided you, as you have quite forgot who
we are: or some base Trader, I might say, Betrayer of Women's honor has
deluded you, by giving you encouragement to such an indiscreet attempt. Return
home then, Sir, I could wish you: and recollect those wits you have scattred:
Which done, it will behove you to beg from me a pardon, whom you have sought
with so unjust an affection.

It could not choose but redound highly to Scipio's commendations, that being a
young man of 24 years of age, in the taking of a City in Spain, he should so
nobly vanquish his own affections, by repressing his flames of lust, when a
beautiful Maid was brought him, as a trophey of his Victory: restoring her to
a young man called Allantius, to whom she was espoused, with a great reward, as
an additament to her Dower. Yet for all this, it may be imagined with an easy
gloss, that her Honor suffered an Assault: and that the Maids repulse begot
in that victorious Commander a singular esteem of her virtues.

It is true, that Darius wife and his three daughters, being spared by
Alexander, improved more his fame, than all those glorious attempts which ever
he had achieved. Yet our Critics will not stick to say, Quint. curt. lib. 3.
but they were attempted: yet so constant were they in preserving their honor,
as neither Majesty could command, nor beauty (as what Prince more amiable?)
allure; nor their own present estate admit any unjust freedom to so
commanding a Suitor.

But to prove unto you, that nothing is more incomparably precious than a
Continent Soul; and that Conjugall Love held such a firm tie even amongst
Ethnicks, as they preferred that gage before all tenders of sensual Love or
fading honor; I will relate here unto you one memorable Story, to improve that
Sexes glory, and beget a pious emulation in posterity.

Cannia, Wife to Synattus, shall be the surviving Subject of this Story; whom
one Synoris, a man of greater authory than he, loved; and making no small
means to obtain her love, yet all in vain, supposed the readiest way for the
effecting his desires to be the murdering of her husband: which he performed.
This Act of horror was no sooner executed, and by the roabe of his authority
shrouded (as what guilt so heinous, but may receive her subterfuge from
greatness) than he renewed his suite, to which she seemingly assented: but
being solemnly come into the Temple of Diana for celebrating those Nuptial
rites, she had a sweet potion ready, which she drunk to Synoris: wherewith
both were poisoned.

In which President, we shall find rare constancy in an Ethnic Lady. Honor,
though it be a bait that is apt to take the most constant minds, could work
no such effect in her. The vow she had made to her first Choice, estranged her
affection from all new Favorites. She could find no breast to entertain him;
nor a Love to receive him; nor an heart to harbor him; nor an arm to embrace
him; who had embrued his hands in the blood of her Dearest. No Nuptial rites
can allure her; no hope of honor delude her; she holds fast to her first Choice
without Change. Yet since this Loving Murderer must needs enjoy her, she will
incline to his motion, and with a Lovesick potion inshrine their livelesse
bodies, without further enjoyment together. No other way could she find to
prevent it: and rather than she will assent to entertain him for her constant
Lover, who was her husbands cruel murderer, the Scene must be made truly
tragical, in both their disasters.

Admirable was the resolution of that noble Captive; who, seeing her Husband
not only discomfitted, but deprived of life; and her self presented to the
General, as a booty worth receiving; being for beauty so rare, as the age
afforded not a fairer nor more goodly personage: so bravely slighted her
restraint, as she expressed her self more like a Commander than a Captive: If
the General at any time sued to her for love; she would with a seeming
graceful scorn reject him telling him; That neither her Fame nor Family would
suffer her to play the Curtezan: and if he meant to make her his Wife; she had
not yet wiped away her funeral tears; and therefore could not so soon
entertain any Nuptial treaties. She wished him to retain a better opinion of
her Sex, than to imagine Women's honor to be as easily won as Forts or
Sconces. Nor could her present condition so discourage her, as to admit a
thought for a Kingdom, to impeach her honor. Demand nothing of me, would she
oft-times say, now when I am your Slave, but what you might as well require if
I were free. Trust me, Liberty cannot so much please me; as loss of honor
would afflict me. The one is in your hand to give; and the other in mine to
preserve. Fetters are easy burdens to an infranchised mind. Though my outward
state be poor, I desire to keep my inward state pure. Lower I cannot be in
fortunes, nor higher in esteem with the Immortal Gods, whom I prize above all
fortunes; so I enjoy my self; by freeing my unstained honor from the
injurious hand of an unjust incroac^er. Which resolution so well acquitted her;
as after those due Solemnities observed for her deceased Husband: she was
received for a Wife by the General.

No less constant in her virtuous affection was that noble Maid; who, having
set her love upon a young Gentleman, whose parts were many, though his fortunes
few: Her Father taking notice of her extraordinary resp^ct toward him: and
having diverse times admonished her to forbear his company; but all in vain:
at last he resolved of a course, by bringing in an other Suitor, in fortunes
richer, though his breeding m^aner; to weine his daughters affection from him.
Many weeks were not past, till the Match was concluded; the Marriage-day
appointed, and all things prepared to solemnize this enforced bargain. But how
far the young Maids mind was aliened from her Fathers choice, might well
appear by the answer she returned her Suitor, at such time as he made her
acquainted how all things were concluded: Is it possible, quoth she, that all
things should be finished, and the Party whom it most concerns, never
acquainted, much less consented? Yes, Mistress, quoth he, I can assure you,
your Father and rest of your Friends knew of it long since; and your Father
thought so well of it, as he consented to it. Has he so, answered she? Then it
seems you have his good will? Yes, forsooth, quoth this Country Hoyden: Why
then, said she, pray you go marry my Father, whose good will you have got: for
you should wrong his daughter, to marry her whose good will you have not.

But all this could not decline her hard-hearted Father from his rich unworthy
choice. Married she must be, and to her lasting discontent. Which when it could
not be prevented; you shall hear what accident hence insued.

The time being now come, when this enforced Match was to be solemnized, and
she to be given in Marriage: even then when her unhappy Father was to take her
by the hand, and give her to her contemptible choice: instead of her hand, he
received from her this answer: Sir, expect no hand from me, for I cannot give
it: having already sent it to him, who has most interest in it. Enforce me
then no further, Dear Father; What joy can this heavy Bridal afford that
Gentleman; when he makes choice of such a Consort, that has neither hand nor
heart to give him? And such an one shall he enjoy in me. My hand, behold, I
have sent him; and my heart I have engaged him. Surcease then to afflict an
unhappy Maid with a supply of more discomforts.

This sorrowful Spectacle (having shown her right arm without an hand) broke
up that Match. For by the persuasion of Friends, her Father was moved to give
her in marriage to her first Choice, with whom she lived in that content; as
she thought her hand well bestowed, to rid her of one whom she so much hated:
and confirm her his, to whom both heart and hand stood religiously engaged.

Those Dainty Dalmatian virgins showed no less Continency in resisting the
assaults of their commanding Enemies: who, when they saw their People
discomfitted, their Country depopulated, their principal ^ities demolished,
and themselves Captives; were nothing at all amated. Insomuch as, being lead
away prisoners, one amongst the rest stepped out and spoke in behalf of herself
and the rest in this manner: Whither do you dragge us? What way do you hale
us? Should you deprive us, of what is most esteemed by us; it were but a poor
purchase; seeing, our Wills have vowed even unto death to make resistance. Take
us then to your Wives, and we will serve you; whereas, if you make Strumpets of
us, we will hate you: and when you are most confident, take occasion to be
revenged of you. Which Speech made their Foes their Friends: causing their
professed Enemies to become their Sponsall Consorts; by turning their inveterate
fury, unto an affectionate Fancy: which procured their Countries safety, and
published to the World their Continency.

Full of masculine valor, and careful of preserving their honor, did those
Scythian women bear themselves: when seeing their miserable Country made
desolate by an unfortunate overthrow: they thought good to keep touch with
their discomfitted and dis-slaughtered Husbands. For having promised them, that
if they were vanquished by their Enemies, they would perform the duty of
constant Wives, and keep their honors untainted in despite of all Assailants.
These constant Dames no sooner heard of their husbands sorrowful discomfiture,
than resolved according to their promise, to preserve their honor: with one
voice and vote being gathered together, they conclude to have themselves shut
up in several places provided for that purpose, and there burned, and in their
own ashes buried together.

There may be found likewise some of this Sex, who having yielded up the Forts
of their Honors upon fair terms, and as they conceived, for their own
advantage; yet declined afterward from that familiarity which they formerly
embraced: by forbearing their Company, whom they seemingly affected: And this
strangeness proceeds from some reasons either out of simplicity or policy
best known to themselves. This makes me remember that merry tale (to
interveine mirth with more serious discourse) which I have heard sometimes told
to this effect.

In the Town of Brada (a place which has ministered sufficient matter of
discourse in these later times) there were Soldiers bill^ted for defense
thereof against the Enemy. These according to the freedom of their profession,
continued there for a season in all jollity and pleasure: every one having his
dainty Doxy or Damasella to consort with. Thus they lived; loved, and
neighbourly conversed, till the enemy approached: whose incamping spoiled their
Courting. For being come before the Town, with a firm resolution, as they
understood, to win, or perish: Those within the Town, fearing, as it
afterward proved, that it would be a long continued siedge; were advised to
remove from them all such as could not be useful for service, as Old men and
Women; who if they stayed with them, would partake of their provision, but
afford them no assistance in a time of such imminent danger. These Old men and
Women, being thus disposed and privately conveyed to several Ports adjoining:
This sharp Siedge goes on: which fell out so commodious to the Enemy, so
disadvantageous to the Town; as being blockt up from taking in any provision,
they were driven into a great strait. Notwithstanding, with much prowess and
constancy of spirit. they repelled the force and fury of their Be^iedgers
repairing by night what was ruined by day: and suffering no opportunity to
pass wherein they might either offend the enemy, or defend themselves from his
hostility. But seeing no possible hope of relief; and an extreme Famine
drawing on; having been enforced, for want of better provision, to eat
Horses, Dogs, and Cats; which begot diverse pestilent and contagious diseases
within the Town: and having now their Magazins so emptied, as their very last
Corn was in the Oven. Yea, taking notice how they were jeered by the Enemy;
when at any time they came near the battlements: using to put their canes in
arch holes, and to counterfeite the noise of Dogs and Cats, to delude them: by
making them wait for their coming out, that they might take them and feed on
them. Being, I say, thus enclosed with all extremes, they resolved upon a
parliance to yield up the Town; upon such fair and honorable terms, as the
least dishonor that could be, redounded to them: only, indeed, the Town was
won from them, which was not lost for want of courage, but provision.

And being now to leave the Town with Ancients and Colors displayed; and
bullets in their mouth: One of these brave metald sparks, remembering himself
how that sometimes before. Siedge was laid to the Town: he was acquainted with
a Bona-Roba; and how she was disposed of in such a Port: resolves with himself
to repair thither, and renew his former familiarity with her: but coming to
the place of her abode, he found the wind turned; being received by her with an
unexpected Coyness; which he much wondering at, demanded the reason of her
niceness? Putting her withal in mind of their former acquaintance, which
might be an inducement to move her to tender him the like favor: No point,
Souldado, quoth she; for me does much fear, you will get me with Colt, you
have eaten so much Horseflesh. What a strange countenance the Soldier made
upon this Wantons answer, I leave to your conceit who reads this: no doubt,
but he went away with a Flea in his ear, to purchase an other Mistress, and
one more constant, if he might aspire to that happiness.

But to omit these, should we peruse the Stories or Records of all times, we
should find admirable instances in this weaker Sex for resisting the bold
attempts of loose Suitors: being so constant in the defense of their honor, as
neither price could betray; nor prayer persuade; nor power enforce their
affections, to give way to the least breach of their continency: crowning ever
their noble aims with a cheerful victory.

But I am to descend now to the next Subject: wherein it shall appear that
they have ever made Honor their highest Object: for in this may you see
portrayed to life, not only their zeal to modesty, but their tender care to
prevent all occasion of jealousy. No wandering eyes to hunt for a Suitor; no
straying feet, like Dinah's, to betray their honor. A modest countenance shall
you find without dissembling; a comely Habit, without fantastic affecting;
and a firm loyal Love without apish toying: Mine shall be the Task; be yours
the patience. We shall tender nothing to your modest ears that may possibly
minister distaste; much, if opinion transport me not, that may afford you
benefit: and amply satisfy your longing appetite with a variously stored and
well-furnished banquet.

SECTION V. Their Modesty in Countenance, Habit, and expression of their
affection.
COUNTENANCE.
THE Habit or quality of the mind is best discerned by the carriage or
composure of the body. Aug. de Christ. Fide.
Do not say, says that devout Father, that you have modest minds, so long as
you have immodest eyes.

Hieron. ad Furiam de vid. Sermon. Tom. 1.
How can she weep for her sins (says S. Hierom) when her tears will make
furrows in her face? with what confidence dare she lift up her Countenance to
Heaven, which her Maker acknowledges not? etc. Light Habits suite not well with
grave hearts: nor wandering eyes with settled minds.

Cyprian de discip. and hab. Virg.
These plaisterings and pargettings of faces to attract adulterous eyes, and to
beget Suitors, sort better with prostitutes and impudent strumpets, who make
sale of their honor, than modest women, who prefer their fame before the sad
fruition of all earthly pleasure.

O, what a madness is it to change the very form and mold of Nature, and to
esteem more of a Picture than a Reasonable Creature! S. Hierom writing to
Marcella says, Hieron de exitu Leae.
that those women are matter of scandal to Christian eyes, who paint their
faces with Cerusse and such like painting stuff: laboring to correct their
Ma^^^r, and with an impudent hand to rectify the errors of their first feature.
Ambros. He^am. lib. 6. cap. 8
Such a picture, says S. Ambrose, is a vicious imposture.

Ibid.
Thou defacest the image of God, when thou deprivest thy Countenance of her
native candor, and strivest to beautify it with an artificial color.

Nor can it move less than a pious compassion in the heart of any
well-affected Christian, to see such ado made in patching and dawbing this
outward cottage, which threatens ruin daily: and such neglect shown to the
Inner house, which communicates to the body, both life and beauty.

Petrarchs advice was otherwise: Petrarch. de remed. utriusque fort.
Be not afraid (says he) though the out-house of thy body be shaken, so the
soul, the guest of the body, fare well.

Tertull. de hab. Mul. c. 7.
I would, I poor wretch (says Tertullian) might see in that day of Christian
exaltation, whether with cerusse, and purpurisse, and saffron, and such
compass of Tyres about your heads you shall rise again? Whether such an
Ornament or Habilement shall plead for you at the day of judgment?

Seeing then, as Festus Pompeius says, that common and base whoores called
Schaenicolae used dawbing of themselves: Pet. Mart. in 2 R^g. 9.30.
And that no good face will seek these helps. Scult.
And that deservingly she incurres a censure, who seeks to improve Nature by
any shop-beauty or borrowed color. Hieron.
And that such affected rubbish or refuse as face-varnish, or any such
exquisite neatness can no way suite with Christian comeliness. (...) etc.
Nazian. con. Mal. immodice comp^as.
And that there is one flower to be loved of Women, a good red, which is
shamefastness. Clem. Constit. Apost l. 1. c. 9.
And that we are expressly forbidden to paint that face which God has made.

Let beauty receive her improvement from no other hand than Nature; what more,
falls of from modesty, and argues a light disposition. But in my opinion,
nothing discovers lightness so much; a^ to make strange eyes familiar with the
knowledge of your Breast. No serious judgment can conceit less than lightly
of such exposed beauty; which that Epigrammatist glanced at happily, when
seeing one of these amorous Girls, who had no meaning to lead Apes in hell,
but would rather impawne her honor than enter any Vestall Order, attyred in a
light wanton Habit, and breast displayed, and this in Lent time; when graver
attire and a more confined bosom might have better becom'd her; he wrote these
Lines: Nunc emere haud fas est (est Quadragesima) carnes;
D^m^ar. ^p^g Cent. 1.
Quin mulier, mammas contegis ergo tuas?
With breasts laid out, why should I Shambles tempt;
"It 's held unlawful to buy flesh in Lent.
That passage was worthy observance, being sometimes betwixt a Bedlamer and one
of these fantastic Girls. It chanced that a poor distempered Bedlamer
meeting with one of these huffing Wenchss in the open street, daintily
accoutred, and stoursy ushered: * Lucky Besse, quoth he, (seeing her breasts
all bare as far as modesty would well permit, and her arms naked up to her
elbow) art not a Cold? -- Well, god keep thee Besse and poor Tom in our wits.
-- Else must we return to the place from whence we came, and receive
whipping-cheere for our labor. Her Gentleman-usher bearing this affront of
this Madman upon his Madam with impatience, gave him the bastinado; but his
indiscret volour brought him to more dishonor: for the Bedlamer feeling it
smart, so belabour'd him with his Horn; as if he had been Hornemad: and I
verily think, had beat him blind, had not the Beedle of the Ward happily come
in to his reskue.

Dainty Nipples (said that excellent Moralist to a wanton Gallant) why do ye
so labor to tempt and take deluded eyes? must not poor wormelins one day
tugge you? Must those enazured Orbs for ever retain their beauty? Must Nature
in such ample measure show her bounty, and you recompense her love with lying
snayres to purchase fancy?

These Instances I the rather insist on, because there is nothing that
impeacheth civil fame more than these outward fantastic fooleries, Where the
eye gives way to opinion: and a conceit is convayed to the Heart, by the
outward sense: For, as by the Countenance, piety is impaired; so by the Eyes is
chastity impeached. Where this is and has been ever held for an undoubted
Maxim: Immodest eyes are Messengers of an unguarded heart. The principal
means then to preserve reputation, is to avoid all occasion of suspicion. And
forasmuch as we may suffer in our fame through trifles, as well as motives of
higher importance; we are to be cautious in the least; lest we be censured in
these, though we fend not in the greatest.

Lacides Prince of Argos, one, whose noble parts deserved that Title, had he
never been advanced thereto by the suffrage of his people; was accounted
Lascivious only for his sleeke looks, and mincing gate.

So Pompeie, because out of an affected way, as was conceived, he used to
scratch his head with one finger; albeit very continent and modest.

So Augustus discovered the dispositions of his Daughters, by the places where
they frequented; the company with which they conversed. The Countenance which
they showed; the manner of their carriage when at any time suited. Lightness
he found in the one; and staydnesse in the other: while the one consorts with a
Ruffian, the other with a Senator.

Now to follow our former method, and present to your eyes the Modesty of
sundry women, whose excellent parts as they merited high approvement: so their
modest behavior enlarged those additions of their honor. Where you shall find
a whole Roman Family so derivative in their virtues one to another, as every
action deserved some peculiar attribute of honor,

One of these you shall find giving these directions to her Daughters:
Wenches, be careful of your fame: attire your Countenances with Modesty; let
not your outward appearance beget in a loose Lover, least hope of prevailing.
Looks are legible lines: men may gather by your Countenance, whether or no
goodness have in you any residence. Nor can you so dissemble light thoughts,
but they will at one time or other break forth in glowing blushes, or immodest
smiles. I have been a Consuls Wife so long; as by his absence I might have
taken opportunity to enjoy an inhibited pleasure by communicating my love to a
Stranger; but never was pleasure comparably precious to mine honor. Trace you
the same path; so shall the Elysian fields receive you, when these shady
Embleames of vading fancy shall leave you.

Another, though young, you shall find of so composed a Countenance, and
constant modesty* as when her Friends had concluded a marriage betwixt her and
a noble Gentleman; whom she preferred in her affection before all others: made
no other semblance of joy, nor no other expression of liking than this: That
she was bound to her Friends for their choice, yet so happy was she in her
present condition, as she could hardly entertain one thought of change. Yea,
at such time as her Nuptials were to be solemnized, and her vowed affection
sealed: and nothing wanted but the rite it self to join their hands together,
as their hearts long before had confirmed that tender; when her unhappy
Bridegroom was by an Imperial command called away to foreign servive, as if
that sad occasion had purposely pitched it self to decline their solace, and
perplexe their loves with a tedious expectance; she put on so cheerful a
Countenance, as none could gather by her outward semblance that she conceived
any discontent by his absence. Yet so constantly affectionate was she to her
divided choice, as no distance of place could aliene her love, remaining of a
votaresse (yet ever reteining an unblemished Countenance) till his return.



More easily to be admired than imitated was the Modesty of that incomparable
Aemilia; who, being one day invited to a sumptuous Feast; where, to delight the
itching ears and wandering eyes of light Guests, were presented sundry wanton
passages: Songs, whose very airs resounded nothing but lightness; Obscene
Motions and Gestures, which relished nothing more than Wantonness: was asked
by a merry Gossip, who sat next to her, how it fared that she laughed not at
those revels as well as the rest? A modest Dame (replied she) should not so much
as give an ear, much less afford a smile to an immodest Scene.

HABIT.
NEXT to this Modesty which many of our Feminine Mirrors showed in their
Countenance; we are to present unto you the Decency they observed in their
Habit. Which, as it was first ordained to keep the body warm two ways: by
keeping in the natural heat of the body: and by keeping out the accidental
cold of the air; becomes so inverted by abuse, as it suites it self to
neither of those Necessities for which it was first ordained. But the phrency
of pride suffers no cold. Bedlam-like it can go in slashes, to comply with
times humor, and scarcely feel the distemper of any unseasonable Weather. A
Mistress eye is an Antidote against a fever. Here you shall have one to bear
more than Milo's Bull, upon their shoulders. Such a weight of Jewels, stones,
borders and carknets, as it seems wonderful to me (to use the words of a
Learned Father) that they are not pressed to death with the burden they bear.
Others like so many pye-coloured Butter-flyes, Cl^m. Alex. 2 Paedag.
falling from Silke-wormes, and changing their nature with their color,
disguise themselves in the lightest stuffs of vanity; which kind of Habit may
be, indeed, truly styled the minds Anatomy. With these nothing can be received
into grace, that appears grave: nor ought complete, that is not fantastical.

Far otherwise affected was that Noble Lady; who, when a Peer of this
Kingdom came to visit her, and seeing all those inner rooms of her house hung
with Black, demanded of her the reason of her sorrowing? Why, my Lord, quoth
she, has your Honor slept all this while, and never heard how I was a
desolate Widow? Yes, said he; but it is long since your Husband dyed, so as,
by the custom of our Nation, you might before this time have left off that
Habit. O, quoth she, but it seems but as yesterday to me, since he died; your
Honor then must give me leave to wear one Livery both in Heart and Habit.
Why, replied this Lord, the very Pagans had times limited for their sorrowing
and Funeral solemnizing. But we are Christians, said she; and though I weep
not as those without hope, yet must I needs with a pious sorrow bemoane the
loss of so Honorable an Help. But admit one in my case were not to be an
incessant mourner: You will confess, I am sure, she should be a constant
remembrancer. And though no professed votaresse, yet would it well beseem her to
make her Chamber her Cloister. Now, my Lord, for mine Habit, though it please
not the eye of a Courtier, yet will it suite well with the humor of such
Suitors as I mean to entertain. A richer covering I shall not need, and this
I hope my means will maintain.

She seemed constant to her Country wear; who coming over into this Island
with other Outlandish women; was wished, to accommodate her self according to
the Habit of our Nation: O, pardon me, Madam, quoth she, I am neither so
forgetful of my own Country, as to put of her livery: nor so meanly
opinion'd of it, as to change it with any foreign bravery. Nor, if I should
shape my self to the Habit of your Nation, could I any long time be known by
it, being so changeable in her fashion.

A Divine answer returned that excellent Lady to an impertinent Objection, when
being one day asked, why she attired not her self to the fashion of the time?
O, Sir, quoth she, because the Time observes no fashion. But if you wonder at
my plainness, and why I bestow no more cost on my apparel; I must tell you,
I can see no reason in the World that we should pride us in that, which, had
we not sinned, we had never needed.

EXPRESSION OF THEIR AFFECTION.
NEXT this, let us instance what rare Modesty has been shown by Women, in the
Expression of their Affection. How loath to be seen to love; and how faithful
to those they did love: How shamefast in their professing; and how steadfast in
their expression.

I prefer love before life, said that noble Aurelia to one of her
Maiden-sisters; yet had I rather loose my life, than discover my love. The like
said that sweet Sulpitia; I could find in mine heart to dye for my Love, so my
Love knew not I dyed for his love. The like said that virtuous Valeria: I could
wish to dye, so my Clarentius knew not for whom I wished to dye. That brave
Burgundian Lady expressed the like Modesty; I will pass by him, said she, and
never eye him: my heart shall only speak to him; for my tongue, it shall
rather loose it self than unloosen it self to him.

A rare Expression of Affection showed that young Maid; who, seeing her Lover
deprived of all means to enjoy her by the averseness of his Father: and
understanding, how he had resolved through discontent to take his Fortune
beyond the Seas, with a religious vow, never to solicit any Woman's love, for
the space of five years: She, though till that time, she had ever borne him
respect with such discreet secrecy and reservednesse, as no eye could ever
discover her affection; intended under a disguised habit, to accompany him in
his journey. Cutting therefore her hair, and taking upon her a Pages habit;
she came aboard in the same Ship wherein he was received; and so continued
during all that Sea-voyage, by the help of that disguise and discoloring of
her hair, to her Lover, altogether unknown. And being now arrived at the Port
at which they aimed, this disguised Page beseeched him, that he would be
pleased to accept of his service: pretending, that since his arrival, he had
heard of the death of his dearest Friends, and such as his livelihood relied
on; so as, he had no means to support him, nor in his present distress to
supply him, unless some charitably disposed Gentleman like himself, would be
pleased to take compassion of him, and entertain him. This exiled Lover
commiserating his Case, took her into his Service; little imagining that his
Page was his Mistress. But no doubt, bore his late-entertained Servant more
respect for the resemblance he conceived betwixt his Page and Mistress.

Thus lived they together for a long time: during which space, she never
discovered her self: holding it to be to no purpose, seeing he had taken a
solemn vow (as was formerly said) that he would solicit no Woman's love for
such a time: so as, rather than he should violate his vow, (which by all
likelihood he would have done, had he known who was his Page) she chused to
remain with him unknown, expressing all arguments of diligence and careful
observance that any Master could possibly expect from his Servant.

Hope, which lightneth every burden; and makes the most painful service a
delightful solace, sweetened the hours of her expectance: ever-thinking, how
one day those five years would be expired, when she might more freely
discover her love, and he enjoy what he so much desired. But Fate, who
observes no order betwixt youth and age; nor reserves one compassionate tear
for divided Loves, prevented their hopes, and abridged their joys by her
premature death. For being taken with a Quartan-fever, she languished even unto
death: Yet before her end, she desired one thing of her Master in recompense of
all her faithful service; which was, that he would be pleased to close up the
eyes of his Page, and receive from him one dying kiss: and lastly, to wear
for his sake one poor Ring, as a lasting memorial of his loyal love. All
which his sorrowful Master truly performed: but perceiving by the Posy of the
Ring that his deceased Page was his Mistress: and that he had bestowed that
Ring on her, at such time as he departed from her; it is not to be conceived,
what continued sorrow he expressed for her.

A Story of no less constant nor passionate affection may be here related of
that deeply inamoured Girl; who, though she preferred her Honor before the
embraces of any Lover: and made but small semblance of any fondness or too
suspicious kindness to him, who had the sole interest in her love. Yea, so
far was her affection distanced from the least suspicion: as her very nearest
Friends could scarcely discover any such matter betwixt them: yet at such time
as her unfortunate Lover, being found a notorious Deliquent in a Civil State,
was to suffer; when, all the private means by way of Friends that she could
make, prevailed nothing for his delivery: and she now made a sad spectator of
his Tragedy. After such time as the Headsman had done his office, she lept up
upon the Scaffold: and in a distracted manner, called all such people as were
there present, to witness: That he who had suffered could no way possibly be
a Delinquent, and she innocent: For this heart of mine (said she) was his; how
could he then do any thing whereof I was not guilty?

Nor could this poor distempered Maid, by all the advice, council, or
persuasion that could be used to her, be drawn from the Scaffold; ever and
anon beckning to the the Executioner to perform his office: for otherwise he
was an Enemy to the State, and the Emperors professed foe. Nor could she be
without much force haled from the Scaffold, till his corpse was removed.

The Historian gives a noble attestation of that majestic Marcella: That none
would ever have thought that she had loved her Husband, till she injoyd him;
but none more discreetly dear in the Expression of her Affection, after she
had married him.

But as Virtue receives her proper station in the Mean; so all Extremes
decline from that Mark. I have heard of Some, who were so over-nice or
gingerly precise in Expressing their Affections; as they would not admit so
much favor as a fair or equal Parliance, unless he observed his Distance,
to their affectionate Servant.

These will not grant admittance to their Suitors, to prefer their requests
in their Chambers. No; they must be distanced by some Partition or Window; or
else woo by Prospective Glasses: or utter their thoughts (with the Silent
Lady) through Canes or Trunks; as if Affection were an Infection. But this
niceness tastes more of Folly than Modesty. Those only deserve approvement,
who can so season their Affections with discretion; as neither too much
coyness tax them of coldness, nor too much easiness brand them of
forwardness in the ordering of their Affection.

This closes fitly with those Posies of two cursory wits writ in a window by
way of answer one to another: She, she, for me, and none but she
That Is neither forward nor too free.
Which was answered in this manner, in a parallel way to the former.

That wench, I vow, shall be my joy,
That Is neither forward nor too coy.
But thus much may suffice for instances of this kind: we are now to descend
from the Expression of their constant but modest Love, to such as were
Corrivals in their Affections; which have in all ages brought forth Tragic
Conclusions.

SECTION VI. The violence of some Women used upon such as were Corrivals in
their choice: With Examples.
It is an useful observation: Satan's infections shoot many times through some
great Star the influence of damnation into lesser bodies: as may be discovered
by these Tragical Instances.
THERE is no Maxim more holding than this: Scepters and Suitors hate
Competitors.


Agreeing well with that of the Greek Poet: Imperial power and Nuptial bed
Brook hardly to be rivalled.


Pind.
Italy has for many ages been a Tragic Theater of such presentiments. Where
you shall find here a Lady so violently strong in her affection, as her
Servant must have Spies near him, if he Court but an other Mistress: Civil
cu^^sies can hardly pass without some rackt Construction. This fury, that
passionate Dame expressed; when, having entertained a Gentleman of excellent
parts and worthy descent, to be her Servant: and having enjoyed the freedom of
their Loves, with much familiarity for long time together: at last, by some
report which she had heard, or some other bad office suggested to her, she
conceived a deep jealousy of her Servant, that he begun to aliene his love from
her, by setting it on such an amorous Curtezan. Time strengthened his conceit;
For where suspicions of this kind are not at first resisted, they become daily
strengthened, and break out into such fearful issues, as they are very
hardly without blood to be quenched. This jealouse Dame giving free scope to
her own thoughts; contracted with a curious Limner to draw the feature of that
Curtezan, as much to life as he could possibly do. Which done, she caused this
Picture amongst other Pieces of incomparable art to he hung up in her Lodging
Chamber. The next time that her Favorite came, having free access unto her,
entered into her Chamber: where she had withdrawn her self (purposely as may
be imagined) into a private Closet adjoining to that room. Meanetime, her
unhappy Servant taking a full view of all these Pieces, amongst which having
found out the Picture of his Curtezan, he bestowed his eye more upon it, than
all the rest: which she observing through a Cranie, and being not able any
longer to contain her self, came hastily out of her Closet where she had
retired* and having saluted her Servant with a seeming-gracefull Countenance as
if all had been well, she began to ask him in good earnest what Piece he most
affected, or (as he conceived) deserved most love? Madame, answered he, they
are all excellent Pieces, and such as have received all perfection from Art:
but to settle much affection upon a Picture, where such a Lady as your self is
in presence, were to prefer Art before Nature. Come, come (quoth she) you can
dissemble daintily: -- But tell me truly, whether this Piece (pointing at his
Curtezan) has not nearest Seasure in your heart! And when he answered nothing:
But I will procure a divorce betwixt you with this, (quoth she;) and with that,
(having a poniard in her sleeve) stabbed him. Which fact of hers, as it brought
to him a premature death; so it hastened upon her a judicial doom.

A revenge of like nature, though performed in a fairer manner, was sometimes
presented by that jealous Florentine: who suspecting the Constancy of her
Friend: and vowing revenge if it proved so: at last she perceived, that the
grounds of her jealousy were not without just Cause. One day therefore she
invites her Corrivall to her House: where pretending, after a free and friendly
entertainment, that she had such a curiouse Antique Piece to show her, as the
world could not parallel: she brought her to a private retired room remote from
the noise of ear, or recourse of any. Where being entered; Madona, quoth she,
showing the Picture of her Servant; do you know that piece? Yes, Madame,
replied she; And what would you do for his sake? For I know well you love him.
She, though she began to excuse her self, could not satisfy this jealous
Lady: who transported with fury, to have any other to share in the Object of
her fancy; interrupted her in these words: No more; it is in vain. Your
dalliance be it never so private, cannot shroud it self from the eyes nor
ears of Florence. But as you partake in the fruition of his love, we will see
what you dare to attempt for his love. If you deserve him, you will fight for
him. Your spirit cannot be weak, if your fancy be strong. Though I might many
times before this have prevented your usurped love by depriving you of life:
and that in so private a manner, as no mortal eye were it never so piercing
could discover: neither were my thoughts so base, nor breeding mean, nor
family from whence I came, obscure; as to stoop to such Cowardice. I must tell
you freely, you could not have bestowed your love on any, whom I did more
fancy, nor any one, if my conceit delude me not, of love more worthy. But,
Madona, you cannot be ignorant of that Proverb: " Love and Command have ever
had a care,
" That none within their Territories share.
Provide your self then, fair Creature, for the Encounter. Here are a case of
Rapiers; and the Combat shall determine our Titles. Enjoy him both we cannot
without distaste; nor receive him without distrust. Now, this will cure all
distempers, and make him all yours, all mine, or neithers.

And so it proved; for this fatal femini^e Duel, rest them both of their
life's: Albeit, the one lived some few hours after, relating the sad occasion
of their quarrel: and with what cheerfulness of spirit the Combat was not
only entertained but performed on both parts.

No less desperate, but fuller of dishonor was the design of that jealouse
amorist: who hearing sundry reports of her Servants inconstancy, would not at
first be persuaded of any such matter, giving him all free entertainment, after
her wonted manner. Till at last, giving more easy way to credulity; she began
to examine the circumstances probably inducing to belief: and she found (as
she conceived) sufficient grounds to confirm her suspicion; and consequently
a withdrawing of his affection. But desiring much to be more fully satisfied
touching his familiarity with that Burgonesse, whereof such frequent report was
every where dispersed; she resolved to counterfeate a Letter as writ from her
servant unto her: and to the end all things might be with less suspicion
carried, she used the help of her Secretary, who could so nearely counterfeate
his hand, as comparing them together, none could scarcely distinguish them. The
purport of her Letter was thus:

Mistress, your Servant has ever addressed his loyall'st endeavors to serve
you. That Task you could never injoyne him, which was not with all
cheerfulness entertained by him. His Friends and Fortunes he has neglected to
observe your Commands. Madame, D'Alveare (meaning her self) suspects my
intimacy with you. This cooles her affection, and contracts my hopes of
aspiring higher, for obtaining any place in Court. Let it not grieve you then,
Dear Lady, if to salve my repute, which is highly questioned: and re-assure me
of my Friends, who seem much estranged: I retire for a season to Vienna, where
a Merchant has tendered me all fair acceptance. Yet, before my departure, I
shall desire in some private place free from suspicion to meet you this
Evening. Where we may both enjoy ourselves with more liberty, and secure our
loves from the eyes of jealousy. Nor only this; but to be advised by you, what
course may suite best with my present Fortunes, and recovery of both our
credits; which I must tell you freely, are brought upon stage in such a
disgraceful manner, as no subject of discourse within the City stands more
engaged to Rumor. Be pleased then, in lieu of those many devotions, which I
have paid you; those constant vows of affection mutually received from you;
those unwilling farewe^ taken of us both; those faithful remons^^ances
returned by us both: to signify unto your Servant by this Bearer, my trusty
Agent, where we shall meet by the assisting secrecy of this Evening: when and
where you shall find a constant resolution winged with desire addressed to your
attendance.

This Letter she made up and sealed it with her Servants Signet, which she had
got out of his pocket: and with all secrecy, lest her plot should be surpised,
and come to discovery, she delivers it to a faithful vassal of hers, to be
conveyed according to direction. Upon receipt of which Letter, it is not easy
to imagine how variously her thoughts were divided betwixt Hope and Fear.
Fear to forgo one whom she so unfeignedly loved: Hope, to persuade him by the
reasons she might use, to stay. Howsoever, she resolved to return him an
answer, which she addressed after this manner.

Servant, in the enjoyment of which title I have ever joyed; upon the unripping
of your Letter, and perusal of the Character, I cannot express unto you how
infinitely I was perplexed. The paper tells me you must leave me: And my
thoughts have ever-since answered those unwelcome lines with sighs, and told
them you cannot. No; you cannot; if love or loyalty may confine you. The
precious gage of my dearest honor detain you. Those free embraces of our
securest privacy countermand you. O! but you tell me, many eyes are on us.
Rumor has spread it self freely touching our familiarity. Nay; what is more!
your own Fortunes become weakened; your friends estranged; All off the hooks,
by reason of our familiar recourse. Nay; what most afflicts you; Your complete
Madame D'Alveare grows cool in her love to you. And these are the Motives that
must divide you from me. Fair pretenses! And yet knew you the estimate of
love, you would as lightly value these, as I have valued mine honor to cloze
with your content. Neither are you so wanting either in Friends, or Fortune;
should these who bear the countenance of Friends relinquish you: as you may
not receive a supply from Friends as eminent, far more constant, and to the
full as cautious of their honor, as your dainty Madame D Alveare. Let not
these then decline you from continuing affection where you profess: and from
contemning their proffers, who merit less. I have left noble Friends and
Favorites, to remain wholly at your devotion. Offers of preferrement, if they
could have wrought on me, I had plenty: yet were all these weak inducements to
the eye of Fancy. But I will not upbraid you with the neglect of my hopes: nor
the numerous Favors of those graceful Suitors, who tendered me more if I
would have inclined, than my own wishes could have expected. Let it suffice
you, that none can more constantly love you, than she who has abandoned all
her hopes to enjoy you. This very evening betwixt seven and eight of the clock,
at my Garden-house I intend to meet you, where shall be provided both repast
and repose for you. Your welcome you know; my true heart you know: let not my
freedom in these beget in you a disesteeme. My bosom is only for you, let me
receive like approvement from you.

This Letter Madame D' Alveare receives; which hastens her intended revenge.
Longer did not the day seem to that Corrivall, for the enjoyment of her love;
than it seemed tedious to this enraged Lady, to accomplish her revenge. Which
she performed with an act of horror in this manner.

Receiving benefit from the silence and secrecy of the Evening, a little before
the time appointed, she privately repaires to the place; where she shrowds her
self closely in a Tuft of shady Tamriks standing near to the Garden-house:
expecting still her Corrivals approach. Which happened all too soon. For coming
to open the Door, this revengefull Lady having her back toward her, pistolld
her: using these words to aggravate the quality of her Crime:

Dainty Madona, your Lover now at last has found you to be true Pistol proof.

But dye they must, who hands in blood do dippe,
Gods judgments well may sleep but cannot slip.
And so it fell forth with this cruel Lady, who surprised by divine Justice,
suffered a just legal censure for committing a fact of such horror.

But of far larger extent was her revenge; who being satisfied of the
disloyalty of her affectionate Servant: under a fair and friendly pretense,
invited him and her Corrivall to a banquet: where in diverse sugar plates she
had caused poison to be enclosed: with which she not only dispatched those two,
at which principally her revenge was intended: but her self too, to the end
that Tragedy might be more completely closed.

Other instances I might here produce from our own Pale: but these may already
seem too many, being personated in natures of so sweet and pliable a quality.
Neither let these unpleasing Examples distaste them, seeing our pen is addressed
to return them recompense in this Their Modest Defense, here prepared for them.

SECTION VII. Their Modest Defense.
NO age but may bring forth Presidents of clemency and cruelty in both Sexes:
There have been ever Tares in the purest wheat; Cockle in the soundest grain;
rankest weeds amongst freshest flowers. These were indeed, savage acts for
such supple natures. But if the wisdom of Nature (to speak like a Natural
man) has provided for the poisonous Spider her Caul: give me leave, without
the least apologizing of error, much less defending actions of such horror, to
weave a thin Cob-web Veil in a Modest Defense of such, who, even in these
designs though undeservedly have incurred high censure.

It is an excellent rule which that Sententious Seneca sometimes observed,
Maluerim veris offendere, quam placere adulando. Sen. de Clem. cap 1.
and to our use recommended: I had rather (says he) offend by speaking truth,
than please by playing the Flatterer; or palliating an untruth.

And the same Rule shall it be our care religiously to observe. For where
pens are free and not engaged to any; Truth must consequently be the
argument of their Story.

There is small doubt, but some will as highly reprove Lucilia for loving too
much, as Livia for loving too little: Both were (equally) occasions of their
Husbands deaths. Yet was there as great difference betwixt these two effects,
as betwixt Love and Hate. Phedra and Dejanira, both of them brought their
Husbands to untimely ends. Yet what the one did, was purposely done, to be rid
of him: what the other did, was casually done to rid others love from him. Good
intentions many times produce heavy Events. And now and then, mischievous plots
Comicall ends. Some have had their impostumes cured, by their weapons, by which
they were wounded. Others have had their wounds impoisoned, where they expected
to be cured.

Olympia, mother to that great Commander, the invincible Alexander, could not
but think it ill in her to prefer so unjust a Suite to her Son, as to
request, nay conjure him by so many Motherly Obligements, to send forth his
Command that One, and he an innocent One, but much hated by the Queen, should
be forthwith executed: Yet was the effect hereof good. For as her noble Son
dissuaded her from pressing any such unjust Suite: so it made him more cautious
afterward of entertaining any Suite, which his Mother preferred, through the
injustice of that presidentall One which she presented.

Mandanes, did ill in disclosing her Dream: for it plotted the ruin of her
Son: yet the effect proved well: for the exposition of that dream made that
Privy Counselor of State, Harpagus, to provide for the Safety of the Child:
and by the providence of heaven, to raise a flourishing Empire out of a
Shepherds Cottage.

Again; of the contrary side: Clitemnestra thought she had done well for the
safety of Aegistus, when she privately hid him, when those Grecian Heralds
summoned him; those fatal wars of Troy called for him. Yet what safety could
there be in the arms of Adultery? A fearful revenge prevented their hopes!
No sooner was that long ten years Siedge finished, unhappy Troy ruined; that
light dishonored booty, the hateful remains of vitiated beauty, wanton Helen
restored, than Aegistus his shameful retire was fully revenged.

The unfortunate Agrippina, whose birth was her bane, whose race was her ruin;
thought she did well in fitting and accommodating her son, that Monster of
men, for an Empire: yet happy had that Empire been, if it had never known such
a son. His education prepared him to comply with time: To ingratiate himself
with Senators and Plebians. To affect popularity: and to cover the craft and
cruelty of his nature with a seeming Clemency, and graceful Majesty.

Thus may you see, how good intentions may produce ill effects: and some
mischievous Plots good ends. Some by loving their Husbands (or to use that
complementall garb) their Servants too well, have by their too much love
ruined both their Servants and themselves. Some desiring to please, have made
them perish whom they sought to please. Like that over-kind Duck who perceiving
her Sweetheart to be tiklish, and thinking it to be a pleasure, tickled him so
long, till he burst his very Spleen with laughter.

Now take a review of all those Tragic Examples, which in our last Section we
presented to your sight! Was there any one of those induced to shed blood for
any hope of honor? Filthy lucre? or any other pleasure, save only to become
sole Sovereigns, or absolute commanders of their own Love? Their Plots were;
not to bring in an Empire; usurp immerited honor, or to send their eyes
abroad, to hunt for new favor. Their desires were confined, their affections
closed; their goal obtained: so they might but enjoy, without Sharers, those
whom they so infinitely loved. Content is worth a Crown: and this Crown they
held themselves seaz'd of, so long as they possessed their own.

Their own, you will say! But you relate but of few such unto us. These whom
you have brought forth for such Examples, had their bosoms open to more than
their own Corrivals in others affections, as well as their own. Which as they
fell into fearful extremes, so were they enlivened by unlawful desires.

It is true; yet are we in charity to collect, that if they so highly valued
stolen fruits, they would much more prize such as were lawfully enjoyed.

You have heard sufficient store of Arguments and Presidents touching their
Continency in assaults; their Constancy to their own. With what Equanimity
they have borne all extremes to express their loyal hearts. Hope of fortunes
could not tempt them; Baits of honor could not taint them; youthful pleasure
could not take them. They continued Widows in the absence of their Husbands.
Resembling Snayles in the carriage of their houses: but Roes in dispatch of
their business.

Whence it was, as I conceive it, that the Romans had a custom, that when any
of their Maids were married, they were to bring their household stuff with
them, being such as was by their Friends bestowed on them; which being brought
to their Bridegroomes house: They were likewise to follow in their Waine or
Caroach (according to the quality of their persons) and at the Tressall of the
door, to break the wheels of the Waine, and to put off their shoes;
implying, that from thenceforth they were to be Housekeepers and no Gadders.
And such constant House-wifes have we here offered to your imitation.

Plato in his Dialogue entitled Symposium or a Gossip-meeting, by way of
fiction, (which relish best when they arise from a pure and refined invention)
describes the difference betwixt two kinds of Venus: whereof the first was
more ancient, brought forth by the Heavens, whom Virtuous men do follow: the
second much younger, begotten between Jupiter and Dione, whom wicked men do
serve. Which Fiction, as it is not without delight, so neither is the Moral
without fruit.

Ye Modest Ones, for to you only is our Lamp dedicated, are these who are
brought forth by the Heavens. Your Thoughts are fixed on that Sphere from
whence you came. It is not on earth that can depresse you below your selfs, be
your Fortunes never so dejected: nor on earth that may transport you, because
your desires are higher seated. When you Love, that love of yours is so purely
sifted from all loose love; as it confirms you nothing less than divine. When
you Hate, that hate of yours is so far from all extremes: as you have an
ear no less ready to hear a Submission, than a tender heart to seal their
pardon. When you give, you give chearefully; when you forgive, you forgive
freely. You cannot hear any one defamed, but with an averse ear and declining
heart, you leave the relater to himself: or dissuade him from dispersing such
reports: or stand in defense of their honor whom you hear traduced,
especially, when their absence leaves them unjustified. When any light object
labors to suggest an impure thought to your unblemished minds: you take a wise
course; you give it a repulse at the first assault: left getting entrance, it
plead possession: and disturb the whole Family by her intrusion. Thus by
making Heaven your Object; whatsoever is less than Heaven, you make your
Subject.

Your Speech, likewise is so seasoned; that nothing is uttered by you, but what
is true; knowing, that the ground of every Speech should be Verity; nor any
thing with vehemence pressed, but what may redound to Civil profit; knowing,
that the aim of every Speech should be Vtility; nor continued, but with a
pleasing sweetness; knowing, that the grace of every Speech is Affability. You
think twice before you speak, and may be demanded twice before you answer.
You are not like our forward Gossips, whose tongues make themselves thralls.
Discretion has so regulated your Speech, as it ever stands at distance with
Lightness and Spleen. Your words, unlike many of our feminine discourses,
retain more weight than wind; they are like Nails fastened by the Elders of
the Assembly; such is their efficacy. They are like Apples of Gold with
Pictures of Silver; such is their propriety.

All your Dialect is regulated by the Rule of Charity; you scorn to Speak
that of another, which you would not have another to speak of you. Your
Discourse differs far from that Talkative Orator, whose use was to power forth
an Ocean of Words, but a Drop of Reason. Or like that impertinent Speaker, of
whose studied but stupid speech this judgment was given: That the shortness
of it was the discreetest part of it. No; there is not an accent breathed by
you, but it dignifies you: because preparation fits it: and an unaffected
dress beautifies it. In a word; that which is a blemish in others, becomes an
incomparable grace to you. For as you never minister occasion of discourse
without cause; so you never close it without maturity of judgment and
pregnancy of conceit.

Your Actions, are so pure from stain, as they represent the purity of your
state. Your Works desire not to be clothed with vailes of darkness. You
consider how that All-seeing Eye is over you, from which, though Adam fly to
the bush, Sara behind the door, no, should the mountains offer themselves for
a shroud: yet in vain is such retire: no place can hide us, from his eye that
is ever over us.

It was Seneca's council to his friend Lucilius, that whenever he went about
to do any thing, he should imagine Cato or Scipio, or some other worthy Roman
to be in presence. This Rule you observe; you conceit with your selves in the
sacred silence of your hearts, which are so close from the affections of Earth,
as they only aspire to the Contemplations of Heaven; that the eyes of all good
men, no, even of those who are become Saints, of men, are upon you. Your desire
is only to please them, who are only pleased with the Object of goodness:
Being Pythagoreans to all the World, and Peripatetians to Christ; Nolan. 3.
mute to all vanities, and eloquent only to Christ.

You follow the counsel of a mellifluous father, Bern. de vita solit^ria. Sen.
Ep. 11.
and of a Wise Moral: by setting always before your eyes some Good person, to
the end that you might so live as if he were ever looking on you, ever eying
you.

There is no young Gallant that need encounter you in those terms which that
cautious Cavaliere did in Erasmus to his wanton Mistress: Are you not ashamed
to do that in the sight of God, and eyewitness of his holy Angels, which you
are ashamed to do in the sight of men?

But now to take a view of these Errors, to which your Sex becomes most
engaged: or at least, for which you are many times innocently traduced. This
free speaking Age will not stick to tax you of Ambition: and wherein must this
consist but in your desire of precedence before others of your sex; and
soveraignity over such as should be your heads? And these will tell you of an
ancient custom, which if you observed as you ought you would not transgress
that law of Obedience so much as you do. And this was; that when at any time a
Couple were married, the soale of the Bridegrooms shoe was to be laid upon the
Brides head: implying, with what subjection she should serve her husband. But
me thinks, this Rituall Emblem or Emblematicall Rite was too much underfoot,
to be observed by one that should be esteemed an equall-individuall mate. She
came from his Side, not from his Foot. And though she be not to walk Checkmate
with him, yet when her Check shall meet with him, it cannot choose but both
appease him and please him when any thing shall distemper him. There are some
likewise that will say, how your Ambition clozeth not only here: Your darling
aim is Honor; you could love him that suits you, if he could bestow a new
style on you. The Title of Madame highly takes you. Nor is there any vanity
that pleases more by playing on your fancy, than the naked Complement of
Lovely Lady. I have heard indeed, some of your Sex so affected; but alas, this
was but an harmless Ambition. Of which humor, that honour-inamoured
Damasella seemed to be, who in that Generall-grand Call of Knights, finding in
her Husband an unwillingnesse to accept, as she conceived, of that Honor; so
far at last prevailed with him by strong Reasons and high Relations of the
Honor and Mirror of Knighthood, as she persuaded with him to entertain it.
But upon his return home, having understood, how he had paid for what he got
not; and disburs'd money for that he had not: She entertained the poor
Pilcherd with a Bastinado: telling him withal, that though his dungrell spirit
would make her no Lady, her fury should make him know what she desired to be.

Truth is, such an innate evil is the desire of Honor, as that person who
affects it not, is of a rare temper. And yet that brave Girl seemed to be one
of these; who being Ladyfide, by an honor conferred on her decrepit Husband:
presently upon report of it, thus replied: Trust me, a Cullis were far more
Sovereign for my spent Husband, than any Honor. For tell me, quoth she,
speaking to the Messenger; will all this he has gotten, restore in him Nature?
Will it cure in him his dry Cough? Distillation of rhume from his head? That
perpetual defluxion in his eyes? Will it strengthen his back? Will it make him
bend less in the hams? Will it get me with Boy, which his Seere stock could
never yet do? If his late-purchas'd Honor may produce these effects, I shall
hold it worth acceptance: If otherwise, be it what it will, I shall hardly
admire it, much less embrace it; seeing, a Post is still the same, be it never
so neately painted or pargetted.

An other Error you are likewise taxed of (as what sex or degree so innocent,
which the freedom of a calumnious tongue may not traduce) and it is, your
usual frequent to Court-Maskes and other public State-Shows: where you use
purposely to present your selves, a pretty time before any such Shows are to be
performed, in hope that some amorous Lord, or some other Complementall
Court-Sparke will take you into some withdrawing room, to court your beauty,
and so ingratiate himself within the easy Lists of your fancy. So as, you come
not thither so much to see what is there presented; as to be amorously courted,
affectionately suited; all which is with such yielding silence and pleasing
smiles redarted, as they hold you won so soon as you are wooed, tainted as
soon as you are attempted, soiled so soon as you are assailed, ent'red so
soon as you are assaulted.

Others likewise report you apt to take affection upon the moving of any
personal Action. If you come to a Playhouse, and there chance to see an
Active Roscius breathing life in his Action: you presently feel a glowing
heat in your veins. You could find in your heart to bestow the choice of a
Lover on such an Actor. Weake-grounded malice, to vent it self on such loving
frailties! Injurious Tetters to femall honors! Because their sweet pliable
natures are such, as they can find no harbor for hate; must they therefore be
tax't, because their Love breaks forth into too much heat? These deserve so
little answering, as if they had no other Advocate, even Nature her self would
plead for them.

There be Some likewise who say; that as you are commonly light in the choice
of your Love: so are you in your Love as subject to change. If your affection
be for Youth; though it best please you: yet you can seemingly bestow it on
Age, though nothing more displease you. And these effects those lovely fortunes
of his loathed Love work in you. And what is all the employment you take in
hand, after such time, as you have given him your hand and heart, (but with no
good heart) but how to cousin him? Your use is, they will say, to give your old
Chrone a sleeping powder; that you may take the keys of his treasure from under
his head, the sooner, and so, long before his death, make your selves his
Administrators. You love him, but only in hope of a day will come: when you may
freely make such an one his Heir, who may suite better with your affection,
and in requital share freelier in his fortune.

These will say too, that you bedew your Husbands Corpse with Stepdames tears.
Those funeral flowers which bestick and bedeck his Hearse, cannot be so soon
withered, as your grief^s are vanished. You bury your sorrow with him: neither
is that sorrow your own, but borrowed. A New-husband is formalled, before your
old One be formally buried.

Now; what poor traducements be these? Might Heathens have their times
limited for mourning, and must yours be everlasting?

Some will affirm too, that in comparison of men, your desires are more
unbounded; and this, they say, even our own Modern Chronicles have
sufficiently confirmed. But we find Bodin worthily taxed for writing that
Caesar in his Commentaries should say, that the Englishmen of his time had but
one woman for ten or twelve men; whereas indeed, Caesar never said so, or could
say so, for that he never knew or heard of the name of Englishmen; seeing their
coming into Britain, was (as may be clearly computed) almost 500 years
after his death.

Again; what might be the reason, will some object, why the Serpent first
tempted the Woman rather than the Man? and this question (ever to your
disadvantage) is no sooner, say they, proposed, than resolved by Chrysostom.
Women are naturally unwarier, easier, and frailer. So as, in that they are
unwarier, they are easilier deceived; in that they are easier, they are sooner
to good or evil persuaded; And in that they are frailer, they are the sooner
vanquished. For this cause therefore would not the Devil assault the Man, but
the Woman; for as much as he knew, that a Woman was sooner deceived, because
unwarier; quicklier persuaded, because easier; and sooner vanquished, because
frailer.

But this Objection I have so clearly assoiled in the very first Subject of
this Book; as I shall little need to stand in your Defense any further
touching this particular. Only thus much may suffice: There is small question
to be made, but the Serpents cunning knew well that he might by all probability
soonest prevail upon the weakness of a Woman: yet albeit, she was first
tempted, and tainted so soon as she consented: the Man was as soon persuaded
by the Woman, though she infinitely less subtle than the Serpent; as the
Woman, though the weaker vessel, was by the Subtility of the Serpent.

But we will pass from these, to those obvious reproves which the present
vanities of the Age lay upon you.

Some here, amongst other objections, which groundless spleen is ever apt to
suggest, and calumny with swift wings to disperse; will say that ever since
that time, that your teeth watered at the Apple, they have ever watered at
forbidden fruit. A licorish and luscious tooth has ever since that time seized
on you. And were this all, it were to be borne with. You cannot see a proper
piece of flesh, promising performance; no dapper youth, whose strong sinnewy
posture confirms him an able complete Lover, but your eye wooes him, and in so
hot a chase pursues him, as though your tongue be silent, your sight is
attractively eloquent.

But what would these Critics have you do? Would they have you shut those
beauteous Windows; and to open them to no Object that may delight you? Is there
such a necessity that you cannot look on him, but you must lust after him? If
there be any rare or prodigious Monster to be seen; we flock unto it, and
bestow our money for the sight of it. And is it lawful for us to fix our eyes
with such greediness on a Monster: and unlawful for you to delight that
pleasing Sense with a beauteous Object of Nature?

Yea; but will these say, we direct not our censure nor judgment only by the
Eye; we have other arguments to evince them of lightness: for go to these
late-licentiate Pattentary Sedans: you shall find them shrouded there for
strange arrands. Though their Couches have windows to eye Spectators; they
would not for a World wish that which the Philosopher sometimes Wished:
Epicurus.
To have windows in their breasts, that the whole World might transparantly
look through them. Poor Corky fools! These can see nothing wagge, but they
must p^epe here, and peep there, and think it is Actaeons shadow: whereas, it
is only the shadow of their own deluded fancy which inthrals them to this
misery.

Nor do these only tax you of a various lightness in respect of your Change,
but of a jealous doubtfulnesse toward your own Choice. If you gossip it, none
must question it: whereas, if they, good men, to allay a tedious hour, or
drown the disquiets they suffer at home in a cup of Lethe, keep abroad late,
they must be called to a strict account, and pay a new reckning, after their
misspent day, in the evening.

Nay; you will tell your innocent Husbands, when, God knows, there is no great
cause to suspect them: That you know by your Payles, what way the milk goes.
Whereas, if any rightly knew the integrity of your thoughts, they should find
that such jealouse surmizes were the least of your thought. No; you did never
so much as suspect them, nor conceive any such opinion of them: for having such
sensible experiments of their weakness, you knew well, there was no cause at
all in that way to traduce them. It was your desire that late distempers should
not abridge their days, and make you widows before your times. It was your
aim, that your Husbands should preserve their fame: That they should not fall
under the hazard of the Halbert, or the uncivile salute of a peremptory Watch.
Besides, alas! it is your fortune, sometimes out of mere simplicity, to
misconster the quality of an error. As that good Gentlewoman did, who desiring
to hear how a young Student in Cambridge and her kinsman, behaved himself in
the University: and inquiring of a Collegiat of his how he did: I can assure
you, Mistress, quoth he, that he holds close to Catharine-Hall. I vow, said
the Gentlewoman, there was no vice that I so much feared in him as that, for
the Boy was given to wenches from his Infancy. Thus took this good simple
woman, Catharine-Hall for some dainty Damsel which he constantly haunted,
whereas it was a Collegiat-Hall, which this young Student so affectionately
loved, and where he so studiously frequented.

But let us go on with these ungrounded calumnies; and discuss the strength
and solidity of them to the bottom. Some of these Timonists, or feminine
Tetters, tax you of unbounded pride: These pencyle out your Borders,
Habilements and Embroderies; your toys, tyres and dressings; your wimples,
wyres, and curlings; your paintings, poudrings and purflings. These, say they,
make your fathers patrimonies to shake, to maintain your bravery while you are
Maids: And makes your Husbands Manors, to do you service, pass the
Alienation Office. Alas, poor Girls! If you appear careless in your dress,
you are quickly taxed of discontent; and if neat in your dress, you are
censured of pride. What you do (I freely appeal to your selves) is to please
the curious eyes of your Husbands: And perchance to prevent the worst: for
should they see you sluttish, who knows not, but it might beget instead of
loving you, a loathing of you; and consequently, make them hunt after new
Mistresses: which would ruin all, by making such a breach, as scarce time
could repair, or the remainder of their declining fortunes redeem?

It was the opinion of Lessius, that in some cases Women might use their
painting and poudring without sin: First, if it were to the intent to cover any
blemish or deformity: Secondly, L^ssius de I^stitia and ^ure, l^b. 4. (...).
802. Pet. Al^go^a in Co^pend^o M^nu^l ^a^arr^, c. 2^ Number. 19. ^ol. 257.
if the Husband commanded it, to the end his Wife might seem more comely in
the presence of others: which was likewise the express opinion of Alagora:
That to add more beauty, were it by apparrelling or painting, yea though it
were a mere work of Art, and colourably deluding, yet were it no mortal sin:
confidentely maintaining the use of painting, grounded upon these precedent
respects.

But I shall not desire that my Lamp may give light to that line, which may
seem to give fuel or foment to any light love. The age is apt enough to
sacrifice too many precious hours to Idolatrize such a Shrine. My aim is only
in a fair and just defense of your imitable actions, to wipe of all such
injurious aspersions as calumnious pens shall or may lay on you.

In which Task, I hold my oil so much the better bestowed; for that I am
confident that whereinsoever you are defective, you will labor to supply it,
by perusing this and collecting hence what may truly make you most amiable and
accomplished.

In the mean time, it shall be my constant opinion (nor do I fear that there
shall be found the least sprinkling of heresy in it) that these Stigmatick
Spirits, who have steeped their pens so deep in gall, have sometimes received
some occasional scars from the worst, which has made them so causelessly, and
without exception to invey against the best. For these (as I conceive) have
unhappily got a blow on the shins with a French faggot, or fed too freely on a
Neopolitan Rabbet. These are they, and only they, who stick not to say, if you
be old, you are loathsome; if young, you are gamesome: you can scorn them that
love you; love them that scorn you. You can play the Snakes, shrowding your
selves under the freshest and fragrant'st flowers: but you have a sting to dart
upon every State. You can play the Sirens by tuning your voice, to allure the
amorous Passenger to Vice: But slight you these malicious affronts: you have
within you to secure you; which will so highly improve you, as you remain
perched above the compass or reach of scandal. Yet is not all this which has
been hitherto spoken in your Defense, so to secure you (for so should I delude
you) as to dissuade you from standing upon your guard. There is in no place
security, brave Ladies: Neither in Heaven, nor in Paradise: much less in the
World. Esaias 14.12.
For in Heaven the first Angel fell. Whence Esaias: How art thou fallen from
heaven, O Lucifer, son of ^he morning? For he fell under the very power of the
Deity. Adam in Paradise, Bern.
the place of all delicacy. Judas in the World, from the School of our
Savior, the Seed-plot of all Sanctity. In one word, are ye Maids? you have
your pattern in a Dor^as. Are ye Wifes? you have your pattern in an Esther.
Are ye Widows? you have your pattern in a Judith. These, though dead, their
memories live: and by their life's prescribe you how to live; that living as
they lived, and doing as they did, your memories may live when you are dead.

And so I descend from their Modest Defense, well becoming Creatures of such
divine Excellence, to their Witty Aphorisms, Apothegmes and Answers; which I
shall illustrate in sundry choice and select instances.

SECTION VIII. Their witty Aphorisms, Apothegms and Answers.
TOo strait and narrow was the confine of his shallow conceit, who wished his
wife to have no more wit than to go out of the rain. It seems, he had a
desire to ingrosse it all to himself, and to suffer his wife to have small or
no share with him. But such a Consort were a poor Help. We shall here find
Creatures of an higher pitch: such, who knew how to allay the discomforts of a
perplexed Husband by their wise and sociable sharing with him in his
affliction. Others so nobly composed, as they scorned to stoup to the lest
thought of baseness, when crushed with the greatest weight of affliction.
Others so far from coyness to those they loved, as to their highest hazards,
they not only expressed it, but suffered for their affections. Others such kind
loving Turtles, as they could not endure to lose the presence of their own; or
to conceive any defects or infirmities in their own: and though all beside
themselves distasted them: yet were their true affectionate thoughts ever
individually knit and cemented to them. Others, who could make such excellent
use of their decayed beauty; as they made it their Emblem of mortality:
begetting no less veneration with their riveld age, than they did affection
with their enamored youth. Instances in each of these we shall take occasion to
offer unto you, with such witty Aphorisms, pretty Apothegms, and pithy
Answers; as may infinitely delight you. And first, of such as could apply
comforts and cordials, seasonably to their disconsolate Husbands, when
surrounded with Objects of approaching misery.

Theogena wife to Agathocles (of whom we have made honorable mention
elsewhere) showed admirable constancy in her Husbands greatest misery: showing
her self most his own, when he was relinquish't and forsaken of his own: and
confirming her true affection with this resolution: That she was not given him
to leave him, or to share with him only in prosperity, but in what fortune
soever should befall him, to keep him company.

The like constancy of love, and comfort in advice showed Sulpitia to her^,
when she plainly told him: What, though Fortune leave you, she who loves you
best, and whom you should love best cannot leave you? Should you be wholly
miserable, she will part stakes wlth you, to make you less miserable.

Secondly, for such, whose brave and well-composed temper would not suffer
their masculine spirits to stoop to any Disasters: we shall furnish you with
imitable patterns in that kind: A lovely Lydia, who could with Medea in the
Tragedy, express her self nobly, and make death and danger the least of her
fears.

Who can be forced, she knows not how to dye;
Honor knows how to suffer, so do I.
This that brave-spirited Martia showed good proof of, curing all threats with
this exquisite receipt: I know well how to pay my debt to Nature, but I hope I
shall never know, how to ransom life with dishonor.

Thirdly, you shall find such, who were so far from coyness to those they
loved, as no danger could decline them from their embraces, to whom they had
sacrificed their affections. This that incomparable Marcella well discovered;
answering such as advised her to be more reserved in her love, with that
elegant Poet, in this manner: Ovid.
Non here convenient, nec in una sede morantur
Majestas and Amor --
Love coyness hates, as Birds distempered weather,
"For Love and Majesty suite ill together.


This that constant Chariclea expressed to her dearest Archas; when in a Tablet
she caused this to be engraven, to confirm her resolution, in despite of all
opposition: May I sooner leave to live, than my Archas whom I love.

In the fourth siege, (though they deserve an higher place) shall you see
presented such tenderhearted Turtles, who held it a punishment worse than
death, to be deprived of the presence of their own: No Object could delight
them, being reft their sight whose affection only inchain'd them.

Of this rank both Divine and Humane Stories render us two examples: The one
is that of Caja Tranquilla, who ever used this apt Posy for a Bride-bush, to
her royal Spouse Caius Tarquinius Priscus; Where thou art Caius, I am Caia.
The other, that of Ruth unto Naomi; Whither thou go, I will go: and where
thou dwell, I I will dwell.

This that noble Lady Armenia, (whom we have formerly mentioned, and whose
memory cannot be too much revived) with a princely modesty seconded; when
being invited to King Cyrus Wedding, went thither with her Husband. At night
when they were returned home, her Husband asked her, (amongst other Curtain
parliance) how she liked the Bridegroom, whether she thought him to be a
fair and beautiful Prince or no? Truth, says she, I know not: for all the
while I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon thy self.

Nor could some of these conceive any such defects in their Husbands, as were
more than manifest to the Senses of others. So as, when one of Hiero's enemies
reproaching him with a stinking breath: he went home and questioned his Wife
why she told him not thereof? Who answered, She thought all men had the same
savor. Which confirms what Plato sometimes affirmed: The Lover is ever
blinded with affection toward his or her beloved.

No less graceful than loyal was the answer of that young Bride to her
Husband; The loving and loyal answer of a young-married Bride, to her Husband,
touching the late rumor of our Scottish wars.
who being borne of the Scottish borders, and married to an Englishman, was
demanded one day by her Husband, whether, if she were to play the Soldier, she
would fight for her own Nation, or for his? As I ^all, quoth she, ever an aye
acknowledge my Husband for my head, so God forefend that I sud crack the
allegiance I owe to the head of my Husband.

Some Aphorisms there be, if they may merit that style, who lose much of their
state, by their too weak discovery of an Anacreontick Spirit, and rendering
themselves too light.

That wench was of a more amiable face, than admirable conceit: who having
entered marriage with a Tradesman, and afterward entertaining too familiar
acquaintance with a Knight; By whom, as it was suspected, she had children as
well as by her own Husband: stickt not to ask this wise question at a Gossips
feast: Put case, a Woman having issue by a Knight, with whom she was
acquainted, as well as by a Man of Trade, to whom she was married; whether
those children she had by the Knight, might not take the wall of those she had
by a Man of Trade? Or, being to be made Apprentices, whether they might not be
Freemen before their Elder Brothers?

A reverend old Bencher, the very first night that he went to bed to his Lady;
She sent forth a Shreeke; and being asked the cause; How could I do less?
said she; If the embraces of an Husband be so cold, What coldness shall I
find in the arms of Death?

That amorous Tomboy was a kinder Trout; who, though she had no competent
portion, yet had she a competible proportion, an incomparable affection. She,
one day, upon a loving Enterview, debated the matter with her Sweetheart in
this sort: Sir, I cannot conceive how you should love me, seeing you spinne out
so much time, when you so shortly may really enjoy me. You make much ado in
getting of a portion, Whereas with less ado we might beget a Christian. Had I
more, you should enjoy it: having less, your joy should be no less, in
enjoying me with it.

That Girl approved her self an expert and experienced Artist for repairing
the decays of a broken Tradesman; who being rudely encountered by One, who
showed himself more haughty, than his state was weighty; more sensually light
than suited with his gravity: Sir, you have lent me your pulse, and I have found
your disease. -- Now, the best Receipt for any one who pines away of a
Consumption in the bowels of his Estate, (of which distemper I find you
labor) is store of Monopolian gold decocted from a Pound to a Noble; and to
take such a quantity of this in a broth from six Mooneths to six Mooneths. A
precious Cordial to make rich Heirs, and rare tears at a Funeral.

That hot- brained Calacute showed himself of too Italionate a temper; whose
Wife being surprised with an extreme Fever, which drove her into so a violent
a distemper; as the fury or phrensy rather of her disease, forced her to
discover many things she did, and (perchance) more than she ever did. He, after
her recovery, believing what her distraction had intemperately disclosed,
willed her to go along with him to his Countrey-house: where, upon his
departure from her, he was pleased to use these words unto her: Madonna, here I
intend to leave you; for I must tell you, I love your room more than your
Company, such is my affection. And I replied she) prefer Rome before your
Company, such is my devotion.

That hapless Malecontent fell upon a desperate conclusion; who, having
relinquished his own Bed for the embraces of a a Strange Woman: and in a
Melancholy Fit, taking a pint of white Wine and mixing it strongly with
Mercury; Willed his Curtezan (as ever she loved him) to drink half unto him:
She, whether out of a servile fear, (or which is more rare in one of her
condition) out of a real love, drunk it to him; which he with an active hand
stirring, to make it more powerful, pledged and drunk it of to the bottom.
She, to express a care of his life, as she had formerly tendered to his love;
having in readiness some Sallet-oyle with other sovereign receipts to repel
poison, mixed them in another pint: Willing him (as ever he loved her) to
pledge her annother health; But his desperate melancholy would not accept it:
While she, no less desirous to live; than tender of his love, drunk it, and
recovered by it.

But to leave the Suburra, and approach the Temple of Viriplaca; a place of
more peace, and in the eye of goodness deserving more praise.

The Last, though not lowest, because furthest divided and estranged in their
thoughts from earth; are those, whose decayed beauty, though it h'as divorced
them from youthful affection: yet has the constant opinion of their goodness
purchased to their rivell'd age, a reverend estimation. This appeared in that
sometimes fair Bellingeria's excellent Apothegme: Though our beauty be
despicable in the eye of youth: Iuvenilem vul tum amisimus, Senilem cultu^
atsigimus.
our rivels are venerable in the eye of age. Though we lose that which our
beauty did gain, opinion: yet we retain that which our beauty might have lost,
reputation. What divine use that excellent Eugenia made of her decayed beauty,
may be gathered by this expressive Aphorism: Sometimes I made my Glass a
Corrector of my Face: now I make my Face the Corrector of my Life. Nor is it
possible I should forget my Grave, beholding so many Graves (meaning furrows)
in my Face.

We shall find Aphorisms, Apothegm^ and Answers of another nature, and a
rising from a lighter temper; less serious, but no less ingenious.

This that pretty pert Girl expressed in her quick answer to her Mother; who
being reproved by her for looking so boldly on men's faces, saying, that it
became Maids to be bashful, and to look upon the Earth, and for Men to look
upon Maids. No, Mother by your favor, quoth she, it rather becomes Maids to
look upon Men, and for Men to look upon the Earth. For as Man is to look
upon that whereof he was made, that is, the Earth: so is a Maid to look upon
that whereof she was made, and that was Man.

She came nothing short of this Girls boldness, occasioned by her own
lightness, who after such time as she had too freely played the Wanton, left
the Child which she had brought forth to the Care and Charge of the Parish: and
being rebuked for it, saying, she was unthankful, so to abuse that place
where she had received so many Courtesies: O, quoth she, no such matter; I have
in this rather shown my self every way ready to tender a requital, than any
way ungrateful: For in this, I resemble the Storke, a Bird of a thankful
nature, who ever leaves one of her young Ones in the house where she breeds
them to the Owner.

That witty wench returned to a Dunse in a Cassocke as shrewd an answer (though
she ever reflected more religiously upon her conjugall honor;) Who telling
this Maid, that Women were at best but Necessary Evils, and that they were
never needful to any but in time of necessity: whereas the Lord stood in need
of such as him. Truly, quoth she, I highly honor your place, yet did I never
read that the Lord stood in need of any thing but an Ass.

That well-meaning Wife knew rightwell how to shape her Husband a Reply: Who,
when her Husband told her that it should be progress time for a season with
him, and that they might lie apart, because it was Dogge-Dayes: Well, Husband,
(quoth she) but I hope there are no Dogge-Nights.

No less to purpose was that good Wifes answer to that Chimick Doctor: Who,
telling her what rare experiments his sublimated Art had extracted from the
Philosophers stone. And that Kelly (that Austrian Captive) was but to him a
Puny in that Mysterious Secrecy: And that, he would not only make her Pots,
Pipkings, Kettles, Land-irons with all her other Utensiles, pure Indian Gold;
but convert her self too, if she pleased, into the very same Metal, and not
only color, but cover her quite over with gold: O no, by no means, quoth she,
Good master Alchimist; I had rather be covered with a little good flesh, than
all the gold of the Indies.

Of such present flashes and flourishes of feminine wit, we might here in large
our selves with variety of Instances; but these for a taste, may serve at this
time for a sufficient repast. Hence it may appear that our endeavors have
been employed, not only to express their maturity of judgment, which i^ of
highest worth; but likewise their pregnancy of conceit, an infallible argument
of a Mother-wit.

From these are we to descend in order, to the last but not least improvement
of their honor: Their Eminent Labors; and how they were Assistants in the
exquisitest Works that have been formerly composed, either for History or
Poesy. Which relation will redound no less highly to their glory.

SECTION IX. Their Eminent Labors; And how they were Assistants in the
exquisitest Works that have been formerly composed, either for History or
Poesy.
This clozing Section is illustrated with examples of incomparable constancy,
judgment, ingenuity, in that excellent History of Philocl^s and Doricl^a.
SUCH men, who have casten their Lots in fair fields, by making choice of such
consorts, whose virtues confirm them Mirrors, and whose lives are lines of
examples unto others; find Hymen smyling, nay shining on their Nuptials all
the year long. Whereas such, who cast their Lots in barren fields, by joining
hands to sensual Brides, Brothell-Beds: who are nothing but voice or air;
with a small portion of skin-deepe beauty to practice on deluded Sense, till it
grow weary. The Bodies of such men, I say, begin to undergo Mezentius torment,
living in the embraces of the dead till they dye. For as death holds in his
power all that is past, governs all that is present, and pretends to govern
all that is to come: the very like Sovereignty has death over these who have
enwreath'd and embath'd themselves in such loathed embraces. Dead they are to
all former comforts, for those are vanished: Dead to all present comforts, for
these are from them estranged: Dead to all future comforts, unless their earth
be with Heaven exchanged.

The Stomach, (to use the words of an experienst Practist) resembles the good
man of the House, and being the cause of all Concoction and Digestion, must be
fortified and strengthened, by being kept temperately warm, retentive, and
clean, without oppressing humors; not empty, or fasting, being nourished by
it self, more than by the reins; and lastly in appetite, whereby Digestion is
sharpened.

Their Stomachs are of a strong Concoction, that could digest Wenches of such
an humerous condition. But I shall spread a Table dished up with Creatures of
another nature, choycer temper, and such, as with modesty and majesty can
tender you a Boulster Lecture.

Not a smyle but implies state; No light smyle that may imply a stain. In
these you shall find (to use Verstegens words) A restitution of decayed
intelligence in Antiquities, concerning their own Nation. And lest I should
keep your Stomachs too sharp, or tire your patience with too long preambles, I
present here unto you their Catalogue.

Zenobia, (to begin with a Princely pattern) after the death of her dear
Spouse Odonatus, though a Barbarian Queen, yet by her reading of both Roman
and Greek Histories, with other memorable relations, suting well with the
passage and posture of those times, so managed the State of that rich and free
City Palmyra in Syria, as she retained those fierce and intractable people in
her obedience: and in a Princely privacy, reserving ever some select hours for
perusal of Philosophical Politics, Oeconomicks, Natural and Moral
Philosophy, Discourses of History; all which held good 0correspondence with her
Majesty, she a bridged the Alexandrian, and all the Oriental Histories: a
task of no less difficulty than utility; whereby she attained the highest
pitch of wisdom and authority.

The like inward beauty upon her Sex, bestowed that virtuous Cornelia, mother
to the victorious Gracchus; who, as she was an Exemplar or Mirror of goodness
and chastity; so by the improvement of her education to her children (the
lineall branches of so hopeful a succession) she expressed her self a noble
Mother, in seasoning their unriper years, in the studies of History, Poesy,
and Philosophy. Next her, Portia, Brutus his wife; Cleobula, daughter to
Cleobulus, one of the seven Sages of Greece. The daughter of Pythagoras (to
leave Rome and descend to Samos) who after his death governed his School;
excelling in all humane Learning; and afterward, to give the World a further
testimony of her chastity, as well as ability; erecting a College of Virgins,
she became sole governesse or guardinesse of it. What shall I say of Theano,
daughter to Metapontus, a disciple of the same Sect? Of which name there were
two; both highly enriched with all knowledge. The one a learned woman of Crete,
and wife to Pythagoras: the other the wise of Antenor, who was the Priest of
Pallas. What of Phemone, that mysterious Sibyll, who first gave life to an
Heroic verse: and in exquisite composures (amongst other prophetical
raptures) recounted the memorable actions and occurrents of her time? What of
Sulpitia, Calanus his wife, far wiser than her ill-advised husband, who
before great Alexander, feeling himself sick and distempered, leapt into a
great fire and there was burned: for she left behind her most sovereign
Precepts touching Wedlock, with the Relations of that age, in a most proper and
elegant style? And Hortensia, daughter to that most famous Orator Hortensius,
who for copiousnesse of speech, gravity or weight of sentence, gave a living
luster to her lines, a succeeding ^ame to her Works? And Edesia, borne at
Alexandria, one of such infinite Learning, sweetness of disposition, as she
was highly admired by those that lived in her time: and amongst other
excellences (to make her more accomplished both in foreign and modern
affairs) singularly read in Histories; then held a Study worthy the
entertainment of noblest Ladies? And Corinnathia, who is reported to have
surpassed the Poet Pindarus in artfull and exact composures: contending with
him five several times, (as may be probably gathered by the testimonies of the
Ancient, and such as were happy Spectators of those glorious Duello's) for the
Laurel Chaplet or Coronet, usually bestowed upon such ingenious followers and
favorites of the Muses? And Paula, Seneca's wife, a Matron not only improved by
his instructions, but highly enriched by the benefit of her own proper
Studies: ever reserving some choice hours for the perusal of such Relations,
as either in those or preceding times had occurred. So as, we may very well
gather, whence the ground of her husbands grief proceeded; whence the source
of his sorrow was derived, in bewailing the ignorance of his Mother, not
sufficiently seasoned in the Precepts of his Father: by reflecting upon the
abilities of his Paula, whose discourse for History, Moral Philosophy, and all
Humanity appeared so genuine and proper, as her very name conferred on her
Family a succeeding honor. Lastly, (that I may not dwell too long on these
Feminine Features, Memorable Mirrors, lest their diligence should tax some of
our trimmer Ladies of their supine and neglectfull errors) Argentaria Pollia,
or Polla, wife to the Heroicke Lucan, is said to have assisted him in the apt
and majestic composure of his verses: being no less rich in fancy, than he
himself when most enlivened by a Poetical fury. Nor did she restrain her
more prosperous studies, only to dimensions; being no less conversant in
Historical Relations, with other humane Sciences, than Poetical raptures.

Such as these might make good Companions to Pray with, to Play with, to
Converse or Commerce with. These make the cheerful beams of every day break
forth, as if every day were the Solemnization of a new Marriage day. These with
an averse ear listen to the Apocryphal verses of those fondlings, nor can
they credit them, when they hear them: Primus erit Mensis Mellitus Origin
Sponsis,
Proximus extinctas sentit amore faces.
First Month's an Honey Month unto the Bride,
Next Month all fondling must be laid aside.


These have no knowledge of any such proverbiall experiments. For so much
estranged were they from fondness (an error too familiar with New-married
Cooples) as their discretion could never incline to any such lightness. Their
youth never admitted youthful parliance: nor stouped to any uncomely
dalliance. Their affections were not grounded on Sense, which made them to be
of longer continuance. For those Loves quickly expire and dye, which receive
their only infusion by the eye.

If thou will believe thy eyes, says Loves Lecturer, thou give credit to thy
betrayers; thy spirit will suffer a thousand pains and confusions: thou will
take looks for azure Mountains, because that distance and proximity deceive
the sight: a river may also deceive thee in its course, till a branch or straw
inform thee what way the stream goes. So may the Glo-worme delude thee with
her burnisht Skales, and with a counterfeate shine surprise thy sight.

Know, I say know (if at any time, any such adulterate beauty shall seize on
thee) that this Woman, this sin-^eered Curtezan; who seems for^ally perfect,
gulls and abuses thee. Yesternight she slept ugly, and this Morning is adorned
with that beauty that thou so much praisest, so highly prizest, and yet she
holds it not but by hire.

If thou had piece-meale examined her, thou would have found nothing but
prinn'd cloth, parget powder and plaster; and to begin her anatomy at the
head, the hair she wears came from the Periwigge-makers shop; for her own
was blown away with an ill-wind that came from Naples; and if any remains,
she dares not show it, lest it should accuse her of the Time past. Her Eyes
have no other brows than those which a Pencill makes. Nor her face no other
color than that of painting: It Is an old Idol newly painted over, and yet it
is no little wonder to see a Picture have Motion: and she is such a one, who
has almost found the secret of that famous Negromancer (that pretended to grow
young again, by shutting himself in a glasse-violl) since that all that which
has made her appear so fair, as thou speak, comes from the Alembick
waters, Esseno's, and painting. If she would suffer her face to be washed, thou
would know her no more, she would be hideous unto thee; rivels and ridges
would each where encounter thee: And were it not for the Confections she eats
and the Perfumes she wears, her mouth and feet would quickly make thee stop
thy nose; if thou should kiss her, all thy lips would be stuck with oil and
grease; embrace her, and she is naught but past-boord, canvas, and whalebone,
with which all the body of her gown (the better body of the too) is stuffed, to
repair the faults of her proportion; and when she goes to bed, she leaves upon
the table (at her beds-feet) half of her person in putting of her Cloths.

Upon what then is thy bleered Judgment founded, that thou find her so
accomplished? Thy eyes have they not betrayed thee? Admire thou thy ignorance,
and know (not to trouble my self with this woman's imperfections) that most of
the rest of the Sex (meaning such only as have engaged themselves to shame,
and exposed their honor to sale) are but beasts full of pride, who triumph
over the simplicity of men: and that even those who seem to be worth something,
bring a thousand sufferings to those that seek after them; so that at the end
of the account, the expenses do always arise to more than the Principal.

And to make thee despise the embraces of these kind of Creatures, put before
thy eyes that secret infirmity, to which nature has so often subjected them;
and I believe thou will entertain a profitable disdain, and repent that thou
ever lovedst a thing so vile and hateful.

By this, we may collect how miserable that Love is which draws breath from a
deceiving sense: whose beginning, as the best of it is but fonding, so the
issue thereof is many times seconded with distaste and revenge, closing their
once pretended, but now vanished love, with an easy forgetfulness. For None
takes greater pleasure to be revenged than a Woman, when she revenges her
self on her discarded Friend or Favorite; and to play with advantage is the
most pleasing and greatest vengeance that can be taken. And that they are apt
to forget, who is it having eyes, and sees not? Experience will tell you, that
she has seen one, that with her right eye wept for her dead Husband, and with
her left laughed to her living Friend. But we have reserved our Lines, and
bestowed our Oil on better Subjects. For even to descend to our own Modern
times, we shall find store of noble Ladies, who are enriched with such unequal
abilities, such matchless indowments both by Art and Nature, as they have
deservingly acquired, and constantly retained that Select style of THE WITS.
Their desire is, to have their Muses rather Buskined than Busked. Sweet and
dainty Airs are the attendants of their Ears. High and Heroic measures those
treasures, which they desire to store; and which give an incomparable grace to
the Theater of our state.

These are they, who hold hours of such estimate; as they cannot endure that
the least minute should expire in vapor, or spend it self upon perfume or
powder. Yea, with some of their precious darling Poems have I sometimes
encountered, wherein I found couched such a priority of Art and Conceit, as
they matched if they outstrip't not many of our most ambitious and
laurel-assuming Labors.

Others we have, who though they be not altogether so happy for strength of
fancy; yet are they no less useful in an other faculty. And these be such,
as read Principles of Huswifery to their well-ordered Family. These will never
spend, where discretion bids them spare; nor spare, where reputation bids them
spend. These know how to command without domineering, how to manage the charge
of an House without mutining. These can welcome their Husbands home with an
affable smyle: and can put on the same Countenance in the entertainment of his
Friend, without a thought of ill. These, though their care be great; yet so
modest are they in arrogating ought to themselves, as they ascribe the good
carriage and dispatch of all things to their Husbands wisdom and providence:
holding ever the approvement of his fame, to be the improvement of their own.
If at any time, These be given to Read; they make right use of what they read.
They read not to dispute, but to live: Not to talk, but to know. Humility ever
keeps them Company, both in Gate, Speech, Look, and Habit. They are
circumspect whom they consort with* ever remembering that true Maxim: Tell me
with whom thou conversest, and I will tell thee what thou art. To prevent the
worst, they address themselves to the best, converse with the best: bestowing
all hours of the day upon some proper employment. For they find more by
Reading, than their own practick declining, that all Loose and Effeminate
infirmities proceed only through idleness; for where that is, lust finds easy
access. So says Petrarch in his Triumph of Love.

Einacque di otio e di lascivta humana.
Where observation may inform every cautious Reader, lest through indiscretion
he deservingly suffer; That a man ill-married, may boast that he possesses in
the person of his Wife, all necessary qualities to be put into the List of
Martyrs.

Whereas, these, whom we here discourse of, are so far from making their
Husbands suffer, as they esteem it their highest honor, equally to close with
them in the harmony of their comforts; and to allay the surcharge of their
griefs with the sweetness of their temper. This the Poet in the person of
Cyrnus cheerfully chanted: (...). Theog.
Than a good Woman naught can sweeter be,
Thou Cyrnus knows't, be witness then with me.


In one word then, Brave and noble-disposed Ladies, be it your care to be the
Same we have described you; so may you amply requite us for this Service we
have done you.

FINIS.

