(...)

THE Smoking Age, OR, The man in the mist: WITH The life and death of Tobacco.

Dedicated

To those three renowned and imparallel'd Heroes, Captain WHIFFE, Captain
PIPE, and Captain SNUFF.

To whom the Author wishes as much content, as this Smoking Age can afford
them.

Divided into three Sections.

1. The Birth of Tobacco. 2. PLUTO'S blessing to Tobacco. 3. TIMES complaint
against Tobacco.
Satis mi^ipauci lectores, satis est unus, satis est Nullus. Upon TOBACCO.

This some affirm, yet yield I not to that,
'Twill make a fat man lean, a lean man fat,
But this I Am sure (hows'ere it be they mean)
That many whiffes will make a fat man lean.
(...).

At the Sign of Teare-Nose.

M. D. CXVII.

Upon the Errata's.
The Authors absence, with the intricacie of this copy, caused these Escapes
here committed, to be so many. But no wonder, if Subjects of this Nature become
subject to Error, when they tre^ of so giddie an humor, as Liquour and Vapor.
Correct them, as you shall meet them, with a consorious candor.

Page 12. lin. 22. for abilished, read abolished. p. 24. l. 8. for priv^tion,
read privation. p. 53. l. 6. for Ference, r. Terence. p. 6^. l. 20. for you, r.
him. p. 66. l. 7. for Flap dragon, r. Slap-dragon. p. 76. l. 1. to deleatur. p.
78. l. 14. of suppleatur. p. 79. l. 23. for defy, r. define. p. 103. l. 24 for
Celphalgia, r. Cephalgia. p. 104. l. 2. beg suppleatur. p. 111. l. 15. for
though, r. thought. p. 118. l. 8. for either r. ever. ib. l. 22. for stop, r.
s^eepe. p. 121. l. ^lt. for intricatest, r. intimatest. p. 135. l. 11. for and,
r. one. p. 138. l. 1. for artificial, r. artificially. p. 141. l. 19. for
Sotary, r. Votary. ib. l. 22. for ears, r. years. p. 142. l. 3. for bath, r.
have* p. 143. l. 15. an suppleatu^. ib. l. ul^. ^or resembrance, r.
resemblance. p. 147. l. 26. for at, r. as. p. 150. l. 9. for Sole^ysims, r.
Soloecis^es. ib. l. 6. for word-joyning, r. word*coyning. ib. l. 23. for
legatum, r. l^gatum. p. 166. l. 8. for of. r. to. p. 178. l. 22. for diet, r.
riet.

To My Learned, judicious, and most experienced friend, T. C. Doctor of
Physic: All success to his conscionable endeavors.
Sonnet.
TO you, in whom knowledge and goodness meet,
Whose ends are honest, and whose sole content
Is to revive your heart-sicke patient,
In humblest sort, as Clients use to greet
Their pious Patrons, do I make retrait:
To whom I owe my self, my life, my love,
My praise, my prayers, next to the Powers above.
The high Physician, in whose glorious hand
The globes of Heaven and Earth contained are,
Give blessing to your cure, cure to your care,
Prosper your practice both by sea and land,
And give success to what you understand:
For in you I have found, what is rare to find,
A curious knowledge in a virtuous mind.
For th'artlesse Mounteb anke, whose cure's to care
How to deceive a Gull, so much I hate it,
I wish but execution of the Statute,
To such penurious venters of base ware,
Who, as Hippocrates relates, dare
Purchase, by Patients death, a little art,
Which they by peece-meale sell at every Mart.
For you, so long as life runs the row these veins,
I will retain a grateful memory,
And blaze the fame of your integrity
^n such a^ these, or in some choycer strains,
To gratify your care, your cure, your pains:
For if we honor him that gives us wealth,
What owe we him that gives us life and health?
"For had I treasure offered, I Would refuse it,
"Wanting the sov'raigne means of health to use it.
EUCAPNUS NEPENTHIACUS, NEAPOLITANUS.

To my worthy approved and judicious Friend, Alexander Riggby Esquire, all
generous content.
ASsumpsits are Law-ties in Courts above,
So be Assumpsits in respect of Love;
This has induced me, Sir, to render you,
Near to my day, a tender of my due.
For in Gants aged-towne last time we met,
I promised you, and promises are debt,
To publish some choice subject in your name,
And in this Toy have I performed the same;
Which, give't no pleasing relish to your mind,
It shall by fire be purged and refined,
Where by the airie substance of my book,
May be resolved to nothing else but smoke,
But how so re this Subject you approve,
It acts his life and death that many love;
So a^, be you but pleased to see his death,
Next time we meet we will laugh him out a breath:
Mean while accept this gage, till I have time
To mold my love in an exacter line.
For the Court, where now my suit depending is,
Has forced me write in forma pauperis;
From whence dismissed, your equal self shall hear
My Muse can mount unto an higher Sphoere.
Yours entirely, EUCAPNUS NEPENTHIACUS, NEAPOLITANUS.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THis Manuscript falling into my hand, for the deserving esteem of the Author,
whose name it bore, I communicated it to the serious perusal of sundry
judicious Censors, who highly approved the curious conceit and invention of the
Author: who composed it (as he has since ingenuously acknowledged) in his
infancy of judgment, which made him altogether averse from publishing it.
Howsoever the subject seem light, you shall find it like a delightful soil,
so plenteously interveined with pregnant passages, pleasant allusions, liberal
and unforced relations, as I make little doubt, but it will afford a pleasing
relish to any ones palate, who through Criticisme of censure is not
prejudicate. Read, reap, and return.

To Whomsoever, whenever, or wheresoever.
SOme few years ago, one Boraccio Fumiganto, a Burmudan, made repair unto
me; and upon discourse of the plantation of Tobacco, entreated me upon all
terms of love and familiarity betwixt us, that I would address my pen to
treat of that Subject; being, as ^e very truly affirmed, a principal help to
discourse, especially to our young English Gallants, whose first salutation to
their acquaintance is, Will you take a pipe of Tobacco? But my answer was no
less roughly than roundly returned, replying, that Alexander Severus would
have smoaked such sellers of smoke, and Xerxes would have pulled their skin
over their ears; if these smoakie Merchants, being such as this Burmudan was,
had vended, or vented those commodities in their time. With this answer, my
fuming Fumiganto seemed much disco^tented, taxing me of prejudicacie, in
condemning a Science (for so this Factor termed it) which was not only hugged
but honored by our hopeful Gentry; whose desire was rather to be
matriculated in the exquisite taking of a Pipe, than in the tossing of a Pike;
in a quiffe and a quaffe, than shaking of a staff. Presently upon this
affront, came in a Trinidadan with a Varinan, who desi ou^ to hear what
Subject it was that made us so hot, I replied, it was Tobacco, the very fume
whereof, as it does ever, had driven us to that distemper. O insolence, or
rather impudence, quoth the Trinidadan! shall a weed, the wealth of many
Islands, and the delight of the Queen of Islands, receive that aspersion?
tellme, tellme (quoth he) thou professed Mamothrept to all generous humors, how
should long and lingri^g hou^es be consumed, how should discourse, wanting
matter, be continued, how should entertainment or the life of society be
preserved, how should hospitality now shown not so much in the ^himney, is in
the nose of the Gentry, he discovered? Nay more, how should some Companies be
maintained, if this sovereign receipt to all maladies, were not countenanced?
What Companies, said I? Marry the Company of Pipemakers, Sirrah Stoicke;
whereof one Brachifort, who is no small Fool, has procured a benefit, to
inhance the rints of his pate by the rents of the pipe, and smoke them who
made Pipes for others smoke. Is it possible, quoth I? Yes, my cringing
Critic (said the Varinan) that it is, and yet you disesteeme our quality.
Besides, I hear, quoth he, that one Aestivus Nepenthiacus, a grand
Monopolist, and a judicious Practist in his profession, has of late renounced
his practice, wherein he was a right hopeful beginner, to betake himself to
the plantation of Tobacco; wherein I will not justify his trial of
experiments, being for the most part more deceiving than thriving; but sure I
am hi^ artificial Stoves, Limbecks, (...), and other artfull inventions, have
proved him a Dogmaticall Doctor in his profession. Whereto I answered, that
indeed I had heard of his rare experiments, but how little Nepenthiacus had
gained by them, might appear by this, that as he had formerly left his
Profession, so now of late he was enforced to leave his nation, to work
wonders among the wild Irish. Where report was, he intended to remain till
he had reduced all those bogs and marshes to plots of Tobacco; so beneficial
is he to the State, though prejudicial to himself. This, quoth the
Trinidadan, may be all easily done, if he exactly observe his geometrical
ascents and descents, which by his mathematical line, which he has always
in readiness, with all facility may be attained. For in that glory of
Islands, wherein I have long time remained, works of greater difficulty than
this have been effected: but to insist on any of these I will not, because
they would seem incredible to the shallow and barraine apprehension of the
vulgar: yet to make instance of one for all, I hold it not altogether
fruitless. I have seen the seeds of Tobacco sown in a bed of gourds, and in
a months space the whole bed of gourds were into leaves of Tobacco changed.
Where at smiling, I have read (quoth I) all Ovids Metamorphosis, and I find
there no such transmutation. No marvel (answered he) those were fictions,
these true and native relations: besides, you are to know that Travelers in
their surveyes, assume a privilege above the authority of Authors. Traversing
thus our ground, as one cloyed with this discourse, I had a desire to leave
them to themselves, and address my self to mine own affairs; but Boraccio
Fumiganto, my familiar friend, and one who had more interest in me than the
other two, st^pt betwixt ^ee and the door, conjuring me upon that inviolable
league of amity so long professed and protested, that I would rest satisfied
by giving way to their entreatie; promising withal, that my travel should not
be unrequited, if I would prosecute some thing touching the praiseworthy
invention of Tobacco, which they with such importunity desired: But modestly,
as seemed me, did I answer: that my labors, as they deserved no such
courtesy, so did I ever scorn they should be mercenarie: besides, if I
should give way to their request by publishing ought concerning the singular
use of that commodity, yet might my Task seem useless, the oil of my Lamp
fruitless, being employed in that Subject so much pressed, so frequently
printed, and therefore needless. Whereat the Varinan seemed much incensed,
vowing, that many years were not past since he first set foot in this I Will,
how then could it appear that any Author would do him that favor, being no
English-borne but a stranger, to undertake for the vent of his commodity any
labor? To which objection I replied, that the English were ever courteous unto
strangers, many times approving better of them, than of their own natural
inhabitants. And whereas, he could not be induced to believe that any Author
would address his pen to write in his favor: I assured him, that I had read
the Titles of diverse books treating of the use and commerce of Tobacco; as the
Poem of that English Musaeus, (...), Tobacco battered. Likewise, another
pleasant poetical Paradox in the praise of the P. wherein is learnedly proved,
and by impregnable reasons evinced, that Tobacco is the only sovereign
experimental cure, not only for the Neapolitan itch, but generally for all
maladies incident to man's body. Which discourse is with no less exactness
prosecuted, than Rodolphus Agricola's was in his tract of the Vanity of
knowledge; Cornelius Agrippa in his discourse of the Uncertaintie of knowledge;
or Erasmus in his so much admired Encomion in the Praise of folly. Besides many
other judicious relations of late years published by our English Navigators,
all tending to the praise of that excellent knowledge in the plantation of
Tobacco: and those exquisite effects which in foreign countries it has
effected. So as the Herb Moli, so highly prized and praised by Homer, could
not be more useful to the wandering Ithacus, in repelling the charms of
Circe, than this Indian weed has been ever by their reports powerful to the
traveling Arabs, to inure them to all extremity. What then should Tasks of
this nature be any more revived, seeing so generous and general an use of it
has made it approved? so as, whoseever should write against it, might have
more adversaries to oppose him; than he had reasons through his whole discourse
to allege for him. Yea but, replied the Trinidadan, for all this, it is not
unknown how the Emperor Eudorus has diverse times inhibited this to all his
Courtiers: yea, and long since, so bitterly inveyed against the humorous and
phantasticke use thereof* as publicly all those great Professors, who
formerly did partake of nature with the S^lamander, to show how conformable
they would be to the opinion of their Empero^r, broke their Tobacco-pipes, to
manifest their distaste of what they so violently had affected, by throwing
away those instruments by which their smoke was usually conveyed. All this,
said I, i^ no less than truth; yet, h^w long did the distaste continue? Did
not th^se brave Tindarian spirits quickly retai^e what they had so seemingly
disclaimed? So as, no meat can be well digested (so powerful is custom being
once retained) till a pipe of Tobacco be exhaled, ^ea some times a whole Petoun
of Indian f^me ^e exhausted. For howsoever, to please the Emper^ur, whose
prince^y and impartial censure without respect to impost, seem (...) of your
profession a little bitter, their pipes were battered, their Tobacco scattered,
and this late introduced relic of Gentilitie cashered; yet by means of a
meagre Matachin, o^e Samius Argilloplastes, they were shortly supplied,
wheresoever, or whomsoever this pleasing humor had disfurnished. Since which
time, both Court and City have no less steemed with your fume, my dear
Trinidadan, than the Academie, that golden grove of Hesp^rie, with your
late-knowne smoke my Varinan, or the Country, that Court-Ape of vanity, with
your vulgar stuff, my stale Burmudan. What Academie, said the Varinan? Sure I
am, if you mean either of those two Sisters, whose renown our very Coast
admireth, and whose unequalled paritie those Countries who never saw them
affects, you err much in your judgment; for the Masters and Governors of
private houses, (this I dare avouch upon mine own knowledge) are such
cautelous Guides and Guardians ^ver that Charge wherein they stand interessed,
as they cannot endure the smell of this Indian Hag, for so they term it, to
evaporate within their Cloisters. So as, being one time there (whereby you
shall easily gather how ignorant these sage Magnifico's were in the artfull
profession of the pipe) it was my fortune to consort with a joviall fri^ of
young Pupills, all Freshmen save one or two, who had received seasoning from
the Pump for their absurdities. With whom having traversed two or three pipes
of rich Varina, with some bottles from Fons. Clitonius which procured Urina,
just as we were canvassing a fresh pipe, in comes a Senior Master, Tutor (as I
afterward understood) to those lively Lads with whom I consorted; who seeing
the chamber all in a fume, grew into a monstrou^ ^ume himself, so as taking up
some odd pipes which lay scattered upon the Table, I will henceforth (quoth
he) prevent you Boys of your piping; and with that, he threw all their pipes
into the fire, intending to burn them; and so he might, but not as he meant;
for his purpose was to consume them. At this conceited tale of the Varinan,
after we had a little space laughed, I replied; that such ignorance was now
from the Academicks wholly exiled: for the grea^est and gravest Students well
perceived, that long study would dull and rebate the understanding, being by
no external receipt cheered. Upon which speech, all these three Antagonists
with joint force, made toward me, reassailing me with new reasons to undertake
the defense of their Trade, objecting, how by mine own mouth they would
condemn me, if they could not now at last after many persuasions; prevail
with me. For (said they) you confess the City, Court, Country: Yea, the
Treasury of all knowledge, even the Academies affect, it, and will you in a
Stoicke reluctancie oppose it? Besides this, you have sundry affectionate
Allies, all Agents of happy employment and hopeful improvement, who since
their plantation in Tortouga have dealt in this commodity, to their profit and
succeeding memory, which may be an irresistible motive to induce it. To which
powerful objections I a little relented, yet so, as I expressly told them, I
would not much insist upon their conveniences or inconveniences of their
trade, being of late time inured to dangerous sophistication, having known by
report of an experienced Chymicke, diverse ounces of Quicksilver extracted from
one pound of Tobacco: but to discourse of the Life and Death of Tobacco; as
first of his birth and education; secondly of his Planting and Propagation, I
should do my endeavor: Whereto they all jointly consented; upon which consent
I addressed my pen to this ensuing Tract here presented.

THE SMOKING AGE. OR, The Life and Death of TOBACCO.
IN Tartarie (I read) not far from the Burmudoes, there dwelt a rich Hander,
whose name was Nepenthes: enricht he was with all the best of temporal
fortunes; and to make his blessings more consummate, with a chaste and
continent wife, called Vsque^aughin. yet that he might acknowledge, there was
nothing in this interins of man's life so absolute, which was not sometimes
attended with crosses, or at least, all^yed* to make humane frailty confess a
more sovereign power: he tasted (one distaste) in the overflow of his
fortunes, which was, want of children. Much he had, and great possessions was
he master of: but who should be his heir he knew not, being bereft (of that
only one of humane blessings, hope of issue. Long had he now lived with his
virtuous wife, when behold he was made happy in hope, though the event answered
not his expectation so fully as he imagined, and thus it fell out. These two
good Inhabitants dwelling near to the sea, they used now and then to walk
upon the sea shore, not only to refresh themselves with the cool temperature
of the air, but in mere compassion to entertain (such shipwrack't souls as
destitute of hope or means, were thrown upon that coast* it chanced that an
Apothecary of the Burmudoes, (intending to go into Hoemonia where the best and
soveraignest herbs, plants, soots, and Aromotaries are said to be) he was
intercepted by Pirots, who rifling him of that poor estate he had, threw him
over ship-boord: but see what refuge he found in the ocean? The Polype fish
(which naturally loves sweet savours, and is exceedingly delighted with
perfumes or any fragrant smell, taking this Apothecary in her nose, presently
approches him, and swallows him (for he was but a little dapper knave) quite
down. The poor Apothecary thus imprisoned, yet not quite bereft of sense, but
to know where he was, remembers himself, recollects his spirits, and with an
expert and successive hand, tries this conclusion; he called ^o mind how he had
some purging Comsits about him, for (he being costive in his body, used them
upon all occasions:) these he ministers to the fish, which she no sooner had
received, then, as the Scolopendra is said to avoid her very entrals, till she
has rid her self of the hook, so she purged backward and forward: sick she
was, and heart-sick of the Apothecarie, and in great extremity, till delivered
of him: for any man may judge, if one pill had such extreme force, what force
was he of that ministered these pills? Not far from the bank side, was this
poor Apothecary set at liberty: when behold, he begins now to wrestle with a
second death: the billows of the sea menacing ruin; the whirlepits gaping to
devour him; little hope or none is left him; for there is no Purge in all his
Boxes will save him. The poor man thus distressed, though to dye hardly
resolved, yet he sees no remedy, to die he must be enforced; and surely had
dyed, if thse two compassionate Ilanders, that ever were pressed and addressed to
pity others miseries, had not rescued him. A little Cock-boat being tied to
the shoare-side, (though unfit to endure any rough tempest,) Nepenthes
unlooseth and in mere compassion (though in this adventure he hazzarded
himself, and was much dissuaded by his wife to the contrary) yet sets he forth
toward him, and by the sudden calmnesse of the tempests intimating, that the
gods themselves were pleased with a work of that merit, he takes him up into
his Boat, and brings him with a mutual joy, in safety to the shore. The
Apothecary as yet amazed with his new-past danger, and as one new come out of a
trance, thinking these two Ilanders had been Neptune and Tethis his Queen,
and no mortal creatures, made this druggary speech unto them following. The
Apothecaries speech.


BRAVE and puissant Neptune, and you sacred Queen of the nine Isles, Lady
maioresse of the great Ocean, Governesse of the lower Elements, Commandresse of
all the skaly generation, from the Seahorse to the Seamouse, Umpiresse of all
differences in this watery region, etc: may a poor ship-wrackt Pothecarie
speak to your Excellence? one that has ministered Triackles, Antidotes,
Receipts and Cordials to all (or most of your Patients) within your flourishing
Isles of the Burmudoes; and now is enforced (like a poor supplicant) al Drugs
of Rheubarbe, Carduus sanctus, Coloquintida, Artemisia, Oenanthe, and what
herbs or plants soever were preservative against the Scotoma, Oedema,
Lithiasis, Paralysis, Celphalgia, Lycanthropia; all diseases, Ulcers, Morbs or
Contagions wheresoever or howsoever arising, all these (I say) set aside, I am
now enforced to crave pardon at your Highness feet. With this: the two
Ilanders interrupted him, demanding the reason why he should pardon? O
(replied the Apothecary) I see the judgments of Neptune be now (and not
without cause) powered upon me; often have I (and with watery eyes I speak i^)
ministered instead of purging materials, such as were binding: This, this, (and
with that he beat his breast exceedingly) have my false Drugs brought me to: I
have often times ministered for potions, poisons to torment my Patients; that I
might increase my estate by their infirmities: I never consulted with my Doctor
for my Patients health, but how to augment my wealth, by his lingering
sickness. Punish me therefore Great Neptune, throw me into the Sea, that I may
poison as many fish as I have poisoned men. Nepenthes willing to waine him from
this strange distraction, bad him be comforted, and with this serious speech
showed him his errors.

MY FRIEND, as thou ascribest, the cause of thy present misery, to thy forepast
impiety, and as thou wishest Neptune might censure-thee according: o thy
demerits, having deserved the worst of men: so I would have thee know I am
neither Neptune that can or will censure, nor she Tethis that should show thee
rigor; Two Ilanders we are that will show thee our best of welcome, and
hospitality shall be the worst punishment we will inflict upon thee: only, as
thou ex: pressest thy own sorrow for the contempt of thy profession: redeem
the time thou have lost, and retire with us; if we can yield thee comfort use
us: for never past misery by this shore unpitied, if we could either remedy it,
or redress it. With great thanks went the Apothecary along with them to a
neighbor Grange adjoining, where with all courtesy he was entertained. It
chanced one day, that Usquebaughin sitting discontentedly in her Garden, began
to expostulate the cause of her barrenness, and thus (though hervertues never
before so far transgressed their limits, or less expressed themselves) she
proceeded.

Wretched Vsquebaughin, what crime have thou committed, what offense have thou
done, or what work of hospitality have thou omitted: That thou (and that only
thou) should be deprived of that commune bounty of Nature? Others have
flourishing issues; and though their estates be less, yet they know, who shall
possess them: But I (that have no issue, bereft of the greatest of comforts,
what avayleth it me to possess abundance, when all this shall succeed to a
doubtful heir? yet is my grief enlarged! who will not judge how Nepenthes
got it? that has no issue to whom he may leave it; sure (will some imagine)
extortion has been the means of his raising, which makes his house so quickly
declining. True, true, (unhappy woman) many such surmises will arise from thy
barrenness: though thy husbands virtues be never so transparant. I will retire
my self therefore to some desolate place, that as, I am deprived of comfort, I
may be deprived of light; nor would I have an imputation aspersed on my
husbands honor, through my defect. Whilst she was descanting thus her own
griefs silently, that the silence of the place and privacie of her passions
might augment them: Cantharides (for so was the Apothecarie called) came into
the garden, where seeing this disconsolate woman (all a mort) wiping her
teare-swolne-eyes, to minister no less solace in her afflictions, than she had
done before to his, he thus with mild aspect, and compassionate respect, spoke
unto her.

IF griefs be best allayed when communicated, or afflictions best eased, when
they find partners: be not such an enemy to your self (sweet Mistress) as so
to engrosse your own passions to your self, as to shroud them from others.
Nor indeed can griefs be concealed. The face is the best Secretary of the
heart; and will express in silence, what passions move disturbance. But it may
be, you wish one of more secrecy to impart your woes unto; of secrecy you
cannot, of discipline you may. And though judgment wants yet shall secrecy
and fidelity supply the place, where more serious advice cannot instruct:
Suspect me you need not, for my life is due unto you; and let this protestation
serve for confirmance: when I cease to be yours, I will cease to be mine own.

The Gentle woman seeing the character of a good Nature in his ill face, and
one that seemed willing to requite so inestimable a benefit as he had
received, subjecting and consecrating his life where it was due: apprehended
this occasion of delivering her surcharged breast, recalling to mind how by his
profession, there might be some cure to the cause of her grief. Guest (for so
I will be bold to call you:) I know sorrows are best allayed when imparted, if
hope of remedy, or least appearance of release be expressed: But so far is
the nature of my sore above the search or reach of cure, that in expressing
them I seem to augment them, because the opening of my malady, will instantly
minister despair of remedy: yet to satisfy your desire (that generally our
hospitality may afford content) I will describe my griefs, though by the
relation I expect no ease. Know (my friend) that many years have my husband
and I lived together, without least difference or debate between us: and in
that prosperity and happiness of estate (if happiness can consist in having
sufficient) as we have not only a competency in our selves, but have expressed
and extended our bounties unto others: Yet in this seeming Beatitude, in this
height of riches (know my friend) that we are made miserable, yea, in our
riches despicable; the cause is drawn from our want of issue, which you know
(if ever experience gave you that comfort) to be the principal motive of true
content; ministering best solace to the parents griefs; yea, and reviveing
their memory, when raked up in the ashes of oblivion. Alas sir, what be these
fair buildings, flourishing Medes, spacious Downs, which you see we are here
possessed of? they must of necessity succeed to some, and it may be to some
base Tartarian, that will raze and deface the memory of our providence, with
his security, riot, and superfl^ous expense. And what shall remain of us?
scarce so much as that we were; But why do I beat the air, with a vain
repetition of misery? You have heard sir the occasion of my grief, the motive
of my discontent; and I know you imagine it to be above the compass of
remedy, let it be sufficient that I have satisfied you, that can satisfy my
self in nothing save grief.

This discourse the Apothecary attentively observed: oftimes lifting up his
hands to heaven, thanking the powers divine, that they had ministered him so
ample and expedite an occasion, both of showing argument of his thankfulness,
and means to release this disconsolate woman of her pensiveness. For this
Cantharides was excellent for many Cures, but for none so famous as for
sterility or barrenness: for which exquisite Art and knowledge, he was famous
through all the Burmudoes Islands: so that as no place was then more savage, so
no Region or Country had more fruitful women in it. Thus therefore, as soon
as she had expressed the cause of her discontent, with cheerful countenance he
thus addressed his speech;

I HOPE (fair Mistress) this present occasion of your grieving shall be (ere
long) the motivest cause of your joying: there is no cloud but it presages a
following cleerenesse, no^ tempest (but if over-past) moves the Mariners to
more cheerfulness. The Halcyons song they say (Mistress) bodes a storm; but
the Dolphins playing, portends a calm. Some sing against their death, with the
Swan; and some sing against their birth, with the Lark^. Some plants are for
expelling sorrow, as the Mugwort; as others to distract the senses with the
Hemlocke. Some have virtue to cast sorrow on sleep, as the Saffron; others to
keep them waking, as the Moly. And Elements skirmish one with another, lest
man should be though only to skirmish with himself. Winds that rise in the
shoares of L^panthos, in the Morning, send forth gusts from the North, in the
Evening, calmes from the West. This I speak (Gentle woman) to express the
limit of your grief extended, the web of your passions contracted, and now
your calm approaching, after so many billows overflowing. The cause of your
grief I know to be moving: for all creatures have, and do repose their
greatest joy in their progeny: Priam and his miserable Hecuba before the ruin
and desolation of that great and populous City, which endured so many sieges
ere it was sacked, were esteemed happy in all things, yet the complement of
their happiness consisted in their fair and flourishing issues. Herotinus had
as much Temporal felicity, as humane debility could attain unto, yet the
extent of that felicity summed up it self in his 600 sons. And true it is
you say, that the posterity gives life to the deceased parent; for as long as
their issue surviveth, their image seems revived, and Nature seems to
proportion a second self in the child, being cast in the mould of the Parent.
But whence this discourse! in expressing comforts of this nature, and not
ministering to your discomfort, I seem to imitate a rigorous and remorselesse
Physician, who before he gives his Patienta Cordial, applies unto him
extremest Corasives. I am heartily glad (Gentle woman) I am arrived here for
your sake, and if divine powers, (as sure they have) may be thought to have a
hand in men's preservation, for a more excellent end or purpose, sure that
Aesculapius (which (...) lenge that public stain to deserved honor; that
corrupter of hospitality; that pearl of greatness, bottle-nosed Bacchus.
Do not remember, how those ambitious Giants, had well nigh scaled thy fathers
palace; overthrown the mansions of Heaven; and made the whole Fabric of Jove
a pile of ruin? And whence proceeded this, but from Jove's too much lenity?
Ixion would have (like thy Bacchus) been a little too familiar with Juno, if
Jove's transpiercing eyes had not diverted his own scandal, and preserved his
Queens honor. But see what just judgment he (in his powerful Majesty)
denounced on so impudent and ungrateful a Villain: in stead of loving, he is
now rolling, and must so perpetually, the wheel of eternal anguish: Blessed
prevention! Deserved censure! But thou (as one either secure of thine one
shame, or ignorant of public infamy) ^itst in a whoores lap, makes Carols to
be sung in honor of thy Bastard: O, is not this brave sport for Bacchus? Yes,
yes, thy Tragedy yields* him an ample and spacious argument of a delightful
Comedy: For lately, I hear, he presented an exquisite Interlude, all composed
of thy follies: here presented one of his drunken Attendants, thy Queen
laughing, another thy self sleeping, and Bacehus brought in himself horning;
where, like a second Al^ides, he makes thy brows his columns, on which he
engraves his perpetual motto, Non ul^ra. Here is excellent work for a silent
ass to be hood-winkt in! What Pilot, seeing an imminent tempest approaching,
will not cast anchor, or retire to harbor? But thou, seeing the tempest of thy
shame, not imminent, but transparent, sleep'st with the Dormouse, and risest
with the Snaile, horned. I will be brief, though a matter of this consequence,
requires a world of instruction: make me Italian work in their guts, play me
Tereus part: Thou have no Progne, but a strumpet; no Philom^la, but an impudent
prostistute. Cut out her tongue, and she will not blab thy shame: hang up
Bacchus for an Ivy bush at every Tavern door in Hell. Let Monsieur Claret
(who I am credibly informed was his Pandor) be drunk of none but Tinkers, and
let them drink till they surfeit, that they may spue him in the street again.
O that I could express the infiniteness of the malady which thou art incident
to, and knows it not; made a monster and observes it not; laughed at by thine
own Planter, and sees it not; balladed at by a nastie troop of Gally-foists,
Villains of the last edition; proclai med Recreants to the field of Virtue,
and whipped in the Statute Book of S^turne. And yet (my squeamish Cousin) you
cannot see into the eye^ore of your reproach. P^oebus so much respects you, he
will not visit you, lest his approach should publish your shame: Luna, like a
modest and chaste matrone, because her ordinary habiliment is an horn, will
not see you, lest she put you in mind of that badge you wear. The Planets, as
more favorable and auspicious than you are to your self, will not come near
your cave (for they are verily resolved) you are planet-strucke already. As I
am your friend, so take my counsel; put her away, that has put you in for all
day; live to be your self, and not to be an impeachment to your self: Some
here of my fraternity laugh at you, others in compassion pity your misery.
Neither pity, nor scorn, are estates worth having: so clear your disgrace,
and wipe off the blemish laid upon your Deity, that those friends which pitied
you, may convert their pity into joy, others that scorned you, may convert
their hate to envy. Howsoever, remain but your friend, as Mercury will rest
ever your Approved, etc.

After the perusal of this letter, you may imagine what cold swounds came over
poor Pluto's heart: so as in the increase of his distractions, and decrease of
his comforts, which he imagined matchless, by the new birth of his supposed
heir: in the retiredness of his passions (which seem most bitter when most
retired) he thus conferred with himself; expostulating the probabilities of
these suspects, with the sincerity of his approved and ever trusty friend
Mercury; of whose undoubted fidelity he made no question: yet because the
longrooted conceit of Proserpina's constancy, and her general respect to
honor engendered in him a doubtfulnesse how to resolve: yet in the end
Mercuries information is preferred before his first resolution. The diverse
enforcive causes whereof may appear more amply in this private discourse to
himself.

Pluto's passions.
A Letter Pluto? Yes, and a bitter one: By these contents I should need an
extraordinary night cap, for mine ears by all Heavens Consistories be
supposed horns. And by whom should these monstrous Appendices be created? The
letter says by Bacchus. Very good; then consequently am I mine own Pandor,
that entertained a Villain to lie with my wife. Yet I can hardly believe it:
Proserpina has lived many years with me, and was never yet detected: she
ever preferred her estimation above any inordinate thought of breach, or
violation of honor; and as proper personages were in my Dominions, as ever
Bacchu^ will make: and can I think a drunken Swad can so soon seduce my
Queen from her respect to honor? No, no: sure Mercury would have me divorce
my Queen, to possess her himself: I know not, if there be knaverie in
Mercury, there must needs be villainy in amity. Yet Mercury was ever a
faithful and approved friend to me: and sure such a report he has heard, and
that, no^ ordinary neither, for it seems it is confirmed by the general
rumor of the Gods. Why then Pluto (to make the conclusion agree with the
premises) thou art a Cuckold: and that bladder-fac'd, goggle-ey'd, rheumaticke
Rascal, Bacchus, has been penning a set speech in Proserpina's Note-booke.
What remedy? I shall be set in black and white for it: to be the first
Prince of hell that ever bore horn for his crest, and mine impresse shall be
about it, Inopem me copia fecit; no rather, Haec sunt insignia Bacchi.
Miserable Pluto. can thou descant of thine own shame without blushing? to
have thy Gem soiled by a Canker-worme? a mop-fac'd Rogue, that seldom or never
lies in sheets, but makes the Tavern his lodging chamber, and the bulk his
pillow. O inconstant Proserpina, to choose a lousy Knave, base in education,
grosser in conversation, and odious to all but Flemmish Brittons! Could none
satisfy thee (unsatiate Messalina) but the dregs of pollution, and that never
made difference twixt lust and love? How thine eyes were dazzled? How far thou
disparagedst thy judgment? Could thou see any such excellency in Bacchus,
or any one good condition to approve thy choice? Was he so far above thy
Pluto, as thou preferredst him before thy Pluto? Blush at thine impudence: Or
if Bacchus grape have taken so deep a tincture in thy blushlesse face, as thou
can not express thy shame by the outward character of a blush, at least send
out a relenting tear, and that perhaps will mollify the heart of thy abused
husband. To whom should I appeal to? If to mine own Judges, I shall rumor
mine own shame in Hell, as it is dispersed already in Heaven. If I appeal to
Earth, that rancorous Troop of incarnate Devils will answer me, it is
ordinary with them to have Cuckolds, and they never enacted Law against that
Venial Error. To be brief, they will absolutely conclude they have no Law
for it. If I appeal to my father Jove, and present a bill of complaint to the
Senate of Heaven against mine own wife, I shall be but laughed at, and the
cause will be protracted, and my self the while eternally tormented with delay
of revenge: But what bids Mercury me do? Play Tereus part, cut out her
tongue, and she will not blab my dishonor: That were a ready way; and yet
hardly were that course secure either; a woman will make a shift to speak, if
her tongue be cut out: there is no hope in so desperate a cure. Come, come, I
have it: hang laughter: Am I a proclaimed Cuckold, and therefore a complete
honest man, and will not I seek remedy for mine imputation? Is it not a
reproach for Pluto, to be termed a Wittall, a plain honest wellmeaning
Cuckold? By my regiment of S^yx, Lethe, and Phlegeton: and by all my power I
have in this inferior Government, I had rather be entitled knave, than
honest. But where is my Revenge? To Jupiter Pluto, to Jupiter; he will pity
his sons misfortune, and censure Bacchus (that slavering Hogshead) according
to his deserts. If I put up this injury, let me be thrust from my chair of
state, my kingdom of Tartarie for ever. Show remorse on me, and inflict
revenge (thou Tonitruous Jupiter) upon this Horne-maker: for if thou do not:
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. I will Jupiter, I will; I Will play
the Giants part; skale thy airy Turrets; raze down thy burnished Pyramids;
ravish the Beauties of thy Court; and make one of my bas^st slaves lie with thy
Queen before thy face. Passion may be long silent, but not suppressed: Injuries
may be endured, but not quite supplanted: I will first, like a poor solicitor,
attend thy Court with lenity, my next approach shall be in thunder.

PLVTO seconds his passion with a complaint to Jupiter, the process whereof
how it fell out, you shall hear afterward. We must now return to Plutoes
young hei^e, and how suspicion arose from Acarno the Midwife, touching the
birth of this young Brat. One day swathling this wan^on Bastard, she perceived
a mark in the child's breast, resembling the proportion of a Vine: the feature
of the leaves, spurges, and Grapes, so artificial natural, as made the old
Trot exceedingly amazed: on she rowles to Proserpina, and shows her this
wonder; the good Queen marvelled not a whit (for she had no reason) knowing it
to be Ba^chus stamp: yet least this should be occasion of difference twixt her
and Pluto; whose jealousy she had now a little perceived; calls for Iris the
Post-Boy in Hell, and commands him, after she had enchanted him with her Ebon
wand, that he might go and come invisible, to take his course instantly to the
North-part of Ta^tary, (on which Border, the Isles of the Burmudoes are seated)
and there he should find (...) child in the C^adle. Which child she enjoined
him with all expedition and taciturnity to convey from thence, and bring it to
her; where, at his return he should hear the rest of her will; intending, as
after appeared, to convey her young Bacchus in his place, that all suspicion
might be avoided: and this stamp of the true father neither might engender
occasion nor argument of suspect or jealousy in the troubled head of her
husband.

On Iris goes in his Embassage (winged to make the course more speedy) nor
rests he his wearied body, till arrived at the utmost Cape of Burmudoes sea,
where after long search, he finds the joyful house of Nepenthes: in he goes
(and in the dark covert of night, when cares get repose, and the ambitious
thoughts of men find harbou^) he easily takes the poor infant from beside his
sleeping parents. Up he mounts with the child, and with as much (...) returns
to the care seized Chamber of Proserpina: where sitting alone (for Pluto was
turned (...) in heavens conclave) seeing (...) come into the chamber, with as
quick (...) (as if her senses before estranged from her, had been suddenly
revived. The child she receives, and the child with as cheerful a
countenance, flies into her bosom. Pretty brat, that occasions no little
grief to thy poor parents, that in their sleep possessed thee, but waking in
the survey of their barrenness make their lives loathed, but their griefs
must not be dilated by our pen; we will leave them sorrowing, and return to
Plutoes success in his suit.

Pros^rpina now at hearts ease, intending next morning to send her bastard to
Nepenthes house, that it might remain there fostred in stead of their own;
was prevented by her husbands return; who came in as she was committing and
commending the child to the care, tuition, and safe convoy of her Herald Iris.
How these two encountered may be imagined by Plutoes former passion; yet to make
our discourse more complete, and the series of our tale with better concordance
knit up; You may suppose Pluto entering his Queens chamber, and with sparkling
eyes, severe look and menacing aspect, thus chastising her.

Proserpina encountered by Pluto.
IMpudent Minion! do thou imagine Pluto has no eyes, because he wears
horns? Let go the bastard; he that fathers it is able to keep it; Thou have
stuffed my head with horn shavings; made me infamous for ever; derided in
heaven; contemned on earth; and pitied in hell. None but Bac^hus (insatiate
strumpet) to fly to, That on my knowledge is buzling with every milke-maide!
Am I the Rhynoceros thou have branched? the first Cuckold of thy making! and
the first that ever was in hell created! and thou it seems (to blind my eyes)
would co^vey this Brat to some desclate promontory, some Anchorage or Sotary,
for to pray for thy lewdness? Sure I think if ever it proved Friar it were
not of the mothers mind, but ere five ears were expired, it would sing, The
Friar has lost his breeches. Out Cockatrice, out: with what forehead can thou
plead for pardon? I that took thee up, as earthly Gallants, take up light
commodities, straggling from thy mother, has found thee now strayed from thy
honor. I will never keep holiday in thy remembrance hereafter, so long as thy
windpipe is open. Thy melody shall be converted to shriking; thy best of
delights to perpetual dispairing; and thy late banqueting to incessant
tormenting. Cuckold Pluto, you strumpet, and none but Bacchus to do him that
dishonor! Better could I have been pacified, and sooner had the passion of my
eter^all choll^r been mittigated, if any within my own Regiment had done it:
But a drunken slave, that in the height of his Cups, will rumor my horns to
all his Cup-shot Assacinats! Go to Hell shall roar for*t. Thy liberty shall
be perpetual imprisonment; thy life horror; and though thou wish death, yet,
he shall not be so thankful as come, if it be but to augment and aggravate thy
misery. And for thy Bastard, hear Jove's decree.

Jove's Decree.
BY the power of my command, Jove the supernall commander of heaven, sovereign
of earth, head Prince of the Mediteranean, and absolute Emperor of the
Tartars, planter of Isles, establisher of Nations, Extirper of the Bastard Race,
auspicious Protector of chaste affections, ratefies this decree following:
Whereas Pluto our well-beloved son, upon just complaint of Bacchu^, and his
licentious Queen Pros^rpina, has informed us of illegitimate issue, descended
from their unchaste loins. And that the Bastard (as an apparent and evident
note of his dishonor, continues in the Court of Hell, to a public contumely
of the said Pluto, and no less grief to us. We therefore, to root out the
very memory of such disgrace, and the being of so worthy an issue: do in our
power transform the said Bastard (in resembrance of Aca^thus) into a a Plant;
which, to express his father shall still reserve the name of his progenitor
Bacchus: and therefore have we in his memory, called him (as one commended to
the care, protection, and tuition of his father) Tobacco, the curse whereof we
refer to the consideration of our son Pluto, whose injuries we in
compassion feel in our self. And that our decree is not to be abbrogated nor
disanulled; We have here in our celestial Consistory, Sealed it with the
subscription of our glorious Synod subsined, Mars, Mercury, Saturn, Neptune,
Aeolus* etc. Our decree is not to be adjorned, but with expedition confirmed.
For Proserpina, to pray is bootlesse; prayers are out of season; or to weep
and deplore her present misery, is fruitless; tears cannot move remorse. The
Decree must be performed, and so it was: for Medusa, that brave inchantresse,
is sent for according to Jove's Decree: and she with her Snaky-rod catching the
child, with the Decree read over it, transformes it presently.

The Argument of the following Discourse.
NOVGHT now but leaves for that same feature clear,
Which but of late did in the child appear.
The root, the feet, the body was the stem,
So much commended now of mortal men:
His father heard it, that his child should take
Anoth^r feature, and another shape:
Incenst at first, yet makes his son divine;
For Bacchus steepes Tobacco in his wine.
The son makes sober, and the father drunk;
Thus by Hels birth, Earth's to confusion su^ke.
Now we will proceed as times be worse and wors^,
From Bacchus blessing, to Tobacco's curse.
The curse of Tobacco, or, Pluto's blessing to Tobacco.
TO return to the miserable Chap* 3.
state of those poor Ilanders, that were now deprived (unawares) of their
choycest and selectedst comfort: I need not, only to express the renuall of
their hopes; Know that Proserpina in remorse of her impiety, weaving a second
error in her first offense, and one no less (if not more) inexcusable than
the other; returns their child again with a sumptuous Armolet about the Arm
of it, to recompense the wrong she had done, with advantage. What joy the
Parents conceived at the restitution of their child, I leave it to you to
imagine: Mean time, we will proceed with the second branch of our discourse,
to wit, the blessing (or cursing rather) which Pluto gave this Bastard Plant,
foretelling, with what admiration it would be received on earth.

Now my brave Bastard, I will send you up wrapped in a Paper to that father of
yours, Bacchus, and may my blessing follow thee. Thou art now to travel
through many straits: first through the noses of the Burmudoes; for there it is
fit thou offer thy self first, because they challenge an interest in thee by
thy birth. Thou shall be hissed out of the school of Hypocrates, Aesculapius,
and Galen. Not a Quack-salver Doctor upon the Universe, but shall read
Lectures on thee, as if it were upon an Anatomy. The mercinary Peddler shall
counterfeat thee: and drying some VValnut leaves, shall forswear himself for
thee. The Frenchman shall love thee, for thou art restorative to his
infirmities; thou shall be as familiar with the tatterd Indian; as Slapdragons
with the Flemming; Potatoes with the Italian: or Flawnes with the Bohemian.
Thou shall be thy fathers Caterer, provide him victual and victualers to (...)
his victual. Yet my comfort is, thou shall not be only for the generous
Gallant, but as well also for Aminadab the Pedant, and Hob-nayle the Pesant:
The very Tinker (with his fine Brass) shall tinckle on thy sides, and snuff
thee out like Neesing-powder. The Pox and Piles shall reverence thee: one fire
strikes out another; and whole families shall maintain their Tatterdemallions
with hanging thee out in a string. But of all Cities, Isles, Provinces,
Dominions, or Segniories, none shall entertain thee in that royalty, or with
that general state at the Albionacts: their Long Acres, Uplands and
Downe-lands shall fly in a trice to retain thee in their company; Thou shall
soake them to the bone (my renowned Bastard) and make them skarre-Crowes to
Nature. Yet, it cheeres my heart, when I think how every fool must have his
Babble; and not a good discourse without the suggestion of thy brave, pregnant
and fiery spirit. Yet, as well as they love thee, they will spurt thee out, and
make thy own Mansion all be slubberd with thy own Juice; while this raises
Pluto one pin higher: to see a young Cavalero spit out his patrimony in Rhume.
No entertainment without thee; nor speech worth observing, that has not life
from thee. Thou makesh the pursued Roarer forget the Sergeant is at door to
arrest him. Thou make him valiant: not a Brass button on the Universe dare
attach him. Who dare encounter Phaeton, that is naught but fire and smoke!
Sending out the Tapers of his wrath, the fagots of his indignation? The
Cressets of his spleen, and the furnaces of his evaporated Ire at the
Crevisses of his Nose? Why, I shall be made to bless thee: Thou will be the
only enlarger of my kingdom, the enricher of my state* and the stablisher of
my Empire eternally. I shall thank my wife (ere long) for my Bastard honors.
Never did Al^ydes more for his stepmother Juno; than thou for thy stepfather
Pluto. I see Charons boat over-burdened already: hoyse up sails Charon, my
honey Bastard sends thee them in Swoupes. But I see more virtue in them yet; as
the light of the fire darkens the light of the candle, so shall thy smoke (the
pure Elixir of a Gallants brain-pan) draw to thee all the smoke that is used to
steme out of great men's Kitchins: Their habitations shall become as desolate as
a Wilderness; as bare as trees in fall of the leaf; as naked as a Frenchmans
Scalpe; and as destitute of hospitality, as a Wappin Broker of honesty.

But this is nothing to that reverence those smoking Albyonacts will do unto
thee: there will a Scholar make a set speech to thee; and canvase thee in a
Blanket, with predicamentall words, above comparison or Gradation. With, O
thou Hyble of Intelligence; thou Ars^nall of eminence; thou Castalia of
Ingenuity; thou Hermyone of Harmony; thou Systema of Logic; thou Anadema of
Rhetoticke; thou Anathema of choler; thou Astraea of Honor. Thus will the
word-joyning Scholar grace thee. Then the Lawyer with his Quillets and mental
reservations, Solecysims, Writs, and Demurres without Demurres, will thus
aboard thee.

O, if John a Styles, or John an Oaks had known thee in their days, what
cases could thou have put the^? for by thee (and none but thee) thou
Heantontymoreumeno^ of judicious pleading, we gained a Melius inquirendum, what
it is, or what it means? as for example, if we find thee not in thy spirit
and life here, we seek thee elsewhere, and so by a Melius inquirendum, we
possess thee. By thee (and none but thee) we find what is a Capias ad legatum;
for being taken in the head, we are forced to lie by it. By thee we find what
an Injunction is at the first sight; being enjoined to avoid much corrupt
matter, wherewith men of our profession be extraordinarily troubled. Wherefore,
if thou have any action of Outlary, against any Gallant or Gallants, within our
Precincts, in behalf of Arrerages due to thy Master in thy behalf; we will
procure thee expedition for nothing, (and reason) for thou art incorporated in
us. Thus will the spruce Areopagite discourse to thee: where presently a
Waterman, a Tankard carrier, or such necessary Hogs* snout in the City will
thus accoast thee. O smoke, no smoke but vapor, and no vapor but smoake^
thou make my Tankard as light as a Pipkin; thou make us never think of our
poverty, drawn in Sluices from Ware, and in Pipes to London. Nay, nose it
(neighbor Timothy) nose it; O Herb of Grace! surely he that founded thee was
some Traitor, for thou have betrayed me of my wits already. Come, another Pipe,
good Master Flie-smoake! why may not we send out a Tankard of water at our
nose, as well as Master Had-land blows out his Acres? We will honor thee
still (my brave Trinidadicall spirit) and we will take it in the snuff
whosoever wrongs thee.

THUS (my Noble and Heroycall Bastard) shall all Professions honor thee; all
degrees reverence thee; and the chief Metropolitan Cities shall maintain
their greatest Traffic and Commerce by thee. Happy shall be that man, who
can engrosse a portion of thy quickest spirit to himself! It shall stand
instead of his Orisons in the morning; and early will he sacrifice the snuff
of his Candle to thy Incense; not a complete Callant, that has not his
V^ensiles to conduct thee to his nose: for thou ministers him a portion of joy,
and tells him of building another Castle or Colosse in the air.

Thus thou playest Minister to Pluto, and estates me in an ample Government;
thy smoke shall be the conveyance to hale those snuffing Prodigalls to my
smoking Dominions; for thou art but a preparative to the solemnizing of thy
father Bacchus his Festivals. Thou, to open the passages to receive liquor: He,
to pour in his unfathomed Bucket, and to rinse their Liver: Thou, like another
Synon, burns Troy; sacks the City; rases down the walls; and with thy
per^idious incursion, subjects all the inward parts of the City to desolation:
He, when all things are done (like a seeming friend) protests affection, and
with ceremonial Ambages insinuates into that poor Fort which remains: where
like Sile^i of the last Edition, they entertain him, receive so much of his
Complement, till they become complete and replete Gallants: then, -suror Arma
ministrat. Bacchus sets them byth'eares, Buffet stools walk, Pottles (like
pellets) express their meaning by their clattering. Here (my worthy
step-child) the comfort of my wronged bed, and the only hope to eternize my
sovereignty, begins my Joy! for Discord and Dissension yields to me a
perpetual Union and Harmony. Thou art that Brand of Paris, shall make earth
flame for it; that Olympia serpent (that snake of Adraste) shall wind thy self
in the minds of men, and draw a greater fleet to thy Voyage of Tenarus, then
ever were of Argonauts to Colchos. If those three Sisters, O^to, Ocypete, and
Celano; those Arch-Pyrats, Harpies of the Atlanticke, brought such rich booties
to their mother Cleona, what will my transformed Bastard do for me, that has
the whole world to rome in? Thou will make Bacchus call thee his white boy; and
I will crown thee with a Diadem of burnisht gold; with a plume of Estrich
feathers: and thou at thy return, like another Aquila, Affricane, or Pompey,
shall triumph in the streets of Hell; we are as many Trophies, as thou have
enricht the Treasury of Hell with souls. Here shall thou lead the Prodigal
in chains, and with a shadow of smoke, draw him to follow thee, aut sequetur,
aut trahetur. Here, my brave Spend-times, shall desire thy company; but thou
like a triumphant Hannibal, shall contemn them, leading the Slaves in bonds;
and like another Tamerlane, make Earths Sovereigns follow thy Chariot
wheels, crouching like pedestals at the foot of thy Majesty. Hear my Cautions
therefore; and in observing them, thou shall purchase thee a wreath of eternal
honor: Not a Fiend but shall bend to thee; and thou in the Majesty of thy
state shall contemn the greatest, being made miserable by thine enchantments.

Especial advertisements given by Pluto to Tobacco.
FIRST caution I propound, is, that in every place where thou come, thou
take the best Booth in the Fair. Plant thy self in the eye of the City: set
me the picture of some sallow-faced Blackamoore, or a Virginia-man, for that
will rather draw custom upon the Frontespice of thy door: A Zeuxes or Apelles
would do well in these cases, to enforce passengers by the picture, to draw
near the substance: make a partition in thy shop; it may be the hot Venetian
comes to bathe with thee, rather than to drink Tobacco with thee. Draw the
curtain close (sin would have no eyes poring upon her) and when thou see a
young raw Novice, that never was yet matriculated in the school of vanity,
make a speech to him in commendation of thy virtue, power, and operation; if
he listen thee with a greedy ear, continue thy discourse with arguments, and
how insufficient soever, no matter, the Gudgeon will be taken, and having him
once in, presume on his custom. Now and then to discourse of novelties, and
unheardof rarities, will not a little increase custom: for the
phantasticknesse of the age admires nothing so much as fabulous relations. Tell
of thy strange birth, but neither of me nor of the place of thy birth: though
men come so frequently to me, yet they love not to hear of me: I would have
thee in any case lay trains for the better sort, for the worser sort love to
imitate the better: And then in thy profession thou may apologize thine
errors (as thou can hardly be without them) if thou mean to live rich, or
not to die a Beggar.

THERE be three persons I would have thee use with all observances, the
Scholar, the Lawyer, and the Poet; I distinguish them, for seldom makes Poet
Lawyer, seldom becomes Lawyer Scholar, seldom exquisite Scholar either Poet
or Lawyer. The Scholar to confirm thy profession by reason, the Lawyer by
equivocation, and the Poet by invention: One to discuss, another to discourse,
and the third to fable These, as by time observing, they may be eternally won;
so by scurvie usage they may be eternally lost. The Scholar will be thine,
if thou talk in his element; sooth him in his arguments; and call him most
profound, dogmaticall, and literate Trismegistus: let not one reason (though it
be never so wide of sense) pass from him without thine approbation; and when
thou art weary in praising his imperfections, fall to admiration; but let it
be, -- Ut pueri Iunonis Ave^. If thou can know what Universitie he is of,
advance it with new-coyned and strangely-minted Hyperboles: Discourse a whole
hour of the antiquities of the place; not Mount Pernassus it self more
ancient. Then dispatiate into the pleasantness of the seat; the fruitfulness
of the place; and withal, of the greatness of their Commons; for that they
like to hear of, though they seldom see it. These discourses will make the
Scholar thine own; he is thine individuate and incorporate friend; the Ivy
claspeth not nearer the Vine, nor the Missell-tow the Oak, than he will knit
to thee.

THE Lawyer will be thine, if thou compare these present times with those
flourishing and impartial days of Hortensius, Marcus Appius, Cornelius
Graccus: swearing too (for thou must make no bones of oaths) that for pure
eloquence, excellent conveyance, absoluteness of method, and other
proprieties, Rome in her glory (even in the maturitie of her time) never
attained so absolute and exact a course in pleading. Then in defense of
corruption, (because every man must live by his trade) talk of brave
Senators, and the bravest Councillors, would now and then be anointed. and
for unction dispense with conscience; and tell him withal, examples of
authority to confirm it. This discourse will so ensnare my young Mowter, as
no question (if he distaste smoke) he will frequent thee for thy many good
parts: An oily tongue (my nimble Bastard) is worth a kingdom.

FOR the Poet, I cannot tell what to say to it, he is so often out of his wits,
as he verily imagines himself the man in the Moon: There Is quicksilver in
his brain; and if he were not now and then encountered by Sergeants, and kept
under lock and key, he would verily turn Bedlame. Yet because frenzy must
be purged, and thou (my Wag-halter) have virtue and operation to love such,
becken to the threadbare contemned Urchin, give him a pipe on my score, he will
pay it at the next new play he makes, if the Doore-keepers will be true to
him: and if not, he will make thee up some scurvie end of a Ballad, deserves a
pipe of smoke. But before thou humor him, I would have thee find him, and I
protest to thee I cannot direct thee to him: many have this name, but as far
different from the perfect strain of a Poet, as the glistering of the Gloworme
from the light and splendor of the Sun. Some come from the camp to the
stage, from the pike to the pen; and few Soldiers will prove good Poets. For
the nature of these men (I my self have had an itching inclination to this
poetical frenzy) had rather fight with Bacchus than Mars; and had rather
cope with a barrel, than oppose themselves to a quarrel. Others, from an
Indenture to a Theater; the Scribe turns Pharisic; and Asinus ad Lyram,
expresses his own shame by his Scriveners fragments. Others, from mowting to
comicke writing: a brave honor to descend to Poet from Lawyer. But amongst
these (my brave Spurio) thou shall find many generous wits possessed with this
frenzy, call them to thee, smoke their wits, it may be they are mustie, and
desire soaking: These poor Gnats deserve thine acquaintance, even the lowest
favorite in Parnassus Armourie, Qui nescit versus, tamen audet fingere. Take
him to thee, he shall, for his love to Ribauldrie, drink a pipe on my score:
What, shall vanity want smoke? No, (my thrice-renowned Hermaphrodite) smoke
thou them here on Earth, and I will smoke them in Hell with pipes of Sulphur.
But I pray thee retain these last of all others; they will draw company to
thee; they are made the very Morio's of our time: and what good wit but either
can draw thee into acquaintance with great ones; or is so endeared to the other
sex; as by their means, thou shall have creatures of both kinds (and that
will make thee for ever) resort to thy shop continually! Humor me these Poets;
extol their devices, though thou never heard of any of them; they love to be
tickled: Flattery they cannot judge of; for they verily imagine their deserts
outstrip all commendations. But now (my Rogue in grain) if thou could set
up a private Refectorie, for the young effeminate sort (for they would like
Adamants draw continual recourse) I would hug thee eternally. Sell me
Potato-roots, Eringoes, all Electuaries, Confections, Receipts, Conceits,
Deceipts, Pomatum, Cerusse, with a large recital of thy brave commodities; and
a little smooth-faced Ganymede standing at the door, who* like another Parret
or Mag-pie, may cry ever in one tune: What do you lack? Pomatum of the best,
Cerusse; what do you lack? If thou be so blessed, as to get these Syrenfaced
things into thy confines, I shall be happy in thee. The best means to ensnare
them, is to commend them; and in comparison of sexes, to prefer theirs in many
degrees before the gross and distempered constitution of man; fumming up some
especial records of their sexes worth. "Blessed creatures, Soveraignesses of
earths happinesses (thus may thou bind them to thee;) when Nature framed the
best of her Art, she examplified it in you, making you the founders of Cities
and flourishing Countries, Provinces and Islands. Asia first founded by a woman
of that name. Europe by Europa, daughter (...) Aegenor King of Phanicia: and
Scythia of a woman that sprung out of the earth, who named her son Scytha. To
describe the rare sit^s and foundations of Isles (matchless creatures) Rhodes,
Corcyra, Salamyna and Ae^ were all founded by women. Shall I ascend higher, and
register your excellence in the Planets, and those celestial bodies, which
give humane bodies light? There be a thousand and twenty stars names known,
all which have their Constellations of women. Shall I then express your
incomparable natures, by essential goodness? why! Virtue her self makes your
sex inimitable.

Justice with a sword in her hand portrayed like a woman; Prudence with a
glass; Temperance with a dial; Fortitude with an huge Colossus on her
shoulder, that Hercules could not remove: all these in Imbroderies, as
Tapistrie, Cloth of Arras, and the like, bear the forms of women.

Thus commend them, and they will sooner buy Eringoes of the worst (so they may
have them by retaile at thy shop) than at others of the best, that* cannot with
a glibberie tongue deifie them. But I hold thee all too long: last Caution I
should give thee, have I reserved for the last, that it may take deepest and
firmest root in thy memory: on my blessing I warn thee to contemn honesty,
as a poor whore that is neither for Court, Country, nor City. Spurn at her
when she offers to be acquainted with thee; it is not fit that Pluto's Bastard
should respect Honesty. Get and care not how; forswear thy self and think
not when; cheat, respect not where. Honesty could never thrive in the world;
as she is a beggar discard her; as she is simple scorn her; and as she is
base loath her. When shall thou see Honesty* approach a great man's palace,
enter a Tradesmans shop, or get bed-roome in an Inn? but Knaverie is ever
reaping a commodity: There is not a Comrade in all the City, but she can make
use on; that wind blows ill, where she gains not something. To be short, ere
thou ever set up shop, or hang out thy Blackamoore, disclaim honesty;
entertain perjurie; and the first part of knaverie may begin with a pair of
uneven scales. Thus if thou proceed in thy trade, I shall think my Cautions
well* bestowed; if not, to aggravate thy punishment, I will eternally banish
thy strumpet-mother from me; and make those very Gallants which frequent thy
shop, kick thee into the kennell for thy honest simplicity. More should I say
unto thee, but that Hell grows turbulent for want of government. Though I do
not leave thee as I found thee, in that thy shape is altered* yet I leave thee
in some respect better instructed: This is my last blessing; Fly into the
world, and may knaverie guide thee, false weights enjoy thee, and many
phantasticke Asses be seduced by thee.

HAVING shipped this plant in Charons vessel, and sent it into the world, what
commerce it had in time, and what people of all conditions frequented it, shall
appear by this pitiful complaint made by Time; whom you may imagine came
forth of an old decayed and ruinous castle, bald-headed, with a sithe in his
hand, and blubbered face, standing in the public street of Troynovan^, (for
there this Plant took first planting:) where he exclaimes against Pluto's
Bastard, in these or the like continuate passions.

The Argument.
The Complaint of Time upon Tobacco; and the misery of man's security, losing
that treasure by Times expense, which can never be repurchased, or redeemed,
but by bitter and incessant repentance.

WHo CALLS on Time? Chap. 4.
Who makes use of Time? Or who in mere compassion will wipe these tears from
the eyes of Time? Unhappiest of men, that should offer the best of men, yet art
despised by all men! None here will negotiate in thy behalf; they make thee a
stale to their pleasures, a Pandor to their filthiness, a Brothell of shame,
and a contempt to thy self. None esteems thee as thou art, precious; but
makes thee different to thine own nature, vicious. The ambitious man hugs
thee, to climb the ladder of preferment by thee. The wanton and licentious
Courtier, to satisfy the phantasticknesse of his braine-sicke vanity by thee.
The covetous miser, to enrich his never-contented coffers by thee. The
Prodig^ll, to spend the gifts of Fortune, and the refined treasure of his
sin-crazed soul by thee. Thus, who uses thee like thy self? Who honors thee
like thy self? Or who embraces thee, but either by pleasing Earths Mammon, to
displease himself, or by contemning thee utterly, to undo himself? If thou
had that which thou have not, it may be some would catch thee, but being bald
(as thou art) none lays hold on thee; what, none? no, none; Nemo, hercule,
nemo! Yet, me thinks, for all thy baldness, the Sergeant should clap hands on
thee; his fingers will grant a bald man no dispensation. Yet thee he never
looks at, for why? thou art out of debt, though all be in arrerages to thee,
all engaged to thee all in subjection to thee: And like an imperious Owner
may command an hourly arrest; yet, who is it of all my debtors braves me
not? who, of all my factors contemnes me not? and (to my grief) who not of
the basest revile me not? Miserable Time* unhappie Creditour^ to have so much
pity on such insolent Debtors. Here I hear my name contested by Truth, and
presently my testimony is beat down by Falsehood; there, the simple honest man
craves that I may try the cause; for (says he) Time tries all things; and
presently the poor man is cut down, before his cause come to the verdict of
Time. Thus Justice goes on stilts, and Time supports her; Falsehood goes under
warrant, and Time secures her; Simplicity is oppressed, and Time must delay her;
the good suffer, and Time sees it; the ill are dispensed with, and Time
confirms it: Thus may all men impute the cause of all disorder to Time; and so
they do, while I in pity of the good, will in Time inflict due punishment on
the evil. Mean time, like love himself, and those Aethereall Powers above,
who for all their integrity were accused to be Authors of their own impiety,
Art thou blamed:

O facinus! mortale Genu^ nos Numin^ primum
Incusat; caus^mque putat, fontemque malorum
Quae veniunt.
O wickedness! what h^inous crimes surprise the hearts of men.
To make us Authors of that ill which is commit by them?
MUST thou poor Time be a Mask to every fact unjustly committed? to every
bribe corruptly received? to every oppressor, that is amongst the worst of men
numbered? What remedy! thine own sincerity is thine own best Apology. Thou will once discover thy self what thou art, and detect the secretst of
Imagination, that now seems secure of thee or thy power. So long has my
Spring continued: I expected a better growth in this field of vanity, then
Stubble and fruitless Darnell. Well, I will now make up my Harvest: I will see
if my Sithe can cut down, where my Lenity could not make grow. I have too
long seen (the essence of my self) opportunity offered, contemned; too long,
the estimation and repute of my name eclypsed. The worldling shall know he has
a power to prune, as he had a desire to water: his infinite store of treasures
got by oppression, shall be as paths which conduct him to the Brinke of
confusion. The lascivious Dame, that turns my houre-glasse to observe
fashions, shall not with all her painting allure me; Nor with her Trumperies
entice me; Nor with her whoorish-looke seduce me. I am too old to be a slave to
a whore; too wise to be tempted by a whore; and too proud to serve a whore.
The wastfull prodigal, that becomes heir of his fathers bags, but not his
virtues, shall not affright me with his oaths; awe me with his screwed face;
or dismay me with his Bilboe blade: I have a weapon of a stronger temper, and
it will pierce further then a Roarers Tolado. The unjust Regrater, that
engrosseth wealth to himself, famine to the land; I will make him open his
two-leav'd granars, pull out his worme-sprowt corn, and lay his foysty
victual forth to the open Market. And this done; I will bring him bound,
before a better Purveyer. The proud ambicious arrogant Princocke, that glories
in his outside, (and so he may, for it is worth more than his inside) shall
Player-like, be stripped out of those silken Trappings: he played a brave man's
part on the Theater of this world, but he has his Exit, and I am in the
Tyring-house and will dis-robe him; he shall know, Mundus Universus exercet
Histrionem; Earth is but a stage, the life an Interlude, the people Actors;
only I am left to empty the Stage with my Epilogue, but none of these for my
pains will give me a Plaudite.

Yet of all these, none to me so professed enemies as these smokers of our Age;
they whiffe me out in fume: and spend my best of hours in Candlelight; their
wits go and come by Pipe and Pipe; thus am I taken in snuff by every Pesant.
Alas (poor aged Time) was thy first race thus addicted? were those ancient
Heroes of renown, which got glory by foreign Conquests, for their Pipe using
a Pike, for an herbs vapor, fields terror, thus employed? No; their time was
spent (and gloriously spent) in their countries renown; Commonweales success;
or public managements of state, not in an airie vapor. These increased in
general respect by particular worth; they had other employments than piping;
Belonaes march relished better than the juice of Necotiana; then were the
clattering of Arms, the ranking of battles, the ranging of soldiers, and
marshalling of fields, of more esteem than smoke. Unworthy successors of so
noble and imparalleld predecessors, shall Time be spent in nothing, being the
precioust of all things, but in smoke and vapor, the lightest and trivialst
of all things? Shall your employments which use to be so serious, be expended
on an herb, of all others, most obnoxious? How Time weeps* see his tears
trickling; his poor decrepit legs declining; his tongue faltring (as one
ready to leave you) and then where be your delights ended, how is that interim
of your life concluded, when Time shall leave you, that so long bare with you?
when your days, as they were employed in smoke, shall end in smoke? Alas! I
do pity my childrens security, pity them and grieve for them; Nec long a
miseria est, qu^squis miseratur. Your misery (by a transumed nature) becomes my
misery; and while you lose me in smoking, I well-nigh lose my self in
sighing. O Niobe, why weptst thou that thou should be so soon deprived of
children, since my greatest misery is derived from having children? Thou
weptst, not to possess them, I to enjoy them; Contemning their foster mother
that first nursed them. I tell them, my tears are continuate; my love intimate;
and my end approaching; yet they answer me with hearts obdurate; enmity
inveterate; and ends despairing. I offer my self, and they spurn at me; woo
them with best of Times rhetoric, and they despise me; and open the treasures
of my heart to them, but they reject them and casheere me. And is not this
miserable, to contemn him, casheere him, revile and inveigh against him,
without whom they cannot live; without whose breath they cannot grow; and
without whose supportance they cannot stand? What have they which I give them
not, (or within the course of my hours) that I minister not? Purity of air,
to breathe; variety of sounds, to hear; fragrancy of savours, to smell;
qualities and differences of taste, to relish; Diversity of corpulent
substance, to handle; and rarities, with dissundred store of varieties, to
behold. And do these bounties deserve no requital? Do these gifts merit no
recompense? Must these ample and indefinite beauties and bounties receive no
thanks? must this (...), that graceful remuneration, established by the
Persians: that, whosoever should be readier to receive than give, was to be
punished with extreme censure, be thus wrapped up in forgetfulness? I have long
expected substances, and am I paid with smoke? a sweet Incence! an excellent
satisfaction! More guerdon do I receive of my love from the sleeping Dormouse,
than Vid Plin* in Not. Hist. Aelian. and ibid.
the smoking Gallants; she sleeps but all Winter, but this Man in the Mist
smoakes it all the year long: he proportions his nose, like the Elephants
snout; and to make himself more terrible, like another Aetna, steemes Vapor
and terror out of his nose. Sure this is none of my Boy! I sent him not into
the world smoking, but shriking; and now as soon as he came peeping into the
world, to fall a piping; he does not that for which he was sent hither. Well;
if this be the fruit of thy long education, the end of my travail, and the
period of my care, I must seek out some other children, that will employ their
time better, and make use of my bounties with more circumspection. O Lord, that
Diogenes had come in those days with his Lantern and Candle at noone day, he
should have found many at their Candle without Lantern, but none of those he
sought for, good men. Alas! where may Time find those rare Phoenixes, those
white Crows, black Swans, those mirrours of mortality? the Nihil quod natum
est, errat.
Grecians Axiom was: (...); nothing that ever was, ever erred; but (...), now
shall be changed into (...), for all things now claim privilege in error; and
yet what availes it thee poor Time, to weep? thou may sooner change thy
self into Marble with Niobe, than dissolve the marble hearts of thy children
with thy remorsefull tears. Virtue feldome mounts, but Vice is ever mounting;
Passion may show thy grief, but the extent of grief (much I fear it) will
not minister a Agn^sco (inquit) (...) Ca^thaginis.
remedy. As when Annibal, seeing his brothers head thrown into his Tents, cried
out: Now do I behold the misery of Carthage! so when I behold that Tawny-faced
Ethiopian stand out pictured with a Pipe in* his hand, to entice the poor
passenger, may I justly cry out; Now do I behold the misery of the world; the
corrupter of Cities; the depraver of youth; the dotage of Age; the dissolution
of all! And this grief is no less than any other to me: when I see Pipes made
occasions of discourse; where nothing rellisheth, nothing de lights without
them: O, how Idleness has erected a throne for her to sit in; and in majesty
triumphs over the labors of poor men! O baine of youth, why dare thou
usurp the authority of a sovereign, that (...) at best, but a Vassal to the
Devil; a deluder of Novices with smoke and vanity; a dissolver of states; a
weakener of spirits; an enfeebler of strength; an effeminator of youth; and a
besotte^ of Age? why should thou in thy self be so imperious, that art to
all States so generally pernicious? Shall that issue which I have bred and
brought up in more generous discipline, in more heroicke affairs: not in
smoke* but in the consideration of themselves; not in the expense of idle
hours, but in the contemplacion of that sovereign end whereto they must of
necessity come (or be miserably excluded;) employ their time (which time they
borro^ but of me) in vanity^ leaving their best and soveraign'st delights, to
follow their own phantasticke humors? have they no other means to bestow
that little remainder of time which is yet behind, but in those vanities which
abridge their time, contract their days, and make me miserable in the eternal
discomfort of my children? Remains there nothing now for all my time of labor
in nurturing them, who have bin odious to that Power from whence I descended?
Ungrateful to me, by whom they were releeved? and worst to themselves, by
whom they have perished? I say, remains there nothing for my labor in
nurturing them, but tears of continuate affliction? motives of perpetuate
distraction (and remediless) being hopeless of their conversion? I was to
them a second Nature, by my nurture pamphering them with my delights; without
occasion of surfeit; cherishing them with my essential Cordials of comfort; and
teaching them mannagements of Arms, all oppositions to discomfit; and yet how
soon may valor be turned to effeminacy, resolution to cowardice, and discreet
government (in a hopeful infancy) to a distemporate diet, by giving the
reins of liberty? But I see the cause! while they lived under Times tuition;
and were observant of his worth; they answered Times hopes, making a virtuous
age succeed a virtuous birth: Then were they rained and ^estrained; but now
giving winds to their sails, they aspire higher, and must taste of an herb
that equals the aspiring of their minds. O, let time move you to a better and
maturer aspiring* not ^ smoaky suffrage of popular praise; not the vain
Consorts of house-wasting Rake-hels: but to take hold of me, now while you may
possess me. I am wilful, if you be neglectfull: I have no hair behind, as
you see: take me then by the forelocke, and make use of opportunity. Time is a
precious jewel that must be sought after, if obtained; feeke after me then,
while I may be obtained. This Age (I know) has many inducements to draw you
from me, many allurements to seduce you: but shall your father, even the Dial
of your youth, and the Haven of your Age, shall ^e (I say) loose that
excellence which was created, and at first ordained for him? Must your Winter
(which seldom brings forth either flower or fruit) be reserved for Time; when
your Spring, Summer, and Autumn have bin consumed in the loss of Time? When
Theseus came to the Temple of Delphos, he offered the first fruits of his hair
to Apollo; making the forepart of his head to be shaven, that he might take
away all occasion of discomfiture from the Enemy (as Homer writes of the
Aba^ts.) Offer then your first fruits, your first endeavors, and first
intentions, to the use and service of time; that in the surveigh of your
readiness, he may minister to you with all cheerfulness. Believe times words!
it is not the swarty-chopt Tobaccodrugge, that will yield you content in the
expense of your time: You may smoke it long ere you better your own
discourse, or make your Accounts even, which Time expects at your hands. A
whole ounce of Tobacco will hardly purchase one dram of wit: Repentance is the
best fruit you shall reap out of such an unsavory herb. Art thou yet
reclaimed, or art thou hardened? If the one, Time shall entertain thee with his
blessing: if the other; Time will bid thee farewell, but farewell thou can
not; being relinquished, and utterly forsaken by Time. I am yet staying here
in the street for thee: answer me but with hope, that thou will come, and thou will revive poor Time, that droopes with despair of thy return. Yet, Spissum
verbum est amanti, veniet: I pray thee foreslow not my hopes, frustrate not my
expectance, but satisfy my love; Never did pleasures with all their
appearance, so much affect thee, nor any temporary delights so well deserve
thee: Come then quickly to him that does both love thee, and has well deserved
thee: Odit, nec patitur moras amor: That love which proceeds from the heart,
hates delays with her heart; but where love is dissembling, there love without
offense may be delaying. How long have I observed thee yonder smoking, and was
doubtful whether thou were (as thou seemedst) a man, or that Beast, which the
natural Historian talks off, that sends out naught but fire? In, I durst not
come to thee; for I doubted, if I had remembered thee of my abuse, I should have
been spurned and spurted at for my labor; Thou art too great to be put in
mind of thy errors: but the time will come ( Et nesci^ citius an facilius)
when thou will wish with briny eyes, relenting heart, and all attendants of a
passionate and distracted soul, thou had received my instructions, attended
to my advertisements, and made Use of my Cautions. I will therefore, with this
public and irrevocable Edict, summon three maine infringers of my Will,
contemners of my self, and corrupters of the Age: my summons shall serve for
my last warning; if they return no more to those Stygian-shops; those Cymerian
hovels of darkness, I will remit their former errors; if (in despite of my
summons) they continue in the height of their Flaming vanities, their smoaky
Impostures, Time shall whip those three Stygmaticall Catolounes to death,
cutting them down like Mugweedes, with the Sithe of Fate: Those three
majesticke Tobacco-nosers, Captain WHIFFE, Captain PIPE, and Captain SNUFF.
And first for Captain WHIFFE.

To Captain WHIFFE.
YOu Captain, that glory in your Art of vanity, making a high Road-way 'twixt
your mouth and your guts, (and with a cunning retrait) bringing it back same
way it came; you, that set up bills for your Novice to read; as thus: Whosoever
will be Disciplined, or Matricula ted in the Art, Science or Mystery of
Tobacco-whiffing, let him subscribe his name, the place of his being; and
Captain Whiff: will be ready there to attend his young master-ships pleasure,
with the profoundst of his skill. O my impudent Sharke, Art thou fled from thy
Captain, and dare thou now usurp the name of Valor? Thou: that durst not
smell Gunpowder art now turned Tobacco-whiffer? For thee, if there were no
Time, yet there would remain some few Minutes reserved, to commend thee to a
halter, for thy flight from thy Captain. I my self will present thee for
altogether; thou shall not only be hanged (I would have thee mark me) before
the eye of the world; but I will have thee begged for an Anatomy, that thy
Entrals* (like Tamerlaines black Bannaret) may hang for Tropheyes in honor of
Captain Whiffe, and his thrice-puissant, and thrice-renowned Profession.
Having brought thee to be this Anatomy, I will leave thee.

To Captain PIPE.
YOu Captain Pipe (because your name is good) and many Pipes we need in this
our flourishing Troynovant, for conveyance of that pure Element water into our
City. You I say, shall be employed in conveying of water, (because you have
been ever used by men which frequented those Alleyes) to those despicable and
forlorn creatures, those diseased Gally-foists of Turneball, Picke-hatch,
Ram-Allie, and other Suburbane-traders, that in contempt of Virtue, make a
Contract with Hell. This (though it be no work of Charity) yet it is as good a
work as is expected of thee Captain: thou were once the Gallants Pander,
bear now the Whoores Tankard: Where I will leave thee.

To Captain SNUFF.
Captain Snuff, it may be you will take it in snuff, if Time tell you
wherein you err: but best is, as I am indifferent for thy hate, I am secure
for thy power: Renounce the Devil, (Captain) be not fired before thy time: be
respective (as thou art a Captain) of thine honor; and take heed thou taste
not, for thy Tobacco, Brimstone and Sulphur: I would not have thee snuff at
mine instructions; for I may, and with unamated front must tell thee, that I
have contested with a man of as great worth, and of far more grace, it may be.
The higher Cedar (if faulty) deserves the rougher censure. Opposition to the
malevolent disposition, is my recreation. Now it may be, that in some drunken
passion thou will swear to stab me, what will thou gain by it? where will thou be, when Time has no being? Let not my precepts move thine indignation,
but thy conversion: for thy threats, Time never feared them (though spoken by
valor) much less by an indiscreet Ass, that is carried away with choler.

Now for my Pipe-invective; if it drive thee into a fume, from a fume to a
flame, my heart is hoofed; may thy gall with fume be seared, thy guts with the
flame be scorched, my fireworke will be secured, though with paper-squibs
only sconced.

If Time should pray for thee, I think thou would not thank me; yet I will
offer a few orisons up for thee, for I doubt thou can offer none for thy
self. Leave me that s^uffing, and fall to sighing; thou art near thy grave,
and then thou shall be smoakt for thy vain time* Receive my tears, Thus
still (me thinks) I hear poor Time complain, And chide her Brats, for being
so profane.
as testimonies of my love (for ill is that nature that sends them forth in
hate:) mean time, these succinct Cautions I dedicate, as remembrances to all
the world; that when Time shall surcease to be, and shall leave them,
Time-lesse Eternity may afterward crown them.

TIMES remembrances to the world.
LIve in the world, as if thou meantst to leave it, being indifferent of loving
it, and resolved to despise it.

In honor, seek it not; for seldom is honor sought by deserts: if she may
by direct courses be purchased, and without appearance of thine own seeking,
receive her: Gold should be taken, if offered. In riches, be not so
prodigal, as thine own expense may breed want; or so miserable, as thou can
not use thine own. In life, prepare for death: in time, for eternity of time;
that when thy being is expired here, thou may live ever elsewhere. In
eminent places, let not the object of Earth darken thine eye for Heaven: for
Time had rather be a poor sojournour twixt Earth and Heaven, than by being
great on Earth, lose my portion of greatness in Heaven.

In thy rising, look to the stairs of thine ascending: if the foundation be
desert, thou may (perhaps) continue longer; but if desertlesse high, I fear
Ph^tons pride will be thy censure. Set an houre-glasse ever beside thee, and
weep at every drop of sand that falls; for every drop of sand abridges of the
number of thy days: wish not thine houre-glasse soon spent, unless thy
fervencie in desire of dissolution, take thee from the thought of mortality,
to the consideration of glory. Happily are thy desires extended, if thus
disposed; and Time, which in thy happy expense of Time did love thee, shall in
thy possession of Eternity, leave thee.

NEPENTHIACI Naenia: OR, MUSAEUS Elegy.
Ista liquescens pluvia, lavet peccati diluvia.
DRe^ch thy dry soul in rivolets of tears;
Em^athe thy panting heart in floods of grief;
Enhearse thy sable soul in lasting fears;
Enroule thy self amongst all mourners chief:
Water thy bed with pe^etentiall showers,
And for wild weeds bring forth delicious flowers.
"For never did the Sun yet shine upon
"That wretch, who sinned more than thou have done.
FINIS.
In a little Tract, entitled Tobacco: TOBACCO.
published by especial direction of the Author upon his deathbed, dedicated
to Humphrey King, one well experienced in the use, benefit, and practice of
that herb, and printed for Will. Barlow (with Tobacco Arms) then keeping shop
in Gracious street: we have collected these observations.

The divers^ie of names given to this Herb.
THis Herb with the French has been most known by the name of Nicotiana,
from Mounsieur Nicot a Frenchman, Ambassador to the King of Portugal, who
sent this herb first into France.

Others have called it, Queen mothers herb; for that when Mounsieur Nic^t had
sent it, commended to her, she first planted it.

Others there want not, which call it Petum Masculine, though far different in
quality and effect, from that the Portugals and Spaniards have called Petum
Feminine.

The sovereign quality of this herb, may be gathered from the very radical
derivative of it: drawn from the observance of a most judicious and
accomplished Knight, one, whose personal worth gives an ^minent addition to his
noble birth: For (...) in the Hebrew signifies ^onum, and (...) in Greek,
Remedium; implying, that it is a good remedy against any malady.
Tobacco first sent from Florida to Portugal, by the testimony of Mounsicur
Nicot, a serious and exact searcher of ancient Records.

The Authors which have most amply writ of it.
two Frenchmen. Charles Stephen, John Liebault,
Aegidius Eurartus, and Monardes, a Spanyard.
The effects or operations of it.
MOunsieur Nico^ finding sundry sovereign qualities in it, amongst other cures
applide it to a Noli me tangere, and cured it. His Patient was Countess of
Ruff, having her face perished with a wart.

The like experiments were done by Iarnick^ Governor of Rochell; reporting at
a solemn feast, how by distilling this Tobacco, mixed with the juice of another
little herb, casually found in the wood, he had cured one extremely pained
with the Asthma.

It has healed these diseases; the Wolf, Canker, Kings Evil, all old sores,
wounds, Tetters, broad biles, pricking of the Fish called Vives (the nature of
whose touch is to procure infinite bleeding, even to death:) the Gout being
rubbed in the infected place with oyle-olive, and afterward by applying warm
leaves of Tobacco, has been much allayed.

It has cleared the sight, and cured one long languishing in a consumption,
which I could instance in a Lady of good account, at this day living.

Aegidius Eurartus* in his Discourse De herba Panac^a, writes, how a certain
woman had given her Cat a very strong poison; when the poor Cat was in that
taking, that she could not stand with dizinesse, and strived to void forth the
poison in vain; the woman remembering her self, found means to open her
jaws, and making a little ball of bruized Tobacco, mingled with butter, to
make it go down the better, thrust it into her mouth, and so swallowing it
down, within a short time she cast up all the poison, and so was saved.

It will cure all pimples, carbuncles, and other red excrements, called
Alebuttons.

The Spaniards report, that the Indians, after their labor and travel, drink
unmeasurably Tobacco; which not only refreshes them, and takes away their
weariness, but makes them apt and prompt to business.

The description of it.
THis herb in form much resembles Consond^. The figure or Proportion of it,
you shall find drawn in the same Tract.

The maine stalk of Tobacco grows upright, and big in proportion, his leaves
are velveted, and are in growth bigger and larger at the stalk than toward
the end of the leaf; resembling the plain form, figure, or feature of any
other leaf not ragged nor indented, save that you shall have some leaves
broader and larger than both your hands, and in length* as much as three hands
breadth.

The flower of the Tobacco is much like the flower of Niel; sometimes yellow,
and sometimes of a Carnation color, and sometimes in form like a Bell.

And when it casts the flower, it leaves the former proportion, and takes
the semblance of an Apple; in which you may find the seeds enclosed very small,
appearing not much unlike to Iusquiasme seeds, which are yellowish: but when
they grow toward their full ripeness, then they appear more near to a black.

The convenientst season for sowing it.
FOr the time of sowing it in England; I agree rather with Monardes than these
two, who say it is best sowing it in the midst of April; but I would rather
hold it better to sow it in March, for the same occasion that Monardes writes:
howbeit, Stephen and Liebault write, that the Spaniards and Indians sow it
after harvest.

The convenientst season for gathring it.
LEo Suavius wills that we should gather the leaves in the month of July; and
then bruise and distill them in a double Limbecke, with two Emissories or
Spouts of glass, and keep this a year: for (says he) this received to the
quantity of an Ounce, for the increasing of health in a sick or waterish
stomach, is most effectual.

The convenientst Soil for increase of it.
THe best place wherein it will most prosper, and be naturally planted in our
countries, is, where the Sun shines most; and if it be possible, against
some wall, which may defend it from the North Wind, which is an infinite enemy
to this herb; being so tender in stalk, nature and quality, as it may endure
no distemper, nor extremity.

It is hot and dry in the second degree; Thus have I proved TOBACCo good or
ill; Good, if rare taken; Bad, if taken still.
and consequently of a purging quality; but fit for persons of all degrees,
upon necessity.

FINIS.
TIMES Sonnet.
SWeet Youth, Smoke not thy time,
Too precious to abuse;
Thou Have fitter feats to choose:
What may redeem that prime,
Thy SMOKING AGE does loose?
Good Oldman, eye thy Glass,
See, how those Sands do fall!
None can agraine recall:
Old hours do quickly pass,
Shall SMOKE consume them all?
Loves Lady, whom Sun, Weather,
Yea, the least airy touch,
( Complexion it is such)
May taint; cinge not your feather,
TOBACCO may do much.
Shun SMOKE, East, West, North, South,
LOVES LADY, OLD MAN, YOUTH.
CHAVCERS incensed Ghost.
FRom the frequented Path where Mortals tread,
Old-aged CHAVCER having long retired,
Now to revisit Earth at last desired,
Has from the dead raised his impalled head,
Of purpose to converse with humane seed,
And tax them too, for bringing him o'th Stage
In writing that He knew not in his age.
Las; is it fit the stories of that Book,
Couched and compiled in such a various form;
Which Art and Nature jointly did adorn,
On whose quaint Tales succeeding ages look,
Should now lie stifled in the steems of Smoke,
As if no Poets Genius could be ripe
Without the influence of Pot and Pipe?
No, no, ye English Moo^s, my Muse was fed
With purer substance than your Indian weed;
My breathing Nosethrils were from Vapors freede,
With Nectar and Ambrosia nourished,
While Hospitality so flourished
In Great men's Kitchins: where I now suppose,
Less Smoke comes from their Chimneyes than their nos^.
But I hear some prepared to question me,
The reason why I am so freely bent
In such sad strains to publish my complaint;
Or what strict Mamothrept that man should be,
Who h'as done Ch^ucer such an injury;
Whose tongue, though weak, yet is his heart as strong,
To call them to account that did him wrong.
I Will tell it ye, and must expect redress;
Would any of you hold it not a blot
To father such a Brat he never got?
Or would he not ingenuously confess,
He Would rather wish himself quite issuelesse?
Conceive this well; for if it be a crime,
As sure it is, such is the case of mine.
Down by a secret Vault as I descended,
Pent in with darkness save some little ray,
Which by a private cranie made his way,
By help whereof I saw what me offended,
Yet found no means to have the fault amended.
Fixed to a Post, (such was poor Chaucers lot)
I found my name to that I never wrote.
And what might be the Subject? no relation
Sad, solid, serious, moral, or divine,
Which sorted with the humors of my time,
But a late Negro's introduced fashion,
Who brought his Drugs here to corrupt our Nation.
Against which, because it is used in excess,
My Muse must mount, that she may it suppress.
Now some may well object, as many will,
This Task adds rather glory to my name,
Than any way seems to impair the same;
But I say no; Chaucer would think it ill
To plant Tobacco on Parnassus hill;
Sacred the Synod of the Muses be,
Nor can such W^eds spring from Apollo's tree.
Besides, what danger might Prescription bring!
For had the use of it been known to me,
It might have pleaded well antiquity;
But the Poets of my time knew no such thing,
How could they then of such a subject sing?
No; the age we lived was formed of milder stuff,
Then to take ought, like Male contents, in snuff.
Pure are the Crystal streams of Hippocrene;
Choice the dimensions which her Bards express;
Clear is their heart as the Are which they profess;
How should they relish then ought that is unclean,
Or waste their oil about a Smoaky dream?
Far be it Minerva should consume her Taper
In giving life or luster to a Vapor.
The Whose pleasing Comments are shortly to be published.
TALES I told, if morally applide,
How light soever, or wanton to the show,
Yet they in very deed were nothing so;
For were the mark they aimed at but descride,
Even in these days they would be verifide;
And like Sybillas Oracles esteemed,
Worth worlds of wealth, how light soever they seemed*
Witness my Miller, and my Carpenter,
The amorous stories of my Wife of Bath,
Which such variety of humors has;
My Priour, Manciple, and Almoner,
My subtle Sumner, and the Messenger;
All which, though molded in another age,
Have raised new Subjects both for Press and Stage.
Yet note these times disrelishing my tongue,
Whose Idioms-distaste by nicer men
Has made me mince it like a Citizen!
Which Chaucer holds a manifest wrong,
To force him leave what he had used so long:
Yea, he dislikes this polishing of Art,
Which may refine the Core, but spoils the heart.
But yet in serious sadness I impute
This to no fate or destiny of mine,
But to the barraine Brain-wormes of this time;
Whose Muse less pregnant, present or acute,
Affording naught that with the age may suit,
Like to the truant Be, or Lazy Drone,
Robb^ other Bee-hives of their hony-combe.
And which is worse, this Work they make their own,
Which they have pruned, purged and refined,
And aptly formed it to the Authors mind;
When I Am assured, if the truth were known,
They reap the Crop which was by others sown.
Yea, these usurpers to that pass are brought,
They Will foyst in that we neither said nor thought.
This, This it was incensed old ^haucers Ghost,
And caused him vent his passion in this sort,
And for a while to leave the* Elysian Court,
Where honest Authors are esteemed most;
But such as on the Deadmans Labors boast
Excluded are, enjoined by Fate to won
Upon the scorching Banks of Phlegeton.
Ye then, whose measures merit well the Name
And Title ye retain, Poets, I mean,
Bedewed with influence from Hippocrene,
As ye Professants seem, so be the same,
And with your own Pens eternize your fame;
Shun these Pipe-Pageants; for there seldom come
Tobacco-Factors to Elysium.
FINIS.

