Here begins the life of saint Brandon
woodcut representation of Saint Brendon, in monk's robes, with a book and
crook or crosier, in a compartment with the device of William Caxton's mark and
initials at the bottom

Saint Brandon the holy man was a monk and borne in yrlonde / and there he was
abbot of an house wherein were a thousand monks / and there he had a full
strayte and holy life in great penance and abstynence and he governed his
monks full virtuously / and than within short time after there came unto him
an holy abbot ye hight Beryne to visyte hy^ and each was Joyful of other and
than saint brandon began to tell ye abbot beryn of many wonders yt he had seen
in diverse lo^des and when Beryn herd yt of saint Brandon he began to sygh and
sore wept / and saint Brandon comforted him ye best wise he could saying / ye
come hither for to be Joyful with me / and therefore for gods love leave your
mourning and tell me what meruayles ye have seen in ye great see occean yt
co^passeth all the world about / and all other waters come out of him / which
comes in all the parties of ye earth / and than Beryn began to tell saint
Bra^don and his monks ye meruayles yt he had seen full sore weeping / and said
I have a sone his name is Meruoke / and he was a monk of great fame / which
had great desire to seek about by ship in diverse countries to find a
solytary place / wherein he might dwell secretly out of the besynes of this
world for to serve god quyetly with more deuoco^n / and I cou^seyled him to
sail in to an ylonde far in ye see beside the mountain of stones which is
full well known. And than he made him ready and saylled thither with his monks /
and when he came thither he lyked ye place full well where he and his monks
served our lord full devoutly. And tha^ Berynsawe in a vysyon yt this monk
Meruoke was sailed right far eestward in the sea more than three days
saylynge and suddenly to his semynge there came a derke cloud and covered them
that a great part of yt day they saw no light / and as our lord would the
(...) away and they saw a full fair ylonde / and thither (...) they drew / in
yt ylonde was Joy and mirth enough and ye earth of ye ylonde shyned as bright as
the son / and there were the fairest trees and herbs yt ever any man saw /
and there were many precyus stones shynyng bright and every herb there was
full of fygures / and every tree full of fruit so that it was a glorious sight
and an heavenly Joy tabyde there / and tha^ there came to them a fair young man
and full curtesly he welcomed them al and called every monk by his name and
said yt they were much bound to praise ye name of our lord Ihu^ yt would of
his grace show to the^ ye glorious place where is ever day and never night and
this place is called paradys terrestre but by this ylond is an other ylond
wherein no man may come / and this young man said to them ye have been here half
a year without mete dry^ke or sleep / and they supposed yt they had not ben there
ye space of half an hour / so merry and Joyful they were there and the yo^ge
man told them yt this is ye place that Adam and Eve dwelte in first / ever
should have dwelled there if yt they had not broke yt commandment of god and
than the young man brought them to their ship again and said they might no
longer abide there / and when they were all shypped suddenly this young man
vanysshed away out of their sight / and than within short time after by ye
purueyau^ce of our lord Ihesu they came to ye abbay where saint Brandon
dwelled / and than he with his brethren recyeued them goodly and demanded them
where they had be^ so long / and they said we have be^ in ye land of by heest
before the gates of paradys where as is ever day and never night and they said
all yt the place is full delectable / for yet all their clothes smelled of ye
sweet and Joyful place. And than saint Brandon purposed sone after for to seek
(...) ^e by gods help / and anon began to puruey for a good ship and a
strong and vytayled it for seven year / and than he took his leave of all his
brethren and took.xii. monks with him / but or they entered in to the ship
they fasted forty days and lived deuoutely and each of them received the
sacrament / and when saint Brandon with his.xii. monks were entered in to the
ship there came other two of his monks and prayed him that they might sail
with him. And than he said ye may sail with me but one of you shall go to hell
or ye come again / but not for that they would goo with him. And than saint
Bra^don bad the shypmen to wind up ye sail and forth they sailed in gods
name so yt on the morrow they were out of sight of any land and forty days
and forty nights after they sailed plain eest. And than they saw an ylonde
far fro them. and they sailed theyderwarde as fast as they could and they
saw a great rock of stone appear above all the water and three days they
sailed about it or they could get in to ye place. But at the last by the
purueeaunce of god they found a little haven and there went a land every
the one and than suddenly there came a fair hou^de and fell down at the fete of
saint Brandon and made him good there in his manner / and than he badde his
brethren be of good there / for our lord has sent to us his messenger to lead us in some good place / and the hou^de brought them in to a fair halle
where they found the tabbles spredde ready set full of good mete and drink. And
than saint Brandon said graces / and tha^ he and his brethren sat down and
ete and drank of such as they found And there were beds ready for them
wherein they took their rest after their long labor. And on the morn they
returned again to their ship and sailed a long time in the sea after or
they could find any lord till at the last by ye puruyau^ce of god they saw
far fro them a full fair ylonde full of grene pasture wherein were ye whytest
and gretest sheep that ever they saw. For every sheep was as great as an ox
and soon after came to them a goodly old man / which welcomed them and made
to them good chere / and said this is yt ylonde of sheep and here is never
cold weder but ever somer and that causes the sheep to be so great and white
they ete of the best grass and herbs that is any where and than this old man
took his leave of them and badde them sail forth right eest and within short
time by gods grace that they should come in to a place like paradys / wherein
they should keep their eester tide and than they sailed forth and came soon
after to that land but because of little depth in some place and in some place
were great rocks but at the last they went upon an ylonde wenynge to them
they had been saufte and made thereon a fire for to dress their dinner but saint
Brandon abode still in the ship and when yt fire was right hot and the mete
nygh soden than this ylo^de began to move / werof the monks were aferde / and
fled anon to ship and left the fire and mete behind them and meruayled
sore of the mouynge / and saint Brandon comforted them and said that it was a
great fysshe named Iasconie which labored night and day to put his tail in
his mouth but for gretenes he may not. And than anon they sailed west three
days and three nyghtes or they saw any land / wherefore they were ryghe heavy /
but soon after as god would they saw a fair ylonde full of flowers herbs
and trees / werof they thanked god of his good grace / and anon they went on
land / and when they had gone long in this they found a full fair well and
thereby stood a fair tree full of bows / and on every bough sat a fair bird
/ and they sat so thycke on ye tree that uneath any lefe of the tree might be
seen the nombre of them was so great and they sange so meryly that it was an
heavenly noise to here / wherefore saint Bra^don kneled down on his knees and
wept for Joy / and made his prayers devoutly to our lord god to know what
these birds mente. And than anon one of the birds fled fro the tree to
saint Brandon and he with flekerynge of his wings made a full merry noise like
a fydle yt him seemed he herd never so Joyful a melody / and than saint
Brandon commanded the bird to tell him ye cause why they sat so thycke on
the tree and sange so merely / and than the bird said. Sometime we were
aungelles in heaven / but when our master lucyfer fell down in to hell for his
hye pride / and we fell with him for our offenses / some hyger / and some lower
after the qualyte of the trespace and because our trespace is but little
therefore our lord has set us here out of all pain in full great Joy and
mirth after his pleasy^ge here to sarue hy^ on this tree in the best manner we
can / the sunday is a day of rest fro all worldly occupacyon / and therefore
that day all we be made as white as any snow for to praise our lord in the
best wise we may / and than this bird said to saint Brandon that it is.xii.
months passed yt ye departed fro your abbey and in ye.vii. year here after ye
shall se ye place yt ye desire to come to / and all this.vii year ye shall keep
your ester here with us every year / and in the end of the.vii. year ye shall
come in to ye land of byhest / and this was on ester day yt the bird said
these words to saint Brandon / and than this bird flewe again to his fellows
ye sat on ye tree / and than all the birds began to sing eue^songe so meryly
that it was an heavenly noise to here / and after souper saint Brandon and his
fellows went to bed and slepte well / and on the morn they arose by times /
and then^e those birds began matyns pryme and hours and all such service as
christian men use to sing / and saint Bra^don with his fellows abode there.viii.
wekes till trynyte sunday was past / and they sailed again to ye ylonde of
sheep / and there they vytayled the^ well / and sith took their leave of that
old man and returned again to ship / and than the bird of the tree came
again to saint Brandon / and said I am come to tell you that ye shall sail
fro hens in to an ylonde wherein is an abbey of.xxiiii. monks which is fro this
place many a mile / and there ye shall hold your crystmas and your ester with
us like as I told you / and than this bird flewe to his fellows again. And
than saint Brandon and his fellows sailed forth in the occean / and soon after
fell a great tempest on them / in which they were greatly troubled long time
and sore for labored / and after that they found by the purueau^ce of god an
ylonde which was far fro them / and than full mekely prayed to our lord to
send the^ thither in saufte but it was.xl. days after or they came thither /
wherefore all the monks were so weary of that trouble that they set little price
by their lives / and cried co^tynually to our lord to have mercy on them and
bring them to the land in saufte / and by purueaunce of god they came at ye
last in to a little haue^ / but it was so strayte yt uneath the ship might
come in / and after they came to an ancre / and anon ye monks went to land
/ and when they had long walked about at the last they found two fair
wells / that one was fair clear water / and that other was some what troubly
and thycke. And than they thanked our lord full humbly that had brought them
thither in saufte and they would feign have dronken of ye water / but saint
Brandon charged them they should not take without license For if we absteyne us
a while our lord will puruaye for us in the best wise. And anon after came to
them a fair old man with hoar here and welcomed them full mekely and kyssed
saint Brandon and led them by many fair wells till they came to a fair
abbey / where they were received with great honor and solemn processy on
with.xxiiij. monks all in ryall copes of cloth of gold and a ryall cross was
before them. And than the abbot welcomed saint Brandon and his felawshyp and
kyssed them full mekely / and took saint Brandon by the hand and led him
with his monks in to a fair hall / and set them down a row upon the
benche / and the abbot of the place wysshe all their fete with fair water of
the well that they saw before / and after ladde them in to the fratour and
there set them among his covent and anon there came one by the purueyaunce
of god / which served them well of mete and drink / for every monk had set
before him a fair white lofe and white rotes and herbs which were right
delycyous / but they wyste not what rotes they were / and they drank of the
water of the fair clear well yt they saw before when they came first to land
which saint Brandon forbode them. And the abbot came and chered saint Brandon
and his monks and prayed them ete and drink for charity / for every day our
lord sends a goodly old man that covers this table and sets our mete
and drink tofore us / but we know not how it comes / new ordeyne never no
mete ne dry^ke for us / and yet we have been.lxxx. year here / and ever our
lord worshypped be he fedeth us / we be.xxiiij. monks in nombre and every
feryall day of ye weke he sends to us.xii. loves and every sunday and
feestfull day.xxxiiii. loves / and the bread that we leave at dinner we ete at
souper / and now at your coming our lord has sent to us.xlviij. loves for
to make you and us merry together as brethren / and al way.xij. of us go to dinner
whiles other.xii. keep the quyer / and thus have we done this.lxxx. year / for
so long have we dwelled here in this abbey And we came hyder out of thabbey of
saint Patrykes in yrlonde. And thus as ye se our lord has purueyed for us /
but none of us knows how it comes but god alone to whom be given honor and
laud world without end. And here in this land is ever fair weder / and none
of us has been seek sith we came hyder / and when we goo to mass or to any
other service of our lord in the church / anon seuentapers of wax ben set
in the quere and ben light at every time without man's hand / and so brenne
day and night at every hour of service and never waste ne mynysshe as long
as we have been here which is.lxxx. year. And than saint Brandon went to the
church with the abbot of the place and there they said euensonge together full
devoutly. And than saint Brandon looked upward toward the crucyfyxe / and saw
our lord hanging on the cross / which was made of fine crystal and
curyously wrought. And in the quere were.xxiiii. seetes for xxiiii. monks and
the seven tapers brennynge / and ye abbottes seet was made in the mids of the
quere. And than saint Brandon demanded of the abbot how long they had kept
that scylence that none of them spoke to other. And he said this.xxiiii. year
we spoke never one to another / and than saint Brandon wept for Joy of their
holy conuersacyon. And than saint Brandon desired of the abbot that he and his
monks might dwell there still with him. To whom the abbot said. Sir that may
ye not do in no wise for our lord showed to you in what manner that ye shall
beguyded till the seven year be fulfilled and after that term thou shalt with
thy monks return in to yrlonde in saufte / but one of the two monks that
came last shall dwell in the ylonde of ankers / and that other shall go quyke to
hell. And as saint Brandon kneled in ye church he saw a bright shynynge
angel / came in at the wyndowe and lyghted all the lyghtes in the church.
And than he flewe out again at the wyndowe to heaven / and than saint Brandon
merueyled greatly how the light brenned so fair and wasted not. And than the
abbot said that it is written yt Moses saw abusshe all on fire / and yet it
did not brenne / and therefore marvel not thereof / for yt might of our lord
is now as great as ever it was. And when saint Brandon had dwelled there fro
crystmasse eue^ till ye twelfth day was passed. Than he took his leave of the
abbot and the covent and returned with his monks to his ship and sailed fro
thens with his monks toward the abbay of saint Helarye. But they had great
tempests in the sea fro that time till palm sunday. And than they came to
the ylonde of sheep and there were received of the old man which brought them
to a fair hall and served them. And on she erthursdaye after souper he washed
their fete and kyssed them like as our lord did to his dyscyples. And there
abode till saterdaye eester even. And than they departed and sailed to the
place where the great fysshe lay / and anon they saw their caudron upon the
fysshes back / which they had left there twelve months tofore / and
there they kept the service of ye resurreccyon on the fysshes back and after
they sailed that same day by the morning to the ylonde where as the tree of
birds was. And than the said bird welcomed saint Brandon and all his
felawshyp / and went again to the tree and sange full meryly / and there he
and his monks dwelled fro eester till trynyte sunday as they did the year
before / in full great Joy and mirth And daily they herd ye merry service of
the birds sitting on the tree. And than the bird told unto saint Brandon
that he should return again at crystmasse to the abbey of monks / and at
ester thither again / and the other dele of the year labor in the occean in
full great perils / and fro year to year till the seven year be
accomplysshed. And than shall ye come unto the Joyful place of paradys and
dwell there.xl. days in full great Joy and mirth / and after ye shall
return home in to your own abbey in saufe and there end your life and come
to the bliss of heaven / to which our lord bought you with his precious
blood. And than ye aungel of our lord ordained all thing that was needful to
saint Brandon and to his monks in vytaylles and all other things necessary
to them. And than they thanked our lord of his great goodness he had showed to
them often in their great need and sailed forth to the great see occean
abidynge ye mercy of our lord in great trouble and tempests and sone after
came to them an horrible fysshe which followed the ship long time castinge
so much water out of his mouth in to the ship that they supposed to have be
drowned / wherefore they deuoutely prayed god to deliver them of that great
peril And anon after came an other fyssh gretre tha^ he out of the west see
and faught with him / and at the last claue him in three pyeces and than
returned again And than they thanked mekely our lord of their delyueraunce
fro this great peril / but they were in great heaviness because their vytales
were nyghe spent / but by the ordinance of our lord there came a bird and
brought to them a great branch of a vine full of read grapes / by which they
lived.xiii. days / and than they came too a little ylonde / wherein were many
vynes full of grapes / and they there londed and thanked god / and gadred as
many grapes as they lived by.xl. days after always saylynge in the sea in
much storm and tempest / and as they thus sailed suddenly came fleing toward
them a great grype which assailed them and was like to have destroyed them
wherefore they deuoutely prayed for help and aid of our lord Ihesu christ.
And than the bird of the tree of the ylonde where they had holden their Eester
to fore. Came to ye grype and smote out both his eyes / and after slew him /
wherefore they thanked our lord. And than sailed forth contynually till saint
Peter's day. And than songen they solempnely their service in the honor of the
feast. And in that place the water was so clear that they might se all the
fysshes yt were about them whereof they were full sore aghast / and the monks
counseyled saint Brandon to sing no more. For all the fysshes lay than as they
had slebe. And than saint Brandon said dread ye not for ye have kept by two
eesters the feast of the resurreccyon upon the gretefysshes back / and
therefore dread ye not of these little fysshes. And then^e saint Brandon made
him ready and went to mass and badde his monks to sing the best wise they
could / and than anon all the fysshes a woke and came about the ship so
thycke that uneath they might se the water for the fysshes / and when the mass
was done all the fysshes departed so as they were no more seen. And seven
days they sailed al way in that clear water. And than there came a southe
wind and drove the ship northwarde where as they saw an ylonde full derke
and full of stenche and smoke / and there they herd great blowynge and
blastynge of belowes / but they might se no tynge but herd great thonderinge
whereof they were sore aferde and blyssed them often / and soon after there came
one stertynge out all brenynge in fire and stared full ghastly on them with
great staring eyes / of whom the monks were agaste / and at his departing
fro them he made the horyblest cry that might be herd / and soon there came
a great nombre of fendes and assailed them with hokes and brennynge iron malles
/ which ran on the water following their ship fast in such wise that it
seemed all the sea to be on a fire / but by the pleasure of our lord they had
no power to hurt ne grieve them ne their ship wherefore the fendes began to
rore and cry and threw hokes and malles at them / and they than were fore
aferde and prayed to god for comfort and help for they saw ye fendes al
about the ship and them seemed than all the ylonde and the sea to be on a
fire / and with a sorrowful cry all tho fendes departed fro them / and
returned to ye place that they came fro. And than saint Brandon told to them
that this was a part of hell / and therefore he charged them to be steadfast in
the faith For they should yet se many a dredefull place or they came home
again / and than came the south wind and drove them ferther in to the north
where they saw an hylle all of fire / and a foul smoke and stenche coming
fro thens / and the fire stood on each side of the hill like a wall all
brennynge and than one of his monks began to cry and weep full sore and said
that his end was comen and yt he might abide no longer in the ship / and
anon he lepte out of the ship into the sea and than he cried and rored full
pyteously cursynge the time that he was borne and also fader and mother that
begat him because they saw no better to his correccyon in his young age. For
now I must go to perpetual pain. And than the saying of saint Brandon was
verefyed that he said to him wha^ he entered / therefore it is good a man to do
penance and forsake sin for the hour of death is incertayn And than anon the
wind turned in to the north and drove the ship in to the south which
sailed seven days co^tynually. And than they came to great a rock stondynge
in the sea / and thereon sat a naked man in full great myserye and pain. For
the wawes of the sea had so beten his body that all the flesh was gone of /
and no thing left but synewes and bare bones. And when the wawes were gone /
there was a canuas that hynge over his heed which bette his body full sore
with the blowynge of the wind. And also there were two ox tongues / and a
great stone that he sat upon the which did to him full great ease And than
saint Brandon charged him for to tell him what he was. And he said my name is
Judas yt sollde our lord Ihesu christ for.xxx. pens which sytteth here so
wretchedly / how be it I am worthy to be in the gretest pain that is. But our
lord is so mercyful that he has rewarded me better tha^ I have deserved For
of right my place is in the brennynge fire of hell. But I am here but certain
times of the year that is fro crystmasse to twelfth day and fro eester to
wytson tide be paste and every feestfull day of our lady and every saterdaye
at none till sunday that euensonge be done but all other times I lie still in
hell in full brennynge fire with Pilate / Herod and Cayphas therefore accursed
be the time that ever I knew them And than Judas prayed saint Brandon for to
abide still there all that night / and that he would keep him still that the
fendes should not fetch him to hell. And than he said to him with gods grace
/ thou shalt abide here all this night And than he asked. Judas what cloth
that was that henge over his heed and he said it was a clothe that he gave unto
a lepre / which was bought with the money that he stale fro our lord when I
bare his purse / wherefore it does to me full great pain now in betynge my
face with the blowynge of the wind. And these two ox tongues that ha^ge here
above me I gave them sometime to two priests to pray for me / them I bought
with mine own money / and therefore they ease me because the fysshes of the sea
gnawe on the^ and spare me And this stone that I sit on lay sometime in a
desolate place / where it eased no man / and I took it thens and laid it in a
foul way where it did much ease unto them that went by that way. And
therefore it eases me now / for every good deed shall be rewarded and every
evil deed shall be punysshed. And on the sunday against even there came a great
multitude of fendes blastynge and rorynge / and they bad saint Brandon goo
thens that they might have their servant Judas / for we dare not come in the
presence of our master but if we bring him to hell with us. And than said
saint Brandon I let not you to do your masters commandment but by the
power of our lord Ihesu I charge you to leave him this night till to morrow.
How dare thou help him that sold his master for.xxx. pens unto ye Jews /
and caused him also to dye ye most shameful death upon the cross. And than
saint Brandon charged the sendes by his passion that they should not noye him
that night. And than ye fendes went their way rorynge and cryenge towardee
hell to their master ye great devil / and than Judas thanked saint Bra^don so
ruefully that it was pity to se and on the morn the fendes came with an
horrible noise saying yt they had that night suffered great pain by cause
they brought not Judas and said that he should suffer double pain the.vi.
day following and they took than Judas trembling for fere with them to pain.
And after saint Bra^don sailed south ward three days and three nyghtes and on
the friday they saw an ylonde. And than saint Brandon began to sing and said
I se ye ylonde wherein saint Poule the heremyte dwells and has dwelled
there.xl. year without mete and drink ordyned by man's hand / and they came
to the land saint Poule came and welcomed them humbly he was old and
forgrowen so that no man might se his body Of whom saint Bra^don said wenynge
/ now I se a man that lives more like an angel than a man / wherefore we
wretches may be ashamed that we live no better. Than saint Poule said to saint
Brandon / thou art better than I for our lord has showed to the moo
preuitees than he has done to me / wherefore thou ought to be more praised
than I To whom said Brandon saint / we be monks and must labor for our mete.
But god has provided for the such mete as thou hold the pleased / wherefore
thou art much better tha^ I. To whom saint poule said sometime I was a monk
of saint Gatrikes abbey in yrlonde and was warden of the place where as men
enter in to saint Patrykes purgatory. And on a day there came one to me and I
asked him what he was. And he said I am your abbot Patryke and charge the that
thou depart fro hens to morn erly to the sea side and there thou shalt find
a ship in to which thou must enter / which god has ordained for yt whose
will thou must accomplysshe / and so the next day I arose and went forth and
sou^de the ship in which he entered / and by the purueyu^ce of god I was
brought in to this ylonde the seventh day after. And than I left the ship
and went to land and there I walked up and down a good while. And than by
the purueyau^ce of god there came an otter going on his hinder fete and
brought me a flynt stone and an iron to smite fire within his two sore claws
of his fete / and also he had about his neck great plente of fysshes which
he cast down before me and went his way and I smote fire and made a fire of
styckes and did sethe ye fysshe by which I lived three days. And tha^ the
otter came again and brought me fysshe for other three days and thus he has
done this.li. year thorugh the grace of god / and there was a great stone out
of the which our lord made to spring fair water clear and sweet / whereof I
drink daily and thus have I lived one and fyfty year and I was forty year old
when I came hyder and am now an hundred and.xi. year old and abide till it
please our lord to send for me and if it please him I would feign by
dyscharged of this wretched life / and than he badde saint Brandon to take of
the water of the well and to carry in to his ship / for it is time yt thou
depart for thou have a great Journey to do for thou shalt sail to an ylo^de
which is forty days saylynge hens / where thou shall hold thy cester like as
thou have done tofore where as the tree of birds is and fro thens thou shalt
sail in to ye land of byhest and shalt abide there forty days. And after
return home in to thy country in saufte. And than these holy men took leave
each of other and they wept both full sore and kyssed each other. And than
saint Brandon entered in to his ship and sailed eue^.xl. days southe in full
great tempest. And upon eester even came to their procuratour which made to
them good chere as he had before time and from thens they came to the great
fysshe where they said matyns and mass on ester day / and when the mass was
done the fysshe began to meue and swa^me forth fast in to see whereof the monks
were sore aghast which stood upon him / for it was a great marvel to se such
a fysshe as great as al a country for to swy^me so fast in the water / But
by the will of our lord this fysshe set all the monks a land in the paradyse
of birds all hole and sou^de. And than returned to the place he came fro. And
than saint Brandon and his monks thanked our lord of their delyueraunce of
the great fysshe and kept their eestertyde till trynyte sunday like as they
had done tofore time and after this they took their ship and sailed eest.xl.
days / and at the forty days end it began for to hayle right fast. And
therewith came a derke myste the which lasted long after which fered saint
Brandon and all his monks and prayed unto our lord for to help them. And
than anon came their procuratour and badde them to be of good chere for they
were comen in to the land of byheest. And sone after that mist passed away /
and anon they saw the fairest country westwarde that any man might se and
was so clear and bright that it was an heavenly sight to behold. And all the
trees were charged with ripe fruit and herbs full of flowers. In which land
they walked forty days but they could not se none end of that land and there
was all way day and never night / and the land was attemperate / ne to hot ne
to cold. And at the last they came to a fair river / but they durst not goo
over. And there came to them a fair young man and welcomed them curtoysly and
called each of them by his name and did great reverence to saint Brandon and
said to them be ye now Joyful / for this is the land that ye have sought. But
our lord will that ye depart hastily and he will show to you more of his
secrets when ye come again in to the sea / and our lord will that ye lade
your ship with the fruit of this land and hye you hens. For ye may no
le^ger abide here / but thou shalt sail again in to thyn own country. And
soon after that thou come home thou shalt dye. And this water that thou
see here departs the world a sondre. For on that other side of this water
may no man come that is in this life And the fruit that ye se here is always
thus ripe every time of ye year / and always it is here light as ye now se and
he that keeps our lords hestes and commandments at all times shall se this
land or he do pass out of this world. And than saint Brandon and his monks
took of that fruit as much as they would and also they took with them great
plente of precious stones. And than they took their leave and went to ship
weeping sore because they might no longer abide there. And than they took
their ship and came home in to yrlonde in saufte / whom thyr brethren
received with right great Joy gyuenge thankynges unto our lord, which had
kept them all that seven year fro many a peril and brought them home in
saufte. To whom begyuen honor and glory world without end. Amen. And so
soon after this holy man saint Brandon wexed feeble and seek / and had but
little Joy of this world but ever after that his Joy and mind was in ye
Joys of heaven. And within short time after he being full of virtues departed
out of this world unto everlasting life in heaven and was worshypfully buried
in a fair abbey / the which he himself founded where our lord shows for
this holy saint many fair miracles wherefore let us devoutly pray to this holy
saint that he pray for us to our lord that he have mercy on us to whom be
given land honor and empire world, withouten end. Amen.

Thus ends the life of saint Brandon. Emprynted at London in the Fletestrete
at the sing of the son. By wynkyn de word.

tripartite printer's device of Wynken de Word, featuring William Caxton's
mark and initials in central position; the sun, two blazing stars, and twenty
small ones at top, the name Wynken de Word a dog, a centaur and a centaur
drawing a bow or Sagittarius at bottom(McKerrow 20) Wynken de Word.




