THE RASING OF THE FOUNDATIONS of Brovvnisme. WHEREIN, AGAINST ALL THE WRItings
of the principal Masters of that sect, those chief conclusions in the next
page, are, (amongst sundry other matters, worthy the Readers knowledge)
purposely handled, and soundly proved. ALSO THEIR CONTRARY ARGVMENTS AND
Objections deliberately examined, and clearly refelled by the word of God.

Isaiah cap. 57. ver. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
CONFIDITE. VICI MVDV. IOA. IO. VHI TVA MORS VICTORIA 1 COR 15. CONFERET CAPVT
TVV. GENESIS 3. ERO MORSVS INFERAT TVVS O^. 13..JESUS. CHRISTVS.


Imprinted at London by John Windet, dwelling at Pawles wharfe at the sign of
the Cross keys, and are to be sold at the Rose in Powles churchyard. 1588.

The chief conclusions in this Book.
1 No man ought to depart the Communion, for any open unworthy ones resorting
unto it.

2 A faithful Christian may keep himself free, from the pollution of the
known wicked, at the Sacrament, and yet not separate himself. And how.

3 Open notorious offenders, not separated from a congregation of Christ, do
not thereupon vnsanctifie the same, so as to make it no Church of Christ.

4 It may be a true Church of God, that has in it diverse corruptions, both in
doctrine and practice.

5 The Church of England is not more unsound, than diverse undoubted Churches
have been, from which no separation was counseled.

6 No man ought to separate himself from the Church of England, for the
defectes and corruptions that are therein.

7 By faith only visible Churches have their account and being in Christ.

8 Discipline is not of the essence or being of a Church.

To the right worshipful his very loving cousin. M. Thomas Hussy Esquire,
all increase of Christian knowledge, zeal and worship.
AS I have made you a beholder, and used your name in my first conflict with
this kind of men (loving cousin) so in my proceeding, and to the very end
(which God shall give when he sees it good) I trust, I may be bold, to
continue the same course. Wherefore now again I return, presenting unto you,
not Glouers matters, in any of those points plainly and professedly, which then
were between us: but the general and great heads of that schism, wherein he
was first overtaken: and that specially between Brown (the famous achbuylder
of such ruinous foundations) and me: though others also are not omitted where
opportunity is offered. For so have these matters, upon the occasion of the
Admonition, grown somewhat large at length, as now appears. By my former
writing I had stirred (as it seems) the hornets nest. By this (I hope) I
shall either drive them in again, or else take away their stings, so as they
shall seldomer hurt any. Those 8. conclusions, wherewith you see I front the
adversary, are as so many Canons, to beat down (through the power of God)
the paper walls of his proud bulwark. The sielie defenses that he makes at
every assault, and entering of his breaches, you shall judge your self, in
this book, coming as it were to the very sight and view of the several
actions. It may be, you have alredie heard somewhat, of the course and behavior
of this people. For though their full swarm and store be (as it is most likely)
in London, and the parts near adjoining: yet have they sparsed of their
companies into several parts of the Realm, and namely, into the West, almost
to the uttermost borders thereof. For which cause, (me thinks) I have reason
yet so much the more to be confirmed in this choice of my dedication, since so,
the rather, as by your hand and means, this benefit of discovering their
iniquity, and making known their poison, may more readily be communicated
unto many in those parts. And as you are now in the service of your prince,
esteemed a worthy man to have the leading and training of so many, to be
prepared for the defense of your country and of this land, against the bodily
enemy, so may that favor be manifoldly greater, which the king of kings shall
in this service vouchsafe you, by making you moreover, as an vpholder and
deriuer of these defenses of his truth, into those weak parts of your
country. Whereinto such undermining adversaries have entered, and carried away
many souls from the common means of their salvation: namely the preaching of
the Gospel, which is called of the Apostle, the power of God unto Salvation,
Romans 1.17.
to all that believe. And thus also, if in the mids of your weapons (as it
were) you shall allot your times likewise, to the preparing and attaining skill,
weapons, and strength to fight the Lords battails against your spiritual
adversaries, happy and happy again shall you be. Your diligence, and watchfulnes
in the service of your God and Queen in this life, shall find rest and
perpetual peace and quietness herafter. Yea your renoume increasing here on
earth, shall be much more abundantly increased, so as no earthly pen can describe
it, namely, when the king of glory shall set a crown upon your head. Think on
these things (most loving cousin) as I doubt not you do, and propound that
worthy captain Cornelius unto your self, as a companion to walk with, or at
least, as an example to imitate. And let that which others take for a reason to
hold them back, be a double spur unto you in this case: Namely the general
contrary practice of the multitude. Remember that he, that could not lie,
has said it, Narrovve is the way that leads to life, and fevve there be
that find it. And, Strive to enter in at the narrovve gate. A word to the
wise is sufficient. 2. Pet. 3.1.
And hereby I hope I shall but stir up your pure mind (as the Apostle
speaks) which is already forwardly running in this race. Nevertheless, I have
counted it my duty, always, and by all good occasions, to put you in
remembrance of these things. For your wealth and good estate both of body and
mind, are of near and dear account and price with me, as the Lord knows:
to whose gracious guiding and protection, I most humbly commend you, and all
yours. From London, the 12. of the sixth Month.

Your worships even in all the duties of a loving kinsman, S. B.

To the Christian Reader, The spirit of truth, and of wisdom in sobriety
through Christ Jesus.
ALthough (Beloved) the judgment and practice of some men of special account
in the Church of God, have to this day held this impression in me, that I
esteem the captains and ancient bearers of this schism, unworthy the honor
of any set conflict, and public confutation: yet is it come to pass (by the
providence of the only wise God) that I have been, part after part, and one
occasion pulling on another, drawn (as it were) by head and shoulders through
the deep of this business. And the labor now accomplished, I am so far
from repenting, that I am in good assurance, through the mercy God, of a
two-folde benefit to arise thereby: the one is, of stopping that violent
stream of seducing, wherein daily such numbers of the younger and weaker sort
of Christians are carried out of our assemblies: principally because the zeal
of such, being greater then their knowledge, becomes an apt pray and booty,
for the instruments of deceit to practice upon. And this agrees with the
exhortation of the Church, Cantic. 2.15.
when she says: Take us the foxes, the little foxes, corrupting the vines,
whilst our vines bring forth the first grape. the other benefit is, that
hereby those impure mouths shall be dashed, that hertofore in their malicious
defense of corruptions, have made no conscience, to clothe all those, that have
duetifully urged the proceeding of our church unto perfection, in one liuerie,
with these schismatic spirits, that so they might purchase unto them, both
from magistrate and common people equal hatred and auoydance. This book shall
by the grace of God, testify unto all that make any conscience to discern
truth from lies, that there is as much difference betwixt those, who^ they in
their bitterness, would thus match together, as is between that child, that
in tender affection, reprooueth and labors the refourming of his mother,
whom he sees by her indiscreet behavior, to become a reproach among women:
and him that under pretense of the hate of her uncomely behavior, should
pluck out her bowels, and forsake her In this my travail, I have cared, as
much as I could, to husband the time unto the reader, and therefore have both
cut off many idle discourses (which the adversary would have drawn me into)
and also have so sounded the matters that I have dealt with, by all the writings,
printed or otherwise, that are probably vouched theirs, as that, I hope, the
godly spirit shall find me no trifler, but such a serious and sincere disputer
as the weight of the cause has required. I was (I grant) in comparison of
others, as a woman of too weak a constitution to conceive and bring forth any
such child: but the Lord has had his way and purpose herein. And as (I protest
before the Lord and his holy angels) with much fear and trembling, I have from
the beginning applied my self unto this work: so yet in the doing thereof
(through the mercifulness of my God) I have bin assisted with much comfort,
and great assurance, even in some things, that seemed at the first, so in
wrapped, by Satan, with so many intricate folds and knittings, as could hardly
or never by me (for I shame not to acknowledge my weakness herein) be brought
to any clear trial and expedite dissolution.

Of mine adversaries I rather know the nature then the number. Although (as it
has been observed) sundry among them, from time to time, have labored to be
leaders, and so upon the spur of emulation have gallopped as hard as they
could: yet without all question, there is none among them that can justly take
the garland from Rob. Brown. That this schism may worthily take the name of
Brown.
His writings do foreiudge the cause against all his competitors. And albeit
new masters are risen among them, that now, in a fresh hot mood, condemn
his coldness and colorable dealing, and that worthily: yet they must, even
Barow and Greenwood, with the rest, acknowledge him the shop of their store,
and the steel of their strength: for arguments, objections and shifts, to
color, and (if it were possible) to uphold their crasie cause withal. Let
them not disdain (therefore) that he should bear the name, as the father of
that family and brood, which, of late years in a quarrel for the Discipline,
have made that rende in the assemblies of England. But some will object, that
these that I name, agree not among themselves: and therefore cannot be
accounted of one family. I am not ignorant, that they are at odds between
themselves, but yet so, as that neither party will join member-like with our
Churches in the word and Sacraments. In doctrine I know they differ, but
diversity of practice was cause thereof. Barow and Greenewood nakedly
discovered their profession, and are prisoners. Brown cunningly counterfeiteth
conformity, and dissembleth with his own soul, for liberty. They fully
believing, the Church of England to be no Church of God, but utterly to be
avoided in all things, as his writings have taught them, made conscience to
separate themselves at all points, accordingly. He, though he have contrived
that cup, whereby he has thus transformed them, as into beasts, yet himself
taking better delight in humane shapes, likes not to enter with them into their
lot. Hence comes that grudge, quarrel and heartburning among them. They
expostulate with him as a coward, and one that shrinketh in the wetting. He
again nippeth them for their egernesse, in running before their old master,
and thereby obscuring his light, as though the truth (forsooth) had first bin
revealed by them. It seems, they would not hear a sermon, to gain their
liberty. But it is manifest, that he to redeem trouble, has learned to apply
himself to all times, places, and persons. Now in this their jar, many
strange paradoxes and gross absurdities have passed between them: arguing
both sides to have trusted in their strength, and therefore to have been
destitute of the spirit of truth to guide their pens. Barow and Greenwood
deny, As appears in a writing that came from Brownes hand of this matter.
that our preachers do preach the word, and that they do, or can beget
faith. They say, The wicked have no word of God, no graces of GOD, no
spiritual or sanctified graces, that they do no good, that they may not
teach, testify, preach or counsel any word of GOD, any religion or duty
of religion. That they have no kind of promise nor blessing: and that there is
no Communion to be had with them in spiritual graces. They deny faith to
come necessarily, by the word of GOD: and say, It may be begotten without
any promise of the word. Being demanded, what faith does believe: They
answer: God, without any consideration of his word and promise. Likewise
being asked, how they came by their faith, it seems they answered, as it
pleased God: namely, by his spirit: but not acknowledging the outward means.
Some of them grant, our preachers beget faith or belief of the word, but
not the faith of Christ. He proves it not the faith of Christ, because it
has not good works: And that also he proves full wisely (forsooth) because
they have evil works; Which he specifieth to be Idolatry, Rebellion and
Bondage. They say, our ministers bring a new Gospel. That the law in their
mouths, and the sacrifices or presumptuous ministry of Korah, Dathan and
Abiram are alike. And they make no better account of our Parish meetings, than
of the meetings at the groaues and hill altars. O woeful men, and drunken with
the wine of their own headie conceits. Brown again, for fear all these
reproaches should light upon him, because he comes into our Churches,
minseth the matter every where, See further page 135.
with these ill stamped distinctions, Of the better, and woorser sort of our
preachers: (wherein he leaves his meaning doubtful still,) and of joining
with us in the common graces, both worldly and spiritual, but not as in one
body, and covenant of the Church. O mocker: Let the Lord judge thy
hypocrisy, for no man can sound it. Concerning the disputation of both
parties in this matter if I be asked my judgment, this must I say: Brown
has sufficiently overthrown the maine assertions of his young masters, as
he calls them, in proouing our preachers to have a calling, because they
bring the word: that they preach the word, because they beget faith: For
examples: in him and themselves they have done it, ergo, etc. And that, The
knowledge of reformation and discovery of Church corruptions came first to
them by their preaching, ergo, etc. And as they number up all the evils they
can find in the doctrine and practice of our preachers, to prove they can do
no good, nor beget faith: he contrariwise by a full flood of their true
doctrine, and good fruits (whereof he makes a copious catalogue) woorthily
quenches the furious flame of their slanderous tongues. Also by the sitting
of the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses chair, and the commandment of hearing
them, he very sufficiently proves that wicked men may preach Gods word, and
being in such office, charge and calling, ought to be heard. The cauils they
make against these things, are such, as show them wilfully to stop their
ears, least the sound of truth should smite their hearts. In these points I
testify, that Brown has well confuted their fury. But if one for Barow and
Greenwood should say these words unto Brown, Though they have well deserved
to be thus quited and convinced for their folly, yet not at your hands: I
know not what he might well reply: for I am sure, if they had been so well
advised, as to have pressed him through all their controversy, with his own
books and writings, they must needs have made him as mute as any fish. And I
doubt not, but the Reader shall be fully persuaded hereof, before he come at
the end of this book. For as for Brown, the masterworkeman of all their mad
building, notwithstanding that in this place, upon this present occasion, there
want not further matter to decipher him: who makes his religion always
proportionable to his own humor and necessity: and so has ever used, to
propound his own last, to make all his disciples shoes by: yet will I refer
the reader to the gathering of the proof of these things, out of other places
in this book: and specially (amongst the rest) where I lay open his honest and
well meaning subscription. Only I will produce a testimony or two of master
Harrisons, who in his life time was bewitched by Brown, to his evident
undoing, partly, by fleeing with him into the low Countries, and partly, by
stretching his purse so wide, to the printing of his book. In a certain
letter he writes to one of London thus, concerning the division that fell
among Brown and them beyond the seas. In deed the Lord has made a breach
amongst us, for our sins have made us unworthy to bear his great and
worthy cause. M. B. has cast us off, and that with the open manifesting of
so many and so notable treacheries, as I abhor to tell, and if I should
declare them, you could not believe me. Which because this sheet and many more
would not suffice to rehearse, I will meddle with no particular thing, to
declare it. Only this I testify unto you, I am well able to prove, that Caine
dealt not so ill with his brother Abel, as he has dealt with me. Again
toward the end of that letter, he writes thus. Also I would admonish you to
take heed how you adventure your self to be a mean, to spread abroad any
of that parties books, except it were more tending to the glory of God then
it is. For in the first book there is manifold heresy: and the other upon
the 23. of Matthewe, is a pattern of all lewd frantike disorder, whose have
eyes to see it. And I do not doubt but that the Lord will yet drive him on to
worse and worse, seeing he has so notably fallen from him. Give not your self
over to be abused: the Lord open your eyes, and give you grace to take profit
by my writing, even as I do give it with a well meaning mind to do you good.
Also in his treatise upon the 122. Psalm, he imputes to Brown, a leaning to
Antichristian pride and bitterness. Me think these testimonies from such a
man as I have named, should set such a brand of shame upon his forehed, as that
every man should abhor the sight of him, whilst he continues so to be like
himself. And here perhaps the most of his sect will answer that they do
indeed acknowledge such things in him, and therefore do also worthily shun
him for a slidebacke. O, but why do they not withal, forsake the whole
course, which God has so cursed? yea, upon the which, he has set from the
beginning, so leageable a print of horrible success? not only in the outward
things thereof, which were indeed (of it self) too weak an argument, but
also in the inward ruins and downfall of judgment, to the daily corrupting
of sound doctrine, even from worse to worse, as I have showed. Which being a
proper and infallible note, that God signeth the ways of the wicked withal,
to be discerned, argues all outward misprosperings, which accompany it, to
carry likewise the same stamp of Gods displeasure upon them. O that you would
be wise therefore in time, and learn understanding, ere it be too late.
Solomon says, Pro. 10.11.
The mouth of the righteous is a well spring of life: but violence covers the
mouth of the wicked. 1. Pet. 4.14.15.16.
And Peter says, If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed,
but let him glorify God in this behalf. But withal he charge us to look
to it, that none of us suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or an evil
dooer, or as a busy body in other men's matters. If God have made it a happy
condition, to be persecuted for righteousness sake, then follows it
contrarily, to be a cursed, and desperate condition, to suffer imprisonment,
loss of goods, or life, for disordered ways, such as the word of God cannot
warrant. If any think that by applying this to the Brownists, I shall beg
the question, to him (I hope) shall the reading of this book, give proof
enough, to free me from all suspect of such unjust presumption. The Lord for
his great mercy grant, that all of us in the Church of England, from the
highest, unto the lowest, to whom the hearing of this controversy shall come,
may not only be directed in judgment, to the attaining of the truth herein,
but withal (likewise) deeply pricked at the hearts (as the rather put in
mind by the scourge of this schism) to search out our sins, and humbly
power out our souls for them, before the throne of mercy: if so be, the Lord
will yet hear us, for this, and remove our iniquities from before his
presence; and so the plagues which he has devised against us for the same. For
our many and strange sins, do procure many and strange judgments (whereof
this is not the least) to break in amongst us. Yea the Lord for his great
mercy, grant our Magistrates sincere hearts, still to purge the Church of all
offenses, our ministers skillful boldness, to do the message of God as
becomes them, every private man, humility, to the diligent attendance of
the word: and the whole body of this Church, a joyful growth, and going
forward to the fullness of Christ, that so all enemies mouths may be
stopped, and the mighty name of Jehovah be magnified over all. Amen. Come Lord
Jesus: come quickly.

Faults in the print.
Page 4. line 7 for rites, read remembrance. page 22. li. 31 read
importunity. page 36 li. 18. one sense. page 37 li. 16 such loud. li. 20.
force of it. page 51. li. 14. dastardlike. page 63. li. 6. are to show. page
66. li. 10. no use. page 114. li. 31. wrester. page 115. li. 13. thought and
sickness.

The doubts and objections of a certain disciple of Robert Brownes, wherein,
being urged to come to Church, the said party desired first to be resolved.
ACcording to Christian duty, I require you in Gods behalf, that you will
resolve me of these doubts following, by good evident proof and warrant out
of the word, as it is your duty to do.

For, where as in doubts that may arise concerning any thing in the book of
common prayer, the preface annexed to the same book, by permission of her
Majesty, not only gives all men free liberty, but wills them to demand
the resolution of such doubts, of the Bishop of the Dioces, or of the pastor of
the parish. I therefore, for the quieting of my conscience, do desire to be
resolved, for he that does any thing in religion with doubt of conscience, is
condemned, Romans 14.23.
because he does it not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and the reward of sin is death. Set down in writing your proofs, by evident
Scriptures out of Gods word, that I may examine them by other Scriptures, and
use no sophistical reasons, nor vain philosophy, for I am forewarned by the
holy Ghost, that we be not deceived by such.

Among the rest, I will at this time, deal with you, but with two things: the
one is, the want of government and discipline, according to the rule of Gods
word. And the other is, the abuse and pollution of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, for want of discipline according to Gods word.

Let us make trial of the true government and discipline of the Church of
God, according to Christ's commandment, to put it in use. Matthew. 18.15.16.17.
verses.
First, to tell my neighbor his fault charitably, between him and me alone,
and so forth, by admonitions, if he be obstinate, then by excommunication, by
the consent of the Church, and all to call him to repentance, and amendment of
life: and we see, that neither you, nor we, can put this in use in your Church
assembly, as God has commanded. But on the contrary, you must have sworn men,
after the institution of the Papists, First to go tell the Bishop, or some of
his hirelings, or Courtkeepers, and they without admonishion, will alone
excommunicate, and for money will resolve by the cannon law of the Papists,
before we see repentance, and amendment of life. Thus I see the commandment of
God rejected and broken, through their traditions, which is sin.

And also for the Lords Sacrament of the Supper, trial should be made by the
government of the Church, of a sanctified people, and so to be a communion of
Saints, and so worthy receivers, by trial of their faith and repentance, and
by the rule of Gods word: the other refused for their wicked life, until they
repent, and amend their lives. But in your assemblies or Church, from 16. or
18. years old, or upward, all are compelled by law to come, though he be a
covetous person, a proud person, a drunkard, a defrauder of right, or
oppressor, or blasphemer, which in contempt of God, in his life, and manners,
makes but a tush or a light matter of sin, and of Gods judgment for sin:
of which sort, are the greatest number in your parish, besides railers, and
liars and such like.

And now I demand, whether Christians are to join, and partake as one body
with them in the Sacrament, being unreformed, yea, or no. Seeing we are
forbidden to eat with such, or to have fellowship with them, by the
commandment of the holy Ghost, unless it be in worldly affairs. For
proof, Read these Scriptures. 1. Cor. 59, 10, 11, 12, 13.2. These 3.14.6.2.
Tim 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 16.17, 18. Ephe. 5.7.8.1. These. 5 21.22. Answer me
(as I have said) by the word of God only, and alone. without the judgment of
man, for I can not be resolved thereby, they are so contrary one to an other.

An Answer resolutorie to the doubts and objections aforesaid.
THREE points you put down unto me, whereunto you require mine answer.
First, is a comparison of the true government of the Church with ours. The
second is of disorders that fall out, at the ministration of the Lords supper.
The third is your question drawn from the two former points.

1 To the first I grant you, that you say, thus far: as namely that we
cannot redress faults so fully as is to be wished.

2 To the second, it is untrue that you say, the law compels all above xvi
years old (without any exception) to communicate: for the law intends a
worthiness, as may appear, by providing censures for the unworthy. Again, it
is untrue, that you charge us to make a confuse mingling with open offenders
without discerning: for both we may, and do debar those that are
notoriously known to be in life offensive: and do both enquire, and are ready
to receive any just and probable information, against whom-soeuer in our charge
that walk inordinately. Yea, inform you us duly, of those sinners, which you
say our Parish is so full of, and you shall not find them I trust to disquiet you
at the Lords table. If you say, we cannot perform this so thoroughly as by an
Eldership, then I grant so much of your second point also.

3 Herehence you ask: whether Christians are to join, and partake as one
body, with them in the Sacrament, being unreformed. I answer that in respect
of outward joining and partaking we may, and ought not to withdraw our
selves, for the presence of the wicked. My reasons are these: first, because
the presence of the wicked hinders not the celebratio^ of the riter of Christ,
nor the communicating of his body and blood to the faithful ones. I prove
that thus, if the presence of the wicked should hinder the actio^, we must
grant that their presence does it, either in respect of it self simply: or
else in respect of us that so judge and esteem of them. Now, that the very
presence it self of the wicked hinders not, it is clear, by the story of the
institution of the Supper by our Lord Jesus himself: who would not have suffered
that wicked Judas to have been present at the celebrating of the feast, if the
very presence of a wicked man could have deprived the rest of the benefit of
the action. Besides, this point should cause us continually to doubt in the
action, because there may be some hypocrite, and unworthy receiver always
amongst us, and yet his sins so secretly carried, as the Church cannot detect
him. But I suppose you will say, that the presence of the wicked hinders the
communion of the faithful, in respect of those faithful that see such amongst
them as are unworthy communicants. I answer: First, if the making void the
benefit of the Sacrament depend upon the knowledge that the faithful have of
the unworthiness of some that are present, then you grant me thus much, that as
many of the faithful, as are not privy to such presence, so many do soundly
enjoy the benefit of the Sacrament. Now then let us see, how it comes that
the rest should be deprived.

That the presence of the un worthy, in respect of the knowledge and priuity of
some of the faithful there present, cannot any way hinder the action to them, I
prove it thus: and putting the case by your self, I say particularly you your
self (if otherwise in Christ you come worthy) cannot be damnified by another in
that aandion. For this sentence is perpetual and universal. Ezech. 18.20.
The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness
of the wicked shall be upon himself. You will ask me, but if I see one
there, that I esteem unworthy, how can I outwardly join with him, and not be
partaker with his sin? I answer, first, our esteeming of any unworthy,
comes either by hearsay, or our own certain knowledge. That which comes by
hearsay, is to be believed no further than the credit and competencie of the
witnesses do reach. If they have been truly reported, or our selves have
known any thing by them, then no doubt (if we have walked wisely and
faithfully) we have also proceeded by admonitions so far with them, as that
it is sufficiently known, we hate their sin. This (at least) is come to
pass, that howsoever it fall out with them.
Which course if you shall observe, is there any more required at the hands of
you a particular member? and if you have thus walked toward them in the
vprightnes of our conscience, doing the duties of a particular member, to your
fellow members, how can the presence of any unworthy one which you see there,
hinder the benefit of the communion unto you? For, the righteousness of the
righteous shall be ^ppon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon himself. If you object that we have not an Eldershippe, and that
therefore you cannot proceed by admonition in such sort as is appointed by the
word: I answer, that hinders not, but that you may so far sufficiently)
make known your hatred to sin in whomsoever, as may testify against, and
give evident check to the profane presumption of any unworthy ones, in your
knowledge. Neither are you herein to fear joining with such, (which you do
not) because they presume to the Lords table at the same time that you come.
For the action is spiritual, and the joining spiritual, by one faith in Christ
Jesus. Which faith as you have in common only with the faithful, so are you
incorporated unto Jesus Christ only with the faithful. The rest may be said
to be at the Communion, but yet are none of the Communion, according as S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.22.
They eat and drink their own damnation. But you will say, as touching the
outward and sensible ioining I am not to be excused. Yes, your former
protesting against their sin does clear the matter to the full peace of your
conscience, inasmuch as there is from the Lord no further power granted to any
particular member. But it seems by your quotations, you will deny this to be
true. And because the places mention separating and shu^ning the company of
inordinat brethren, you will gather from thence to separate your self from the
Communion, if you epsy any unworthy ones there. Indeed if you prove that every
particular member of a congregation has this power, then have they far more
tha^ I have spoken of: but this will be found a chief thing, wherein you have
ouershot your self. By the scriptures that you quote, you say it maybe proved,
That we are forbidden to eat with such, or to have fellowship with the^, unless
it be in worldly affairs. Now if your exception of (worldly affairs) be well
gathered, then this is it you would say, That those places of scripture do
prove, that we are directly forbidden to eat, or outwardly join with the^ at
the Lords table. I have considred the places, and am sorry to see you so
mistaught. I would you had drawn one argument out of your 6. places, that I
might quickly have seen your building. I am Persuaded, if you had heard the
places but read unto you, without the peruers wresting of others, you would have
understood them more truly than now ye have applied the^. I return them
therefore again to your better consideration, protesting unto you in the fear
of the Lord, that if you examine them in the humility of your heart, with a
simple desire of the truth, you will see and testify, that without great wrong
doing to the word of grace, you cannot conclude from those places, that either
we are forbidden the outward ioining at the Lords table, or else have liberty
given us in worldly affairs (as you term it) to use familiar conversation
with inordinat brethren. For it is most certain and evident that in all those
places (read them who will) the precept and admonition of the Apostle is
concerning private conversation and behavior toward inordinat professors:
there being not a syllable set down touching our dealings in public Churches
meetings and exercises. But here although your evidence have thus failed, it
will be required perhaps at my hands, that I set down some profes to the
contrary, to the overthrow of this your opinion, and to make my last argument
the stronger: which was, that a particular member has no further to deal in
this case than by process of admonition. 1. Remember that the church is the body
of christ, Ephe. 1.22.23.1. Cor. 12. Ephe 4.15.16. Col. 2.19. Romans 12.4.5.6.7.8.
who is the head there of. This body also consists of many members having
distinct offices and placing: which body as also every member thereof, receive
from the head life and increase, but so as that they be not sundred and
distract, but set together by ioints and seames with love. Now if the church be
thus reckoned the body in respect of the head whereunto it grows, and the
particular members, be members of the same body in respect that they grow and
continue in it, and serve unto the use to the whole, as members do in a
natural body, consider what follows, and how absurd it is that you say, That
a particular member may separate it self from the whole, in consideration of
some unworthy and unclean parts. Is it meet, that, because some (yea, let it
be that the most) of the members of a body be broken, lamed, or diseased, the
rest that are sound should forsake the unity of the body? were it not to
destroy the whole? and (in stead of strengthening the whole against the
infection of those parts) were not that to conspire against the whole, and
utterly disable it to withstand the co^tagion of the parts? for take away
knitting together of the members, and is not then the body destroyed? whereas
on the contrary, if the sound members continue in a bodily unity, though some
parts be long time sick, there is possibility of their recovery: yea though
they should not, yet may the body live though with some inconvenience of their
maime or blemish. But if you say (they being corrupt and not separate may else
infect me) and herein seem to ground your self upon that place to the
Corinthians. Know you not, that a little leaven leaueneth the whole lumpes? I
answer, the Apostle does there urge them to the excommunicating of the
incestuous person, but stirs no man to depart from the Church, no not in
case of so secure a negligence as the Corinthians had committed. It is one
thing, that we being humbled and afflicted at the dangerous examples of evil
members amongst us, must labor to separat the^, for the better health of the
whole body: (and this in deed is the purpose of S. Paul to teach the
Corinthians in that place) but it is far another thing to say as you mean,
That all the sound members must separate themselves, if the unsound remain
vnseparated: and of this the Apostle there gives no inkeling, which certainly
had been necessary, if the danger to every particular member should be
altogether such as you pretend. For whereas you understand the comparison of
the leaven to be such, as that the remaining of unsound members in the Church,
should be accounted of as great force to infect the whole Church, as the leaven
in leauening a whole lump, The likeness is in quality, not in equality.
you are greatly deceived. For those two things in that case, are compared in
likeness of nature, not in there equality of effecting. Like as you should
say, the conversation of two or three righteous men conuerteth a whole
company, even as a little salt sauoureth a whole pot full of liquor: we know
it were a truth that you should speak, but if I should thereof gather that you
make those two causes of equal force, in respect of their matter, to work
their effect, should I not do you great wrong? No doubt I should. For the
liquor never fails to be seasoned of the salt, but it is commonly tried that
the greatest number of a company remains wicked still, notwithstanding the
righteous. Such also, if you mark it, is the similitude of the leaven: for the
effect of it follows necessarily in the mass of meal: but it is not of
such necessity that in a whole congregation all become unsanctified for some.
Let the Church at Corinth be an example hereof. If the whole congregation had
bin infected, and so unsanctified, through the remaining of that wicked man
amongst them, would the Apostle (think you) have still entitled them, The
Church of God, 1. Cor. 1.1.
and sanctified ones in Christ Jesus? there had been no reason in it. What then
(will some say) to what end did the Apostle put them in mind of the effect of
leaven, when he challenged them for their negligence? even to the end that they
being put in mind of the resemblance that is between the nature of leaven, and
the wicked, in that both are disposed to infect that which is near them, might
have more care to use all the means that God has put into their hands to
avoid the danger. For as the remaining with the godly tends to the
reforming of the wicked: so the remaining with the wicked, tends to the
deforming of the godly, yet does neither of both fall out always necessarily,
especially upon a whole company or congregation. Therefore, Out of the places
quoted before.
seeing a Church is as the body of Christ, and the same body consists also
of many members, every of which is so to exercise the office of his place, as
that all may concur to the conservation and increasing of the whole unto a
perfect body, it follows necessarily, that no true member ought to separate
it self, for any cause, so long as there is life in the body, and abiding
with the head. For I trust you will not say that the remaining of a known
wicked one does ipso facto extingish life in the body, and separate the same
from the head Christ. Neither may you think to avoid me by obiecting, that
you separate not your self from the body by going from one congregation to
another, in that every faithful congregation, in respect that Christ is the
head thereof, has this same resemblance of a body. For if that be a good
reason, then Paul said not well to the Corinthians, that, 1. Cor. 1.12.13.
to addict themselves so severally to diverse teachers of the same Gospel,
tends to the parting of Christ. We know well they all held Christ the
foundation (under which teacher soever, they professed it) yet in that, some
chose Paul with neglect of the other Apostles, some Apollo, others Cephas, and
others held Christ, without esteeming the means of teachers, they were justly
charged to be in danger of schism, whilst they so continued. How then can
they be excused, that forsaking the congregation, whereunto through the
providence of God, by their dwelling, they are gathered and joined, do consort
themselves with some others, as the affection of their special liking leads
the^. How can they (I say) be excused for being guilty of parting Christ?

To conclude therefore (for this time) since it is (as I hope) plainly proved.
First, That the presence or remaining of the unworthy in a Congregation,
cannot keep back the benefit of Christ from the faithful of the same.
Secondly, That particular members have from the Lord no further power and
authority in case of offenses than by admonition: and that their chief
regard must be, by unity to provide for the continuance of the whole
congregation, which in this case is considered as the body of Christ. Thirdly,
That the practicing and proceeding of particular members, beyond the limittes
of admonition, as namely for some offenses, to depart from one Congregation
(where the reason of their dwelling requires them to be) and join themselves
to another, breeds schism, and division of Christ. It follows of the first
point, that you may join with us: and of the two latter, that you ought not to
depart from us of this Congregation, unless you will show your self to be a
rebellious member to the body, and be found guilty of dividing Christ. Of
which things now I beseech you, by the mercies of God, to have a due
consideration.

A second Answer or Reioynder to Brownes reply for the doubts and objections
of his Disciple.
WHat desire I have W. F. to withdraw you from error, and to bring you to the
truth, as the Lord who searches the heart, knows at full, so no man that
seeeth these my willing labors taken in the behalf thereof, can with any
charity doubt of it. And though I have now less hope than I had (seeing you
without all judgment to discern the spirit of error and arrogancy, which is
so nakedly seen in the framer of your reply) yet, as by the testimony of two
or three witnesses, so shall my love of your salvation, be made manifest by this
my coming again unto you. So much therefore at the least, through the
goodness of God, I shall gain: if there come more, I shall receive it as
advantage, and praise his most holy name for all. Bear with me if I follow
not your teachers humor in aunswering, for (if there were nothing else) my
time is more precious unto me.

1 Upon my grant, that in our Churches we cannot redress faults so fully as is
to be wished, he gathers six heresies, for errors sounds not full enough
in his lavish mouth, but because they are without all demonstration, no man is
bound to believe him.

2 Whereas you said, The law compels all to communicate that are above
sixtene years old: I answered, The law intends a worthiness, and yielded
this reason, because it provides censures for the unworthy. Your leader
says, I falsify the question, and the laws. For the question, let that be
judged by others. And in that he charge the laws to enforce a confuse
mingling, with what face can he do it? A lier has need of a good memory.
If he remember the 2.3.4. pages of that brainlesse answer to master
Cartwrights letter, where amongst others of like nature, are these words: We
know that the laws do punish all outward gross wickedness, or suffer it to
be punished, as namely idolatry, etc. and if there be any vice unpunishable
by the law, The laws enforce not a confusion at the Lords supper.
yet the laws do suffer either the Church, or every householder or
governor, to correct (so it be not against law) such as are under their
charge. Again. Also for the discipline, in gathering the worthy from the
unworthy, the law appoints it, Page 4.
and gives leave to make exception, both in public judgment, and in
Churches, against unworthy persons: as against drunkenness, fightings,
murder, adulteries, stealth slanders, etc. and yet also do give liberty to
the Church to use their own discipline. Let him now look who is his
adversary in this. Whereas I bid you inform us of inordinate walkers that we
may remove them, he says: We must first have an order of discipline
established. If he mean by an order of discipline, some kind of order of
discipline to debar the unworthy, then it cannot be denied, but we have an
order for it, as the answerer to master Cartwright, in the words before
rehearsed, in behalf of the laws, acknowledges: if he would not be so
shortly taken, but have his words understood of that only ordering of
discipline which the word of God sets out, then as I reverence that for the
only and unchangeable ordinance of the almighty, so find I none a greater
adversary thereunto than he: nay than you all, if you all be of that judgment
he is that wrote your replye. For (besides other things that I will not now
enter into) whereas I acknowledge that in our Church, though we have some
ability to withstand open prophanations, yet that the governing by an
Eldership is far to be preferred for the expectation of a happy success: he
opens his mouth as an enemy, but with much falshoode and folly. First he
says, I make an Eldershippe, a part of your second point, leaving out
discipline. I said before, we have use of the discipline to remove the
inordinate, only this I granted withal, that if you should object, that we
have not so good use of it, as if it were ordered by an Eldershippe, my self
would join with you in that point. Now if he had but so good use of his
understanding, as we have of this discipline, he would have discerned, that I
added this only to prevent such an objection from you, and not that I thrust it
into your second point, as to make it a part thereof. Secondly he says, by
Elders we mean Aldermen, as that we seek no other but by civil power and
authority to force the unruly. Whereunto if I should answer he was mad, I
should favor him much, in moving pity for him: and if it be not taken so,
both friends and enemies, A discovery of Brownes Discipline.
must needs set a harder sentence upon him. Again, he takes it not
necessary, but superstitious, to stand upon the choosing of Elders, as the
state of our Church now stands: and in stead thereof, he supplyeth, that
the forward of every Parish put forth themselves by visiting, counsailing,
withdrawing, comforting etc. to perform the business. Wherein he gratifieth the
enemies of discipline with this, that the form of Church government is
changeable. Besides, let the wise consider, whither that be not apparently a
confused course, wherein every one that lusts may govern. He supposes,
considering the times, that an agreement were better than a choice. As though
there can be obedience, and so agreement, where those that govern are not
chosen. His consideration of the times warranteth no man to run before he
be called. He gives another reason: that rather God may have the praise in
provoking and calling them, then man in choosing them. This I perceive is
Brownes Anarchie, and thus I overthrow it. Whatsoever course of obedience
tends more or rather to the praise of God then another, that same is always
to be preferred before the other. But he says, that for men to put forth
themselves to execute discipline, tends rather to the praise of God, then if
they be chosen: Therefore we must conclude, (if he say true) that to offer our
selves, is always to be preferred in this case before choosing and so it
shall follow by consequence, that the order of ordayning set down by the
spirit of God, is not the best course of all others. Also when as it is hereby
intended, that the forward professors, upon their own inward motions and
feelings, shall thus take upon them to be Elders, and the others must so
acknowledge them, it follows thereuppon connexiuely, that these inward
motions and feelings must be holden warrant enough, both for themselves to
take upon them Church-callings as also to bind other men's consciences to obey
them. For if this testimony of their feeling, be not an authentical warrant
to the conscience, how shall either parties walk in faith? Romans 14.2.3.
So then if this be not to lead us into the lake of Anabaptisticall
revelations, I know not what can be. But he proceeds saying: As for the
names of Elders and other ceremonies in ordeyning, seeing they are made
mockeries and matters of persecution, I judge it superstition to make them
unchangeable. As the names of things are not too stiffely to be stood upon,
so I doubt whether the mockeries and persecution you mean, be cause enough to
alter these. Howbeit whatsoever may be granted in such respects for the
names, and some other outward circumstaunces, Act. 13.2.3. Act. 14.2.3. 1. Tim.
3.2.3.4.5.6.7. Compar. with titus 1.5. 1. Tim. 3.8.9. compa. with Act. 6.5.
as things not essential, yet touching the order of ordeyning by choice, for
as much as that is the wisdom of the word, and necessary to the avoiding of
confusion, such respects can have no force at all against it. In that he
calls this sticking to the ordeyning of Elders, superstition, I would but
have given it to his rashness, save that he adds, that it is to make in force
the Popish Sacrament of orders. Which bewrays him for a wicked betrayer of
Gods truth, in that he yields the hard urging of the holy ordinance of
God, to give maintenance or force, to the lewd and braine-sicke imaginations
of man. I surcease to prosecute the absurdities of these assertions more
curiously, as annoyed with the stench that flows from such Gangraenes: only,
if he shall be your leader in this point also, as in others, then both you
and your fellow disciples, must now at length leave to move any more quarrels
about the calling of our ministers. For you hear that no solemn nor set order
in their calling is necessary: yea he tells you in plain words: That the
obedience of the worthy unto them, is a calling by man, and the agreement of
the wisest is a choosing. I call you to witness of this his francke gift, lest
hereafter he would revoke it.

4 My answer to your question he says is dark, doubtful, shifting, untrue,
and cauelling. The three last let him take to himself, my conscience is
clear: in whatsoever seems dark or doubtful, I am ready, That Christians
may partake in the Sacrament with wicked ones, and not be defiled with their
sin.
yea desirous to give as good address, as the reasonable reader shall require.
Your question was in this sort propounded, Whether Christians may join and
partake as one body in the Sacrament with wicked ones? Whereby I conceived your
judgment to be this, that if there be any at the Sacrament that you know to
be unworthy, you ought not then to communicate, but go away, as fearing least
you could not communicate, but be partaker of their sins. To this I answered
as deliberatly and plainly as I could, and so as may easily appear, I
allow, no other joining with such, then as their presence and eating at the
same table may be called a joining. Which I prove we may and ought to
sustain, not securely and carelessely (as he takes me) but with this
condition understood ( if we can-not remove them) which I supposed my whole
drift and reasons following must needs have made you perfect in. So my first
reason is, not as he has shaped it, but thus: if the presence of the wicked
cannot hinder the celebrating of the remembrance of Christ, nor the effectual
communicating of his body and blood to the faithful ones, the^ may we (having
faith,) effectually comunicate notwithstanding their presence. But the first is
true, therefore the latter follows. Herehence he gathers many absurdities
and gross errors, with bringing in Traitors, infidels, Turks, Popes to the
communion. But he misrekoned in three points which caused him to err in the
su^me. First, in that he understands me to speak of a careless
communicating, which he could not have done, if the Lord had not smitten him
with blindness, since I afterward plainly declare what duties has been done
of us before communicating: The second, what I answer to your question
concerning duties of us, that is to say particular members, to do in this
case, he receives as though I spoke of the body of the congregation, how it
should be carried and ordered in the Sacraments. The third, he puts an
impossible case, as though Infidels, Turks, Popes, remaining such, should come
to our communion. In all which you may see him full of that same vain
Philosophy, and Sophistical cauilling, which you feared to find in your
answer. Such is the stuff of his third page, mingled with the most odious
comparisons and spiteful collections that his heart could devise.

5 But here if he say, I have then pared the question, and made it more
particular then it was propounded. I answer, it was most expedient, and for
your better instruction to understand, and so to use your question as it might
best fit, and be applied to the particular members of a congregation, and so
of our Parish, whereof by your dwelling you should be a member. Besides, to
have understood it of a whole congregation, I had no reason, because I could
not suspect you doubted my judgment in that, to wit, whether a Church ought
to debar the known wicked from the communion: especially (howsoever you
might doubt) he that replied, had no reason at all to doubt it, seeing what
high account I made of the ordinance of God in that behalf. Again, consider
the business is with you, you I say, who dwelling in our Parish do most unkindly
(as we take it) separate your self from us. On the other side you suppose you
have cause so to do, till you can be resolved of some things, whereat your
conscience sticks. You choose to declare your greeuances by writing. In your
writing you complain of lack of order amongst us to discern of the
communicants, and there-hence you require to be answered. Whither it be
lawful for Christians to join in the Sacraments with unreformed ones. Whereby,
who sees not, that you propound the case for your self, as though if there
can be a course showed, whereby a careful Christian may settle his conscience
to communicate, although some wicked ones be present, and partake in the signs
with us, that then you would be content to join with us, or else not. Thus
taking the question (whether best for your instruction or no, I now refer it
to the judgment of all men:) I answered unto it (I hope) clearly, I am sure
sincerely. Whereunto if this your leader would have replied with like affection
to do you good, he must have done it, taking the question in the same sense.
Else if he had nothing to say to the question so taken, what needed this
prodigal expense of time? when as he might in a word, have only admonished,
that I mistook the question, and so an end. Now (to stop up these starting
holes) know you, that if in the question, you mean by the word, Christians,
the whole body of a Church or congregation: I answer that they ought to
discern of the unworthy, and separate them to the uttermost of their power:
and that by how much the more they are negligent in this duty, by so much
the greater is their sin. So that herein I suppose, you and I differ not in
judgment. On the other side, if the word, Christians, be taken (as I
understood it) for particular members of a congregation, as you one, and I
another, in this congregation or Parish, then do I answer, as before I did,
which was this in effect, That we may and ought to communicate, and not go
away, The plain sense of the question.
or with-drawe our selves from the Lords Table, though we see some that we
know to be notorious offenders, at the same time partake in the signs with
us. This was proved by the argument a little above rehearsed, namely, because
those wicked can-not hinder the celebrating of the remembrance of Christ, nor
the communicating of his body and blood to us that come with faith. My reason
for that is this. If the presence of the wicked should hinder us, that must it
do, either simply in it self, or else in respect of us that know them to be
wicked: but neither of those ways can we be hindered by them, and therefore
not at all. That the presence of the wicked in it self hinders not, I showed
in a word, as a thing which needed no great proof. And that it hinders not
in respect of us that know them (if we have borne our selves wisely and
charitably toward them by process of admonition which I understood to be
such as our Savior appoynteth) I prove, Matthew. 18.15.16.17.
first by a perpetual Cannon out of Ezechiel. Secondly, from the bounds and
limittes of a particular members duty in this behalf. And here in deed we
grow to the issue of that whole controversy. I say, a particular member ought
to admonish, and at length to tell the Church, but not to with-drawe
himself, though the Church should not separate the same unworthy one. You I
perceive hold the contrary, namely that a particular member ought to
with-drawe and go away from the congregation in such a case. How this point is
debated, comes hereafter to be spoken of. Here I will stay a little to take
away what he brings of any show, against so much of mine as I lately
rehearsed.

The presence of the wicked in it self does not hurt us.
6 Touching my distribution of presence simply, and in respect of our knowledge,
by which I prove the unworthy cannot hinder the effectual communicating of the
worthy, let the godly wise judge, whether I have altered or shifted away the
question, or he rather, (bearing therein a brand of Gods judgment)
understood not what he read. Page 4.
If you doubt what I mean by the presence of the wicked. I understand not
their presence as bystanders or lookers on, but as receivers at the same time
of the Sacramental signs of the body and blood of Christ: and this my example
of Judas could not but teach you. Your leader confesses that Judas eat the
Passover, but was not at the new institution of the communion. If it did much
concern the business in hand, I would nothing fear to have him my
adversary in it, but that part of my division, as I did not there, so I will
not here insist upon, because it is of both sides confessed, that the presence
of the wicked in it self, The presence of the wicked in respect of our
knowledge of them hinders not.
hinders nothing. The other part is, that their presence hinders not, in
respect of our knowledge of them. Your answer is, it hinders in respect of
our knowing and communicating with them, as though I also had not granted a
kind of outward joining and communicating. Page 5.
Your replier says, this is sin, but he brings not one argument to prove
it. In deed if I should so join with an unworthy one in the Sacrament, as
approving him thereby to be a lively and sound member of the body, I should
sin in calling evil good, otherwise it can be no sin unto me, to me (I
say) that have performed those duties of reforming or remoouing him, which
Christ commands, and so I would have you understand me in all places.
Which if you do (as you had no other cause, if you had weyed my whole answer
together) you shall find a large acquittance for the cauilles at the place of
Ezechiel, and many other debtes, which your replier demands at my hands.
Page 6.
Now for proof that this communicating is no sin unto me at all, I will
show you: first, that it is not the sin of allowing him for a sound member
that is unsound: and secondly, that there is no other sin in it. For the
first, I reason thus. If I approve him for a sound member, neither in the
sight of GOD, nor to his own conscience, neither in the knowledge and
judgment of the Church, then can it no way be said, I approve him. But I
do it not by any those ways, and there-fore not at all. That I do it not in
the sight of God, it is manifest, for he beholds the heart, and therefore
knows that I do not so allow him. Again, That I do not allow him for ^
worthy member.
that I do it not neither to his own conscience or in the knowledge and
judgment of the Church, my former proceeding by the commanded course of
admonition, has abundantly cleared it. Page 7.
If you infer, that in this sort also I may go to Mass, if I will, you are
wide. For the question is of the behavior of a member in that body, whereof it
is a member, and not in a strange body, whereof it is no member. And so it
follows not, that because I hold my self bound to keep the unity of that
living body, (whereof I am a member) even with some inconvenience of sickness
and unsound parts, that therefore I may as well join my self to a strange
body, and so become a member of Satan. Yet this is your great leaders
Sophistry. The reason why thus I communicate.
If you yet insist, urging me with the outward action communicating, I answer,
I do that, not as a thing of mine own head, or which I might at my choice
refrain, but as a duty necessarily enjoined me of God by his providence
through my being and placing there, and justly required of me, by the Church
or spiritual body, through that same enforcing law of the coherence, and
being together of the parts and members, which is the express ordinance of
God, as (amongst other places) the fourth of the Epistle to the Ephesians from
the first verse, to the end of the sixteen, and Philippians 2.4. Hebrews
10.25. Iud. 19. do notoriously prove it. So that unless I hold the
congregation (whereof I am) now disanulled, and become no Church of Christ,
for the not separating an unworthy member (which is Anabaptisticall heresy) I
cannot voluntarily either absent my self from their assemblies to holy
exercises, Ephesians. 4.3. Ver. 15.16. 1. Cor. 1.12.13. Heb. 10.25. Iud. 19.
or yet depart away being come together, without breach of the bond of peace,
sundring the cement of love, empairing the growth of the body of Christ, and
incurring the guilt of schism and division. And thus much for the former of my
two points, namely, that my communicating in such sort as is said, is not the
sin of calling evil good, or an vn-sounde member sound. Now that I sin
not at all in it, I prove it as in my former answer, That there is no sin in
this manner communicating.
because I have performed the duties of a private man, or particular member,
and beyond which I am commanded nothing of the Lord, nothing I say, in this
course of duty: for I exclude not hereby our prayers, mourning or whatsoever
tends to his recovery: but I exclude both our private excommunicating of
him, as you do in this reply, as also our own sundering and separating from
the congregation for his cause, which is the thing in question between us.

Whereas I say that by our proceeding by such course, as I presuppose every
wise Christian to have walked in, toward the offending brethren, this (at the
least) shall come to pass by it, that it be sufficiently known, we hate
their sin: an upright heart must needs understand, by that clause, ( at
least) an implying of some better benefit and fruit of our labors, as in
refourming or remoouing him, which (being most wished of us if we enjoy not,
yet the other never failing us (when we cannot attain to the chiefest) must
likewise content us. Was there then any reason, or came it from the leading of
a good spirit, Page 6.
to refer that to the parts of duty (as granting thereby some further
duties left undone) which in open evidence points at more excellent effects
or fruits of our labors intended by us. Truly I doubt whether any learned
Papist, would so foolishly have cauilled for his credit sake. The like
shamlesse cauilling is also in the beginning of his 7. page.

8 But he says, Page 7,
If the Church be established and refuse to debar him, whom they confess
to be so wicked and vnrefourmed, all are made wicked by our complaining. Now
if he had said: If the Church be established, and do not debar him, etc, I
had then good cause given to have made here his answer, as also if in stead of
these words ( all are made wicked by our complaining) he had said, that Church
or spiritual body is now thereby dissolved and separated from their knitting
unto Christ. For if he mean not so, he can never conclude against me, that
particular members may depart their assemblies: and if he do mean so, you
shall hear what I say to it hereafter.

9 In saying the action of communicating is spiritual, I exclude not al kind of
outward joining, but show the essential joining to be spiritual by faith,
wherein the wicked cannot come near us. As for the outward joining such as it
is, I have proved it before, both dutiful and void of the infection of their
sin: yet still he urges, that I warrant him to be a companion or brother in
Christ, by communicating with him. I deny that as before. If you ask how
then I should be brought to communicate with him in any sort. How it comes
to pass that I thus communicate.
I answer, the Church requires my presence as a member, I by the bond of
coherence, participate with the whole, in the holy action. By so doing it
falls out in consequence, that I participate in the signs with that
unworthy one, because he is vnseparated. Now (if you mark) I do not
partake with him at all, by my very act of communicating, but only in as much
as I communicate with the Church, which being simply and absolutely a duty
(as before proved) cannot be controlled, neither ought to be pretermitted for
that which has no true appearance of evil in it (I mean in the eyes of those
that have learned to judge righteous judgment) And that it has not so much as
just appearance of evil in it, unto such is showed already by the reasons
given to prove, that there is no sin in this manner of communicating.

10 But he cries, that in this wise I admit a division in the Communion. I
hear his cry, wishing it had more sense, and less opportunity. An inward
division he denies not but there may be. Now what have I said, whereby he
should find that outward division he speaks of, when as I expressly
acknowledge an outward joining. As for the ministers part, in delivering the
signs to such a one, it does not follow, because he delivers them unto him,
that he does it to warrant his damnation, or of set purpose to further his
destruction. For neither the delivering, nor the things delivered, but only
his unworthy receiving, is cause of his own damnation. Neither is that
knowledge if it be granted) that the minister has of his unworthiness, a
warrant to withholde the signs, if most voices have held him in, for that can
he not do of himself: only therefore it remains, that he thus far also
suffer him in the Sacrament, and wait for the time when the Lord shall either
more fully reveal him, or graciously deliver the Church from the contagion of
him. How the mininister may deliver the sacrament to one that he knows to be
unworthy.
In the mean time he teaches him the sign, not as he is worthy or
unworthy, but as he is yet undivided from them. He that thinks these
things can never fall out, even where discipline is best established, he has
little experience, and less judgment.

11 Whether I have grieuouly abused the place to the Corinthes, in that sort
that I have alleged it, let the judgment be with the godly reader, as also
whether your leader has committed that, wherewith he charge me upon the same
chapter. When he says that Paul proves it to be no Sacrament at all to the
Corinthes, Answer to master C. page 37.
and not as I suppose it to be a Sacrament to some, and not to other some. The
same spirit says likewise in another place: Paul condemns even the Supper
and says: this is not to eat the Lords Supper. His drift is to deny against
me, that any can have hope to partake and communicate comfortably and
profitably with those, amongst whom any known wicked ones are admitted in this
action, and therefore also he says before in his reply, In his reply. page 5.
that if there be any open breach of the covenant by any one known to the
rest, the sacrament is of no force. Again he has these words. The communion
is not a division that is half good to the one part, and half bad to the
other part, In his reply. page 4.
but either wholly good, or wholly bad. Let not the reader believe, that I say
or suppose it to be a Sacrament to some, and not to other some. I acknowledge
both sorts to receive the sacrament, that is, the consecrated Elements, one to
their comfort, but the other to their condemnation. And to leave other points
that might here be examined, and to keep to the question, the strength of the
two last quoted propositions, stands upon that place to the Corinthes taken
in such sense as he delivers it. Let us therefore come to examine that
whether it be gold or stubble. He says, The sacrament not disanulled for the
wickeds sake.
Paul proves it to be no sacrament at al to the Corinthians, by these two
weighty arguments. First, that the form and institution of the Supper was
violated by them all. 2 That so was the end and use And first to answer his
literal abuse of Paul's words in the 20 verse, which is this. When ye come
together in one, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. Me think a learned
divine should not be ignorant, that this is a kind of excessive negation very
usual in the scriptures, and is therefore here, like as in all other such
places, to be restrained within due regards of circumstances, and conferences
of other scriptures, as within the natural intended listes, and necessary
described compass of the holy Ghost that uttered them. For example, Genesis 32.28.
the Lord said unto Jacob, Thy name shall not from henceforth be called Jacob,
but Israel. Again, speaking by his Prophet, Iere. 7.22.
he says: For I spoke not to your fathers, nor commanded them, when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. And
Paul says likewise in another place: 1, Cor. 1.17.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. Let these three
suffice for the rest. Now we know, that Jacob was called Jacob afterward, but
not only by that name. The Israelites were commanded burnt offerings and
sacrifices, but so as chiefly to behold in them the Messiah to come. Also we
know Paul did baptize, verse. 14.16.
therefore when he says, I was not sent to baptize he gives us to
understand, that the chief duty and charge of his Apostleship was to preach
the Gospel, in comparison whereof, the baptising he used was not to be spoken
off. Now seeing the holy Ghost thus in other places, uses the like general
negation, which must be so limited as I speak of, marvel not though in
this place also, he deny that to be done by the Corinthians, which was not
done as it should be, by many, or (perhaps) by the most of them. Now for the
arguments which he forces upon the Apostle, I say, he is too bold to snatch
that which the Apostle never meant to give him, and that in two points. For
neither does the Apostle affirm, that the essential form of the institution
was violated, nor yet that the foul abuses committed, were done by them all.
The first I prove thus: When Paul had said, When you come together in one,
this is not to eat the Lords Supper, immediately he shows them the reason
why: For (says he) Every one in eating, takes first his own Supper, and so
one is hungry, but another drunken. Here is nothing controlled touching the
substantial form of the institution (which consists in the consecration
and distribution of the bread and wine) but only the disorder that was among
them in disposing of themselves and using it, against which he opposes the
repetition of the institution, as he had delivered the same unto them before,
and that being done, in the 23.24.25. verses, he therehence deducteth that
thing in the 26. verse, which he would afterward, and does apply to their
reproof, even to the very end of the cause. Now, neither is that same thing
any whit of the form of the institution, but only touching the use and end,
whereunto they should have prepared and applied themselves in that action. Like
as the most clear stroke of that sentence, plainly, and only sounds in
these words: For as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup,
you shall declare the Lords death until he come. The things in them
disagreeable to this, and therefore to be blamed, he declares to be, that
there was of the rich of them, Verses 21.22.28.
which respected chiefly to feast and feed their bellies in that coming
together, and made no difference by their behavior, between the holy Supper
of our Lord, and civil banquettings. Now seeing the Apostle thus
particularizeth these offenses of the Corinthian communicants, and withal,
specifieth nothing to be reproved in the Ministers, touching the form of the
institution: who is he that dares believe this presumptuous spirit, who cares
not what he faceth upon the word of God, to maintain whatsoever his corrupt
brain has once conceived?

The second point which I said he snatcheth, is, that he avouches these abuses
among the Corinthian Communicants, to have been committed by them all. Which
thus I refell. To retain all the Apostle his traditions, even as he had
delivered them to the Corinthians: and yet all those same Corinth, to
transgress them in no less matter, then in celebrating the Lords Supper, are
two things directly contrary. But the Apostle testifies for them in the first,
Verse. 1.
therefore he charge them not with the latter. That he testifies the first,
appears, where he begins with this exhortation. Be ye followers of me,
Verse. 2.
even as I am of Christ, and immediately subioyneth, I praise you brethren that
you remember all my things, and retain the traditions as I delivered them unto
you. Whereby it is manifest, that the Apostle addressing himself to those
points, whereof he was informed touching the unseemly behavior that was among
them at Prayer, and at the Lords Supper, first confirms the minds, and
approves the judgments of such brethren, as had soundly vpheld the truth in
those things, and afterward delivers that, which the guilty should find
themselves reproved in. 2. That some withstood that profane disorder, and
polluted not themselves with the rest, That is, by the like evil behavior.
in their behavior at the Lords Supper, it is necessarily inferred upon that
Paul says: Verse. 18.
There were dissentions among them, even at their coming together at the Lords
Supper. This is the first thing in that matter, whereof he shows his dislike,
but withal, confirms such as held the truth, affirming that greater matters
then those, Verse. 19.
yea, even heresies should grow among the^, by which they should be so far from
being damnified, that contrariwise, they should become more manifest and famous
by the^. And as the Apostle in this verse voydeth these of the fear of that
conclusion he had set down before, to wit, that they came together not with
profit, but with hurt, pointing the same now directly to be applied to that
part which gave the occasion of dissension. So likewise does he thereby as
manifestly declare, that he includes not all the Corinth. in the reprehe^sio^s
that follow. 3. If they were all alike in this offense, then were they all a
disordered and wicked company, and so (in all men's eyes) ten times worse in
every point of celebrating the Lords Supper, then the assemblies of England
are, from which notwithstanding he labors thus with all his strength to draw
and hold you. Now, if the Corinthia^ church was fallen wholly to be a gross
disordered company, Page 3. of his reply.
and your leader holds plainly, that open gross wickedness breaks the
covenant, it follows that they had also broken the covenant, and so by flat
consequence, could not be a Church of God, when Paul thus wrote unto the^:
which (me think) should be clearer then any candell, to make you see your
leaders impude^cy: who blusheth not, by this means, to give the Apostle the
lie to his teeth. 1. Cor. 1.2.
Hence (as by the way) this may be deducted, which I advise you well to
consider. The Corinthian Church more disordred in communicating, then the
English assemblies.
Either the Corinth Church was now no Church of God, nor brotherhood for
faithful men to resort and keep the^ to, or else a Church of far greater
disorder, in coming together to the Lords Table, then ours of England, and
particularly of this congregation is, ought yet to be holden a Church of God,
and brotherhod for faithful me^ to resort and keep unto. But the first is
false, says the same Apostle in the place last quoted, therefore the latter
stands firm, and cannot be denied of any that with the least indifferency
co^pareth our communicating with theirs. For if you will object they had the
right order of discipline, and so have not we that makes them the greatlier in
fault above us, as having more means in their hands, yet came shorter of a
holy profession in outward behauior then we, and so seals up my conclusion
more surely to convince you. But I return again to my former purpose, I hope
I have made it manifest, that neither the form of the institution was violated
by the Corinthians, nor yet the abuses committed, were done by them all. And
now I suppose it will not be hard to prove, that the most unworthy among them
did also eat the outward sacrament. First, if those had not eaten the
sacrament at all, they could not have been charged with eating the bread, and
drinking the cup of the Lord vnwoorthelie, without discerning his body, Verse.
27.29.
and so to their condemnation: But they are charged so: therefore we must
needs grant they did eat it. The assumption is proved in the 30. verse,
saying: For this cause many among you are weak and sick, and many sleep.
Wherein the Apostle by these effects, leads them to acknowledge the cause,
namely, their sin, such and so as he had propounded it in the 27. and 29.
verses. Whereby behold, and if you will suffer the point of truth to pearce
into your heart, cast out that furious spirit that says: The Communion can not
be good to one party, and bad to another, and acknowledge by this case of the
Corinthians, that manifest indignities may be committed by some, and apparent
unworthy ones may communicate with others (when they cannot be removed) and
neither disanull the sacrament, nor yet infect or make guilty all the
Communicants with their sin. Neither does this place alone afford this
instruction for you, Jude. 4.7.8.10.
but even that place of Jude also, where inueying against such filthy
professors, as whose gross sins could not be altogether secret in any
Church, wheresoever they lived, yet does he grant it might come to pass,
Verse 12.
that they should impudently thrust themselves into the Church feasts of
charity (wherein also the Lords Supper then used to be celebrated) though so
also they should be but as spots and stains therein. In the which place
neither does the Apostle once insinuate, that the action should thereby be
disanulled unto them, nor all to be made wicked by their means in
communicating: yea contrariwise implies (to the comfort of the godly) that
they might by prayer through the holy Ghost, in the circumspect observing one
another, Verses 20.21.22.23.
keep both themselves and others from the contagion of all such. Now I would
wish you (W. F.) and all of your learning, to fix your eyes here a little in
the meditating of these two places, and amongst other things bethink you, what
was the cause, that neither Paul in consideration of that great disorder in
the Church at Corinth, nor yet Jude in respect of those wicked ones, which he
calls spots in the Church feasts, 3. John. 9.10.
no nor John (that I may touch you utterly to the quick) in testifying that
Church to be ambitiously usurped upon, ouerweyed, and therefore corrupted in
the discipline, do yet in the least syllable, directly, or indirectly, account
those assemblies thoroughly leauened, or the covenant broken, or yet persuade
any of them to withdraw from the rest, and to gather a part. And after you
have diligently sought and considered, it may be you shall find no cause but
this, namely, that the Apostles were as far from your leaders mind and
judgment in this matter, as Heaven and Hell are distant and divided asunder.
Now against his odious repetitions, and senseless collections, I oppose the
plainenes and simplicity of mine answers: but where I call our dealings by
admonition and laboring for the Church censures, Page 8.
a kind of protesting against the sin of the unworthy: he mistaketh me, as
though I meant, an open excepting against the^ at the Lords table.

12 I say, there is no further power given to a particular member in proceeding
against the unworthy, Page 9. That particular members can proceed no further
then admonition.
than by process of admonition. Your replier urges me with diverse Scriptures,
which he supposes, warrant me some further proceeding. The first is. Give not
that which is holy unto dogs. Inasmuch as this may be brought to Church
assemblies, it belongs to the practice of the whole jointly, not to a
particular member severally, and alone, like as other precepts also of Church
government. The second is, Matthew. 18.18.
Let him be unto thee as an heathen and publican, that is to say, when the
Church has for his sin separated him, for so his binding by the Church is
set down in the next verse, with the efficacy thereof, to bridle the obstinate
and stiff-necked. The third is, If an Angel from heaven, or Paul preach
otherwise, hold him accursed. I hold him for a cursed instrument of Satan, and
not a blessed servant of God, whosoever brings us another doctrine, then the
Lord has left us in his word: but what is this to the purpose in hand? His
fourth and fifth places: Be not thou partaker of other men's sin, and follow
not a multitude to do evil, Sect. 6.9.
I have answered before, where I have showed how far, and in what sort, we may
partake with the unworthy in the Sacrament, and have proved it to be without
guilt of their sin. The like I answer to his other two places out of Timothy.
He quoteth Ierem. 1.17.18. If he meant that every private man should take upon
him, as with Ieremies commission, either for the parts of his duty toward the
Church, or the manner of carrying himself in his place, he seduceth you
dangerously, for so every private man may publicly denounce the judgments of
God against Princes, Ministers and people, and contend with them all, if they
fail in their duty, yea, if they but judge them to fail in their duty (for I
trow he will not ascribe to them such sure revelations, as had the Prophet) and
so what should an Eldership do in the Church, yea or any other governors, when
as if they proceed not according to my expectation in any thing, I, and so any
private man may disanull their doings. If otherwise he cite the place but for
the general doctrine that may therehence be derived unto all, namely,
whatsoever the Lord commands any of us to do (be it a matter that seem never
so dangerous and fearful to us) that we observe to do it to the uttermost,
without fearing the faces of any: if (I say) he quote the place for this, let
him know, that when he shall prove particular members of a Church to have
received such a commandment from the Lord, as is here in question, then this
place of the Prophet Iere. shall make for his cause, in the mean time, I cannot
but judge the man to talk very idely. Also if he do not as impertine^tly cite
the 11. of the Revel. v.4.5. it is because I lacked his treatise, In the
Preface to the book of the lives of Christians.
that might make that scripture plain and easy unto me, and which was promised
now some 4. or 5. years ago, in a certain book, the title whereof is thus
stoutly subscribed: By me Robert Brown.

13 An Apostle (says he) is but one member, Whether a particular man can cast
off a whole congregation.
and yet might any one Apostle or messenger of Christ forsake or cast off whole
Cities or Churches, that refused or withstood their message: therefore (I trow)
it must be concluded, that particular members, or private men, may cast off
whole Churches or spiritual bodies, if their execution of discipline fail in
any part. Alas, alas, that ever you should bear your self upon such a rotten
prop. Consider now again the comparison, and you will evidently see the error.
Apostles, that is to say, public persons of an extraordinary embassage, and
so of gifts, and that were not by any reason of their calling to settle in any
one congregation, are compared with private men or particular members, of no
extraordinary sending nor gifts, and such as by all reason of their calling,
are all their life long, (necessary remove of dwelling considered) to abide
members of one congregation: these persons (I say) of so contrary condition
(which I set abroad chiefly to prevent some things hereafter) are compared
in one action, that is (in forsaking.) But as there is no resemblance betwixt
the subjects, or things to be forsaken, so there is no reasonable proportion
between the causes of their forsaking. The Apostles forsook Churches or
assemblyes that were without Christ; we must forsake Churches and congregations
of Christ. The Apostles forsook them for refusing the covenant offered: and
we must forsake them for imperfect observing of the fruits of the covenant
receyned. Behold the fraud, and flee from it. So his instances of the Synagogs
of the Jews in Antioch and Ephesus are powered out like water upon the ground,
since those were not Churches planted in the new covenant, and therefore none at
al for Christians to be members of. And heerabouts he trauerseth much ground,
as if he would meet me, but never walks that way, which it was likely I
would come.

14 His demand concerning the Popish Church, whether we be schismatiques for
departing from that, is frivolous, The Popish Church no Church of God.
for that is fallen from the foundation, and has no knitting with Christ,
having denied the faith. Also the decree of God touching his forsaking of her,
is now for a good time gone out against her, 2 King. 17. Ier. 3.3.
as clearly as in times past against the Israelites, and the one is no more
within the covenant and protection of the Lord, than the other. Touching that
he says, that To deny Christ's discipline and government, is to deny Christ,
he says truth. But concerning the question in hand, he beggeth thereby that he
shall never get. For unless he will say, and so can prove, that what
congregation soever fails or is restrained, so as it does not execute all
ecclesiastical censures, or cleereth not the sacraments from all offenses to
the communicants, the same denies Christ, and falls from the foundation:
except (I say) he can prove this, he has nothing against us toward the
denying of Christ: nor yet to prove, that particular members may separate
themselves from such a Church, which he makes you believe, Page 10.15.
to be a matter most evident. Yet I must answer him, Whether if the Church
will join in the Sacrament with an unlawful Minister, a Wolf, a hireling, a
thief, those amongst them that know and can prove him such a one, That the
godly may not depart the Communion for the sin of the Minister.
may withdraw themselves? That the sin and corruption of the Minister is no
cause for the godly to withdraw from the Sacrament, it follows in good
proportion to be concluded from that which has bin hitherto disputed of the
members of a Church in general. 1. Sam. 2.12.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.
And here moreover for direct confirmation, the examples of Ely and his Sons
may suffice us: with whom it was lawful for the people to sacrifice and receive
spiritual blessings by their hand, though their lives were most offensive,
and namely the sons notoriously wicked. So I say of the Scribes and
Pharisees, whom it was lawful to hear. Matthew. 23.2.3.
Now if he mean by thieves, such as lead not in by the door Christ, he
does injury, and deals captiously: for they that gather not unto Christ,
John^ 10.4.5.
but have strange voices, which the sheep acknowledge not, those are rather
the great antichristian deuourers, which bring another foundation besides
Christ Jesus, and are not to be enrolled with such as teach the doctrine of
faith truly. But here yet I must insist a little, because I know that Brown
in a certain place excepteth two things against this example of Elie his
sons: One, Answer to M. C. page 66.
That the better sort of the people did withdraw themselves from the
Sacrifices, because of their sin, and the other is, That Elie ministered and
not his sons, when Elkanah and his wives came to offer. I answer. Whereas
the text does testify, saying Therefore the sin of the young men was very
great before the Lord: for men abhorred the offeringes of the Lord. Sam. 2.17.
It gives not the least show of arguing, that there was now no offering of
the Lord, for the faithful sort to come unto (for the flat contrary is
avouched) nor yet that any as in duty, did abstain from the Sacrifices (for
then also by the whole course of Brownes doctrine, Elkanah, Hannah, and Samuel,
in not abstaining, did partake with the sins of the Priests, and were become
wicked with them, yea and so consequently their sacrifices should have been
accursed unto them, so far should they have been from bringing such a
blessing as they did) but when it is said, The people abhorred the offering of
the Lord, because of the sin of the young men: what is it? but to aggrauate
the sin of the Priests, and show the extent of their iniquity, to reach
even to the making of the people thus to sin. This is confirmed by Elie his
words, when rebuking his sons, Cap. 2.24.
he says thus (according to Tremelius translation) Do not so my sons: for
this is no good report which I hear, that you turn away the people of the
Lord. And this is that sin, 2. Sam. 12.14. Isai. 52.5. Ezech. 36.20. Romans
2.24.
which the word often opbraydeth unto loose professors, that they make the
name of God evil spoken of for their sakes. Now, that he says, touching
Elies offering the sacrifices, and not his sons, is miserably destitute of
all probability. For first the text says, Elkanah and his wife went up out
of his city every year, 1. Sam. 1.1.2.3.
to worship and to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh, where were
the two sons of Elie, Hophni, and Phinehas, Priests of the Lord. If these
be mentioned for Priests of the Lord in Shiloh, who should doubt that they
offered the sacrifices of the people that thither repared for that end, and so
of Elkanah amongst the rest? And that old Eli labored not in those days, in
the business of the sacrifices, it seems very probable, in that he was not
able, being about nintie years old, for the bodily labor thereof, to offer
the sacrifices, and in which regard, the Priests had leave to cease at fifty
years of their age. He sat (I grant) in the Temple, saw the services of
the Lord performed, and blessed likewise the people, but that he offered the
sacrifices, and especially without his sons, by no lawful use of the text it
can be proffered.

16 Hitherto your leader has added his poor furniture, to help you to
prove, that particular members may depart from the body of the Congregation
for default of separating the unworthy. Now he comes to bring your proofs
in proportion, that he might make you still believe, he does not seduce you.
Wherein though I could willinglye forbear him, in respect that his copy has
deceived him, yet I suppose it may be good for him, that his insolent behavior
have some repressing. The six places of Scripture which you quote, I said do
concern our private conversation and behavior toward inordinate brethren,
and have not a syllable touching our dealings in public Church meetings and
exercises. Here he thinking me to lie wide open, runs violently upon me,
with the place of the Corinths, to dispatch me at a blow: but therein doing,
the evil spirit of malice and revenge that set him on, blinded his judgment,
that he could not see how sure a ward I had, till he ran his own hand
upon the point thereof. For I said not (as he tells you) that none of those
places have any thing concerning public Church meetings, and exercises: but
my speech was, that they had not any thing touching our dealinges in public
Church meetings and exercises. Wherein, if your judgment be so weak, that as
yet you perceive no difference, call to mind the question, which is, whether
particular members of a Church, may depart or withdraw themselves from that
body, if they know any unworthy ones at the Lords table. You point me to
Scriptures to prove they ought. I answer, that those Scriptures give us
rules concerning our private conversation, and touch not our dealinges in the
Church. Now I would ask you, whetherto you refer this word our? If you
refer it to the whole body of the Church, then you change the question, and
flee your ground: but if it be suffered to have the natural relation to
particular members, then may you see, that your leader has not a little abused
you. If out of the last verse of the chapter (for it was quoted thus. 1. Cor.
5.9.10.11.12 13.) he shall yet strive to save himself in this manner, because
this place requires the church to excommunicate the incestuous, which must be
done by voices and consent of the particular members, therefore it speaks of
particular members dealing in the church. Mark the end, and you shall see his
gain. The question is, whether particular members may depart from the church,
as before, or no. This place (you say) infers some dealing of particular
members in the Church. I grant it, what shall you get by that? You will say this,
that I the^ have unjustly denied this place to have any thing concerning
particular members dealing in the Church. If I have denied any thing that might
hinder you to find the truth, the^ have I dealt unjustly. But we see that by
your gain. For if by this obtained, your cause be never the better, he has
fed you then with words, and made you never the fatter. Thus you must apply
it to the question, if you will endeavor to make gain of it: If this place
warrant particular members to have dealing in the Church, then it warranteth
them to separate themselves in the case aforesaid, and so do you not see iron
and flax knitte together of a knotte? Is some dealing all dealings? Will your
leader never unlearn so gross a fallation? You see now if I let you have
this, it does you no good, and for my part I will none of it, it can pleasure
me nothing. If you ask why then I made my negation so general. I answer
first, that in denying those places to concern particular members in the
Church, I did it not to interuert or hinder the truth, as now appears.
Secondly, it is the lawful liberty of any man, in reasoning to use change of
words, so that our sense be kept, which shall easily be (especially both
sides having sound hearts to seek the truth) If the question still be made
the line to measure them by. and therefore whereas I said those Scriptures
touch not our dealings in the Church, what man of honest mind, or that had
any spark of truth left in him (considering the question) would not have
understood by that word (dealings) our tarying or departing from the Lords
Table at the sight of the unworthy? Solomon says, Prou. 14.1.
The wisdom of the wise, is to understand his way, but the foolishness of
fools is unto deceit.

17 The rest of the places you quoted to prove your purpose, are not according
to the copy you gave him, The true sense of those scriptures which commonly
the Brovvnists cite to prove their separation from the communion.
but these. 2. These. 3.14. 2. Tim. 3.1.2.3.4.5. To. 16.17.18. Ephesians. 5.7.8. 1.
These. 5.21.22. and all these (I say, with that to the Corinthians spoken off
before, (the question being rightly considered and taken) make nothing for
you. For in as much as any of them concern our behauior in public, so much do
they appoint the duties of particular members, toward others jointly, but
nothing of their own departing or tarying separately. Again whatsoever any of
them say of separating to be practiced of particular members, there can they
not be understood of Church meetings, but of private conversation. But to
iumble these things together, A dicto secundu^ quid ad. simpl.
without discerning, and (as it were) to live in that gross sophistication, of
taking all respects for some, is (as it seems) your leaders joy.

18 But he charge me (by so understanding those places) with such seditious
doctrine, Page 12.13.
as may bring in rebellion against Magistrates, put down acquaintances of men
familiarly in marriage, loose al bonds of obedience in children and servants,
and cut off all intercourse of merchandise, and bargaining with professors.
These will prove but such l^wde soundings, as an empty barrel ever yields.
Paul aduertiseth Timothy, 2. Tim 3.1.2.3.4.5.
that in the last days should come perilous times, wherein men should be
lovers of themselves, covetous, vainglorious, proud, etc. having a form of
godliness, but denying the face of it, and that therefore he should avoid such.
John says to the elect Lady: Ver. 10.
If any man come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to
house, neither bid him Godspeede. By which Scriptures you see particular
persons by name warranted to avoid private conversation with inordinate
professors. This place also to the Corinthes, though it be written to all the
Church, 1. Cor. 5.9.10.11.12.
yet is it concerning particular men's practice, in their separate and private
places and behavior. And though your leader will be loath to loose his place
above many others, Title against par. prea. and hired lectures. Answ. to M. C.
Page 13.
hecause he has stood so much heretofore upon denial of this which I affirm
thereof, yet has he now to think, that neither the auncientie of his error,
nor the inconvenience he dreameth of, can yield him strength enough to keep
it. The inconvenience shall be met withal afterward. Here I will show the
reasons of my judgment out of the place. Ver. 9.
I wrote unto you (says Paul) in an Epistle, that you should not company
together with fornicators. Br. great place, in the Epist. to the Cor. discussed
This verse you see, is of shedding, or sorting out our company. Then
follows, and not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the
covetous, or with extortioners, or with idolaters, for then you must go out of
the world. But now I have written unto you, that you company not together: If
any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat not. In these
verses we are directed both what persons to shun, and also in what
conversation or company. In appoynting the persons, he excepteth for those
that were not as yet come to religion, Ver. 10.
and sets down this rule to hold in all those, that are counted brethren in
the Church. Of his exception he renders two reasons, first, because the
number of those that professed not Christ, was then so great, as they could not
avoid them and live in the world. Secondly, Ver. 12.
because Christians are not charged with their censuring, but they are reserved
to Gods judgment. Why brethren are subject to those private censures (as I may
speak) he gives this reason, because we ought to look into, and judge one of
another. The conversation is set out by one kind named for all, to wit,
eating of meat, which is always a very notable mark and fruit of
familiarity. I know your leader would have you understand this, of eating
bread at the Lords table only, but the 10. verse delivers the whole text
from this injury. For if the Apostle would have had them taken his meaning in
this place to be directly of their meeting and companying at the Lords Table
(as you take it) what needed he to have excepted those that were out of the
Church, and no brethren, with who^ the Church neither had, nor might have
company at the Lords Table. Yea how absurdly had he reasoned, in saying thus (
for then you must go out of the world) as though he should say: if you
altogether debar the wicked that are without the Church, from your company at
the Lords table, then may you as well get out of the world, for you cannot
live in it. When your leader is so grossly ouershot in such plain points, it
lies you upon carefully to consider, whether the hand of God be upon him in
as heavy a judgment, as fell upon Elymas the sorcerer, for perverting the
straight ways of the Lord. By this that is said, Act. 13.10.11.
I trust it is clear enough, that the doctrine which he calls so seditious,
is not mine, but the Lords, and therefore if it have any such dangerous
consequences, as your replier reckons you see that his accusation must reach
higher then me. But (alas) how does it grieve me in your behalf, yours (I
mean) with the rest of your company? I would (if it pleased God) that you
knew, or could discern rightly, with what sorrow I am sundry times affected
for you when I consider (which I do often) what numbers (as I hear of you)
whereof many have otherwise good parts in them, are so intollerably abused and
over carried by that wretched man. For (even in this) does it follow (think
you) that if we tie our selves to this rule of sorting our company in private
conversation, that then the knot of marriage should be loosed, the bonds of
obedience broken and outward acquaintances quite shaken of etc. Is there no
mean betwixt these two extremities, but that we must be either unnatural or
careless? Surely if we should take this course in all the Scriptures, we
should make a strange religion by and by; I mean if we receive some general
sayings of the Scripture, without their peculiar exceptions and declarations in
other places. As for example. Thou shall do no manner work on the seventh
day, and thou shall not kill: what should the service and ceremonies do in the
Church, or the Magistrate in the common wealth, if these be not limited and
declared by other special places and exceptions? And if you grant me this, that
places are to be compared with places, and generals declared and understood by
specials, why the^ shall you see this knot sone untied, or rather that there was
no knot nor difficulty, as your leader has mislead you. For that those places
of dissorting our selves from the wicked, make nothing against obedience to
Magistrates, we have Matt. 22.21. Romans 13.1.2. with diverse others to declare
them. Again, that they debar no duties in marriage. 1. Cor. 7.3.4.5.12.13.
with many other places that you know do warrant us. 1. Pet.
2.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25. chap. 3.1.2.3. ad 7. Matthew.
5.31.32. Mark. 10.6.7.8. Ephesians. 5.22. etc. col. 3.18 etc. Ephesians. 6. 1.2 etc. Tit.
2.4.5. 1. cor. 7.21.
The like also may be said of children to parents, and in the rest. So that
then, conferring these places together, we see flatly, that as on the one side,
we are bound generally to shun private conversation with ungodly ones: so on
the other side, we must necessarily observe withal, whatsoever special
duties are to be required at our hands by any one. And thus at length it
will fall out, being as from both sides resolved, that touching Magistrates,
parents, married folks, and masters, the general prohibitions of not eating,
nor keeping company, must be understood of shunning the malice of sin and
seducing, yea that our doings must be with a kind of mourning, and affliction
for their sakes, but not forbidding necessary duties, which other bonds of
commandments, do straightly bind us to. Touching other acquaintances and
dealing with brethren, those prohibitions reach not beyond their inward
familiarity, and delightful accompanying, which is ever stained with foul
tolerations and neglect of Christian reprehensions. And therefore have we for
these cases other golden rules also to guide us by. 2. These. 3.14.15.
When as Saint Paul says: If any man obey not this our saying in this letter,
note him and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, yet count him
not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. We must so avoid his company,
as he may not find want of love and brotherly kindness in us, but only a
chief love of virtue, that thereby he may take shame at his sin. To the same
purpose says he in another place. Let no man deceive you with vain words,
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience:
Ethes 5.6.7.11.
Be not therefore companions with them. Likewise a little after. And have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove them
rather. This conferring and resolving of places together, if your leader had
grace to use, having also vngorged himself of that prejudice, whereby now his
taste is made so insincere in all things, you may see that as in these points,
there is no such danger as he talked of, so neither in the great question
betwixt us of joining with the Church, at the Lords Table where the unworthy
ones are. For the keeping of the bond of unity in the Church, Ephesians. 4.1.2.3.
etc. to the end of the 16. Heb. 10.25. Iud. 19.
has an express law and charge, which no general words of other places,
much less preposterous zeal, can dispense withal, or take away.

19 It seems to me by a speech in his 7. Page, that he secretly gives you
this answer for that, namely if the Church at any time separate not the
unworthy, or cannot do it, it is thereby fallen from the covenant of life,
Also page 3.
and cease to be a Church of Christ, so that you may safely go from them I
will not yet say much of this matter, I had rather the author would recant it
(if it might please God,) then that I or any other should stand to confute so
gross an error: for if he hold, that obedience and holy life are causes of our
justification, and whereby we enjoy the covenant of life, and not tokens or
fruits only, his case is worse, then that he can truly enjoy the name of a
Christian.

20 The rest of his 11.12. and 13. pages, shall receive this answer: it
seems the author of them was not well in his wits, but malice had made him
as those in Bedlem, that talk quite out of order and sense. For I pray you,
takes he not upon him there to prove out of your quotations, that we are
warranted and commanded to depart from the communion, where the unworthy is not
separated (for I had denied that those Scriptures intended any such thing. Now
that wherein he occupies himself, in stead thereof, is to prove (not
without some profane abuse of the Scriptures) by a sort of foolish
syllogismes, that have never a true assumption, that I am herein an heretic;
the question in the mean time, which should bring forth that consequence,
lying altogether unproven: the gain that he shall get by it, is, that he
lost the vantage of so much time, and has put himself for a laughing stock
to all that shall read his writing. I speak not of his inward and higher
reckonings. I pray God be merciful unto him in them for his Christ's sake. As
for me, I will not answer a fool according to his foolishnes. Yet there is
one thing which in the midst of his rage against me, he utters, whereof I
must admonish you. Page 13.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper (says he) is a Sacrament of order, or
orderly communion: and adds, Orderly communicating is not of the essence of
the Sacrament.
that order or orderly communion is the very form, matter, manner or essence,
and nature thereof. As he lights here upon popish phrases, so you are to
fear him in substance: his divinity is sick to the death, Mat. 26.26.27.28.
when he thus defines the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The outward matter of
this Sacrament is bread and wine, the four me is the blessing and separating of
them to that use, with their distributing to the members of the Church. Orderly
communicating, is a fruit or effect of government, and a beautiful ornament
to the Sacrament, but nothing either of matter or form, and therefore not of
the essence of the Sacrament. Of his learned use of logic terms, I will here
say nothing for shame, I had much rather to cover his nakedness altogether, if
the truth would suffer it. Thus much for refutation of his defense of your
quotations. Now I will come to his cauilles at the reasons, wherewith I
prove, that particular members ought to deal no further in this case, then by
process of admonition. Which words if you understand rightly, and as the
question in controversy will guide you, (like as before I have declared) you
shall see his first argument full of vain words, wherein he says, there is
more required of particular members then admonition, and reckons up mourning,
lamentation, prayers, etc. which thing, are nothing at all in question betwixt
us. For only this is betwixt you and me (and which he brings here in the
last place) you say particular members may depart from the Lords Table, for
the presence of the wicked thereat, I reason against you negatiuely, and show
what duties are required of one toward another by order of discipline, and
beyond which we have no commandment from God, See the 6. Section.
whereby I exclude not those things which are not at all in question, but that
which you hold in question against me. If you had brought me to a reasonable
adversary we should never have spent time in such frivolous cauillings.

22 Well, at length (I trow) he falls close to the question, and will prove
even out of those places that I allege for the unity and knitting together of
this body, that same separation of the members, which is here in controversy.
And thus he disputes. What places enforce an outward uniting in the Sacrament
with the members of Christ's body only, the same enforce a deuyding or
refraining in the Sacraments, from those that outwardly are manifest to be no
members of his body: But all these places enforce such an outward uniting with
members only: Therefore they enforce a refrayning and dividing in the
Sacrament from open wretches, which are known to be: no members. I may grant
you this argument in some sort, and yet you are as near your purpose, as you
were at the first. For if he understand by dividing and reframing, the action
of the whole body of the Church, then is it that, which they ought jointly to
execute against the unworthy, and that is nothing to the question: but if he
mean, this those places which command an uniting in the Sacrament with the
members of Christ's body only, do by the same reason command particular members
to refrain or depart, if any open unworthy do communicate (which had been
rightly to the purpose) then his proposition is apparently false. Ephesians. 1.22.23.
1. Cor. 12. ephesians. 4.1.2.3. etc. to the 17. Col. 2.19. Romans 12.4.5.6.7.8.
And I reason against him from the same places thus. If the members of a Church
or spiritual body, have no further promise of life and continuance in Christ,
then as they (like the members of a natural body) continue in the unity of
the same Church or Spiritual body, then it follows necessarylie, that what
members so ever, separate themselves from their spiritual body or Church, the
same do separate themselves from the life of Christ thereby: But the first is
true, and infallibly proved, by those places I quoted (whereas unity and
holding together of the members, is made the essential form of the body.
Page 15.
) Therefore the latter follows thereof.

23 I say, that as corrupt and unworthy members, can be no cause why those that
are whole should forsake the body: so no open gross communicantes, can be any
cause, why we that are faith-full should forsake the Church. Your leader
makes you believe, that you hold not this question. I think (in deed) he
knows not what he holds. But I say unto you, (mark it well, as it lies
you upon, for in your standing upon this point, that particular members of a
Church may depart or refrain from the Lords table, if unworthy ones remain
there vnseparated, it does necessarily fall out thereupon, that either you
hold that particular members may forsake a Church of God, (which now I
perceive your leader renou^ceth:) or else that the covenant of a Church is
broken before God, by the failing of any necessary point in practice: Which
implying the covenant to be held by works, is the high way to Popery. This
thing have I noted once or twice before. Sect. 8. and 19.
And here now also the third time, the reader may see that I am not over
hasty to take him at such advantage. But withal I trust there appears good
hope of victory to this side, when as the adversary (after much labor to keep
the advantage thereof) has now flatly forsaken one of his holds: and that
which remains for him to flee unto, is able to kill him with the stench
thereof, though no man should pursue him any further.

24 He follows the comparion of members of a natural body, with the members
of a Church. And first he says that as every particular member of a body, may
shake of the rotten, and yet not forsake the body: so may every particular
member of a Church. This is plain beggerie: for no particular member of a
body can do that of it self, and if it could, his conclusion thereby should
make but for sole excommunication, His second comparison is thus propounded
and applied: As the members of a natural body, refuse to use the service of
the rotten ones: so ought the members of a spiritual body, refuse to
communicate in the sacraments with such. Every man that considers what I have
said, sees that he fights here with his shadow, and not with me, for I
employ no such members in any service. But to clear his eyes, it may be, God
shall make this a medicine, when he shall give him to meditate, that it is quite
contrary to his ordinance in the natural body, for the whole members to
forsake their places, or to refuse to nourish themselves in the unity of their
body, because of some rotten ones that do indaunger them. Neither have his
other comparings, any more worthy thing against me, though too much to bewray
his own vnlearnednesse. For whereas he esteems that every member of a
natural body withholdeth and keeps away blood and nourishment from the
rotten, it is manifest that he is as ignorant in natural things, as in
divine. For blood comes plentifully enough to rotten members, so long as they
are vnseparated, only it nourishes them not as of old, but is perverted by
them to the increase of their rottenness. Let him follow this vein no longer,
if he have any wit in his head.

25 After this, he bears you in hand, that he fully satisfies a question,
which I should be ready to make in these or such like words: What if the
Church, or the rest of the body, will not withdraw themselves from that dead
and rotten member neither will cast it off, what shall one member do? To this
he answers, First, That if one member do cast it off, the rest will not be
angry. Which is the same begging he used even now. Secondly, that it is a
token, the rest of the members are not so lively, etc. which is a very cold
answer. If he had said, it is a token, the rest of the members are dead with
it, so as you may safely depart from them, he had satisfied the question. This
he would have you to understand, but he durst not utter it. For it is the
fashion of an heretic, to keep more poison in his heart, than he utters
with his mouth.

26 The first part of his next point is beggarly. That a member cannot forsake
one congregation of Christ, and go to another, without guilt of schism, and
forsaking the body of Christ, I proved in my first answer, which yet
remains untouched by him. His objection that one Congregation is not the
whole Church of Christ, Page 16.
etc. is an unlearned cavil. For every particular Church, touching the
knitting together of the members, and partaking with Christ the head, 1. Cor.
12.27.
through that same bodily unity, is in the same sort to be considered, as the
whole Church, and we can no more forsake a particular Church, and yet be of
the whole, than can a finger forsake his hand, and yet be of the body. Take
heed therefore unto your self: branches broken off do shortly wither, and
after that become fit for nothing but for the fire.

Sect. 14.
27 His objection of forsaking the Popish Church, I have answered before. The
next is a pretty dialogue of words, which because he made it for his own
recreation, I will not hinder him. His oppositions are but his own unproven
and unsavory suppositions. How truly he charge me therein with diverse
iniquities, let the godly consider my writing, and so judge. Whereas he sows
the seeds of new questions, to draw in other discourses, I am not one for
his toothe, to nourishe them.

28 He would make you believe, that he proves our Church a monstrous and
false body, so that you may hold it safe to forsake us, and this he will do
out of mine own words, because (forsooth) I confess it may have unsound and
corrupt members vnseparated, yea which we are not able to separate. By which
reason, if you have a fello^ on your finger, which causes mortification
therein, if either you will not, or cannot get it cut off, you are thereby a
monstrous and false body. But here ought to be no question of deformity, but
of the being of a church. Then he charge me to say, that it may be a church
of God, though it have the discipline and government of Antichrist, in stead
of Christ's, and that I confess, we have offices, rites orders, etc. after the
popish institution. I know what I have said, he is ready to snatch before any
thing fall to the ground. But now upon good cause of the question, this I
answer freely. It may be a true Church of God, That it may be a true Church of
God, though diversely corrupted in doctrine and manners.
though therein diverse rites be corruptly instituted, and the censures and
offices popishly carried and ordered. If you doubt that, I will prove it thus.
Whatsoever has the essential parts of a Church of God, the same must needs
be confessed to be a Church of God: But a Church of such government and
orders, may have the essential parts of a Church of God. Therefore a Church of
such government and orders, may be a true Church of God. The first part no man
that has understanding can doubt of. The second is also manifest thus: that
whereas there are but two essential parts of any thing, to wit, matter and
form: the matter of a Church is Christ the heade-corner stone, and a people
who are as living stones to be laid upon him: 1. Pet. 2.4.5.6.
the form, is the coming unto him, and being builded upon him by faith: It
is certain there may be other wants and deformities, where these essential
parts are. Now those deformities and wantes may be both in points of
doctrine and practice, as may plainly be proved by examples of the Churches
of God established in all ages. For the leaven of evil and dangerous points
of doctrine, 1. Cor. 15. ca 6.12.13.14.15.16. etc. Col. 2.11.16.18.
let the Churches of the Corinthes about the resurrection, also counting
fornication among indifferent things, and the Colossians, about ceremonial
observation of days, and abstinence of meats, Gal. ca. 2. ca. 3. ca. 4.
and worshipping of Angels, testify. Yea let the Churches of Galatia,
generallye infected with dangerous doctrine, be witness. Wantes in points
of knowledge and doctrine, appeared manifestly to be in the Apostles, and the
Church at Jerusalem touching the vocation of the Gentiles. Act. 10.11. cap.
As for practice in governing and ordering the Churches, if we search the
times, we shall easily find both deformities, and disabilities or wantes, yea
even in the wholesome censures of the Church, which are here in question. 1. Cor.
11.20. etc
The Corinthians vnreuerent and scandalous (yea almost profane) coming to the
Lords table, is an example of a foul and corrupt behavior of a Church. Of
wants and disabilities in the practice of Church government, let us mark
whether they may not be found, even in some Church, which that most painful
Apostle Saint Paul, labored so plentifully to make perfect: consider (I say)
diligently, and you shall find that same famous Church of Rome (where not long
after Paul died for the testimony of Christ, Philip. 1.15.16.
) so weak and defective, in duties of government, as that they could not
separate from them such as preached Christ contentiously, and with so spiteful
minds against Paul, as tended to the cutting off of so good and faithful a
guide from amongst them. You will not say, they deserved it not, nor yet that
the better sort would not do it, for then also their fault was worse. You
cannot say, they knew it not, or it was secret, for Paul was in prison, so
as the knowledge thereof could not come to him, but by the information of
brethren: Cap. 2.20.21.
yea it is manifest by the same Epistle, that the greater number of that
Church, did corruptly demean and carry themselves in the same. Again, that
pestilent chair of ambitious usurpation over the assemblies, was crept into
the Church, whereof Saint John makes mention in these words. 3. John. 9.10.
I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who seeks the prehemine^ce among
them, receives us not, wherefore if I come, I will declare his deeds which he
does prattling against us, Discipline as much depraved in the Church where
Diotrephes was, as in the Churches of England.
with ambitious words, and not therewith content, neither himself receives
the brethren, but forbids them that would, and casts them out of the
Church. First here is as much deprauation of discipline, as Brown can tell us
of. Secondly it is plain, that the same Church, remained then unable to
remedy it: which the Apostle signifies, by purposing a time to come and
rebuke him, which needed not (if the Church according to his demerite, could
have chastened him.) Thirdly, he yet intituleth them the Church, whereby all
men may see, the Apostle was far from Brownes mind. For he neither
insinuates, that the Church was now disanulled by such corruption, nor gives
any caveat for men to withdraw or withhold themselves from joining with the
same, which certainly had been necessary, both for that time present, and all
posterities ensuing. Consider likewise, what I have before observed upon the
11. to the Cor. in the 11. sect. So that turn you which way you will, this
shall be sufficiently proved always, that a Church, that is to say, an
assembly consisting of the essential parts of a Church of God, may be
chargeable of diverse other wantes and deformities both in doctrine and
government, which being so, the other bulwark also which your leader had
builded for you, to persuade you boldly to go from us, is beaten down to the
ground: namely that the failing of any necessary point in the public
practice of government, breaks the covenant of a Church. Yield your self
therefore, for here must you needs be taken.

22 But now let us come to apply this same general question to our
particular congregation, The Church of England has the essential parts of a
church of God.
which if it be tried in the essential parts aforsaid, shall undoubtedly be
found a Church of God, howsoever in some other things impure and defective. He
excepteth (but against his own knowledge and conscience, Page 17.
) that we have no power nor order in use, to separate the unworthy. First this
is no way of the essence of a Church, as I shall prove. Also I have said
before, that we both may, and do discern of the Communicants, and debar the
unworthy. And I brought places of his own writings that testify the same. If
he doubt whether we do it, let him inquire. If the reader would see, where
the law does warrant it, let him read at the beginning of the ministration
of the Communion in the Church books, In the defense of the Admonition to the
followers of Brown. sect 7.
and there shall he see it. His sophistical fetch in making this discipline
all one with Christ's power and government, is bowlted out in another place. To
hold the church of England to be without Christ's discipline, is they
unadvisedness of him that puts all upon the spur, and never looks at his
way. To discern the worthy and unworthy in the assemblies: to admonish the
inordinate, to suspend and finally excommunicate the unruly ones (which is the
discipline whereof our question is) all men know the church of England by law
professes and daily practices: therefore it cannot be said to be without the
very discipline of Christ: this very discipline (I say as touching all the
parts and duties of censuring, although not ordered and administered by such a
course as the word appoints. Which if he consider better, The Church of
England not without the discipline: but does administer the same in a corrupt
course.
he may more truly hereafter affirm, that the church of England administreth
the discipline corruptly, then that it wants the same: and that the outward
form and ordering of the discipline is popish, but not the substance so. How
much we labor according to our places, to recover that liberty the word gives
to every congregation, for executing the discipline, as it is impossible for
you to report of it, that come not among us: so it is a shame for him to define
of it, that otherwise knows us not.

30 But then he would have us cry out by name against those that restrain
us, yea though it cost us our lives. I answer. All men in this cannot be tied
to one rule for the manner of proceeding, neither in any other case of suffering
for the truth: but every one is to be left (brotherly stirrings up excepted) to
the particular preparations and thrusting forth of the spirit. Your leader
therefore, having such a particular feeling of so great a charge and bond of
duty, to venture his living and life in this case (and specially holding the
discipline so dear above us, as he pretends) cannot keep back himself in
this case, but with rank cowardlinesse, and being guilty of betraying the
good cause: yea who ought to go before all others in suffering for this
reformation, but he only that pretends to hold the same at a higher price,
and to seek for it with a more fervent zeal than all others? But we have
experience sufficient of him, what great things he has suffered, and how. And
this we know, whatsoever he discourses otherwhere of his fugitive life, that
although some others have been hanged for his heresies, he has not only been
contented to let them go without his company, but coming also to some trial
of his courage before authority, there was not only no show of that Heroical
spirit, which he would have you see in his writings, but contrariwise shifting
answers, with subtle reseruations, shameful and disorder like giving back
from the truth it self, and finally a most hypocritical subscription, least
he should have felt affliction in the least of his fingers. See the defense
of my Admonition. Sect. 13.
Of any of these (if you doubt) I will be ready to show you proves.

31 In my first answer, I showed you the right understanding of that
comparison of the leaven which S. Paul uses in the 1. to the Cor. 5. cap.
that you might see, The comparison of leaven with the wicked in a congregation
discussed.
if that place (so commonly objected of your leader to warrant your separating
from our assemblies) be but rightly understood, it quickens our care, and
diligent endeavors to remove corruptions, but teaches no man to forsake his
Church. I gave you to understand, that the comparison is there of quality,
not of quantity. I speak not of like force and like nature, without regard
of like woorking. I know we consider of the natures of things by their
effects, and therefore I said also, that Paul puts us in mind of the
effect of leaven. The leaven in sowring the meal wherewith it is mingled, and
the ungodly in corrupting those with whom they keep company, have herein both
a like nature, yea and their effects when they do come to pass, are both
alike. For it is true, that when the wicked draw others after them to become
also of evil conversation, that before were not so, the effect is like to the
sowring of the meal, which before was not so: but now the measure of working
of the one, and of the other, is not the same in both subjects. Which that I
may help you the better to understand, consider that the matter subject to the
sowring of the leaven is meal, a thing altogether and wholly disposed to
receive the impression thereof without resistance. But the matter whereon the
wicked do work (in this comparison is a company consisting of two sorts of
men, contrarily disposed and tempered, the one apt to be infected, and the
other having a supernatural power to hold out their contagion. So that though
the sowring that the one makes, and the corrupting that the other works, be
alike, yet are they not equal. For of the meal, all is infected, but not all
of such a company, and so is it in the comparison that I gave you. By the salt
all the liquor is seasoned, but so is not always a wicked company by two or
three righteous men converted. Again, the leaven in one night so wreth the
meal wherewith it is mingled, you dare not say, that the case is the same with a
whole congregation: and yet you say more, if you hold that by warrant of this
scripture, you must depart from the sacrament, where you see unworthy ones
admitted, for so you account the whole congregation to be leauened, that is
unsanctified, in a moment. But I must further remember you, that as in diverse
places, the scripture speaks of leaven in the ill part: so our Savior Christ
propounds a similitude by the same in the good part. Matt. 13.33.
Which if you apply and urge, as far forth as you have done this, you must
say, that where faith and regeneration by the gospel is once begun, there do al
become faithful and renewed: even as of 3. pecks of meal, all becomes
leuened. Which if you do say, all the world will cry shame of you. If you
fear so to abuse this place, why fear you not also in the other? Moreover,
whereas your leader teaches you to apply these words of Saint Paul: A
little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, as though the Apostle had given you to
understand thereby, that one known, and so proved a wicked man, remaining
vnseparated in a Church, vnsanctifieth the whole, and brings a nullity upon
it, he does too grossly and shamefully abuse, miscary and seduce you. For by
leauening Paul meant corrupting them with evil manners. Chap. 5.^.
Like as to the Galathians, he means by the same speech, the corrupting of
that Church with false doctrine, and not the disanulling of either. So that if
God have yet left you the understanding to make difference between sick and
dead, and that which is vnpure, and that which is not now at all, your leader
can no longer misleade you in this point. For if he dare avouch it, that
whatsoever congregation is corrupt either in manners or doctrine, the same is
not to be reputed, or joined with, as a Church of God, we can soundly, and so
may safely prove and denounce him for a Donatist, and not worthy to live in any
land of Christian government. His unsatisfied dalyance with my comparing of
salt with the righteous, argues the man, either so pursued by the hand of
God, that whilst he controlleth all men, himself is utterly spoiled of
understanding, or else of so reprobate a mind, that he wilfully closes his
eyes, and stops his ears at those things that have special force to
affect the senses to the reformation of his judgment. And after that he has
altogether thus abused you in the scope of my comparison, least he should
leave you any light at all in it, he takes it to his own stithie, and hammers
it a new, for so he presumes it shall be fit for the scholars of his
learning. The Lord give you eyes to see, and a heart to abhor his most
dangerous and pestilent conclusion: for thus he teaches you, (even the same
doctrine, Brown in ^lat Donatisme.
which right now I called Donatisme) that like as sweet water intermingled
with poison, is poisoned and turned into the nature of poison: so the notorious
wicked openly mingled in one outward Church with the righteous, or the
righteous with them, they become one wicked crewe together, even all of them
poisoned and infected together. As touching the author of this sentence, I have
little hope, as in all the rest to prevail ought by my answering, only for
your sakes my dear brethren) that have not as yet sounded the deepenes of
Satan in him, I will herein also lend my labor to weigh out this matter, by
the waightes of the Sanctuary. And although my 11. and 28. Sections, do
sufficiently cover him with shame and confusion for this point, yet shall this
be further also even as the nail of Iahel, to pearce through the temples of
Sisara down into the earth. First, this his bold comparison seems to have
craved at his hands (at the least) some one example out of the Scriptures,
showing us when or where the spirit of God disauoweth any Church for the cause
of some notorious wicked ones among them. If I therefore in exemplifying
against him, shall bring a cloud of witnesses, all of them testifiyng, as with
one mouth, the flat contrary, I hope I shall enclose the truth of this cause
more strongly, then that any wily or undermining foxes shall be able to enter
in hereafter to violate the same. Wicked members of a Church vnseperated do
not vnsactifie the whole.
And to begin with the Churches, of which, we have the life and lively voice
of our Savior Christ to testify, and after that, to enquire of the Apostles,
it may not be denied me, but that in the Church of Jerusalem, the Lord did
dwell, and that there were offered the Sacrifices, and performed the rites of
his holy worship which he accepted at the hands of his servants, in the
days of our Savior his coming in the flesh. Now in the outward body of this
Church, were corrupt Scribes, superstitious Pharisees, Mat. 3.20. ca. 15.3.4
Luke 11.4.6.
and epicurish Sadduces: this last sort denied the resurrection, and the two
former also corrupted many things in the doctrine, and sur-charged the Jewish
Church with importable burdens of traditions, being indeed the ordinary
teachers of the people, Mat. 7.29. mar. 1 21.22. man. 21.15.33. etc. to the 45
cap. 22.34 35. cap. 23.2.3. etc. Luke 1.8. Cap. 2 22.37.41.
but so yet the pestilent and notorious corrupters of true religion: these are
in your leaders comparison to be resembled by the poison: on the other side
there were, though of smaller number, that in the midst of the same
congregations, paid their vows unto the Lord in the simplicity of their
heart, being in the mean time openly mingled in one outward Church with such
unrighteous ones. Of this sort we may reckon diverse by name, as Symeon,
Zacharias, Marie, Anna, and Elizabeth etc. Here therefore we should conclude,
by your leaders rule, that those being the sweet water and not reserving their
worshipping of God and religious services to separate meetings, but performing
them in the congregations of notorious wicked teachers, and very falsely
instructed people, were now also impoysoned and become one wicked crewe
together with the rest. But I trust you will confess, that the scriptures are
contrary, and so consequently, therefore that your leader does seduce you.
Again, to be as brief likewise as I may in the rest. Reave. 2.20.
Our savior in his own words delivered unto John, that the Church at Thyatira
had so that wicked Iezabel amongst them, as that they were guilty of
permitting her to teach and seduce the servants of God, making the^ to commit
fornication, and to eat meats sacrificed unto idols. The Church at Pergamus,
Reave. 2.14.15.
was charged to have amongst the^ those that maintained the doctrine of Baalam,
and of the Nicolaitans. Now, by your leaders rule, these had also so
impoysoned the rest, that not one amongst the^ could be said to hold fast the
faith, nor keep the name of Christ, nor serve him purely, so as to be exempted
from the punishment that should light upon the rest, Ver. 13.16.19.24.
in the day that the Lord should visit: but the word of the Lord says
directly to the contrary: therefore your leader is found a blasphemous seducer
in his co^pariso^. And that we may touch likewise the Apostles testimonies.
When Jude acknowledges spots in the Church feasts, Jude ver. 12.
are not those spots the wicked ones, which he there inueigheth against? If
then he had approved your leaders doctrine, he would not have written them
preservative instructions to keep out their contagion (for such mingling had
now by his rule impoysoned all) but it lay upon his fidelity to have told
them, that whenever it should come to pass, that they so mingled, they
should count themselves no longer Churches of God, but infected and wicked
companies even all the sort of them. The same do I say of the Church, wherein
Diotrephes was. 3. Job. 9.10.
But those Apostles writings are far contrary hereunto. Therefore your
leaders comparison is abominable. Iam. 1.2.3.4. chapters.
I omit to speak of the Churches which Saint James, not condemns, but
expostulateth with, concerning proud dispisers of the poor, unbridled
pratlers, lip Christians, envious men, contentious, prouokers, unclean
livers etc. which were among them. As also the Thessalonians, who had their
inordinate walkers, busy bodies, 1. These. 3.10.11.
and such as labored not duly in their callings. Yea herein their blame being
much the greater, that they permitted such amongst them, having been admonished
of that matter once before. Ver. 10.
And now I come to the Colossian, Galathian and Corinthian Churches: these had
in the midst of them such as seduced mightily, Col. 2.16.18. Gal. 3.4.5. 1.
Cor. 15.12.
and prevailed dangerously, yea some in the fundamental points of religion, and
articles of our faith. The Corinthians (touching practice, 2. Cor. 12.20. chap.
13.2.
) had such as stirred up strifes, emulations, anger, contentions, commotions
and tumults, such as married with infidels, 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16. Chap.
10.2.7.10.11.12. Chap. 11.3.4.19.20. chap. 11.15.
such as with open speeches, depraved Paul's writings: the sounder sort being
guilty of harkening unto, and tollerating such, as thus in their vanity and
iniquity wrought his disgrace, and in his, the truths: yea, shall I say further
(not as delighting to blaze the sins and corruptions of these Churches, but
justly indeuouring to extinguish this Church-firebrand, which Satan, in the
throng of all our heaps of woes has hurled amongst us.) Besides, that I have
delivered in the 11. Section, 1. Cor 12.13.14. cap. 6.12.13.14.15.16. etc. ca.
8.
it is certain, the Corinthian Church was outwardly mixed with such as by
carnal eloquence profaned the temple of God, used indifferent things with
manifest offense to the weak, esteemed fornication amongst indifferent
things, 1. Cor cap. 10.7.14 15.16.17.18.19 20 21.
and committed no obscure kind of idolatry in eating at the tables of Idols
meats sacrificed to the devil. Now then if these Churches by all this mixing,
were not become impoisoned and wicked crewes, but remained still of reverend
account among the Churches of God, for the righteous sake, which were not
herein impeached by the wicked, then is your leaders comparison framed to the
great fall of truth, and himself proved to be a pernicious schismatike by it.
But the Apostle cleereth the first in many places of those his Epistles, so as
(I hope) no man will ask me particular proofs thereof: therefore the latter
must necessarily be granted of all sides. And then by the way, let me observe
this one thing: If a few holding the true worship of God in synceritie, mixed
with many, That no man ought to depart from the church of England for the wants
or corruptions therein.
bearing an outward profession with them, but otherwise of very offensive
life, yea some notoriously wicked, and not separated from amongst them, have
been notwithstanding rightly accounted Churches of God for faithful men
comfortably to join unto, and no man exhorted to withdraw from their
assemblyes, then is there utterly no cause for you and the rest, to disclaim
the Churches of England as you do, and to separate your selves from us, for
those impurities that are amongst us: therefore the first being true, by most
of the examples aforesaid, it remains by the latter, that you labor to the
Lord for mercy, and so return. Lastly, in my first answer touching the
similitude of leaven, I inferred this absurdity, upon your leaders
interpretation thereof, namely, that so the Corinthians were unsanctified, and
become no Church of God, because they had not removed the incestuous person.
Your leader salueth that sore with five excuses in the behalf of the
Corinthians, Page 18.
but indeed all will not make a plaster of a hair breadth to cover so mortal
a wound. First he says, The wickedman remained not among them, which is
apparently false, else why did Paul appoint his remove? And touching the space
of time, it will be found reasonable long, if you consider how long it must be,
ere Paul being at Philippi, in Macedonia, could hear out of Corinth in
Achaia, the undoubted truth of their disorder. His second excuse is, They
communicated not with him in the Sacraments being known. But it is certain
they did; else why did Paul rebuke them for miscarying themselves in the
matter? ^. Cor. 5.2.


And that they knew of him, there is no reason to doubt, first, because if the
matter had been unknown, and vnconuinced to them, they had been still free
from blame, and (as I said before) Paul had no reason to check their
security. 2. I would ask him, how Paul came to the knowledge of it? by
revelation? no, for he says* Verse. 1.
It is heard for truth, or for certain. Well, had he it by reports? they must
come from Corinth, and then must you either say, they were some pike-thanke
spies, that without cause so accused the Church (which is great reproach to the
Apostle, in that he should without cause, and yet so peremptorily, accuse them
of neglect of duty) or else confess, that they were of the faithfullest
brethren, who being not able by themselves to prevail with the Church, sought
by this means of telling Paul to do it: and then you see, the case as clear
as may be. 3. Your leader says, He was not convinced: belike, he had vowed the
number of five, and so this must fill up tale. His 4. excuse is, That they
wanted not Christ's power and discipline to sever him being in bondage to
popish discipline. I perceive he is almost drawn dry: for what is this to the
purpose? The Corinthians still communicated with him in the Word and
Sacraments, in consideration whereof (by your leaders judgment) it had been
lawful for as many as made conscience of the matter, to have forsaken the
assemblyes, and then it follows, that either you may forsake a true Church of
God, (which hold you have already renounced) or else that the Church at
Corinth was now disanulled, become a leauened lump, and so fallen from Christ,
which is blasphemy too abominable, so that (whether you look forward or
backward) here that fox, I mean that Heretic is taken. Fifthly, he says,
They refused not to sever him, but only neglected it. Yes, it must be said
(except when we speak favorably) that they, in effect, refused to sever him,
else could there have been no just complaynt made against them to the Apostle.
They refused perhaps not in plain words, but in lending the deaf ear to the
complaynings, and securely neglecting the means of their healthie state.
Howsoever it was, in such sort it seems to be, as that they that infourmed it
to Paul, had no hope else to get remedy. But if one should grant it only a
negligence, in the mean time, the forwardest, and soundest brethren, must
either still communicate with him, whom they would remove, or else forsake the
assemblyes: and so I have you again at the same point you were at before. Thus
you see, what extremities error brings you into, when it is traced out to the
end. If you take the comparing of the wicked, with leaven to be in quantity,
that is, that the Apostle should understand the wicked to have as through power
and force, to make wicked a whole Church, being suffered amongst them, as has
leaven to make sour a whole mass of meal, in which it lies: then was the
Corinthian Church now leauened throughout, and consequently, become no Church
of God, when Paul wrote his first Epistle.

32 Of all the other cauils of your leader, at my answer to the comparison of
leaven, because (as it seems) you are little capable of them, and they are
easily judged by all that have some gifts of learning (both as concerning my
speech, wherein he hunteth for contrariety, and also my Logic, which he told
you would not fadge.) I answer here no further, but freely give it up to the
verdict of the godly learned. If your leader have any thing empaired it, or
gotten therein at my hands by his worthy Reply, let him enjoy it for his
gain, only this I may tell you in secret, if his teeth would serve him no
better for to eat his meat, then his Logic does to discuss a question
rightly, you must feed him with spoone-meate, or that which is minced, if you
meant to keep him long alive: he may freely bid fie of all Logitians, and no
reproach to himself therein. The rest of my answer (he says) is nothing but a
tedious repetition of former matters. But if you look upon it again, you
shall see among other things, a plain demonstration of your schismatic, and
therefore very dangerous estate. Wherein for as much as he has forsaken to
defend you, let it stir you up to the better and earlyer consideration of all
his other dealings: which if you shall do, with humble calling upon the name of
the Lord, I trust it will please him in mercy, to reach you his hand of
conduct, to bring you out of that vast wilderness, wherein you have lost your
selves, and make you to see those good things that concern your stable peace,
even in this Church, though poor, diseased, and piteously neglected, yet such
as the Lord vouchsafes to beget and nourish to himself many children by.

Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceauest not in him the lips of
knowledge. Proverbs 14, 7. A Defense of the Admonition to the followers of
Brown: made in reply to a raging Libell of Brovvnes, sent abroad, in sundry
written copies, against the same.
WHen I came to the knitting up of my Confutation of Glouer, (Christian Reader)
I judged it a labor much tending to the benefit of many, to write some short
admonition to his followers: whereby his unsoundness being urged again unto
them by rehearsal, and justly aggreeued by the dangerous consequences, their
hearts might be pricked (if it were possible) to seek and to embrace the way
of truth again. In the entry whereof, I considered the original of their
evil estate to be derived from a former fountain, unto which also my labor
of cleansing must descend, if I would obtain my desired fruits thereof. It is
not any new thing, but of old observed, and witnessed unto by the written word,
that the Lord, Eccles. 7.28.6. petition. Romans 1.23.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. 2. Tim.
3.13.
in his righteous judgment, pays sin with sin, and every degree of
declining from his truth, with some other deeper downfall unto Apostacy.
Therefore, when I beheld and perceived, all that I could learn, of the
fiercest followers of Glouer, yea and Glouer himself, to agree with Brown, in
that general of schism, for the discipline of the Church, I saw there other
heresies, Brown the fountain of Glouers heresies.
as plagues of that transgression, which might not be removed, till he as the
Genus, or captain cause of them could happily be avoided. For this cause do I
so direct and prosecute my admonition to the followers of Glouer, as that the
first place contains their errors in proper from Glouer, and the second,
such as they have in common from Brown. In which last part, as I make their
case all alike, so by the first, I do manifestly dissort them. Alike is their
condition in this, that they both have forsaken the brotherhood of the Church
of England for the matter of discipline, and therein hold of Brown; and again
unlike in this, that some of them only, in their wild wandering, meet with
the heavy judgment of God unto Apostacy. Which hard estate of theirs, being
showed in the first part of the admonition (least they should think themselves
safe, having gotten out of Glouers briars, to lie out still wandering with the
dispersed companies of Brown) the other part therefore declares the evils
that have come unto them by him, and that in the ears of all his followers
also, if so be the Lord would vouchsafe unto any of them likewise the grace of
a happy conversion. Neither is the handling hereof so obscurely carried, but
that any of wisdom might easily perceive it: first, let the transition from
the former to the latter part be considered, which is in these words,
immediately after Glouers heresies were committed to their consideration. But
now to come unto the man that first led you out into the wild feeld of error,
are you made wiser by him, etc. This (I say) does show, that now only I went
about to remember them of such things as they were directly abused in by
Brown, the first author or beginner of their danger. And therefore it also
argues, by the proportionable law of contraries, that Brownes cause, and the
venom they had received by him, was not touched at all in the first part.
Secondly, drawing to a conclusion, after I had proved the issues of both their
ways to be evil, I gathered the sum in this sort. Now therefore beloved in
Christ Jesus, since your going out with this man has had so hard event in many
of you, as to bring you to the unrecoverable rocks of E. G. and leads even
the better sort (whom Gods judgment has not as yet hunted forth so far) to a
manifest decay of true judgment and understanding, joining thereto the
fearful companion of uncertainty, and restless course of life, forsake,
etc. What can be cleerer than these words, are to show, that Brown in this
admonition, is understood as the stock, Brown the father of a twofold schism.
from whence already has flowed two families, both walking toward
destruction, but yet the one much faster then the other, so as, though a man
may say truly, every follower of Glouer, is a follower of Brown, yet cannot
thereof be concluded on the contrary, that every one of Brownes followers is
Glouers in like sort. Because some men have frensies through extremity of
fevers, does he that says such frantic men are feuerish, conclude on the
contrary that all feuerish men are frantic? let no man therefore whom God
has kept clear from spiritual frensies (which corrupt the true use of
reason, no less than the bodily) yield captive their senses and understanding
to so immodest a man as Brown, that he in this tempest of his disturbed and
stormy affections, should by so lewd a libell, transform them (as it were)
into his judgment. And this I mean, not only touching the iniquity that he
charge me withal, for joining in some sort, his company with Glouers, but
for the other points of my admonition also, which he makes his seduced ones
believe, to be false and slanderous. In defense whereof (I trust) those that
have their judgments seasoned with the common anointing of Gods children, will
see and testify, that though I have been by his Libell, all to bitten and
torn, as it were with a mad dog, yet the Lord, by the sovereign antidote of
his spirit, has preserved me, that I am not become mad also with him. And I
beseech the faithful Reader, that he will not require at my hands, replies to
all that Brownes furious pen takes occasion to descant upon, nor to answer a
fool according to his foolishnes: but to be content, that I extend my defense
only to the matters of some weight, committing the rest to his prudent
estimation and judgment.

His first 29. points (according to his numbering) I refer to the Reader.

To the 30.
Brown dangerously corrupt in matter of justification.
I Charged Glouer of holding this heresy: That those that have put on Christ,
have power and strength to abstain from sin, and keep the commandments,
and that a man is not yet justified, but condemned, all the while he is subject
to sin against his will. Herein (says Brown) I condemn as well the truth
as the falsehood. Because (says he) I could not distinguish betwixt the
regenerate part of a man, (which though the man sin, yet that part sins
not) and the unregenerate part, which (though the man be justified in Christ
yet it is condemned.) A man would think by their utterance, that these things
were sound Divinity, and of the learned universally acknowledged; so as they
need no proof, but serve here only to notify my ignorance. Howbeit, there
is nothing less (in deed) then Catholic doctrine in them. First, where he
says, The regenerate part sins not, though the man sin, he parts the
soul, which is a simple substance, and therefore not partible. No man speaking
properly, but only in a borrowed speech, can say. The regenerate part, or
unregenerate part of a man: neither when any sound writer says so, does he
otherwise understand thereby then thus: In as much as a man is regenerate: or
the regenerate and unregenerate condition: The inner man, The outward man: The
new man, The old man: which are notes or names of qualities, not of substance,
nor parts. But this man quite exempting some part of a regenerate man from
sinning, and making another part always to lie under condemnation, speaks
more improperly, then that any modest metaphor can cover his fault. Neither can
his best favorites, seeing this inconvenience, run to these other terms to
interpret his phrase by, the blame that he has laid upon me, will not
suffer them. For if they say, he meant no otherwise then as Paul speaks in
these words. I thank my God through Jesus Christ our Lord Now therefore even
I in my mind do serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin. If (I
say) he understand nothing else by it, then has he said unjustly (that I
condemn as well the truth as the falsehode) whereas I have set down this same
doctrine in my book, and cited the very same place of Paul, to that purpose.
Secondly, where he says. The unregenerate part is condemned, though the man
be justified in Christ, it is all a like absurd, but much more dangerous. The
absurdity that it has equal with the former, is in this, that if his phrase
of speech be granted sound, yet the distinction he offreth thereby, is in
deed no distinction, but a plain axiomaticall contradiction. The whole is
good, a part is evil. Brown is sound, his brain is sick. Are not not here
special contradictions? and of the same force, as if one should say, a part of
the whole is not good: or Brownes brain is not sound: which if any man should
speak, would not every one of sense answer, that if the latter be true, the
former is false, and so on the contrary? the like consideration receives his
saying: for if part of the man be condemned, it cannot be said the man is
justified. And contrariwise, if the man be justified it cannot be said, part
of him is condemned, but if any such thing were truly to be pronounced, it
must thus be delivered: part of a regenerate man is condemned, and part is
justified. Again, in that he esteems a regenerate man to have some part of
him unjustified, he holds him no further justified, then so far, as his
inward renouation, A regenerate man has no part of him under condemnation.
or inhaerent holiness has proceeded: which never being perfect in this life,
makes that no man is wholly justified in this life, and so consequently no man
to be saved in the life to come. For after death comes judgment. Here
except the man can fetch fire out of Popish purgatory. I know not how he
will dissolve these bands, B. holds a Christian justified but by his
renouation.
besides if a man be justified no further then he is renewed, and so his
justification consist in the transmutation of inhaerent qualities, then is that
false which the Church of Christ has ever holden, Romans 3.22.24. ca.
4.23.24.25. ga. 1.4. ca. 3 11.12.13.22.2. cor. 5.19.21. ephesians. 1.3.4.5: 6. Heb.
1.3. etc.
that our justification stands only in the free remission of sins, and not
imputing our iniquities, through Christ: but on the contrary his righteousness
being imputed unto us, as ours: this imputation (belike) serves now to the
use, B. holds that there is some part in a Christian that sins not.
after we are once regenerate. Further, if there be any part in us that
sins not, then is there some part in the regenerate man that fulfilleth the
law in it self. For that which in it self fulfilleth not the law, cannot in
it self be exempt from sin, and if it be not in it self exempt from
sin, it cannot be absolutely said, not to sin. Beyond all this, if we be
justified but in respect that we are regenerate, and regeneration consists
in good works, it follows that we are justified, B. gave Glouer his hold.
but in respect of works. Now in this what difference is betwixt him and
Glouer, (whom he says he confuted) let the godly learned judge: as also
whether I have injuriously inferred these conclusions upon his assertions. Let
this also answer his 43. number. To the rest, from the 30. to the 47. thus
much only say I, it is a wonder and astonishment that any should be found so
sottish, as to admire, and addict themselves to the teaching and leading of
such a senseless guide and ungodly liver.

To that which is from the 47. to the 57.
The first corruption wherewith the admonition charged B. proved.
3 I charge him to have set down this doctrine: we must never forgive our
brother having offended us, except he first repent thereof, and seek
reconciliation. Against it I oppose places of Scriptures which contain some
special contradictions thereunto, which I understood in these two points,
first, in that his denial of forgiveness is universal, without all exception
of inward or outward. Secondly, it is extended unto all kinds of offenses
without exception. The first is resisted by all the Scriptures I oppose, the
second by those which require a frank and absolute forgiveness, after the
example of Gods gracious pardon to us, like as love covers a multitude of
sins: which things, when he saw I meant (as appears by his 31. Section) yet
he cauilleth as though I did as universally contradict him, and so disanull the
doctrine of proceeding (by reprehensions) to the censures of the church in
matters necessary. His answer to the purpose is, that the word, Never, was
not in his book: nor inwardly was not meant: whereby he would make you
believe, his proposition was not universal. Such shifts serves him to keep
many simple ones in his snare. But the godly wise suspect him so much the more.
His words are these, Answ. to M.C. Page 38.
Christ has given power to every Christian to retain the sins of every
brother, whom he knows to trespass against him, and not to forgive him
except he see him repent. The first contradiction to truth is plain in these
latter words. Not to forgive him except he repent, he confesses the truth
is, we should inwardly forgive him. Now, to forgive, not to forgive, or no
forgiveness, some forgiveness, every man sees to be contrary, and his
proposition also to have been general. Secondly, the former part put down in
these words, indefinitely to retain the sins of every brother is
nevertheless too universal, especially being put down by a distribution of
public and private sins, in the next lines following, and still without any
exception. Pro. 10.12. 1. Pet. 4.8. Page 39. Read his declar. of the joining
together of certain persons toward the latter end.
Circumstance also does further enforce it, for whereas in the same place he
urges this practice of reproving with so hard a penalty, as the loss of our
interest in Christ, if we suffer our selves to be straited in the matter, what
place leaves he for suffering, covering, passing over, any our brothers
trespasses? I would their own practice did not too much confirm, their
judgment in this to be corrupt.

To that which is from the 57. to the 60.
The second corruption wherewith the admon. charge B. proved.
4 The admonition says, Brown teaches, that any one of a Church may
excommunicate, if the rest will not join with him. For proof, some quotations
are set down, the most were missed. His answer brings some fair shows to
the contrary. Indeed he has two notable tricks of an heretic, one is,
ambiguitie of speech, and deliverance of his mind. The other is
tergiuersation, and colorable shrinking, when he is pressed with his
falshode, what reasons I had to judge him a teacher of such doctrine, I commit
the view of them here to the consideration of the godly: to whom, in this and
all the rest, I submit my self. In his book of unlearned and witless
definitions, Number. 55.
against the law of verity he defines the kingdom of Christians to be
their office of guyding and ruling with Christ, to subdue the wicked, and make
one another obedient to Christ. Now mark whereunto this tends, he says in
another place (answering this objection, that the sin is the ministers in
disordered administration of the Sacraments, not ours) we ask them, Title
against parish prea. and hired lect. etc.
does not the Church partake with the minister? and is not every Christian a
King and a Priest, to rule with Christ by open rebuke, if no other do in
season rebuke, and by withholding those from their communion and fellowship
which are without the covenant? and yet more clearly speaking against the
Bishops authority, and rule in the Church, with disauowing their
suspendings, and callinges of ministers. Answ. to M.C. Page 17.
Nay surely (says he) the least in the kingdom of God shall be able by the
word of God in their mouth is to pluck up, and root out such plants, if
none other will join with them. I mean they shall pronounce them by the word
of God, to be abominable, and have no fellowshippe with them in the Church:
and so to them, they are utterly plucked out of the Church. For they are kings
and priests under Christ, to execute the Lords government against such, and
therefore ought not to loose their right, which is even their heritage and
gl^rie. Now weigh these places, with his proposition, as I have put it down,
in these words. Any one of a Church may excommunicate, if the rest will not
join with him. The antecedent part he gives in these clear terms. Every
Christian is a King and Priest to rule, etc. and The least in the kingdom of
God shall be able, etc. if none other will join with them. The consequent is
proved in that every such are abled to execute the Lords government against
the wicked. Of which government excommunication is a part, as himself in his
divisions declares, number. 48. Now in his defense he has but one place of
special harbor, and that same also will fall about his ears, if it be
touched. For where he has those words. Yet we say not, that every one of a
Church may excommunicate, Answer to M. C. page 28.
for we ought to tell the Church, etc. Immediately follows, But what if the
rest of the Church will not join with us therein? Surely then as we proved
before, we must set our selves against them all, we must not be afraid of
their faces, as the Lord commands, least he destroy us before them. Now
wherein seems this setting of our faces against them to be, but (according to
the nature, and original of that objection) in our sole separation of the
unworthy? As though he should say, If they will not do it, then we must do
it: and so his denial of the same before, to be expounded to hold, till time
that we have labored in vain for the Churches consent. But when I understood
him so, I perceive I did him too much favor. For he will have it understood,
not of separating some one member, but of separating the whole Congregation
from the Church of God. For he says. We must set our selves against them all
by rebuke denouncing judgment, and forsaking fellowship. In the practice
whereof it follows, See my second answer to the question of communicating
with the unworthy.
that either we our selves forsake a Church of Christ, (which he denies in
another place) or else do separate the same congregation from the Church of
Christ. In all which, it may truly be attributed to him, in a plain sense,
that was ascribed to Jeremy, in a mystical sense: namely to be a fit man,
to pluck up, and root out, destroy, and throw down, even kingdoms and
nations, according as in those only words he urges the place of Jeremy, in
his answer to Master Cartwright. page 26.

To that which is from the 60. to the 67.
The third corruption wherewith the Adm. charge Br. proved.
5 The Admonition charge him with this conclusion: that one default of a
congregation in separating the unworthy, may disanull it for being a Church. I
need not go far for proof of this, if the handling of the last point be
remembered. For if one may cast off a whole congregation, when he cannot
obtain their voices to the separating of some offendour, (and he will not
say, that a man may cast off a congregation of Christ) it is manifest, he
holds, that one default of separating the unworthy disanulleth a Church.
His answer has not the strength of a rushe in it. His own words are. If
any one such open and manifest offense, as is open murder, idolatry,
adultery be found amongst any, and they are become so negligent or wilful,
or are brought into such spiritual bondage, that they will not, or can not
cure such offenders, but that offenses remain and reign still among them
incurable: Then the covenant is broken with them all. And this is but to feed
his disciples with wind. For he will again at his pleasure interpret this
negligence, wilfulness, and bondage, to be, whenever a Congregation
consents not to the motion of separating the unworthy, as besides the places
already cited, these may further testifiie. In the 18. page against Master
Cartwright, he says, Those that hold the covenant to day, may break it to
morrow. This is but a short time to prove either bondage, wilfulness, or
negligence. Again, he says, Any gross wickedness committed by all, is the
breaking of the covenant by all. Now he will interpret it gross
wickedness, when any Congregation consents not, to the motion of one, or
some few, for the casting out of any wicked one. Let these words be
witness. And is not this a message from Christ, Answer to M. C. page 30.
when one or a few persons do justly rebuke a Congregation, for overthrowing
the Lords discipline, and treading his scepter under foot? And is not his
scepter cast down, and his kingdom polluted, when he which is manifestly
known, and proved to deserve separation, cannot be cast out? This one
defaulte of separating the unworthy, he accounts the treading under foot
of the scepter of Christ (yea compares it in the same place to be equal with
Apostacy) therefore gross wickedness, and therefore also by his doctrine, of
force to disanull a Church. Whereupon it follows, as the Admonition truly
infers, that seeing Saint Paul calls the Corinthian Church, a Church of
God (notwithstanding their grossest kind of negligence, and vile continuance
in security, touching the separating of the incestuous person) either Saint
Paul was to be blamed for so doing, or else Brown is a dangerous
schismatike in teaching such doctrine contrary to him. The mystes which he
casts before his disciples eyes, to extenuate this sin of the Corinthians,
are scattered and brought to naught in my second answer to the question of
communicating. Sect. 21i
What he can make of this word incurable, or any other terms of vauntage
he can devise, the rest of his writings here cited being considered, let the
godly reader judge. The manifold conclusions of heresies, which he would
make the reader believe to be in my assertion, declare but the full swarm
that lurketh in his waspish breast. My answer is, either they are no heresies,
or none of mine.

To that which is from the 67. to the 72.
6 It may plain enough appear to the wise reader, The fourth corruption
wherewith the Adm. charge Br. proved.
that the Admonition takes such a course in setting down the six corrupt
opinions of Brown: as that the former (for the most part) opens the way, and
gives light to that which follows. So here, considering what has been
proved in the last point before going, to wit, that one breach of duty in the
practice of government, breaks the covenant and disanulleth a Church, it
follows hereof necessarily that he judges, the covenant betwixt God and his
Church, to be holden and kept by works. His only answer to the purpose for
this is, Brown holds the keeping of discipline, the keeping of our covenant
with God.
That he calls not discipline the covenant, but says, that the covenant is
kept by discipline. Which is altogether as much as I lay to his charge,
howsouer he catches at a feather to maintain some quarelling, as appears
by my manner of setting down the truth opposed to his falshoode, within five
lines following. For there I say, Not by works, but by faith is the covenant
kept on our part. Now since he confesses, as much as I meant to charge him
with, and that which I charge him with is popish heresy, it follows that
Brown teaches popish heresy: yet he contendeth earnestly, Number. 69. That he
speaks in no place, of keeping the covenant by faith, or by works. But if he
be so mad, that he understands not practice to be works, then is he too mad
to be talked withal. And is not (I pray you) the keeping or executing of
discipline, the practice and works of the Church? And B. is not much behind
him in other places, as shall be showed.
From this manner justifying or condemning the Church by works, Glouer turned
it to the justification of particular Christians by works. How thin the
sheeres were that went between these two, let all sound Christians judge.

To the 72. and 73.
He accounts discipline the groundworke of the Church, (says the Admonition.
The 5 corruption wherewith the Ad charge B. proved. Harrison calls it the
chief corner stone, upon the 122, Psalm.
) Brown says, He uses no such word as groundworke. Let the reader judge.
These be his words, in the place that I quoted. Having discoursed after his
wild manner, against all sorts of the ordinary ministry in England, says
he, The Popes old house was destroyed in England, and they are called to
build it anewe. Tit. against Parish Priests, hired lect. etc. last leaf.
And by and by after: Let us welcome wise gentlemen: they took in hand to
build the Lords house, and now mo then twenty years are past, in studying for
the groundworke. If his hand had not been so hasty to write, but his head more
considerate to read the leaf that was quoted, perhaps he would not have
denied the word, for fear of the reproach of impudency: yet suspecting such a
thing might be found in him, he adds, Nevertheless, whosoever denies,
that the discipline, that is, the power and authority of Christ, is essential
to the Church, and avouches that it is but an accident or hangby, the same is
an heretic and blasphemer of Christ Scilice^, si sanum haberes sinciput. A
Church which consists of believing 1. Pet. 2.4.5.7.9.
people, builded so by faith, upon Jesus Christ the head corner stone, is in
a two fold condition to be considered: the first is the very knitting unto
Christ, wherein alone stands the life and being of a Church, and in nothing
else. For it is he (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 5.23.
that gives salvation to the body: he makes it through his paid ransom
Ephesians. 5.24.26.27. 1. Cor. 1.30. Psalm. 36 7.8. Cant. 2.3. Isai. 4.3 4.
and imputed righteousness, justified, holy, and unblameable, without spot or
wrinkle. The second is, in that by this union with Christ, all things of his
mediation (and so of his kingly office) are in a measure, communicated Ephesians.
4.16, Col. 2.19. 1. Ioh. 1.3. Romans 8.32. Apoc. 3.20.21. Psalm. 36.8.9.10.
thereunto, so as it now practices obedience, and holy behauior unto the Lord,
and these conditions are no other then such as we may behold in every
particular christian. For first, apprehending Christ by faith, he becomes one
1. Cor. 6.17.
with him. Next is begun (by communication) a change of the inherent qualities,
to a practice of 1. Pet. 2.4.5.7.9. Ephe. 5.1. 2. Col. 3.0.10. 1. These. 1.6.
Psalm. 17.15.
holy life. Now I would know of that great divine, whether a man be justified,
and so a Christian, in the apprehending of Christ, or else in the renewing of
his inherent qualities, The Archpapists, and counsel of Trent hold so.
If he say, By renewing, he knows his companions. If he grant it by
apprehending, then his groundwoorke has failed him. And like as every one
particularly is justified for a Christian, through their only uniting with
Christ by faith, even so are many together justified for a Church of Christ,
through such union with him only. And then, if this union give it the form of
a Church, it must necessarily be a Church, before it practice discipline,
because our discipline in question has no place, but in an united body, or
congregation. Now nothing can be, but in respect that it has all the
essential parts of being. Discipline is not of the essence of a Church.
Whence must needs follow, that the Church having first a being, before it
exercise discipline, consists of all the essential parts, before it
exercise discipline, and so discipline must be found no essential part at
all. Plentiful confirmation hereof have we in the Scriptures, from the
practice of the Lords chief instruments, in the planting and refourming of
his Churches. Those three thousand souls, that were gained at one prosperous
preaching of Peter, Act. 2.41.42.44.45.46.47.
may not be denied the name of a Church of GOD, since of those things, that are
there recorded to be done of them, some are only proper to a Church, and have
no place at all in other meetings. For these being now baptized, are said to
have continued in the daily exercise of the word, prayer, thanksgiving,
breaking of bread, and communicating of their substance. Now if the censuring
discipline in question, had been essential to their being of a Church, so as
without it they could not have done those things which only perteyned to a
Church, as the Apostle would first have been mindful to establish the same,
so the holy Ghost would not have failed the setting down thereof, especially
addressing himself in that story, to describe the memorable beginnings and
framings of the Churches, as a pattern in such cases unto all ages ensuing.
Therefore whereas the holy Ghost, voucheth it a Church, apt to exercise the
word and Sacraments, whose very being it defines by the only joint and
willing receiving of Christ Jesus, Act. 2.38.41.
preached unto them for the remission of sins, without any mention making of
the discipline we speak of, it is plain enough, that he accounts not of
discipline as a thing without which, those conuerts could not be made a visible
Church. The like is of the congregation in Samaria, Act. 8.5.6. and 12. called
a Church of God. cap. 9.31. The manner of Paul, Barnabas, and others in the
planting of the Churches at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra, Act. 11.20.21.26 Act.
13^43.48. Cap. 14.1.21.22.23.
do yet further enlighten this that I have said in the other. For, first they
gathered congregations unto Christ by the preaching of the Gospel in those
cities, after that as they found them grown to a fitness, at other returns
unto them, they furnished the^ with Elders orderly elected among them. This
their order (I say) declares, that the erecting of discipline and ordeyning of
Elders therefore, does not make a Church of Christ: for that if the Apostles
had so judged, they would never have deferred the establishing of it, to times
after the gathering and planting of them. Yet further to confirm this thing,
Paul writing thus to Titus: for this cause left I thee in Creta, Tit. 1.5.
that thou should redress the things remaining, and appoint Elders in
every City, as I commanded thee, teaches us, both that the Apostles
gathered Churches without this discipline, and also held them in the accounte
of the Churches, before that was added to them. Which things prove
discipline, not to be of the essence of a Church, as clearly as can be
wished. Now touching reformation of declined Churches, let us see what some
examples, in that course do afoord us. When Asa the first renowned reformer of
the declining Churches of Judea began to set in hand so glorious an enterprise,
he that considers the history shall see, that among other things, the
discipline of the Church, lay as a thing cast down, and neglected, as
appears by the reformation thereof, which immediately I shall speak of. If
then discipline had been of the essence of the Church, there had not been at
that time, nor in the days of Abija his father, any Church of GOD remaining
at Jerusalem: but the latter is false, and is proved by the protestation of
Abija, alittle before he joined battle with Jeroboam, and the testimony of the
spirit of God in delivering that history, 2. Chro. 3.4.18.
who says. That the Israelites were depressed the same time, and the children
of Judah strengthened, because they stayed upon the Lord the God of their
fathers. Therefore the former also is false, namely that discipline is of the
essence of a Church. Also if discipline should make it a Church, or be
necessary to the being thereof, it appears that notwithstanding all Asaes
reformation, yet, was it as then no Church for the godly to resort unto, since
the reedification of discipline is ascribed, not to Asa, but to his son
Iehosaphat, 2. Chro. 19.8.11.
after him. Neither may any with probability conjecture, that Asa set up
discipline, 2. Chro. 15.17.
and let it fall again. For, to have an upright heart all the days of his
life (which thing the holy Ghost testifies of him) and to suffer that which
the Lord had made him see to be worthy reformation, to go down again,
are two things contrary, and cannot be verifyed of one and the same subject.
But now all men that sauoure the word of the Lord, must needs acknowledge,
that the Church of Judea in Asaes days, was a glorious habitation of the
Lord, and the Temple at Jerusalem, a place then for his faithful servants,
to do their sacrifices and services unto him: 2. Chro. 15.8.9. etc.
insomuch as that many of the Israelites fled from their own coasts, to
dwell in Judea, seeing thus the Lord to be amongst them: So must they of
like necessity confess that which therehence firmly is concluded, to wit,
discipline not to be of the essence of a Church. Lastly, to come to the
worthy Iehosaphat, who feared no slanderous imputation of arrogancy, or
singularity to himself, neither accounted it any impeachment to the dignity
of his father Asa, though in repayring and beautifying the house of GOD, he
should exceed him in some points: considering (I say) his course of
proceeding, if discipline were necessary to the being of a Church, then all
that he did in the beginning of his reign, was worthy no commendation. 2.
Chro. 17.5.6.7.8.9.
For what good could he be said to have done to the Church, when as all that
he had done, could not (by this man's saying) gain it the worthy name of a
visible Church? for as touching the reformation of the discipline, it appears
to have been about the latter end of his reign, after the Lord had by his
Prophet, 2. Chr. 19.5.11.
rebuked him for yelding wicked Ahab assistance in his enterprise. Wherefore, as
I hope to hear of no man so impudent as to say, that the Church of Judea was
then no apparent Church of God (I mean in his time before the reviving of the
discipline) so am I sure, that none but such as are grown to that impudency,
will hereafter affirm discipline to be of the essence of a Church. Let all the
likers of Brownes writings now consider, whetherto his reproaches reach, when
he says, that by denying discipline to be of the essence of a Church, we
seclude Christ, and the Church of Christ, from the power, authority and
discipline of Christ, and (as he says other-where, that so we make Christ a
dead Christ, yea an Idol or counterfaite Christ, Answ. to M.C. Page
33.34.25.36.
and the Church an Idol or counterfeit Church: If we have committed this thing,
then these Kings, and those Apostles are guilty thereof. But because he
seems to have fortified himself in this as in a Castle, let us also even
here make proof of the strength of his walls. And first what means he to
say, we feign a counterfaite Christ, and a counterfeit Church? Is it because
we remove discipline from the being of a Church? Why then thus he disputes.

They that hold the power, authority, In the place last quoted and his 72.
section against my admonition. Brownes greatest argument to prove disc. to be
of the essence of a Church.
and government of Christ not to be of the essence of a Church, do feign a
counterfaite Christ, and a counterfaite Church: But they that say, discipline
is not of the essence of a Church, hold the power, authority and government of
Christ, not to be of the essence.

Therefore they that say discipline is not of the essence of a Church, feign a
counterfaite Christ, and a counterfaite Church.

Here is Harison also upon 122. Psalm. answered for this matter.
This (beloved) is indeed the maine pillar, whereupon all Brownes and Brownists
schismatic building stands: and thus (by the grace of God) I will
overthrow it. First to lay the way open and avoid ambiguitie. The word,
government, that it may bear the same sense with the word, authority,
wherewith it is coupled as a synonymie, must be taken for the office of
government, and not as it is used sometime for the action of government. For
example: When one says, David had the government of the children of Israel,
there he means the office of government. But if he say: David's government
replenished the Israelites with the knowledge of God, then he means by
government, not the office, but the action or administration of government.
Again, the word, power, may be used in a double sense: one when it is
understood for might, strength, or efficacious force, 1. Cor. 5.4. ca. 4.18.19.
2. cor. 10.4.8. cap. 13.4. Psalm. 110.2.
which is that the greek word (...) expresses. In this sense cannot power, in
this place be taken, because that kind of power of Christ, is no other then
his divine essence, which he has from the father by an eternal generation, in
as much as he is begotten of the substance of the father, and so is
coessentiall with him. For this is a far differing thing from his auth
oritie, or office of government, and therefore may not, as one thing, stand
ranged with those words. The other is, when the word, power, means nothing
else, but authority, jurisdiction, Mat. 28.18.
or government. As where he says, All power is given me in heaven and in
earth, here the word is not (...), but (...) And therefore signifies not the
force and might of Christ, whereby he executes all things in his government,
but his authority or office of government. And in this sense we admit and
receive it here, as of the same sort with those words wherewith it is coupled.
The entrance thus paued, I answer to his syllogism, denying both proposition
and assumption. His proposition carrying the force of a conuexiue, falsely
infers the feyning of a counterfeit Christ, and a counterfaite Church, upon
the denial of his power and authority to be of the essence of a Church. For
they do not thereby, as he bears men in hand, separate Christ and his Church
from his power and government. Men of mean understanding know, that there
are propper accidents to things which cannot be separated from them, and yet
are not of their essence. For example, heat cannot be separated from the
fire, nor moving from the sun, yet are neither of those properties any part
of their essence, nor does he that says, heat is not of the essence of
fire, nor motion of the essence of the sun, deny therefore the fire to be
hot, or the sun to have his motion. And concerning these offices in
question, touching which Brown so arrogantly challenges M.C. to answer
whether they be of the essence of the Church: I would the reader should ask of
him, Page 35.
or his friends (if he think it good) whether the kingdom and Priesthood of
the son of God and man, the word incarnate, be parts of his essence, or
accidents unto him rather: and so whether he that shall say, they are not of
his essence, does thereby dispoyle him of his offices? I fear not (unless
you take him in some desperate fit) he will answer, no. Why then, if a thing
may truly be removed from the essence, and nevertheless necessarily admitted
in the Subject, how follows it, that they that deny the kingly power or
authority of Christ, to be of the essence of a Church, do there-fore make or
feyne a Church that is without it. This being voyded, let us now try, whether
Christ's power authority and office of governing, be of the very essence of a
Church, as he would have it.

This shall we soundly try out, This has been done once or twice before. Yet I
must crave the readers patience thus far.
by examining by the word of God, what are the essential causes of that which
is, and truly may be called the Church of God. And first for the matter of a
Church, The matter of a Church.
I suppose it will-be readily yielded unto, to be Christ the head corner
stone, and Christians who are as lively stones to be builded upon him to a
spiritual house. 1. Pet. 2.4 5. Ephesians. 2.20.21.22.
For so the Apostles Peter and Paul plainly declared, according to which
proportion, he is likewise called the head, and we that believe in him, the
members, as Saint Paul says, that under the feet of Christ God has subjected
all things, and has appointed him over all things to be the head to the
Church which is his body, Ephesians. 1.22.23. cap. 4.15.16. Col. 1.18.22.23. ca.
2.19. Ioh. 15.5. Romans 11.
even the fullness of him that fills all in all things. To the same end
Christ compared himself to a vine, and those that believe in him to the
branches of the vine. Like whereunto is that of the Olive, and the branches
grafted therein, as Saint Paul delivers it. The matter of a Church we have.
Let us now see what may be the form. The form of a Church.
Neither will it be hard to find that, if we consider that the setting
together of prepared stones makes the building, the uniting of the head with
the members fourmeth the body, and the continuance together of the stock with
the branches, gives the being of a tree. For so is it likewise agreeable to
all reason, that the uniting and knitting together of Christ and Christians,
be granted the formal cause of a Church. Now this unition is by two means,
the one eternal, the other serving but for this life. The eternal unition is
by the holy Ghost, whereby we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones,
Ephesians. 5.30.31.32. Gal. 5.2.5. Ioh. 17.21.23.
and made finally complete and perfect in one God through that one and only
mediator between God and man Jesus Christ. This is peculiar and proper to the
Catholic Church (which is the whole company of the elect of God) and does not
pertain to the members of a particular Church, as they are only considered
members of any particular Church, but as they are also in that regard, members
of the Catholic. The temporal unition, which (as I said) serves for this
life, is by faith: which shall cease in the day of the revelation of the
Saints of God, when we shall be possessed, Romans 8.23.24. 1. Cor. 13.8.12.13.
Hebr 11.1. 1. Cor. 15.53. John. 17.23. 2. Cor. 5.4.
of the full fruition of all those things we hoped for, as the holy word does
testify, for mortality shall be swallowed up of life, persuasion of
possession, and faith of the fullness of the spirit, and perfect being in God
through Christ. Mean time, Romans 11.20.21
faith is as the engrafting of the branches into the stock, whereby they are
vpholden, whilst that by the sap and spirit of life proceeding therefrom,
they be grown and established. And as the branch to be ingrafted, needs
those his enwrappings and bindings, to support and defend it against sundry
inconveniences, till it be able to be without them, and afterward they are of
no use unto it: so does faith support and desend the tender conscience, against
all the storms of temptations, till there be that perfect growth in Christ,
that is utterly freed from them, at which time, in like sort, faith does cease.
But here withal, this faith must be understood to admit a twofold
consideration: the one in respect of Gods, the other in respect of man's
beholding and judging thereof. In regard of God, that only is acknowledged,
which is unfeigned and sealed up with his holy spirit of promise. But in
regard of man, a feigned faith may also stand in the reckoning, since man cannot
judge of the heart, but must therefore accept and rest in the sound confession
of the mouth, and so according to this latter consideration, has the Reader
the right understanding of faith in this question concerning the fourming of
visible Churches, for man to discern of and join with them. Now that faith
does engraffe and unite us unto Christ, and so is the proper form of
particular and visible Churches, I needed not at all stand here to prove, if
there were not in this man against whom I deal, a just suspicion of
fundamental Apostacy herein. For if he had been indeed persuaded thereof,
to this day, we should never by him have been thus brought to the proof of
the being of our Church, as now he has provoked us. Therefore although this
cause has been already so handled by the worthy servants of God against the
common Aduersarye, as that he whosoever at this day shall call it into
question, is more worthy the sharpest discipline, then any disputation.

Yet for to stop importunate mouths whatsoever, and to make clear to the
world the confutation of Brownes false conclusion here in hand, it is
requisite, that after the large labor of others, I also point at some profes
for this purpose, showing that visible Churches, in as much as they stand in
the account of visible Churches, Visible Churches are united unto Christ by
faith only.
are united unto Christ by faith only. First, let all the planting of Churches,
thoroughout the story of the Acts be considered, and see if the holy Ghost do
not every where testify this uniting unto Christ by faith, and nothing else.
The first three thousand souls that Peter gained at one Sermon, are said to
have received the word, Act. 2.41.
and thereupon to have been added unto the Church by Baptism. The which
receiving of the word whereupon they were baptized, Act. 8.36.37.
cannot be otherwise understood (for the Lords ways are one) then the same
which Phillip demanded as the thing by which alone the Eunuche could obtain
the seal of a Christian, namely faith, and so is it also expounded within two
verses in the same former places of the second of the Acts, when the story
says of the same assembly these words: Act. 2.44.
And they that believed were in one place, and had all things common. But
nothing can more explayne and confirm that example, then another like unto it,
of the gathering of a Church by Phillip, in a City of Samaria, Act. 8.12.13.
See also Act. 3.15.16.20.25.26 cap. 4.4.10.11.12 cap. 10.38.42.43. cap.
11.20.21.23.24.26. ca. 13.39
where the Text expressly says, That as soon as they believed Phillip which
preached the things that concerned the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were Baptized both men and women. Then Simon himself believed
also, and was baptized, etc. The same likewise is the flat doctrine of the
Apostles every where. Let the lovers of truth behold and bear witness. Christ
(says the Apostle) has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Galath. 3.13.
when he was made a curse for us: for it is written, Verse 14.
Curssed is every one that hangs on tree; that the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of
the spirit through faith. Verse 22.
But the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe. Wherefore the
law was our schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith, for ye are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ.
The same Apostle says, Verse 24. Verse 26.
Ephesians. 3.12.1^.
We have boldness, entrance, and confidence by faith in Christ. And
expressly, That Christ dwells in us by faith. Now judge whether the sun
can give thee clearer light to read, then the plain terms of the Apostle,
do teach thee to acknowledge our uniting unto Christ by faith. If any man
desire to see more variety of places, let him look these To. 3.21.22.24.25.
ca. 5.1.2.10.11. Ephesians. 4.12.13.15. Coloss 1.21.22.23. cap.
2.5.6.7.12.13.14.15. 1 Thessalonians. 1.2.3.7.8. 1. Tim. 1.4 Hebr. 3.6. cap. 4.2.6.
cap. 11.1. Romans 11.20.23. John. 1.12.
quotations, where he shall see, by the abundant testimony of the spirit, that
we are all reconciled unto God by faith, accepted for our faith, united unto a
body, and engrafted into Christ the living stock, by faith. Thus then, if
matter and form be the essential causes, whereof any thing consists, and
whereby the being of any thing is acknowledged, I hope we have here with Ma.
C. found out and proved the essential causes of a Church, so as no man needs
to be perplexed in discerning the being thereof, if he have atteyned such a
mind, as can rest in the wisdom of God.

Here we meet with that foolish and vain exception of Brown against Ma. C.
namely, That Christ is the life and essence of the Church, and not faith, which
is, Page 35.
as though faith had not direct relation to Christ, and Christ to faith in this
consideration of a Church, wherein neither can faith be considered without
Christ, nor yet Christ as their head without faith. And if Ma. C. having set
down, that Christ is the foundation of the Church, and that the assemblies are
laid upon him by faith, should have added in such express words, that faith is
the life of the Church, were faith to be taken here without respect of the
foundation named before? Or were it a harder speech, then that which S. Paul
utters, Romans 11.20.
when he says: We stand by faith. What difference is there between, We live
by faith; and we stand by faith? But Habacuck the Prophet missed not the very
words, Habac. 2.4.
The just shall live by faith. But yet cannot Brown abide this, that by faith
only the Church is united unto Christ. Wherefore because Ma. C. says, that
nothing besides faith in the Son of God is necessary to the very being of a
Church; Page 34.
he replyeth, saying, That then belike children, which yet through want of
discretion cannot have faith, shall be without the essence and life of the
Church. O deep Divinity, worthy a Cambridge degree (if I should requite him
with his own terms.) Christ has these words, John. 3.18. H^br. 11.6.
He that believes not, is condemned. And the writer to the Hebrews, Without
faith it is impossible to please God. What cause had Brown more to object this
of childrens faith against Ma. C. his discourse of the being of a Church, then
against these general axioms of Scripture touching the being of a Christian,
or in state of salvation? for it lies as indifferently against the one as the
other. And if he had whereby to be reconciled with those Scriptures, so as his
objection should not lie against them, a little equity would have lead him to
have applied the same to Ma. C. his conclusion likewise. If his knowledge be no
better then he says, All infants are not without faith as Brown supposes.
he must learn, that infants of parents that be within the covenant, are not
to be accounted without all faith, as his writing supposes: for if they be
elect, then have they the Luke. 1.15. Iere. 1.5.
spirit, and so faith in power, ability and inclination, though not in
outward profession and action. Like as also at the same time, they can not be
denied to have reason (for as much as they have a reasonable soul) although it
be but potentially, and not in act or outward gesture. If they be not elect,
and so have not the annoynting of the spirit, nor therefore any faith in the
sight of God, yet receive they so much from the faith of their parents, as to
be by it accepted of the visible Church for a holy seed, and partakers of the
promises, because they, judging but as men, have no cause at all to doubt
thereof.

This man urges out of Habacuck, Habac. 2.
that The just shall live by his own faith, but there was no cause: for it is
not said, that infants shall be saved, or live in the sight of God by their
parents faith, but only, that by it, they are of men to be reputed within the
covenant, and of the visible Church. Yet he stands to it, that Not by the
faith of the parents, but by the promise made to the righteous and their seed,
the children are reckoned in the Church. O trifeler: how are the parents within
covenant, and partakers of the promises, but by faith? And how do the promised
blessings descend unto the children, but in regard that their parents believed?
Wherefore, this foundation will stand unmoved against all Papists and
Apostates, that particular visible Churches are united unto their head Christ
by faith, and by faith do they stand. And certainly it is strange, how this
should be doubted of by any that esteem themselves justified by faith, since
one member has not a several law of life by it self: but look by what law
and tenure one by himself enjoys the state of being in Christ, by the same
also does another, and consequently many together, even till you have reckoned
the whole number of the Church militant.

Now for the kingly authority and government of Christ, since no corner of the
world, no not the uttermost borders of his enemies are without it: how can his
Church (whereof himself is the head) be imagined to be without it? And yet it
follows not, Answer to M. C. Page 35.
because the Church, nor no action therein cannot be exempted from his rule and
government, that therefore his rule, authority, or government, should be of
the essence thereof. I have showed before, that though proper accidents, be
perpetually in their subjects, yet are they not of their essence. And here I
say furthermore, that if Christ's power and authority be of the essence of all
assemblyes which are subject unto it, then is it of the essence of Popish and
Heathenish Synagogues, for his throne is also pight in the midst of his
Psalm. 45. and 68.19. Luke. 3.17. Psalm 110. Prou. 15.3. Matthew. 28.18. Ioh.
17.2. 1. Cor. 15.24.25. Romans 9.17.18.19.20.21.22.23 Philip. 1.28.29. 2 Thessalonians.
1.9.7. cap 2.10.11.12. The bounds of Christ's power and government not
considered of Brown.
enemies. Again, if it follow, that where Christ's government and authority
is not made thus essential, there it may be concluded, Christ is not made
essential: it follows equally on the contrary, that where his authority is
so made essential, there he is granted to be essential also: and then seeing
Brown will have it to be of the essence of the assemblyes where it is
admitted, he most unawarely makes Christ of the essence of Popish and
Heathenish companyes, as I said before: for as much as they are all under his
kingly authority and government: and as well sits he to direct the course
of his enemies in all points of their rage and malice to their own
destruction, as his elect in the way of righteousness to their salvation:
even so the Scriptures in all places, and namely, the last quotations, do
apparently testifye.

By this that is said, I hope, it is clearly proved, that Ma. C. upon good
grounds has delivered, that Christ is the head or foundation, and the
assemblyes or particular Churches, are united unto, or builded upon him by
faith, and that nothing besides faith in the Son of God, is necessary to the
very being of a Church.

Also, having found the essence of a Church, it follows, that all things else
attributed thereunto (and namely Christ's government as occupied in that
subject) are referred by the learned to the place of accidents, and so was it
well enough gathered by Brown him self, save that where he interprets the
word accident, by the word hang by, he rather poynteth at the desert of an
Heretic, then notes out the nature of such an accident. Thus much to his
proposition.

His assumption beguileth with a grosser kind of sophisme: as from the denial
of any thing in part, Harrison also beguileth with the same fallation. Psalm.
122. and is here therefore answered.
to conclude the denial of the same thing in the whole. For upon the denial
of discipline, follows not the denial of all Christ's power, authority, and
government, except Christ have no further authority and government, then is to
be executed by the Elderships of Churches.

But I have proved before, that Christ's government is absolute over both
friends and enemies professors, and not professors of his name.

And here further concerning his Church, I say, the administration of his
government is twofold, proper, Iesa. 11.2. Psalm. 45.8. Ioh. 3.34. cap. 1.16. 1.
Cor. 1.30 Coloss. 2.3. Ephesians. 4.7. 1. Pet. 2.5.9. Revel. 1.6. ca. 5.10 Christ
executes his government in his Church partly by the secret hand of his power,
partly by the outward hand of his members.
and communicated. By his proper government, I mean that which he has
reserved only to himself, as not being limited or shut up within any bounds
of laws or orders revealed unto the creature, but is executed, according to
his infinite wisdom, by the secret hand of his divine power, and that both
extraordinarily, and ordinarily, and both ways to the calling and fauing of
his elect, which are the true believers, and to the hardening and condemning of
the reprobate, which are the counterfeite Christians. The extraordinary ways
are seen in his immediate judgments, to the confounding of the wicked, and
succouring the godly. The ordinary, by making the word of exhortation and
reprofe, and every thing of ordinary edifying, the 2. Cor. 2.15.16.
savor of life unto life to those that are saved, and the savor of death unto
death, to those that are damned. Hence flow calling, comfort, rejoicing, and
2. Tim. 3.16.17.
growing up to perfection to the former: but rejecting horror, continual
hardening, and 2. Cor. 2.15.16.
final perdition to the latter. His communicated government, is that which
being limited within the compass of certain Laws and Cannons of his holy
word, he has committed to be outwardly executed by the hand of the members of
particular Churches accordingly. This consists in their outward using the
Word, Sacraments, etc. and in their political guiding, concerning both the
manners and necessities of all and every of them. This latter part only of the
communicated government, which is the political guiding of the Church, What
must be understood by the word Discipline, in all the controversy between the
Brownists and us.
is that same discipline, which generally all Ecclesiastical Writers speak
of, and which is now with us in question, whether it be of the essence of a
Church. Let therefore the godly Reader consider, what an odious iangler Brown
is, who upon any denial of the last and most inferior (though yet no base but
a worthy) part of Christ's government in his Church, concludes a denial of
all and every whit of his power, authority and government therein. Brown
greatly abuses his disciples with this sophism. So likewise Harrison upon the
122. Psalm.
And therefore where the Reader finds in Brownes writings, Discipline and
Christ's government matched together, as though they were synonymies, that is,
diverse words, but of one signification, there let him smell this his
Sophistry, and reject the lewd seducer so offering it. And though he pretend
the place to the Corinths, 1. Cor. 5.4.
to approve his phrase, saying: Paul calls this Discipline the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, believe him not. For the Apostle speaks not there of
Christ's power as it is taken for his authority and office of government, but
for his divine might, strength, and efficacious power, by which he is with his
Church to the end of the world, Math. 28.19.20. Luke 24.49. Acts 1.5.8.
and promised to be in the midst of two or three that should be so gathered
together in his name. Heerevpon, Math. 18.19.20.
Paul does not call (as he says) Discipline, the power of Christ, but
encourages the Corinthians to minister the discipline of Excommunication upon
the incestuous person, arming them thereunto with the mighty presence of
Christ, by which it should be made effectual. This double use of the word,
power, I prevented before. And now let Brown know, that whereas by
alleging the Scriptures, he shifteth, I may say, coggeth in a diverse sense,
the pitfall of Homonymie, which he prepared for his reader, is discovered, and
so become a snare unto himself. Next, from two or three places, that set forth
the efficacy of the word, by magnificent and worthy titles: as 1. Corinthians.
4.20. The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Psalm. 110.2. The
Lord shall send the rod of his power out of Syon. And 1. Corinthians. 10.4.
The weapons of our warre-fare are mighty through God: from these places (I
say) he concludes thus. So then, if the power of the word, to bind and
loose, to remitte, Answ. to M.C. Page 34.
or retain men's sins, to promise life, and to rebuke and give over to
execration, be taken from Christ or the Church of Christ, what remains but
an Idol or counterfeit Christ, an Idol or counterfeit Church. Here both he
proceeds in his double faced fallation last noted, conueying himself by the
word, power, from Christ's office, to his divine essence, whereby he
accomplisheth all things in his government, whether by the mean and
ministry of men or otherwise, as I observed before in the distribution of his
government: and also heapeth upon it, an impudent petition of the principle,
as if the discipline being removed from the Church, foorth-with the word
should be without Christ's power to bind and loose, to remitte or retain
men's sins: which is not so much to extol the worthy discipline (as he
pretended) as it is either to clogge and chain up Christ's divine power
thereunto: or else to make discipline the divine force, and efficacious power
of Christ himself which is his essence. Whether soever of which (as one must
needs) be granted, not Master Cart-wright, but Brown shall be found the
absurd blasphemer in this case.

The bulwark of his cause is beaten down, and there is not a weapon left him
of any strength unbroken, if this be well weyed, which is by me delivered. And
if the reader consider, that although the discipline be a kind of the
authority of Christ, yet is it not all, nor the principal of his authority:
and that although he use it, many times, as a chariot, for his holy word to
ride upon, to subdue rebellious spirits: yet he uses it neither most
chiefly, 2. Cor. 1.21. 2. cor. 10.4. Heb. 1.3. cap. 4.12. Esa. 11.4.
nor most ordinarily: but the simple preaching of the word, is his continual
scepter and sword, whereby he saves his people, and conquereth his enemies:
beats down every strong hold: pearseth to the division of the soul and
Spirit, and of the joints and marrowe, and judges the very cogitations and
conceiptes of the heart. This, I say, if the reader consider, seeing there are
no greater effects in the whole kingdom of Christ, Iohnas. 3.5.6. 2. Sam.
12.7.13. Act. 24.25. ca. 26.^8. ca. 2.3.8.
then these which he executes by his word, yea when it is not assisted by
the discipline (for the word may stand without the discipline, so cannot the
discipline without the word) he will not only stay himself, as in a
refreshing shadow of Christ's gracious government, where he sees the word
delivered and taught: but also acknowledge and testify, that it is a most
malicious devise of Satan, practiced by such instruments as Brown, under a
quarrel for the holy discipline to draw thousands of souls from the most
ordinary and mighty means of Christ's government, and administration of his
kingdom, that so lying scattered from the fold, they might be out of all
hope of ordinary rescue, when the deuourer should find them.

Answ. to M.C. Page 36 38.
Let not Brown now hence-foorth ask what part of discipline may be wanting,
and the Church notwithstanding have the essence, and name of a Church. For
although Mast. Cart. not framing himself to Brownes sense and writings, as
with whom he meddled not in his letter, uses the word, discipline, in a
larger sense, as comprehending all the behavior concerning a Church in outward
duties, and so (amongst the rest) the daily planting and building, by the
calling and offering of the word by the ministers, and the hearing, receiving
and obeying of a people: yet Brown can-not think to use the word in that
sense, since his own writings have bounded him and set him in a scanter
compass, namely within the political guiding of a Church, which I have lately
before spoken of, as generally all his writings, and namely his most unlearned
definitions and divisions Numb. 48. do testify. Where defining the kingdom
of Christ, to be his office of government, whereby he uses the obedience of
his people to keep his laws and commandments, to their salvation and
welfare: he deuideth the same in ouerseeing and trying out of wickedness,
rebuke and suparation. By which place, (unless we will imagine of a discipline
that has larger limittes then the kingdom of Christ) we see what Brown
understands by discipline. Within the polliticall guiding of a Church,
therefore, must he be contented to be restrained, in all this disputation of
discipline. And as for his busy hunting after Contradiction in M.C. his
words, in saying, discipline is not of the essence of a Church, and yet for
want of all discipline, Page 35^36.
to take away the essence and name of a Church: his labor is utterly lost, as
I have proved before, in speaking of proper accidents. And though in words,
he urge the show of a contradiction, without discipline there may be a
Church, and without discipline there can be no Church. Yet is it an empty
barrel without liquour. For when the reader shall have added the word, some,
to the former, and the word, all, to the latter, that the first may be read
thus: without some discipline there may be a Church: and the other thus:
without al discipline there can be no Church, he shall plainly discern, that
Brown did but dream of a contradictio^. After those his shiftings and
turnings to avoid the evidence of M C. reasons, and to hoodewinke his reader
from the sight of the^: he sets on as though he would prove the contrary
of M.C. conclusion: namely that discipline is of the essence of a Church.
Wherein when he has spent three or four pages, Page 37.38.39.40. Other
fourmes of Brownes reasoning, to prove disc. of the essence of a Church.
with many vain and abused quotations of scripture: after his wonted manner,
the whole course of his arguing comes all to this, that the word of God gives
the Church authority, to observe the behauiours of the several members, and
to bind and loose, remitte, and retain sins by ecclesiastical censures,
and so exercise the keys of the kingdom of heaven: Therefore such
jurisdiction is of the essence of a Church. A worthy Captain of so unworthy a
schism. Set this in a due form, and I think himself (if it were possible)
would blush for shame to see it. It is thus. Whatsoever the word of God
commands to be used of the Church, that same is of the essence of the Church:

But the word commands the discipline to be used of the Church:

Therefore is the discipline of the essence of the Church.

If this be the good reasoning, let us see whither it will bring us.

Whatsoever the word of God commands to be used of the Church: the same is of
the essence of the Church:

But the word commands good works to be used of the Church:

Therefore good works are of the essence of the Church. Likewise.

Whatsoever the word of God commands faith to bring forth, the same is of the
essence of faith:

But the word of God commands that faith bring forth good works.

Therefore good works are all of the essence of faith.

And thus it will come to pass, that every commandment being made of the
essence of a Church, and of a particular Christian as a member: every
transgression likewise shall overthrow the Church, and the state of a
Christian. His scope being seen, let us take also a short view of the
handling of his matter. Setting down discipline, first in two points, Page 37.
as if he would begin at the two maine heads thereof: he makes the gathering
of a Church one, and the guiding of it, the other: as though you might
understand, how the light of the fire can be before there be fire: the use of
an instrument, before the instrument be fourmed, and the action of a living
thing, before the same living thing be engendered. But in these disputes of
discipline, the man must be remembered, that we speak not of discipline at
randon, but strictly of the discipline of a church. Which therefore, having
continual relation to a Church, as have the actions of a man to a man, can no
more be presupposed to be the discipline of a church, before the same church
be: then can, the actions of any man be ascribed unto him or reported of him,
before the man himself that should do them, be begotten. But if he will needs
have the gathering of a Church to be a part of the discipline, Brownes
writings hold not together.
what part will he refer it unto? For hereby we shall find him as far at
odds with himself, as he is with the truth: His division of the kingdom of
Christ, (which he takes to differ nothing from the discipline, as I have
declared) you have heard before. What part thereof is the gathering of a Church
to be referred unto? Perhaps he will answer the last part, namely
separation. But alas poor man, he forgot that his own definitions have quite
debarred him all such escape. For, Number. 48.
separation (says he) of the wilful or grievous offender, is a duetifulnesse
of the Church, in withholding from them the Christian Communion and fellowship,
by pronouncing and showing the christian Communion to be broken by their
grievous wickedness, and that with mourning, fasting and prayer for them, and
denouncing Gods judgments against them. And this he calls not separation
from the profane world, but separation from the Church. The same he says of
the other two parts: trying out wickedness and rebuke, they be duties of the
church (says he:) therefore the Church is presupposed first to be (say I) and
so he in this dissenting both from truth, and from himself, shows that
nothing but the spirit of lies does lead him. B. subtle phrase worthy to be
observed.
And why does he say, The Church must be gathered of the worthy, and not
rather of believers, according to the usual speech of the Scriptures? Forsooth
he knew, that if he granted the Church to be gathered of believers, there
needed no more to be said to his confutation. He was so wise therefore for
himself, as to choose rather a word more impertinent, and less perspicuous,
both to reserve a vauntage of cauilling, and to darken the light unto his
reader. In the tenth of Matthew whence he fetches his phrase, Christ gives no
commandment to the twelve to gather Churches, as lthough for that end they
should enquire who was worthy: but only that they should carry through the
cities of Judea, the sound of the coming of Messiah, for the wakening of the
people, and preparing their minds to receive their salvation, now coming so
near toward them: and there inquiring out of the worthy is not enjoined them
for gathering of congregatious in towns and cities, but for their direction
touching the places, where they should look for intertainment, whilst they
tarried in any town or city. And therefore (says our Savior) In whatsoever
city or town ye shall come, inquire who is worthy in it, and then he says
not, gather all such together to be a Church, but there abide ye, till ye go
thence: as appointing them in every town where they come, to take up their
lodging in the house of him, whom they heard most specially to be spoken of,
for an honest and religious life. The rest of his quotations here are from his
purpose: they concern not gathering of Churches, but partly the behavior in
Churches, and partly every several Christians discerning of contemners. Mala
1.13.
And Malachie among the rest is fowly forced, when as because he says The
Lord rejected their offerings, because they offered the scrobled, and the
lame, and thesicke, and the blind. Brown says, It figureth the rejecting of
our Sacraments, when dogs and swine do communicate therein: when papists and
Atheists, drunkards, Maygamsters, blasphemers, raylers, fighters, and such
like, are presented as sweet bread at the table of the Lord. Where he should
compare the blind and lame sacrifices, with the defect and defilement that may
be in the Sacraments and services of the Church: he to serve his own turn,
compares them with the unworthy receyuers and disordered members of a Church,
which was very clenly cogging. Besides that it is untrue, that every unworthy
receiver, by and by is a dog or a swine: Matthew. 7.6.
for the description Christ gives of them by their properties, is such as
rightly agrees with those only, who with open malice and wilful stubbornness
tread underfoot and blaspheme godliness, and ragingly persecute the professors
of the same: Act. 13.45.46.
Such found Paul and Barnabas of the Jews at Antioch. But such therefore is
not every unworthy Communicant, or that does deserve excommunication. His
heaping up of Papists and Atheists with the rest, shows that his pen was in
running, and he must needs fill up the number. Finally, it is false, that they
were no sacrifices, because the Lord reproves the bringing of such by the
people, and the accepting of them by the Priest. For they keeping them to the
kind of cattle that God had ordained for his sacrifices, as sheep, oxen, etc.
it ceased not to be a sacrifice, although a faulty one, when they offered the
lame, and the blind of those, because the fault was in the quality, and not in
the substance. Whereas if they should have killed a dog, or an hog, or an
ass, then it had been utterly no sacrifice. Page: 38,
His corrupt opinion in urging the retayning of every trespass of our brothers
till we see him repent, I have discovered before. Now when he says, This
liberty and power every Christian must hold, or else he is the servant of
men, and not of Christ: And therehence argues from the more to the less?
Brown makes good works, the essence of a Christian.
If a particular Christian cannot want it, how shall the whole Church be
without it, and yet be named the Church of Christ? It is manifest that he
makes the reproouing of offending brethren to be of the essence of a
Christian, and so reasons from the denial of the more probable, to the
denial of the less probable. But his reasoning is sophistical, and the
consequence popish heresy. His reason is sophistical, in that he makes it
less probable for a church to fail in matters of discipline, than for a
christian, in his own particular of monishing his brother: when as contrariwise
it is more probable, because to the discipline of a Church is required a
consent: and consent is never free from the clogges and crossings of
co^tradictorie judgments, which a particular Christian being less subject
unto, it is therefore less likely, equal or probable, that he should fail.
And for more proof, experience teaches this every where. For in Churches
where the discipline of Christ is either not wholly, or not soundly established,
you shall always find some particular members diligent and sound in their
duties this way. And I refer to the reader the consideration of many
particular members of the English assemblies in this behalf. I said there was
popish heresy in the consequence, and the reader shall testify no less, when
he considers, that if the reproouing offending brethren be of the essence of
a Christian, and no man can deny the doing thereof to be a work, it follows
that works are of the essence of a Christian, and consequently of a church, as
I have justly charged him other where. Behold still, whitherto his inco^siderate
course does carry him? If his disciples abhor this, and grant that a
particular man cease not to be a Christian for his default in this duty:
even so must he grant by the same necessity, that a Church cease not to be a
Church for her defaults in discipline. It is true, that such a christian, is a
weak christian, according to the proportion of his wants and errors, and such
a Church is a diseased Church, and that according to the measure of her
imperfections, but yet still a Christian, and yet still a Church, for the
essential causes aforesaid. Page 39.
He says, Every particular christian is a king and Priest unto God. This is
true. But to what end are we kings (says he) forsooth to hold the scepter of
Gods word, to judge the offenders, Numb. 55.
and for nothing else? No. For so it is in his wise definitions also. Well if
this be all, when his disciples and he have best learned to be this kind of
kings, (as they have too well learned this lesson alredie,) what can they be
found, but those hypocrites, Matthew. 7.3.5.
which spy motes in other men's eyes, but mark not the beams in their own:
and by that name, shall be commanded of the just judge (with shame) at length to
look into themselves, which before were wholly occupied in the beholding
others. But whosoever will not wilfully close their eyes, if they shall suffer
themselves to be remembered, that the most immediate near and principal end,
(except Gods glory which is the principal end of al ends) of christians being
kings unto God, is, to mortify our own affections and evil lusts, and to
subdue sin in our selves, they will leave with worthy detestation so loose a
teacher, and be skillful to epsy this gross sophisme, which almost every
where he commits, under color of some part of a thing, denying the same
thing wholly. And thus it fares with him almost in every sentence of the page
we have in hand, If a particular Christian do not uphold his liberty and
power in judging and rebuking particular offenders, he is utterly without the
Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ. In like manner (says he) if the Church do
not openly rebuke and excommunicate: it has no interest in the Priesthood and
Kingdom of Christ, and so is none of his Church. Again, If it cannot
excommunicate, it has not the Keys of the kingdom of heaven to bind and
loose, reteyne, or remitte sins, By the keys, B. understands nothing but
the censures of the Church, so do Har^ so^ereth is their answer
and to shut the gates of heaven against any. Which is as much to say, as a
Christian must show the effects of Christ's Kingdom in all things, or else
in none. And a Church if it has it not in all respects, it has it in no
respect. And thus (belike) because Brown is not yet so mad, as that he will
suffer no clothes upon him, we should not believe diverse of his great
friends, who say, he is mad, or out of his wits, whereby they seek to
excuse his dealings. The Church has (as I said before) the word of God,
which because it opens comfort in Christ to the penitent, and shuts it up
from the obstinate, Matthew. 16.19.
is therefore called the Keys of the kingdom of heaven: as also the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes: Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18.
called also in another place, the savor of life to life in those that are
saved: and the savor of death unto death in those that perish. 2. Cor. 2.15.16.
These Keys are diversely administered, or dispensed: as generally,
particularly, openly, privately, by the several members, or by a joint number
of the Church: and so either simply, or else joined with some personal
restraint, as suspension or excommunication. Now where the Keys are not all
manner of ways thus dispensed, does it follow, that there they are not
dispensed at all? He needs not tell us, that the Church has liberty and
right by the word to use them all, and so stand harping upon this ill tuned
string, that it has power to judge those that are within: when as this in the
mean time which should have gained his cause, lies unproven: namely, if the
Church use not all her right, she uses none: and if she exercise not her
power of judging every way, then does she not exercise it any way: This (I
say) being proved, had put life into his cause, which now remaining
unproven, makes his impudent conclusion, wherein he boasted to have proved
this, ridiculous. Page 40.
That which he calls a fond answer of M. Cartwright, was because it was
fondly understood of him. The point is explained by me before. The rest of his
37. page, being chiefly of the Corinthians discipline and abuses in the
Sacrament, I have made breathless in my discourse of Communicating.

Thou have heard (beloved) what this great master can say, to prove
discipline of the essence of a Church. Let us now hear him, returning to the
rest of his objections and cauils at M. Cartwright his letter touching this
point. M. Cartwright having truly said, that Church assemblies are builded by
faith only upon Christ the foundation, the which faith so being, whatsoever
(says he) is wanting of that which is commanded, or remaining of that which
is forbidden, is not able to put that assembly from the right and title of so
being the Church of Christ. For that, faith can admit no such thing, as gives
an utter overthrow, and turning vpside down of the truth. Hereunto he
adds. By this title of the faithful, the Apostle in his Epistles notes out
the Churches of God: being all one with him to say: To the faithful, or to
the Saints, as to the Churches of such a place. What soever wants unto
this, or is more than enough, it wants or abounds, to the disgrace and
uncomeliness, or to the hazard of the continuance, and not to the present
overthrow of the Church. And although, besides faith in the son of God,
there may be many things necessary for every assembly: yet be they
necessary to the comely and stable being, and not simply to the being of the
Church. This sound and sober doctrine of prudent distinguishing and discerning
things differing in their proper kinds, thus laid down by this reverend
man, being wrangled at in other things (as you have heard) there remains
that which Brown says, against his reason of entituling the Church with
those terms, the faithful, and of the Saints.

The Apostle indeed, The words Saints and faithful synonymies in Paul's
epistles.
almost in all his writings to the churches, saluteth them by the title of
Saints or faithful: as namely at Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, and Colosse, in
the stead of calling them Churches of those places, as putting them in
remembrance of that whereby they stood, and had their being of a Church. Like
as also writing to Timothy and Titus, 1. Tim. 1.2. Tit. 1.4.
he calls them his natural sons in the faith, and according to the faith,
as noting by that (without any addition of other words (though Brown
says, it could not be showed) their state and being in Christ. Whereas, if
discipline, and judging offenders, had been of the essence of a Church, and
of a Christian, Saint Paul would rather, have used these or such like titles.
To the Saints and displinate ones at Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, and Colosse:
and to Timothy and Titus my natural sons in the Discipline, or according to
the Discipline and judging offenders. Act. 8.36 37.
So when the Eunuch coming by the water, said, See here is water, what does
let me to be baptized? Philip should not have answered him: If thou beleeuest
with all thine heart, thou may, but rather, If I may see thee disciplinate
or endued with the power of Christ, to judge and rebuke particular offenders,
then may thou be baptized. That the word Saints and faithful, are
Synonyma, and signify all one, and no differing thing in those places, it is
easily proved, by that, the Apostle saluting the faithful at Philippi, Philip.
1.1.
does it by the title of Saints only. without the addition of the word
faithful. In like sort, directing his second Epistle, not only to the church
at Corinth, but to the rest of believers also in all that province, he uses
the word Saints alone, to signify them. Whereas if Saint Paul had meant any
higher thing by the word Saints, then he does by faithful in other
places, the Corinthians should not have told, to whom his direction should
have perteined, since they being men could judge no further, than of the
outward profession. This is made yet more then manifest, by comparing the
direction of the first Epistle herewith: for there placing his titles just
oppositely, and calling the Church at Corinth, Saints, and the rest of
professors, by the title of those that call on the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he shows his flat judgment to stand for the indifferent use of
those words: which confuteth the error of Brown, Page 41.
imagining the word Saints to implie actual holiness, and not the
profession of faith, whereby (and that only) every one that holds it, are
(in all humane judgment) esteemed to stand under the sweet harbor of
Christ's imputation. And when I thus speak of esteeming Christians, only by
their profession of the true faith, I would not be so understood, as this
garish fellow takes master Cartwright, pages 6. and 7. but of such a
profession as shows at least some good notes of gladness and willingness
to the word and means of faith, though they be not atteined, neither to so
high a pitch of knowledge, nor so set a course of holy practice, as either to
subdue themselves in all outward actions, or censure offending brethren in
their particular trespasses. Therefore, when he demands, how they that
show forth a wicked and unholy profession, shall still be called the Saints
and Church of God? 1. Cor. ca. 11. and ca. 5 largely set down in the latter
discourse of communicating.
His answer is ready. The Apostle called the Church at Corinth, Saints
(notwithstanding their manifold unholy practices, wherewith the joint
assemblies were to be charged, generally, and also the particular members
severally) in regard of their present standing in the faith of Christ, who not
only takes away the imputation of our sins (our sins, I mean, of the
elect only, in the sight of God, and of all such professors as I have spoken
of, as touching the judgment and estimation of man:) but also by daily
degrees, carries us finally to the top of inherent perfection. For the hope
whereof, and this present profession, whence that probably so arises, until
apparent appostacy break forth, all the members of a Church are to be
reckoned Saints and sanctified ones in Christ, like as Paul entituleth the
Church of Corinth. This man says: though Paul wrote his Epistle to the Church
and Saints at Corinth, yet does he not thereby call the incestuous person, or
other gross sinners, members or parts of that Church. In all points of the
question of a Church, I see, that a strange blindness has possessed him, in the
steed of more then an ordinary knowledge, which he pretends. For if the
incestuous person were not a member of the church at Corinth, why did they
separate him? Does not separation, or sundring, necessarily argue a union or
being together? 1. Job. 2.29.
The distinction of Saint John serves not in this case: for he speaks of
Aposttaes from the catholic faith, not of moral offenders that are to be
reconciled to their places. And when he says: they went out from us, but they
were not of us, he signifies, that they were not of the catholic Church,
which is the number of the elect: which distinction of catholic and
particular Churches, if Brown would observe in any measure, it would no less
avail to the comfort of his own confused conscience, then to the well regarded
peace of our Church. For a particular Church, being a convenient number of
such, The Definition of a particular Church. Act. 2.38.41. ca. 8.5.6.8.12.13.
comp. with cap. 9.31. Romans 1.17. cap. 3.21.22. Philip. 3.9. Math. 13.4.
as do in one uniform agreed, course of the outward joint worship of God,
profess that righteousness, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ: consists
both of the elect and reprobate, unfeigned and counterfeit Christians: being
therefore rightly resembled by that net cast into the sea, that gathers all
kinds of things. And so (as touching the eye of man) all are to be accounted
members of that Church, which join together thus in one profession. And if
open offenses break out in any, then appears diseased or rotting members,
but yet members till they be separated: I mean still, as in the eye and
judgment of man, according as it behooves us to speak in all this question,
of the state and condition of particular Churches. The rest of his 41. page
against M.C. was matter of his own finding, like a bad husband that loves to
make long harvest of a little corn.

M. C. to prove that there may be sundry things necessary to the comely and
stable being, and yet not simply to the being of a Church, gives two instances
from the people of Israel, which neglected for the space of 40. years, the
holy Sacrament of circumcision, and the Passover, (also as it seems) one
only time excepted, and yet ceased not therefore to be the Church of God, and
to have the Sanctuary amongst them. Brown says, this matter is shamefully
abused: Page 42.
but we shall see anon where the shame rests. His manner is to speak loud,
and do little. That there was no negligence in omitting circuncision, and the
celebration of the Passover, but a necessity and commandment, he would
prove thus: and first for the Passover, because (says he) It was not to be
kept after their coming out of Egypt, save at some special charge of the
Lord, as Numbers 9.2. till they came into the land of Canaan. How proves he
this? First by some testimonies of Scripture full slenderly understood: Exodus
12.25. cap. 13.5.
and secondly, by a reason taken from the end of the Passover, which makes
clear against him. His Scriptures testify, that they were more then once
remembered to keep the Passover, when they came into the land of Canaan: but
he shows us not, that they were only then to keep it, and not ordinarily
before. The keeping of the Passover a long time neglected by the people of
Israel.
To keep the Passover in the wilderness, and to keep it also in the land
of Canaan, are in no wise contrary: so as to argue from the affirmation of the
one, to the negation of the other. But although that be so beaten upon, to
prevent the security, or forgetfulness of them, or their posterity, when
they should come to the land of rest, as, least they should imagine that
which figured their so hasty going out of Egypt, to cease, when they should
be at ease: yet must the whole institution be better considered, and thereby we
shall see (as our Savior answered touching the bills of divorce) that
howsoever the Israelites practiced afterward, yet in the beginning it was not
so. For the Lord said, Exodus 12.14.
This day shall be unto you a remembrance, and ye shall keep it a holy feast
unto the Lord throughout your generations: ye shall keep it holy by an
ordinance for ever. Verse 17. Verse 24.
This is repeated again, and the third time, before he makes mention of the
land of Canaan: and when he comes to that, he does not bring it in
expositiuely, as with, I mean, To wit, That is to say, or any such note of
further opening that, which he had spoken before: but having said in the 24.
verse, Therefore shall you observe this thing, as an ordinance for thee and thy
sons for ever, he adds: After Tremelius translation.
Be it therefore, when you shall come into that land, which Jehovah, even as
he has said, shall give unto you, and shall observe this worship: Be it, I
say, that your children asking you what this worship means, you shall say,
etc. al which appears (as I said) to be no restraint of the former general
and thryse repeated commandment, but partly a further enforcing of the
perpetuity of the ceremony, by so special enioyning even their land of rest
to be subject unto it, and partly to teach the deriuing of the use thereof, to
the generations long after. Also when he sets down that day, to all their
posterity and generations: it is likely, that either they must observe it in
the wilderness, or else they that then lived could not keep the
commandment, Number. 9.1.2.3.
in teaching their children the practice and instruction thereof. Again, in
the 9. of Numb. it is expressly noted, that they celebrated it then, in the
first month of the second year, which was the next in order to the passover
in Aegipt, the Lord (as it were) making himself a gracious remembrancer of
them for that time: not upon any special cause, as Brown would carry it, but
only because the appointed time was returned: for the word of God, in no case
is silent, to give the reasons of any special exceptions of general
commandments. Also if it had bin commanded in the third or fourth year, there
had been some little color of that he says. This is yet more evident, seeing
that in the same place, the Lord commands further, that it should be kept
in the appointed time, namely the 14. day of the first month, and calls
that, the due season thereof. Which argues plainly, that the keeping of that
feast was seasonable, before they came to Canaan. Deuteronomy. 16.5.6.
And therefore also, when they came beyond Jordan, into the land of Canaan
(although they were not come to their rest,) yet they celebrated it, even
without any special commandment from the Lord, because it was the proper
time of the Passover. Now whereas Brown reasons, that because it figured
the hasty going out of Aegipt, and through the wilderness, therefore they were
not ordinarily to keep it, before they came to the land of rest: he might
much more reasonably have concluded, therefore they ought to have kept, etc.
because the oftener meditating, and the mo helps we use in the very action of
perfourming our commanded duties, the more likely and probable is our better
performaunce of the same. And that circumcision was omitted by negligence,
Circumcision a long time neglected by the people of Israel. Josh. 5.7.
it is evident in Josh. 5, where the cause of their uncircumcision is rendered,
to be, neither necessity, nor commandment, (as Brown fableth) but the very
negligence of their parents, for so the text says: They were uncircumcised,
Ver. 9.
because they circumcised them not by the way. And therefore after, the Lord
calls this their circumcising, the taking away the shame of Egypt from the^:
plainly casting so in their teeth, their uncircumcision, as nothing else but a
trick of Egypt, which they sauored of, as they did of other their manners of
worshipping their calves etc. Neither is it any thing, that he alleges, of
their let of iourneying. For first this generation at Gilgal might have
pretended the same, being not yet come to their place of rest: yea better in
that, they being men grown, could not journey after it, and should thereby be
in evident danger of all their enemies about the^. Secondly, seeing God had
commanded circuncision at a certain day, and not limited their iournying any
certain day, they were to think in all equity, that the Lord would not
dispose so of the removing of the cloud or pillar, as that they should be hurt
in the obedience of this commandment. Thirdly, if they had circumcised their
children as they ought, at 8. days old, and not deferred it until they were of
age, al men may know, that the children carried of their mothers, could not have
been hurt by their mothers travail with the^. Last of al we may see, that eue^
in the journey, which God required of Moses, and that a journey of great
importance, Exodus 4.24.25.
he required notwithstanding his childs circumcision. Which argues, that God
gave no dispensations in this matter for iournying. And therefore it must be
concluded, as M.C. has rightly reasoned, that if this people omitting these
necessary duties, ceased not to be the Church and people of God, it is plain,
that many necessary points, perteining to a sound, comely and stable being, may
be found wanting, and yet the Church not presently ouerthrown thereby. Now I
suppose Brown him self will not say, that the political guiding of a Church,
by the censuring discipline, is greater then these twain. And in this respect
(says M. C.) the Dutch assemblies, whereof the greatest part in high Germany,
which besides the mayme of discipline which is common to our Churches, are
grossly deceived in the matter of the Supper, are notwithstanding holden in
the roll of the Churches of God. In this respect also, certain assemblies of
our profession, which having the use of the discipline permitted unto them, and
not suffered to have the use of the Sacrament of the Lords supper, are not
therefore when the Lords Churches are mustered, and their names written and
enrouled up, cast out as unfit to be in any account of the Lords host. Brown
says, the Dutch Churches err in transubstantiation: but he judges it not an
heresy. If he can understand any difference between transubstantiation and
consubstantiation, he may acknowledge to the correction of his rashness, how
well he was ouerseene when he wrote it. Then in that he accounts it an error
and not an heresy, he declares what a crooked rule his affection is to judge
by: calling al things that he esteems amiss in my writings, heresy, (though
he know not whether I will defend them or no when they are showed me) and yet
pleads for popish transubstantiation, that it should not be condemned for an
heresy.

As for the Lutherish consubstantiation, there can not but gross absurdities
follow thereof, even to the overthrow of Christ's humanity, and that it is
stoutly maintained by furious and brawling writings, and followed in the
persons that withstand them, by prison and banishment: Brown, if he were not a
very empty vessel of all good learning and reading, would never have made
doubt of it. That there are some Churches of our profession, which having
discipline, are withheld from the use of the lords Supper, If a church may be
without a Sacrament, then much more without this discipline.
it makes nothing against him, but against us, as he imagines: but in deed
it is such a wound to his cause, as he can never cure. For if a Church may be
without the use of one of the Sacraments, and yet be a Church, how much more
may it be a Church, if it want the discipline in question? Touching M. C.
comparison of the body of man, most proper to set out the state of the Church,
and a thing often used in the Scriptures to such purpose. Brown, being not
able to escape the evidence of the truth that appeared in it, passes it over
with a deep silence in his answer, and only in the margent of M. C. epistle
sets down this word, A fopperie, for a full confutation: wherein (me
thinks) the Reader may well allow his wit though not his honesty. M. C. his
last illustration of the former reasons, Discipline to a Church as a wall to a
City, or a hedge to a vineyarde.
is thus set down. Was not Jerusalem after the return from Babylon, the
City of the great King, until such time as Nehemias came and builded up the
walls of the City? To say therefore it is none of the Church of God, because
it has not received this discipline, me thinks it is all one with this, as if
a man would say, It is no City, because it has no wall: or, that it is no
vineyarde, because it has neither hedge nor ditch. It is not, I grant, so
sightly a City or vineyarde, nor yet so safe against the invasion of their
several enemies, which lie in wait for them: but yet are they truly both
Cities and vineyardes. Against this, Brown trifleth beyond all measure. And
first, as if M. C. had said, Page 43.44.45.
that the walls of Jerusalem, by precise testimony out of the Scripture,
signified Discipline, whereas he draws the similitude but indifferentlye as
from any City, though Jerusalem be named as a famous instance, in stead of
all others in like case: and that he does touching the use of a wall, which
is most apt to set forth the effect and fruit of the Discipline: because, as
the one is the defense of a city whereby it is continued, so the other
preserves a Church in health and stable standing. And it is most sottish that
upon some places of Scripture (and the chief of them touching only the
Catholic Church, and so quite from the question of a particular) by which the
Church may be said to be builded in the walls of a city, to reason as though
it may not therefore in any wise be compared also with the Citizens and
Burgesses of a City, which are compassed with discipline, as with walls:
seeing Saint Paul does term them citizens of the Saints. Ephe. 2.19.
So is it more then childish, that he cites the Psalms for the praising of
the city by the walls and gates thereof, since every Grammar boy could have
told him it to be a trope of Synecdoche: a part for the whole. Again, such is
his folly in citing Nehemiah, Nehem. 2.3.5.
where he knows not, that the manner of speech is, to debase the being of a
thing, as though it were not, upon want of some chief ornament, or special
point of commodity that belongs unto it, as also that the building of part
of the city, is called the building of the city. The praises of Jerusalem
therefore taken from the walls and gates thereof, is (as I have said) a
speech, wherein the less is taken to note the greater, and is more effectual
then if he named the whole, or the greater parts thereof. For seeing the Lord
loves the wall so much, or the gates more then other cities, how much more the
whole city? and although he think it is no Church til the walls be builded,
yet the reader shall observe, that the people of God sacrificed, as in the
temple (which was the place only appointed for the sacrifice) when only the
foundation of the temple was laid, Ezra. 3.
and found therein that mercy and comfort from the Lord, for the which they
solemnly praised his holy Name. And accordingly is it meet for Christians in a
careful endeavor of further building, to be thankful even for the foundations:
though Brown can find no matter of thanks unless we had all. whereas if he
still withdraw, til he find such a church, yea as that has the walls of
discipline made up in all the parts that he respects, and as his best
writings intend, he shall never join with any Church, if he could live whilst
the world endures. But to proceed to the rest of his cauils, there needs no
great remembrance to bring forth what a city may be without a wall, and
vineyard without a hedge. Pol. Arist. lib. 1.
And if he had conceived of the being and definition of a city, any whit more
scholerlike than a waterbearer, he would with the learned, and all that be
skilful in the state of things, have defined it, by the laws and policy, and
not by the walls thereof. For if it should happen to be dismantilled, it
cease not therefore to be a city. When as therefore a number of men may
meet together to associate themselves by certain laws, and agreements
amongst themselves, without having a wall, it is evident that a city may be
without a wall. Likewise let al indifferent men judge, whether a space of
ground set and furnished with plants, or herbs, has the substance of a
garden, orchard, or vineyard, and is rightly to be called so. I speak not of
what course we take, in making orchards or vineyards, but of what course may be
taken in this business, in regard of the substance of the things. And so, if a
man not fearing, or not foreseeing such outward violences, as a fence might
keep out, do replenish, as is aforesaid, his ground adioining to his house
or otherwhere, for the uses of orchard, garden or vineyarde, shall they not in
deed be such things, and so truly called of him? And if afterward, finding or
conceiving a discommoditie of the want, will he not say, I must sense in my
orchard-garden or vineyard? If Brown scorn to be taught these things of the
learned, or of common sense, yet (at least) let him lay his hand on his mouth,
and hearken to the prophet, by whom the Lord said, Zecha. 2.4^
Jerusalem shall be inhabited without a wall. He spoke so after the manner of men,
amongst who^ that might come pass, for the deep peace and great security
they should have. Now to become of a city no city, is no mending but
declining case, but the Lord speaks thereby, of their bettering and happier
state: and therefore the want of a wall takes not away the being of a city.
And I pray you, in a city besieged, the walls in many breeches, through the
battery, being entered, tell me what it is, that the soldiers afterward are
said to sack? Esaias. 5.
must you not say, they sack the city? Also Esaias does manifestly declare,
that the Lord planted his vineyard, yer ever he hedged it, or did other cost
unto it. And when he magnifieth his mercy thus toward his church, in saying
that by this means, he had left nothing undone which he could do to his
vineyard, he thereby declares, that he had done more to it, than many that have
vineyards use to do. And therefore more than was necessary to the very being of
it. Again, by the same reason that they deny it to be a vineyard, because it
has no hedge, they might deny it to be a vineyarde because it has no
watchtower, winepresse, and such other. Moreover when the Lord took away the
hedge, as there he threatens he would, I would know, what the enemies of the
Church did tread underneath their feet, did they not tread the the Lords
vineyard? But it may be thought a shame to stand so long in the proof of this
which Brown is not ashamed with tedious strife of words to deny.

When as these things, by the grace of God, are thus established, the contrary
mistes dispelled, which the adversary had cast in, to darken the truth, and
discipline found, not to be of the essence of a Church, which is the very
knife, whereby all the sinews of the Brownists contentious arm against the
Church of England (from which they draw their disciples,) are cut asu^der: yet
in the knitting up of this point, there be two things, which in as few words
as I can, I would admonish the reader of. First, The Church of England by
these writings not justified in any of her corruptions.
that although M. Cartwright in his Epistle to M. H. and I, in these my
defenses, do thus far speak to the justifying of the Church of England,
wherein we have received that spiritual life and comfort, which do worthily
draw out of us these duties, Here is also Harison answered, for that he says
to this purpose upon the 122. Psalm.
yet have we (through the grace of God) nothing less in our minds, than to
justify any corruption that may be espied in it. So unworthy a burden is
it therefore that Brown lays upon us, out of the Prophet, charging us (when
we avouch the Church of England, notwithstanding the defects and corruptions
that it has, to be yet a Church of GOD, Iere. 7.4.
from which no faithful man is to separate) as though we pleaded for and
boulstred up iniquity and corruption by the glorious titles of The Temple of
God, The Temple of God. The cases are too unlike, for a man that is well in his
wits, to compare together. The Jews so pleaded the prerogative of the
Temple, to confute the Prophets threatening of judgments, for their sins and
transgressions: as though it could not be true, that by any means God should
forsake them, to whom he had made such plenteous promises, and that so long as
they kept the external worship which God had appointed, they thought themselves
not so far chargeable with their wicked manners. Directly contrary both in
judgment and affection, are we unto them (by the grace of God) in all this
business. We esteem the state of our Church in some respects grievous and
lamentable enough, full of prouocations of the heavy displeasure and
indignation of the Lord, which as we acknowledge to be most just, if they
had been powered down upon us now long ago: so we are out of doubt they will
come, if we find not grace to turn and seek the Lord more dutifully, while
the day of his long suffering yet endures. And for this cause we earnestly
beseech those rhat are the Lords remembrancers, not to keep silence, neither
to give him rest, Esaias. 66.6.7. Esaias. 58.1.
as also the Prophets whom the Lord has sent, to lift up their voices as a
trumpet, to tell the people their sins, and Israel their transgressions.
Only withal we admonish, Matthew. 13.6.
that whatsoever the Lord has joined together, no man do separate. Which
being a universal precept of the eternal GOD, binds as well every
particular member, to keep the unity of the Church, which the Lord has
gathered by the preaching of Christ crucified, as it does the Church it self,
to the joint use of all holy duties and means of her increase. In both of
which, we humbly crave an equal regard and consideration. Otherwise as the
ministry of him that cries to the Churches, Revel. 2.6.
to repent, and be mindful of those things, from whence they are fallen, to
strengthen the rest that are ready to die, that their works may be full
before the Lord. And to buy gold of Christ to enrich them, Revel. 3.2.3.18.
and white garments to cover their nakedness, As (I say) his ministry
breaks not the head, Psalm. 144.4.5. Prou. 27.6. Luke 10.33.34. The Church of
England should be reproved, but not forsaken.
but is like that wine and oil of the Samaritane, powered into their wounds,
for a gracious recovery of health: so on the contrary, he that, seeing the
mournful estate of any Church, tending to desolation and ruin, shall fall a
gathering by himself, or any way shrink from bestowing all his strength to
the upholding and rebuilding thereof, he plays that envious Onans part, Gen
38.8.9.10.
that abhorred the building of his brothers house, respecting more the spread
of his own name, than making conscience of Gods holy ordinance. And as his
sin is so much greater than Onans, by how much the overthrow of many
Churches, already gathered, is greater, than the refusal to revive the name
of one house or family, by so much the greater judgment also is to be feared
from the Lord. Yet was Onans sin revenged by GOD with death. The other thing
that I would have the reader perfect in, is this: that this Troublechurch
Brown, not receiving the love of the truth, touching the being of a Church in
Christ by faith, but striving for other grounds and essential causes thereof,
which the Lord never acknowledged, is (in a heavy, though just judgment),
compassed about with a strong delusion, so as he has not abstained from
defiling the very covenant of life, to his own, and all that follow after
him, most certain destruction, if the balm of Gods grace be not sent in time
to heal them. For in the forepart of his answer to master Cartwright, Page
7.8.9.10.11
he miserably confounds the covenant of the law with the covenant of the
Gospel. Romans 5.20. Gal. 3. and 4. cap.
Whereof the first has the condition of works a part: the other is made
simply without condition of works, if we believe only. He abuses to his
purpose a number of places, all which prove that the establishment of the
covenant of grace has necessarily good works joined withal, as effects or
fruits, Brown dangerously erreth, touching the covenant.
but not as causes, and so any part of the covenant, as he grossly supposes.
Some sentences of his I will set down for those that have not his books. It
is written (says he,) walk before me and be thou upright, and I will make
my covenant between me and thee. As who say, one condition and part of the
covenant is, our upright and good profession. And this profession he tells
you, what he means by, in another place: Def. uam. 38.
where he says. Our profession and submission to his laws and government, is
the keeping of our covenant by leading a godly and Christian life. Now in the
same place, he defines the covenant on our behalf, to be our agreement and
partaking of conditions with God. That he shall be our God, so long as we
keep under his government, and obey his laws and no longer. As for faith,
the covenant thus being corrupted, Brownes faith.
how should it escape the defilement of his fingers? In his declararation of
the gathering together of certain persons, etc.
Therefore in a certain place he defines faith to be a conscience of our
redemption and happiness in Christ, whereby we wholly yield up our selves
unto him in newness of life. And upon this he adds, So faith cannot be,
except we be, so renewed, that no open gross wickedness be in us. Where
indeed appears to be the fountain of all his gross reasoning, when he
denies the profession to be good, where it is not altogether good, without
mixture of corruption. The opening of which things, together, in this place,
(the like whereof I have also pointed at otherwher) I do not for the disgrace
of the man, (though that withal, if he amend not, shall justly accompany it)
but directly to disgrace falsehood, and lay open the way of unrighteousness,
with the issue thereof, unto his folowers. The commodity of it, I hope, shall
be great in two principal respects. One, that the same path of death, which he
has beaten unto them, may be shunned of of all that love the way of life. And
the other that no man hereafter marvel (seeing this contrariety in points of
foundation) that Bro. quarelleth with, and separateth from the Church of
England, as of which, he is in no wise worthy to be a member. And now to
conclude, By Brownes Faith himself is proved no Christian.
in that he says, Faith cannot be, except we be so renewed, that no open gross
wickedness appear in us: from his own mouth this sentence must proceed
against him, that he is no Christian. Do you ask how I can prove it? Let the
same his assertion be the proposition, therhence I assume thus, Brown has
open gross wickedness in him, now the conclusion follows, Therefore Brown
has not faith. You will ask proof of my assumption, I give it you thus:
Railing, reuiling, and slaundering, publicly sparsed abroad in writings
agianst any, is open gross wickedness, but Brown has committed these
things: witness this his libell against me: (omitting all his other writings
at this time) wherein I yield the judgment to all that have seen it, whether
they have found the like vnscholerlike scolding, such base reuiling, so
peremptory without all proof, accusing, and unchristian beyond all charity,
slandering (both me and many) in the writings of any, the vilest heretics in
our memory. To those that have not seen it, let these few places, in stead of
his multitude, testify. His reuiling phrases are such as these, but infinitely
repeated. number. 53. O blind Pharisee: or rather O froward heretic. number. 54.
Thou blind Pharise. number. 60. O false tongued man, shall not God pluck thee out
of the land of the living? number. 78. Nay thine and thy partners hypocrisy,
joined with envy, outrage, and cruelty, shall be better known. Thou teach
F. thy fogging Phisike, and he teaches thee his lying divinity. number. 79. The
wretch cares not what he forgeth against us. And by and by after: O caitife,
thou would feign hear of it, that we were all hanged, number. 103. Thou
vnpitifull and graceless writer and falsifier, etc. These may give a glimpse
of his railing. Now for his slandering. number. 34. The hypocrisy of railing F.
and Bredwell with their partners, is hidden in rich men's houses, sometimes in
deceytful fastings, as though we should have present reformation, and sometimes
in delicate feastings, in bribes, gifts, show of alms to the poor, when all
goes into their own bellies or purses. number. 75. If all were such persecuting
wretches as Bredwell is, they were not only infidels, denying the faith, but
also worse than infidels, because they yet suffered the believers to dwell in
the same house with them: but Bredwell and his partners would not suffer them
to dwell in the same City with them, no not in the same Country, no not upon
the face of the earth. number. 77. Nay false hypocrite, this word only is thine
own addition, etc. It is thy manner and thy partners, to force, to threaten, to
make stirrings and hurly burlies, and to drive man and wife asunder. Thine and
their outrage cannot be satisfied with blood. Thine and their raylings,
slanders and false accusations, have brought diverse of us to death, some by
the Gibbet, some by long imprisonment, some by flight and pursuit, some by
extreme care, death and sickness: some by seas, some by necessity and want,
some by changing air, dwelling and place. The blood of all these shall be
upon thine and thy partners heads. Three other places, to wit, number. 115.116.
117. Whether they conteyne gross blasphemy, not only against men, but against
GOD, and his word, I refer it to the consciences of all that have seen
them, (for, I think it nor good for some respects, to set them down) and
appeal to the searcher of the hearts and reins for judgment. These things
considered, I trust I may with the Christian readers consent, conclude, that
there is open gross wickedness found in this man, from whence by his own
rule it follows, that he has not faith: and so consequently is no Christian.

From the 74. to the 78.
8 So far (says the Admonition) he proceeds in seducing, that he says,
The 6. corruption wherewith the Admonchargeth Bro. proved.
the wife ought to go away from her husband, if he will not go with her, in the
case of want or bondage of this discipline. Brown says, I falsify the case.
as though he had only spoken of heathenish husbands, from whom it should be
lawful for the wives to go, when they became in danger of persecuting by the^.
The reader sees, the issue here betwixt us to be this: whether Bro. has
taught, that want or bondage of discipline, is cause sufficient for a wife to
go away from her husband. These be my proves out of his writings. Let the
reader judge. Speaking of a place of Paul to the Corinthes, he has these
words: And therefore he teaches the woman which believes to abide with the
unbelieving man, Tit. against par. preach. and hired etc.
and the servant which believes, to keep with his master, except they be
froward and persecute, or the whole Church be held there in bondage, or they
cannot hold the true worship, and all Christian duties, with the sufferance of
other and the safety of their lives. For then they may flee, etc. Here his
exception being disjunctive, puts three cases wherein the wife may go from
her husband. 1. For frowardness and persecuting by him. 2. For the bondage of
the Church, where they dwell. 3. (As it seems to me) if she be in danger by
others. But I intermeddle only with that, wherewith I have already charged
him. If we will know what he means by the bondage of the Church, let other
places of his give the interpretation. In his answer to M.C. page 37. showing
how he understands the discipline of the Church to fail, he says, Though
some preacher or other person offend, yet does not therefore the discipline
of the Church fail, or want, except the Church be negligent, or wilfully
refuse to redress such offenses, or is brought into bondage that it cannot
redress them. Here he interprets bondage to be when a Church cannot
redress faults. In the 15. Page of the same book, he shows what he
esteems the cause of that bondage, in these words: What is a church without
this power we speak of? yea what are those assemblies, which in stead of it,
do hold that Antichristian power of the spiritual courts, or rather are
held in bondage by it? Now if the wife ought to go from her husband, where
the Church is in bondage, and that same bondage must be understood, when as a
Church has not power and free liberty to censure and redress offenses,
without restraint of any spiritual Courts, it follows to be his doctrine,
as I have charged him, that a wife ought to go away from her husband (if he
will not go with her) only for the want or bondage of the outward discipline
where they dwell. Neither do I by that word only add any thing that is not
his. For if the wife may go from her husband for this one cause amongst
others, it follows and is necessarily intended, that for this only she may
go from him. His cavil at my word enforce is as witless: for whatsoever is
taught as a thing given in charge and commandment from God, that same
enforces the conscience to a practice. Whether Brown by a charge and
commandment as from God, do enforce the wife to such dealing with her
husband, let these speeches of his be called to witness. ^itl against par. pr.
and hired lect. etc.
It (or the Church) must hold the true flock, and seek the right shepheardes,
and depart from others. This is commanded to all, and therefore though the
husband will not, yet the wife must do it, or the husband, though the wife be
against it. And by and by after: For we show, that so far we must be from
hearing or receiving of such pastors and ministers, and from dwelling in their
Parishes, that the wife may not tarry for the husband to flee from them if he
be untoward. Also in the very place where he accuses me for this matter, his
own words do again answer for me. Brown (says he) has not one word of
enforcing, but only, the husband or wife in such a case have liberty, and it
is their duty. Now, where any thing is laid upon us, as a duty unto God,
what liberty the conscience has to choose the doing or not doing of it, let
all that have any conscience judge. His Number 78. is answered.

To the 79.
9. The admonition has these words, I hear besides, that there is one among
you, who whispereth already in corners, that we must not believe in the holy
Ghost. This (I protest) was no guess, or light conjecture of mine, but a thing
testified by two sufficient witnesses unto me: the man also I can name, if it
were convenient, and he was then in the same schism with Brown for the matter
of Discipline.

10. To that which is from the 80. to the 97. I answer not.

To that which is from the 97. to the 104.
Brown proved to be a committer of the same things he condemns: and is
contrary to him self in all those points wherewith the admonition charge
him.
11 The reader must understand, that the admonition enters 2. general
accusations against Brown, to prove him a man not to be followed, but
forsaken: one is unsound and dangerous doctrine, the other, his wavering and
changeableness. The first and most grievous, I trust is now made manifest, the
latter needs fewer words: the proof of it stands in these iiii. points.
1. Whether he have condemned the art of lodgicke as unlawful for Christians,
and yet used it him self. 2. Whether he have heretofore provoked all true
worshippers to flee out of England, as to avoid the displeasure of God: and
yet both dwells here him self, and has counseled a resorting to our
sermons. 3. Whether he have subscribed. 4. Whether his two assertions
concerning discipline, have in them that which is contrary, yea, or no. If
these things be found true, then it follows that the man is mutable also,
even as necessity of time and place do draw and strain him. As for the first
point concerning lodgicke, it is a wonder to see how the poor man runs,
from one corner to another to hide his nakedness, and when he has all done, the
best defense he has, is that which serves him always, even a face that ca^
never show one token of shame or modesty in it. O desperate impudency: does
Bro. deny that he has condemned the art of lodgicke as unlawful? Brownes
first contradiction proved.
what can he say to induce any of his disciples to believe him? thus he
begins as soon as he has given me the lie: In deed vain lodgicke is named
in the marge^t, and so is vain philosophy named by sundry writers, also vain
arts, vain and false sciences, and that out of the scripture: yet are neither
those learned writers, nor the scriptures condemned therefore. He would have
the reader believe, that there is a vain lodgicke and a good lodgicke: and
that he spoke but against the vain lodgicke. This is to please a child with a
plumme, when he has hurt him before with throwing him down. But his vain
epethite was in deed no distinction of lodgickes, but only as an ouerfilling
of his furious pen, and conceited form of his malicious utterance, for all
lodgicke and phylosophie is by him condemned, as by the grace of God, I will
prove. After that, he says, There is a vain art of lodgicke, a false
deceitful and contentious sophistry, and yet a lawful and artificial use of
reason. This is absurd, to confound an art and the abuse of an art together:
and he might as well call heresy, divinity, as sophistry lodgicke. But he
proceeds thus: wherefore Brown condemns not reason (which they call
lodgicke) but the art of lodgicke, that is, their evil order and false manner
of using or rather abusing reason. Do we call Lodgicke, reason? beware
(beloved) his fowling net of many meanings. The word Lodgicke is derived from
two Greek wores, which together signify, To use reason, Lodgicke and the
original thereof briefly poynted out.
and so the learned understand by the word lodgicke, the rule of disputing or
reasoning: not reason it self, but the regular use thereof: not the actual nor
habitual knowledge, which is in every man, according to greater or lesser
aptnes and clearnes, but a ruled course of long observed precepts, for the
help of all. And this artificial rule of reasoni^g, follows and expresses
(as in a sensible image) the universal force of the natural, as of the first
pattern or sampler, diligently observed according to the motions insited in
humane wits, and expressed by the use of excellent men. For the same universal
force, and particular forms of natural reasoning, drawn from the use of al
chief wits, and still able to be confirmed by the testimony of al momuments of
wisdom, sacred or profane, this (I say) does art, having drawn the same to
certain ordered heads, propou^d, as the image of nature, to be imitated in
disputing, that so a man beholding in this artificial glass, as it were the
face of his ancient estate, before the finful deprauatio^ (which brought in,
not only that same disorder and corrupti^g of our affections, but also this
confuse cloudines of our understanding, which we see in every one, more or
less cleared, according as they have more or less labored in reforming it,
either by the obseruatio^s of all times, which stand in art, or else by their
own proper observations, which consist in the raw experience of their own
short lives) might strive on still, to take away the spots remaining: each
succeding generation, enjoying herein the benefit of the formers labors.
Wherehence we see both the common means which the Lord has used to bring
this age present, the ripenes that it shows this way: as also how it comes
to pass, that art, which was at first but natures scholar, becomes at
length, after a sort, her scholemistresse. Now then, let not this lodgickebiter
beguile you (beloved) with any shifting sophistry (which is indeed all the
art he has) by confounding reason and lodgicke together, which can never be
taken one for the other, in a proper kind of speaking, no more then the image
of a man can in proper speech, be called a man But let us further mark his
words: Brown (says he) condemns not reason (which they call Lodgicke) but
the art of lodgicke etc. I did never charge him to condemn reason, but the
artificial use of reason called lodgicke: now if his answer be any thing to
me at al, it must needs be that one of these two is meant in this his
Apollo-like answer: namely, that he conde^neth not natural reasoning, but
artificial reasoning: or else, that he conde^neth not all lodgicke or artificial
reasoning, but only our lodgicke and artificial frames of reasoning. Let him
choose which he will, and his own answer overthrows him: for if he be
thereby understood to condemn artificial reasoning, he is contrary to
himself having said a little before, that there is a lawful and artificial use
of reasoning: if he say he conde^neth but only our frame and art of reasoning,
he gives me enough to prove my cause against him: In his book of L^ef* and
Diuis. Ans to M.C. page 44.56.57. in his couf with M.E. and M.P. in his repl.
to the quest. of communio. and in his Answ. to my Admonition.
for if he avouch our lodgicke, as it stands in use at this day, to be
unlawful, he avouches the thing that I charge him withal, and then I say, why
has he used it him self? yea why does his answer afterward deny
syllogisticall reasoning to be simply unlawful? why also has he used the very
terms both of our lodgicke and rhetoric, which otherwhere so Momus-like he
scoffeth at? the example of Paul's fighting with beasts at Ephesus is by him
abused, since Paul therein used no course that was unlawful and condemned by
the word of God, but Brown uses our Lodgicke, which himself has said to be
forbidden in Gods Word, and therefore unlawful. His quarrelling at my words
simply forbidden, shows his vnlearnednesse: for that is to be called simply
forbidden, which, not in regard of circumstances, but in regard of the thing it
self is said to be forbidden: and therefore, though he have not the word
simply, yet he has the force thereof in his speech, so long as he condemns
the art in self and every part thereof. But why (beloved) does he stiffely
avouch, that He has not said Lodgicke is an unlawful art, a heathenish
foppery, etc? believe me, it is not because he trusts to the goodness of his
cause (for the places that I quoted are more plain, then that any doubting can
be left) but in that, he has either gotten some Giges ring, to cloak his
adulterating of the Scriptures, or else a body of such cameleonish substance,
as has sundry colors at sundry beholdings. For let the word Lodgicke be
taken, as I have now showed it ought to be, and the Sun is not clearer in his
full shine and light, then that this my accusation of Brownes condemning
Lodgicke, is plain and manifest. I will point a place or two for those that
have not his books. Did ever any godly (says he) profess their Lodgicke,
before Christ came in the flesh, or since his coming, till the coming up of
Antichrist, was it studied and learned? was it then nothing needful, and is it
now so needful? Does not Paul speak of Lodgicke in that place where he
writes of spoiling by Philosophy and vain deceit? Afterward, dealing with
the objections made against that sense of Paul's writing to the Colossians, he
handles the reverend Beza like as a scurrilous iester, rather then as a modest
divine should do, and that because he acknowledges not Lodgicke to be
forbidden in that place of the Apostle: these be his own words, let the Reader
judge. Cap. 2.8.
So does he in that place to the Colossians, not as Beza would interpret it of
the three sorts of corruptions, the first, of speculations, the second, of he
himself cannot tell what, save that he says, it stands upon custom and
feigned inspirations: the third was of joining the Law worship with the
Gospel. Thus he would point at Paul's meaning, and does drive another way. For
Paul names the vanity and deceiptfulnes of Philosophy, and shows, that
that is after man's traditions, or the rules and principles of this world, and
not after Christ: and so he does strike at that strong tree of vanity, which
is Philosophy, and the root thereof, which is man's traditions, or the rules
and principles of their worldly arts. But Beza for one tree, has got himself
three, namely, speculations, customs, and inspirations, and the ceremonial
worship. In stead of philosophy, which Paul calls vain deceit, he names
curious speculations; as if one should ask a Hatchet, and he should give him
the helue. Paul would root out all their philosophy; and Beza but some part,
etc. A man would think there needs no great labor to prove out of these
words, that Brown holds both lodgick and all philosophy to be forbidden in
the Scriptures: but hear him further, for soon after, he takes upon him, out
of Timothy and Job, to reject every part of lodgick by name, and thereupon
follow these words: But what, say they, is there no use of lodgick? what say
you then to a thing and the cause thereof? for the effect is known by the
cause, and the cause by the effect: so they give us four sorts of causes, but
we return them upon them as the spillings of their drunkenness. Again, They
demand here, whether definitions be unlawful, we answer, that to name the
kinds and sorts of things, and to name their natures, is not unlawful, but
their idle art of defining is unlawful: and to thrust their definitions as
mysteries into our bosoms, or to term the naming of things, or their natures
whereby they are called, by the words of their vain art is wholly unlawful.
It is manifest that when he wrote these things, he dissembled not (as now he
does) to profess the condemning of lodgick: else let even his next words
following the last rehearsed (wherein he pretends to answer an objection
against him) be called to witness. If they ask (says he) why me then use the
names, and have labored also so much in defining, we tell them, that we
return their own weapons upon them, not that we care for such weapons, but
because they fear them so much, we have tried if they may dismay them in their
folly, and turn them to the truth. Here by the manner of his answer, (you
see) is nothing less, then a denial of condemning the art, which is now all
the refuge the snared Fox can find. If he could have enjoyed his supposed
rest, within the harbor of that answer, there should his Ship have remained
still, but when he perceived by the admonition, that there was a rock for his
estimation to perish upon (because this cannot be denied, that whatsoever
things are unlawful, Christians ought not use) he rather chose this shameless
denying of that which cannot be denied, then that he would give glory unto God,
in acknowledging his fault, and forsaking his error: wherein let all true
Israelites judge, whether it appear, that the love of himself and praise of
men, be more precious in his eyes, then the love of God, and praise of his
glorious name.

To the 104.105.106.
12 The second point, wherein the admonition proves his inconstancy, is this:
Brownes second contradiction proved.
that he once held it a tempting of God, for any that followed his course, to
tarry in England: and since again, both himself is returned, dwells here,
hears our Sermons, and has by private writings counseled others so to do.
These contrary courses (I say) considered with this, that notwithstanding his
later practice, the man remains of the same judgment against the English
assemblyes, which he held before, when he passed the Seas, and called his
chickens after him: let the godly judge, whether his footesteppes may sauoure
of the guiding of Gods spirit, and so argue that same assurance in the
conscience, Romans 14.5.23.
which the Apostle Paul calls for in all our actions, yea or no. His
answer for this is like the former, even with a cauterized conscience,
denying that, which he knows to be true. The bare quotations in the
admonition made him bold: but he ought to have remembered, that there might come
a day, wherein they should be enlarged, and set down to his shame. Now, that
he provoked to flee out of England, let these his words be first considered:
Therefore thus says the Lord, Titl. against disordred preaching at Paul's etc.

England by Brownes writings is Aegipt, but by his practice Jerusalem. In the
same title.


I feed not my flock at Paul's Cross in London, or S. Maryes in Cambridge, or
in your English parishes. O ye my sheep, go ye not thither, as though there
were my fold, and there I rested, and fed my flock, for there be Shepherds
and flocks also that follow them, whith are not of Christ, for they hold of
Antichrist. Also he says, If in all England or in some more famous places of
England, whether great Cities or Universities, or the Court it self, we see
not the Kingdom of God maintained, but persecuted, and the true worship of God
refused, a false worship and idol service wilfully suffered, and many Popish
abominations vpheld and established, from thence the Lord does take away his
kingdom, as it is written: The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a nation which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Yea, none may
continue to preach the truth unto those, when once they have boldly testified
it, and they put it from them, etc. Afterward he shows his meaning more
clearly thus: In Aegipt the whole Church was in bondage, and it wholly
departed, yet did Pharao give leave there to worship God rightly, but answer
was made, it is not meet so to do in this place: for lo, can we sacrifice
the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and they not stone us? so
also in England, though the Magistrates should give us leave to worship God
rightly, yet the true worship and reformation of the Church is abomination to
the Bishops, and other wicked Preachers and people, and what stirrings and
hurly burlyes would they make? but they say, we must abide such troubles. In
deed, we must hear them, when we cannot avoid them, and in avoiding them, we
must take heed to hold still a good conscience: but we tempt God, as did many
of the Jews, if when we may go out of Aegipt, and avoid such troubles, we
will not, or murmr against it. Yet if this be not plain enough, Decl. of
gathering and joining together of certain persons, etc.
that he understands England for Aegipt, let him remember where he
confesses, He was accused of false doctrine (by his own company) because he
said, that England was as Aegipt, both for the outward bondage and oppression
of the Church, by Popish forcing, laws, and penalties, and for all kind of
wickedness, and because he said they did sin, which had a full purpose to
dwell still in England, when the Lord did call them away, and they had liberty
to depart. Now when he accompteth them called away, his own pen also has
instructed us, namely, in these his words following. Yea though the Magistrate
give them leave there to dwell as they liked, yet the laws and disorders
abiding still the same, they could not there tarry. Also in another place:
Title against disordred preaching at Paul's Cross. etc.
but if it be said, what if some desire the truth, must they also be forsaken?
I answer, that if they desire the Kingdom, and sell not all they have to buy
it, and the place where it is, and will not come and dwell there (now that was
beyond Sea where he was at that time) they are unworthy thereof. It is come to
pass upon those as it is written, that they desire to see one day of the Son
of man, and cannot see it. If the whole Church (which you must understand to be
those of his judgment) be persecuted, it ought wholly to flee, and if laws be
made against all, though as yet they be not executed on some, yet the
persecution is general, and they are called away. Now Brown shall do well to
tell us, what bands of laws were then so straight, and now relaxed, that they
should then flee out of England, as out of Aegipt, and now dwell with us
again, as in Jerusalem. Till he show us this, he must be contented to have it
written as in great letters upon his forehead: A wavering minded man is
unconstant in all his ways.

To the 107.
This concerns the third argument, which the admonition Brownes leuitie and
changeableness. What can be more contrary, Brownes third contradiction proved.
and therefore absurd, then to condemn the Church of England for no Church of
God, as also the officers (that take on them and execute the government
thereof) for proud Prelates, Antichristian usurpers, and such as we may not
meddle with: and yet himself when he is brought to the trial, to subscribe,
allow and approve all this? does the Reader think it reasonable, that this man
should bear himself upon the names of Wickliff, Luther, and Calvin, as though
they had ever committed such things? I speak not neither as reproching any man
that returns from error to a sounder mind (for I would if it were Gods will,
that might be seen in Brown) but, I speak to the worthy detestation of him,
that not changing his judgment, only for fear of trouble, practices and
ratifieth the same things, which he has so bitterly prescribed against unto
all men, in public writings. Yea and whilst he does this, and has withal his
own hand of subscription extant against him, yet still seduceth, and carries
away from the ordinary assemblies, as many as he ca^. The state of which
persons so led out by him, if we consider but a little, as they exceedingly
prove it, so we shall not a little see it to be grievous and lamentable. For
how utterly unlike is he to that good Shepherd, that gives his life for his
Sheep? and (if his doctrine were good) how altogether like is he to that
hireling Shepherd that when he has led his Sheep out of the fold into the
plains, there charge the^ to abide all dangers, shifting in the mean time
any way for his own safety? must not that woe cleave fast unto him, Math. 23.4.
Luke. 11.46.
that was denou^ced against those that laid importable burdens upon other men's
shoulders, but themselves touched the^ not with the least of their fingers?
full many of his poor disciples lie in prisons, whilst he laugheth at
liberty, and, touching that, for which they suffer, adds aflictio^ to their
bands, by all his behauior. Brown confesses his subscribing, but yet with
brazen face demands what was amiss therein: even this verily, that his own
writings, and daily practice are as directly against it, as black, to white,
hot, to cold, and nay, to yea. And here his immodest daring, and ungracious
terms enforce me to lay him open, Brown a subscriber, and yet a detester of
the Church of England.
whereas my adm. had somewhat unnecessarily spared him. The Bishops civil
authority (says he) Br. did acknowledge lawful in his subscription, and their
magistracy to be obeyed. This is sufficient against himself: yet he has
clipped the compass: for the words are, I do humbly submit my self to be at my
Lord of Cant. commandment, whose authority under her Ma. I will never resist
nor deprave, by the grace of God etc. Here is not civil authority only (as he
would help it) but the authority that he has under her Ma. which al me^ know
is as well ecclesiastical as civil. This Br. promised never to deprave, but he
has falsified his promise and subscriptio^, in that he has not hitherto by
public writing reca^ted those books, which therefore live as the express
image of his mind, to teach the contrary. Some places I will rehearse, that all
may see how Br. thinks of the By. procedings, and of their authority it
self. In his declaration of gathering his scismatical church, telling how he
withstood Harisons entering into the Ministry by the Bishops means, these are
his words: When he (that is Harison) had talked with R. B. and showed him the
matter wherabout he went, he received this answer, that it was unlawful to use
M. Greenhams help or any man's else for the Bish. authorizing. So he showed him,
how he had dealt concerning the Bishop, and was so far from seeking license,
ordaining, or authorizing at his hands, that he abborred such trash and
pollutions, as the marks and poison of Antichrist. And speaking of their form
of ordaining, O worthy outward calling (says he) Do not the Bishops pray when
they make ministers, and shall we condemn their prayers? for the fox is a
father in the church when he prays for grace: are not our ministers duly
examined? they are posed by M. Exam. Title against parish preachers, and hired
lect. etc.
Beware ye priests that you ca^ speak Latin, and in any case forget not your
Cathechisme, etc. Then follows, Breath upon the^ ye By. and give the^ your
gracious spirits, which ye call the holy ghost, so shall they be those good
spirits like frogs that come out of your mouths to make battle against us.
Kneel down ye preachers, that the B. may ordain you sitting in his chair:
his holy hands shall bless you, they are washed from blood as was Pilates, and
as the nose of a wolf which will raven no more. Then must you take your
licenses in parchment, and pay well for them: prepare a box for your wax,
print your message therein, and keep touch with the Bishop, least he open your
box, and your calling fly away: behold, this is their outward calling. In
another place he has these words: Titl. against disordred preaching at Paul's
Cross, etc.
We say therefore, O ye Prelates, not by your Lodgicke Oracles, but by the
word and doctrine: is Paul's Cross Jerusalem, or is the Lords name there? is
not your name sounded there, as by the blast of a Trumpet? my Lord Bishop there
controlleth, in his name the Preacher stands up, as the Wolf does in a
visard, he has the Bishops name in parchment, for that is his license, it is a
thieves quittance though he came in by the window, it is the scourcoasts
passport, though he roaue out for his pray. My Lords face is in the wax, a
print and mark of holiness, who can preach without it? It is the seal of
ghostly message. Three such seals have threefold grace, but the money which
buyeth them has that grace seven hundredth fold. Is this now the Lords name,
when his Gospel must hang on parchment, or on the name and marks of those
Romish beasts? Is this his name, when his glad tidings cease, except the
parchment hold, and his message misseth except a waxemarke gives it? Is this
Jerusalem where such Bishops reign, or should we call it the throne of the
Lord? is it not rather the seat of iniquity, to which (as the Prophet says)
the wicked do approach? etc. And a little after, Now therefore ye Preachers,
because ye subscribe that the Lords government is wanting, and yet set up
other Lords, or suffer them in his place, and because you cannot, neither will
you preach, but by their good leave and license, therefore you cannot preach my
word. What do you at Paul's Cross, or what should my messengers do there? do
not there the Bishops as also in your parishes, tread down the Lords
Sanctuary? and are not the people as they over whom the Lord did never bear
rule? yet you say the Bishops government is tolerable, and take the teeth of
those VVolfes, for a discipline to the Sheep. Again, within few lines; This
is now the throne of the Bishops, which in the dioces, parishes, and cathedral
Churches, is lift up against Christ. From it does come forth their laws and
injunctions, by which all men even small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond are made to receive a mark in their hand, or in their forehead. For all
are made thralles and slaves to their policy, to build the Church, and to
worship God after their deuisings, etc. Now yet more apertly (if it were
possible) to show how he depraueth their very authority, I must trouble the
reader with mo of his places. In his declaration, telling of his own
authorizing by the Bishops, among other like he has these words, that he
thought it lawful, first to be tried of the Bishops, then also to suffer their
power, though it were unlawful, if in any thing it did not hinder the truth,
but to be authorized by them, to be sworn, to subscribe, to be ordained, and
receive their licensing, he utterly misliked and kept himself clear in those
matters: howbeit, the Bishops seals were gotten him by his brother, which he
both refused before the officers, and being written for him would not pay for
the^: and also being afterward paid for by his brother, he lost one, and burnt
another in the fire: and another being sent him to Cambridge, he kept it by
him, til in his trouble it was delivered to a Justice of peace, and so from him
as is supposed, to the B. of Norwich. Yet least his dealing in this manner
should encourage others to deal in worse manner, he openly preached against
the calling and authorizing of preachers by Bishops, and spoke it often also
openly in Cambridge, that he taught among them, not as caring for, or leaning
upon the By. authority, but only to satisfy his duty and conscience. Also in
the same discourse he has these words, This he (that is himself) judged not
only to be against the wickedness of the By. but also against their whole power
and authority: for if the authority of the Church, and of the forwardest
brethren or elders therein, be above the By. how should it not follow, but that
the By. may be commanded, accused and charged by the Church, yea also
discharged and separated as is their desert? but now because of their popish
power and canon laws, they have lift up their authority more high, then the
Church ca^ take accounts of them: and not only by force do thrust out and
trouble whom they list, but also reign as Lords and Dukes in their dioces,
their authority must needs be usurped. And a little space after he says thus
of them, that They rule by three sorts of laws, as by the civil, the canon,
the common law, which are three kingdoms unto the^, or as the Popes triple
crown: and by prete^ding the fourth law, which is the word of God, they
ouerrule too too much. Title against disordr. pr. at Paul's Cross. etc.
Agreeably with this, he says in another place; Behold, ca^ they be Jerusalem,
which is called the throne of the lord, when there the By. sit as in the
throane of Antichrist? What throne has Christ, but by his government, which
they say is wanting? and what is the throne of Antichrist, but that Lordship in
their dioces, with such sway of popish officers, and with such romish
traditions? A little after, What shall we answer? they say, they call no
preachers to preach, but God, the Church, the Queen, and people agree to
receive them: so their parishes are churches, and those great assemblies are
the flock of Christ, for they are fair cages, though the birds are unclean:
know you not an honest woman? for she does love fornicators, so may you know
the true Church, for she loves such Prelates: O church of price, O the famous
church of England. Tell ye the church, that is, tell ye the By. of the dioces,
the church can give him authority, to authorize both the church it self and
the Gospel, as if God should entreat such a Prelate to be good unto him, etc.
And by and by after. Yet is this church of England the pillar and ground of
truth, for the By. ouerride it: they are the truth, and it is the ground, it is
the beast, and they are the riders: it stoupeth as an ass for the^ to get up,
the whip of their spiritual courts, and the spurs of their laws, and the
bridle of their power, do make it to carry the^. We give, say the By. then we
take say the Preachers: hold, take you authority, but on this condition, that
you preach no longer then we list. Mark you this (say the preachers) for we
have no authority but by the bishops, and if they give it us, why may they not
take it away? so the theefetaker does please the theefegiuer, and the young
wolf wants, when the old wolf is angry. Lastly, thus he writes in another
place of his declaration. Now, whereas they mingle civil and church offices, it
was answered by the word of God, that such mingling was flat Antichristianitie:
for Christ himself refused to be a civil Judge and diuider of lands, and
forbad his Apostles to meddle in such manner. Luke. 12.14. Luke. 22.25.
Again it is written, No man that goes on warfare, entangleth himself with
the affairs of this life: 2. Tim. 2.4.
for if once ecclesiastical persons, as they call them, get civil offices,
they become that second beast, which is Antichrist: for they get the image of
the first beast, which is, Reu. 13.15.
the power and authority of wicked Magistrates, that confirm their authority:
so they give a spirit to the image, that it should speak, that is, their
church laws and orders, having got civil power, both to deceive men by show
of Religion, and to force them with threats and penalties: Now would I know
of the reader, what it is that Brown by these places has spared unto any
Bishop in England, or left vndepraued in their authority. Furthermore, for the
unlawfulness of meddling with, or complaining to their courts and officers,
behold how vehement he is, as in all his dealings. Answer to M.C. Page 16.17.
Also because the judges and officers of the court do wrest Gods law by their
popish canon law, and respect persons, and take rewards, which is forbidden in
Deuteronom. (and by their profession they must needs do so, or else they cannot
hold their office) how shall any make complaynt unto them for church matters,
which can be counted none of the Church? And seeing Christ has commanded to
complain to the church against the sinner, how shall Christ's ordinance be
broken, by complaining unto such wretches? Furthermore, seeing the scripture
shows that the church has nothing to do to judge those that are without, 1.
Cor. 5.2.
how shall any complain of such a number of wicked men, as never were worthy
to be counted the Church. Again, 1. Cor. 6.1.
seeing no godly man may seek judgment under the unjust, as Paul shows, if
he have a matter against a brother, why should we seek to such for judgment?
Again, because those canon officers are strangers, neither known to the
churches, nor dwelling among the^, no marvel though Christ say, John. 10.
that his sheep will not follow nor seek to strangers, but will flee from
them. Moreover, 2. Cor. 11.20.
because they bring the churches into bondage (as it is written) because they
devour, because they take their goods, because they exalt themselves, and as
it were smite the people on their face, and cast the^ in prison, they do all
these things besides the church government, and therefore ought to be rejected,
and in no case to be suffered. So he concludes, Thus it is manifest by the
word of God, that such proud Prelates, and Antichristian usurpers, have no
authority nor power of the church, neither is their suspe^dings to be counted
suspensions by the Church, nor their calling of Ministers, a calling by the
Church. Having then thus condemned our Bishops authority, and disauowed as
utterly unlawful to meddle with their courts and officers. How strange is
this, that he sees not his subscription to the B. authority to have gainesaid
all his writings? yea, how monstrous is it, that he should thus fetter other
men from any way, using, or applying themselves to their courts and officers,
and yet himself, of late, being justly called in question, Called S. Toolies
in Southwarke.
by the Minister of the parish where he dwelt, for not communicating according
to the order appointed, made his speedy recourse to a Doctor and judge of such
courts, and by his means, cut off and forestalled the intended proceeding of
the minister and congregation there against him. O worthy Captain and guide of
so unworthy a schism. But perhaps his Proctors will plead for him, that his
subscription and late practice, have now cancelled all his former writings,
Brown stripped of all excuse.
so as they cannot henceforth in any equity be urged against him. No, no, let
the^ know that I hold him here faster, than that all of them can be able to
wring him out of my hands. I answer therefore, that since the time of his
subscription, first, he has written, In his reply to my answer to the
question of communicating.
that which is against both the By. and their authority, as in these words:
Thus your writing condemns you of iniquity, that speak not one word in the
He supposed he had spoken it to our minister.
pulpit, against the restraint by popish discipline, that ye cannot separate.
How sore do you labor, and how much do you suffer, that dare not speak a word
by name against those officers and courts, neither name nor protest openly
against those wicked, against whom you would have us protest particularly and
by name. And by and by after. But why labor you not also to charge them
openly, though it cost you your life and living? Also in his Libell against my
admonition, Numb. 20.
he has these words: Thou have written it heretofore, that there is no Aegipt
in England, and have thou now found us out to be in Aegipt. Do thou not
perceive, that thou and thy partakers, abusing your knowledge to persecute
those which are come out of Aegipt, are worse then Aegipt, yea princes of
Sodom, and people of Gomorrha? look thou to it, that thou remain not in
Aegipt. Thou have confessed that we were once come out of Aegipt, thou can
not say so of thy self, if still thou justify thy Aegiptian doctrine and
pollutio^s, as is to be seen by thy pamphlet. Let the reader now bethink him
what Bro. calls Aegiptian doctrine, since my book contains no doctrine, but
the doctrine of the church of England, and so it was judged and allowed by
authority. Also whether he account England as Aegipt, which he would deny in
another place, and whether he exclude the Bishops from the number, when he
calls me, and all my partakers, that do persecute him and his followers,
Princes of Sodom, and people of Gomorrha. Again, when my admo. demands what
gain their departing from our church here in England has gotten the^: he
denies not, that they are departed, but answers thus: We have gained, by
fleeing from persecuting wolves, Numb. 28.
not wealth, nor bellycheere, nor favor in the world, but loss, imprisonment,
all manner evil speeches, and death it self. Nay, he is so far from recanting
his former course, as that he thundreth judgments, and inuocateth vengeance
(even the blood of all those of his sect that have died any way by pursuit of
law) upon the heads of all those, that have been means and partakers to their
trouble: these are his words: Numb. 77.
It is thy manner, and thy partners, to force, to threaten, to make stirrings
and hurly burlies, and to drive man and wife asunder: thine and their outrage
cannot be satisfied with blood: thine and their railings, slander, and false
accusations, have brought diverse of us to death, some by the Gybbet, some by
long imprisonment, some by flight and pursuit, some by extreme care, thought,
and sickness, some by Seas, some by necessity and want, some by changing air,
dwelling and place, the blood of all these shall be upon thine and thy partners
heads. These places are sufficient, being written since his subscription, to
prove, that he still continues to oppose himself against the authority and
government of our Bishops, as also to the unity and peace of our Church.
Secondly, to those that object his subscriptio^, to cut off the allegation of
his former writings against him, I answer, that Brown has in writing since
his subscription, justified all his former cause and doctrines in every point,
and therefore has again cancelled his subscription, and revived all his
books. This I lay down by his own evident words in two places of his libell
against my admo. let the Reader consider and judge. Numb. 3.
Glouers popery (says he) or popish heresies, being long ago by many divines
refuted, needed not Bredwells childish refutation, whereas the cause wherein Bro.
has stood as yet is refuted by none. Now the places above cited show, that a
chief part of Bro. cause, is touching the authority and proceeding of the
Bishops, which he utterly detesteth. And seeing then he avouches his cause, to
stand as yet vnrefuted, he intends not that his subscriptio^ should any whit
empaire the same (for then he could not say so) but means therefore, that the
By. authority shall still be holden in no better case, then his books have left
it. Again he has these clear and full words, both for himself, and his
followers, Numb. 77.
None of you all can show any fault, false doctrine or wickedness in us. By this
time therefore (I believe) the reader sees, that I have left this wavering
weathercock, as naked of all defense to cover his shame, even as is my nail,
according to the proverb. But now let us look further also into his subscrip.
He confesses, that secondly he subscribed, that where the word of God is duly
preached, and the sacraments accordingly ministered, there is the Church of God.
But he dissembleth and keeps from the reader another form of words for that
article, which was offered him thus. 3. Do you acknowledge the Church of
England to be the church of Christ, or the church of God? and will you promise
to communicate with the same in prayers, sacraments, and hearing of the word?
and will you frequent our Churches according to law or no? to this he subscribed
affirmatively. Here again, let the crafty fox turn him which way he will,
and he is taken. For howsoever he would maintain quarelling upon the first
form of words, of Preaching the word duly, and ministering the sacraments
accordingly: yet when as he bound himself to frequent our Churches according to
law, he has at one gripe choked all his former writings. Let the
congregation of Toolyes Church in Southwarke testify, Or, Olaues.
whether for almost this two years space, that he has bin Schoolemaister
there, and dwelt amongst the^, he have at any time communicated with them in
the Sacra. and whether upon their late urging of him thereunto, he has not (to
defeat them) removed his dwelling into another parish, and left a troublesome
stink behind him in their Church. Yet some perhaps will object, that he does
sometimes communicate with our assemblies in the word. Hear the word
(sometimes) I confess, How Brown sometimes hears our Sermons.
but communicate with us therein, I deny that he does. How does he hear? as a
censor to judge, not as a brother to learn: as the Spider goes likewise to
the flower, but not to gather honey, as the Be: and thus the Devil also may be
said to communicate in the word with us. I confess I speak vehemently, but I
protest, the love of God constrains me: for before his subscrip. Brown being
about Stamford, was earnestly entreated of M. Far. and M. Har. Londoners, that
forasmuch as he had granted the^, it was not unlawful to hear the Word in our
assemblies, that he would by some writing, persuade his followers at London
thereunto, seeing they did at that time utterly condemn hearing with us. They
obtained his letters, which (as they testify) persuaded indeed to hearing in
our assemblies, not as children addressing themselves to the sincere milk of
the word, to grow thereby: nor as me^ plowing up the furrows of their hearts, to
receive the seed of the holy word to a perfect rooting in the^: but in stead of
these, other co^ditio^s of their hearing were put down, as trying, looking
into, and judging of the doctrine and behavior of the preachers, and that so
they might come, as by occasion and in the way of protestation for such
respects. Also he gave them a special exception of preachers, which overthrew
the whole matter: for when they were to avoid all that opposed themselves to
their course, what a doubtfulnes must he needs bring upon the^ to hear any?
since as they have wickedly condemned our assemblies for no Churches of God, so
we cannot choose but hate and pursue them, as enemies of all true peace and
sacred unity, saying with the Prophet David, Psalm. 139.21.22.
Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? and do not I earnestly contend with
those that rise up against thee? etc. Now also since his subscription, in his
Libell against me, he puts down his distinction of hearing in these words:
While they rail and resist the truth (for so he takes his way and doctrine
only to be) we may hear them as enemies, Numb. 105.
but join with the^ as brethren we dare not. And now I suppose you see, how he
hears our Sermons, and will grant unto me, that this is not to communicate
in the word with us, although he had given his hand and promise thereunto. But
alas, who would judge otherwise of this matter, if he have but a little looked
into Browns books? which he stoutly justifies to be without false doctrine or
fault. Every where in the^ has he disclaimed both our prayers, preaching and
Sacraments as none of the Lords, and therefore how shall he be taken (what show
so ever he makes) to communicate with us in any of them? two or three places
of his infinite number will I shortly set down, and so leave this point also to
the readers further consideration. Title against parish preachers, and hired
lect. etc.
But indeed (says he) is the Lords message a blind reading of service? and
though they preach, yet is that the Lords gold which they bring? when they take
and leave the flock as the wicked bishops appoint them, and neither can nor
will plant or refourme the church? have I sent them, says the Lord, or
commanded them, when they cause my people to err, by their lies, and their
slatteries, saying, ye are his people and church, though ye be polluted and
abominable? have these dumme dogs and tollerating preachers my letters and
seals? I never gave them (says the Lord) they are stolen and counterfaite:
yea, they have the seals and licenses of their wicked bishops, and if they
have my message, why hold they their peace at the wicked B. discharging, as if
they had his message only? be it therefore, O ye Prelates, that ye put Moses
seat for Moses doctrine, can you preach the Lords word and doctrine, or
minister his sacraments? to preach some truth as wicked me^ may do, and to
preach the Lords word of message is not al one for his message cannot be
without his government. Then a little after, Ye have not yet (says he) cast
off the yoke of Antichrist, and received all things concerning my kingdom and
government. Therefore because ye have not planted and builded my church says
the Lord, that it may be visible, nor purged and cleansed it from open
abominations, both ye and all the works of your hands with your prayers and
sacra, are unclean and accursed. Within few lines after this, yet forsooth,
it is made great wickedness not to hear these preachers, for they sit in Moses
seat, and are not blind guydes: Nay, they sit in the seat of Antichrist: and
if they were blind, they should not have had this sin, etc. Again within
few lines, But yet these wicked preachers rise up against this, and cry out
that they have the chief, they have the word and the Sacraments, and as for
the government and discipline, it is but an accessory and hangby, needful in
deed, but yet they may be without it, and be the Church of God
notwithstanding. But for this matter look the 16. verse and the meaning
thereof. In this place we say, that their preaching is not the word of message
from God, neither may we partake with them in the Sacraments. But in stead of
a thousand other places, hear him as patie^tly as you may, this one sentence,
against all kind of communicating with our assemblies of England, thus
blasphemously barking. They hold still the Priesthood of Antichrist, Titl.
against disordr. preach. at Paul's cross, etc.
which is the tollerating and dispensing with wickedness, by such wicked
preachers to make Christ and Belial agree. Therefore thus says the Lord, I
feed not my flock at Paul's cross in London, or Saint Mary's in Ca^bridge,
or in your English parishes, O ye my sheep, go ye not thither, as though
there were my fold, and there I rested and fed my flock, etc. Since he still
justifies all his doctrines and dealings to be fautles, let him and his
friends now see, how they can reconcile these things with his subscription.

His 4. interrogatorie was this, Will you promise also quietly to behave your
self, and to keep the peace of this church: and that you will not preach nor
exercise the ministry, unless you be lawfully called thereunto? To this also
he answered affirmatively, and that he would perform the same accordingly.
The latter part of this interrogatorie, Brown confesses in his answer to my
Admonition: but the former part he hides in his bosom. His proud challenge
will not suffer him now, to shrowde him self from shame in neither. First
therefore, to begin with the former part, having bound him self by the
third article to frequent our assemblies according to law, and to acknowledge
the same Church of England, (which does consist of these assemblies) to be
the Church of God. Now does he in the fourth place, tie him self to the good
behavior toward this Church, which has necessary relation to the Church
before so mentioned. This I so lay down, that the slipperie shifter should not
think to escape me, by drawing an interpretation from these words, to his
conuenticles at his pleasure. There be 3. notes of difference, that will not
suffer these words, this church, to be understood of his conuenticles. 1.
That the title of the Church of England, can not without great insolency, be
attributed to any other, then that which is established by the law of the land:
and that, he shows him self to see well enough in his 62. section of his
Answer to my Admon. where, for the same reason (though it helped his cause
never a whit) he quarelleth with me, for calling the church at Corinth, The
church of Corinth. 2. Their conuenticles can not be said to be frequented
according to the law, without the like insolency of speech, as in the former
note. For by this form of words, is always intended the law of the land:
and whenever the law of God is spoken of, it is ever set down with those or
the like plain words of difference? else let them show one instance to the
contrary. But the third difference is most clear: for having bound him self
to frequent and hold the peace of our Churches, he is taken faster, then that
any struggling can give him hope of escape. Thus having voyded the doubtfulnes
of his subscription, let us now come and try, how well his heart and his hand
have gone together, and that I may rake no further in his filthy confusions,
(whereof I suppose the reader would be as weary as my self) let the former
cited places of his writings, be here likewise called to witness, what a
friend he is to the church of England, and what peace he entertaineth with our
assemblies. As for his practice even since his subscription (omitting all that
was before, and namely his runnning over the sea, and carrying many with him)
the parish where he dwelt of late, does testify, as is said before, that it
is far from a peaceable and quiet behavior toward the Church: but much
more the parish of Olaues in Siluerstreete, a poor woman in the which, he has
so strongly seduced, that whereas my self sometimes had hope, by satisfying
her propounded doubts in writing, to have won her into our assemblies, and
church exercises, which of many in that parish was greatly desired, he has
again, by so large a writing and heap of words, overwhelmed the seely woman
(who belike thinks v. or vi. sheets of paper must needs confute one) and
confirmed her in her sottish separation, so as at this day in respect of
inferior means, we see utterly no hope of her recovery. As for
excommunication gone out against her, she altogether contemned it, before half
a score of the parish: and boasted of Bro. spreading of his writings against
me, to a hundredth miles distance from London. Besides this, and somewhat later,
he has disturbed the congregation at Dertford, drawn away some, railed openly
and dispersed writings, as of challenge against the lecturer there, M. Edmondes.
for discovering unto his auditorie the danger of that schism. Behold, is not
this quiet behavior, and tending to the peace of this Church? the latter part
of his last interrogatorie, being this, that he should not preach, nor
exercise the ministry, unless he be lawfully called thereunto, is as well
observed and kept by him, I warrant you. I think he dares not (for the
evidence of proof that he knows to be against him) deny, that he has since
his subscribing, preached in private houses: and namely amongst the rest, one
Lords day, and not far from Ludgate: having a little before in the same house
earnestly conte^ded against, in reasoning, and dissuaded from public hearing.
He was at the same time by one M. W. soundly resisted in the same his
schismatical dealing: who rightly judged it not meet, in a time of the great
asse^blies of the church, to the public exercises of the word and prayer, to
make private meetings for the same at our pleasure. And M. W. after he had
spoken in this matter, what the Lord then gave him, departed with some others
that went with him to the next sermon, and left Brown with the rest that liked
better to tarry, to their cursed co^uenticle. Wherein Bro. took upon him to
exercise the ministry of preaching: howbeit (he says) he was earnestly
requested unto it by those that were present. Now that point therefore will I
leave to the learned to decide: namely, whether this was a lawful calling to
that ministry, yea or no.

Besides the subscribing to these interrogatories, he furthermore wrote his
submission: a point or 2. whereof I will likewise set in the vewe of the
Reader. Fifthly (says he) I refuse not to communicate in the Sacraments. For I
have one child that is already baptized, according to the order and law, and
by this time in mine absence, if God have given my wife a safe deliverance, and
the child do live, I suppose it is also baptized in like manner. Further, my
servants being three, do orderly come to their own Parish Church, according
to the law, and communicate also according to the Law. Hereupon he adds,
To all these points that they are true, I do subscribe with mine hand and
name, this 7. of October, Anno Dom. 1585. Here I observe, that he testifies it
to be orderly done, to come to our own parish Churches: which is more then his
writings can well bear, howsoever he think to shift it. Also in that he
says, he refuses not to communicate in the Sacraments: perhaps he stops
the cry of his conscience, (which tells him, he communicates not in the
Sacraments with our congregation) by this foolish and deceitful persuasion:
namely, that he satisfies his promise by communicating in the Sacraments,
though but in his own conuenticles. But his argument of fact, that he gives
to bring credit withal unto the same assertion, as in these words: For I
have one child thas is already baptized according to order and Law, etc. this
(I say) stops up that starting hole against him. And then it would be
showed in what congregation of ours, he has communicated in the Sacraments,
since the day of his running over sea. Nay if his behavior be truly
observed, when he comes into our congregations, I do not think, it can be
proved, that he has since that day, so much as joined with them in their
prayers. Brown the pattern^ of a notorious ill conscience.
To this last place of the matter of Brownes subscription, I have reserved one
thing, which is good for all to know, and some to provide for, and that is this.
Answering to my Admonition for that point of his subscription, which I had
objected against him, as a proof of a vile conscience, he grants that he
had subscribed, but he denies that he had so subscribed, as that he should be
proved against himself thereby, in any thing. Thereupon he sets me down
(though untruly as you have heard) certain fourmes of the points whereunto
he did subscribe, and there withal tells me, what handsome interpretations
of his own words he can make: whereby giving one hand, to the satisfying of
the authority, that then dealt with him, with the other he stroketh the eyes
of his foolish followers, that they might sleep still in the opinion of his
good meaning. As though the dealings of Rob. Brown, had not otherwise been
vile enough, except he had by this means showed, that he has not one hair of
an honest man about him. Read (beloved) and then testify. The first article of
his subscription he reports thus. The bishops civil authority Brown did
acknowledge lawful in his subscription, and their magistracy to be obeyed.
Well, how do you think he makes this agree with his books? even thus he
tells you, that he does by those words, neither justify those for brethren
which do persecute, nor allow an idle and Lordly ministry in the Church as a
part of the brotherhoode. How the reader can conceive this, that he denies
upon his subscription, I know not: but thus much I am sure, this his
explication certifieth, that the BB. being by the Queen and her laws, allowed
the titles of Lords, are accounted of Brown not to be members of the Church.
And by this answer it appears, he coggeth this imagination into his
disciples, that he allowed the BB. civil authority, but therewithal denied
them their ecclesiastical ministry. Howbeit, in plain words he subscribed
to their authority. To cover himself in the 2. article, he is feign to hide
the truth, as I have before discovered. For the third, though he use the same
craft, yet in that he cannot but confess that he subscribed, that his child
was baptized according to order of law, to salve his credit with his
companions in this, he says, But yet it was done without his consent, and
contrary to an order he had taken and appointed: for it was baptized in England
he being beyond the sea. If it were contrary to his purpose, how could it
argue his not refusing to communicate in the Sacrament? On the other side, if
he tell his disciples true of his meaning herein, that he had taken other
order for his child's baptizing, but that his being beyond sea, crossed his
purpose: how agrees that with his neglecting of the same order taking, for his
later childs baptizing, which even at the time of his subscription, he
alleged (by way of conjecture, as if God had given his wife safe deliverance)
to be baptized also according to law. He was now in England when he might
have taken better order, if the first were such an error. But because he had
no such colorable excuse for this, he took a shorter way, though no less
shameful, in stepping over that part of the article, as though there had been
no such thing. Also for his alleging his servants coming to Church according
to law, whereby he persuaded unto the BB. his own conformity that way, he
excuses this to his companions to be, for that he was not to force his
servants against their conscience and custom, being newly come to him. Adding
this beside, that he never came to the same Church with them, the parson being
a common drunkard, and infamous by sundry faults. Again, confessing he
promised the BB. on the one side, that he would come to Church according to
order of law, On the other side, he persuades his disciples, that he might
well enough do so, for that there was no law to force him to take such a
parson for his lawful minister, neither to join with him in the prayers and
Sacraments. Thus has he first manifestly mocked authority, Jude verse. 8.
so as that place of Jude which he had wrongfully writhen toward me,
returns now again with full force upon his own head. And secondly, he
apparently shows that he continues his old course of seducing the seely
sheep, even as heretofore. In sum, if all that is here said, touching his
subscription, be melted together as in one lump, where shall we find a more
perfect image of a pestilent schismaticke, and one more void of all
conscience, than is this Brown, though Rome it self be raked through to find
him? How well do these notes (which were long ago observed to be the very
properties of all heretics) agree with this man's manners: Clemens Stro. lib. 7.
namely, to shrink from their doctrines as ashamed, when they are pressed with
them, and nevertheless still vnderhande to glory in teaching such things.
Again, Barnar. ser. 66. in Cant. cantic.
as an other testifies, It is not enough to be heretics, unless they be
also hypocrites. These are they that come in sheep clothing. Sheep they are
in show, foxes for craft, but wolves in act and cruelty. Neither is it in
price with them to follow virtue, but to color vices as with a certain
painting of virtue.

To the 108.
14 No part of Church Discipline can be wanting, but the Church does straight
way go to ruin thereby. Again, there may be a true Church of GOD without the
Presbiterie. These two axioms will not well agree, as the Admonition
supposes. Brown sent me glewe, which he said, was strong enough to hold
them together. I have tried it, and it will not prove, unless some unlawful
Art be used with all. He mistook me much in judging, I understood no
differncee betwixt Discipline and Presbiterie. I know the office and the
officer is not all one: but where the officer wants, there the office also
wants, as touching the execution thereof. And therefore where the Presbiterie
wants (which himself makes the only executors of the censuring discipline)
there that discipline also by his rule, Def. 51.53.
is wanting. For why else does he say, the Church of England is without this
discipline, if the same may be granted to be, where the Eldershippe is not?
Now his answer explicating his second enunciation, which I urge against the
first, says, His meaning was, that a Church remains still, though all the
officers of discipline should die at once, because (forsooth) yet still the
office and right of government should remain. I reply: that the government
which he speaks of, in this case, cannot be said to be actually, but
potentially. And if he hold it sufficient, to auouche the apparancie of a
Church (whereof is and was the question in the conference alleged) by a
potentiall having of discipline, we shall soon end the controversy for the
assemblies of England. But I may not here omit to note the dealing of this
double faced Ianus. In the conference which the Admonition cites against him:
through the occasion of his writings against the Church of England, it was
objected to him, that it seemed he had condemned our Churches, in that they
were not guided by Presbiteries. He denied his writings to import any such
thing. Hereupon they demand, whether (then) he would grant that there may
be a true Church of God without the Presbiterie. He answered, yea. Now in his
writing against me, he denies not that he answered so, but declares his
meaning to be otherwise than they took it. So that if they had further urged
his writings against his answer, it now appears, that he could cunningly
have turned the table vpside down, as the painter did: who being hired to
paint a tumbling horse, made him running: which when he that set him a work
found fault withal, the painter turned the table vpside down: and then the
horse which before appeared running, seemed plainly to lie tumbling. But what
dealing was this for a divine, to a question propounded, of the constitution of
a church, necessary to the acknowledging of it, (as appears by this occasion
of the question before rehearsed) to make answer concerning an accidental
case of a constituted Church? And this answer being but as the lining of his
words, the outside seeming altogether correspondent to their purpose. So
deals he generally in all his writings and actions for this his
schismatic course: and namely in most of the points of his subscription: as
that no child can better represent the visage of his father that begot him,
than this man does the spirit of him that gave those doubtful answers at
Delphos,

15 The rest I answer not, till you come to his conclusion, number 120.

Whereunto thus much I say, let it be (O Lord) as this man has desired,
namely, be thou judge, whether of our ways be approved in thine eyes: and
whether of us has the strength of truth in his mouth, and be merciful unto
our iniquities, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake.

Psalm 8.2. Out of the mouths of babes and suckelings have thou ordained
strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and
auenger. FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John VVindet, and are to be sold at the Rose in Povvles
churchyard. 1588.

NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO Luke 4. Verbum Dei manet in aeternum:



