A Treatise OF DIVINE WORSHIP, TENDING to prove that the Ceremonies imposed
upon the Ministers of the Gospel in England, in present controversy, are in
their use unlawful.

1604.

A Treatise of Divine worship, tending to prove that the Ceremonies imposed
upon the Ministers of the Gospel in Enland, in present controversy, are in
their use unlawful.
CHAP. I. Of divine worship in general.
DIVINE worship is any actio^ or service that is immediately and directly
performed unto God him self, whether the true God or a false, whether
commanded by divine authority, imposed by humane, or assumed upon our own
heads and pleasures. For in this latitude of sense is divine worship to be
co^ceaved, that it may comprehend under it both true and false worship.

2. Though all Actions and services that Man performs unto Man are not parts
of civil worship, yet every Action and Service that man performs directly to
God, is a part of divine worship, and ought merely to concern his own
glory. It being impossible to imagine how the creature should perform any
service, or do any action to the Creator him self but worship. For the ground
of worship is the sense of some excellent eminency of goodness in the party
worshipped and defect and inabilitie to do an answerable good to a good
received in the party worshipping, for we need not to worship God, if we
could be as good to him as he is to us, and therefore (except we should mock
him) because receaving all good from him, we are not able to do the least good
unto him, all that we can do, is to worship him, that is, to glorify him
above all things; and debase our selves before him as nothing in his presence.

3. All special things therefore done in the service and worship of God, is
worship: and a part of that honor that is done unto him. And what so ever
special thing done in divine service, is not a special honor and worship unto
God, must needs be a dishonor and abuse of his Majesty, who requires nothing
but worship at our hands, and unto whom we can not possibly do any other good.

4. If therefore a man shall do any special action in the service of God, of
which there is no use out of the same: and that action so done, bring no
special honor to God; the doing of it is a profanatio^ of the name of God. For
all special actions done in the Service of God, must either bring special
honor to God, or else they must needs dishonor him.

5. Divine worship is Internal only or External also. Internal worship is
merely spiritual, and performed only within the temple of man's heart, of
which none are witnesses but God and a man's own conscience. All the inward
motions of the heart directed unto God are parts of this worship, as faith,
hope, confidence, love, fear and joy in God, etc. which are all of them
diverse acts and parts of Inward worship, in every one of which God is
honored. All which spring from the apprehension of our own wantes, and Gods
infinite excellency and goodness toward us. We need not proceed any further
in handlinge of this worship, it nothing appertains to our present purpose.

6. External worship is an expressing and setting forth of the Internal by
outward signs and rites: by which as by certain outward bodily shadows and
colors the spiritual and Inward worship of God is made visible and sensible to
others.

CHAP. II. Of Ceremonies in general.
THESE signs and rites are called Ceremonies. A Ceremony is a corporeal
advmbration of some hidden thing in the mind, that it desires to affect others
withal, in some effectual manner, for by such means as these, are the
secrets of the soul disclosed and painted out or figured to our own and
others bodily senses.

2. Such actions properly are ceremonial, that are mere shadows and signs
exhibiting nothing but some similitude and resemblance of such things, as man
is desirous but not able to exhibit in substance and in deed. And therefore
are called co^plements, because in doing the^ a man labors to supply that in
a shadow, that he can not do in substance. And hence it is that the more
unable a man is to do that he would, the more he uses to supply his defect
with signs and tokens.

CHAP. III. Of Natural Ceremonies.
CEremonies are either Natural or Instituted. Natural ceremonies are all such
voluntary compositions and gestures of the body, as are with moderate
deliberation used to shadow forth those hidden motions, affections, and habits
of the mind, that are begotten in the mind by some goodness in those unto whom
they are performed and done; for a man performs no ceremony unto him self,
but unto others, and the ground of that ceremony is in him, unto whom it is
performed.

2. For example: Authority in another begets reverence in me. This
reverence possessing and affecting my soul, it breeds in me a desire to
manifest it unto the party revere^ced, but I cannot possibly do it by any
other means, but by some bodily shadow and sign, whereupon nature teaches me
to bow the body; the like may be said of lifting up of hands, casting up the
eyes, etc. All of which kind are certain natural impressions of the soul
made in and upon the body, endeavoring in and by them to make her hidden
motions so visible and effectual, as they may affect our selves and others.

3. Comelines and decency does especially consist in the use of Ceremonies of
this kind, and they have been ever carefully observed in the Church of God,
as well before Christ as since, both in her public and private ministrations;
which wilfully to neglect, were to sin against God, and for any to inhibite
only upon their will and pleasure, were impiety. But these Ceremonies in
controversy are of another nature as shall afterward appear.

4. This first kind of Ceremonies the more natural they are and the more they
shall appear to flow from the free and enforced will, of him that acts them,
the more decent and of greater grace they are, for they are such shadows as
are sent forth from our passions by the light of nature, and are not fit for
any other use or signification.

5. And as nature only frames them well, so if it shall appear that they
proceed from her and are not forced and wrong from men (invita minerva) she
puts into them such a light, that any of ordinary conceyt may in the sign
see the thing signified.

6. These Ceremonies though Natural and therefore common to all men, yet are
they not in all degrees universally the same, because havinge their original
from the natural motions and conceptions of the mind, especially passion and
affection, by which they are animated and formed, there being in the stock of
mankind such diversity of natures and dispositions; such diverse degrees of
the same inclinations; such a diverse composition and minglinge of affections,
it can not be but nature must needs vary and be diverse in them.

7. And though they are natural, yet are they not such as nature by violence
forces and wringeth from men (as the actions of panting and breathinge) such
as men cannot at their pleasure abstain from, or lay down, for laughter in
extreme mirth, and weeping in great sorrow, though they be natural
impressions and signs of inward and hidden passions, yet are they not
Ceremonies; but such signs only are ceremonies, wherein there is concurrence
both of nature and will, in the framing and use of them, as appears in the
particulars above specified; and therefore are such, as may upon some special
or particular occasions, be omitted or suppressed.

8. Thus much of natural ceremonies. Instituted ceremonies are such outward
rites and signs as by reason of some Analogy or similitude, are ordained and
appointed to signify and shadow forth any mystical truth. They being not
brought forth by nature to any such end or purpose: of which kind are all the
Jewish Ceremonies, Our Sacraments, All Paganish and Popish rites, and those
Ceremonies in present controversy. For none of al those external rites, do
by nature signify any such matter, but their uses and significations are put
upon them only by the will of the institutor or vser, and are not so much
intended for decency and order, as for solemnity and state.

9. Those things that are put to this Ceremonial use, being not made by nature
to any such end or purpose, must, if they be not vain and foolish, borrow
light from some word of institution, for the more mystical the Ceremonies of
this kind are and of secreatecsense, of greater grace they are.

10. Natural Ceremonies, if by institution and appointment they be put to any
other use the^ nature it self has fitted them unto, do loose their name and
become Instituted Ceremonies, as kneeling tied to eating and drinking in the
Sacrament, etc.

CHAP. IIII. Of civil and religious Ceremonies in general.
THE use of both these kinds of ceremonies, that is natural and instituted,
is either in civil services of man to man, or in religious services of man to
God from whence ceremonies receave a second denomination, and are called
(whether they be natural or instituted) either Civil or Religious Ceremonies.

2. Civil Ceremonies therefore are such Rites and Ceremonies, as are performed
in Civil offices and duties between man and man, as they are members of a
civil body or incorporation. The right use whereof is called Civilitie, and
the contempt rudenes; the end of civil Ceremonies is to signify and shadow
those inward affections that one man desires to show to another, in the due
use of these ceremonies co^sistes humanity, lowlines, courtesy, good manners,
civil state and pomp, etc. because the Ceremonies of this kind are not
controverted, we pass them by.

3. Religious Ceremonies are such outward Rites as are performed in religious
duties and services of man to God: and they are outward shadows of zeal,
devotion, faith, holiness, reverence of the majesty of God, etc.

4. In the use of these Ceremonies especially does external worship consist
whether true or false.

5. Religious Ceremonies are either Common or Proper: common Ceremonies are
such as are equally used in civil and religious matters: bowing the knee used
in prayer, is a religious ceremony, signifying in that action a Divine
reverence of God. Yet it is not a ceremony peculiar and proper to Religion,
because it is a ceremony that is and may be used to the Magistrate, to shadow
forth also civil worship due unto him. Of which nature all natural Ceremonies
seem to be, and any Instituted Ceremony may be, if it have no reference to
Religion in the use.

6. Though matters of civil order and decency be very improperly called
Ceremonies, they being rather matters of substance, and it being impiety
wilfully and without necessity to neglect them in the Congregation of
Saints, or to do any thing contrary unto them: Yet all things te^ding thereto,
may for doctrine sake be referred to this head. For though Gods worship do not
consist in them, yet Gods worship is profaned in the wilful contempt and
neglect of them. Yea as far forth as natural and civil decency and
comelines are outward shadows of inward worship, They may be safely reputed
parts of divine worship.

7. Matters therefore of order and decency in the service of God are all such
matters as are drawn from the ordinary civil customs of men, and which for
any to neglect wilfully, would seem to the reason of a natural man a disorderly
and unseemly thing. As to come to the assembly clothed, and that in seemly
and usual apparel, according to our civil callings in the world, to sit
there quietly and in a comely manner, in respect of compositio^ of body, to
give as much as may be, upper place to our civil superiors, that the place of
mecting be fair swept; that the Table of the Lord in the time of Communion,
be spread after the civil fashion of the Country, with a fair table-cloth;
that men pray bare-headed, etc. These orders used in civil meetinges of men,
wherein civil decency is observed and kept, ought not to be neglected in
religious meetings, and therefore they may be called common Ceremonies or
orders.

8. These ceremonies of civil order and decency, are of that nature and
necessity, that for the Magistrate wilfully to inhibite, were sin in him,
and for any particular man not to use and observe as much as convenientlie he
can, (though authority had never enjoined them in particular) were impiety.
And therefore they are of a far different nature from the ceremonies in
controversy: For let it be supposed to be no sin to use these when the
Magistrate enioyneth the^: yea suppose them to be holy ornaments and Rites,
yet if no authority humane or divine had iustituted them, it had been no sin
for any man to neglect them, nay it were a foul sin to use them. For
example: Our Lords spiritual enjoin every Minister in Divine service, to
wear a white linen Ephod or surplice, they may (if it please them) as lawfully
enjoin him to have painted before and behind, two fair red crosses: but if a
private man upon his own head should use his Surplice so, though it be an
honorable sign that he adds, it would be made a grievous crime.

9. They therefore do but gull the simple of the world, that from humane
authority to institute such civil orders as are above specified, do infer
that man has authority to bring into the service and worship of God such
ceremonies, as are clean of another nature. As though because the Magistrate
may ordeine such Ceremonies, as without his ordinance, were impiety for a man
not to observe, therefore he may ordeyne such ceremonies which without his
ordinance at least, were impiety and wickedness for any to use.

CHAP. V. Of Ceremonies peculiar to Religion.
THOSE Ceremonies that are proper to Religion are such as in a peculiar manner
are tied to religious persons actions and purposes only, especially such as are
in a special manner tied to the solemn worship of God. In these ceremonies
consistes the external form of divine worship, and they are the outward badges
and cognizances of the same.

2. All Ceremonies used in the service of God, are either civil ceremonies (to
wit such as are also of the same use out of the service of God) or holy
Ceremonies, to wit such wherein holiness consistes in the due use of them; or else
they are profane, that is such as have no use, or a superstitious use. The
ceremonies in controversy are not For then the bare omission of the^, would
argue rudenes and incivilitie.
civil ceremonies: again it is granted there is no holiness in the use of them
Some nigher his M. have given it out yt he would (if he could) hang those that
put holiness in the^.
, Therefore they are profane ceremonies, and by consequent not to be mingled
with holy things.

3. As there are diversities of religion and Churches, so there are diversities
of Rites and Ceremonies by which they are distinguished, and ceremonies are the
partitio^ walls whereby (for the most part) one Church is divided from
another. For he that shall with a more narrow eye seek into these things shall
see, that for the most part, the diversities and varieties of Ceremonies are
the begetters of diversity of doctrines, and opinions, whereby one Religion
differs from another.

4. The more one Church differs from another in Rites and Ceremonies, the
more it uses to differ in substance of doctrine; and the more one Church
draws near unto another in Ceremonies, the more it draws near unto it in
substance of doctrine. The Churches of France and Scotland in substance of
doctrine do so much the more differ from the Synagogue of Rome, by how much
the farther they differ from her in Ceremonies, then other Churches; and some
in the Church of England that do strive to come to Rome in Ceremonies, come so
much the nearer to her in doctrine, as might appear by diverse instances if the
matter were not too too apparent.

5. He that hates the Religion it self, hates all the shadows and shows of
the Religion; and he that loves the shadows and rytes of a Religion, he loves
the Religion it self; he loves a Pope well that loves the triple Crown; he loves
a Friar well, that dotes upon his Cowle, and shaven crown; and out of question
he loves a Maspriest with all his heart, that is mad, upon his massing attire,
or any part thereof.

6. As it is rudenes and want of civilitie, to neglect or contemn a Civil
Ceremony, so it is prophanes and irreligion to neglect or contemn a Religious
Ceremony: and as outward civilitie consists in the due use of civil
Ceremonies, so outward holiness and religion consists in the due use of all
Religious Ceremonies: Those Ceremonies therefore are profane and not beseeming
the true worship of God, that are so far from any show of holiness in the use of
them, that they make the party that refuses the use of them to seem, and to
be reputed pure, holy, and precise, of which nature our Ceremonies in
controversy are.

7. As civil Ceremonies tend to the honor of them unto who^ civil worship is
due, and is a part thereof: So Religious Ceremonies tend to the honor of him
unto whom religious worship is due and is a part thereof, neither can a man
possibly imagine how any thing should be religious whether a Substance or a
Ceremony, but it must needs respect him that religion it self respects, as
therefore we perform civil honor unto those unto who^ we perform civil
ceremonies, so we perform Religious and Divine honors unto those that we obey
in a religious ceremony. They therefore that claim and perform obedience
therein, do claim and perform that which is due only to God.

8. Nothing intended or done by man is an honor to God, but that which is an
obedience unto God in some Commandment. All Ceremonies therefore of Religion
that are an honor unto God, must be commanded by God himself: and to bring in
such Ceremonies into his worship as are no honor to him, is to mock God.

9. All Religious Ceremonies or Ceremonies of Religion, are spiritnall, that
is, are ordained for spiritual uses and ends, and not for civil or
temporal, and therefore are outward notes and testimonies of those things that
make us spiritual men, and they are parts of spiritual honor due unto
spiritual authority and lordship.

10. All spiritual Lords may claim as their due, spiritual worship, and
therefore may institute religious Ceremonies: for look what difference there
is between humane and divine, Temporal and Spiritual, the same difference
there is between the peculiar worship due to the one, and to the other: if
therefore Temporal Lords may require all civil rites and honors, Spiritual
Lords may require all Divine and Spiritual rites and honors.

11. Civil honor and reverence only can not nor ought not to please a
Spiritual Lord, hence it is that the Spiritual Lords of our Church cannot
content them selves with such honor that we give to civil Magistrates and
Princes, but we must obey them in peculiar religious duties and services; and
surely it is meet that if there be any such besides Christ, that we perform
spiritual homage unto them, and they are not worthy that high style that
will be content with temporalls, when spiritualls are due.

12. Those Ceremonies that are enjoined by true spiritual Lords, are truly
spiritual and holy, even as spiritual and holy as the Sacraments, though they
consist of some things in their own nature indifferent; and those Lords are not
spiritual, that are not able by their sole authority and word, to hallow that
which before was not holy.

13. Those that can make a Surplice, a Cope, a Cross, etc. to be ornaments of
Religion and holy Ceremonies: can, when it pleases them, make a shaven Crown,
a Monks habit, spitle in Baptism, holy Water, the triple Crown, and all the
Missall rytes, as holy. For they are al of the same nature: and those that can
find no reason to prove those unholy and unlawful, would find none to prove
any other external Rite to be so, if they should in the same manner be
imposed.

14. Those that have power upon their own will and pleasure to bring into Gods
service some indifferent thing, may bring in any For all indifferent things
are of the same nature.
indifferent thing: those that may bring in without special warrant from God,
pyping into his service, might as well bring in dancing also; those that have
authority to join to the sacrament of Baptism the sign of the cross, have
authority also (no doubt) to join to the Sacrament of the Supper, flesh,
broth, butter or cheese, and worse matters then those, if they will. Yea, those
that have power to make peculiar forms of Religion and worship, have power to
make and invent a Religion and worship of their own.

CHAP. VI. Of Divine worship in special, and first of true worship.
THvs much of Divine Worship in general, both Inward and Outward, and of
Ceremonies wherein Outward Worship especially consists. Now let us in
special consider the same. Divine worship therefore is either true Worship or
false.

2. True worship is that immediate service that the true GOD him self
requires to be performed unto him self. In the exercise whereof consists
true holiness and Religion.

3. True worship both for matter and manner, ought to be according to the
prescript rule of Gods word only: neither has any mortal man authority to
frame according to his own conceyte, any form or fashion of Gods service and
worship; for the manner of worship also must be holy, and not the matter only;
and no man has power to make any thing holy, that God halloweth not by his
word and spirit.

4 All civil furtherances and necessary circumstances of Gods solemn
worship, though they be not essential parts of the same, nor by special
Nomination commanded: Yet are they to be esteemed Ordinances of God, and not
humane inventions. As God having ordained that his Saints dwelling together
both Men, Women and children, of all sorts and degrees, should ordinarily at
appointed times meet together, it must needs be presupposed to be his
ordinance that they meet together in some such ordinary places, as are
fittest for to receive most commodiouslie such Assemblies: so God having
ordained that his Ministers should preach or proclayme salvation to a
multitude geathered together, and that they should sit at his feet, has also
ordained that the Ministers seat should be higher then the rest of the
peoples; and the like may be said of all other such Circumstances of Divine
worship, which are matters of so base and low consideration, and so subject to
common sense, that it neither besemeth the majesty of the word of GOD in
special, or humane authority derived from God, to make any laws in
particular about them; no more then to make laws that one should not sit in the
Congregation upon another lap, or one spit upon another clothes, or face:
or that men should not make antic faces in the Church.

CHAP. VII. Of false worship.
THVS much of true worship. False worship is such a service of God as has no
warrant from God him self: worship is false in matter or manner in whole or in
part; neither can the true matter of worship sanctify a corrupt manner, or the
true manner sanctify a corrupt matter, or some parts of true worship, or the
whole it self, sanctify any part of false worship that shall be adjoined to
it, or mingled with it.

2. Whatsoever is unholy and superstitious out of Gods solemn service, can not
be made by the sole appointment and will of man holy and good in the solemn
servise of God, but must needs be more unholy and superstious therein, and
therefore a part of false worship. If for a man to sign him self or another
in the forchead with the sign of the Cross out of baptism, be superstitious
and unholy, it can not be good in Baptism but a prophanerite.

3. The more light and toyish the things seem to be that without warrant
from God are brought into the worship of GOD, the more we should abhor
conformity unto them, it being a fearful presumption, to serve God in a
toyish manner: for who is he that trembles at the Majesty of God, that dares
use in his worship any toy and trifle? They are deceaved therefore that think
that therefore we should not make scruple to use them because they are toys.

4. That is a corrupt manner of worship wherein there is confusion and
vndecencie, for all things must be done in the service of God, in decency,
order and comelines, as it is granted; and under the name whereof these
ceremonies are obtruded upon us: But those things that are indecent and
disorderly in other matters, and of no necessary use in Gods worship, can not
be matters of order and decency in the service of God, except God him self
should in a special manner command them.

5. It being therefore confusion and disorder in civil matters where a
multitude ioynes together in a common suite and supplication for all to speak
at once the same words: and common wisdom and discretion having taught it to
be a decent and orderly ceremony, that some foreman should speak, and the
rest hold their peace, giving only some sign and testimony of assent: he must
be more then a man, that must make it an orderly thing in our general and
ordinary suites and prayers to God, for all the congregation to open their
mouths together in a prayer, especially since God has in special appointed
the Minister to be the mouth of the people, and expressly requires the
assent of the people only in the word, Amen.

6. It being a ridiculous disorder in other matters in any solemnity, where
any Deed or Record is to be read or rehearsed for one to read one period, and
another read or say another, how can it by man's wit and will, without ordinance
from God, be a matter of order, for the Minister to read one verse of
scripture, and the people another; for the Minister to say one piece of a
prayer, and the people by way of catch, to say another.

7. If any thing be indecent out of the worship of God (the same reason of
vndeacency remaining) it is much more indecent in the worship of God; for the
more excellent the thing is, in which an indecent thing is used, the more
indecent the thing is that is so used. As if it be indecent to go naked in any
company, it is much more indecent to go so in the Congregation: If foul
apparel be every where else indecent, it can not be decent in Gods service,
though all the Bishops in the world should decree it.

8. An indecent and disorderly thing the more strictly it is urged in the
service of God, the more dangerous it is to yield unto the same, and so much
the more effectual cause of false worship.

9. If there be some apparel that does in special manner become the service
of God, and deserves to be appropriated unto it, the^ by the same position
there must be some apparel that does deforme and disgrace the service and
worship of God: for if no apparel can deforme it, then no apparel can be an
ornament or decent form unto it.

10. If any apparel do deforme Gods true worship, it is that apparel, that
does most beautify and grace the false and Idolatrous worship of God, As that
apparel must needs most deforme a wise man that does most adorn a fool, and
that apparel must needs be most unbeseeming a King, that is seemly and
decent for a beggar.

11. If therefore men would set their wits upon the highest streyne to
invent an apparel to disgrace the Ministers of the Gospel, they could not
invent a more odious attire then the consecrated attire of a filthy
mass priest, the most abominable Idolater in the earth.

12. Those that abhor Idolatry as much as they do beggerie and folly, can
not but hate and abhor the badges of Idolatry as much as the badges of folly
and beggerie, and therefore can not but account that priestly attire that is
enjoined unto us by our Prelates, an apparel more unbeseeming the Minister of
the Gospel, then a Cloak with a thousand patches, or a coat with four
ellebowes, for beggary and folly being judgments and not sins, the notes of
beggerie and folly can not be so odious in a spiritual eye, as the notes of
Idolatry.

13. If it be denied, that the apparel enjoined is popish, because it was
before popery was; this answer may be made. 1. It can never be proved that it
was before popery. For though not all popery, yet some popery was in the
Apostles times: most of the heresies were before the full revealing of
Antechrist which notwithstanding we fasten upon them and count popish they
having entertained them. If therefore an error mainteyned before Popery, and
retained by Papists, deserve the name of a popish error, why should not
unnecessary apparel, though used before, yet entertained now only by them, and
those that receive it from them, bear the name of Popish attire. 2. As a Coat
of diverse colors is a fools coat, notwithstanding that Joseph one of the 12.
Patriarchs wore one, so a white linen garment is a popish garment though some
Ministers in the East Churches did wear them, and yet it can never be proved
that either they wore such a one, as is prescribed unto us, or that it was a
ministerial garment and not their ordinary civil attire, or proper to the
Minister only, or if all this, that it was well done: for there being no one
father that wrote since the Apostles times, but have erred in some matters of
Doctrine, why may they not as well err in matters of ceremony, if all the
true Churches of God beside our own in England, and the greatest part of the
sufficientest Pastors of our own Church, are held to err in the general
renouncing of these ceremonies; why might not some few Ministers in the old
Church, as well err in instituting and using them?

14. A corrupt and scandalous Ceremony in the worship of God is so much the
more dangerous and scandalous to others, by how much the more it comes graced
and countenanced with lawful authority. A corrupt ceremony enjoined by a
Heathenish Pagan and Tyra^t unto the Ministers of the Gospel living under his
jurisdiction, cannot do so much spiritual hurt, as when it shall be required by
a Christian Magistrate, for the good conceyt of the institutour and ordeinor of
a religious Rite, is it that breeds superstition. Those therefore whose
special calling from God is, to edify the souls of men and not to destroy
them, ought so much the more to avoid these Ceremonies they judge and know to
be scandalous and hurtful to the souls of men, by how much the greater grace
and countenance they receive from the authority of man, neither can the
commandment of the Magistrate be a sufficient plea at the bar of Gods
judgment seat for a man that by virtue or force thereof alone, has done any
action (how indifferent so ever in it self) that his conscience tells him will
scandalize his brother, and so hurt his soul; gross therefore is the doctrine
of them that teach, That Paul (if the Magistrate had command him) should have
eaten flesh, though his brothers soul should have been damned for it.

15. The more indifferent an action is in it self, the more odious it ought to
be unto us when we shall perceive it to hurt our brothers soul, which ought
to be a thousand times dearer unto us then his body, or our own lives, for he
shows neither love nor mercy to his brother, that had rather be the instrument
of his everlasting damnation, then omit the doing of a mere indifferent thing,
though he should incur therefore any bodily punishment whatsoever. That
form therefore of Gods service that consists in the use of such things
indifferent, as experience manifests, are a scandal (and by consequent a
destruction) to the souls of infinite numbers, ought not to be used of any,
much less of those, who are called by Christ to feed the souls of men and not
to destroy them. How scandalous these Ceremonies are to all, how the omission
of them cannot be scandalous to any, but unto such as are worse scandalized
already by embracing them, requires a larger Treatise.

16. No Magistrate that is a Christian will challenge authority to destroy the
soul of any man, and therefore he cannot upon his own mere will and pleasure
without sin against God, enjoin any thing (not required by God) that
evidently tends to the destruction of any man's soul; and those subjects that
(being ready to perform any duty that God requires unto the Magistrate)
shall refuse to do any such thing so required, and shall patiently and meekely
yield themselves to any punishment the Magistrate shall think good to lay upon
them without resistance, shall A paciant suffering, when we cannot in
conscience obey, is the best obedience.
perform more true and loyal obedience unto his authority therein, then any
of those that shall yield obedience to any laws of that kind enacted by never
so good a Magistrate and (in show) to never so good an end.

17. No subject therefore can take any such authority from the hands of the
Magistrate, which may warrant him to do any thing that shall evidently destroy
his brother soul at any time, much less in the service and worship of God
wherein all things that are to be done, ought to tend to the edification of his
soul in a special manner.

18. It is plain in the word of God, that the kingdom of God (that is) the
service and worship of God, stands not in meats and drinks, nor any such
external rytes having no authority from God. When therefore without any
commandment from God, such external things shall be brought into the service of
God, and made the very forms of the same; such Rytes must needs be false
worship, and that form of Gods service must needs be adulterate, that is
made to consist in such things. For no authority can make that a part of Gods
kingdom, that the word of God does expressly deny to be a part thereof.

19. Those Ceremonies therefore in present controversy being merely by man
brought into the worship of God, are by no means to be yielded unto, for it is
in effect to make the Kingdom of God to consist in meats and drinks or in such
like things. For if man has authority to make the kingdom of God consist in
apparel, etc. he has also authority, if it please him, to make it consist in
eating and drinking, and may make them a part of the Liturgy as well as any of
those things that are in controversy.

20. Those peculiar Rites and Ceremonies which are in that manner and form used
in the service of God, that if God himself did but ratify and confirm that
present sse of them should then be parts of his true outward worship; must
needs as they are used (without Gods ordinance) be parts of a false outward
worship: But our surplices, crosses, kneeling at the Lords Supper, etc. are
such, that if God should but command to use them as we use them, that is if he
should require every Minister in divine service to wear a surplice to note
joy, dignity or sanctity, or in Baptism to cross a child in sign, etc. Nay
though he should express no use at all, but barely enjoin the things
themselves to be used in his service, yet they should be parts of Gods true
outward worship, for whatsoever God tieth in a peculiar manner to his worship,
is a part thereof. These Ceremonies therefore in controversy having such a use
in the service of God, unto which they are peculiarly tied, must needs be used
as parts of Divine worship, for else the bare ratifying of their present use,
could not make them true worship; Being therefore (as they are used) parts of
divine worship and not parts of true divine worship, because not commanded of
God; they are parts of false divine worship, for that divine worship that is
not true worship, is false worship.

FINIS.

