HELPS FOR SVDDAIN ACCIDENTS Endangering Life.

By which Those that live far from Physicians or Chirurgions may happily
preserve the Life of a poor Friend or Neighbor, till such a Man may be had to
perfect the Cure.

Collected out of the best Authors for the general Good,

By STEPHEN BRADVVELL. Physician.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS PVRFOOT, for T. S. and are to be sold by Henry
Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1633.

To the Charitable READER.
THou, that imitating the Good Samaritan, have never a hand, but what is ever
ready to help thy grieved Neighbor. Take thou this little Labor, to make thy
Charitic greater. And know, that the maine motive which made my Pen for this
work, was my observatio^ of Man; who is called A little World, or (if you will)
A Globe in plano; delineated with all those fair and fruitful Kingdoms of
virtues, and sweet proportions which beautify both Mind, and Body. Yet
withal, those boundless Oceans of fatal Accidents (whose merciless and
sudden billows threaten still to confound him) make him but A World of
Miseries. Times Footmen run not so fast on their sandy arrands, as mischances
in full careers rush upon us. All the Joys we possess by day (if they hold it
out) vanish with the day. All our Gloryes are Sunne-beames but of a waterish
shining. Our Clocks of Health seldom go true; those of Death, more certain
than believed. We are owners of no content but sleep; and yet even that
blessing is subject to distraction: for our very Dreams do often prove
Diseases, and affright us. Nor do these uncertain winds blow down Signe-posts
only, blast the Common sort alone: But from head to foot, the Statues even of
PRINCES are sometimes riven with these thunders. To bring a Catalogue of all
those Great Ones Histories testify to have died by Poyso^, Drowning, and other
Accidents in this Treatise specified; would make this Praeface (like the Cates
of Mindus) too big for this Book. Let it suffice, that not only the Sun
and Moon often suffer Eclipses; but all the lesser Stars in their brightest
glories are often clouded with Mischances. We see then on what a ticklish
needles point our Pleasures dance; and when they fall off, with what a nimble
foot Calamities leap into their places. Let it not then be held a worthless
Work to bring defensive furniture against such Sudden Incursions. And if the
Cedars for all their wealthy timber be sometimes over-turned with Tempests:
have not the lower Trees that fill the Land with fruit (the Husbandmen I mean)
much more need of succor in such storms? It is their way chiefly that I
strew with these flowers of Recovery. If others gather some, and find their
sweetness, I hope their virtues will teach such virtuously to loath
Ingratitude. For the Poor (whose wants double their Pains, and yet their
Paines-taking makes their natural strength easily repayrable) I have brought
easy and common Medicines. But before the Rich (whose pampered lives make
mischances more difficult, both to be endured and cured) I have laid open
Remedies of richer value.

In all which I have here and there stuck some Observations of mine own. The
Work is but little; but my Labor was the greater so to compile it; that as
every one may need it, so every man may be able to buy it. I have likewise
written it in a plain style, that every one also may understand it. Hoping
therefore that these my Labors shall (by GODS blessing) be beneficial to
thee, of what estate or degree soever thou art; I rest

Ready with my best skill to do thee all healthful Service, STEPH. BRADVVELL.

A Table of the Contents of every Chapter in this BOOK.
CHAPTER I.
Prevention of Mischief by Poisons eaten or drunk.
CHAPTER II.
A General way of Curing such as are hurt by Inward Poisons.
CHAPTER III.
A more Particular way of Cure; wherein is touched the eating of Mushroms,
Muskles, and Perewinckles.
CHAPTER IIII.
Serpents or Worms crept into the Body.
CHAP. V.
Poisonous Humors spurting or dropping out of the wounded bodies of venomous
creatures, and lighting upon a Man's skin.
CHAP. VI.
Certain General Notions for the Help of such as are Stung or Bitten by
venomous Beasts.
CHAPTER VII.
The General Method of Preventing, and Curing all venomous Stingings and
Bitings.
CHAP. VIII.
Stingings of Hornets, Bees, and Wasps.
CHAP. IX.
Bitings of Adders, Slowwormes, Efts, the Shrew-Mouse, and other such venomous
Beasts.
CHAP. X.
The Biting of a Mad Dog.
CHAPTER XI.
Bitings of Creatures not venomous, yet in some Constitutions apt to turn into
venom.
CHAP. XII.
Inward or Outward Bruises by a fall from an high place.
CHAP. XIII.
For those that are almost Strangled by a Halter, Garter, or such like means.
CHAP. XIIII.
For such as are almost Drowned and stifled in Water.
CHAP. XV.
For those that are Choked with Smoke of new kindled Coals in a close Room.
CHAP. XVI.
For such as are Suffocated with Stinking Smells.
CHAP. XVII.
For things Sticking in the Throat.
CHAP. XVIII.
For Scaldings with Water, Oil, Lie, Milk, or any other Liquor. As also for
Burnings with Fire, Gunpowder, Lime, or such like.
HELPS FOR SVDDAIN ACCIDENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Prevention of mischief by Poisons eaten or drunk.
DIverse Physic Authors have invented various rules to prevent Poisoning, by
suspecting their food and company: But those are all false lights, and
uncertain; poisoning the mind many times with causlesse jealousies, till the
passions break out into sore afflictions of ones own self, and contagious
infections of some others purer reputations. Therefore (that I may be no
abettor of other men's errors) my counsel shall be; First, and principally to
rely upon the provident mercy of GOD to watch over and keep us; And in the
second place, to rest upon the use of good Antidotes only. Such as are, Common
Antidotes.
Mithridate, Andromachus or London-Treacle, Confectio Alkermes, and Confectio
Liberans. These are always ready in every well furnished Apothecaries shop.

Of any of which, you may take every morning fasting the quantity of a Hasell
nut: and that either simply by themselves, or else in some Broth, or Posset
drink: or, if your stomach through coldness and ill digestion require it, in
white Wine sweetened with a little Sugar. Or else use the plain, but anciently
applauded Antidote.

Take two Walnuts, Mithridates Antidote.
two Figs cut in two, twenty leaves of Rue, and a little Salt. Beat all
together in a Mortar to a pulp, and eat it in the morning fasting. In praise
of which these Verses were written.

Armatusque cibo tali, quascunque veneno
Quilibet insidias sibi tenderet* haud metuehat.
He that with such a Poyson-proofe was armed,
Feared not that day by Poison to be harmed.
Avicen makes it thus.
Take of Walnut kernells two parts, Another way.
dried Figs and Salt, of each 5. parts, and of dried Rue twenty parts. Of
which Rhasis says that it will make one vomit up any unwholsom food received
that day after it.

You may also apply this Outward Medicine, which is an approved one.

Take half a halfepeny loaf newly drawn out of the Oven, make it hollow in
the middle of the crummy side, and fill it with Treacle and Vinegar, while it
is hot apply and tie it to the Navill. It both preserves the body; and draws
out the venom (if any be within) be it of what kind soever. I have an
excellent Antidote of mine own, The Authors Antidote.
if any will be pleased to come to me for it.

CHAPTER II.
A general way of Curing such as are hurt by inward Poisons.
IF any be Poisoned, How to know if one be poisoned or no.
Aetius (Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 1. cap. 47.) says it will appear by these signs.

Not long after the taking of it, there will come either a sudden coughing, or
vomiting of bloody and stinking stuff, or trouble in making water, or some
pain within the body, or vehement heat, or gnawings within the stomach or
guts, or else some sudden numbnesse: also prickings in the flesh, trembling of
the limbs, Hicket or Yex, Convulsions or Cramps; breakings out of the skin into
blisters, biles or scabs; filthy spots, or foul and unnatural color of the
skin; swelling either all over, or else of some part of the body; streitnesse of
breath, much filthy vomiting, and in those vomits sometimes the very plain
appearance of some part of the Poison. If any of these (says he) happen to a
healthy man suddenly upon his meat, this man is to be judged infected with
Poison.

And then must this course following be observed.

First, you must endeavor to fetch the Poison out by the same way it was taken
in. As, if it were eaten, or drunk; by vomit: If in a Glyster or Suppositorie;
by a Glyster again it must be purged out. If by a Fume, by a cordial Perfume
it must be encountered, and conquered. If by the mouth it were received,
whatsoever kind of Poison it be, before it be digested further than the
stomach (if it may be time enough found) give the party a great draught of
some fat broth; or Oil and child's urine; Vomits.
or else Sweet Butter and Water, with two or three spoonfulls of the juice of
Radish roots in it. Give one of these bloud-warme, to make him vomit. If the
first vomit fail, give the second, and so the third if the second fail. And
if they work not of themselves quickly, provoke them further by putting the
finger into his throat, or a feather dipped in rank Oil, or in Oil of
Linseed.

But if it have gotten into the guts (which will appear by the gnawings and
gripings) give him a sharp Glyster. As

Take Mallows, A Glyster.
Violet leaves, Mercury, Beets, of each a handful; Aniseeds, Fenell-seeds,
Carawayseeds, of each a spoonful bruised; the flowers of Violets, Bugloss,
Borrage, Damask Roses, and Camomill, of each half a handful. Boil all well
in a sufficient quantity of fair Water. Then strayn it; and to three quarters
of a pint of the liquor, put an ounce of Diacatholicon, These Purging Medicines
may be had at the Apothecaries.
and three drams of Diacolocynthis. Three ounces of Honey and a knifes
poynt-full of Salt. Mix all together, and give it Lukewarm.

And if, while it is yet in the stomach, a vomit or two, or at the most three
bring not away the Poison (which will appear by the ease the party receives)
then give him a strong Purgation, such as this:

Take of Mallows, A Purging Potion.
Violet leaves, of each one handful. The flowers of Violets, Borrage, Bugloss,
Damask Roses, of each half a handful. Aniseeds, and fenell seeds bruised, of
each half a spoonful. Liquorice scraped and sliced a quarter of an ounce.
Boil all together in a sufficient quantity of half Water half white wine.
Then having strayned it, Take a quarter of a pint of the liquor; to which put
Hiera of Coloquintida and Diacatholico, of each three drams; Syrup of Roses
solutiue, and Syrup of Wormwood, of each half an ounce, or a little spoonful.
Mix all well together, and give it as a Purgation.

Those that are of good ability may have this Mass of Pills made by some
skillful Apothecary for them, to keep by them against a time of need.

Rs. Pills.
Alos rosatae vnc. ij.
Myrrhae extractae cum aq. vitae drach. vj.
extracti croci drach. iij.
rhabarbari electi drach. ij.
agarici trochiscati drach. j. ss.
turbith albi and gummosi drach. j.
scammonij rosati sorup. ij. ss.
Ambrae griseae scrup. ij.
moschi grana x.
Cum sir. ros. soluti. q. s. fiat Massa.
Take at once the weight of six pence or nine pence, as need requires; being
formed and rolled into Pills of a fit bigness for the Patient to swallow.

If it be a Child, A Gentle Potion for weak ones.
or a weak body; make a quarter of a pint of plain Posset-ale, wherein is
boiled a few sweet Fenell seeds bruised: adding to it an ounce of the black
pulp of Cassia fistula. Mix all well together, and let the party drink it
off.

If there be torments in the guts, A mild Glyster.
this may be given in way of a Glister also, adding only some course Sugar.

In this case likewise, when the venom appears much and violent, you must
give a Glyster besides the Purgation; yea Glyster upon Glyster, as soon as one
cease to work giving another, (though they be twenty in a day) till all
complaints cease. That is, till neither evil taste, smell, vomitings, or
gripings within the body remain, to show that any relics of the venom are
yet left.

If the stomach and guts complain of a burning heat; Note.
to qualify the stomach, drink Posset-Ale boiled with sweet Fenellseeds, and
mixed with Cassia, as before-said: and for the guts, this Suppositorie
following.

Take of Hiera of Coloquintida ij. A Suppositorie.
drams: a little Salt, and a sufficient quantity of Honey. He ate them
together softly on the fire, till the lump come to a sufficient hardness; then
roll it up in form of a Suppositorie, and annoynting it with Sallet-oyle, or
sweet-Butter, administer it.

Now, What is to be done after Purging.
when by Vomits, Glysters, Suppositories, and other Purging Medicines before
described, the venomous matter appears drawn away; in that the body feels
no more of those torments and troubles it was before afflicted with: then let
the party drink a draught of warm milk mixed with Honey. And if sharp
Glysters have been often used before, let him take also one Glyster of milk
and Honey; or of some fat broth to wash away the relics of the sharpness and
biting quality left in the guts and stomach.

In the mean time, to defend the brain, heart, and liver from infection of
the venomous vapors that will hasten to those noble parts; A Plaster.
Take Conserve of Barrage-flowers, Mithridate, and London-Treacle, of each a
like quantity: Mix them well together, and spread all thick upon a piece of
Leather of a hand-breadth every way, and lay it well warmed betwixt the Paps.

Take also, A Fomentation.
of Red Roses three handfulls; Sage, Betony, Rosemarietops, Rue, Wormwood, of
each a handful; Tormentill-roots, and Gentian-rootes, of each cleansed and
sliced thin, half a handful. Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of
white wine, half water, till a third part be boiled away.

In this liquor dip woollenclouts, then wring out the liquor from them, and
apply one cloth reasonable hot to the mould of the head; and another all over
the stomach. And when these clouts wax dry, dip them again in the same liquor
well warmed, wring them, and apply them as before.

Thus, having rid the body of all evil Accidents; you must root out all the
relics of poison yet left behind, lest they remaining still, beget as
dangerous, though not so sudden or violent an issue. Therefore, then betake
your self to Antidotes. Such as are named in the first Chapter, for
Praevention; but their Dose must be doubled. In way of Cure, these also that
follow are especially commended against all kinds of Poisons whatsoever. Viz.

The Hoof of an Ox cut into parings, Antidotes against any kind of Poison.
and boiled with bruised Mustard Seed in white Wine and fair Water.

The Blood of a Malard drunk fresh and warm: or else dried to powder, and so
drunk in a draught of white Wine.

The Blood of a Stagge also in the same manner.

The Seeds of Rue, and the leaves of Betony boiled together in white Wine. Or,

Take ij. Scruples (that is, forty grains) of Mithridate; of prepared
Crystal one dram (that is, threescore grains) fresh Butter one ounce. Mix
all well together: Swallow it down by such quantities as you can swallow at
once; and drink presently upon it a quarter of a pint of the decoction of
French Barley; or so much six shillings Beer. Of this I have had happy proof.

There is also another excellent course to be taken (besides all these) by
those of ability, A way of Sweating described by Mathiolus.
and that is; Take a sound horse, open his belly alive, take our all his
entrayles quickly, and put the poisoned party naked into it, all save his
head, while the body of the horse retains his natural heat: and there let
him sweat well.

This may be held a strange course: but the same reason that teaches to divide
live Pullets and Pigeons for Plague-sores, approves this way of Sweating as
most apt to draw to it self all poisons from the heart and principal parts of
the Patients body. But during this time of Sweating, he must defend his brain
by wearing on his head a Quilt thus made.

Take Cynnamom, A Nightcap to preserve the Brain.
Nutmegs, Cloves, all the Saunders, of each half an ounce.

Roots of Angelica, Tormentill, white Dittany, and Valerian, of each one ounce.

Dried Sage, Rosemarie, Balm, of each half a handful; and of Red-Rose leaves
dried two handfulls. Make all these into a gross Powder, and Quilt them up in
Sarsnet or Calico; and let it be so big as to cover all the head like a Cap:
Then bind it on fast with a kerchief.

In all this time, What Diet he is to use.
the Patients diet is not the lest to be thought upon which must be new Milk
from the Cow, His meat.
fresh Butter, Sallet Oil, fat Broths of Mutton or Veale, or of fresh Beef.
For fat things stop the vessels, and hinder the course of the Poison to the
principal parts. In his broths also boil these herbs; Burnet, Buglosse,
Borrage, and wild Time.

He must reside in a clear air, Air.
or else have the Air rectified with perfumes, and those must be temperate and
mild, not too full of fume, lest they suffocate his Spirits. I need not set
down any; every one knows the use of Rose Water, Juniper, Rosemary, Bays,
and Frankincense: Let him be ever smelling to Rosemary rubbed in ones hand; to
Juniper -berries a little bruised, Lemons stuck with Cloves, Myrrh, Storax, or
Lignum Aloes.

He must sleep little: Sleep.
for sleep draws the venom to the center of the body; but watching drives it
to the outward parts.

As for Thirst; Drink.
let him bear it as much as he can: But if it afflict past sufferance, let him
drink (now and then) new milk turned with Vinegar into Possetdrinke.

CHAPTER III.
A more Particular way of Cure; wherein is touched the eating of Mushroms,
Muskles, and Perewinckles.
THough I intend not to discover the particular nature of every Poison (which
might be a way to instruct evil minds in evil purposes) yet without some
distinction, Distinction of Poisons.
I shall take much pains to little purpose. Therefore this general difference
must be made known; namely, that there are Poisons both Hot and Cold: and
their Cures are as different as their Complexions.

Therefore, In Hot Poisons.
if the Poison taken, be hot (as will appear by the Accidents that will
follow; viz. Bitings, Prickings, and Gnawings within; extreme Heats, Burnings,
inflammations and Hot Swellings Inward or Outward) Then the Glysters must be
gentle. As thus,

Take Mallows and Violet leaves, A Gentle Glyster.
of each two handfulls; French Barley one handful, Camomill-flowers half a
handful. Boil them in a sufficient quantity of fair water till the third
part of the water be boiled away. Then srayne it, and to three quarters of a
pint of the strayned liquor, put an ounce of Diacatholicon (or for the richer
sort, an ounce of Cassia Fistula newly drawn) and three ounces of Course Sugar
(or else Honey of Roses two ounces) and a little Salt.

Eat fat Broths, with coolehearbs boiled in them, Diet.
as, Borrage, Bugloss, Violet leaves; and likewise French Barley; with juice of
Lemons, the tartness being taken off with Sugar or Honey; as also Sorrel so
corrected.

Give the Patient leave to sleep, Sleep.
if he can; but enforce it not.

And for his Antidotes, Antidotes.
use Mithridate mixed with Conserve of Roses. Or else

Take of Diamargariton frigidum, one dran; of oxymel fimplex one ounce, and
Carduus water three ounces. Mix them together, and let him drink it.

In all other points keep him as is taught before.

But if the Poison be of a Cold nature, Cold Poisons.
which will appear by coldness within or without, or both; numbnesse,
fulness, dullness, and drouzinesse. Then use Vomits, shape Glysters, and the
like, as are appointed in the precedent Chapter.

Keep him from Sleeping. Waking.
Make him neeze often with powder of strong Tobacco blown up into his nose
with a quill: Neezing.
or if the Tobacco alone will not do it; mix a little powder of Euphorbium
with it.

Rub his Breast, Frication.
Sides, Back, and Limbs with warm woollen Clothes.

Speak much to him, Stirring.
and enforce him to stir his body as much as may be. Sweat.


Endeavor also to make him Sweat: to which purpose you may use this Medicine
following. Take one dram of Gentianroote in fine Powder, with two or three
graynes of Bezoar-stone. Give it in a little draught of Carduus Posset-drinke
made with white wine and a little Vinegar. Give it hot, and cover him well with
cloths, ordering him so before, in, and after sweating, that he take no cold;
neither eat, nor drink in five or six hours after.

Let his Antidotes be Andromachus or London-Treacle. Antidotes.


With his meat, Meat and Thirst.
boil Garlic, Onions, Balm, and Sweet Fenel-seeds. And let him endure Thirst
as long as he possibly can.

In all otherthings, order him as occasion shall serve or require, according to
the prescriptions in the Chapter before.

Some, Mushroms.
out of wantonness, and apish imitation of Strangers, have learned to eat
Mushroms, commonly called Toadstools: which is an excressence of the earths
superfluity, not void of a venomous quality; though some are less hurtful
than others, and to some constitutions, little or nothing at all apparently
offensive.

I knew a Mountebank in Devonshire, A Story teaching the Cure.
that persuaded many to the use of them; whereof two (the one a young man, and
the other a woman) to the hazard of their lives were over-taken with his
Cookery. To the young man, I gave this Medicine, two drams of Hens-dung dried
and powdered; fair water, white wine, and Vinegar, of each half a quarter of
a pint, with half an ounce of Honey. All mixed together he drank it, vomited,
had also two stools, and so recovered. The woman, being his mother, and seeing
me use the dung, co^jured me to give her some other Medicine that was more
cleanly. Whereupon I made her go to her well warmed bed; and then gave I her a
draught of Posset-ale wherein Penyroyall was boiled, to which I put a little
Aqua Vitae and Salt Peter: She hereupon did Sweat abundantly, and recovered.

Others there are, Muskles and Perewinckles.
that out of an Antipathy to their Constitution, are directly poisoned if they
eat Muskles: others again are in the like case with Perewinckles. I have seen
some with Muskles swelled, and spotted all over. In which case, after a Vomit,
and a Glyster (such as are before described in the second Chapter) I gave this
Antidote following.

I took Terra Sigillata (for want of terra Lemnia, which I account the better)
and Juniper berries, of each a like quantity; made them into fine Powder: And
of this Powder I took the weight of half a dram, and with a sufficient
quantity of fresh Butter, made a Bolus or lump, which the Patient swallowed:
and after the third time (which was done every 12. hours) he recovered. And in
five days was perfectly well.

CHAPTER IIII.
Serpents or Worms crept into the Body.
THough it happens very rarely; A Snake, Est, or Siowworm crept into the
stomach.
yet sometimes it has so fortuned, that some lying asleep on the grass with
their mouth open (as many do sleep so) have had a Snake, some an Est, one had
a Slowworme crept in at his mouth into his Body: Any of these will much torment
a man; but especially the last: Because therefore, I have known many take
delight to sleep on the grass in the fields; and since such an accident may
happen, I thought it not amiss to teach a help for the same.

While it is yet in the Stomach, labor by vomiting to cast it out. If that
prevail not, Take the juice of Rue mixed with your own urine: and drink a
draught of it: and if need require, drink diverse of these draughts one within
an hour of another.

Marcus Gatinaria commended the smoke of burnt old shoes received in at the
mouth through a Funnell: A Viper.
Telling of a man that had in vain tried many other Medicines; and with the
use of this, avoided a Viper downward. This Mizaldus records in Centur. 8.
Number. 94.

Some enforced through great thirst in the heat of Summer to drink of any water
next to hand, A Horseleech.
have in their greediness swallowed a Horse-Leech; which being in the throat,
and finding it self in a place full of such food as it loved; fell to sucking
of blood there; which must needs be a great torture to the Party. For which
Accident, I find in Authentical Authors these Remedies following.

The juice of Willow leaves drunk, has the property of vexing that creature;
making him let go his hold; and so the party, enforcing himself to vomit,
may cast it out. Assa faetida dissolved in Vinegar, and the throat therewith
gargled (if it be not gone down into the stomach) will do the like. But if it
be gone down so low, drink a draught of white wine wherein Garlic is
boiled. Or else, Take half a dram of Aloes Succotrina powdered in a draught of
white wine or wormwood Beer.

If an Earewig or other like creature chance to get into the Ear; Earewigs.
Blow the smoke of Tobacco through a pipe into the ear. Or, Take the juyces
of Wormwood and Southernwood, of each a like quantity; mix them, warm them,
and drop a little into the Ear.

CHAP. V.
Poisonous Humors spurting or dropping out of the wounded bodies of venomous
creatures, and lighting upon a Man's bare skin.
THus have some been outwardly poisoned. My self while I was a Student in
Cambridge, was so hurt by the spurting of a venomous humor from the body of a
great Toad into my face, while I pashed him to death with a brickbat. Some of
the moisture lighted on my right eye, which did not a little endanger it, and
has made it ever since apt to receive any flux of Rheum or Inflammation.
Others I have known to receive like harm from a Spiders juice. The skin that
it touches swells and grows red and painful. The mischief of this, may
be prevented by presently washing and bathing the place for half an hour or
an hour with the juice of Rue, and the distilled water of St. John's Wort, or
with Plantaine water, mixed with Andromachus-Treacle, and a drop or two of Oil
of Anise-seeds.

Hereunto I may add the Stinging and Blistering of Gnats, Blistering of Gnats,
Ants, and Nettles.
Ants, and Nettles.

Though no danger does follow this Accident; yet we may avoid the temporary
trouble: By fomenting the place with the juice of Lavender Cotton: or else
annoynting it with Sallet Oil and Wood ashes. Or,

Take Nettle-seeds and Anise-seeds, of each a like quantity, bruise them, and
steep them in Sallet Oil in a glass with something a wide mouth: set it in
the Sun in Summer time for a month together. Annoint the place with it. Oil
of Anise-seeds will do it also.

CHAP. VI.
Certain General Notions for the Help of such as are Stung or Bitten by
venomous Beasts.
AS there are diverse kinds of Creatures that sting or bite venomously; What
Beasts are most venomous.
so are the mischiefs different that break forth from their venomous natures.
For the Hornet has a more venomous Sting than the Be or Waspe. So the Biting
of the Adder (which is a kind of Viper) or of the Slowworme (which some also
call the Blind-worme) is more dangerous, than of the Est, or Shrewmouse.

As for the Snake; The Snake does no harm.
I know by experience, that he has neither sting nor tooth to offend with;
though his likeness to the Adder at first sight, has long deterred people from
so near acquaintance, as to take notice of his innocence.

Likewise the Stings and Teeth of the living Creatures are more pernicious than
those of the dead: Living are more venomous than dead Beasts.
because native heat, that ministers spirit to the venom, makes the venomous
substance more thin and subtle; as also more active and piercing.

Furthermore, More or less venomous by Sex; Age;
the Female of every kind is more fierce, and more dangerously venomous, than
the Male: the young, than the old: And those that live in rocks, Place of
living.
mountains, and dry places, than they that breed in fens, moors, marshes,
and such moist grounds.

Moreover, Feeding.
those that feed upon other venomous Creatures, are more pernicious upon the
eating of that food; As the Adder when he has eaten a Toad. And require
stronger Antidotes and in greater quantity than others.

Also, Ingendring
at the time of their engendering, they are more cursed, and full of poison, and
than at other times.

And in Summer time, Time of the Year.
all these are more deadly, than in Winter: For the venomous hidden is more
deadly, than the manifest quality; the thin, than the thick matter; and the
hot, than the cold temperature.

To which we may add, Aptness of the Body offended.
the more or less aptness of disposition and constitution of the body by any
of these so offended. For those men or women that are of a hot temperament;
having many and great veins outwardly apparent, and thereupon their pores more
open; are much more apt to receive the venom even speedily to the Liver and
Heart: than those, that (being of a cold constitution) have small veins, and
streit pores, through which the poison has but slow passage.

Lastly, Fasting make these Accidents the more dangerous.
those that are stung or bitten while they are yet fasting, and their stomach
empty; are in more danger than they that are full fed. For when the veyns and
vessels are empty, they do greedily suck in any matter that is administered;
yea, though nature abhor the quality, because at that time she minds only
the supply of quantity (as is apparent in those that are extreme thirsty; for
they will drink a great draught before they regard or find the taste) whereas
those that have fed, and filled the veins to the satisfaction of quantity;
their vital spirits are thereby made the more strong, and able to resist and
repel the fierceness of the venomous quality.

With these few general Notions, I have thought good to acquaint such, whose
understandings are able to make use of them; that they may lend their helping
hand to those that need them, with the more judgment and dexterity.

CHAPTER VII.
The General Method of Preventing, and Curing all venomous Stingings and
Bitings.
PRevention is only two ways: Prevention.
By having an eye to all places where they are likely to be abroad: And by
driving them from the place of a man's habitation.

All venomous Creatures are driven from the house by these fumes and washings
following.

Fume your rooms with the smoke of Harts-horne shavings, burnt in a
chasing-dish or firepanne: or the shavings of sheep hoofes: or the parings of
old shoes.

Wash the walls with the Gaul of any beast boiled a little in water: or the
decoction of Rue or Wormwood: or Assa faetida: or Coloquintida boiled in water.

But in the Cure; The first point of Cure.
The first thing is to pluck out the Sting, if there be any: and presently
after, annoint the place with Honey: If with that it assuage not. Mix
Mithridate with your Honey, and annoyt it again: or Honey and Treacle of
Andromachus. If the prick or wound be large enough, wash it with urine, or
salted water, or sharp Vinegar, or else with white wine: in any of which,
dissolve Mithridate or old Treacle of Andromachus; which being mixed together,
heat it good and hot, and so wash the place well, rubbing it as hard as the
patient may endure it, to draw the venom from running inward.

Some do presently burn the wound with a hot Needle or Bodkin: Actual
Cautery.
and it is the best way, both to consume the venomous matter before it go
further, and also to keep the orifine open, which must be so kept, till there
be no likelihood of venom left in the affected part.

Upon this burning, there will grow a crustie scab, round about which the place
must be scarrified with the sharp point of a Penknife, that the corrupted blood
may have issue. And when the scab is grown dry, you must annoint it with fresh
Butter alone, or fresh Hogs grease mixed with it, and having so loosened it,
take it off. All which time, the part must be often washed with such a mixture
as I praescribed before: And round about the wound, over all the swelled part
lay a Plaster made of Turpentine, Wax, black Pitch, and Pitch of Burgundy:
And into the wound put some Lint dipped in Vnguentum Basilicon, mixed with a
little burnt Alum, to keep the wound open.

But if the hurt be in the face, the actual Cauterie or hot iron must not be
used, for fear of leaving a scarre and blemish in the face for ever after.
Therefore in stead of that way; let some body presently suck the wound with
his mouth: Sucking of the wound.
which also is very good; but it must be done with these Caveats.

First, 1. Caution.
the sucker must take heed he have no sore, blister, nor rawnesse in any part
of his mouth, tongue, gummes, throat, or lips; for then he endangereth
himself, by sucking venomous matter into places prepared to entertain the
infection of it.

Secondly, 2
before he suck, he must wash his mouth, first three or four times with white
wine wherein Mithridate or old Andromachus Treacle is dissolved; and after,
with sallet-Oyle.

Thirdly, 3
he must be careful, that he presently spit out all that he sucketh into his
mouth, and let none of it go down his throat: least while he physic
another, he poison himself.

Lastly, 4
when he has sucked out all the venom; let him again wash his mouth three or
four times with the like washing, as before he sucked. And to conclude, let
him drink a little draught of the same, to prevent all evil chances.

But if no man will venture thus to suck: Application of Pullets.
Take a Pullet or Cockerell, bare his rump, and rub the fundament well with
Salt; then hold it close to the wound, holding his beak closed with your hand,
and giving him breath but now and then, only to keep him alive; and his
fundament will draw out the venom. If one die, take another; and so continue
till one of the creatures outliue the labor. Then may you be sure the venom
is clean drawn out.

Some apply Horseleeches to the wound, if it be very small. But sometimes it is
so big, (as when an Adder or Slow-worme has entered many teeth; or when a mad
dog has made it) that the fundament of such a creature before named cannot
compass it. Then take a Pullet or a Pigeon, and divide it alive, and apply it
(while it is full of life's heat) upon the wounded and grieved place (which must
be scarrified beforehand) that the vital heat of that creature may draw the
venom through the scarifications. Let it be therefore bound on, and kept there,
till it be even cold; and then apply another, and so another; till (by
asswaging of all pains, and swelling without, as also by the quietness and
quickness of the spirits within) the patient appear freed from all poison us
offense. Then apply Garlic fried with sweet Butter or sallet Oil: to make
sure that no remainder of mischief be behind: for it is an excellent outward
Medicine against all both Stingings and Bitings that are venomous.

When all this is done, and now it is sure that all the venom is perfectly
drawn forth; If the wound be big, How to heal the wound.
it must be healed up with some good Balsam as a green wound. But if it be but
a prick, it will soon heal it self, so it be but kept from the air.

But besides these outward Helps, the Patient must taken inward Antidotes
also. And of such I have spoken in the first Chapter. This is sufficient for
the general course; Now we must come to a more particular way of Cure.

CHAP. VIII.
Stingings of Hornets, Bees, and Wasps.
SOmetimes these creatures leave not their sting in the place, but when they
do, the first course is to pick it out: And then, if it be a Hornet, as it is
the more dangerous, so there must be the more care had of it.

If the Sting will not easily be gotten out, Stinging of Hornets.
lay to it a poultis made of leaven, wood-ashes, and sallet Oil mixed
together. Or bath it with Childs urine good and hot. And when it is out, wash
the wound with a little water and salt mixed with the juice of Rue. Then burn
it, or else suck it as was said before: and after that, apply to it a little
lint dipped in old Andromachus Treacle mixed with Honey; and over it, as also
over all the swelling, lay a poultis made of fresh Cow Dung mixed with Barrowes
grease, or sallet Oil.

Bees, Of Bees and Wasps.
and Wasps, though they seldom endanger life, yet they swell and inflame the
part stung by them, and cause a great deal of pain, which sometimes is
followed by a Feavor; therefore it is necessary to find a Cure for it. And some
constitutions receive also deadly mischief by such stinging. As some thirty
years ago appeared by the Lady Walsingham, wife to Sir Francis Walsingham
Secretary to Queen Elizabeth: who (as I have often heard it related by my
Father, who was her Physician) being stung in the hand by a Wasp at dinner
time; the venom presently swelled up all her arm to her shoulder, and thence
to her throat: that, had not speedy means been used, and (as God would) her
Physician bin there present, it was thought, snee would have dyed within less
than an hour.

First therefore, the Sting is to be taken out, as is said, and presently the
place to be anointed with Honey, and covered from the air. If this prevail
not (as with the most it does) burn it, or suck it: and apply Treacle of
Andromachus or Mithridate mixed with Honey. Or, for the poorer sort, fresh
Cow Dung or dogs dung mixed with sallet Oil. And, if need be, give the party
some inward Antidore; such as have been before commended. Or else for present
speed, Take Garlic boiled in white wine, or strong ale. Or else, the seeds and
roots of Lillies boiled in Beer. Or the seeds of Mallows boiled in water, and
white wine, with a little Vinegar.

Not long ago I saw a young man stung in the eye-ball with a Be, Stinging in
the Eye-ball.
while he was too closely looking into the door of the hiue: But the Be left
not her sting there. Upon the place, I applied this Plaster. I took a
handful of Carduus benedictus newly gathered, pounded it in a mortar very
fine, and mixed it with the white of an egg, so spreading it upon a pledget of
flax, I laid it to the eye, and as it waxed dry, renewed it twice. This
Plaster of Carduus is excellent to recover the eye if any venomous juice be
spurted into it, or if the eye be hurt by a corrupt air, which the common
people call blasting: It eases pains; takes away bloody spots in the eyes;
and is good for all burnings in, or about the eyes.

To this, Bitings of Spiders.
let me add the bitings of Spiders; the garden ones are the worst: for they
are of the kind of Phalangiae. The Inward Antidote for them, is, a draught of
New milk, wherein the inner meat of River Crabs is boiled. Or, a spoonful of
the brains of a sheep boiled in water and Vinegar. Outwardly, apply the
Cobweb of the same Spider, binding it on with a fine linen rag.

CHAP. IX.
Bitings of Adders, Slowwormes, Efts, the Shrew-Mouse, and other such venomous
Beasts.
Remembering what I said before in the sixth Chapter, Bitings of Adders,
Slowworms, or Efts.
to begin the Cure. The flesh of the same beast that biteth, boiled, or roasted,
as they dress Eeles, and inwardly taken, helps much. Or a dram of Gentian
root powdered and drunk in a little draught of white wine. Or half a dram of
Terta Sigillata in the same kind of wine. Or else the same wine with Opoponax
and Aristolochia rotunds.

Outwardly, the best thing to be applied is the flesh of the same beast that
did the hurt, pounded in a mortar, and applied in manner of a Poultis. Or a
Poultis made of Cocks-dung and Vinegar. Or an old Walnut beaten with Salt, an
Onion, and a little Honey, and applied. Or take Peny-royall and Fenell, of each
a like quantity, boil them in water and white wine, and bathe the place with
the liquor. Or else drop into the wound the liquor that sweateth out of the
green ashen wood while it burns on the fire. Or Oil of Bay and oil of St.
John's Wort, of each a like quantity. Or else a little Tar mixed with a little
salt spread on a piece of Leather, and applied playster-wise. This is for the
Adder, Slow-worme, or Eft.

Now the Shrew-mouse is a little kind of mouse with a long sharp snout,
Bitings of the Shrew-Mouse.
and a short tail; It lives commonly in old ruinous walls: It biteth also
very venomously, and leaves four small perforations, made by her four
foreteeth; To cure her biting; her flesh roasted and eaten is the best inward
Antidote, if it may be had. Otherwise, a dram of the seeds of Agnus Castus
beaten and steeped in white Wine. Or else some of the other Antidotes described
at the beginning of this Book. And outwardly, apply her warm liver and skin,
if it may be had. Otherwise Rocket-seeds beaten into powder, and mixed with the
blood of a Dog. Or else the teeth of a dead man made into fine powder.

CHAP. X.
The Biting of a Mad Dog.
ALthough in this our country of England, I have neither seen nor heard of
any such terrible dangers happening to people by a mad-dogs biting, as in other
Regions: yet I have seen Dogs mad. But the care that has been used for
prevention, has perhaps hindered the sight of those Accidents which old Authors
have so laboriously Commented upon. And besides that, the temperature of our
Climate keeps the Dogs of our Country from prooving altogether so
pernicious as in Graecia and Arabia. For Aetius says that the mad Dogs are
worst in intemperate Climates, where the Winters cold and Summers heat are
extreme. Tetr. 2. Sermon. 2. cap. 24. Howsoever, I will set down a brief
course of help, to prevent, the incurablenesse of the mischief; as I have it
from the best Authors.

This kind of madness proceeds from black Choleric juices wherewith a
dog more than other Beasts abounds. The cause of a Dogs Madness.
For he is of temperament hot and dry; as appears by many proofs. As first,
by his continual eager appetite (being always hungry) and greediness in
devouring any filthy offalls; Flesh putrified, stinking, and full of Maggots;
whether it be raw, and perhaps buried under ground; or any other way rotten and
infectious. Also they will drink of any durtie puddle, or stinking
ditch-water: which kind of drink wondrously increases black choler. And
besides this, at two seasons of the year especially are Dogs most subject to
madness; which is the surest of all arguments: namely, in the height of
Summer, and in the depth of Winter. By Summers fervencie their blood being
overheated, turns into burnt choler: And through Winters extreme cold, the
same blood is per Antiperistasin, so much enflamed, that it becomes burnt
Melancholy.

You shall know a Dog to be mad, The Signs that a Dog is mad.
by these signs. He is afraid of Water, and at the sight of it, trembles and
bristles up his neck; his eyes are fiery and glaring; he runs to and from,
and reels this way and that way, like one that is drunk; he holds down his
head, gapes with his mouth, lils out his tongue (which is blackish, or evil
colored) slavers at the mouth, and his nose runs: he snaps and bites at
every thing in his way, but barks not at all; he couches his ears, carries
his tail betwixt this legs. Other Dogs (though bigger than he) fly from him
at the smell of him. He takes no notice of any friend, neither spares to bite
his own Master: and being gone out of the house, never repayreth back again
to it (unless by chance) for he knows no place aright.

Whosoever therefore is bitten by such a Dog, must presently be looked to. And
if the Dog that has bitten, have passed by so suddenly, that sufficient
notice could not be taken of him: Then dip a little bread in the blood of the
wound, and offer it to some other Dog that is not mad; and if he refuse to
eat it: there is cause of suspicion.

Or take a Wallnut-kernell pilled, beat it in a mortar, then steep it in the
blood of the wound; and give it to some Poultry mixed with their meat. If they
die the day after, it is counted a sure sign that that biting was of a Mad
Dog.

The party so bitten finds no alteration in himself for diverse days after.
The Symptoms or Accidents that follow such Bitings.
For this biting is no more painful than as a wound, nor does any such
swellings or other Symptoms follow presently upon it; as in the bitings of
Serpents. But after some time, the bitten party begins to grow melancholy; and
to have strange and unwonted fancies in his mind, talks to himself, and uses
foolish gestures: for now the power of the poison having crept up into the
brain, corrupts the imagination. His sleeps are broken with terrors; and he
leaves all company, choosing out solitary walks. If till this time there could
be no certain knowledge. Now it is high time to begin a speedy help. Incurable.


For when once he comes to bark like a Dog, to hate the light, and sight of
all shining metalls and looking-glasses; as also to fear water, and all other
kinds of liquors (which Symptoms at last does follow such bitings hitherto
uncured) he is held to be past cure. Curable.
But so long as he knows his own face in a glass, and is not frighted at
it: or may be drawn to drink water; he is (by Avicen and others) accounted
curable.

As soon therefore as any one upon these signs suspecteth himself bitten by
a Mad Dog, let him presently repair to some learned Physician, or at least
to some well experienced Surgeon (for such extraordinary cases are beyond
ordinary skills) if such may be had. Otherwise let some discreet man read
carefully this Treatise, and ponder the method very diligently; especially this
Chapter, which teaches thus to begin the Cure.

Labor forthwith to draw the contagion out of the wound by cupping-glasses;
application of Pullets or Pigeons that lay eggs, scarifications, Leeches, and
drawing medicines; Read the 7. Chap.
as in the 7. Chap. I have discoursed. If the wound be so small that it
bleedeth not; scarifie the place, and with a cupping-glasse draw out the blood;
or burn it with an hot iron, or else (if the patient will not endure the hot
iron or actual cautery) apply a potentiall cautery, or an eating Medicine; as
Sublimate mixed with some cold thing, that it may be less painful: as for
example.

Take of Sublimate two drams, An excellent Causticke.
of juice of Henbane one cunce, mix them and dry them together, and make them
into a fine powder. Apply some of this, and when the scabby crust (or escar) is
grown dry upon the place, take it off with a little sweet butter, or with
sweet butter, pitch, and the white of an egg mixed together.

When it is come off, fill the orifice with the powder of Mercury and Roche
Alum, or else use Mercury mixed with a little Vnguentum Basilicon. Which
Mercury is an excellent thing, not only to keep the wound open, but also to
draw the poison outward. The wound must be kept open forty days at least: In
which time, One way of Cure.
the juice of Sorrel is to be applied hot every night and morning; and the
decoction (or broth) of the same herb, or at least of meat boiled with the
same, must be drunk by the patient every morning fasting. Aetius says, he
knew an old man that cured this disease often, with this medicine only.

Or else you may dissolve a little Andromachus Treacle in white wine or Aqua
vitae; Galens way.
and dipping a little lint or ragge in the warmed mixture, rub the orifice as
hard as the patient can endure. This also is commended for an excellent
Medicine; but then you must apply upon it Honey and Turpentine mixed with an
Onion or Garlic beaten into the form of a Poultis. And Galen appoints this
Plaster following to be applied to the wound. Take of Vinegar a pint and a
quarter, Opoponax three ounces, Tar one ounce. Boil away the Vinegar, and
make it a Plaster. And this is highly commended by the Author.

In the beginning of this mischief we must neither purge nor let blood, for
then we shall draw the venom from the circumference to the center; which is
dangerous to life. Yet both these means may be used afterward; if by
continuance of time, and neglect in the beginning, the venom have spread it
self into all the vessels. In the mean time, we must set upon it with apt
Antidotes. As with Garlic boiled in white Wine, and drunk fasting; which
resists the poisons entrance into the principal parts. Or,

Let him drink this draught every morning. Take the powders of Myrrh and
Gentian root; of each one dram; the powder of River-Crabs (or Crayfishes) two
drams. Mix them in a fit quantity of white Wine, and drink it. Or,

After Galens way, thus.

Take nine parts of the powder of burnt River-Crabs, five parts of Gentian
root powdered, and one of Frankincense powdered. Mix them together, and give a
spoonful of it in a draught of Spring Water. These Antidotes are thus to be
continued forty days together; and that in the beginning, before he fears
water: for after that, the quantities must be doubled.

The powder of Crabs is made thus.

Take River-Crabs, A Famous Medicine.
or Crayfishes, (for Sea-Crabs are naught for this use) in the height of
Summer, when the Sun is in Leo, and the Moon a little past the full. [But
Rasis will have it, when the Sun is in Aries. [Others in Cancer; it seems a
similitudine] I will not disp ute the choice: but the first is the most
generally accepted, from Galen] These being gotten, must be put alive into a
copper vessel, and burnt on the fire to ashes. Then beat them in a Mortar,
searce them, and so reduce them into a fine Powder.

Another Author, called Johannes Stockerus, both in this, and in all other
kinds of venomous bitings, affirms, this course following, never to have
deceived him.

Take Gentian root powdered, Stockers way of Cure.
and Treacle of Andromachus, of each one dram, every morning fasting for three
days together; and the Patient must fast five hours after. If he feel
himself disposed to sweat, let him order himself in his bed for it, and
sweat as much as he can, or is able to bear.

To the wound, in manner of a Plaster, apply Garlic, Rue, and Salt pounded
together in a Mortar. And so much for the way of Cure in the beginning.

When he begins to be afraid of water, The cure of Hydrophobia.
he hardly admits of any Cure.

Now the reason of this Hydrophobia or fear of water is generally held to be,
The reason of Hydrophobia.
That the venom abusing the Fantasy, makes the party affected to have horrid
imaginations of water. But some special Authors (having found by experience
that the drinking of cold water causes Convulsions in such over-dryed and
parched stomachs) conclude that it is extreme pain and torture proceeding
from that drinking that so terrifieth them from it. And this also is the reason
why those that fear water are counted incurable.

Therefore the water that is forced into them ought to be at first very warm,
and the party must by degrees be brought to drink it colder and colder; so
likewise the Baths that they are to be cast into, ought to be in like temper,
to avoid all cramps and Convulsions both inward and outward. Neither must there
be any Bath used at all (according to Oribasius) till twenty days after the
biting, at the soonest.

This Hydrophobia (or fear of water) begins not at any certain time after
the Biting. For most commonly it follows forty days after; in some, seven
months; in others a whole year after. Again in some it comes within a
fortnight after: According to the strength or weakness of the constitution of
him that is bitten. For some bodies strength is able to resist the venom far
longer, when others weakness sinkes under it much sooner. Some have their
pores more streit to keep out, others more open to let in the venom. Also some
have their blood and humors more pure (and therefore less apt to infection)
others more impure and corrupt; therefore more easily turned into venom.

The maine general Remedy is by Celsus and others held to be, The main
Remedy.
Casting of the Patient into the Water before he be aware of it; and this to be
done every day for many days together: (For that which he fears is the only
Medicine to cure him). In doing this, if he cannot swim, after he has
swallowed a good quantity of the water, take him out again. But if he be
skillful in swimming, hold him under water a little while till he have taken in
some pretty quantity; For thus both his extreme thirst and fear of Water
will be soonest cured. But let him not be long deeper than his nostrills, least
he be suffocated. It the Cramp or any Convulsion take him; as soon as he is
out of the water, bath him all over with Sallet Oil good and warm; which, as
it will take away that Accident, so will it also stop the pores of the skin,
and keep the waters cooling quality from going out again too suddenly.

My self (upon the sight of a picture of the Water-Torture in Amboyna) have
conceited this invention. The Authors Invention.
Let the Patient be bound fast to some post or stake, and tie about his neck
a linen cloth doubled and cast into the form of a hollow Basin (as you would
make him look like the sign of St. John Baptists head in a platter) the cloth
must first be dipped in Oil and Wax well mixed together, that it may hold
water like a Basin: Then let one with an Ewer or Pitcher pour water gently
into the cloth, till the water rise up to his nostrills, where through it may
enter into his body (if he will not open his mouth) whether he will or no.
Keep the Water still at that height with continual soft pouring in, til he
has drunk a good draught: only sometimes forbear so much as to maintain
his breathing. Thus have I out of a wicked weed sucked Honey for Health; and
from an inhumane torture extracted ease in a grievous sickness. This is the
help without which is no help; for this case is held incurable without
drinking of water.

Yet this is not all that must be done: Evacuations.
For if the party be Plethorick (that is, too full of good blood, which will
appear by his high color, and his big and full veins) he must be let blood
in the Liver-veyne, according to the discretion of the Artist. If Cacochymick
(that is, full of corrupted Humors) he must be purged with Sena, Epithymum,
Fumoterrae, Mirobalans, Elaterium, Black Helebor, and the like; or with
Hamech, Diacatholicon or Diacolocynthis; with white wine, wherein is decocted
also roots of Fenell and Parsley, of medowgrasse, water Lillies, and of
Flower-Deluces, and such like diureticke simples: For the provocation of urine
is also in this case very behoouefull.

This only I set down to make the cure complete; but I do not reduce the
Purgatiues into form; because by this time there is leisure enough to find out
a Physician.

Now in the last place the Patients Diet comes to be observed. Diet for those
that are bitten with a mad Dog.
And such sick ones must feed something liberally; for hunger is very hurtful
to such as suffer under venomous wounds. In the beginning of this disease, Salt
meats, and sharp Sauces are good, as Sorrel, Vinegar, and Verjuice; also
Garlic, Onions, and Leekes, for by their help the mad venom is hindered from
creeping into the noble parts. Fattie and slimie meats also are to be chosen,
because they stop the passages, and mouths of the vessels, that they may not
easily let in the poison. His drink must be stale middle Beer; And of Wines,
Sherrys, and Graues-Claret or White are the best. But after eight, or at the
farthest fifteen days are past, let his sauces be of a more temperate
quality, tending rather to moist than dry; and such as are proper to resist
melancholy; as pickled Gelly-flowers, Broom-buds, Capars, Asparagus, and such
like. In his Broths boil Beets, Violets, Succorie and Endive, Parsley, and
Fennell-roots; Anise-seeds and Fenell-seeds, and such other simples that
provoke urine, (which as I said before are very profitable in this case) Also
Sweet Wines, as Muscadine, Canarie, and High-Countrey white wine. Sometimes
also (to please the pallat; let him lick of Oxymel simplex, Syrrup of Citrons,
or Syrrup of Lemons. He may also eat River-Crabs or Cray-fishes either raw or
buttered. But from the beginning the flesh that he eats must be of Mutton,
Veale, Lamb, Kid, Rabbet, Pullet, Chicken, Partridge or Pheasant. Some
counsel to mince some roasted Veale, and the Liver of the mad dog roasted,
together, and so let him ear it with a little butter, water, and Vinegar.

To conclude; His Belly must be kept soluble (if need require) by gentle
Giysters and Suppositories: And his Sleep must in the beginning be but little;
but when he begins to rage, and is of himself overwakefull, it is good by
some safe outward means (such as the Artist shall see cause to appoint) to
cause Sleep.

CHAPTER XI.
Bitings of Creatures not venomous, yet in some Constitutions apt to turn into
venom.
SOme are bitten by Dogs that are not mad; or by Apes, Monckeys, Squirills;
by Horses, by Mankind, or any other creature not venomous: yet sometimes these
wounds in some kind of Flesh are hard to heal.

The reason is either in the Creature biting, or in the party bitten. In the
Creature biting, though in it is own nature it be not venomous; yet there is at
that time a malignant quality in the moisture of the mouth, begotten by the
disturbance of the brain, through immoderate anger.

In the party bitten: The reason why some men's flesh is easily, and some men's
hardly cured.
Some men are made up of a kind of Flesh always (by what accident soever
wounded) hard to be cured. These either are very melancholic of Constitution
(and Melancholy is the most offensive humor in the body, and therefore apt
through any extraordinary passion to become corrupted and in a sort venomous)
or they are very fearful; and Fear corrupts the juices of the brain
(through the force of imagination) and makes them fall down and disperse
themselves into all the parts of the body filled with a sickly quality, and so
contrary to nature. This is the reason why fearful men are apt to die of a
slight wound: whereas a valiant Spirit has always flesh apt to be healed.

Now for such hard healing Flesh (from which of the two causes soever it
comes) I counsel, that besides the ordinary course of curing wounds
artificially according to the Rules of Chururgerie, there be also given some
temperate Cordial (as it were an Antidote against this venomous Accident) to
call up the Spirits, and to comfort the Faculties. For I know it by experience,
that the Cure is thereby made much the more easy.

Such an Antidote is this following; which (because it cannot be rightly made
but by an Artist) I will set down in Latin for the Apothecaries understanding
only* least the Ignorant tampering beyond their skill, discredit the Medicine.

Re. Nepenthes Bradwelli.
fol. Melissae,
summitatum Rosmarini,
florum Primulae veris,
florum Cheyri,
florum Calendulae, ana m. iij.
florum Angelicae, m. ij.
Rad. Angelicae, j ss.
Gariophyllorum, iij.
Rad. Enulae Campaniae, vj.
Infundantur omnia in Aquae Vitaeli. xxiiij. horis 24. Tum in alembico
destillentur. s. a.

In Aqua elicita infunde etiam Glycyrrhizae parum, sic gustui arridebit.

This Cordial Water my Father called Nepenthes. If the Angelica be good
indeed, it will have both a pleasant taste and smell.

A spoonful or two of this Water recalls, rectifies, and confirms the Spirits
Animal, Vital, and Natural: For Swou^dings aco^mon Accident.
And is therefore very good against Fayntings and Swoundings.

CHAP. XII.
Inward or Outward Bruises by a fall from an high place.
Sometimes it happens unfortunately, that a Man falls down from an high
place, as from a housetop, a high tree, a scaffold, or a ladder; and is taken
up for dead: yet in a little time, may by good means be recovered to life; and
the Bruise (whether it be inward or outward) may be cured.

In this case, the maine things to be looked to, are: First to recover the
party to life and sense: which may be done by the use of my Cordial Water,
called Nepenthes, described in the Chapter immediately going before; or else
with some other comfortable drink of like nature.

Secondly, if the Bruise be Inward: Inward Bruise.
there will be either ejection of Blood at the Mouth, Nose, Fundament, or
passage of Urine, or else congealing of Blood within, wherewith will be Inward
pain, and difficulty of Breathing.

If the party avoid blood, it is not amiss, so it go not too far to the
expense of his Spirits: But if so, then give him half a dram of Terra
Sigillata in a draught of Posset drink, Too much bleeding from within.
wherein the flowers of St. John's Wort are boiled. Or, The tops of St. John's
Wort boiled in Posset-ale. Or, Take red Coral, white Coral, white Amber, Bole
Armoniak, Terra sigillata, of each
j. dram. Camphor iiij. grains.
Make all into fine powder, and divide it into four equal quantities or
Doses. Take every dose in two ounces of Plantaine water, and as much red wine
mixed together, once in six hours, as need shall require. Or else, Take the
quantity of a Walnut of old Conserve of red Roses mixed with a scruple of the
powder of Mastick; or rather with five or six drops of the Oil of Masticke:
Repeat the taking according to need.

But if there be no evacution, Blood congealed within.
but suspicion of the Blood congealed within. Then

Take Nep stamped and strayned, with a little Ale or Beer, and drink a
draught of it once in six hours. After three times taking it so; stamp it new
and strain it with Muscadine, and drink a little draught in the morning
fasting, and at night when you go to bed. Or,

Take the quantity of a Bean of quick Brimstone in powder, in a little white
Wine warmed. Or else, Twenty grains of Irish-Slate in powder in a draught of
Posset-Ale made with white Wine.

Some give ij. drams of Rheubarb, with one of Madder, made into powder, in a
draught of white wine: repeating it, as need requires. Or, two drams of
Rheubarb alone, in neat white wine. Or, Take of Rheubarb one dram, Madder and
Mummie, of each two scruples. Make them into fine powder, and drink it in a
draught of some ordinary Pectorall Decoction.

Outwrdly annoint the Breast, Outward means.
or Back, (as cause electeth) with two ounces of Oil of St. John's Wort, and
half an ounce of Sperma ceti mixed together, and warmed, Do this morning and
evening. Or else, use this Ointment.

Take of new charned butter unsalted ij. pound; Madder one ounce powdered,
Tormentill roots powdered vj. drams, Mummie half an ounce powdered, Sugar Candy
powdered iiij. ounces, Sperma ceti ij. ounces. Boil them together in a
sufficient quantity of good white Wine, till all the wine be boiled away. Then
with a little Wax boil it again to an Unguent.

Thirdly, Outward Bruise.
if the Bruise be Outward only; you must consider whether it be a Simple or
mere Bruise, or a Bruise with a wound. If it be a simple Bruise. Simple.
You may make a Plaster with Branne, Honey, and a little Salt (or rather
Niter, if you can get it) and apply to it. Or, Take the powder, and the Oil of
Myrtles, of each an ounce, and the white of an egg well beaten. Make a mixture
of them, and dip Clonts in it, and apply them to the place. If the Contusion or
Bruise be very large, you must make your quantity accordingly.

But if there be a wound withal; With a wound.
Stop not the blood too soon (if it bleed well) for many times the noxious
humors that are mixed with the blood, are very happily evacuated that way. But
if on the other side it bleed too much: Take the white of an Egg well beaten,
and mixed with Bole Armoniak made into fine powder, and dipping a piece of flax
therein, lay it to the wound. Or, the white of an egg beaten, brown paper
ashes, and fine powder of Chalk mixed together. A Cobweb also of a fit bigness
for the wound, does many times serve the turn. Or else, have this Powder
always ready. Take Sanguis Draconis, Olibanum, Aloes hepatica, and Sarcocolla,
of each ij. ounces; root of the Flower de Luce one ounce. Make all into fine
powder, and mix them together. Apply a sufficient quantity to the wound, and
lay upon it some flax wet with the white of an egg on that side to be laid
next the wound; and bind it on gently for strayning the wound. This is very
effectual.

As for the Cure of a Green Wound, Bradwells Balsam for Green Wounds and
Bruises.
there are so many Balsams abroad, that I need not teach any. Yet to show, I am
no niggard of my Medicines, accept of this Balsam of mine.

Take of the best Sallet Oil two pints, put it in a jarre-glasse with a broad
mouth; put to it an handful of flowers of the greater Comfery. Then cover it
with a trencher, and set it in the Sun a week. Then put in the leaves of six
red Roses not too much blown; a handful of Mullen-flowers, and as much of the
flowers of St John's Wort. Set it in the Sun still all the Summer. And if you
add two or three leaves of green Tobacco, it will be the better.

This have I often proved to be excellent, both for green wounds and Bruises,
annoynting the place with it warm: and lapping the part up close from the
outward air.

The last main point in this Accident to be considered is Pain in the Head,
Pain in the Head.
which is for the most part a companion of such falls; and if it be much, must
be mittigated by some means, least it bring the patient into a Feavor.

For this therefore, Anoint the aching part of the head with oil of Roses and
oil of Lillies mixed together. Or foment and bathe it with this Fomentation.
Take of the young and tender leaves of Myrtles one handful, Myrrh in powder
three drams. Boil them in Muscadine.

Or else, Take a Quince or two, pare them, and coare them, and boil them in
Muscadine till they be soft: Then beat them in a Mortar to a Poultis, and
apply them very warm to the aching place.

If one application serve not, repeat it often.

But, if in such a fall, any Bone be put out of joint, or broken; they must get
help of such as are skilful in Bone-setting, which Art is learnt by sight, and
not by writing.

CHAP. XIII.
For those that are almost Strangled by a Halter, Garter, or such like means.
SOme have been strangled in jest. As I knew a Player that one time acting a
part wherein he was to be hanged; and having not fastened his halter
sufficiently to his trusse, it slipped, and almost choked him in earnest. I
knew another man that was robber at Tiburn, and because he asked the thieves
how they could be so bold to tempt their fate in the face of the gallows, they
hanged him up there; but presently upon sight of company took them to their
heels, and by the same company the man was saved from a final execution. Some
also through desperation have hanged themselves, as we have too often examples.

If any of these may be cut down while there is life in him; he may by GODS
blessing and skillful endeavors be recovered.

A learned Doctor of Physic, Dr. Guyn.
being asked how one might be recovered in this case, answered both briefly and
wittily; Cut a throat to save a life. A good way of help but hard to perform.
His meaning was, That way must be made by incision, through the skin in the
place where the Halter was; that so the constrained blood might be set at
liberty, the coagulated blood let out, and way given for the windepipe and
other internal vessels to open themselves again. But this is not to be
attempted by any but some skilful Surgeon indeed, that knows perfectly the
situatio^ of the parts; for if any nerve or tendon should be touched, great
mischiefs would follow; and if the Iugular veins be cut, it is the present
death of the Patient. Therefore other and safer means are to be attempted.

As soon then as the Halter is loosed from his neck, A more easy way.
presently thrust your finger as far as you can down his throat (forcing
open his with some fit instrument) and presently pluck it out again; that you
may open the passage within, but not stop his breath more. Then straight way
pour down his throat some warm Vinegar with beaten Pepper in it; or
Penyroyall beaten and boiled in Vinegar; or Nettleseeds beaten and boiled in
Vinegar. Provoke him also to vomit by tickling his throat with a feather dipped
in rank Oil. About the place of the Halter also (to mollify and open the
skin, and dissolve the bruised blood) wrap linen clouts dipped in Sperma ceti,
(or sallet Ole) and oil of Lillies mixed together, and apply them good and
hot: and as they wax cold, renew them continually.

Hippocrates in his 43. Question about Foaming at the mouth.
Aphorism of his second Book, says that those that are any way strangled and
not yet dead, if about their mouths there appear a foame, will never be
recovered. But Galen in his Comment upon that place seems to be of another
mind. And Christopherus a Vega in his Tract. de Art Medendi li. 3. Sectio. 5.
cap. 8. affirms that he saw three recovered that foamed at the mouth. One of
which had hanged himself, but his friends did quickly cut the rope, and he was
preserved by drinking Vinegar and Pepper: for that mixture restores the almost
extinct heat. Being come to himself, let the Patient abstein from much talk,
for the space of four and twenty hours; and let him have some Ptisan or
Pectorall Decoction for his drink.

And when he is grown strong again, if he yet feel some encumbrance, and
swelling in his throat; it is good to open the Cephalica, or head-veyne of his
arm, and let him bleed nine or ten ounces, or according to his age and
strength. But this must be done by due judgment of the Artist, who may by
this time be brought to him.

CHAP. XIIII.
For such as are almost Drowned and stifled in Water.
MAny take great delight in swimming and bating themselves in Ponds and Rivers
in the Summer time; some to cleanse and cool their bodies, some for pleasure of
their skill in swimming, others either for company or mere wantonness: And
many of these adventure into places past their depth; where I have known some
taken with the Cramp on the sudden, that if there had not been many helpers
at hand, they had speedily perished. Some happen into whirlepools, wherein they
have been violently drawn, and immediately drowned, while their companions
might look on with sorrow, but could lend no help to save them. Others in a
great River have been carried away by the strength of the stream in spite of
their skill in swimming, whereupon before they had so much presumed. Others
floating among slags and weeds, have had their feet so entangled by them, that
neither the strength of nature, nor the sleights of Art could keep them from
being cast away.

And here, by the way let me insert a counsel to such as are Fathers and
Mothers, A Caveat.
or Masters and Tutors to young Boys. Some use to keep their children in so
strictly, that the unfortunate poor fools longing after such forbidden
pleasure; and fearing to make others privy to their purpose, steal out by
themselves, and run into some river or pond, without discretion or election;
where (having neither guide nor helper, but such as themselves) some of them
sometimes prove by the loss of their lives, that while they beguiled their
governors too much, they deceived themselves most of all. To prevent this
therefore, it were good (in my judgment) to give way to these desires of
children, at fit times of the year, and in waters whose bottoms are even and
sandy, with clear and gentle streams fit for their strength and stature; and
free from flags, weeds, holes and whirlepooles: having also with them some
discreet man skillful in swimming, that (if any danger should hap,) may
speedily succor them. And the times of the year fit for such bathes, I hold
to be in the beginning of July, and in the end of August* That is, before and
in the end of the dog days; The best time of the day likewise, is an hour
before Sunne-set.

And now to return to the point although by the accidents aforesaid, as also by
violent storms, and the darkness of night, too too many following their
affairs have been woefully wasted to the shore of sudden death: yet some
have bin taken up for dead that with careful and skillful usage have recovered
both Life the true love of nature, and Health the happiness of Life. Therefore
when any one is so found, The way of Recovery.
the first thing to be done is to turn his feet upward, his head and mouth
downward, and so to hold or hang him up by the heels, that the water may come
out of him again. If this alone cause him not to cast out the water, and the
party be without sense or motion; then also let some one of the standers by,
that is of good discretion, put his finger into the parties throat, or take a
feather dipped in Linseed oil, and thrust it into his throat, turning it round
therein, to make him vomit. And in the mean time, let others help forth the
water by stroaking, crushing, and driving his belly and stomach reasonable
hard, from the bottom of his belly toward his throat. If it be cold weather,
let all this be done in a warm room before a good fire. After the water is
come away, it is good to hold strong sweet smelling things to his nose (as
Musk, Lignum Aloes, or such like) to warm the Brain, and comfort the
Spirits. Also if he remain senseless or faynting, his Spirits are to be
recalled and awaked with Ros solis, Aqua Caelestis, or some such comfortable
water; and he is to be handled in all points as those use to be that fall in a
Swound.

If by these means he recover life, The Cure after Recovery.
sense, and speech; let him (some two hours after) eat some meat of a hen or
chick (if he be able) or else suck the juice of them; and let them be roasted or
broyled, rather than any other way dressed (for so does Alexander Benedictus
counsel, li. 7. cap. 3. De Curandis morbis.) And with his meat, let him eat
Pepper and Sugar, or Pepper and Honey, as he likes best. He may also eat a
roasted egg with pepper in it. But let him not drink at all in 24. hours at
the least, and then let it be middle-Beere and white wine mixed together; of
which let him drink but 2. small draughts at a meal, and betwixt meals not
at all. This Diet let him observe for a week together, keeping himself warm
and moderately stirring his body immediately before, and an hour after his
meat.

Also, if the Physician see it requisite, other means may be used to prevent
the coming of a Feavor, or to mitigate, and take it away if it be already
come; as also to prevent a Dropsy, which is a likely effect of such a watery
cause. The refore by good advise Bloodletting in the Liver-veyn, Glysters, and
other Medicines may be administered.

Lastly, For Water gotten into the Ears.
if any water be gotten into his Ears; Take Goose grease, and the juice of an
Onion, mix them well together, and drop a little of it bloud-warme into his
Ears.

Sometime such a sorrowfuli misfortune may befall a man in the Winter time; A
Modern Story of an old Gentlewoman.
or it may happen to an old body, as once it did in the North part of the
Devonshire to a worthy old Gentlewoman, who stepping on a bridge over a gutter,
her feet slipping, she fell in; and through her great weakness (being above
fourscore years of age) because she was not able to help up her self
again; she lay so long till with crying she had no voice left. It pleased God
that the water was not so high as to drown her; but the coldness of it had
like to have killed her before help came: for she was not heard into the
house, though she strayned her voice exceedingly, and though the house was
hard by. Only her son coming forth that way by mere chance, found and
saved her.

In this case, The Cure.
let some cordial water (as my Nepenthes, Aqua Caelestis, or the like) be
given first inwardly, to help natural heat forth into the outward parts
again. Then lay the patient in his naked bed well warmed; And if it be a man,
let a young man (in whom natural heat has his full force) strip himself
naked and presently go to bed to him, and there embrace him closely, keeping
in the clothes about him on all sides, til he have brought heat into him
again. If it be a woman, let some young maiden of a sanguin complexion do the
like.

The patients diet must be of good nourishing and warming things, using some
cordial medicine morning and night, first and last, for ten days together.

Once I knew an Infant of two years old, An Infant drowned in Soap-suds.
or there about; that was drowned in a tub of Soap-suds. And because it is a
chance that may happen to more, I will show how Skenckius says that he
recovered such an one. Observe. li. 2. Observe. 18.
It was a little Girl betwixt two and three years of age, which fell into a
vessel of Soap-suds, with which soapie water her stomach was much filled, and
the child thereupo^ seemed ready to give up the ghost; lay in a dead sleep,
ratled in the throat, hardly drew breath, made a groaning noise, as one
suffocated, and lay gasping and gaping like a dying body: the winepipe being so
over-full and oppressed, that it could hardly receive air in, or return
breath out.

Skenckius being sent for, The Cure.
prescribed a Decoction of unhulled Barley with Liquorice and Figs, adding a
little Butter and Sugar. This he caused presently to be poured down her throat
lukewarm; where by she was provoked to vomit out all the soapie water; and so
was recovered. And I believe (though Skenckius make no mention of it) he gave
her also afterward some Antidote or Cordial Medicine (as was meet) to resist
the venomous quality of the Soap, where of it must needs leave some relics
behind it, too strong for the weak nature of such an Infant to overcome.
Therefore in this case I would give ten grains of Hearts horn finely powdered,
with one grain of Bezoar-stone, or else with three or four grains of
Ambargreise in a little distilled water of Carduus, Scabius, or Dragons. And
this should be repeated every six hours, till it have been given three times.
Or else a little Mithridate dissolved in Red-rose-water, sweetened with a little
Sugar.

Forestus (in li. 15. of his observations, the 26 Observation) tells of a maid
about 19. Note.
years of age, that having fallne into a filthy Water (some stinking ditch or
sewer it should seem) being not suffocated, but having drunk in much of that
water, and sufficiently vomited, using the help of no Physician; within a
fortnight after, she fell into a pain of her loins, and a continual Feavor.
For which she was feign to be let blood and purged; and Forestus administered
other remedies also, having much labor to save her life. This I thought good
to note as a warning to those that are apt to make slight account of the
Physician, when they find not present danger of death.

CHAP. XV.
For those that are Choked with Smoke of new kindled Coals in a close Room.
IT is dangerous to be in a little room with the doors and windows shut,
where there is a pan or furnace with fire in the midst of the room:
especially while the Coals are kindling, or the Furnace but newly made is
annealing. For the vapor and smoke stifleth suddenly, before it be suspected
or perceived. Diverse have been found dead in this manner.

Christopherus a Vega, A Story out of Vega.
Tract. de Art Medendi. li. 3. Sect. 5. cap. 8. tells of diverse that having
supped together in a close room, the fire (as it should seem) being renewed
after supper, and the door shut to keep the cold air out; suddenly cast up
their supper again, with great perturbation of their Spirits and swounding: No
man considering the cause, and therefore not laboring for the remedy. Some of
them died before they could complain that they ayled any thing. Others were by
this Physician found vomiting. But when he had set open the door and casements,
they were soon refreshed and recovered with the mere ingresse of the fresh
air.

By which you may perceive, The Cure.
that the venting of the ill air out, and the receiving of the fresh air in,
is both the Prevention and Cure of this Accident. But commonly there remains
an headache for a while after, which with some cool persume, as rosewater
poured on a hot fire-shovell, or Camphor held to the parties nose; and the
applying of a Rose-cake dipped in Vinegar and Rose Water (or in Vinegar alone)
to the forehead and temples. After their recovery, it is good also to gargle
with warm water, and Oil of Violets, or Oil of sweet Almonds; and to drink
some fat broths; or swallow some warm fat moresells of Mutton or Lamb; or else
some fresh butter. Such things does Haly Abbas in the 6. Book and 4. Chapter
of his practice appoint, And the reason I take to be, that Fatty and Oily
things will best heal that harshnesse that the smoke and ill vapors have
begotten in the throat and stomach. If a Feavor sueceed, and the constiution
require it, Forestus counsaileth to open a vein. Li. 15. Scholia ad Obser. 26.

Ambrose Parey (in his treatise de Renuntiationibus) finding two servants in
this case, Another Story out of Ambrose Parey.
in sight dead, and their teeth set in their head; took this course. First
with a silver quill (which one may better do with a Syringe) he put into their
months some Aqua vitae well rectified (that is, twice or thrice distilled) with
Hiera and Treacle dissolved in it. With often doing thus, they began to
stir; and soon after voyded much filth at the nose and mouth, Upon this, he
gave them Oxymel very often, with which (together with much rubbing and
clapping on the back) a great deal of phlegm and slimie stuff, with bloody
yellow frothy matter came out of their mouths. Then did he blow up into their
nostrills the powder of Euphorbium to purge the brain better (but I would
rather advise the powder of good Tobacco, with a little Euphorbium, if need be;
because Euphorbium of it self is dangerously violent) and so with oil of
Mints rubbing the pallats of their mouths, and their jaws within, much more
filthy matter came forth. Then a sharp Glyster drew the remnant downward After
which, with Cordialls he refreshed their spirits, and rectified their depraved
humors.

CHAP. XVI.
For such as are Suffocated with Stinking Smells.
ONe may be choked also with stinking Scents, such as privies and filthy
ditches send forth. Amoderne Story.
As in Saint Laurence Lane in London a young man fell into a privy vault, about
fourteen years ago (as I remember) who with the stinking stuff was for the
time suffocated; but being missed, and by chance, was with much ado gotten to
life again. Nevertheless, using such only as wanted skill to encounter such
a strange Accident, he died within two or three days after.

Christopherus a Vega, A Story out of Vega.
in the place before quoted, tells of two men that being employed among others
in cleansing certain sinkes, and stinking sewers, were so overcome of the
evil savours, that by their fellows they were taken up and carried out for
dead. Yet he recovered them both The one by giving him Vinegar and Pepper to
drink. The Cure.
And the other by pouring into him Vinegar and the powder of Penyroyall. It is
good for him also to hold to his nose strong sweet perfumes, as of Musk,
Ambar-Greise, Civet, Lignum Aloes, and such like, But where such rich Simples
are not to be had, Sweet Marjoram, Time, Penyroyall, Rosemary, and Lavender
(rubbed together betwixt ones hands) may be held to the nose. And if any of
that filthy water be gone down into his stomach, it must be brought forth by
vomiting. Likewise, if in at the nostrills, the patient must be provoked to
neezing, with powder of Tobacco, long Pepper, or such like.

CHAP. XVII.
For things Sticking in the Throat.
OF Things that endanger stopping of the breath in swallowing, some are Sharp,
and some Blunt.

Of the Sharp sort are Fishbones, Sharp Things.
Pinnes, Thorns, and such like: for sometimes a Fish-bone in swallowing
sticks cross the throat, and is very offensive. And the like has happened
by a Pin with such as foolishly use to carry Pinnes in their mouths.

Of the Blunt sort, Blunt Things.
it happens sometimes through over-greedy eating, that a gobbet of meat, or
a piece of a bone too big for the swallow, sticks in the throat likely to
stop the breath. Sometimes through wanton rolling of a piece of money, a ring,
a bullet, a pease, a plumstone, or some such like thing; it slippeth into the
throat and sticks there. Some again whose gullet is very narrow, in
swallowing a Pill have been much endangered. I have heard of a Child in
Woodstreet strangled with a Grape: and we read that Anacreon the Greek Poet
was choked with a Grape stone.

Now of those things that are Blunt; they that are of the bigger size cannot
fall into the windepipe, because the passage is too little to entertain them:
But they offend with their over-bignesse sticking in the meate-pipe, and so
compressing or thrusting together the neck of the windepipe which joyneth to
the meat-pipe, that the breath (for that cause) cannot pass freely. On the
other side, very Small things, as a Crumme, a drop of liquor, or the like,
cannot stick in the meatpipe; but their offense is by reason that when we
swallow and breath at once, the Epiglottis (which is a little piece of flesh
that covers the mouth of the windepipe to keep the things that we swallow
from falling into it) lifting it self up (as it always does either to take in
air, or to let out breath) some little thing may in that point of time slip
into the windepipe, whose passage is so streit, that the breath is presently
stopped.

The Sharp things may light into either passage, and if they turn cross;
their offense is painful pricking and wounding of the part; whereupon may
follow inflammation, and swelling; which swelling will stop the breath also, as
in the Squinancie the swelling of the neighbour-parts streitens the Breath-pipe.

If those of the bigger Blunt sort stick in the mouth of the meatpipe,
Toremoue things in the meatpipe.
let the party drink as great a draught of drink as he can to carry it down.
If that will not stir it, but the party waxes black in the face, and
cannot fetch his breath; clap him often on the neck betwixt the shoulders,
holding down his head; and give him a draught of sallet Oil to make it slip
away. But if it be so low in the throat, and fixed, that it cannot be gotten up
nor down; let some discreet body thrust it down with their finger, or with a
smooth stick.

If a Pin or Fish-bone stick in the throat, and it be so high that (opening
the mouth wide) you may see some part of it: pluck it out (if you can come at
it) with your fingers; or with a hooked wiar, or else with two smooth sticks
in manner of a pair of tongs: a small curling-iron is very apt for the
purpose. If it be low and out of sight, thrust in a small Candle of Virgin-wax
warmed sufficiently, that the Pin or Bone may stick to it when it touches it,
and so you may draw it out. Or if you have no such Candle, take a small limber
willow stick, make it crooked like a bow, and annoint it at one end with
Turpentine, and assay in the same manner to fetch it out. Or let him swallow
down a piece of a Spronge fastened to the end of a brown thread, and anointed
with Turpentine; and when it is gone so low as to touch that which sticks in
the way; with the thread pluck out the Sponge again. If it will not come
forth; Swallow a piece of fat meat upon it to drive it down; or a fig
opened and turned the inside outward; or a crummy piece of new bread dipped in
saller Oil.

But if a crumme of Bread, To remove Things in the windepipe.
a small Fish-bone, a Pin or such like, suddenly slip into the windpipe; it
will make him cough, and let some other make him neez likewise by tickling his
nostrills with straws or rushes. If he cough not enough to bring it out, let
him swallow (by sudden gulps) some Vinegar or Verjuice: so with much coughing
it will be driven out; for the breath will not suffer it to sink very low.

But sometime a drop of Vinegar, or some such sharp sauce slipping of it self
into the same passage, causes much trouble. The party must then drink
leasurely, and by gulps a draught or two of water and honey; or else of small
Ale and Sugar.

CHAP. XVIII.
For Scaldings with Water, Oil, Lie, Milk, or any other Liquor.
As also for Burnings with Fire, Gunpowder, Lime, or such like.
FOR Scaldings. For Scaldings.
Take the White of an egg or two or more of them, according to the largeness
of the hurt: Beat it with a sufficient quantity of oil of Roses, or else of
sallet oil. Dip fine rags in it, and apply them to the place, and take them
off no more till it be well. Only three or four times in a day wet the place
through them with the said mixture.

Against Fire or Gunpowder; For Burnings.
Take two pounds of Butter that was never salted, melt it, and pour it into
Spring Water; there beat it and wash it well. Then take twelve ounces of the
fine powder of Brimstone, the seeds of Coucumbers made into fine powder, and
Camphor also in fine powder, of each half an ounce. Mix all together with the
Butter, and keep it as an Ointment; in which dipping a feather, anoint the
part burned, and lay a fine soft linen cloth upon it. Repeat the annoynting
often.

Sometimes Burning Lime may be spurted into the Eye, For Burning Lime etc. in
the Eye.
or some scalding drop, or a spark of Fire may leap into it. For this, the
white of an Egg beaten with Eyebright water, or Carduus water, is very good;
if you drop now and then a drop of it into the eye. But the Plaster of Carduus
described in the 8. Chapter is most sovereign.

I was in place about seven years since, A True Story.
where some Gentlemen were taking Tobacco; and as one had knocked out the
snuff or coal of it on the Table; another in jest blew it toward him, he also
blew it at him again. This began to be pursued from one to the other, till a
little Girl looking on (whose height was little above the Table) received the
evil of their jesting; for some of the burningcoale of Tobacco was blown into
her eye. It tormented her extremely (as nothing burns more terribly) I ran
into the garden, where I found some ground Ivy, whereof I gathered some, which
I stamped, and strayned, and putting a little fine powdered Sugar to the Juice,
I dropped some of it into her eye; upon which she received sudden ease, and
had it not applied above twice more, before she was perfectly well: But in the
mean time, her eye was muffled up from the outward air.

Here observe that the eye must never be dressed with any Oil or Ointment;
Note.
because oily and greasy things diminish the sight.

But for all the parts of the Head and body beside, make use of these two
Ointments following, which are approoved excellent for All kinds of Scaldings
and Burnings whatsoever.

The first is my Grandfathers, Two Excellent ointments for all Scaldings and
Burings.
Master John Banisters.
TAke of sweet Butter newly charned, Banisters.
and never salted what quantity you will; boil in it a fit quantity of
Goose-dung; strain it into clear and sweet Springwater. Do this seven
times: and the eight time strayn it into Rose Water; where let it remain for
the space of twelve hours. Ever now and then crushing it, and working it
together with very clean hands. After that, take it out, and put it up in a
Gally pot; keeping it as a precious ointment for that use. It takes away the
pain presently, and heals with as little blemish as may be.

The second has been often prooved by the Right Honorable, the Lady
Hastings, late deceased.
TAke the leaves of the ThornyApple of Peru, The Lady Hastings ointment.
English Tobacco, and Ground Ivy, of each a like quantity. Chop them small,
and rub them in a stone-morter as you do Green-sauce. Then in a fit quantity
of Hog's Grease boil them very leasurely on a gentle fire, till it begin to
look green. Then strayn it, cool it, and reserve it. When it is cold, while
it stands to settle, you shall see a thin part above separate it self from
the thicker part underneath: every day therefore, as it setleth, pour gently
of that thin part (as of no use) and keep only that which is thick.

This heals grievous Burnings and Scaldings without scarre. But the part when
it is dressed must be left bare, that no linen or woolen touch it.

Thus have I endeavored a common good. And I beseech our Lord Jesus Christ so
to bless all his servants, that either by his Providence they fall not into
any of these Accidents, or else by his blessing upon these or the like means
they may safely escape them. An Advertisement to the Reader.
IN this whole Treatise, the Quantities of the Inward Medicines must be
balanced with the Age and Strength of the Patient. For the Doses that I have
set down are intended for those that are in full ripeness of years, in the
vigorous strength of their age. Those that are by age or nature more tender or
feeble, must take less quantities at a time, according to the difference of
their Age and Strength.

FINIS.

