THE BATTLES OF CRESCEY, and Poictiers under the leading of King Edward the
Third of that name; And his Son Edward Prince of Wales, named the Black. By
Charles Allen, sometime of Sidney College in Cambridge.

Magnarum rerum etiamsi successus Non fuerit, Honestus ipse conatus est,
Seneca. LONDON, Printed by Tho: Purfoot for T. K. 1631.

DOCTISSIMO AMICO SVO CAROLO ALEINO de nobili hoc Poemate.
SI quid victrices debebunt vatibus vmbrae,
Aevum mortali si dare musa potest,
Et decus aeternum praestare, hos doctus honores
Praestitit Alleinus, Rex, Edovarde, tibi,
Gallorum domitor, tibique inuictissime Princeps,
Cujus adhuc nomen saecula nostra colunt.
Felices animae, lauds agnoscite vestras,
Carminaque eximios dignae sonare duces.
Maesta suas iterum lugebit Gallia clades,
Damnaque per calamum iam renovata tuum
Sentiet infelix, lugubria praelia damnans,
Temporaque Anglorum cum pharetrata cohrrs
Rumperet hostiles horrenda strage catervas,
Gallaque Gallorum luxuriaret humus
Sanguine pinguescens, quae ne damnare tenebris
Saecula, vel possit perdere livor edax;
Hos patriae reddit meritos Alleinus honores,
Nec patitur regum fortia facta mori.
Thomas May.

To his Friend Mr. Charles Allen upon his learned Poem.
THe noblest spur unto the sons of fame
Is thirst of honor, and to have their name
Enrold in faithful History: thus worth
Was by a wise ambition first brought forth.
Blessed Edward whom posterity shall know
By this unspotted work, to which we owe
Our knowledge of thy Choicest deeds: so just
Has bin my friend unto thy reverend dust.
Truth is the historians Crown, and art
Squares it to stricter comeliness: each part
Thou skilfully obseru'st, whose learned slight
Shall teach succeeding ages how to write.
Go on t'improoue the world, and scorn the harm
That malice can find out, desert's a charm.
Be fortunate as knowing, may thy brain
Ioue-like bring forth valor and wit, disdain
Those torturers of wit that stuff these times
With rude Composures and vnseason'd rimes.
It will be weakness to enlarge thy praise,
Thy own judicious Poem is thy bays.
John Hall.

To my Friend Mr. Charles Allen.
CHarles, by the muse Edward the Black seems fair,
The daring Son of an undaunted Sire.
Live not my hopes, if I can judge more rare
Their Acts, or thy expression. To require
An equal censure, this with truth accords,
They give thee matter, thou afford'st them words.
John Lewis.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and accomplished Sir John Spencer of Ofley Knight
and Baronet.
Sir,
I Have read (said Cosmus a Duke of Florence) that we should forgive our
Enemies, but no where that we should forgive our Friends: It seems by this
Dukes doctrine, that the transgression of an engaged obseruer is no venial
sin. Indeed the discontinuance of my service cries so loud, that had I not
much faith in your goodness, I should not hope an atonement; But your noble
nature has bespoke my confidence. The figure of that devotion long since set
in my breast I here delineate in this Dedication, begging the noble charity of
your construction, that you would rather conceive well of the pattern, then
too nearely examine the portraiture. A diffidence whereof were an unpardonable
trespass to your generous self, to whom my study shall make good, what your
merits expect from the faith of his observance, in whose Logic to be and to
be yours is conuertible.

Charles Allen.

TO THE NOBLE and virtuous Lady, the Lady Spencer of Ofley.
Madam,
IT may seem a solecisme to match a Lady and a battle: for Trumpets and
Fifes are harsh accents in a Ladies ear; and a Battle though but in arras is
terrible: But this makes the constuction good. I see your virtue (most Honored
Lady) stand higher then your Sex, and in that I know that the atcheiuements of
active spirits are more welcome to a masculine virtue then a soft discourse.
Besides there has ever been a sympathy betwixt Ladies and Martialists, and
the Doves of Venus make their nests sometime in a Soldiers helmet: Nay (to
pass true stories) the books of Knight errantrie were but shrunken things, if
we took out of them adventures done for Ladies. I hope the reconcilementis
made, if not, your Ladyship is merciful; and though you detect an error in my
Judgment, you shall find an infallibility in his devotion, who here lays
his hand upon your Altar for protection.

Charles Allen.

THE BATTLE OF CRESCEY.
It Is true, my hand black Edward cannot enrowle
In honors brazen leaves, nor draw a line
In his famed table, unless Homers soul
Were made by wondrous transmigration mine.
I cared not, though Pythagoras did miss
In all Philosophy, if true in this.
Yet may I draw somenobler Genius forth,
Whose high-borne streines are privileged from time,
Who in the handling of a theme of worth,
Can drown fames trumpet with a mighty rhyme,
And soaring notes impt with a muses wing,
High as the Bards that Agincourt did sing.
Let Tourney quake, great Edward's at her gate,
And like a meteor menaceth her walls,
Tourney may glory in her better fate
If by the hand of Edward, Tourney falls:
For it is a comfort by great hands to die,
And thus to fall is next to victory.
But now the enemy is on his way
( Navar, the French, and the Bohemian King,)
To take the hungry Lion from his prey:
Three Kings but named might some terror bring.
But titles never were by judgment feared,
Had all the host been Kings he had not cared.
And that the French might know his perso'nall worth,
He dard De Valois to a single fight;
And if not that, to draw a hundred forth,
That fewer slaughters might decide the right.
A good King knows (cause all depend on him)
To loose a subject is to loose a limb.
I will not question, if a leader should
Be personally seen in such an action,
It is enough for me that Edward would,
His precedent is real satisfaction.
A King's a God on earth, and this i will call
Edwards divinity; one dye for all.
But such defiances are vain to those,
Who more their numbers than their valor trust,
Now army army, all shall all oppose,
The French will have it so the English must.
Edward appoints a day: it is bravely done
To tell thy foman when thou will come on.
It Was genuine valor in our grand-sires, who
Proclaimed when, and what they meant to do,
And scornd like thieves to steal upon a foe,
A foe vnwarned is unarmed too.
By sculking out to beat an enemy,
Does pilfer honor, and steal victory.
The cloud of war was ready to dissolve
To showers of blood: the air affrighted feared
The blows it should receive, now all resolve
To go, or send to death: but all is cleard.
What was presaged black proves a fair day,
A Ladies breath dispelld the storm away.
Sister to Phillip, mother to Edwards wife,
The Lady Jane De Valois interceedes,
A cloistered Nun sets period to the strife,
Or else whole troops had di'd, and now none bleeds.
Troops of that force, that had they joind in one,
Had thrown a palenesse on the Turkish moon.
Coriolanus armd with fury dard
Bid a defiance to ungrateful Rome,
And would have humbled her proud hills, nor feared
Had the grim Father of Romes founder come.
His mothers loving prayers make him yield,
Her arms, not Romes, must make him quit the field
Edward for England hasts puts out of pay
His foreign aids; he finds his treasuries
Starved by his Offi'cers, since be went away:
The Dutch shall not share in his victories,
The English only shall partake in glory,
None else be quoted in their honored story.
Nor is it wisdom, where no treasures are,
To hope for succors from a strange supply:
Mony's the nerve and ligament of War,
It makes them fight, and keeps from mutuny.
Leaders are souls, Armies the bodies, coin,
The vital spirits that do both combine.
Now Mars is chained in his iron cave,
And stern Enyo has set up her lance,
They in more strict restreints more wildly rave,
And are made sharper by their abstinence.
Let fury take her course, she will prove mild,
To stay her gallop will make fury wild.
But soon they quit their prison and rejoice
To try in Britain wars uncertain chance,
Edward for Mountford stands, Phillip for Blois
Who both plead right in that inheritance.
Weapons are drawn on both sides to cut out
Their rights, but are put up before they fought.
And now two Cardinals, (a Nun before)
Strike a fair truce, and are the shields of France,
As Fabius of Rome their words fence more
Than arms; but when the English next advance,
And march to Cressey, then the French shall know,
Their Church hoth not a guard for such a blow.
But hungry Mars once more to prison must,
And fast from blood, nor dare once dream of fight,
Their tools of death for want of use shall rust,
Whilst plowmen stewd in sweat make theirs look bright,
Under a checkerd shadow Tytrus singes,
Whilst peace fans choler with her silver wings.
Yet though their helmets gather rust, and are
The shops, where spiders weaue their bowels forth,
Yet let not those brave heads, that did them wear,
In rusty idleness entombe their worth.
The spirits are extinct, and valor dies,
Without their sovereign diet* exercise.
Which moved our second Arthur to erect
A table, least their Magnanimity
Should languish in dull coldness, and neglect
Of practicing their arms, and cheualrie;
For exercise, and emulation are
The parents, that beget children for war.
Famed Arthur worthy of best pens, but that
Truth is so far before it is out of sight;
Thy acts are made discourse for those that chat
Of Hamptons cutthrote or the red-rose Knight.
Yet there is truth enough in thy fair story
Without false legends to enshrine thy glory.
Some monkish pen has given thy fame more blows
Then all the Saxons could thy body lend;
The hand a sacrifice to Vulcan owes,
That killd the truth by forgeries it pend.
When truth and falsehood interlaced lie,
All are thought falsehoods by posterity.
Yet in the reign of this first son of Mars,
All is not sternely rugged, some delights
Sweet amorous sports to sweeten tarter-wars,
And then a dance began the garter Knights.
They swell with love, that are with valor filled,
And Venus doves may in a head piece build.
As Sarum beauteous Countess in a dance
Her loosened garter unawares let fall,
Renouned Edward took it up by chance,
Which gave that order first original.
Thus saying to the wondering standers by.
There shall be honor to this silkenty.
Some the beginning from first Richard bring,
(Counting too meanly of this pedigree)
When he at Acon tide a leather string
About his Soldiers legs, whose memory
Might stir their valor up, yet choose you whether
You Will Edwards silk prefer, or Richards leather.
But they take not a scruple of delight,
More than's by nature given torellish pain:
At once; your welcome pleasure and good night,
Before it is settled, it is expelled again.
As dogs of Nilus drink, a snatch, and gone,
Sweets must be tasted, and not glutted on.
By this time France is rank, her veins are full,
And ripe to be let blood, deaths instruments
Are keen edged, which before were dull,
And fit to execute the minds intents.
The furies rowsed from their loathed shelues,
For former fastings now may glut themselves.
The sword, the shield, the battle axe, the spear
Are taken from the well-stor'd armory,
And that which justly shall beget most fear,
The well experienced English archery,
Who knew to conquer: Parthiae cannot show
Such high-raisd trophies, as our English bow.
Tall ships are rig'd* and with provision stord,
Stay but a while, till a fair wind shall rise,
Young Jason had not such with him a board,
When bound to Colchos for the golden prize.
The very ships when they were lanching forth,
Did seem to dance to have in them such worth.
The sails, as if with child, grew big with wind,
And long to have flown ore the briny ford:
The rising waves for fear themselves declind,
Supposing they were Neptunes were a board.
Or else for fear Neptune kept down the maine,
Least seeing them it would have changd the reign.
The vessels are vnlading of their freight,
Richer than ever crossed the seas before,
The earth with longing did appear to wait,
As proud to have their footsteps on the shore:
But the displeased sea grown angry, now,
Vexed for this loss, fretted her wrincked brow.
Bnt if wise nature had informed the earth,
That all her vert should into gules be turned:
Or of that blood she should teeme such a birth
As she had of the Giants, she had mournd.
Or else suncke down under the brinie flood,
Then had they fought in a red sea of blood.
Some thirty thousand foot, great Edward led,
With these were joined twenty five hundred horse,
The French the fields with five such numbers spread:
Yet heated by their wrongs he beards their force.
Not Clements mediation can assuage,
The just incensed flame of Edwards rage.
Their hosts before twice did their weapons shake,
Twice did their hosts return without a stroke,
They truce at Tourney, and at Malstroict make
A truce twice made the French as often broke.
The vnmanlie for fee of fidelity
Is worst eclipse in sphere of Majesty.
Evils are linked together, now he spills
Baccos, and Cliffons blood in Normandy:
Nor can one place confine his rage, he kills
Edwards approved friend in Picardie.
Our friends are parts make us entirely one,
What Is left of us is lame, when they are gone.
But that which most aggreeued Edward struck,
And to his honor seemed the greatest stain,
Philip too hautily the homage took,
Which Edward did to him for Aquitaine.
When you depresse great spirits, that aspire,
You throw down balls to make the^ rise the higher
It is a trespass against martial right,
To take up wrongs on trust, and not repay:
When beareing old ones new ones do inuit,
There Clement cannot Edwards fervor stay.
Since he is justly fired, less shall be done
Now by a Pope, then had been by a Nun.
March on: and now at Carentine they are,
Great Cliffons hands are naild upon her gates.
This act shall make her feel the extreme of war
And wronged Cliffons hands shall spin her fates.
Like a Petar they make her gates to fly,
And open a passage to her misery.
But Carentine can now no longer hold,
(For guilt is fearful,) and the English are,
Like herds of wolves amidst a fleecie fold;
Wronged favors turned to fury will none save.
For drams of Cliffons blood, whole pounds are shed
And hundreds are atonement for his head.
The walls that would have guarded them shall burn,
And cause they shard in guilt, be razed down:
Edward the buildings does to atoms turn,
As if he would annihilate the town.
For that his corpse they of its rites beguile,
The town in flames is Cliffons funeral pile.
They take in Caen in Normandy, and advance
Forward (for no controlement yet bids stay:)
Almost to Paris, and the heart of France,
Whilst sword and fire do usher them their way.
Though fire was given but for the heat, and light,
Yet man can teach this element to fight.
And now it is time to bid the English stand,
Which is not done by bearding them in fight:
They tumble down the bridges, and command,
The impetuous stremes to counter check their might
Edward must cumbat, if he will pass over,
Now against water, as with fire before.
But whilst the English are in search to find
Where it is fordable, and how they might
Gain to the other side, the French diuind
By weak conjectures that this stay was flight*
Thus do we build assurance on a wave,
And easily believe what we would have.
Weak man, (the welstord shop of vanities,
Dream of a shade, and shadow of a dream)
Erects presumptions on uncertainties
And is in fears, or hopes fondly extreme.
Thoughts airie castles in a breath do fall,
And hopes which highest fly flag first of all.
But long the stream cannot there journey bound,
Not with his winding arms the passage keep*
On Blanch Laque upon some the English found,
A ford, which nature had not made so deep.
For nature durst not be rebellious
To stay, whom heaven would have victorious.
Edward was first that entrd on the ford,
(Like to great Philips greater son, when he
Fought against Porus) with this moving word,
He that does love me let him follow me.
It was a word so forciue, that it might
Make valor wonders do, and baseness fight,
Philip six thousand foot, a thousand horse
Sends to the ford, whom Godmar lead along,
To lay a rub before the English course:
But opposition makes strength more strong.
For virtue gathers heat by having foes,
Valor is dulled, and numbed, when none oppose,
As when the sea has artificial bounds,
And damms have laid command upon the waves,
Not rebellike to ouerrun the grounds;
More madded with these stops, it wildlie raues.
And valors of that one eyed Captains mind,
'Twill make a passage if it cannot find.
Fury is not by full resistance tamed,
Voyding must ward it: he is mad will stay
A bear, or bull broke loose: fury inflamed
Is violent on all that is in its way.
What stands before, is offered to the eye,
In the true nature of an enemy.
And now S. George: The French are mowed down,
Like men ripe for the sword, the English won
The quitted bancke; Godmar is overthrown,
And when no hands to fight, has feet to run,
And least their army should too great be thought,
Leads back too thousand fewer then he brought
The passage is theit own: for Crescey now,
Which in his mothers right was Edwards own,
Crescey is famed for that overthrow,
Where horror in his deepest die was shown.
To be in view of that which is ones right.
Would make a heart for less than Edwards fight.
In three Battalias the King drew out
His men, by valliant commanders lead,
Wales her young lion in the vangard fought,
Which like a hearse in form was ordered.
It were enough to make a coward fly,
To see this emblem of mortality.
With him was Hare court, Warwick, and La ware,
Beaucham, and Bourchier, worthies who knew well
The use of hand, and head: the next troops are
Lead by Northampton, Rosse, and Arundell.
Cheifs, who like sowles, could the dull spirits stir
In the chill heart of coldest follower.
The third Battalia King Edward lead,
His soldiars might under his conduct be
Proud and secure: so Mars stood in the head
Of his robustious Thracian company.
The three Battalias seemd, as they did stand,
The three fork'd thunder in Jove's flaming hand.
The English army is closed up behind,
And barricadod that they cannot fly:
Their horses took away put them in mind
That they were there to conquer, or to dye.
It Is policy to bar the means of flight,
Necessity will make a coward fight.
Courageous Edward spurs their valor on,
And cheeres his sprightfull soldiars; where he came,
His breath did kindle valor, where was none;
And where it found a spark, it made a flame.
Armies of fearful hearts will scorn to yield,
If lions be their Captains in the field.
Through all the army this tenthworthy rid,
With a white rod in his victorious hand,
As if to chastise fortune, if she did
But dare his uncontrolled designs withstand.
'Though fools, and cowards at the name do quake
The wise, and valiant their fortune make.
The King (as strength joined with wisdom should)
Set targets in the front, to save his men
From Genoan Crosbowes; so wise Rome of old
Gave crowns to them that saved a citisen.
Offensive rashness she did not commend,
It Is the first act of valor to defend.
Which made the old King of Bohemia say,
The English marshalling speaks this intent:
Either to loose their lives, or win the day,
To get a trophie, or a monument.
A soldiar has two aims, to win or dye,
A Coward two, quickly to win, or fly.
Now Sauois Earl to make the conquest full,
Brings in a thousand to the enemy:
To share in his hoped fortunes, and to pull
A pinion from the wing of victory.
But Amie here ^is debt to nature paies,
And wears Cypress for triumphant bays.
Black was the day, the Chaos was thus black,
Before 'twas said, Let there be light; the clouds
Opend their watrie treasures, which did crack
They were so full: all is insable shrowds,
The symptoms of true grief were in the sphere
As if it meant to be chief mourner here.
The Sun at first half scared with the sight,
Behind the Moon with half his body lies:
So soon as he was quitted of this fright,
He shot his beams full on the Frenchmens eyes.
And against them let his rays like arrows fly,
As if he sided with our archerie.
Then on a cloud an arch triumphall drew,
And looked upon that watrie lookinglasse.
That he himself might by reflection view,
Whether his late Eclips had changed his face.
Or else it was to let the English know,
How much they were endebted to the bow.
The lightning cuts the air with flaming wing,
Willing to aid the Sun in that dark day;
And heavens great shot does in the welkin ring,
And with loud bellowings vshers the fray.
As if for those great Lords which here shall fall,
Heaven owed a volly to the funeral.
Shoales of ill-boding Ravens (as if the sky
Had not been dark enough) a shadow made
Dark as the clouds; that though the glorious eye
Of heaven had shind, they had been in the shade.
Fowls jointly met to feast upon the dead,
The guests were tombs where men were buried.
The pikes are orderd, ensigns are displaid,
And menace brave extremity; the light
Of glittering helmes and wauing streamers made
A day seem clear, which before seemed night.
Pale fear had amorous looks, and all the while
Terror looked Iouely, and death seemd to smile,
The shafts headed with death, and wingd with speed,
Now to the arched engine they apply,
Which as if hungry on man's flesh to feed,
With greedy certainty appeared to fly.
Their bows with such a certainty they drew,
As Phoebus did when he the Python slew.
We to the gray goose wing more conquests owe,
Than to the Monks invention; for then
We culled out mighty arms to draw the bow,
Striplings often serve us now, then only men.
For these hot engines equal mischief can,
Discharged by a boy, or by a man.
Bullets, because they undiscerned fly,
Work less effects of fear: but dangers seen,
If they cannot be fenced, more terrify;
At startled sense reason has startled been.
Amazed to have so many shafts in sight,
In hope to ward them, they forget to fight.
A well-selected Archer can let fly
Thrice for one shot of the best musketeere:
And barbed arrows gall more eagerly,
Where they once light, they second fresh-wounds there,
And mad the Horse, who will not forward stir,
More sensible of them, than of the spur.
Who madded, as they backard fly, do fall
Foul on their own, and do their service there:
Whilst their own Horses their own quarters mall,
They both themselves, and enemies must fear.
Thus broke, with an unwilling courtesy,
They open a passage to the enemy.
The musketeeres discharge but in one rank
At once; but whole squadrons of Archers may:
These wound at random, they but at point blanke;
And when both sides, are now engaged in fray,
At push of Pike; behind the armed foot,
Though muskets cannot, yet the Bows may shoot.
At the famed Battle of Lepanto, when
Valiant young Austria vvwas admiral;
The Turkish Archery did slay more men,
Than by our Pieces of all sorts did fall.
And the white faith of history cannot show,
That e're the Musket yet could beat the Bow.
The Genoan Bows, to make the French horse way
In the first point are ranged: but the showers,
Auxiliarie heaven distild that day,
Corrupt the Genoan strings, but hurt not ours.
Small things work much, where victory is due,
And only hurt your foe, though might hurt you.
Now since their Bows unserviceable be,
The King commanded Allanson to rent,
And beat them from the point: thus often we see
Actions condemnd for some ill accident.
Which may miscarry, when it is not the crime
Of him, that did attempt them, but the time.
Mean men are often in small faults impeacht:
Greatness above the clouds so high asshrind;
It cannot by Jove's greatest shot be reached,
And laughs at the low vollies of the wind.
Wolfe-bane amongst roses leaves its deadly sent,
Faults amongst great men find no punishment.
But the English of their strings more care did take,
(Whose winged pursivants deaths message bear.)
Some (through loves seat the liver, passage make,
As if our Archers had been Cupids there.
Some strike life's seat, the heart, so that you can
Scarce tell, if death did shoot them, or a man.
As when the colder Region of the air,
Moulds Rain to haile-shot, the relenting tree
Of the plump God, lusty before, and fair,
Loses her rubies with heavens battery.
Thus fell the French: for shoot, though in the dark
It Is hard to miss, when the whole fieid's a mark.
The Genoan tempest is dispelled: their force
Divided wins no fear; a mighty flood
Cut in small rills is weakened in his course,
And parted strength is easily withstood.
Divide, and then you conquer: for though none
Can break a sheafe of darts, they may break one.
Disorder's next to ruin, and destroys
The essence of creatures: order did create,
Then by the rule of contrarieties,
It Is a disorder does annihilate.
By this ill shaped enemy do fall,
Both bodies politic, and natural.
Continued, or collected bodies are
Weakened by their disunion; but do
Get strength by vn'ty; beams reflex'd are far
More hot, because they are united: so
We see in bodies ly^ened by a soul,
The union of the parts conserues the whole.
Divisions ruin Realms: the Monarchies
Of Mars his Rome, and Macedon thus fall;
Christendomes whip, that now does tyrannize,
Shall thus return to her original.
Factions those commas are, that bring the state
Of Kingdoms to their period, and fate.
The hot Count Alanson with fiery horse
Scoures over the plains with an impetuousnesse,
Which easily made it a short-winded course:
As it was said of great Themistocles.
His heat was quickly cooled, and did draw
To a too sudden end, like fire in straw.
The generous-mettald courser (as if we
Had been too slow on foot) is taught to fight:
We borrow speed to meet our enemy,
And fly to our revenge: and to do right
Unto the active French; old Thessaly
Won not more Garlonds than their Chevalrie.
Armies (if we Iphicrates will hear)
Are of themselves dull bodies, nor can weeld
Their sullen weights, unless the horse be three,
Which are ihe feet: indeed the horse at field.
Are best in actions of celeritie,
In expeditions, and discovery.
But horse against resolute foot can littlewin,
The mounting is more firm, the aims more sure;
For footmen have their moving from within,
They from their horse: yet horse are more secure
In flight, and have (as Xenophon did say)
But the advantage, when they run away.
The sprightly Count is quickly out of breath,
Like to heavens lightning as soon out as seen,
A gallant flash before the night of death;
Those edges soonest turn, that are most keen.
A sober moderation stands sure,
No violent extremities endure.
A storm of Enhlish Arrows breaks their course,
And routs their troops: stout Alanson's engaged
Within the lists of death; the furious horse
(Impatient patients of their wounds) enraged
Dismount their riders, vexed, that they did bear
Men, that did spur them to those dangers there.
But careful Phillip his Battalia brings
To disengage his cosen: and foresight
And providence in Kings does, make them Kings;
Kingdoms are Chaoses without their light.
And in Niles mysticke characters, the eye
More than the scepter noted majesty.
Suffolk as wary, on his battle drew,
To aid his Prince, and check the King of France:
Whilst rusty horror through the armies flew,
And dealt his dole of death: indiff'rent chance.
Durst not yet choose her side on which to be,
And no less wavering was victory.
Reason it self did think it fit to leave them
To their wild passions, and let fury guide:
Now choler of their reason does bereave them:
If fury be at home, reason's denied.
Madness and anger differ but in this,
This is short madness, that long anger is.
The swords forgot to glister any more,
As loath to lend their light to that dark shade;
They Are double did in a deep grain of gore,
Youl'd think they had so many Comets made.
So many by their fatal seisures did,
That Atropos might lay her knife a side.
Here a hand seuerd, there an ear was cropped,
Here a chap fallen, and there an eye put out.
Here was an arm lopt off, there a nose dropped:
Here halte a man, and there a less piece fought.
Like to dismembered statues they did stand,
Which had been mangled by times iron hand.
There one (as if unwilling should be spent,
Cost to make Marble seem to live) does mean
To be himself a cheaper monument.
Whilst slain, he still upon his sword does lean.
And for the service he did there that day,
Himself stood there as his own statua.
Here one, all of whose self was as one wound,
(Oftener transfixt than mighty Scaeuas shield)
Sometimes himself, sometimes he beats the ground,
Or clings so fast as if he'de win the field.
So many ways to death, yet does not die,
The soul uncertain which way it should fly.
There two united gores do make one flood,
Wherein the duellers do sail to death:
Thus Elephants, and Dragons mix their blood,
When both do vanquish, and both loose their breath
Their angry bloods did in two channells run,
But friendly now in death flow but in one.
King Edward like a clowd hung on a hill,
(As Affricks Captain said of Fabius)
Marking those gamesters; ready to destill,
When need should bid him be propitious.
And whilst be wisely watched for their sakes,
Not only viewed the sport, but kept the stakes.
As an old Eagle pearched on a tree
(After the Sun has ratified her brood
By their vnwaur'ring eyes) is proud to see
Her royal birds inbrue themselves in blood.
So stood the King, whose heart within him glows
To see his Eaglet flesht upon his foes.
But as Jove's trees, that crown proud Idas brow,
Stoop at stiff Eols often repeated rore:
And many drops can eat a Marble through;
So numbers iterated bear valor ore.
What? can a faintness fall on such? it can,
Edward may saint, though he be more then man.
Nor the intelligence, that moves the sphere,
Nor sphere it self, do any faintness prove:
Because there is no contrainence there,
Nat'ralls moved nat'rallie may ever move.
If to the center were an immense space,
A stone for ever could maintain the race.
But whilst our souls have union with clay,
Our limbs in upward motions are pressed
By their own struggling weight another way;
Exhausted spirits bid our motions rest.
No mortall's indefatigable, then
Had they not fainted, who had thought them men.
Now as the English houer on the brinke
Of ruin, ready now to make a freight
For gristley Charons leaking boat, and sink
Under the pressure of their numerous weight.
Unto the King regardfull suffolk sent:
He knows to win, that knows how to prevent.
The messenger returns; his anfwer this:
Whilst the Prince lives, his highness will not care,
Nor think of aid: he says, the day is his,
As lawful as his birthright; nor will share
In his vnriuald fame: the field must be
Either his grave, or stage of victory.
Nor was he cruel in this act: his son
Now for his honor fought: and in this strife
Aid had took from't; therefore the King sends none,
To show he valued honor above life.
To be indulgent to his life, had been
To kill his honor, and the greater sin.
What distance is in man? some are as much
Beneath an others virtue as above
The worst of beasts: this message cannot touch
This man of men, nor his fixed spirit move.
But should you it unto a coward tell,
It had been deathstroke, and the passing bell.
It was to Edward, and this Edward could
As well put off himself, as put on fear:
It were a ^inne to worth, if any should
Not think him dreadles, and undaunted there.
For he was heir apparent to the state,
And fear had proved him illigitimate.
Look, as the earth foundation of all
Our staring buildings; yet it self has none:
But its own self secures it self from fall,
And has no buttresses to lean upon.
For whilst grave bodies to the Center run,
They hug that point, and poise themselves thereon
Thus an heroic soul lodgd in a breast,
In which are centerd all the lines of worth:
Closely compacted on it self does rest,
And for its self its own supplies draws forth.
Edwards own worth, if no supportes come on,
Is its own base to stay it self upon.
Hope in great actions is too weak a hold,
And yields her enterteiner to his foe:
When churlish winds with testie Neptune scold,
We cut the Cables, and let anchors go.
Then hope to win, when hope of aid is gone,
The way to safety is to look for none.
If we had any cowards in the field,
They purge their aguish passion, at the sight
To see their Prince menace his flaming shield,
Like to the Sun; and spear, like Comet light.
Where shadows terminate, light issues in.
It Is first, to dare to fight; it is next, to win.
But if there were amongst our English host,
Within the colder region of whole blood
There dwelt perpetuallice, and shiuring frost,
Which could not be disolu'd: they did this good.
For every English that did basely dye,
Bequeathed his foe his fear for legacy.
The game of death was but a jest before,
Turned earnest now: before they did but try
To use their weapons; there they did no more,
But meditate, here practse how to dye.
And if stearne Mars had left his sanguine throne,
Here he had met more Diomeds then one.
Mortality till now had but defraid
Some trifling reck'nings on deaths bloody score,
Some Items not worth speaking: now Death's paid
Whole sums; and Charons boat which leak'd before
Had suncke right down; had not his Stygian flood
Been made more saileable, thickened with blood.
Armor as if 'twere sensible of smart,
Falls to the ground: his flesh, who did it bear,
Is his own coat of proof to ward his heart:
And their own arms are the best targets there.
Weapons are dulld, but stomachs keener are,
And hearts are better-pointed then they were.
In Affricke, near heavens porter Atlas side,
A Lioness beseeg'd by men, and hownds,
There makes a breach, where it is most denid;
As free from hope of life, as fear of wounds.
Led by despair, she scoures about the plame,
Thirsty of blood, as Africa of rain.
So marchd the Prince with his black regiment,
(Assisted by the arms of valiant Lords)
And top'd the gaudy poppies, as they went,
And struck such terror, that before their swords
Did seize, the French stood trembling; thus an oak
Shakes with that wind vshers the thunder stroke.
For they like thunder shot their fury through,
Where solidnes did most resistance make:
And crumble into dust, what would not bow,
Whereon they stand, and thence advanced take
Their stately flight, on humbled backs we rise,
And on the wings of ruin conquest flies.
Thus Rome in a sedition was took,
When Arnulph came there mutinies to quell:
His soldiers shoutings such amazements struck,
That from the wall the startled Romans fell.
Their heaps were scaling ladders, and their fall
Made him the stairs on which he clim'd the wall.
The Boheme King in head of all his men
Encounters with dehruction, and dares
Death to a duel, which did meet him then,
And with deep cutts cancel his date of years.
Disarmd him not, he still his weapon held
As if his ghost should fight, when he was killed.
Kings, upon whom many depend, have used
To Have danger at a distance, nor at all
Tread within reach; the Theban chief accusd
Himself, for being near an arrows fall.
For Kings are those chief stones, which arches knit,
Let one be dislocated, all will flitt.
A loyal subject has nor life, nor breath
But what is infused, and breathed from the Prince:
Who if he rashly shall encounter death,
Stifles too cruelly his influeuce.
And it is a problem whether thus to dye,
Or greater rashness be, or cruelty.
Leaders without disgrace have sometimes fled,
He that did fly this day, may next day fight:
Great Amurath had not been vanquished,
Had not Huniades been saved by flight.
Wherelife more than our death auailes the state,
Valor by flight may look for better fate.
But where it does not, leaders must not move,
But cope with danger: here a Captains flight
Reads baseness to his men, and coward love
Of an ignoble life; in such a flight.
A valliant Diomed will rather dye,
And scorn to stir, though Nestor bids him fly.
Twice was the King of France beat off his horse,
By Henault movnted up, as often did rise:
And acted to the height of single force,
He did so noblic fight, so well advise.
He seemd his armies hand, and armies head,
He fought like Scaeua, and like Caesar led.
The valliaut King still wrastles with his fate,
As if he would untwist, what that had weau'd:
Deeming the web of fate had been like that,
With which the Grecian dame her loves deceived.
Flesh cannot break the threads, the fates have spun
Like Narses web, theirs cannot be undone,
Nor Frances strength nor fortune can prevail,
Fortune has left no refuge but to fly:
The King turned head, and all his men turned tail,
And leave at once the field and victory.
Soon turned the King, the army turned as soon,
Thus a small rudder turns a Galeone.
The King congratulates his son for this
Fair earnest of his future victories,
And seals up his language with a kiss:
With mute expressions the Prince replies.
Silence has Rhetoric and veiles are best,
To portr^^^t that, which cannot be expressed.
Wars greater tempest had forgot to blow,
And horrors thicker clouds were driu'n away;
But lighter mists, and weaker blasts did now
Appear to dim the honor of the day.
Thus when a roaring storm has ceasd to rave,
A trembliug noise still murmurs on the wave.
When the next morn had blushed to see the field
Look redder then her self, in purple dight:
Some scatterd troops, as willing to be killed,
Came rather to a slanghter, then a fight.
If the sound bodies of whole arms fail,
It Is ruin for sore members to assail.
For by the English breathing death, they are blown
Out of the field: and day drawn out of night:
So many Lords of France were overthrown,
That yet I never could judge, if that I might
Or a misfortune, or an honor call,
That loss should always on their nobles fall.
FINIS.
THE BATTAIE OF Poictiers under Edward, Sirnanamed the Black Prince.
NOt in full orb as yet his honor shines:
True honors orbs are filled by digits, grow
By orderly addictions, high designs
Do with Methodicall progression go.
Tall Cedars by degrees advance the top,
It Is Mushrome honor in a night springs up.
Nature the hand, and instrument of heaven
With sober pace aduanceth fairelie on:
Her pieces are produced by smooth, and even
Degrees, and grow by soft accession.
Nature by mediums works, leaps not at all,
And honor leapd to seems unnatural.
But yet she stays not, but does gently pace
In her continued march: and high borne sprights
Work, (...) Falcon to wring to her place
Winns are by constant circlings, not alights.
Macedo^ heir could glory, he did raise
His name by expeditions, not delays.
Then on great Prince, the eldest son of Fame,
Honors first borne; continue still to add
Items to virtues sum, and wear a name
Charged with more well-won titles, than he had.
Contest for thy inheritance in fame,
More just thy interest, more fair thy claim.
France was the court wherein the case was tried,
With title so apparent, proofs so clear;
His plea for honor could not be denied
By justice bribed: nay if more worlds there were,
And Philips son had triumphed on them all,
His suit for honors birthright here should fall.
But he that would court honor in the field,
And wed her nobly to his virtue, must
Hold passion in; on a firm basis build,
And know the causes of his war be just.
Great actions, if not founded deep, will reele,
The greatest ship must have the strongest keele.
To procure peace, or keep a foe at bay
By warding injuries, call a war just:
But not to hug revenge, and make a way
For brutish feritie, but that Kings must
Keep Kings in good opinion, that they know,
What a wrong is, and how to use a foe.
T'enlarge the ^i^ts of Kingdoms, and extend
An Empires arms a war may authorize:
The Prince, whom sacred leaves do most commend,
And by the style of heaven is writ most wise.
Made all the people tributarie be,
Were from Euphrates to the midland sea.
Or to recover, what our right has been,
And what is deteind unjustly, to regaine,
Where justice ends, there justly wars begin,
Our Edward thus did war in Aquitaine.
Thus fierce Camillus taught the insulting Gaul
To weigh the treasure, and restore it all.
King John had settled upon Charles his son
Aquitaines D^rchie; which did owe her state
To Englands Edward, who confirmed it on
The Prince, with charge his right to vindicate.
Kings do mark Kings proceedings, and to eye
Their ways is politic necessity.
This was that Charles, whom the French stories writ
First Dolphin: Vinbert broken at the chance
Of's only sons decease, did give his right
Of Dolphinie to Phillip King of France:
But with this coution conferd the same,
They should the heir of Franee the Dolphin name
Go vindicate thy right? a word what can
Effect a wonder on lame cowardice,
And teach it move: but to the Prince a man
To picture prowes by, it does but this,
Remove those letts which did his valor stay;
Streams have self motions, take the dams away.
Thus when a pondrous stone, whose wight propende
Down to the loved center, with a stop
Has an encounter as it downward tends:
And with the interposure is kept up,
Whose'uer shall displace the impediment,
Imparts no motion but by accident.
Still had their King seen peaces laughing browe,
And smoother front, had he not bard his foes
Of that, for which there was no right to show,
As once a Pope the Indies did dispose.
Which made the barberous King to laugh at this,
One should dispose of what was none of his.
But th'vnexperienc'd King dares sport with flame,
And sindge his royal pinions, he does think
The bloody dye of Mars is but a game:
And thirsts wars bitter potions to drink.
His father drank not all the violls up,
Edward's his doctor to dress him a cup.
He musters up his men, extracts the best
Out of the English mass, Salsbury, L^le,
Suffolk and Warwick: men that might contest
With antiquie worth, and lead the right hand file.
Wise Princes have wise seconds, nor alone
Imbarke in actions, eyes see more then one.
Suppose the general wise, and valiant,
Such the commanders; yet if be proposd
Proiects of consequence, they do not grant
They should in one breasts conclaue be disposd.
But call a martial court, and there debate
Which side makes best conclusion for the state.
Such were the soldiers here, and such the head,
Mars could not here select a soldier out*
But could command; no captain but could lead
The Gods, when they against the Giants fought.
Mars would have chose these soldiars in his wars,
And Mars his soldiars Edward for their Mars.
The Prince eight thousand sineweie archars bringes,
Armed with fatal engines, which were tried,
And never taught the foil; as if their wings
Impropriated conquest to their side:
Their whistleling shafts always victorious fly,
Featherd with plumes were plucked from victory.
A thousand men of arms called out, did look
Like iron statues, art had taught to go:
Which stood more firmly on the ground they took
Than Macedon^^ Phalanx er could do.
And as the Prince these fiery warriors led,
He seemd the star some Comet followed.
More to distract, and more to terrify,
The English land in diverse parts of France:
Whilst Glosters forces fight in Normandy,
Wales does in Aquitane the war advance.
For in a war that has more seats then one,
More fear's diffused, and more pillage wone.
Charles of Na^ar challenged a right in ^ry,
Great Gloucester took up arms in Charles his right,
And in his own Edwar did France defy,
For right the Prince, for right did Gloucester fight.
For those false Keys which lock up justice, are
The Keys which open Ianus his doors of war
Gloucester with Philip brother of Nauar,
Preuailes in Normandy: takes Narbon in,
Forces C^rcassou; nor durst fortune bare
The cittyes gates, which Gloucester meant to win.
He shot without a counterbuffing stock,
Like to a thunderbolt through Languedocke.
But Glosters not my theme: (though that too hi^
For best of quils to reach) I must retreat
To Edwards quarters, and there vainly try
To make his greatness make these measures great.
The only muse I sue to is his name,
And vncorrupt relation of his fame.
And now my fancy sees great Edward rise,
Mars his Enthusiast: his actions were
Raptures of valor, and deep ecstasies
Of man above himself: for drawing here
His spirits from their matter, passed more
Himself, then he surpassed the world before.
He on the stage of Aquitane did play
That part, which none beside can personate:
In every course or found or made away,
And prostrates as infallible as fate.
Like to deaths harbinger his passage made,
And there death lodged, where he lodged his blade
Cities of such a strength (that they had been
Abler t'ensure the Godlings from surprise,
Than bodging in strange shapes:) did let him in
As if he had been keeper of the keys.
And raineing arrows in a featherd shower,
He could have pierced more then a brazen tower.
Some towns inueited by their strength withstand,
Not out of hope to stand but out of shame:
Some yield more to his name, than to his hand,
For that had summond them, before he came.
Whilst some are forced, some yielded, as he went,
And seemed to have been won by precedent.
Thus fall the shrubs, poor neighbors of an oak,
Whose top kisseth the clouds, whose root sounds hell
Which vanquished by the assault of sturdy stroke
With groniug fall the underwood does fell.
Small states sink with the fall of greater states,
The same their fortunes, and the same their fates.
Ciement the sixth of Rome strikes in for peace,
An act of which few of them guilty are:
The Papacy arrived at the increase
Of her progression by foreign war.
And since the Eagle did some plumes afford,
It thriu'd less by the keys, than by the sword.
But Wales th'exact Idea of a son,
And true commander, wisely did deni't:
Unwarranted from home had it been done,
He had entrenchd upon his fathers right.
Th'jniunctions of thy Prince must stand, not thine
The soul of Martial feasts is discipline.
Stern Manlius yields his victorious son,
Unto the lictors axe, because he fought
Without command though challendg; and had won
The day from Metius, and rich spoils had brought,
The loss of such a son does rather choose
Than Rome the least of discipline should loose.
No ear to lecture of soft peace is turned,
Mars his red letters writ with sword and spear
Must still be read, his valor's but adjournd
It Is not prorogued: it was no period here
But as a breathing comma to the Prince,
Such stops as these are spurs to violence.
As I have seen come galloping amain
A gentle Knight, who meeting on the road
An old frind long unseen, does entertain
Someshort discourse, then with his gingling goade
Prick up grasshopper, and devour the way,
And win with speed, what he had lost by stay.
And thus a stream proud with a fall of rain
Topping his banks, and scorning the control
Of a poor channel wins from the plain,
And with impetuous violence does roll.
But if some dam shall countercheck his waves,
It breaks the dam, and more insulting raues.
The Prince shoot smoothly though without recoile;
And towns so eas'lie homag'd to his name,
As if he went but to receive the spoil,
Which fortune had told out against he came.
And with so swift dispatch effected this,
That Caesar's Vici was but slow to this.
Fair fortune was engrossd for him by fate,
Yet was he not more fortunate, then wise:
Wise as Huniades, as fortunate
As Castriot, which two this one comprise.
He seemd to take towns at a cast, and get
(As one Timoleon) cities in a net.
Now shiuring winter fledg with featherd rain
Couerd the earth with beds of watrish down
Which warnes the Prince to quit the open plain,
And have his soldiars winterd in a town.
Who unto Burdeux vninpeachd retreates,
And for that year takes leave of matiall feats.
The careful Prince will not his men bestow
In fields vnsheltred, whilst the leagring cold,
And battring engines of chill ice, and snow
Assault the spirits, and surprise their hold.
Who let their men ith field in winter lie,
Both combat nature, and the enemy.
The Sun surrownding with a fleet carrere,
On the highway of the Eclipticke line:
Had inned in his winter signs that year,
And at the goal his mounture did decline.
Thus Edward to his winter Tropic came,
Advancing through the Zodiac of fame.
As when a fat, and teemeing soil is grown
Lean, and o'respent; and by its often birth
Threatens a barren womb, the moileing clown
Fallowes the acres of his languisht earth.
Thus chiefes indulge their weari'd soldiars rest,
And husband valor in their fallow'd breast.
Apollos yew is not at all times bent,
It sometime feriates, and string is slackt:
The sinews of his lyre not always rent
With screwing torture nor with winding rackt
These rests and stops with sweet variety,
Tune all our actions to a harmony.
Now had the Sun rid through his winter stage,
And lighted at the lusty ram: the earth
With herbs, as Aeson, did renew her age,
And was impregnate with a numerous birth.
Flora to open her wardrobe did begin,
As 'twere to deck her at her lying in.
The constellation of the winged steed
Rising with Sol, attempereth the air
To the radical humor, and does breed
Blood in the strouting veins, and sprights repair.
Soldiars in spring doubly their service can,
A man in winter is but half a man.
The Prince, who had in winter seemed to set,
Aduanceth forward, with th'aduancing Sun:
Does not his resolute designs forget,
Nor to consummate what he had begun.
Not to promote what we do once comence,
Argues a weakness, and a diffidence.
Veins would be cram'pd; the stream of blood would freeze,
In the old channels, should they longer lie:
And if they still should sacrifice to ease,
Valor would fall into alethargie.
Dull lakes are choakt with melancholy mud,
Motions does clear, and cristallize a flood
No body's (...) healthful without exercise,
Just wars are exercises of a state:
Virtue's in motion, and contends to rise,
With generous ascents above a mate.
Princes in motion with the spheres contest,
Made more for veneration, then for rest.
With vncontrowled march he did advance
Througb Bruges, Perigort, and Limosin:
And seizd the bosom of affrighted France,
The terror of his acts vsherd him in.
The loud report of his victorious name
Did execution long before he came.
As when the nurses rod cannot appease
The Child; at th'hearing of some horrid name
It Is hushed: thus Turkey with Huniades
Stilled their children saying that he came.
A frightfull name's as forciue as a blow,
Both Edwards name, and arm can overthrow.
For he, like light diffused, in the air,
Spreads without opposition, meets no stay
To check his fair proceedings, nor impair
His smoother fortune wheeling on her way.
No lets encountered with his fortunes yet,
They ran as smoothly as Musaeus writ.
As yet there is no abatement of his power,
No blood expended, they did nothing meet
Whereby they might diegust the wars, no sower
As yet had been attempe^d with their sweet.
Thus Arethusa slides through Neptunes bed,
And keeps her maiden stream vnrauished.
But whether march we? are the arms of France
Pinio'nd with fear? What not a Caualleere:
That for his mistress sake dare try his Lance;
If not for's country be a champion here?
Yes now their horsemen like a tempest come,
Acknowledgd then the flower of Christendom.
King John such unexpected have did make
(His spirits heated with too quick a fire:)
He did the Prince at Poictiers overtake;
He wingd his hope, and imped his desire,
As if he would his hasty fates importune
He might outrun his father in misfortune.
The King mistook it for a chase, and thought
To overtake, were to surprise his foe*
As when a hownd with snufling long has sought
Through way less woods which way the game did go,
Rouses by chance a Lion for a dear*
And thus the French did rowse a Lion here.
Under the heavy burden of their power
They seemed to make the groaning earth to yield:
And with a clowd of men (able to shower
Destruction on the world,) darken the field.
A whirlewind scowring from the Northern waine
Did ease the oppressed, clear the darkened plain.
They had the odds of number six to one,
A wonder by a sixth to be withstood:
So many Spears at once, and lances shown,
Did in a champaine seem to make a wood.
But I have heard, a wolf did never fear,
A flock of sheep, how great so ever it were.
Let fond Tigranes in a proud despite
Scoff at Romes handful, and in bravery
Brag to his men, they were too few for fight,
And but too many for an embassy.
They chased this bragart, and the conquest wou,
And made his honor set before the Sun.
They have the odds of country: the cause is
Tried in their court; and we are forced to play
In their own alley: nay, they are strain by this
To fight; they loose the country with the day.
But in inuasiue wars abroad, we do
But loose our selves, and not our country too.
Upon the foil, where thou were borne, to flee
Cries bastard in thy face: is it not just
To pay her life, whch once did lend it thee?
Ner could thou better dye and once thou must.
Give me a cock that nere durst strick a blow,
Upon his dunghill he will beat his foe.
Nay, as if fortune had a patent lent
For France, t'ingrosse all the advantages,
Odds in conceit; conceit, an instrument,
Which though pantasticke, gets realities.
The pregnant mothers strong imagination
Has given her womb a real alteration.
The King of France his army did draw out,
And on a spacious plain imbatteled:
His numerous multitude he wheeld about
Like the first mouer; and the fields did spread
With train too long, and wings too short to fly,
Unto so high a pitch as victory.
His hopes had now imposed on his belief
That he already had the victory:
He thinks that tedious, which all else think brief
He means to ^^^ne his battle presently.
Desires are ha^^ie, and when hopes are strong,
Minutes are lazy, and compendiums long.
They think to scourge our heroes, and with steel
Whip this young warrior, who now was made
Professor in his art, and scornd to feel
Check, or correction from the proudest blade.
It cannot come into their memories,
He had at Crescey fought his master prize.
Scorning the petty numbers which we brought,
They rate them prisoners more then enemies:
And against light, and truth of nature thought
That efficatious force in number lies.
He is blind-hardy, that will dangers slight
For they grow heavy, when they once seem light
If chance claimd not an interest in tents,
And schools of Mars, then the French numbers might
Seem in good eyes enforcing arguments
For strong conclusions, but she claims such right,
That it is a question whether Rome ought more
To her own fortitude, or to this whore.
But France has greater opposition here
Than single fortune had we cowards been,
She had imparkd us like a heard of dear,
But in so few never was more valor seen.
A multitude could never make a head
Against feirce Lions if by Lions lead*
Whilst the French swollen with vain, and sickish hope
Of victory, are ready now to burst
In feaue'rish choler on the foe; the Pope
With fatherly prevention tried first,
It for such fevers any thing might be
A sovereign cure besides Phlebotomie.
To meditate between this mighty pair
He sent two Cardinals: the French withstood
With ears of proof, and fortified against prayer,
Their Crosier staves could here do little good,
Nay, if the herald of the gods had come,
He might have broke his rod, and so flowne home.
We were too far gone in this maze to fly,
Nor humane judgment could present a light
To show us out; Time, and necessity
Advise the Prince lean to a Peace, which might
Be not inglorious, and give a blow
Upon his honor deeper then a foe.
But France presuming fatally there are
Upon her side matchles advantages,
Will hear no music but the sounds of war,
The hymns of Peace are but dull aires to these.
Thus Semele the thundercracke will hear,
And dies with that, which only pleased her ear
The Prince beset with strong objections
Of opposits can no evasion see:
Would therefore yield to fair conditions,
Nay, yield up all things but himself; and he
Cannot be guilty of such base controwle
Whose body't selfe's no prison to his soul,
Yet this, and only this can satisfy
Their high desires: Edward must basely yield
Himself a prisoner: nay he will rather dye,
Than yield, and live: nay fore he quits the field,
He Will take their King: it is just, he that will choose,
To take thy freedom, should his freedom loose.
He gives conditions, as if we were
Now in his hands, and really possessed
In's ouerweening thoughts: and does not fear
Our fortune, and our valor: but professed
He Would set us Laws: but Edward thought it fit,
Those Laws like Dracos should in blood be writ.
His articles at first did terror strike,
And did our minds in dark suspenses hold,
But ended things to laugh at; not unlike
The armed charets in the field of old
Wherein both sithes, and hooks and spears were borne:
Were first a terror, afterward a scorn.
To yield ones self, and yield before a blow
Calls indignation ftom a cowards breast.
He could not yield his honor to his foe,
For others had in it some interest.
He had deceived country, and King for he
To them for's honor must accomptant be.
His life, and honor at the stake did lie.
Set to be throw'n at in this martial game:
He Will therefore use his life courageously
To keep from forfeit his vngaged fame;
And with a fearelesse progress dangers meet,
Life not in length, but in the use is sweet.
The King of France an error did commit,
(And wars for errors scarce have second room)
Had he but tymd it, and not joined yet
We easily would to composition come.
Fortune's a Market, if a while you stand,
Things do grow cheap, and fall into your hand.
We could not with provision be stored,
He might have cut it off without a blow:
Famine had been more forciue, than the sword;
But he will fondly buckle with his foe;
And by his folly make our fortune great;
Serpents prove Dragons when they Serpens eat.
Great actions are not molded ont of hand,
They ask their time for just conception;
Least they should prove blind issues; they deman
A first, and second agitation,
And are on arguments of Counsel tossed,
Or on the waves of fortune they are lost.
When mature counsel has concluded, what
Is to be done; and how contrived; we need
Dispatch, the life of things, to practice that:
Consult at leisure, prosecute with speed.
Which Tytus by his emblem well descride,
A nimble Dolphin to an anchor tied.
King John admits no consultation
To ripen his designs, as if it had been
Too short a time for his perdition.
Grapling with dangers brings them sooner in.
Actions are weakened with too hasty speed,
Thus predigestion does diseases breed.
He Kenns not precedents that went before,
But with erected, and ambitious eye,
Thinks on surmis'd advantages to sore,
Nor minding what is before him, to mount high.
Thus a seeld dove with right up mountures flies,
Because she sees not, what before her lies.
If he had but his fathers legend read,
There had been lectures to have taught him wit.
The name of Crescey might have struck him dead,
To think like fortune might attend us yet.
Heaven destining a fall, muffies the eyes,
And when it will destroy, it stupefies.
When some did the Emperor Charles the fourth advise
To dare the Turkish cressant, he refusd:
'Cause through the current of all histories,
He saw much blood was in those wars effusd.
The ancient times, what is the best, do show,
The modern teach what is most fit to do.
When Zeuxis did his Juno go about,
From the choice shapes of the Agrigentine Dames,
He culd the rarest of perfections out.
Thus Princes do arrive at highest names,
For they the best of all examples take,
When they the Juno of their power do make.
Their former sufferings might instructions be:
It Is best another madness to enjoy:
They might their own through other danger see,
And with what fate we did our shafts employ.
From fire which has once burnt it, to refreine,
Moves in the circle of an Infants brain,
When Archimedes engines once had feared,
And did at Siracuse the Romans maull,
Not one in all the leager once appeard,
But stood the space of danger from the wall.
If they a piece of rope, or wood did spy,
Supposing it an engine, they would fly.
From his own loss he will read instruction,
And try experience on himself: they sing
To a deaf rock, who tune persuasion:
The Card'nalls is dull rhet'ricke: for a King
Not to be forced is a glorious state,
But not persuaded is a dangerous fate.
Wise Chiefes would purchase, were it to be sold,
A foes return: which made that worthy say,
If he will go, make him a bridge of gold,
No metal is too dear to paue his way.
Unwelcome oppositions will at length
Create a sudden fury, and new strength.
The Freneh well mounted did so firmly ride,
They seemd some monster made of man and beast:
Thus rid the Centaures by Enipus side,
Invited to Peryth'ous bridal feast.
Nessus did fall by great Alcides Bow,
Thus the French Centaures have their overthrow.
John on his horse the confidence did lay,
And thinks he sooner shall upon their speed
Allight at th'hope, and honor of the day,
But this opinion did an error breed.
An eye through water measures nothing straight,
Nor wisdom through the glass of preconceit.
He sees not how the prince had laid his men
Close in a bushie, and unequal ground,
His horse though better could do nothing then,
And while at once they feel the arrows wound
And windings of a bush, they do mistake,
They feel the stinging of some winding snake.
A ground (as I have seen some dining room
Whose seeling art has cut in wandering vines)
So that by nature: that no horse can come,
But is supplanted by th'intangling twines
The creeping vines with their erroneous course,
Were made by nature shackles for their horse.
We this advantage borrowd from the place,
The French Kings error does another make:
No place was given by merit, but by grace,
Which make deseruers cold to undertake.
When no fair aspect shines on deserts,
There is a dearth presaged on arms, and arts.
Three hundred horse he culled from the rest,
The rest conceiving it a high neglect,
Think themselnes worst, 'cause others are thought best.
And 'gin to envy, whom he did select.
Enuie's a race, in which the runners, mind
Those, who do run before, not who behind.
In great designs we such impressions see
Impeach an action, where the mind must look
Pointblank upon the work, nor squinting be
By the affections from the bus'nes took.
A shaking eye has an uncertain sight,
And minds by passion moved aim not right.
Vexed with disgrace they discontented grow,
And thus distracted, either study why
They were rejected with dislike, or how
To be revenged for such an injury.
And readi'r are to double their despite,
Than animate their courages to fight.
The Prince helped by these errors, and the ground
Strengthened by nature, where his men were laid,
Used art to make it stronger then 'twas found,
That it might more impassable be made.
Rests not in what was by mere nature done*
Art is to perfect what that has begun.
The night before, ditches, and trenches cast,
So wide, they might not by the horse be leapt.
His Archers close behind the banks were placed,
From whence they shot, and were so safely kept.
That I would prove, and by no proof but this,
The place conserueth what contained is.
Yet it were weakness, if he were content
With strength of place: and therefore that he might
Have breasts as fortified, he did present
His men with the necessity to fight.
When a, needs must, commands us to begin,
We loose with honor, or with wonder win.
His men with obstinacy armed so,
And resolution, that the farewell breath
Of Edwards gasping men could blast a foe.
And if no friends would vindicate their death,
Yet this should be their comfort, here to dye,
Would be their birthday to eternity.
And now with horror I the French espy
Come rolling o'r the Champaine like a flood.
Their swords like scourging Comets in the Sky
Prognosticated deluges of blood,
To drown us in, but that the English bow
Like the propitious meteor said no.
Here you may see their formest troop of horse
With a resolved brau'rie charge the banks:
There see the ruder archers break their course,
And spoil the method of their orderd ranks.
Thus against a rock deep founded in the maine,
The waves often sally, often repulst again.
There see their second troop so close compact,
As if that all should but inflict one stroke;
And be as but one person in that act:
But falling on our men at arms, are broke.
Thus on the stones a storm of hail does fall,
It breaks it self, and does not hurt at all.
Now see the third ride forward in a brave,
Then backward beat, then vanish out of sight.
As I have seen a straw slide on a wave,
Until encountered by a narrow straight,
Then forward, backward, and about it whirles,
And then is swallowed in the watrish curles.
We had been ouerlai'd with numbers now,
And if declining had been crushed straight:
The body of our army did not bow,
But standing right is settled with their weight.
Imposed weights columns which lean deface,
But standing straight they fix them on their base
Had Plato seen this army he would swear,
(Ravished to see such wonders done by men)
Valors Idea had existence there,
And never before vouchsafd to lodge with men.
Valor so high, that whatsoever may be
Conceiud of it, is no hyperbolie.
Here Edward fought, and there the French men fly,
Whilst he an alley through their quarters made:
They count it not a harm, but grace to dye,
If that their deaths were honored by his blade,
No Herald shows an arms of such a note,
As where his weapons gave the bloody coat.
There Audley stood, thus Diomed did stand,
When he the God of battle did defy:
His flaming sword came lightening from a hand,
Of as swift execution, as his eye.
The bloody lines which there his steel did write,
Were perfect copies how the world should fight.
Who is that? Warwick? yes it is he, be gone,
He is deaths swordbearer, who went before
To make death way, which else could have got none*
He slaughterd many, and affrighted more.
The thunder dart though but on one it fall,
Yet does it strike a terror on them all.
There come the common soldiars, who did light
Their valor at their Captains: no commands
Of leaders, but examples bid them fight,
They seemd like Briareus with his hundred hands.
And if employed, they could as well, as he,
Have rescus'd Jupiter, and set him free.
So many heaps of slaughterd men did raise
The field in swelling hills, that no man will
Have faith enough in these last faithless days,
To think the sword so many men could kill;
But rather that some stroke from heaven did fall,
Or spreeding sickness did infect them all.
Those witty feigners of antiquity,
That with a drop was from some lover shed,
Could give a tincture to the mulberie,
And make her greener fruit, look sanguine red.
Had they then lived and this field had seen
There had no fruit in all the world been green.
See in that heap one man among the rest,
Under those bleeding carcasses survive,
And by the weighty multitude oppressed:
Themselves vnburi'd bury him alive.
And must be pleased with this unequal lot,
The living shall have graves, the dead have not.
Here arms lopt off; put them in mind to use
The service of their legs in time, before
They shall those necessary members loose.
Here one that lost a leg fretted, and swore
At his own madness he so long should stay
That now he could not run, but hop away.
There might you see a helmet full of head,
Like to an iron monument stand out.
Here all the field with plumes of feathers spread,
Which mocked by the winds did fly about.
The hou'ring plumes presented to their sight,
Was a presaging emblem of their flight.
Here John of France with steely wand did show
Wonders, incircled in a hostile ring:
There hardy Phillip ran the army through,
To disengage his father, and his King.
Thus Affrican amongst the thickest ranckes,
Fought for old Scipio at Ticinus banks.
But what is that I hear? o it is fly, fly,
Or a rude noise of Soldiars that would ^iue,
And in confusion for quarter cry,
Which should they sooner ask, he would sooner give.
Valor, and mercy are the fixed poles
On which the sphere of Edwards honor rowles.
Kings are Gods pictures, and their mercy lend,
Best life unto the Pieces clemency,
And moderation do best commend
Their actions, and their fortunes beautify.
These glorious lustres are the varnish cast,
Which makes their acts not only shine, but last
Mercy declard unto a foe, does show
We Are cit'zens of this world; and would not be
Cut off by ferity; and lets men know
No sep^ratists are in humanity,
Here we maintain communion, for our hearts
Are continents not Isles from other parts.
King John with humble state is entertaind,
Not dealt with roughly as an enemy;
Edward by valor his first conquest gaind,
And wins a second by his courtesy.
Base wolves, and bears still urge a yielding foe,
Edward's a Lion, and he cannot do so.
In midst of triumph, here the crier say,
Remember thou art man, to moderate
Thy fortune: on a steep descent we stay,
Our selves, and horse; thus in a high-raisd state
We use a moderation, and begin
On fortunes steep to reine our pnssions in.
So many prisoners at this battle took,
Who did into the arms of mercy yield:
As might have taken us; at the first look
They seemd enough to win again the field.
Save that these odds did for the English stand,
One keeper can ten prisoners command.
So many Noble Lords did write with blood,
And seal with wounds that France did love her King
As if the Nobles did not think it good,
The commons should their testimony bring
To ratify that truth; themselves will be
The Only subscribers to this verity.
Edward the heavens does humbly gratify,
Whose stars had for him in their courses fought,
And lead him by the hand to victory
And like sure conuoies through his dangers brought:
Timotheus thriues not, after he denies
A share to fortune in his victories.
Then he bestows rich larges on his men
T'enflame their minds, that if they did not love
Virtue for her own self, rewards should then
Win their loves to her, and their dullness move.
Reward is the great pillar of a state,
Which does support as strongly, as her fate.
Then heightens them with commendations, praise
Is the reflection does from virtue rise;
These fair encomiums do virtue raise
To higher acts: to praise is to advise,
Telling men what they are, we let them see,
And represent to them what they should be.
And they were worthy of it: Rome never saw
An army yet, to which this host would yield,
Nor brauer Chief than Edward er'e did draw
Her powerful legions into the field.
Edward shall mate the proudest He of Rome,
Let Caesar's self her great dictator come.
When Rome had conquered all the world beside,
Then, and but then she durst attempt the Gauls,
Gauls, who before her powers did deride,
And often had scourged her at her own walls.
Rome never durst the stubborn Gaul defy,
Till she had not another enemy.
But England had another powerful foe,
The hardy Scot, to threaten from the North
Incursions: yet then did Edward go
From home, and lead with him an army forth.
And spite of Oracle a conquest win
Which said we should with Scotland first begin.
Victorious Caesar bed ezperienc'd men,
Custom'd as well to conquests, as to fights:
Those whom heroicke Wales conducted then,
Were but mere nouices in Mars his rites.
New changed the whip for sword, the share for shield,
And Ceres fat for Mars his bloody field.
The Gauls indeed were resolute in war,
Whom Caesar with his legions vanquished:
Yet were those Gauls inferior by far
Unto the French: for the French conquered
The Gauls, who could not then themselves defend
Eue'n when that Rome did them assistance lend.
Ariouistus with his Germans had
The Gauls in slavery (a great allay
To the best temperd spirits) and had made
Factions to take their soueraignetie away.
Seditions are the rills, which at the length,
Weaken the current, and maine stream of strength
But now the French were free, a settled state,
And fixed in the obedience to one Lord,
A King for fame, and fortune wondered at,
Under his colors Kings did draw the sword.
A King for whom one did himself bereave
Of rule for love, and one for money leave.
Against a state so strong, and settled thus,
Edward durst come with an vnpractisd few,
The French had more advantages of us,
^han Caesar of those Gauls he overthrew.
And yet there were more marks of valor mad^
In France by the English than the Roman blade.
Then why has history so copious been,
In old Romes strength, as if it meant to say,
Not what should win belief, but wonder win,
Thus Alexander left in India
So great an armor, which should rather be,
T'amaze, than to inform posterity.
Mighty third Edward thou did propagate
Strength in thy children, though we often see
Their seed degen'rous, and it is thought a fate
The sons of Heroes should a blemish be,
Pure was the grain when it at first was sown,
But it has many husks when it is grown.
Who has in virtues Zenith seated been
Swerues farthest in his fall: a mighty spright,
Highly sublimed is stranger to a mean:
Nor is it foild in sin, but falls down right.
And for the sins which such great sires have don
The heavens have often took vengeance on the son.
And sometime too, great men vxorious are,
(So was Themistocles) and let their wives
With too indulgent education mar
The hoped fortunes of their childrens lives.
Children like water on a table spilt
Are easily drawn into what shape thou will.
But noble Edwards fortitude descends
Down to his sons: this royal Eagle breeds
An airie of true Eaglets, not commends
Doves to the world; a valiant race succeeds.
This valliant father: never could Heroes vaunt
Of two such mighty sons as Wales and Gaunt.
Now farewell Lords, who seem to have thrown despair
Upon the world; which fears while it shall last
It hardly shall be crowned with such a pair,
For nature lost the moulds, where they were cast:
Or else in making them she spent such store,
That she has scarce materials for more.
FINIS.

