A CONSIDERATION OF CERTAIN POSITIONS Archiepiscopall.
1 Religion cannot stand without some Ceremonies, as kneeling etc.
REligion is the fear of God to serve him precisely according to his word, and
therefore it is called Godliness. Isa: 29.13. Act: 2.5. and 10; 2. and 26.5. 2:
Tim: 3.5. Heb: 9.1. Iam. 1.27. As by Superstition his Majesty means, when
one restreignes himself to any other rule in the service of God, tha^ is
warranted by the word. Bas. dor. page 15. Which is therefore called Wilworship.
Col: 2.21.23.

Howsoever it be Religion, out of the fear and love of God, to keep his
co^mandeme^ts as well of the second as first table, yet the conscionable
observing of the commandments contein^d in the first table is, by an
excellency, called Religion; And whereas man cannot judge of such observing the
first and third commandments therefore is he esteemed Religious, who makes
conscience of the 2 and 4: commandments; In sanctifiyng the Sabbath with such
an outward manner of worship, as is not after man's invention, but according to
Gods word.

So that by Religion, in this position is meant the outward (especially
public) worship of God: Religion being put for worship, because the fear of
God to serve him precisely according to his word, is, of all the actions of
men, especially to be manifested in worshipping God. Who will be sanctified in
all them that come nere him if they offer strange fire. Levit: 10.3. Religion
(then) being put for Outward worship, the position is granted. For in deed the
outward worship of God does consist only of ceremonies, that is, outward
demonstratio^s of inward worship. But, how does this follow, The outward
worship of God cannot stand without some Ceremonies, ergo. It cannot stand
without the ceremonies in question? As though Religion had no better ground
than Diocesan Bishops have, according to this maxim: No Ceremony, no Bishop.

But more clearly to perceive the truth, it is to be considered that some
ceremonies by nature, or general custom demonstrate inward worshipp is not
only signs thereof, but effects also. Other do the same, as signs only by
institution. By which instituted ceremonies God is not worshipped except they
be by himself prescribed; For as no fire could make any sacrifice a savor of
rest to God, but that which came from God. Levit. 9.24. and 10.1.2: So no
warrant can make outward worship, or any part thereof acceptable to God, but
that which comes from God. Math. 15.9.

Therefore it does not follow, that because kneeling in prayer is lawful,
therefore the ceremonies in question (na^ely the Surplice) be so to. For 1:
Nature teaches us to manifest inward reverence by outward gestures. 2 General
custom amongst us makes kneeling the most solemn sign of the gr^atest
reverence. 3 In true worshippers of God kneeling is not only a sign of inward
worship, but an effect also. 4: It is warranted by the word. And 5 it is not
appropriated to the outward worship of God: For men do usually, and may
lawfully, demonstrat their inward reverencing of men by kneeling. Whereas the
ceremonies in question (namely the surplice) do not demonstrat inward worship
by nature: For then all religious worshippers would (at least) have a
disposition to use the surplice at all times, and in all places. (2) None can
affirm, that general custom makes a Surplice a sign of inward worship.
Because the public use of it is most what omitted or enforced, and there is
no such matter as the private use thereof, and by private persons. In both which
considerations it may be (3) denied to be an effect of inward worship, and the
rather if it cannot be proved to be an effect of the obedience of faith to
some commandment of God, prescribing the same. Which (4) cannot be; Seeing in
all the new Testament there is nether precept, nor example; nor other matter of
necessary conclusion warranting the same. And yet (5 It is appropriated to the
service of God, and therefore superstitious, and not religious, especially being
urged as it is.

2 Ceremonies are lawful, when their doctrine is lawful.
If by Doctrine of ceremonies be me^t their signification, then the Th sis is
d^nyed: For then other Pop^sh ceremonies may be restored. As setting up of
Candles to signify that the works of all christians, Phil. 2.15. especially
Ministers. Math: 5.14.16. should shine before men; and yet it is pronounced in
the 3 Injunction to be devised by man's fantasy, besides scripture, and
therefore Superstitious. And unleavened bread in the Lords supper may signify
Sincerity and truth. 1: Cor: 5.8. And yet by the Communion book ( Rub: after
the Communion sect: 5.) it is reformed, To take away the superstition, which
any person has, or might have: But many have, and may have Superstition in
Ceremonies retained.

If the meaning of the positio^ be this Ceremonies are lawful, when they are
warranted by lawful doctrine, it is to be granted; but then the Hypothess^^
must be denied. For it is petitio principii to affirm; that Ceremonies in
question are so warranted.

3 The doctrine of Ceremonies is part of the Gospel.
This position is true, but only according to the distinction of the doctrine
^f ceremonies by institution. Which doctrine is either affirmative, showing
what Ceremonies by institution are to be used, and those be only the two
Sacraments, which are indeed Seal s, and not only Ceremonies. Or Negative,
teaching what ceremonies are not to be used. viz: Neither Ceremonies of the
Jews, nor traditions of Elders. John 4. 20.21.23. Neither Carnal rites. Gal.
3.3. Heb. 9.10. Nor commandments of men. Col. 2.22.

Which negative doctrine of Ceremonies, is indeed according to the truth of the
Gospel. Gal. 2.3.5.12.14 and that is contrary to the Ceremonial law of Moses.
Because that law stood in carnal rites. Heb. 9.10.11. That is, Ceremonies
instituted to instruct and direct the outward man unto the inward service of
God, and therefore was that law called a carnal commandment. Heb: 7.16. and
those Ceremonies accounted Rudiments of the world. Gal 4.3. So that after faith
(that is the Gospel) came, that law, and the Ceremonies thereof gave place, as
being less perfect, a childish paedagogy and beggarly rudiments. 1 Cor:
13.10.11. Gal. 3 25* and 4.2.3.9. In respect of the more perfect word of
Christ, Col: 3.16. 2 Cor: 3.13.17.18. Who is that Messiah, who, when he cam^,
did tell us althinges concerning the outward worship of God. John. 4.
19.20.25.26. But Christ never told us the ceremonies in question.

Therefore if the negative doctrine against Jewish Ceremonies instituted by God
to the purposes aforesaid, be part of the Gospel, or word of Christ, much more
is the negative doctrine against ceremonies instituted by man to the same
purposes, without warrant of the word, part of the Gospel. Col. 2.20.22.23.
Gal: 1.6.7.8.10. And ^e rather; because the word says, ^^at they, who burden
the Church ^ith ordinances of the world, which ^e traditions after the
commande^ents and doctrines of men, do not ^old Christ the head. Col.
2.19.20.22 and 3.1. and opposing such traditions ^o the commandments of God,
and ^^ith of Jesus, makes them part of ^^e beasts mark. Revel. 14.9 12.
Here unto accords that which is affirmed in the book of Common prayer, in
the preface of Ceremonies, viz. Christ his Gospel is not a Ceremonial law (as
much of Moses was) but it is a religi^^ to serve God, not in bondage of the
figure or shadow, but in the freedom of spirit.

4 Ministers refusing Conformity are Schismatiques.
This word Schism according to thnow received use thereof in the Church,
signifies A voluntary renting of the Church only for matters of the outward
government thereof. So that Schismatiques are by Doctor Bancroft, in his Notes
before his Sermon at Paul's cross, Anno 1588. defined as out of Augustine, to
be such, as reteining with us the true faith, seperat themselves from us for
orders and Ceremonies. In which sense though Brow^ist: (so called) may be
deemed Schismatickes, yet ^^n^ot Ministers refusing only to Conform; be so
accoumpted: Because, their deprivation or suspension notwithstanding, they do
not seperat themselves from the church, neither do they (indeed) forsake the
Ministry of the gospel, which they desire (before all worldly benefits
whatsoever) to execure with a good conscience, but are thrust from it; and
therefore, if men driven by excommunication out of the Church be not
schismatiques, much less Ministers driven by deprivation or suspension only
from the execution of their Ministry.

This word Schism is sometimes ta^en for any dissension in the church, ^herby
the peace, but not the unity, ^hereof is broken. 1. Cor: 11.18. In which sense
they are to be called schismatickes, who are specially to be blamed for such
dissension. But if all the Prelates cannot give one Argument soundly concluded
from the word, to prove, that the Ceremonies in question may be prescribed by
authority, and yielded unto by the Ministry, without sin, then are they
Schismatickes, according to the judgment of the Apostle. Who beseeches the
brethren, to mark them diligently, who cause division and offenses, besides
the doctrine which they have learned, and to avoid them. For they that are
such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies, and with fair
speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans 16.17.18. By
which answer Protestants do sufficiently justify their separation from
Papists. Much more may Ministers justify their refusing to Conform yet
without separation. But when any such Argument shall be given (which has not
yet been heard of) then are Ministers refusing Conformity to be deemed
Schismatics. In mean while this Position is to be taken for Petitio principii.

A PROPOSITION.

CONCERNING KNEELING in the very act of receiving Howsoever. Published to
satisfy professors, yet humbly, Submitted to the judgment of Prophets.

Romans 14.10.11.12. Why do thou condemn thy brother, for it is written I
live (says the Lord) and every Knee shall bow unto me. So then, every one of
us shall give accountes of himself unto God.

Cor. 10.14 22. Flee from Idolatry, Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table,
and of the table of Devils.

PRINTED. 1605.

To my Christian friend, N. grace and peace.
Howsoever it greiueth me to hear o^ much more to se the troubles wherewith
Satan (knowinge his time to be short) does trouble the Church of God in all
places about unprofitable and Popish Ceremonies, yet (to tell you the whole
troth) my grief is the less when I consider that both they them selves, who
be most troublesome, and do most urge those Relics of Rome be ambitious, Romans
16.17, 18 Phil 3.2.19 Gal. 6.12.
or Dumme Dogs or, non Resident, serving their bellies, and minding Earthly
things, even like their Predecessors, who urged the Ceremonies of Mozes in the
Primitive Churches, and their proceedinges (like them selves) be so exorbitant
that they cannot but prove odious to all men. What a- matter is this, that
after the Sacramental Bread is ministered, the Cup should be denied because of
not kneeling? If any of these scrupulous Ministers had played such apart,
though it were with one, openly known to li^e in sin notorious without
repentance, whom by the 26. canon no Minister shall in any wise admit to the
receiving of the holy Communion, how would that Precisian be trounced But in
this Puritan Government of the Church there is no fault but non conformity to
superstitious vanities, A Bird of theit fether may Preach scores of Popish
Doctrines, be scandalous in life, and at his last cast at dice when he has
lost all, say, In the Spite of God let him do now what he can, and yet hold
his own well enough, An other man's own and ill enough I might well say if
the law might have due course well, God amend all, and restrain the remnant of
this Rage. In mean while I rejoice to hear that it is given to any of Gods
people not only to believe in Christ but also to suffer for his sake, having
the same fight which they see or hear to be in their Ministers, Phil, 1, 27:
as it becomes the Ghospel of Christ, the sincerity whereof belongs as well
to the people as to the Ministers of Christ. for howsoever all are not to wear
the where of Babilons Smock, yet all are to make cons^ence of bowing the knee
to Baal. To confirm your zeal against the superstition of Kneeling I have
long sought (being often solicited so to do by you) and at length found a
short but (in my poor judgment at least to me) a sufficient discourse which
I have printed, that I may comfort not only you but many other also who are in
doubt, with that comfort wherewith I my self am comforted of God. I say
Comforted. For when the judgment is satisfied the heart is comforted* This
only I require of you that there be no inquiring after or gessing at the
author or publisher. If that hurtful curiosity were mortified learned men now
fearinge that humor would be boulder to wright and publish their Godly
judgments, touching points in co^trouersy among other I hear of a more larg
and learned treatise of this point which no doubt the author will publish in
time or other for him if cursous heads itching ears, and wanton tongues do not
hinder. In mean while let us make as good use of this, as we can. And the
Lord give us understanding in all things

Farewell
KNEELING IN THE VERY act of taking, eating and drinking the Sacramental
bread and wine, in the holy Communion cannot be without sin.
standing, sitting, etc. yet in this case, it is by Institution of man. For
neiher nature nor custom, does teach us ordinarily to knele when we eat and
drink neither does the word require Kneeling in this case. M^^h 27.29 Mal. 1.6
7.
yet a taking of the name of god in vain. Seeing all significatio^s of honor,
in Gods service, ought to be to the honor of his name, T^^ 4.2 2 King 5.18.
and an oath not religiously intended (as in the nature thereof it ought to be)
to the honor of God, is the taking of Gods name in vain. Did Naaman newly
brought to the knowledge of God, attribut so much to bowing in the house of
Rimmo^ when his master leaned on him, so that it was not his volu^tary act? And
shalwe, who have had the Gospel long, kneeling by institution and
determination, in a principal part of Gods service, make no accou^pt whether
we honor god, or no, by such kneeling?

kneeling be Instituted for a more reverent receuing, then it must be either in
regard of God, or of bread and wine If in regard of god then must we be well
persuaded that such kneeling is an acceptable service unto his Majesty. Rom
12.1 and 1, 23. Isa 29 13. M^^h 1^.^.
And that this may be, we must consider, whether such kneeling be a wilworshipp
or a service reasonable, and according to Gods will. Least otherwise we find
our selves so far from honoring God, as that we provoke him. As did Nadab and
Abihu, Levit. ^0.1.2 3
who offered in^ense, but not with the very fire which God appointed, 1 Chro
13.10 and 15.12.13.
and were therefore devou^ed with fire. And as did King David, and the priests,
who carried the Arc otherwise than it ought to have been, and therefore Yzza
died for it, with a sodai^e death. For God will be sanctified (if not By yet) In
all them that come near him.

Luke 22.14. 1 Cor: 11.1.
who ministered and received sitting, or in such a gesture, as in those
countries was most used at eating. From which example to differ, without
warrant from Gods word cannot be without fault. Seeing examples of holy men,
much more of Christ, are to be followed, except there be some reasonable cause
to the contrary. And the Apostle to reform an abuse which crept (even in their
times) into love feasts, which were immediately before, or after the Lords
supper, did banish them thence, and reduced the manner of administering the
Lords supper to the first institution, saying: 1 Cor. 11.22 23.
shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. For I have received of the Lord
that which I have also delivered unto you etc. Whereby it is apparent, that that
form of administration, which differs from the first institution, is worthy
no praise and therefore no acceptable service to God. For if the Apostle would
not tolerate an indifferent thing (as was a love feast till then) to continue
so nere the L. supper, when it was abus d, how would they allow the change of
sitting into kneeling, especially in these two considerations?

superfluity) was never so great, and scandalous, in the Apostles time, as the
abuse of kneeling (viz. Idolatry) was and is in the sinagogue of Rome: And
besides, Love feasts were either before, or after the L. supp^r, wh^ras
kneeling is in the principal part of the holy Communion. Therefore if the Apostl
banished Love feast^s from the I supper, because of the abuse, and brought the
Church to the simplicity of the first in (...), Is it not a tempting sin to
retain the Idolatrous kneeling of Papists, and reject the exemplary sitting
of our M. Christ? And the rather, because it is in that sacrament, and in that
part of the sacrament, which especially sets forth our communion with
Christ, and his Church, and is therefore called The communion. 1 Cor: 10.16 17.
In due consideration whereof, how can we imagine, that Christ has any honor
by our kneeling? Seeing it swarneth, not only from his example, but also from
the practice of all reformed Churches, except in England, Concertatio Ecclesiae
Cathol^n argu.
which the Papists them selves call Puritan-papisticall, for retainyng this,
and other popish corruptions, and, Seeing it may be an argument (especially to a
papist not understanding our tongue, that we have communion with Antichrist,
and and his sinagogue, at least in the Idolatry of bread worship. Which our
failing, or carelesnes to avow our communion with Christ and his church, and
not abhorring all communion with Antichrist and his sinagogue cannot be without
grevous sin. Or else Paul sinned, Gal 2.11, 12 1 Co^ 11.^6 2 (...) 6.1^ ^7.
D^^t. 12, 30, 3^.
when he rebuked Peter for not holding communion with the Gentiles converted,
and wrote without good warrant, where he says: If any lust to be contentious,
we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. and in another place:
What communion has Christ with Beliall? Com^ out, and touch no unclean
thing. Does not God straightly forbid us to serve him, as Idolators do their
gods. These things considered, Can kneeling wherewith Papists do honor their
breade^ God, be honorable to Christ, in his holy sacrament?

^en^l. 3.20. ^ath, 8.11,
If any hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with
him and he with me, so he says, Many shall come from the east and west, and
shall sit with Abraham etc. By which places it appears that as by supper, so
by sitting, familiar rejoicing, or rreioycing familiarity is expressed. In
which respects the communion ^s called the Lords supper and not A Sacrifice,
and we are said to be pertakers of the L. table, and not of an alter. 1 Cor.
11.20 and 10:21
And therefore not kneeling, and sitting is for receiving. We read not of any
gesture of body prescribed, or observed in Circumcision, and Baptism as in
the Passover and L. supper Because there needs no material regard to be had
of any certain gesture in the 2. Exodus 12.11 Numb. 9, 3.11.12. Math 5 17. and
26.20.
former sacraments, so the foreskynne were cut of, and water be used: But in
the other two, a gesture, answereable to the action is requisite. And therefore
God prescribed to his people: when they were to fly out of Egeipt, the gesture
of loins gyrded, and staves in their hands, because the eating then of the
passover was in have. But that gesture being but for that time, as may appear
by the omission thereof, when the observation of the passover was established,
our Master Christ, who came not to break but fulfill the law, and knew what was
sitest to be done, did not eat the passover sitting, a gesture more answerable
to eating in peace, than the former used in Egeipt. Whereby kneeling is
convinced, as being a-gesture altogether unanswerable to eating And the rather,
because it darkeneth the counsel of God, and being a sign of the greatest
Submission obscureth that Rejoicing familiarity, Job. 38.2. 1 Cor. 11.25 26.
which the L. supper signifies, and seals. Do we not condemn the papists
for ministering the communion in one kind, because such an administration is
against Christ his example, and does not lively demonstrate the Lords death?
Here a caveat is to be given, that none take occasion by this discourse, to
justify the childish paedagogy of signifiynge ceremonies devised by man,
Seeing sitting was used by Christ, and the signification thereof is found in
scripture. And therefore that childish paedagogy is not justified by that worthy
servant of Christ, M. Cartwright, his judgment, viz. That sitting does signify
our rest in Christ Jesus.



Ioh. 13.4.1^ Genesis 2, 2 3.
but in some time) the particular time is not to be observed, except Christ had
sanctified it to the communion, as God sainctified the 7. day, on which he
rested, Math 26.31:^5 Lek 22.53
or (at least) chosen it of purpose, a^ he did sitting. But whereas it was upon
special, and necessary occasion, for the passover must eaten before the L.
supper could be instituted instead thereof, and presently after supper the hour
came, when Christ was to be betrayed, therefore if the Jews transgressed not
the institution of the passover, by changing a gesture, at the first
prescribed by God according to that their present occasion, in another sitter
for a ti^e of rest, much less do christians transgrese the institution of the
L. supper, by changing the time taken by Christ upon occasion, but not
prescribed, into some other fitter (in discretion) for the ordinary
celebration of the L. supper. As probably the Primitive Churches did. For every
first day of the week (viz. the L. day) the brethren came together to break
bread, Act 2:42. and 20.7: 1 Cor: 16, 2. Revel: 1.10:
id est, to minister the communion. So that either they never met upon the L.
day, but in the evenning, or else they celebrated the communion at some other
times, but for ^y alteration of the gestures of sitting, especially into
kneeling there is not the least probability.

viz. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preseru thy
body and soul into eternal life, and take and eat this. etc. Here unto
these answers may be returned. Seeing we reject Christ his example of sitting
for kneeling, we must not stand upon what we may do, but humbly consider what
we must do. For if there be not a necessary, and a justifiable cause both of
those prayers, and of Kneeling in regard of them, do we not presume upon
Christ his patience, in rejecting his example? Now, what necessity is there of
those prayers, at that very time? Seeing prayers go before, and follow after.
Again, must we needs kneel at every bitte of a prayer? Is their more
necessity to obey a needless direction to kneel at those prayers, than to
follow the example of Christ, In sitting when we take eat and drink, things
r^quyred in the same sentences? And w^^ must the people kneel, when they hea^^
those prayers, rather than the minist^^ who pronounces them? But it is a
quest^on, Whither those prayers be justifiable o^ no. For besides that, by
reason of them, Kneeling, devised and abused by Antichrist, does cross the
practice of Christ and his Apostles, and they may seem a^ vain repitition:
Even the adding of th^^ to the words of institution is contrary t^ the mind of
Christ. For he did first bless^ or pray, and after gave the Elements, in a
sacramental form of words, Math. 6 7 and 26 26. c. ^. Mark 14.21 Luk: 22.19,
etc:
without any addition, saying, take, eat, etc. Which order of administration,
and form of words, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and Paul do so constantly, precisly,
and sincerely relate, that any may perceive the meaning of the spirit to be.
That the sacramental form of words ought precisely to be observed, without
any addition. And the rather because Paul begins his relation thus, ^aue
received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11, 23 ^4,
that which I ^aue also delivered, etc. So that it may ^^me to be against
religion and reason, ^^at to a sacramental form of speech, ^herin the
minister should only supply the ^^rson of Christ, there should be added a
^rayer, as in the name of the Church. This ^^fusion is fitter for Babylon, than
for ^^on. Lastly, Why is not a short prayer, af^r other going before, as well
joined to the ^^cramentall form of Baptism: viz. N. ^aptise thee In the name
of the Father, etc. (...) then this addition of prayer to the sa^rame^tall
form of words, be not of faith, Rom 14.5, 23
^ow can we, with faith and a good consci^^ce, confirm, or allow the same with
our ^neeling?

Kneeling, it is ^ffirmed. That it is indifferent whither ^e sit, stand, or
kn^^l^: Seeing Christ did sit, when he did eat the pass^^^r. Wher^as God
commanded the ch^^dren of Israel ^n Egypt to eat the passover standing, and
some reformed churches receive standing, for all that Christ did sit at his
last supper: Therefore the King may appoint Kneeling, as the most reverend
gesture, and best beseeming so holy an action. For answer whereunto, howsoever
that which is already said, may suffice, Yet it may be further considered,
That though it be admitted, that it is indifferent to sit, or to stand, yet it
does not follow, that Kneeling is indifferent, For sitting is the example, and
standing is a gesture sometimes used in ordinary eating, and (in the objection)
it is said to be prescribed at a sacramental feast. Again, It does not
follow, That because Christ used a gesture fitter for eating in his time,
instead of a gesture prescribed upon occasion, it is therefore lawful to use a
gesture nothing answerable to eating, and that taken out of the Synagogue of
Antichrist (as though the word of God came out of it, 1 Cor. 14.36
or to it only) instead of a gesture most answerable to eating, and of purpose
used by Christ at the institution of the sacrament. So that, notwithstanding
all that is said for Kneling, His Majesty (upon whom the burthern as of this
gesture so of other ceremonies, is laid) may remember, 2 Chro* 29 25,
That Hezekiah appointed Levites in the house of the Lord with Ci^balls, etc.
according to the commandment of David, and Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the
Prophet, for the commandment was by the hand of the Lord, and by the hand of
his prophets. And withal consider, that if Kneeling were the most revere^t
gesture, and best be seming the holy communion, our L. and Master would not
have sitten down of purpose, at his last supper. And that Ahaz was deceived In
deeming the Alter at Damascus, 2 K ng 16 10, 12:14 15
more honorable for Gods service, tha^ the alter of the Lord.

Kneeling, for reverence in regard of bread and wine. Which need not be much,
For no sound protestant, of any knowledge, will affirm it, but rather
presently consider, That if kneeling be instituted for reverence in regard of
bread and wine, It must be either because they represent the body and blood of
Christ, though remaining bread and wine touching there substance: And then for
like reason, we may worship the crucifixe, and image of God, as the papists
do: Or, because Christ is really, bodily, and locally, though invisibly,
present in the^, either by Transubsta^tiation, according to the herisy of the
papists, or by consubstantiation, according to the herisy of the Lutherans.
These things cannot but be considered, And then it must needs follow, that if
we abjure these herisyes of Papists, and Lutherans, we must also abhor
idolatrous, and superstitious kneeling, their daughter and Nurse, which was
never heard of before Transubstantiation was hatched in the sinagogue of
Antichrist. R^^q^^s of R^^^^. (...).
So that immediately after Pope Innocent decreed Transubstantiation, Pope
Honorius decreed kneeling. Auns to (...) Iuels ch fol. 111
Therefore if Harding does grant that it is not well to kneel: but in regard
of a real, and bodily presence, a sound protestant should infer, But I detest
your real presence, therefore I abhor your Idolatrous kneeling.

Idolatry in worshipping a God made of a piece of bread, 1 Thessalonians. 5 1^
and of communion with Antichrist, rather than, with Christ, and therefore the
greatest sca^dall that ever was or can be, both in regard of those evils it
does occasionally teach, or confirm, As also in regard of multituds (indeed
the most part of people) either not suffice^tly instructed in the right
understanding, and use of the sacrament, and therefore carried with a blind
devotion learned by tradition, or corrupted (more or less) with the leaven of
popery. Who all in regard of their weakness, are endangered by this gesture,
either grossly to commit the Idolatry of papists, or to have a superstitious
estimation of the cutward elements. And the rather, because by the 21 Canon it
is provided: That no b^ead, and wine newly brought, shall be used, but first the
words of institution shall be rehearsed, when the said bread and wine be
present upon the Communion table. As if the words were incantations, and the
table like the altar which sanctifies the sacrifice. May not this prouiso
seem (at least to the simple) to make way at least to the Popish cons^^ration?
How grevous a sin it is to scandalize the make, Ma^h, 18.6.
may appear by the word^^ of Christ^ viz. whosoever shall offend one of these
little ones, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his
ne^^e, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. C^o 8.13.
And of Paul: If meat offend my brother. I will ea^e no flesh, while the world
stands, that I may not offend my brother. What an offense or scandal is, the
Ap^s^l^ show th in the same chapter, viz. An occasion of falling to the weak.
The particular offense he speaks of is this: Notwithstanding the gospel was
preached a convenient time, and that by the Apostles, yet many wanted
knowledge, and, verse 7:10.
even unto that time, did eat as a thing sacrificed to an Idol. Of whom if
any should see a man endued with knowledge sit at table in the Idols temple,
his weak conscience might occasionally be imboldeued to eat those things
which are sacrificed to Idols. If Paul would never eat flesh rather than he
would offend in this case, because in so doing he should sin against Christ,
how dare a christian, ver. 12
having knowledge, kneel in the presence of any, who, for want of knowledge,
receive superstitiously. Of which sort, seeing there be so many even until this
hour, and ever likly to be, that we know not when, and where to communicate
without some such, either old, or young: it follows, that as sitting at table
in the Idols temple, could not be with out sin, in the Apostles time, so
kneling cannot be without sin in these days, when the number of faithful
teachers is much decreased, but of papists much increased, and by our kneeling
much confirmed in their bread worshipe. Sum of the confe. pa. 74
Therefore If his Majesty's judgment be sound, that the surplice is not to be
worn, if Heathenish men were commorant among us, who, thereby, might take
occasion to be strengthened in their paganism? shall we by our corrupt
practice of kneeling, strengthen the papists, who swarm among us, in their
Idolatry? If the State does well, in ordeining the sacrament to be administered
in usual bread to take away superstition, Rub. after the com, sect 5.
whereas Christ did by occasion, minister in vnleave^ed bread, shall not we do
ill, In teaching, or confirming superstition by kneeling, whereas Christ did of
purpose minister sitting? Hom. against peril of Idol part 3 a
Setting up of images in churches only to be lay men's books, is, by
authority condemned, Levit: 19.14
because they are as stumbling blocks in way of the blind So that they have
been, are still, and will be hereafter worshipped by ignorant persons. Is not
kneeling as scandalous? How can it then be justified?

1 Cor: 10.17 28.
but at a private table where no weak ones were, in the Apostles time: yet how
does the Kings commandment take away scandal from kneeling in public
places? Does it make all so sure, that none can be scandalized? Or, if that
cannot be, does it take away guiltines from the scandalizer, as if all the
blame of scandalizing, were in the Kings commandment? Su^rly it must be in
the former, or else the latter cannot be, For by scandalizing a weak brother
perishes. Cor 8.11. ^mb: 35
Of whose blood, the scandalizer is guilty, as Ioab was of Vriahs blood, ^am,
11:15 ^, 17,
notwithstanding the Kings commandment. Here his Majesty known to be of a
gentle disposition, and to have learned, yea professed better things in
Scotland, is most humbly prayed, to take this word (King) as spoken in
imitation, and understood of Cantor: who known to be of a violent disposition,
did carry matters in the Convocation, and published Canons not orderly, and
fully concluded, as some of his suffragane prelates report, But it is
impossible, that the Kings commandment should make all so sure, that none can
be scandalized, the general ignorance of the people, the disposition of the
ignorant unto superstition, the old leaven of popery not purged, and the
multipliyng of papists, all well considered. Nay rather, It is likely, that by
the commandment, the scandal will be the greater. Especially in regard of
the 27 Canon, where ministers are commanded, under pain of suspension, Not
wittingly to administer the sacrament to any, but such as kneel. May not
simple, and superstitious persons take occasion thus to argue? Why should
kneeling be thus urged by authority, if the sacramental signs of the body,
and blood of Christ, be no more to be reverenced, than water applied in
baptizing children? Seeing that is also a sanctified sign of Christ his blood,
that w^sheth away our sins, and iniquities.

To conclud, If kneeling in the very act of taking, eating and drinking the
sacramental bread and wine, in the holy communion, be (1) an institution of
man. (2) If it be the taking of Gods name in vain, when it is without all
respect of reverence (3) If God be not honored thereby, except it be according
to his will. (4) If it swerve from the example of Christ his sitting, and
therefore deserves no praise. (5) If it be a provoking sin to reject the
exemplary sitting of christ, whereby we show our selves to be in communion with
Christ, and the reformed churches, and to r^taine kneeling, which for bread
worship, ought to be banished, and whereby we seem to be in communion with
Antichrist, and his sinagogue. 6) If it obscureth that rejoicing familiarity
in and with Christ which the L. supper signifies (7) if the argument from
Christ his example be made the stronger, in that he sat of purpose. 8) If the
lawfulnes of chasing a fitter time than the evening cannot justify our
rejecting Christ his exemplary sitting (9) if the bittes of prayer joined with
the words of institution do make kneling the more sinful (10) If kneeling be
not as indifferent, as standing, nor best beseeming the holy communion, and the
King must appoint nothing but by the hand of the Lord. (11) If we ought to
abhor kneeling, as we abhor the worshipping of Images, Transubstantiation,
and Consubstantiation (12) If to scandalize be greevously to sin, and
kneeling ^e a show of the greatest evils, and withal the great^st ^candall.
And (13) If it be a begging of be question to affirm, kneeling to be
indifferent, and the Kings commandment ^^so called) does rather increase,
tha^ lesson ^candall by kneeling, It may be averred, that kneeling in the very
act of Taking, eating, and drinking the sacramental bread and wine, in the
holy communion, cannot be without sin.

The Printer to the reader.
The copy sent me wanted direction for the quotations* and I wanted an English
corrector therefore have I failed more ^hen I would: especially in placing them.
^ut pardon I pray, and take knowledge of these principals:

Errata,
Page 2 put down Rom, 16, 17, 18, phil, 3, 2. 19, gal, 6, 12 lines, 2 page, 5,
pu, d, mal. 1, 6, 7. l 2 pa 6, 2 king 5, 18 l 3, pa 7, 1 cor. 11, 1, l 5, pa
10, 1 cor, 11, 16 l 3 and 2 cor 6, 15, 17 l 4, and deuteronomy 12, 30, 31 l 5, math 8,
11 l 2, pa, 11 set up 1 cor 11, 20 and 10, 21 l 2 and p, d, exo, 12 11 16, number,
3, 11, 12 math, 5, 17 and 26, 20 l 12. pa 12, l 1. put out not. and set up Job
38. 2 l 1, p, d, 1 cor, 11, 25, 26, l 6, pa 13 s, v: John 13, 4, 12 l 10. p, d
gen, 2, 2, 3, l 3. pa: 14 pu, d: Math 26: 31: 45: Luke 22:53: lin 4 read must
be eaten lin 11. read into another. pa. 16. li: 2 read sentences prescribed and
s: v: math 6. 7 l 5


