A NEW SPRING SHADOWED In sundry Pithie POEMS.

MVSOPHILVS. Quid nescis, si teipsum noscas?

LONDON, Printed by G. Eld, for Thomas Baylie, and are to be sold at his Shop,
in the middle-row in Holborne, near Staple-Inne. 1619.

TO MY WORTHY AND judicious Friend, Sir Francis Ducket Knight; his best wishes.
SO many kind respects have I had shown
From You and Yours, that if you were mine own
As You are mine; for what can be more near,
Then Love and Blood contracted in one Spheere?
I could not prize Love at a higher rate,
Nor to my self more kindness vendicate:
In lieu whereof, (but' less the requitall's small)
I tender you this SPRING, and this is all:
Wherein, if ought tune fitly with the Time,
I Have styled it Yours, it shall no more be mine.
Yours in all respective love MVSOPHILVS.
In Militem Scientem DISTICHON.
NOn titulo Militis, Militis sed nomine tanti
Gaudeo, nam Milites curo quid intus habent.
Cor non corticem.
Upon the New SPRING.
A New Spring's found which cures most diseases;
It cleeres the Eyesight, and the Bladder eases,
It cooles the Stomach, and it cheeres the Heart,
And gives free passage to the digestive part,
It recombines the Sinnewes too, some say,
And makes the Cripple throw his Crutch away.
So as there is none that justly can complain them,
Since both a Sir Edward Bellingam, a Knight of extended bounty and courtesy.
Knight and's Spring do entertain them.
He, out of Love and Bounty mixed together,
It by it is Virtue healing such come thither.
O that the Reader could like Virtue find
In my New Spring, to cure the griefs of Mind,
But much I fear me, if it had like force,
The Bodies care would make my Spring taste worse.
PHILO

A NEW SPRING.
PHILO to PHILEMON.
Non Vltra.
EAch day and hour (my friend) that shines on thee
Esteem it as thy Lives Epitome;
Nor need I by a Precept further show it,
Since it is so well advised us by the Poet:
"'Among hopes, cares, fears, and all the griefs thou have,
"Imagine every day to be thy last:
So shall the sight of each approaching Day
Summon thee hence that thou may have away:
Mean while contend in virtue and in grace,
Hastening to the end of this thy Pilgrims race,
This Weauers Shuttle, Grass, Post, Shadow, Span,
So short's the course, so small's the time of Man.
Man's security, the Devils opportunity.
MAn thinks the shade of Night can cover sin,
But Night and Day be all alike to Him,
Whose eyes as they are piercing, so they be
Pure, and do loath the least impiety.
MORAL.
HOw often have I (O Lord) erred in this,
Thinking thee blind when Night approached is;
Where if I rightly did distinguish light,
I Would think Man's Day far darker then thy Night:
For there is no Night with Thee; but such a Day,
As needs no Sun to chase the Night away.
Annotation upon the precedent MORAL.
IT is observed by the Learned, that Adam after his fall or defection from God,
seeing his own nakedness which he procured to himself by his own
disobedience, being borne in a Primitive freedom of will, to have fled for
refuge, or covert rather, to a shadie Grove in the Garden, imagining to exempt
himself from the punishment due to his Sin, by flying to the shade to cover
his Sin; implying (say they) that Man no sooner erreth, then he seeks some
sconce, some defense for the sin which he commiteth. But he that rewards
in public, discusseth the secrets of our hearts in private: The Night is to
him as the Day, for he sees not as Man sees; he that securely pretends
darkness for a covert to his sin, and in the presumption of his own security
expostulates with his Creator, saying, Who sees me? shall receive his reward
in the Land of Darkness; for the secrecy of his sin cannot avoid the
piercing and searching eye of the Lord. Let him therefore stand in fear of
Gods Judgment both in the Morning and Evening, that he may shun the Arrow that
flies at the noonday, and the Pestilence that kills in the Evening.

A Divine EMBLEM.
Nosce et tace.
Tu te time si viues tute.

THou Better part of Man: the inward Eye,
Extended far boue sense;
how should the path
(Erring and straying from Humanity)
Have guidance but by thee?
where each Man has
A native pronenesse to Obliquity,
Subiecting Reason to
unbounded wrath,
Reaching as high by's Eye, as by his Faith.
Where Truth lies hid, curbed by injurious time,
As in a Cave obscured:
til the glorious Sun
Disperse this mist of Error by his shine,
Discovering that which was
in darkness done:
Still cheerful be that fair Aspect of thine
By whose refulgent beams
such acts be shown
As but for thee (Dear Light) had nere bin known.
Age, which in some is as a Tale that is told,
Wherein we rather be
then seem to live,
Tells me that it is not many years make old;
But hours how well disposed,
since we must give
Account for every Talent which we hold;
And though the Lord seem this
account to drive:
Time will approach when there is no repriue.
Then may my number be in hours, not years,
How good, and not how many,
lived, not spent;
Where may my Sins force sighs, my Errors tears,
Living on Earth, yet leaving
Earths content
To Earthly-minded Moles, who sum their fears
By loss of goods, and give
no free assent
To ought, save what is to their profit meant.
My Eyes not fixed but moving in their Sphere,
Transcend frail Objects,
nor can they behold
Ought worthy loving or affecting here,
Where best of Natures treasures
is but mold;
Which in the Worlds eye how fair so ere,
They show their gawdie luster
is but gold,
Which when the Mizer has is only told.
Let me have Riches inward; for the rind
Of Earths exterior Beauty,
my desire
Rests well contented, howsoere I find:
And further should our soule-rapt
thoughts aspire
Then to content the Body; for the Mind,
As in her rank of honor
she is higher,
She scorns (pure Mirror) to be soild with mire.
How hard is it to be good, and not decline
From that small share of goodness,
where the Age
In which we live, bids us to suite the time
And make no mention of
a Pilgrimage?
It Is true indeed, we seldom see the prime,
Of Virtue made continuate;
for the Page
Which lackies Patience often ends with rage.
He lives the best who has the least account,
Accounting every day
to be his last:
That when he comes unto his final point,
To make recourse unto
the years be past,
And sees to what the Total sum does mount:
He may rejoice, to have made
so little wast
Of precious Time, while he on Earth was plast.
How est offend we? and as rockt asleep
Secure of Judgment, in
the bed of Sin
Lie we as men exempt from vengeance; Sheep
Straid from their Shepherd, which
has ever bin
So kind to his Flock, as he has sought to keep
Them safe by his own harm;
yet leave we him,
Pursuing the path of error we are in.
If there be Hell, why do we live on earth
As if there were none? yea,
if common sense
Tells us a Pilgrimage has no true mirth;
Where this day we are he ere,
next calls us hence:
Why live we here as if we nere should forth
From this vast Grate of grief?
our residence
Is short on Earth; then let us hasten hence.
Th'vnseemliest Object Man's eye can behold
Is Age attended on
by naught but years;
Where his gray-hayres may tell us he is old,
But there is no other sign
of Age appears:
Wherefore his Age seems as a Tale that is told,
His life a Medley of
desires and fears,
Desire of life to welcome Death with tears.
What is this curious model Man? whose shape
Divinely featured
includes all fair
In Him as in her Abstract, but an Ape,
That imitates all forms,
in habit, hair,
Carriage of Body, and whats'ere may make
His vanity admired,
now here now there.
Distasting most the taste of's Country air.
If Man consist of Body and of Soul,
And that the being of
the first relies
Upon the latter; why should it control
The first by which it lives?
or why despise,
Or strive to make her: chiefest Beauty foul
With her seducing
trifling vanities,
Which press the Soul so low it cannot rise*
That Know thy self, derived her first birth
And Pettigree from Heaven,
and did appear
On Earth to make it seem an heavenly Earth;
But see what chanced: Men so
besotted were,
Of their defective Knowledge, as a dearth
Fell amongst humble men,
learning to err
And fall by Pride, as did that a Lucifer. Quare ista omnia, nisi quia in
mo^tem illum ascenderu^t, in quem primus ascendit Angelus, and descendit
Diabolus. August. in Soliloq. Cap. 29.

O let us then confess, (as well we may)
Our Knowledge it is nothing;
and the good
That Is in us is not ours; nor can we say
Ought proper ours save Sin,
so rank's the blood
Of our corrupted Nature: where each day
Paints out our frailety,
which if understood,
Man has no cause at all for to be proud.
If every Even were as it ought to be,
It should keep count of all
the day that is past;
Asking our sin-surcharged soul, what she
Has done? which reckning should
be never rac't
Out of the Table of our Memory:
But have it so, over all
our actions placed,
That the form we have may never be defaced.
If every hour we spend must bear record
When we shall summoned be;
how careful should
Man be of every work, and every word,
Done, to be done, or spoke?
for how shall mould,
Clay, and corruption stand against the Lord?
On whom we all are truly
said to hold:
Seeing the crimes we act so manifold.
Where each Man's Conscience shall his Tophet be,
His Sins his Testates, and
his last farewell
To Earth, his entrance into misery:
Where his own Soul appears
his only Hell,
The Companions that attends him, doubts and fears,
Moving Despair to sound
her larum Bell,
To warn him to the place where he must dwell.
Mansion of horror, where the quenchles fire
Burns without ceasing, where
the gnawing worm
Eats without resting, and that woeful hire
Death never dead, though dying;
where the form
Of all confusion forms her retire;
Thrice happy he if he
had near been borne
That Is marked to come to such a place forlorn.
No Life but shade of Life; for what is Life,
But a continual Death,
wherein we die
Each day a little? where dissension, strife,
Restless Ambition,
Treason, Perjury,
Oppression, violence be only rife:
Where outward objects daze
the inward eye,
And ill's made good by sins impunity.
Live may I neither to my self nor Time,
Since Time-obseruers now
prove Parasites;
But to make straight that great account of mine,
After so many days,
so many nights,
Past in neglect: so may my Soul in fine
Possess (then happy she)
those pure delights
Which do include of comforts infinites.
Muse do I much when I do hear men call
(Whether Experience tell
them, or their Art)
Some years more safe, some Climactericall;
Where if we look into
our humane part:
In hours, days, years, we shall perceive how all
Summon alike Deaths
parley to our heart;
From whom to get we strive, but cannot start
I have long sought that Essence of my being,
A faithful friend; and I,
have found in Some,
A vein of protestation well agreeing
With Friend, if Christian, but
when I should come
To take a surer trial, he was fleeing,
Proving a Summer Swallow;
this's my doom
My friend's in Heaven, on Earth he has no room.
When I observe Earth's as a Ball in the air,
I asked my self what may
I seem to be,
That lives as if I had my Mansion there,
Planting my hopes on
mutability?
And I do find who otherwise lives here
Then as a foreign Trauellor
though he
Seem wise to some, he seems a fool to me.
This House I live in, like a shaking frame
Threatens each day a fall;
yet I secure
Where I must go to, or from whence I came
Live so, as if this Building
would endure,
And to eternity extend her name:
But 'lasse how weak am I,
seeming most sure,
While sin wounds deep and does despair of cure.
Some, far less wise then curious, do delight
To glaze their windows with
Perspectiue glass,
Presenting sundry objects to the sight,
As Hills, Dales, Seas, and
whatsoere shall pass
Within an equal distance: but the light
Which the Bay-windore of
my Mansion has,
Has no such various Prospect, though it might,
But opens wide that she may see what is right.
May Goodness be the Abstract of my Fair,
My best advice, Direction
of the word:
May Worlds-care be still my least of care,
May my Self-love be now
to love the Lord:
May I observe a time to spend, to spare,
Not taking thought to waste,
or how to hoard,
But in expense to keep me on even board.
Rich had I rather then accounted be,
Says the Worldling: But I am
not of his mind;
For my Account is dearer unto me
Then this same Bark of man,
this outward rind;
Yet Rich are men of most account we see;
It Is true indeed, we by
experience find,
Often goes the Cart before, the Horse behind.
Arise to judgment, is a doom of fear
To Flesh; for why she could
contented be
To build her self a Tabernacle here,
Living to be her own
posterity;
But th'Soule mounts upward to an higher Sphere
Striving to break from her
captivity.
Nor can she joy till she is at liberty.
Her Nunc dimittis, is her cheerefulst Song,
Her passage th'entrance to
a safe repose,
Her comfort this, (though her restraint was long)
Griefs past be counterpoiz'd
with present joys.
Her hope that she shall make her party strong,
Being both rid of her
perfidious foes,
And sphered there where sacred comfort flows*
In our first Birth we shrike, in death we sigh,
Thus discontent is Man,
in birth and death;
In Birth we shrike because affliction's nigh,
In Death we sigh, sigh, since
we cannot breath:
Thus both in Death and Birth there is misery;
And more in Death then Birth,
if so his wreath
Of glory be reduced to wrath beneath.
An Elegy which the Author entituleth Bound yet free; Speaking of the benefit
of imprisonment.
THou, whom we call life's death, Captivity,
Yet can contemplate in the darkest Cell
Of things above the reach of Vanity,
Do in my judgment Liberty excel;
In that thou teach man to mortify
His indisposed passions; and can well
Direct him how to manage his estate,
Confined to th'narrow prospect of thy Grate.
He sees the passage of this Globe of earth,
And makes right use of what his sight partakes:
Some he observes express a kind of mirth,
Of which he this due application makes;
If they did know the misery of Birth
With Deaths approach, they would not hazard stakes
Of Souls eternal glory, for a day
Of present joy, which one hour takes away.
Others he hears bemoning of the loss
Of some dear friend; or't may be not so well,
Decrease of fortune, or some other cross,
Which to forgo they deem a second hell,
(So firmly fixed be their minds on dross)
As naught smells well but what of gain does smell.
These he condemns, and proves it every way,
The captiu'st wretch's in better state then they.
Others he notes observing of the time,
Mere Fashion-mongers, shadows of the great;
And these attendance give where th'Sunne does shine,
And like to Isis Ass admire the Seat,
More then the Person, cause the robes be fine
That hang about it: and he does entreat
Their absence; for, These cannot well (says he)
By living, leave name to posterity.
Others as base and far more dangerous,
Notes he, as Politician Machauels,
Who count that gain which is commodious
Adhering to themselves, and to none else:
For these make ancient houses ruinous,
And Charity from out the Realm expels,
Reducing th'Orphans tear and Widows curse
To th'damn'd Elixie of their well-cramm'd purse.
Others he notes, and they would noted be;
For painting, purfling, smoothing, cerusing,
Show they would be observed for vanity,
Staruing their Souls by bodies cherishing.
And these he laughes at for their foolery;
For while they put the Case to garnishing,
That Shell of frailty, they are indifferent
What shall become of th'Soule the Instrument.
Others there be which seem least what they are,
Pretending truth in falsehood, and do gull
The World with shadow, yet does he compare
the passage of events, and finds at full
Their end's attended with an endless care,
And th'pregnant wit which seems so smooth proves dull,
When thousand Testates shall produced be,
For to disclose their close hypocrisy.
Others he sees and taxes, for they hold
proportion with the World, being made
After a better Image, yet they are sold
to all collusion, making in their trade
This vilde Position: Who Will be rich when old
must cheat being young: but see how they are displaid,
So often have they deceived as now they must,
Persorce deceive themselves by men's distrust.
Others as Prollers of the time he sees,
but scorns to take acquaintance; for their fate
Presageth worst of ills, whose best increase
proceeds from good men's falls: yet mark their state
As indirectly got, so little peace
accrewes in state to any, for the hate
Of God and man attends them; and how then
Should there be peace where is war with God and Men?
More he beholds, and he observes them too,
and numbers their dimensions as they pass
The compass of his Prospect too and fro,
for this same Grate he makes his Looking-glass,
In which he sees more then the world can show,
conferring what is present with what was;
Extracting this from times experienced School,
The Captiue's freer then the Worlds fool.
For by the first we show but what we are,
and Moralize our selves in being pent
Close from the Worlds eye, which we compare
Unto a Prison, since th'enfranchisement
We haue's in Heaven: then howsoere we fare,
though bound, if free in mind, th'imprisonment
We suffer, cannot so our spirits depresse,
That the freedom of our minds should seem ought less:
Ought less; nay more! for we approve as true
What th'deuine Moral taught: That one may have
A fuiler and more perfect enteruiew
of the Stars beauty in a hollow Cave,
Then on the Superficies; for the show
of pomp distracts our passions, and does slave
Our reason to our sense; whence we may know,
The dangers of high states are seen below.
Below; and what more low then to be shut
from open air, strang'd from the sight of Men,
Closed in oblivion, linked hand and foot
least their escape gain liberty? what then
Shall this enthrall my soul? it cannot do it,
it does aspire above the thoughts of them
Who shed their Childish tears when they are sent
By higher powers to take them to restraint.
The truth of things, (says sage Democritus)
lies hid in certain Caves, that is, the Cell
Of Thraldom which restraines and limits us,
which makes us happy if we use it well;
For we are sequestered from th'pernicious
objects of earth, and may in private tell,
What we in public were, where we do find,
The freest man may have the slauish'st mind.
For my experience tells me the Act of Sin,
proceeds from sins occasion, which restrained,
To meditate souls freedom we begin,
and fly from earth when th'Body is enchain'd,
Making our thoughts contemplators of Him,
whom if we get we have sufficient gained:
So as the Grate of our Captivity,
Is the Gate that opens to souls liberty.
Whence it is we see so many taste the air
of freedom, with neglect of what they are;
Making their will their Law; but when they share
their portion in affliction, then their care
Is in the honor of that inward fair,
and they lament the state wherein they were:
For Man in state forgets himself and his,
Till his Affliction tells him what he is.
If life indeed were such a Iubile,
that every hour, day, year, did promise us
Continuate health, and wealth, and liberty,
then had we better reason to excuse
The love we have to our mortality:
but since we see we cannot will nor choose,
But must be rest of these, why should we grieve,
To leave as men what men are forced to leave?
Nor skills it much where we be reft of these,
whether in Thrall or Freedom, but of th'two
I Would rather lose my fortune where I cease,
to make resort to any, and must know
No more of The World or the Worlds prease;
but am retired from the public show
Of this frail Theater; and am confined
In Flesh to taste true liberty of Mind.
A Mind as free as is the Body thrall,
transcendent in her being, taking the Wings
Of the Morning to ascend, and make that all
of hers immortal, sphearing it with Kings;
Whose glory is so firm it cannot fall:
where every Saint in their reposure sings
Th'triumphant Paean of eternity,
To Him whose sight gives perfect Liberty.
Then whether my restraint enforce or no,
I Will be my self, but more in my restraint;
Because through it I see the end of woe,
tasting in grief the Essence of content:
That when from this same double-ward I go,
this same entangled Prison; the continent
Of heavenly Freedom may receive my Soul,
Which Flesh imprison might, but not control.
Rest then (Retired Muse) and be thy own,
though all thy own forsake thee, that when Friends,
Fortune and Freedom are but small or none,
thy hopes may aim at more transcendent ends;
So by the Body in strait durance thrown
thy vnconfined Soul may make amends,
For that which she had in her Freedom lost,
In that most blessed wherein she seemd most crossed.
The Statue of AGATHOCLES.
The Argument.
AGATHOCLES, a Tyrant of Syracusa, caused his Statue to be composed in this
manner: Caput de auro innuendo Regis dignitatem, Brachia de ebore intimando
eius venustatem, caetera lincae menta de aere, denotando strenuitatem; pedes
ver^ de terra indicando eius fragilitatens.
The Head of Gold, Arms of Iuorie, and other of the lineaments of purest
Brass; but the Feet of Earth: intimating of what weak and infirm subsistence
this little-World Man was builded. Whence we may collect what divine
considerations the Pagans themselves observed and usually applied to rectify
their moral life; where instructions of Nature directed them not only in the
course of humane society; but even in Principles above the reach and pitch of
Nature; as may appear in many Philosophical Axioms, and diuinely-inserted
sentences in the Works of Plato, Plutarch, Socrates, and amongst the Latins,
in the inimitable Labors of Seneca, Boaethius, Tacitus and Plinius secundus.
Upon the Moral of this Statue of AGATHOCLES, insists the Author in this Poem,
concluding with this undoubted Position: that as foundations on sand are by
every tempest shaken; so Man standing on feet of Earth, has no firmer
foundation then mutability to ground on.

The POEM.
AGathocles, me thinks, I might compare thee,
(So rare thou art) to some choice Statuarie,
Who does pourtray with Pencill he does take,
Himself to The Image which he is wont to make.
How artfull Thou, and graceful to by birth,
A King, yet shows that thou art made of earth;
Not glorying in thy greatness, but would seem
Made of the same mould other men have been:
A Head of Gold, as thou art chief of Men,
So chief of Mettalls make thy Diadem;
Victorious Arms of purest Iuorie,
Which intimates the persons purity;
The other Lineaments composed of Brass,
Implies th'vndanted strength whereof thou was:
But Feet of Earth, show th'grownd on which we stand,
That we are cast down in turning of a hand.
Of which, that we may make the better use,
Me thinks I could dilate the Moral thus:
Man made of Earth no surer footing can
Presume upon then Earth, from which he came,
Where firmness is infirmenesse, and the stay
On which he builds his strongest hopes, is Clay:
And yet how strangely confident he grows,
In Heauen-confronting boldness, and in shows
Bearing a Giants Spirit, when in length,
Height, breadth, and pitch he is of Pigmies strength:
Yea, I have known a very Dwarf in sight,
Conceit himself a Pyramid in height,
Ietting so stately, as it were in's power
To mount aloft unto the ayery Tower.
But when Man's proud, I should esteem't more meet,
Not to presume on's strength, but look on's feet,
Which Nature, we observe, has taught the Swan,
And ought in reason to be done by Man.
Weak are foundations that are reared on sand,
And on as weak grounds may we seem to stand;
Both subject to be ruined, split, and raz't,
One Billow shakes the first, one grief the last.
Whence then or how subsists this Earthly frame,
That merits in it self no better name
Then Shell of base corruption? It Is not Brass,
Marble, or Iuorie, which, when times pass,
And our expired Fates surcease to be,
Reserve in them our living memory;
No, no, this Metal is not of that proof,
We live as Those under a shaking roof;
Where every moment makes apparent show
(For want of props) of final overthrow.
Thus then me thinks you may, (if so you please)
Apply this Statue of Agathocles.
As he composed his royal Head of Gold,
The pur'st of Mettalls; you are thereby told
That the Head whence Reason and right Judgment springs
Should not be pestered with inferior things:
And as his active sinnewie Arms are said
(To show their pureness) to be Iuored,
Like Pelops milke-white shoulders; we are given
To understand, our Arms should be to Heaven
(As to their proper Orb) enlarged, that we
Might there be made the Saints of purity:
By rest of the parts which were composed of Brass,
(Being of bigger bone then others was)
We may collect Men made of self same clay,
May in their strength do more then others may.
Lastly, on Earth as Men subsistence have,
Their Earthly feet do hasten to their Grave.
Of SLEEP.
Sleep is the Prison that restraines the sense
From due performance of her offices,
Yet th'glorious Soul is of that excellence
It mounts aloft, and scorns such Bonds as these;
She acts when the outward senses are asleep,
Building fantastic Castles in the Air,
And dives sometimes into th'obscurest Deep,
Conferring things that are with things that were;
She fills the laboring Senses with extremes,
And dreams of Love if that she be in love,
For what by day she thinks by night she dreams;
Seeming all mouelesse when she is known to move.
Often She betrays the action of the day,
While th'labouring Sense blabs on the dead of night,
And guilty of her self seems to bewray
What we or did or thought, and though our sight
Is fixed on no one object; yet the eye
Of understanding has her proper Sphere
Wherein she moves and has her sovereignty,
And being once there, she is ever there.
Nor can Man properly be said to rest,
When sweet-charmd Morpheus shuts his leaden eyes:
Unless it be by the outward sense expressed,
For the Soul nere rests, nere sleeps, nere vacant lies:
But as we see in Martial policy
While some do sleep some still keep Centinall,
That they may notice give if ought they see
Approaching near the breaches of the wall;
So this same watchful spy is ever seen
Cautiue and circumspect least th'foe should win,
Her strait-beleaguer'd fort and vanquished clean
The Bodies power by letting Error in;
Yet see we often the temper of the Soul
Follow the Bodies various temperature,
And as foul water comes from Springlins foul,
So if the Body be disposed pure
Exempt from Passions, she will ever keep
A calm retension of her faculties:
For guilty minds are troubled still with these.
And this we see in Passions of the mind
Or her Affections rather, there is none
But is to some one humor more inclined
Then to another; as the Chollerick one,
Whose Passion spurns at Reason, and delights
In nothing less then to be patient:
And this he shows in darkest silent nights,
When Sleep advises him to be content.
Next is the sullen sallow Melancholy,
Whose nature's Saint or Devil, and it dreams
Either of Subjects pure or most unholy,
For of all Humors this is in extremes.
The third a warry crude, raw Phlegmatic,
(A bedridden Humor) yet in youngest bloods,
And he is spitting still and Rhewmaticke*
Whose Dreams are neither bad, nor greatly good.
The last and best, for it does show affection
In red and white is Sanguine, and is mixed
So equally of all, as this Complexion
Is the only one where Beauties Star is fixed;
And the Dreams her senses whisper are so clear
From any thought of Passion, as her will
Is over her Passions so to domineere,
That no delight may train her unto ill;
All these do dream; but there is no perfect rest
To any these, save to a guiltless breast.
Upon the four Constitutions,
AS cold and dry attend on Age,
so hot and moist on Youth;
But hot and dry distempers show,
far more then any does:
The last (not worst) might well be first,
is cold and moist together,
Which gives digestion such free course,
as it exceeds the other:
All these appear both here and there,
but no distemper's worse
Our Gallants think, and so think I,
then Dryness of the Purse.
Of HOSPITALITY.
WHere art thou? no where? no, where is thy consort
Of old Black-iacks, Blew-coats? They Are flown to the Court
Where they are transformd. To what good Dyonise?
To Pages like Pie-colourd Butterflies;
Alas poor Country, thou have nothing then
But vast penurious houses without Men;
A row of smoake-lesse Chimneyes which agrees,
With barme-lesse Hogsheds, empty Butteries,
VVorme-eaten Rafters, VVindores Spider-wouen,
VValls Snaile-belimed, a Loome-mudded Oven
Estranged from Bake-meats, nasty Dayeries,
Halls hung with Caules and forlorn Nurseries.
And yet Panurgus thou art more to blame
Then Court housekeepers, for thou thinks no shame
When foot-bet Travelers that is like to burst
With heat, come to thy house to quench their thirst,
To boult thy Buttry-dore and bid them go
To the Alehouse, where the aue nothing to bestow:
Wherefore to save their money, thou do bring,
These wearied Travelers to some wholesome Spring,
Where they may drink their fill; whenc't may appear
Thou Wilt rather wast thy water then thy Beer.
And thou Cremutius that do nere display
Thy Bounty but upon thy Marriage day:
Where thou inuites thy friends unto thy store
Of Resty Bacon; for thou have no more
Of Cates, to make their welcomming expressed,
With one reserved Kilderkin of the best;
Whose Key thou kept as I informed am,
Till thy Feast Day, and then thou gaue't thy Man:
The wily Porrus, who had so much wit
As to appoint a time which might befit
His jolly Cumrades to drink up thy Beer
While thou and thy starved Guests conferring were:
But by what hap I know not, he is found,
With his Boon-socio's traversing their round,
Which makes thee swear, fearing thy Beer should lack,
To pull thy Blew-coate from poor Porrus back,
But how did Porrus mittigate thy rage?
Sir take your Coat, so you will pay my wage.
But this does little move thy worthless mind,
He wears thy Coat, thou keeps his wage behind.
And Luscu, thou that never made expense,
In vain disbursements above eighteen pence
In all thy time; me thinks I see in thee
The Misers Mirror or Anatomy
Rightly depictur'd, who has wealth at will,
Yet (like the Hydropticke Man) is thirsty still:
See thou not Luscus how thou starues thy self,
To Cram thy Coffers and increase thy Pelf?
And yet how fond art thou, all thou do save,
Will in the end afford thee but a Grave,
A Shroud, thus ends thy care, thus ends thy store:
This Beggars have and Princes get no more.
And yet, unhappy thou, drains golden streams,
T'inhance thine own by indirectest means.
Making this Axiom with thy humor fit,
Thou cares not how thou get, so thou may get:
But if thou knewst what wiser men do know,
Thou would not get before thou question how.
The SHRIFT.
A Time there was, and diverse there be yet,
Whose riper years can well remember it:
When folk were shriuen for the sins they did commit
And had their Absolution as was fit:
Among which, as one crime does another get,
Where hope of Pardon does authorize it,
For Virtues Turtle-like do single sit,
But th'troope of Vices still in squadrons meet;
A Boone-Companion to his liquor given,
Came thither with his Neighbors to be shriuen.
Steven (quoth Friar) for's Christen name was Steven,
What sins have done to grieve the Lord of Heaven?
Speak freely man, and it is ten to seven,
But by due Penance I will make all even:
Confession is the way, when Man is driven
Into Despair, that guides him unto Heaven.
I have been drunk last day and this day to,
And may be next day too for ought I know:
Tell me then (holy Friar) directly how
Or in what sort I may my Penance do?
Drunk (quoth the Friar) now by the faith I owe
I know not what it means, nor as I trow
Under Confession had I't ere till now,
Yet come next day thou's hear what thou shall do.
Mean while the Friar would not neglect his time,
To know the secret of this drunken crime,
Therefore betime, ere four a clock did chime,
This profane practice grew to be divine:
For Vpsefreese he drunk from four to nine,
So as each Sense was steeped well in Wine,
Yet still he kept his rouse, till he in fine,
Grew extreme sick with hugging Bacchus Shrine:
Upward and downward it did work so sore,
As if his vital spirits could work no more,
Or that he were ariuing on the Shore
Where Mortals must ariue: but rid of store,
That did oppress his stomach ore and ore,
At last he got a nap upon the floor,
Which having tempered his Brains, he swore
To try conclusions with the Pot no more.
Stephen kept his steauen, and to the time he gave,
Came to demand what Penance he should have?
What Penance (quoth the Friar?) I Will tell thee knave,
I think it fit this Penance to receive:
"Go and be drunk again; for if it have
"The Effect with thee it had with me, I Would crave
"No sharper Penance to the sinfullst slave,
"For soon it would possess me of my grave.
"Thus in this Sea of Sodom where each shelfe
"Menaceth ruin to the forlorn Elfe,
"The Drunkard is a Penance to himself.
Quidam erat.
A Preaching Friar there was, who thus began,
The Scripture says, There was a certain Man:
Acertaine Man: but I do read no where
Of any certain Woman mentioned there;
A certain Man, a Phraze in Scripture common,
But no place shows there was a certain Woman*
And fit it is that we should ground our Faith
On nothing more then what the Scripture says.
The Sign in CANCER. An Epigram.
A Crabbed Shrew, through sickness weakly brought,
Wished by all means a Doctor should be sought;
Who by his Art that he her grief might know,
Felt both her pulse and cast her water too:
Which done, he to her husband turned again,
And wishd him be content all was in vain:
For when the signe's in Cancer, she would dye;
To whom her Husband answered merrily:
"If that (my learned Doctor) had been so
"She had been dead believe it long ago;
"For these ten years and odd she has been mine,
"And I nere knew her yet out of that Sign.
A PRIZE.
THree Darlings have I, and I know not which
To make a (...); First is mee^ly rich,
Fair, ^^se, but we (...) be different,
And where that is there can be no content.
The Next as loving as the Turtle is,
Whose Lip distills pure Nectar with her kiss,
But this's my fear, her Nature is so prone
To give content, she cannot keep to One.
The Third is rich and wise and well adorned
With inward graces, but she is deformed,
So as for all that I do treasure lack,
I would not get it on a Cammels back.
Which should I have of these they all love me,
One must I have, I cannot have all three?
HIMENS Eglogue between Admetus and Menalchas.
MENALCHAS. WHat makes Admetus sad? What ere it be
Some cause there is that thus has altered thee.
Is it the loss of Substance, or of Friends,
Or thy content in coffeehouse ends?
Is it some seruple in thy Conscience,
Which vnresolu'd does leave thee in suspense?
Is it that thou thy long wished love should leese?

ADMET. No, no Menalchas it is none of these.

MENAL. Thou art not sick?

ADMET. Nor sick, nor greatly well.

MENAL. Where lies thy grief?

ADMET. My Countenance can tell.

MENAL. Smooth is thy brow, thy countenance fresh enough.

ADMET. But Cares have made my wreakfull mind as rough.

MENAL. Of Cares Admetus.

ADMET. Yes, I have my share.

MENAL. Yet hope of cure.

ADMET. No hope of cure to care.

MENAL. Nay then I see it is love that thee does wring;

ADMET. Thou errst Menalchas, there is no such thing.

MENAL. If neither loss of friends nor loss of wealth,
Want to enjoy thy Love, nor want of health,
If neither discontent, nor grief, do show
Care in thy face, nor sorrow in thy brow,
If thou be free as we all know thee free,
Engaged to none, what is it greeueth thee?

ADMET. Would know Menalchas?

MENAL. Yes.

ADMET. I Will tell thee than;
The Case is alterd: I Am a Married-Man.

THANKFVLNES.
THe early Lark, from Earth to Heaven does raise
Her well-tuned Note to chaunt her Makers praise,
Why should not Men (indew'd with Reason) show
Themselves more thankful, since more thanks they owe?
FINIS.

