A PROTESTATION OF THE KINGS SVpremacie.

MADE IN THE NAME OF the afflicted Ministers, and opposed to the shameful
Calumniations of the Prelates.

Psa. 7.3.5. O Lord my God if I have done this thing, if there be any wickedness
in my hands, Then let the Enemy persecute my Soul, and take it, let him tread
my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the Dust. Selah.

Ioh. 18.23. If I have spoken Evil: bear witness of the Evil, But if I have
spoken well why smitest thou me.

Printed 1605

TO THE CIVIL STATES of this Kingdom.
WE beseech your H. and W. that you would by this true light that we shall
give unto you, look into our innocence. His Excelent Majesty, your selves,
and your Sacreed Thrones are exceedingly abused, with Foggs and Mists, which
(breathed out of the mouths of the Prelates) are cast between your eyes, and
the Integrity of our cause: through the darkness whereof you are led to give
many heavy Sentaunces against the most harmles Subjects in the Kingdom, as
Enemies to the Supremacy and State. Whereas it shall appear that no
Christians in the world give more unto the same then we and that in very
truth, the cause that we maintain is for the King and Civil State, against an
Ecclesiastical State, that secretly, and in a Mystery (as we may hereafter
have occasion to prove) opposes it self against the same. If this
protestation shall in any measure satisfy you. Then we desire your Honorable
Mediations for us to the Highest. If not. That then we may know wherein it is
defective and we shall be found ready to give all Satisfaction.

A PROTESTATION OF the Kings Supremacy.
WE hold and maintain, the same Authority and Supremacy in all causes and
over all persons Civil and Ecclesiastical, granted by Statute to Queen
Elizabeth, and expressed and declared in the book of Aduertisements and
Injunctions, and in M. Bilson against the Jesuits, to be due in full and ample
manner (without any limitation or qualification) to the King and his Heirs and
Successors for ever. Neither is their (to our knowledge) any one of us, but is
and ever has been most willinge to subscrib and swear unto the same,
according to form of statute, And we desire that those that shall refuse the
same may bear their own iniqutie.

2 We are so far from Iudgeing the said Supremacy to be unlawful: that we
are persuaded that the King should sin highly against God, ^s he should not
assume the same unto himself, and that the Churches within his Dominions should
sine da^nablie, if they should deny to yeald the same unto him. yea though the
statuts of the kingdom should deny it unto him.

3 we hold it plain Antichristianisme for any Church or Church officers
whatsoever, either to arrogate or assume unto themselves any part or parcel
thereof, and utterly unlawful for the king to give away or alienate the same
from his own Crown and dignity to any spiritual potentates or rulers
whatsoever within or without his dominions.

4 We hold that though the Kings of this Realm wear noe members of the
Church but very Infidels, ye and persecutors of the truth, that yet those
Churches that shall be gathered together within these dominions ought to
acknowledge and yeald the said supremacy unto them And that the same is not
tied to their faith and Christianity but to their very Crown from which noe
subject or subjects have power to separate or disioyne it.

5 We hold that nether King nor Civil state are bound in matter of Religion
to be subject and obedient to any Ecclesiastical Person or Persons whatsoever
no further then they shall be able to Convince their consciences of the truth
thereof out of the word of God. Yea we think they should sin against God,
if they should ground their Religion, or any part or parcel thereof upon the
bare Testimony or Judgment of any man, or of all the men in the world.

6 We hold that noe Churches or Church officers have power for any crime
whatsoever to deprive the king of the least of his Royal prerogatius
whatsoever, much less to deprive him of his supremacy wherein the height of
his Royal dignity Consists.

7 We hold that in all things Concerning this life whatsoever, the Civil
Jurisdiction of Kings and Civil States excels and ought to have
pre-eminence over the Ecclesiastical, and that the Ecclesiastical nether has
nor ought to have any power in the least degree over the bodies, lives, goods,
or liberty of any person whatsoever, much less of the Kings and Rulers of the
Earth.

8 We hold that Kings by virtue of their Supremacy have power: yea also that
they stand bound by the law of God to make Laws Ecclesiastical such as shall
tend to the good ordering of the Churches in their Dominions, And that the
Churches ought not to be dissobedient to any of their Laws, so far as in
obedience unto them, they do not that which is contrary to the word of God.

9 We hold that though the King shall Command any thing contrary to the Word
unto the Churches, that yet they ought not to resist him therein, but only
peaceably to forbear obedience, and sue unto him for grace and mercy, and
where that cannot be obtained, meekely to submit themselves to the punishment.

10 We hold that the King has power by virtue of his Supremacy, to remove
out of the Churches, whatsoever he shall discern to be practiced therein, not a
greable to the word of God. And if he shall see any defect either in the worship
of God or in the Ecclesiastical Discipline, he ought by his royal authority
and power to procure and force the redress thereof, yea, though it be without
the consent and a against the will of the Ecclesiastical Gouerners themselves.

11 We hold that the King has as much author itie over the body, goods, and
affairs, of Ecclesiastical persons, as of any other of his Subjects whosoever.
And that by his authority, he may force them not only to all ciuyll duties
belonging unto them, but also unto all Ecclesiastical: afflictyng as great
punishment upon them for the neglect thereof, as upon any other of his Subjects.

12 We hold that he has power, to remove out of the Churches, all
Scandolous, Scismaticall and Heretical Teachers, and by all due severity of
Laws to repress them.

13 We hold that all Ecclesiastical Laws made by the King (not repugnant to
the word of God) do in some sort bind the consciences of his subjects: and
that no subject ought to refuse obedience to any such law.

14 We hold that the King only has power within his Dominions, to Couvene
Synods or general Assemblies of Ministers, And by his authority Royal, to
ratisie and give life and strength, to their Canons and Conslitutions, without
whose ratification, no man can force any subject to yeald any obedience unto
the same.

15 We hold that though the King may force the Churches to be subject and
obedient unto him: and to be Members of the Common wealth, ye^ that the
Churches severally or jointly, have no power to force him: or any subject,
against their will to any service unto them, or to any religious (...)
whatsoever. No, nor to be so much as a member of any Church.

16 We hold that the King ought not to be subject to the Ecclesiastical
Censures of any Churches, Church officers or Synods whatsoever, but only to
that Church and those Officers of his own Court and Household, unto whom (in
reverence of their Religion and of the spiritual Graces of God he sees
shinynge in them) he shall of his own freewill, subject and commit the
Regiment of his soul, in whom their can be, no suspicion nor fear of any
partiality: or unjust or rigorous dealing against him.

17 We hold that if any Ecclsiasticall Gouerners (call them by what name you
will) shall abuse their Ecclesiastical authority in the execution of their
Censures, upon any man whosoever. That the King and Civil States under him,
have power to punish them severely for it, much more if they shall abuse it
upon the Supreme Majesty himself.

18 If the King subiecting himself: to Spiritual Guides and Governers, shall
afterward refuse to be guided and governed by them according to the word of
God, and lyuinge in notorious sin without repentannce shall wilfully contemn
and despise all their holy and religious Censures, that the^ these Governors are
to refuse to administer the holy things of God un to him, and to leave him to
him self and to the secreat Judgment of God, and wholly to resign and give
over that spiritual charge and tuition over him, which by calling from God and
the King they did undertake. And more then this they may not do. And after all
this, We hold that he yet still retains, and ought to retain, in tierly
and solidly, all that aforesaid suprea^e power and authority over the
Churches of this Dominion in as ample a manner as if he were the most
Christian prince in the world.

19 We acknowledge King James to be our only lawful Sovereign and unto him
to be due all the aforesaid Supremacy and we renounce and abjure allopinions
doctrins practicies whatsoever repugnant or contrary to the same, as
Anabaptisticall and Antichristian. And wish they may be severely punished.

20 We never refused obedience to any Laws or commandments of the King: or
State whatsoever, but only to such as we have proved or are ready to prove,
(if we might be heard with indifferency) to be contrary to the word of God.
And we are ready to take our Solemn Oaths, before the Throne of Justice,
that the only cause of our refusal of Obedience to those Canons of the
Prelates for which we are in present so extremely afflicted, is mere
conscience, and a fear to sin against God: And that if by due form of
reasonnyng we may be convinced in our consciences of the contrary, we are as
willinge as any Subjects in the Realm to Obey and Conform.

21 We refuse Obedience only to such Canons as require the performaunce of
such Acts, and Rites of Religion, as are rejected and abandoned of all other
reformed Churches, as Superstitious disorders, Such, as are special mysteries
of the Romish Antichristian Idolatry, Such as have been controuerted in the
Church ever since the last breaking forth of the light of the gospel, out of
the cloud of Popery in Luthers time. Such as all Protestant writers and
defendors of our Faith beyond the Seaes, and most of our own Countrime^ have
either in general or par ticular condemned as vain, idle, and un profitable,
Such as all the faithful, and painful Pastors of this Realm: and in a manner
all States and degrees of the same, would be content were removed: and sweept
out of the Church, and for which few or none are zealous but the Prelates, and
their adherents.

22 We deny no authority to the King, in matters Ecclesiastical, but only
that which Christ Jesus the only Head of the Church has directly, and
precisly appropriated unto himself, and has denied to communicate to any
other creature or creatures in the world. For we hold, That Christ a lone is
the Doctor of the Church in matters of Religion, and that the word of Christ
which he has given unto his Church, is of absolute parfection containyng in it
all parts of the true religion, both for substance and ceremony, and a perfect
direction in all Ecclesiastical matters whatsoever. Unto and from which it is
not lawefull for any Man or Angel, to add or detract.

23 We are so far from making claim of any supremacy unto our selves (and
those eccliasticall officers which we desire) that we exclude from our selves
and them (as that of which we are utterly incapable) all Princely and Lordly
state pomp and power whatsoever, houlding it a sin for any whosoever to
exercise (no not by conmission from the magistrate) any authority over the
body, Goods, lives, liberty of any man whosoever for any crime or offense
whatsoever. So that any one of the basest and most inferior Civil officers in
a Kingdom has and ought to have (in our judgment) more authority and power
over men then any or all the Ecclesiastical Officers in the same kingdom or in
the whole world. Yea we hold that the highest Ecclesiastical Officer in the
Church ought to be as subject unto the basest Civil officers in the Kingdom,
as the meanest Subject in the Kingdom, And that they ought not by virtue of
their office, to challenge any freedom or immunity at all from any Ciuyll
Subjection whatsoever, belonging to any common Subject,.

24 We consine and bound all Ecclesiastical power within the limitts only of
one particular Congregation, houldinge that the greatest Ecclesiastical power:
ought not to strech beyond the same, And that it is an arrogating of Princly
Supremacy, for any Ecclesiastical Person, or Persons whosoever, to take upon
themselves Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over many Churches, much more over
whole Kingdoms and Provinces of Christians.

25 We hold it utterly unlawful for any one Minister to take upon himself,
or accept of a sole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over so much as one
Congregation. And therefore we hold that some of the sufficientest and most
honest and godly men in the Congregation, ought to be chosen by the Heads of
Families, to be adioynded in Comissio^ as Asistants to the Minister, in the
Spiritual Regiment of the souls of that Congregation, of which he is the
Pastor.

26 We hold that these Ecclesiastical Officers being so chosen by the Church
or Congregation, are to exercise over the said Congregation only a Spiritual
Jurisdiction and power, consistyng in a careful oversight of the outward
behavior of the Members of their Church, That it be not scandalous, offenciue,
and vnbeseemynge Christians. And if any Member shall be delinquent, they are
brotherly to admonish him, showing him the nature of his crime by the word of
God, And if after two or three admonitions, he sheew no tokens of sorrow and
penitencie, then are they to deny unto him the pledges and seals of of the
Church, to wit the Sacraments. If this cannot humble him but that he continue
obstinate in that sin, then they are by the mouth of the Minister in
Congregation (the whole Church consentinge freely thereto) denounce him to be no
Member of the Kingdom of Heaven, and so forbear to have any further charge
over him, until God shall work the grace of Repentannce, in him? in this
manner they are to proceed against all apparent and Evident crimes only, as
Murder Adultery Theft Blasphemy, Ribaldery Lying, Slandering, Profanation of
the Sabothes contempt of Divine Worship. Disobedience to the Civil Magistrate
etc. Nether ought the Extremest of the Ecclesiastical Censures any whit
hinder the course of justice that the Civil Magistrate is to exercise against
the same crimes for if a Traitor himself should be penitent, the church
ought to forgive him and lovingly to embrace him as a Son, but the Magistrate
ought to execute him, If he should be obstinate in that crime: As the
Magistrate ought to cut him off from the Civil communion of men, so ought the
Congregation (of which he is a Member) cut him of from all spiritual
Communion with them. If any one of the Ecclesiastical Officers themselves
shall sin, he is as subject to the Censures of the rest as any other member
of the congregation. If they shall all sin scandolously either in the
execution of their Office, or in any other ordinary manner: Then the
Congregation that chose them freely, has as free power to depose them, and to
place others in their room. If the Congregation shall err, either in
choosinge or deposinge of her spiritual Officers, Then has the ^uill
Magistrate alone power and authority to punish them for their fault, to
compel them to make better choice, or to defend against them those Officers
that without just causes they shall depose or deprive.

27 We hold that those Ecclesiastical Persons that make claim to greater
power and authority then this, Especially they that make claim Iure Divino of
power and Jurisdiction to meddle with other Churches then that one Congregation
of which they are or ought to be Members. Do usurp upon the Supremacy of the
Civil Magistrate, Who alone has and ought to have (as we hold and
mainetaine) a power over the several Congregations in his Dominions, And who
alone ought by his authority not only to prescribe common Laws and Canons of
Uniformity and consent, in Religion and worship of God unto them all, But also
to punish the offenses of the several Congregations, that they shall co^mitt
against the laws of God, the policy of the Realm, And the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions enacted by his authority.

28 We hold that the King ought not to give this authority away or to
committ it to any Ecclesiastical Person or Persons whatsoever, But ought
himself to be as it were, Archbishop and general Overseer of all the Churches
within his Dominions, And ought to imploye under him, his Honorable Counsel,
his Judges, Leiftenaunts, Justices, Cunstables and such like to oversee the
Churches, in the several divisions of their civil Regiments, visiting them
and punishing by their civil power whatsoever they shall see amiss in any of
them: Especially in the Rulers and Gouerners.

29 For as much as no people are more hated persecuted and wronged of the
wicked world then the true Churches of Christ, We hold that no people in the
Earth stand in more need of the civil magistrate, then they. And that it is
the greatest outward blessing they can inioye in this life, to live under the
Protection of their Swords and Scepters, and the greatest cause of mourning
when the same shall be bent against them. And we hold those churches to be no
true churches of Jesus Christ That livinge in any cuntry, shall refuse
Subjection to the civil Regents and Gouerners of the same, be they (in respect
of Religion) never such Paganish Infidells.

30 We hold it utterly unlawful, For any christian Churches whatsoever, by
any armed force or power, against the will of the civil magistracy and State
under which they live, To erect and set up in public, the true worship and
service of God, Or to beat down or Suppress any superstition or Idolatry
that shall be countenaunced and maintained by the same. Only, Every man is to
look to himself, that he communicate not with the Evils of the times,
induringe what it shall please the State to inflict, and seekinge by all honest
and peaceable means all reformation of public abuses, Only at the hands of
Civil public Persons, And all practices contrary to these, we condemn as
Seditious and sinful.

31 All that we crave of his Majesty and the State, is, that by his and their
permission and under their protection, and approbation, It may be lawefull for
us, To serve and worship God in all things according to his revealed will, and
the manner of all other reformed Protestant Churches, that have made separation
from Rome, That we may not be forced against our consciences to stain and
pollute the simple and synere worship of God prescribed in his word, with any
human Traditions and Rites whatsoever, but that in Divine worship we may be
actors only of those things that may for matter or manner either ingenerall or
special be concluded out of the word of God. Also to this end that it may be
lawefall for us to exhibit unto them and unto their Censure a true and Sincere
Confession of our faith, containyng the maine Grounds of our Religion, unto
which all other doctrines are to be consonant: as also a Form of Divi^e
worship and Ecclesiastical Government, in like manner warranted by the word,
and to be observed of us all under any Civil punishment that it shall please
the said Majesty, and State to inflict, under whose authority alone, we
desire to exercise the same: and unto whose punishment alone we desire to be
subject if we shall offend against any of those Laws and Canons that
themselves shall approve in manner aforesaid, And our desire is, Not to
worship God in dark corners, but in such public places and at such
convenient times as it shall please them to assign, to the intent, that they
and their officers may the better take notice of Our offenses (if any such
shall be committed in our Congregations, and assemblies) that they may punish the
same accordingly. And we desire we may be subject to no other Spiritual Lords
but unto Christ, nor unto any other Temporal Lords but unto themselves, whom
alone in this Earth we desire to makeour Judges and Supreme Gouerners and
Overseers in all causes Ecclesiastical whatsoever renou^cyng as Antichristian,
all such Ecclesiastical powers as arrogate and assume unto themselves under
any pretense of the Law of God or man, the said power which we acknowledge to
be due only to the Civil Magistrate.

32 So long as it shall please the King and Civil State (though to the great
derogation of their own authority as we may have occasion hereafter to
prove) to maintain in this Kingdom, the State of the Hierachie or Prelacie:
We can (in Honor to his Majesty and the State, and in desire of peace) be
content without envy to suffer them to inioye their State and dignity, and to
live as brethren, amongst those ministers that shall acknowledge spiritual homage
unto their spiritual Lordships, paying unto them all temporal duties, of
Tenthes and such like: yea and joining with them in the service and worship of
God so far as we may do it without our own particular communicating with them
in those human Traditions and Rites, that in our consciences we judge to be
unlawful. Only we crave in all duetifull manner that which the very Law of
Nature yeldeth unto us, that for as much as they are most malicious Enemies
unto us and do apparently thirst either after our blood, or the Shipwreck of
our faith and consciences, that they may not henceforth be our judges in these
causes, but that we may both of us stand as parties at the bar of the civil
Magistrate to be tried in those differences that are between us, and that
when they shall publicly malign or flander us or our cause, it may be lauful
for us in a dutiful, sober, peaceable and modest manner without personal
reproach or disgrace: in as public manner justify our selus, and then
instead of that silly mockseruice to the King of wearing a linen rag upon our
backs or making a Christ's Cross upon a babies face we shall be ready to
perform and yeald triple homage service, and tribute unto him, and shall think
our lives and all that we have to vile to spend in the service of him and the
Civil state under him.

FINIS

