

THE English Gentleman: Containing Sundry excellent Rules or exquisite
Observations, tending to Direction of every Gentleman, of selecter rank and
quality; How to demean or accommodate himself in the manage of public or
private affairs.

By RICHARD BRATHWAIT Esquire.

SENECA in Herc. furen. -- Qui genus jactat suum
Aliena laudat.
LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, and are to be sold by ROBERT BOSTOCK at his
shop at the sign of the Kings head in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

TO THE NOBLY ACCOMPLISHED, honored, and loved; THOMAS Viscount WENTVVORTH,
Lord President of York; all correspondence to his prudent'st and prepared'st
resolves.
Worthyly Honored,
Virtue the greatest Signal and Symbol of Gentry: is rather expressed by
goodness of Person, than greatness of Place. For, howsoever the bleereey'd
vulgar honor, the purple more than the person, descent more than desert, title
than merit: that adulterate Gentility, which degenerats from the worth of her
Ancestors, derogates likewise from the birth of her Ancestors. And these be
such, whose infant effeminacie, youthful delicacie, or native liberty has
estranged them from the knowledge of moral or divine mysteries: so as, they
may be well compared to the Ostrich, who (as the Natural Historian reports)
has the wings of an Eagle, but never mounts: so these have the Eagle-wings of
contemplation, being endued with ^he intellectual faculties of a reasonable
soul; yet either entangled with the light chesses of vanity, or trashed with
the heavy poizes of self-conceit and singularity, they never mount above the
verge of sensual pleasure. But I am here to tender unto your Honors judicious
view, a Gentleman, quite of another garb: One, whose Education has made
formal enough, without apish formalitie, and conceiving enough, without
selfe-admiring arrogancy. A good Christian in devout practicing, no less than
zealous professing; yet none of the forward'st in discoursing on Religion. For
he observes (as long experience has brought him to be a judicious observer)
that Discourse of Religion has so occupied the world, as it has well-neere
driven the practice thereof out of the world. He esteems such only happy, who
are of that number, whom the World accounts fools, but God wise men. He
understands, that whatsoever is sought besides God, may so employ the Mind, as
it may be occupied, but never satisfied. He observes the whole Fabric of
humane power, and he concludes with the Preacher; Ecquid tam vanum? He notes
how the Flesh becoming obedient, behaveth herself as a faithful servant to
the Soul: This governs, the other is governed; this commands, the other
obeys. Finally, he sums up all his Observations with this: He that Sigheth
not while he is a Pilgrim, shall never rejoice when he is a Citizen. This is
the Gentleman, whom I have presumed to recommend to your protection: and to you
he makes recourse, not so much for shelter, as honor: for his Title, it
exempts him from servile bashfulnes, being an English Gentleman. Now, if any of
those corkie Censurers, Qui Mercurium in lingua non in pectore gerunt, shall
chance to accoast my Gentleman: I resolve me, his Education has made him so
accomplished at all assayes, and his conversing with the most piercing'st
judgments, has brought him to that perfection, as he can discern of what
mould or temper these Critics are; Mancipia paueae lectionis cum sint.
concluding, voces sunt, For my Dedication, instead of all unnecessary excuses
of presumption, I will cloze briefly with this constant Resolution: Though to
your TITLE there be HONOR due, It is your SELF that makes me HONOR you.
praeterea nihil; as is said of the Nightingall. This only rests; if I limme
him to the life, in spite of censure, he will merit the patronage of honor: if
I fail in my Art, (as I dare not presume of my strength) it is in your Honor
to impute the fault rather to the pen than the man, whose intimate affection to
your Lordship, made him err, if he err.

Your Honors in all devotion, RICHARD BRATHVVAIT.

To the knowing Reader.
HE that provides not for his Family is worse than an Infidel: yet he who
prefers the care of his family, before the adva^cement of Gods glory, may seem
to be of Cardinal Bourbons mind, who would not lose his part in Paris, for
his part in Paradise, Each man's private Oeconomie ought to be a certain
Academie, wherein all sacred and moral knowledge is to be taught. For that
master of a family, who only extends his care in providing how to get, making
the Object of his providence gain, will experimentally cry out, when his
mouth shall be filled with gravel: O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of
thee to that man, whose peace is in his substance! To prevent which immoderate
care, and that every one may cloze with Cicero: Virtute qui praediti sunt, soli
sunt divites, I have proposed some especial rules of direction, right worthy
(if my judgment do not deceive me) the observation of every public or
private family: though principally tending to the making up of an Accomplished
Gentleman. For who knows not, (if he know any thing) how the Gentry of this
age, through a depraved effeminacie, must be in custom with the fashion, to
purchase him the title of Gentleman? Where he is to enter co^merce with Tailor,
Haberdasher, Millener, Sempster, and sundry other appertinences of a Gentleman:
which in time, work Gentility out of love with Hospitality, engaging him so
deeply to vanity, as by a strange Catastrophe, he ever ends with misery. To
rectify these obliquities, I have brought a Gentleman, who professes the true
and new Art of Gentilizing: yet not like your begging pedanticall Artist, who
by a mercenary Bill pasted on some frequented gate, gives notice to the itching
Passenger, that if any one be minded to learn the rare and mysterious Art of
Brachygraphie, Stenographie, Logarisme, or any Art (indeed) whatsoever, (though
he be a mere stranger to any) upon resort to such a Sign in such a Lane, he
shall find a most illiterate Anacharsis, ready to bray his brains in a Mortar
to give him content. But this Gentleman, as the Science which he professes is
free, so does he teach it freely: craving no other reward for his fruitful
Observance, than thy friendly acceptance.

Upon the Volume and Title.
I Had purposed that this Work should have been digested into a portible
Volume, to the end it might be more familiar with a Gentleman's pocket, not to
pick it, but that he might picksome good from it: But since the Volume would
not bear it, you must with patience bear with it, and with more trouble bear
it: by enlarging your pocket to contain it.

Now for the Title, I am not wholly ignorant, how a Subject entitled The
Complete Gentleman, was heretofore published; which (I can assure you
Gentlemen) consorts with this rather in Title than Tenor, Name than Nature;
the proof whereof I refer to the generous and judicious Reader.

The Subjects whereof this Book principally treats and insisteth.
Youth. Disposition. Education. Vocation. Recreation. Acquaintance. Moderation.
Perfection.
An exact Table or Directory, leading to the principal points contained in
this Book.
YOVTH. Observat. 1.
OUR youthful years, our Climactericall years; with the dangers that attend
on youthful years; seconded by an authenticke story out of Eusebius. page 1.2
The vanity of Youth displayed in four distinct Subjects. 5 Two reasons why
Young Men were not admitted to deliver their opinions in public assemblies. 11
Three violent passions incident to Youth. 26 Two reasons why Youth is naturally
subject to those illimited passions of Ambition, Lust, Revenge. 27 Especial
motives or incendiaries, tending to the increase of those passions. 29 The
proper postures of a complete Roarer. 42 Physic prescribed, and Receipts
applied, to cure these maladies in Youth. 46 What choice employments deserve
entertainment from a Gentleman. 47
DISPOSITION. Observat. 2.
THe diversity of Dispositions. page 51 A probable judgment of our
Dispositions, drawn from the delights we affect, or company we frequent. 53
Passion the best discoverer of our Disposition. ibid. Discovery of Dispositions
in distempers. 54 Promotion held ever, man's best Anatomy Lecture. 55 The
Disposition is not to be forced. 57 What Disposition (being distinguished by
three infallible marks) is most generous. 61 The proper aim or end whereto
the actions of true resolution are directed: with the prudent observation of
Cortugal, one of the Turkish Princes, in his persuasive Oration for the besiege
of Rhodes. 70.72
EDVCATION. Observat. 3.
WHat Education is. page 75 Education dilates it self to three subjects. ibid.
Our knowledge reflects upon two particulars. 76 A profitable Exhortation to all
such as are drawn away by strange doctrine. 80 Two especial errors incident
to subjects of discourse; Affectation, Imitation: whereof Gentlemen are
seriously cautioned. 82 Persuasion, being the life and efficacy of Speech,
consists on three parts. 83 Immoderate passion, in arguments of Discourse and
reasoning, to be avoided. 88 Education either improveth or depraveth. 91
Education, the best seasoner of Action, as well as of Speech, or Knowledge: no
less prevalent in Arts Manual, than actions Martial. 91.99 Education, the
best seasoner of Youth. 101
VOCATION. Observat. 4.
THe Definition, necessity, and conveniencie of a Vocation without personal
Exception or Exemption. page 106, 107.115. Virtue consists in Action, time in
revolution, the maze of man's life in perpetual motion. page 107. lin. 16 Three
necessary considerations touching the conveniencie of a Vocation; divided and
applied. 109 The Efficacy of Prayer in every Vocation; and the exercise thereof
seriously recommended. 110 We are to resist vices, by practicing and doing acts
of the contrary virtues. 114 Men of place, in respect of three distinct
Objects, are three ways servants. 115. lin. 23 Men of place, of all others
least exempted from a Vocation. 117. lin. 18 The ground of all Novellisme. 121
Vocation in general. 124 The first invention of Trades, Arts, or Sciences. 127
The Ancient Borough of Kendall (upon serious discourse of Manufacture) worthily
commended for their industry in Wooll-worke: the judicious Dutchmen of
Keswick, for their Copper-worke. 125, 126 A serious survey and judicious
display of all the Liberal Sciences. 127 The Vocation of a Gentleman in
particular. 133 The Vocation of a Gentleman has employment public or private.
136 How a Gentleman is to demean himself in public affairs of State. 135
The life of man either Active or Co^templative. ib. lin. 7 Directions of
reservancie, useful to all Gentlemen in their keeping of company. ib. lin. 33.
Credulity, in two respects, dangerous to persons employed in affairs of State.
137 Credulity In believing the relations of others. In imparting his thoughts
to the secrecy of others: showed in a conceited story. 137, 138, 139
Resolution in suffering neither price to draw him, nor power to overawe him.
140 Disobedience punished in acts most successive. 142 The holy war, as a
consequent action of honor, reco^mended to the undertaking of all young
Gentlemen. 146. lin. 15 How a Gentleman is to employ himself in public
affairs. 143 How a Gentleman is to demean himself in private affairs. 147
Two perilous shelfes which endanger Justice. 149 How Justice is to be poized
equally. 151 Impunity the foster-mother of all impiety. 152 How a Gentleman is
to demean himself in his own family. 154 Every family a private
Commonwealth. 155. marg. A Gentleman is so to demean himself in his family,
as he neither hord up niggardly, nor lash out lavishly. 157. lin. 11 He is to
keep a Hanke of his bounty, lest too much profuseness bring him to misery.
ibid. lin. 18 He is neither to be too remiss, nor too severe in his family.
ibid. How a Gentleman is to employ himself in spiritual affairs within his
family. 161 The Exercise of devotion commended, a Blessing thereon pronounced,
if duly performed; which Blessing is on a precept and a promise grounded.
161.162
RECREATION. Observat. 5.
THe difference of Recreations. page 165 Of the moderate and immoderate use of
Recreat. 171 The benefits redounding from moderate Recreat. 173 The
inco^veniences arising from immoderate Recreat. 175 The year of Iubile defined
and described. 177 Objections against Stage Plays, proposed and resolved. 184
What honors ancient and modern times have conferred on Poets, and what
bounties for their poems. 189.190 What especial subjects are privileged from
Jests. 192 Who the first Comedian, who the first Tragedian. 193 A woeful
example of a Gentlewoman, who was a continual frequenter of Stage Plays. 195
Excess of Gaming reproved. 196 Cheaters displayed; their humors
experimentally decolored; their Habit, garb, and formal insinuation
discovered. 197 Young Gamesters most subject to passion. 225 A doleful example
of one that at gamoused imprecation. ibid. Another Modern example covertly
shadowed, of one who desperately surprised with distemper of loss, poisoned
himself. ibid. An excellent moral discourse of Hunting. 198 The story of the
fool of Millan, and his discourse with a Falconer. 201 In exercises of
Recreation, those only are most approved, by whom they are with least
affectation performed, and with most freedom of mind embraced. 205. lin. 3 An
accurate discourse of valor, and how in arguments of contest or challenge, a
Gentleman may come off with honor. 209 The misery of Duello's. 206 A
collection and election of Histories. 211 The knowledge of our own Modern
Chronicles, most beneficial to Gentlemen. 218 History, the sweetest Recreation
of the mind. 220 The judgment of God inflicted upon the actors and authors of
Treason, Sacrilege, etc. 213, 214, 215 What good moral men have flourished in
evil times. 216 How a Gentleman is to bestow himself in Recreation. 221
Prodigality condemned, moderation in expense, as well as in the exercise it
self, commended. 223 Distinction of times for Recreations, necessarily
enjoined. 226 No expense more precious, than the expense of time. ib. Election
of Games for Recreation: which conduce most to memory or retention; which to
pregnancie of conceit or apprehension. ibid.
ACQVAINTANCE. Observat. 6.
OF the use of Acquaintance. page 233 Man's security, the Devils opportunity.
235. lin. 6 A display of some Monasticke professors. ibid. Privacie no less
perilous than society. 236. The particular benefits derived from
Acquaintance, extend to Discourse. Advice. Action. ibid. Of the benefit we
reap by Acquaintance in matters of Discourse. ibid. Of the choice of
Acquaintance in matters of advice. 238 Friendship resembled to the Juniper
tree, whose wood is sweetest, shade coolest, and coal hottest. 239. marg. Of
the benefit properly derived from one friend to another in every peculiar
Action. 241 The Expressive Character of a real friend. 243 The benefits which
redound from the mutual union or communion of friends in the exercise of
pleasure. 245 All Jests either festive or civil. 246 Those jests are best
seasoned, that are least salted. 248 A rule of infallible direction touching
choice of Acquaintance. ibid. Of the choice or judicious approvement of
Acquaintance, in affairs of highest consequence. 249 Neither Timist nor
Timonist are within the Lists of Acquaintance to be entertained. ibid. The
Timist, or Time-observer, displayed and displaced. ibid. The Timonist, or
Time-detracter, discovered and discarded. 254 Evil society the source of all
sensuality. 253 What directions are to be observed in the choice of a wife.
256. *Which branch has proper relation to three choice Characters annexed to
the end of this Work; which Characters are in some Copies only annexed, and
for some other Observations hereafter reserved. The harsh and heremiticall
conceit of the Carthaginian Arminius, touching Marriage. 257 The Character of a
shameless wanton. 259, 260 The Character of a shamefast woman. 263, 264 Advice
in respect both of portion and proportion. 263 Privileges granted to such as
are married. 265 Nobility and Affability hold equall'st concurrencie. ibid.
lin. 34 Sundry inducing motives to Love recounted. 268, etc. Of Constancy in
the choice of Acquaintance. 271 Who are best consorts to pray with, to play
with, to converse or commerce with. 272. lin. 34 Three faculties of the
understanding, with their Objects. 276 Of reservancie toward Acquaintance. 279
A twofold reservancie; 1. In concealing our secrets. 2. In retaining our
substance. 280 An admirable story, clozing with an unexpected Catastrophe, of a
prodigal Gentleman and an unconscionable Creditor. 287 Of the absolute end of
Acquaintance. 292 All things by course of nature have their proper end, save
only suits of Law, which admit no end. ibid. lin. 32 A brief Survey of
Acquaintance in City, Court, and Country. 293, 294 Learning, the moving'st
inducement and exquisitest ornament of Acquaintance. 295 Titles formerly
conferred on such as were learned. ibid. The absolute aim or end of
Acquaintance, is either to better them, or be bettered by them. 296 Especial
offices wherein friendship and Acquaintance should be exercised. 297 What
gracious effects were produced by the friendly compassion of those faithful
instruments of Gods glory, in the first conversion of this kingdom. 298, 299,
etc. The flourishing state of the Church, amidst many hoary winters of
innovation, turbulent times of persecution. 300 An excellent conclusive precept
recommended to all young Gentleman. 304
MODERATION. Observat. 7.
MOderation defined. page 306 Our life a medley of Desires and fears. 305
Moderation of Princes in their contempt of Soveraigntie, illustrated by an
example of one of our own. 309 Otho's resolution, who by dying had rather
prove himself a mortal creature, than by living, load himself with cares of
an Emperor. 310 No virtue can subsist without Moderation. 311 A review of
those maine assailants of Temperance, Lust, Ambition, Gorgeousness in
apparel, luscious fare, company-keeping, etc. illustrated by diverse instances.
315, 316 What excellent fruits are derived from Temperance. 313 Conquest of a
man's affections the greatest victory. 315 Chastity the choicest ornament of
Youth. 316 A distinction of degrees, Conjugall, Viduall, Virginal. 322 A more
particular display of Cheaters, with their obsequious natures, etc. 329 Wherein
Moderation is to be used. Expense of coin. Expense of time. 331 Motives to
Hospitality, with a reclaim of our Gentry from the Court to their Country. 332
Three sorts of persons encountered and reproved for their abuse or careless
Expense of Time, the Ambitious. Voluptuous. Miserably-covetous. 339 The
Ambitious man's designs aptly compared to Domitians catching flies, or the
misty conclusions of the deluded Alchymist. 340 The Voluptuous Libertine
mis-imployeth time in two respects; 1 In respect of himself. 2 In respect of
those good creatures, ordained for the use and service of himself. ibid. The
Covetous wretches Treasury, the storehouse of his misery. 342 Nothing so
terrible as the approach of Death to a worldling. 343 Moderation of the
passions of the mind, reduced to two subjects, Joy. Sorrow. 344 The Christians
Joy is no carnal but a spiritual joy. ib. His sorrow is not a sorrow unto
sin, but a sorrow for sin. 345 Eye is made the sense of sorrow, because the
sense of sin. 346 Where in Moderation is to be limited. 347 The occasion of
all immoderation derived from those three troubled Springs: Concupiscence of
the flesh; Concupiscence of the eye; Pride of life. 348 Excellent rules
prescribed for moderating cares of the flesh. 349 The Eye, as it is the
tenderest and subtillest Organ of all others, so should the object whereon it
is fixed, be the purest and clearest of all others. 352 The Eagle an Emblem of
Divine Contemplation. ib. The worldlings earthly honor resembled to the bird
Ibis, her filthy nature. ibid. The desperate fate of an inamored Italian. 353.
lin. 14. The proud Luciferians of this world similized to the Chameleon, who
has nothing in his body but lungs. ibid. lin. 33. Promotion declares what men
be; instanced in Cardinal Woolsey. 354 The power of Prayer expressed by these
three distinct Characters: It is Gods honor; Man's armor; The Devils terror.
Or thus. Gods oblation; Man's munition; The Devils expulsion. Which pious
practice, as it is Gods sacrifice, so should it be man's exercise. 355 An
absolute clozing direction tending to true Moderation. 356 Of the accomplished
end which attends Moderation. 357 The difference betwixt the Ethnicke and
Christian Ethicke, in the opinion of felicity. ibid. The Exercise of
Moderation reduced to a threefold practice; 1 Overco^ming of Anger, by the
spirit of patience. 2 Wantonness, by the spirit of continence. 3 Pride, by the
spirit of lowliness. 361 He who uses his tongue to filthy communication,
incurs a threefold offense. 1 In dishonouring his Maker. 2 In blemishing his
souls image or feature. 3 In ministering matter of scandal to his brother. 363
Wherein true Content properly consists. 364 Those two passions or affections
of desire and fear; desire of having more than we have; fear of losing what
we already have, may be properly said to have a threefold respect: To the
goods or Endowments of Mind. Body. Fortune. 365 No Attendant more tenderly
constant to a Gentleman's reputation, than Moderation. 371 Moderation the best
Monitor in advising and advancing him to the true title of honor. ibid.
PERFECTION. Observat. 8.
NO Perfection in this life absolute, but graduall. page 373 Two considerations
of maine consequence: 1 The foe that assaults us. 2 The friend that assists us.
375 The Christians complete armor. ibid. The first institution of Fasts, with
the fruit thereof. 377 The power of Prayer: with examples of such as were most
conversant in that holy Exercise. ibid. and 378 Circumstances observable in
works of charity and devotion. ibid. Objections and resolutions upon the
ground of Perfection. 381. lin. 16 Of the Contemplative part of Perfection. 382
A Corollary betwixt the Heathen and Christian contemplation. 384 Examples of a
contemplative and retired life. 387 A threefold Meditation of necessary
importance: 1 Worthiness of the soul; 2 Unworthiness of Earth; 3
Thankfulness unto God, who made man the worthiest creature upon Earth. 389 Of
the Active part of Perfection. 391 No contagion so mortally dangerous to the
body, as corrupt company is to the soul. 393 Two especial memorials
recommended to our devoutest meditation. 1 The Author of our creation. 2 The
End of our creation. ib. A fourfold Creation. 394. lin. 8 The fabulous and
frivolous opinions of four Heathen Philosophers, ascribing the creation of all
things to the four Elements. 396. lin. 6 Their arguments evinced by pregnant
testimonies, both of Scriptures and Fathers. ibid. The End of our creation. 397
Singular precepts of Mortification. 399 Idleness begets security, properly
termed the Souls Lethargy. 400 A Christians Ephemerides; or his Evening
account. 401 The Active part of Perfection, preferred before the Co^templative.
403 No ARMORY can more truly deblazon a Gentleman, than acts of charity and
compassion. 404 The Active preferred before the Contemplative, for two
respects; the first whereof has relation to our selves; the second to others.
407, 408 Ignorance is to be preferred before knowledge loosely perverted: with
a comparison by way of objection and resolution, betwixt the conveniences of
Action and Knowledge. 406, 407 Action is the life of man* and Example the
direction of his life. 409. l. 3 Wherein the Active part of Perfection
consists. 410 Active Perfection consists in Mortification of Action and
Affection. Mortification extends it self in a threefold respect, to these
three distinct Subjects: 1 Life. 2 Name. 3 Goods. illustrated with Eminent
Examples of Christian resolution, during the ten Persecutions. 411, 412 Not the
act of death, but the cause of death makes the Martyr. 414 No action, how
glorious soever, can be crowned, unless it be on a pure intention grounded.
415 Mortificat. in respect of name or report, is twofold: 1 In turning our
ears from such as praise us. 2 In hearing with patience such as revile us. 418
Scandals distinguished: and which with more patience than others may be
tolerated. 424, 425, etc. Mortification in our contempt of all worldly
substance: pitching upon two remarkable considerations: 1 By whom these
blessings are conferred on us. 2 How they are to be disposed by us. 427
Vainglory shuts man from the gate of glory. 428 An exquisite connection of the
precedent Meditations. 430 The absolute or supreme end whereto this Actual
Perfection aspireth, and wherein it solely rests. 434 Singular Patterns of
Mortification, in their Contempt of life, and embrace of death. 439, 440 The
reason of his frequent repetition of sundry notable occurrences throughout this
whole Book. 439 The Heart can no more by circumference of the World be
confined, than a Triangle by a Circle filled. 442. lin. 23. Though our feet be
on Earth, our faith must be in Heaven. 445 A pithy Exhortation; A powerful
Instruction; clozing with a persuasive Conclusion. 453, 454, 455 A Character
entitled A Gentleman.
THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
YOVTH.
Argument.
The dangers that attend on Youth; The vanity of Youth, displayed in four
distinct Subjects; Three violent passions incident to Youth; Physic
prescribed, and receipts applied to cure these Maladies in Youth.

YOVTH.
HOwsoever some more curiously than needfully may seem to reason, Observat. 1.
that there be diverse Climactericall or dangerous years in man's time; sure I
am, that in man's age there is a dangerous time, in respect of those
Sinne-spreading Sores which soil and blemish the glorious image of the soul.
And this time is Youth, an affecter of all licentious liberty, a Comicke
introducer of all vanity, The Dangers that attend on Youth.
and the only Heir apparent to carnal security. This it was which moved that
princely Prophet to pray, Lord forgive me the Sins of my youth. Sins indeed;
because the youthful sinner is ever committing, but never repenting, usually
provoking God, but rarely invoking God. This is he who Snuffeth the wind, with
the wild Ass in the desert, being like the Horse or Mule which has no
understanding, by giving Sense preeminence above Reason: and walking in the
fatness of his heart, as one wholly forgetful of God. He may say with the
Psalmist, though in another sense, Vt jumentum factus sum apud te: upon
exposition of which sentence, Vnum est inslar belluae humiliari, aliud est
belluinos inores imitari.
it is laudable (says Euthymius) that in the sight of God we take our selves
as Beasts to show our humility, but not to resemble beasts in ignorance or
brutish sensuality. Many are the dangerous shelfes which menace ruin and
shipwreck to the inconsiderate and improvident Soul, during her sojourning
here in this Tabernacle of clay: but no time more perilous than the heat of
Vicina l^psibus adolesc. ^^a. Hieron.

Omnia in hat aetole juvenescunt vitia.

Eusebius. lib 3.17.


Youth, or more apt to give fuel to the fire of all inordinate desires; being
as ready to consent, as the Devil is to tempt, and most willing to enter parley
with her spiritual enemy upon the least assault. It is reported by Eusebius,
that Saint John meeting a strong young man, of good stature, amiable feature,
sweet countenance, and great spirit, straightway looking upon the Bishop of
that place, he said thus unto him: Christ being witness and before the Church,
I commend unto thee and thy care this young man, to be especially regarded and
educated in all spiritual discipline. Whom when the Bishop had received into
his tuition, and promised that he would perform whatsoever he ought, S. John
again and again gives his charge, and contesteth his fidelity: and afterward
he returns to Ephesus. The Bishop takes the young man home: brings him up as
his own son, keeps him within the limits of his duty, entreats him gently,
and at last baptiseth him, and confirms him. Afterward, upon remitting
something of his care, and giving freer reins to his liberty, the young man
takes occasion to shake off the yoke of tuition, and falls into bad company,
who corrupt him: diverting his course from the path of virtue by these means.
First, they invite him to banquets, then they carry him abroad in the Night,
afterward to maintain their profuser expense, they draw him to theevery, and
so by degrees to greater wickedness, being now made Captain in this theevish
company. At last Saint John returns and says; Go to Bishop, give me my
depositum, which I and Christ committed unto thee in the Church which thou
governest. The Bishop was astonished, thinking that he had deceitfully demanded
some money which he never received, and yet durst scarce distrust the Apostle.
But as soon as Saint John said, I demand the young man and soul of my
brother: the old man hanging down his head, sighing and weeping, said; ille
mortuus est, he is dead. How and with what kind of death, said John? Deo
mortuus est, he is dead unto God, answered the Bishop: Nam nequam and
perditus, and uno verbo Latro evasit: for he is wicked and lost, and in a word
a Thief. Much matter might be collected from this Story, to enlarge the ground
of our Proposition, to wit, what imminent dangers are ever attending on Youth,
and how easy it is by the painted flag of vanity, and sensual pleasure, to
draw him to ruin. For doubtless, many excellent rules of instruction had this
grave Bishop delivered and imparted to his young Pupil: many devout taskes and
holy exercises had he commended to his practice: many prayers full of fervent
zeal had he offered for his conversion: many sighs had he sent, many tears
had he shed to reclaim him from his former conversation. Yet see, how soon
this youthful Libertine forgets those instructions which he had taught him,
those holy taskes which were enjoined him, those zealous prayers which were
offered for him, those unfeigned sighs and tears which were shed for him I he
leaves this aged Father, to become a Robber, he flies from the Temple to the
mountain; he puts off the roabe of truth, and disguiseth himself with the
vizard of theft. And no small thief, but a Leader. Rachel was a thief, for
she stole idols from her father; Iosuah was a thief, seeing he stole grapes
from Canaan; David was a thief, seeing he stole the bottle of water from Saul;
Ionathas was a thief, since he stole honey from the Hive; Iosaba was a thief,
since he stole the infant Ioash. But here was a thief of another nature; one,
whose vocation was injury, profession theevery, and practice cruelty: one,
whose ingratitude toward his reverend Foster-father, merited sharpest censure:
for Bysias the Grecian, Osige^ the Lacedemonian, Bracaras the Theban, and
Scipio the Roman, esteemed it less punishment to be exiled, than to remain at
home with those that were ungrateful for their service. Si ingratum dix^ris,
omnia dixeri^.

Min. Publianus.


So as, it is not only a grief, but also a perilous thing, to have to do
with ungrateful men. And wherein might ingratitude be more fully exemplified
than in this Young Man, whose disobedience to his Tutor, sleighting his advice
that had fostered him, deserved severest chastisement? But to observe^ the
cause of his fall; we shall find how soon those good impressions, which he
had formerly received, were quite razed and defaced in him, by reason of
depraved company: whence we may gather, that Youth, being indeed the
Philosophers rasa tabula, Quisimus, Quinam ^^^mus, in Ephebio constitu^um est.
is apt to receive any good impressure, but spotted with the pitch of vice, it
hardly ever regaines her former purity. Whence we are taught, not to touch
pitch, lest we be defiled: for as that divine Father says, Occasiones faciunt
Latrones. Truth is, the sweetest Apples are the soonest corrupted, and the best
natures quickliest depraved. How necessary therefore, the care and respect
Youth ought to have in the choice and election of his Company, may appear by
this one example, which shows that Society is of such power, as by it Saints
are turned into Serpents, Doves into Devils: for, with the wise we shall
learn wisdom, and with the fool we shall learn foolishness. Dangerous
therefore it is, to leave illimited Youth to it self: yea, to suffer Youth so
much as to converse with it self. Diog. Cyn.
So as, that Greek Sage, seeing a Young man privately retired all alone,
demanded of him what he was doing? who answered, he was talking to himself.
Take heed, quoth he, thou talk not with thine enemy. Lectum non citius
relinquens, quam in Deum delinquens: n^n citius surgens, quam insurgens. The
vanity of Youth displ^yed in four distinct Subjects.
For the natural pronenesse of Youth to irregular liberty is such, as it is
ever suggesting matter of innovation to the Soveraigntie of reason. Now to
reduce these enormities incident to Youth, to certain principal heads, we
will display the Vanity of Youth in these four distinct Subjects* Gate,
Look, Speech, Habit: that by insisting and discoursing on each particular, we
may receive the feature of Lady Vanity portrayed to the life.

IT is strange to observe how the very Body expresses the secret fantasies of
the mind: GATE.
and how well the one sympathizeth with the other. I have seen even in this
one motion, the Gate, such especial arguments of a proud heart; as if the body
had been transparent, it could not have represented him more fully. And I have
wondered, how Man endued with reason, could be so far estranged from that where
with he was endued; as to strut so proudly with feet of earth, as if he were
never to return to earth. But especially, when Youth is employed in ushering
his Mistress he walks in the street as if he were dancing a measure. He
verily imagins the eyes of the whole City are fixed on him, as the very
pattern which they esteem worthy imitation: how nearly then concerns it him
to stand upon his equipage. He walks, as if he were an upright man, but his
sincerity consists only in dimension. He fears nothing so much as some rude
encounter for the Wall, Audacia pro (...) habetur. Salust. in Bell. Cati^.
and so be discredited in the sight of his Idol. Now I would be glad to weane
this Phantasticke from a vein of lightness, and habituate him to a more
generous form. First, he is to know, how that which is most native and least
affect^ve, deserves choicest acceptance. We were not borne to glory in our
feet, the Bases of Mortality: but to walk as children of light, in holiness
and integrity. Safer it were for us, to observe and make use of that, which
the Swan is reported to use, when at any time she glories in the whiteness of
her color, to wit, she reflects her eye upon her black feet, which qualifies
her proud spirit: making her so much the more dejected, as joying before in her
own beauty, she was erected. Excellently was that Emblem of humane frailty
shadowed in the image of Agathocles the Syracusan tyrant, who commanded his
Statue to be composed after this sort: the Head to be of gold, signifying
pureness, the arms of ivory, intimating smoothness, the body of brass,
implying strongnesse, but the feet of earth, importing weakness. Be the
Head-peece never so pure; be it a Diadem of gold we wear, it cannot promise
to us perpetuity; we stand on earthen feet, how may we then stand long,
relying on such weak supporters? Though Nebuchadnezzer strut never so proudly
upon the turrets of his princely Palace, Dan. 4.27.
saying, Is not this great Babel which I have builded? he knows not how soon
he shall be deprived of his glory, 29.
and be enforced to feed with the Beasts of the field, 30.
being as one estranged from his former magnificence. Quid ergo ad nos
consolatio mundi? Let us not glory in mundane vanity, nor repose too much
confidence in these feet of frailty. Seneca.
Sipes interris, men's sit in coelis; Though our foot be on earth, let our mind
be in heaven: knowing, that (as Saint Augustine says) Three cubits of earth
do expect us; and how little or much so ere we possess, this is all that
shall be left us.

THe next Subject we are to treat of in this Display of youthful vanity, LOOK.
is his Look: wherein he is ever noted to show a kind of contempt,
expressing by his eye, what he conceives in his heart. Here is oculatus testis,
an eyewitness to tax him of his pride; disdaining to fix his eye upon the
lower shrubs, as if a reflex on them should derogate from his glory. They that
looked upon Sylla's ring, Plutarch. in vit. Syll.
could not choose but take notice both of Sylla's seal and the treason of
Iugurth; so he that should but eye a proud Look, could not choose but collect
from what heart so disdainful a Look proceeded. I have ever observed, the
most generous to be least affective in this kind: for it is, and has been
ever an inherent propriety in them, to express a generous affability as well
in Look as Speech. August.
The eyes (says a good Father) are members of the flesh, but windows of the
mind; which, Eagle-like, should be ever erected to the beams of
righteousness, and not depressed by any unworthy object of external
baseness. The only Sight of God is the true food and refection of our minds:
Gregor.
we look to be satisfied, but satisfaction we cannot find in any outward
object; much less in contempt of our poor brother, who many times exceeds us
more in worth, than we him in birth. But tell me, Young Gallant, what it is
that moves thee to this contempt of others? Is it thy descent? alas, that is
none of thine; thou derivest that glory from thine Ancestors, whose honor by
thy virtues as it lives, so obscured by thy ignoble life, dies. Yea, recall
to mind how many glorious Houses now lie buried in the grave of oblivion, by
the vicious course of irregular Successors: and again, how many Houses, whose
Names formerly were not so much as known, either raised from others ruin, or
advanced by industrious merit, usurp their glory. Is it thy Riches? Indeed, if
the Philosophers axiom be true; Riches is a sign of eternal glory, there
were some reason to glory in them: but we shall find this glory merely
imaginary, yea a great darkner and blemisher of the internal glory and
beauty of the mind. For as the Moon does never eclypse, but when she is at
the full: so the Mind is never so much obscured, as it is with the
superfluity of Riches. And again, as the Moon is farthest off from the Sun
which gives it light, when it is at the full; so a Man, when he is the fullest
of Riches, is farthest off from that equity and justice, which ought to give
him light in all his proceedings. And therefore, he might do well herein to
imitate the Fly, which puts not her feet in the great mass of honey, but
only takes and tastes with her tongue so much thereof as serves her turn,
and no more, lest by doing otherwise, she might remain taken and drowned
therein. Yea, if we should but reflect and take a view of certain Ethnicks,
whose ^dmirable contempt of Riches eternized them, we should observe what
inimitable continency was in them, and what an Hydropticke thirst of avarice
remains as yet unquenched in us. And though we must live according to Laws,
and not to Examples, yet Cicero held that naught could be taught without
example; wherefore, to enforce this argument further, we will here produce
certain Heathens, who contemned Riches so much, as being offered, yea
obtruded, they would not accept them. Anacharses refused the treasure sent him
by Croesus: Anacreontes refused the treasure sent him by Polycrates: and
Albionus refused the treasure sent him by Antigonus. The like moderation we
read in Fabius Maxim. Crates, Mimus, and most of the Greek Philosophers. This
indifferency toward Fortune, is excellently described by the sententious
Seneca, concluding, Nihil eripit fortuna, De tranq. an.
nisi quod ipsa dedit. To insist on more examples, were to enlarge this branch
too much; we will therefore shut them all up with that divine observation of
the wise Simonides; who being asked once, whether Virtue or Riches were of more
reputation, made answer, That the virtuous did more frequent the doors of the
rich, than the rich the virtuous: Thence inferring, that Wealth was a great
nourisher of Vice, Quo altior in divitiis, eo cop^ostor in vitiis.
and Poverty of Virtue; or rather implying, how those who are richest are
oft-times the retchlest, being ev^r with vices more infected, who are to
highest fortunes advanced. Wherefore I assure me, thou will not glory in
riches, for they deprave the Soul, which should be in the Body, Ber. de inter.
Dom.
like a Queen in her Palace. Whence then proceeds this haughty Look?
perchance thou will object, that thou art a man of Place; admit thou be: is
there nothing thou can find to express the eminence or greatness of thy
Place, to which thou art called, save a disdainful or surly Look, ^
neglectfull or scornful countenance, contemptuously thrown upon thy
inferior? Surely, if such an one thou be, how great so ere thou be, I will
admire rather thy Seat than thy Self: and conclude with Aristippus, A stone
sits upon a stone. These are they, at whom our Modern Poet glanced pleasantly,
when he says: "They dare not smile beyond a point,
for fear t'unstarch their Look.
So punctual and formal they are, as besides a kind of formal and
phantasticke humor they are nothing: or to express them better; They think
it a derogation to honor, to converse with baseness; They show a great deal
of peremptory command in an awful Look, imagining it a sufficient argument of
greatness, for Midas Ass to have Minos countenance: For thus has Time drawn
out their forms to me,
They be and seem not, seem what least they be.
Since then neither Descent, for that is derived from others; nor riches,
aptest to deprave us of all others; nor place, being worst expressed in
glorifying our selves and contemning others; should move us to put on the
countenance of disdain to our inferiors: we are to conclude, that Humility,
as it opens the gate unto glory, so Affability, a virtue right worthy of every
generous mind, cannot be better planted than in the eyes, those Sentinels
which guard us, those two Lights which direct us, those adamantine Orbs which
att^act affection to us. M^^am. 1.
A face erected, first to man was given,
T'erect his eyes unto the King of heaven.
Let not then any other object entertain it, at least, not retain it: if they
be to be employed in any worldly object, let them be employed in contemplating
his works who made the world; for all other objects are but mere vanity and
affliction of spirit.

SPEECH.
THe third Subject we are to discourse of, is Speech; a propriety wherein Man
is distinguished from other creatures: yea, the only means to preserve
society among humane creatures. Sine loq ^^la non potest sla^e societas.
Ar^st. Aug. de Magist.
Quant^meliu^ est docere quam loqui, tanto melior est quam verba locutio, says
S. Augustine: By how much better it is to teach than to speak, by so much
better is Speech than words. Here this learned Father makes a maine difference
betwixt Speech and Words: which distinction may be properly applied to the
argument whereof we now treat. The rash Young man, who uses no guard to his
mouth, nor no gate of circumstance unto his lips, Psalm. 141.3.
inureth himself to many words, but little Speech. Now to define Speech, it is
nothing else than an apt composing, and an opportunate uttering of words;
whence it is said, Words spoken in season or opportunity, Prou. 25.11.
are like apples of gold with pictures of silver. And herein is Youth many
times blameworthy, who will profess himself a Speaker, before he know what to
speak; yea, putting his oar in every man's boat, admits no conference, no
treaty, no discourse, how transcendent soever, but he will be a Speaker:
though it oft-times move some wise Phocion to say to this jangling Pithias, In
vit. Phoc.
Good God, will this fool never leave his babbling? Aristotle debating of the
convenience and propriety of discourse before Alexander, In lib. desecr.
secret.
maintained that none were to be admitted to Speak, but either those that
managed his wars, or his Philosophers which governed his house. Observe here
what strictness was imposed even upon Heathens, to restrain them from too
much liberty of Speech, only such being admitted to speak, whose approved
judgment in military or philosophical discourse might worthily be said to
deserve attention. Two reasons why Young men were not admitted to deliver their
opinions in public assemblies.
Diverse reasons of no small consequence might be here produced, why Young men
were not to give their opinions in any matter of State in public places; but
we will reduce them to two. The first whereof may be imputed to their rashness
in resolving; the second to a passionate hotnesse in proceeding. For the first,
to wit, rashness in resolving: it is the property of Youth without
premeditation to resolve, and without counsel to execute. Now as it possible
any good effect should succeed from such unsteadie grounds? Yes, you will say;
some are of that present and pregnant conceit, as a matter is no sooner
imparted, than they apprehend it: and for Speech, diverse have had such
excellent gifts, as they would show more native eloquence in a Speech presently
composed, than upon longer preparation addressed. Did not Tiberius better in
any Oration extempore, than premeditate? Have not many in like sort, as if
secretly (...).
inspired, expressed and delivered abundance of profound learning upon the
present? It is true, yet are we not hence to collect that premeditation is
fruitless, that rash and inconsiderate resolves are to be admitted, or Young
men's advice, which is for most part grounded on opinionate arrogancy, (...),
not (...), secundum opinionem, non secundum veritatem, should be authenticke.
For admit Young men were eloquent, yet foolish eloquence (which must needs be
in unseasoned Youth) is as a sword in a mad-mans hand, Pic. M^rand in epist. ad
H^r^ol.
it cannot but hurt much; being first, apt to persuade, and likewise by
delivering dangerous matter, no less prompt to depra^e the ear that is
persuaded. The second reason which we observed, why Youth was not to give his
opinion ^n any public place, was his hotnesse in proceeding. It is intolerable
for these Young-heads to be opposed: they are deaf to reason, Neque locus,
neque amious quisqua^ teget, quem arma non texerint. Salust. in Bell. Iugurth.

Ferociam animi, quam habebat vivus, in vultu retinust Catilina Salust. in
Conjur. Ca^il.


as if opinion had possessed them of purpose to oppose reason. This appeared in
those violent attempts of Catiline, Cethegus, Lentulus, and their factious
adherents; who, though privately cautioned and friendly advised by such, whose
long experienced love and fidelity assured them of their unfeigned amity yet
rather than they would lose the opportunity of their aims, all counsel must
be rejected, and their own private opinions (without ground of reason)
embraced. But to come nearer them in our discourse: these Young-blouds use
rather, Catiline-like, to speak much and do little, than Iugurth-like, to
speak little, and do much. Salust.
Of all Innes, they love not that of Harparates, with the sign of the finger
on his mouth. They are unmeasurably passionate in any argument, and so nailed
to their own opinion, as conceit transports them above reason, and leaves no
place for contradiction. It is commonly said, Law, Logic, and the Sw^tzers
may be hired to fight for any one.
that Law, Logic, and the Switzers, may be hired to fight for any one; and
we have found out one that will match them. Now you have received the
character of his Speech, I would labor to reclaim him from his error; which
to effect the better, he must know, that being a Gentleman, (for to such an one
chiefly do I direct my discourse) he can asperse no greater imputation on
Gentry, than in exercising his tongue in fruitless and frivolous discourse, or
spending his breath in useless or needless contention. The tongue (as one
observes) is a small member: Blos.
but very glibbery and proane to ruin: apt it is to rebel, if not restrained,
prompt to innovate, if not confined. But of all the sallies or excursions which
are made by the tongue, none in my conceit less beseeming a Gentleman, than in
giving reins to passion, to slave himself to illimited fury: much more profit
should he find in expostulating with passion, recalling to mind that saying
of Archytas so much commended; who being angry with one of his hindes, said; O
how would I have beaten thee, had I not been angry with thee! Where two meek
men meet together, their conference (says Bern^rd) is sweet and profitable;
where one man is meek, it is profitable; where neither, it proves pernicious.
May your Speech, (...). Basil. Virtus maxima, in mole minima.
(Gentlemen) be so seasoned, as it may relish of discretion: rather learn the
art of silence, than to incur the opinion of rashness: for the one seldom
gives argument of offense, but the other ever. Speak, but not with affectation,
for that gives a better relish to the ear, than to the conceit: Speak, but
not in assentation, for that is mercenarie, and seems better in the mouth of a
slavish Sycophant, than a generous professant: Speak freely, yet with
reservation, lest the Comedians phrase have some allusion to your opennesse;
being so full of chinkes, as secrecy can have no hope to find harbor in your
bosom. As to Speak all that we know, shows weakness; so to impart nothing
of that we know, inferres too much closeness: to observe a mean in these
extremes, choice respect is to be had with whom we converse. If we find him
apt to conceal, we may more safely and freely deliver our mind; but where
suspicion of secrecy ministers argument of distrust, we are to be more
cautelous: for it is great folly to engage our thoughts to the secrecy of him
whom we know not. Worthy commendation was Augustus in this respect, who was so
choice in the election of a friend, to whom he might communicate his privatest
thoughts, as he would employ much time in searching and sifting him, ere he
would retain him. And hence I might take occasion to tax diverse, who are too
ready to open their bosoms unto all encounter^; and yet I must freely
confess, that this credulity ^f theirs, merely proceeds from the goodness
of then nature: for they imagine (such is their easy simplicity) that others
are as secret, as they open. Such is the affability of unexperienced Youth, as
they cannot reserve the secret'st of their thoughts, but must discover them
upon the first view to their first acquaintance: whence Plautus, Benignitas
ejus ut adolescentuli est; wherein he seems to instance Youth, as a pattern
of ingenuous affability, no less ready to utter his thoughts, then his
subtle applauder is to hear them. Much more fruit should he reap by
observing that divine precept of Ecclesiasticus: Thou that art young Speak, if
need be, and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked. Eccles. 22.8, 9.
Comprehend much in few words; in many be as one that is ignorant: be as one
that understands, and yet hold thy tongue. Wherein he proposes an exact rule
to be observed by Youth, even in circumstance, as well as substance of Speech.
Now it may be expected, that I should propose a form for words, as I have
proposed a rule for discourse; but my reply to him, who expects this, shall be
the same which Demosthenes made to Aeschynes the Orator; who having found fault
with Demosthenes, questioning him of certain words which he had pronounced,
something rare and strange, was in this sort answered by him; That the fortunes
of Greece depended not upon them. Only thus much I will add, to reclaim him,
who more curiously then pertinently, insisteth rather on Words than Substance:
that as there is no man but would esteem him for an indiscreet builder, who
prefers the care of his frontispice before the maine foundation, or such an
one for a foolish Painter, who bestows more art upon the varnish than the
picture: so whosoever intends his care rather to find out words than matter,
may be holden for a verbal Rhetorician, but no serious Orator. To be short, if
you will have my opinion touching the use of words: I esteem such to be most
elegant, which are least affected; for there (...) propriety of Speech which
best becomes us; being adorned with such ornaments, as grace our discourse
better than adulterate art, which many times bestows so much time upon
beautifying her self, as she forgets whom she should serve.

WE are now to descend briefly to the last, HABIT.
though not least vanity incident to Youth; and it is Habit or Attire. Wherein
I have not a little wondered, falling now and then into more serious meditation
with my self, how any man, having reflex, by the eye of his Soul, to his
first fall, should glory in these roabs or rags of shame, being purposely
invented to cover his sin. Sin indeed; for had not man sinned, his shame
had never been discovered. Poor Fig Leaves were then the only shelter, to
shroud from shame this miserable sinner. Then was Adam his own Taylour, and
stood not much on fashion, so his nakedness might find a cover. Come then and
hear me, thou perfumed Gallant, whose sense chiefly consists in sent; and
observe how much thou derogat'st from thy own worth, in covering a shell of
corruption with such bravery. All gorgeous Attire is the attire of sin; it
declines from the use for which it was ordained, to wit, Necessity, and
dilates it self purposely to accomplish the desire of vanity. Foreign
Nations, on whose flowrie borders the glorious Sunshine of the Gospel has
not as yet shined, though for their Silks and Sables, none more plenteous or
precious, yet with what indifferency do they use these riches? It may be you
will object, that Art has not as yet shown her cunning amongst them; so as
their neglect of fashion merely proceeds from want of skillful Artists, to
introduce the form or fashion of other Countries (by means of civil
government, more curious and exquisite) to their people. But I shall ^^ov^ and
that by impregnable arguments, how this contempt of pride is naturally planted
in them; yea, with what scorn and derision they look upon other Countries,
usually affected to this delicacie and effeminacie in apparel. Such as have
traveled, and upon exact survey of the Natures of foreign Countries, have
brought the rich fraught of knowledge stored with choicest observations to
their native home, have confirmed this: for they have found such contempt in
other Nations, touching these fruitless vanities, wherein we idolatrize our
own forms, as it struck admiration in them, as their Records, to this day
extant, do apparently witness. To instance some whereof, as the Russian,
Muscovian, Ionian, yea even the barbarous Indian, it may appear with what
reservancie they continue their ancient Habit; loath, it seems, to introduce
any new custom, or to lose their antiquity for any vainglorious or affected
Noveltie: with a joint uniformitie (as it seems) resolved, Tam in cultu
Numinis, quam apparatu corporis, moribus legibusque uti praesentibus, etiamsi
deteriores sint. But leaving them, because we will a while insist upon profane
authorities; let us reflect our dim eyes, bleered with the thick scales of
vanity, to those Divine Sages, whose excellent instructions no less imitable
than admirable, merit our approbation and observation. In vit. Solon.
It is reported by Laertius, that on a time Croesus, having adorned and
beautified himself with the most exquisite ornaments of all kinds, that
either Art, or cost could devise; and sitting on a high Throne, to give more
grace or luster to his person, demanded of Solon if he ever saw a sight more
beautiful? Yes (quoth he) House-cockes, Phesants, and Peacocks; for they are
clothed with a natural splendor or beauty bestowed on them by Nature,
without any borrowed elegancie. The like contempt appeared in Eut^apelus, who
valued the internal beauty of his mind, more than the adulterate varnish of
Art. Besides, he was of this opinion, that he could not do his foe a greater
injury, than bestow on him the preciousest garments he had, to make him
forgetful of himself and his own frailty; whose nature the Poet excellently
describes thus: The Sage Eutrapelus right wisely bade Hor^t. epist. l. 1. Ep.
18.

His foes should have the richest roabes he had,
Thinking he did them harm, himself much good,
"For given, they made him humble, them more proud.
Amongst many profitable Laws enacted by Numa, the Law Vt in exequiis epu^sque
celebrandis n^mioque apparatu corporis, omnis inutilis sumptus prohibeatur.
Sumptuaria conferred no small benefit upon the State public. For by that Law
was prohibited, not only all profuse charge in Funeral expenses, but likewise
the excessive use of Apparel, whereby the Roman state grew in short time to
great wealth, laboring to suppress those vices, which usually effeminate men
the most, to wit, delicacie in fare, and sumptuousness in attire. Now there be
many, I know, who invent fashions merely to cover their deformities, as Julius
Caesar wore a garland of Laurel to cover his baldness withal; and these
seem excusable, but they are not: for did not he who made thee, bestow this
form on thee? Could not he have stamped thee to the most exquisite or absolute
feature, if it had so pleased thy Creator? And will thou now control thy
Maker, and by art supply the defects of Nature? Beware of this evil: I can
prescribe thee a better and safer course, how to rectify these deformities.
Have thou a crooked body? repair it with an upright soul. Art thou outwardly
deformed? with spiritual gra^^^ be thou inwardly beautified. Art thou blind,
or lame, or otherwise maimed? be not there with dejected, for the Bl^nd and
Lame were invited. It is not the outward proportion, but the inward
disposition; not the feature of the face, but the power of grace which works
to salva^^^on. Alcibiades, Plutarch. in vit. Alcibiad.
Socrates scholar, was the best favored Boy in Athens; yet, (to use the
Philosophers words) look but inwardly into his body, you will find nothing
more odious. So as, one compared them aptly (these fair ones I mean) to fair
and beautiful Sepulchers; Exterius nitida, interius faetida; outwardly
hansome, inwardly noisome. Socrates.
Notable was that observation of a learned Philosopher, who professing himself
a Schoolmasters, to instruct Youth in the principles and grounds of
Philosophy, used to hang a Looking-glass in the School where he taught;
wherein he showed to every scholar he had, his distinct feature or physnomy:
which he thus applied. If any one were of a beautiful or amiable countenance,
he exhorted him to answer the beauty and comeliness of his face, with the
beauty of a well-disposed or tempered mind; if otherwise he were deformed, or
ill featured; he wished him so to adorn and beautify his mind, that the
excellency of the one, might supply the defects or deformities of the other.
But thou objectest; How should I express my descent, my place; or how seem
worthy the company of eminent persons, with whom I consort, if I should slight
or disvalue this general-affected vanity Fashion? I will tell thee: thou can
not more generously, I will not say generally, express thy greatness of
descent, place, or quality, nor seem better worthy the company with whom thou
consortest or frequentest, than by erecting the glorious beams of thy mind,
above these inferior things. For who are these with whom thou consortest?
mere triflers away of time, bastard slips, degenerate impes, consumers of
their patrimony, and in the end, (for what other end save misery may attend
them) Hairs to shame and infamy. These (I say) who offer their
Morning-prayers to the Glass, eying themselves (...) till Narcissus-like they
fall in love with their own shadows. Mihi mirabile fit quod non enecentur,
cum tantum onus bajulent.

Clem. Alex. 2. Paedag.


O England, what a height of pride art thou grown to? yea, how much art thou
grown unlike thy self? when, disvaluing thy own form, thou deformest thy
self by borrowing a plume of every Country, to display thy pie-coloured flag
of vanity. What painting, purfling, powdring and pargeting do you use, (ye
Idols of vanity) to lure and allure men to break their first faith, forsake
their first love, and yield to your immodestie? How can you weep for your
sins, Hieron. ad Fur. de vid. Sermon. Tom. 1.
(says Saint Hierome) when your tears will make furrows in your face? With
what confidence do you lift up that countenance to heaven, which your Maker
acknowledges not? Aug. de Christ. fide.
Do not say that you have modest minds, when you have immodest eyes. Death
has entered in at your windows; your eyes are those cranies, those hateful
portells, those fatal entrances, which ( Tarpeia-like) by betraying the
glorious fortress or cittadell of your souls, have given easy way to your
mortal enemy. Vtinam miserrimus ego etc. Tertull. de hab. Mul. cap. 7.
I would I poor wretch (says Tertullian) might see in that day of Christian
exaltation, An cum cerussa, and purpurisso and croco, and cum illo ambitu
capitis resurgatis: No, you stanes to modesty, such a Picture shall not rise
in glory before her Maker. There is no place for you; 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
but for such women as array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness
and modesty, not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel.
But, as becomes women that profess the fear of God. For even after this
manner in time past did the holy women, 1 Pet. 3.5.
which trusted in God, tire themselves. Read, I say, read ye proud ones, ye
which are so haughty, and walk with stretched-out necks, the Prophet Isaiah,
and you shall find your selves described, and the judgment of Desolation
pronounced upon you. Beca^se the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with
stre^ched-out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking (...) minsing as they
go, and making a tinckling with the^^ feet; therefore shall the Lord make the
heads of the daughters of Zion bald, and the Lord shall discover their secret
parts. And he proceeds: In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament of
the slippers, and the calls, and the round tyres. The sweet balls, and the
bracelets, and the bonnets. The tyres of the head, and the sloppes, and the
head-bands, and the tablets, and the eare-rings. The rings and the mufflers.
The costly apparel and the g^ailes, and the wimples, and the crisping-pins.
And the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods and the launes. Now hear
your reward: And in stead of sweet savor, there shall be stink, and in stead
of a girdle, a rent, and in stead of dressing of the hair, baldness, and in
stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning in stead of beauty.
Now attend your final destruction: Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy
strength in the battle. Then shall her gates mourn and lament, and she being
desolate shall sit upon the ground. See how you are described, and how you
shall be rewarded. Enjoy then sin for a season, and delight your selves in the
vanities of Youth: be your eyes the Lures of Lust, your ears the open receipts
of shame, your hands the polluted instruments of sin: to be short, be your
Souls, which should be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, cages of unclean birds;
after all these things, what the Prophet has threatened shall come upon you, and
what shall then deliver you? not your Beauty* for to use that divine Distich
of Innocentius, Tell me thou earthen vessel made of clay,
What Is Beauty worth, when thou must die to day?
Nor Honor; for that shall lie in the dust, and sleep in the bed of earth.
Nor Riches; for they shall not deliver in the day of wrath. Perchance they may
bring you, when you are dead, in a comely funeral sort to your graves, or
bestow on you a few mourning garments or erect in your memory some gorgeous
Monument, to show your vainglory in death, as well as life; but this is all:
Those Riches which you got with such care, kept with such fear, lost with such
grief, shall not afford you one comfortable hope in the hour of your passage
hence; afflict they may, releeve they cannot. Nor Friends; for all they can
do, is to attend you, and shed some friendly tears for you; but ere the
Rosemary lose her color, which stickt the Coarse, or one worm enter the
shroud, which covered the Corpse, you are many times forgotten, your former
glory extinguished, your eminent esteem obscured, your repute darkened, and
with infamous aspersions often impeached. If a man (says Seneca) find his
friend sad, and so leave him, sick without ministering any comfort to him, and
poor without releeving him; we may think such an one goes to jest, rather
than visit or comfort: and such miserable comforters are these friends of
yours. What then may deliver you in such gusts of affliction which assail you?
Conscience; she it is that must either comfort you, or how miserable is your
condition? She is that continual feast which must refresh you; those thousand
witnesses that must answer for you; that light which must direct you; that
familiar friend that must ever attend you; that faithful counselor that must
advise you; that Balm of Gilead, that must renew you; that Palm of peace,
which must crown you. Take heed therefore you wrong not this friend, for as
you use her, you shall find her. She is not to be corrupted, her sincerity
scorns it; -- Prima est haec ul^io, quod se Iudice, ne^o nocens absolvitur.
Iuv. Sat. 13.
She is not to be persuaded, for her resolution is grounded; She is not to be
threatened, for her spirit sleights it. She is aptly compared in one respect to
the Sea; she can endure no corruption to remain in her, but foames, and
frets, and chafes, till all filth be removed from her. By Ebbing and flowing ^s
she purged, nor is she at rest till she be rinsed. (...) ab agro ad
civitatem, August. in enar. sup. 45. Psalm.
a publico ad domum, a domo in cubiculum, etc. Discontentedly she flies from
the Field to the City, from public resort to her private house, from her
house to her chamber; She can rest in no place; Fury dogs her behind, and
Despair goes before. For Conscience being the inseparable glory or confusion
of every one, Bernard. de interdomo. cap. 1.
according to the quality, disposition or dispensation of that Talent which is
given him, for to whom much is given, much shall be required: We are to make
such fruitful use of our Talent that the Conscience we profess may remain
undefiled, the faith we have plighted may be inviolably preserved, the measure
or Omer of grace we have received, may be increased, and God in all glorified.
Which, the better to effect, we are to think how God is ever present in all
our actions; and that (to use the words of Augustine) Whatsoever we do, or
address our selves to do, it is before him that we do, yea whatsoever it be
that we do, he better knows it than we are selves do. An^ Sol^loq. cap. 14
Sen. (...) Lucil.
It was Seneca's counsel to his friend Lucilius, that whenever he went about
to do any thing, he should imagine Cato, or Scipio, or some other worthy Roman
to be in presence. In imitation of so divine a Moral, let us in every action
fix our eye upon our Maker, Whose eyes are upon the children of men; so shall
we in respect of his sacred presence, to which we owe all devout reverence,
Abstain from evil, Tuscul. quaest. lib. 1.
do good, seek peace and ensue it. Such as defiled themselves with sin, by
giving themselves over unto pleasure, staining the Nobility and splendor of
their Souls through wallowing in vice; or otherwise fraudulently, by
usurpation or base insinuation, creeping into Soveraigntie, or unjustly
governing the Commonweal; such thought Socrates, that they went a by-path
separated from the counsel of the ^^ds: but such, as while they lived in their
bodies, ^nitated the life of the gods, such he thought had an ^sie return to
the place from whence they first came. If the Pagan had such a divine conceit
of those, whose approved life represented a certain similitude or resemblance
of God, as he imagined, no glory could be wanting to them, in regard of their
integrity: let us embrace the like opinion, and express such apparent
demonstrations of sanctity, that as we exceed the Pagan in regard of that
precious light we enjoy, so we may exceed him in the conversation of the life
we lead. But how should these painted Sepulchers, whose adulterate shape tastes
of the shop, glorying in a borrowed beauty, ever meditate of these things? How
should their care extend to heaven, whose Basiliske eyes are only fixed on the
vanities of earth? How should that painted blush (that Jewish confection) blush
for her sin, whose impudent face has out-faced shame? Two Loves (says that
learned Bishop of Hippo) make two Cities. Jerusalem is made by the love of
God, but Babylon by the love of the world. Aug. sup Ps^^ 64.
And these are they, who engaged to worldly love, have forsaken their true
love; they have divided their hearts, and estranged their affections from that
Supreme or Sovereign good. O then (Young men) come not near the gates of this
strange woman, Prove. 5.5.
whose feet go down to death, and whose steps take hold on hell. This is the
woman with an Harlots behavior, and subtle in heart. This is she, who has
decked her bed with ornaments, Prove. 7.
carpets and laces of Egypt: and perfuming her Bed with Myrrh, Aloes and
Cynamon. Take heed thou sing not Lysimachus song; (...). Archi^. Ta^ent.
The pleasure of fornication is short, but the punishment of the fornicator
eternal. But of this Subject we are more amply to treat hereafter; only my
exhortation is to Youth, whose illimited desires tend ever to his ruin, that
if at any time it be your fortune to encounter with these infectious ulcers,
these sin-soothing, and soule-soiling Lepers; and they like that whorish woman
in the Proverbs, invite you to their lothed daliance, saying. Come, Prove. 7.18.
let us take our fill of love until the morning: Come, let us take our
pleasure in daliance: that you shake off these vipers at the first assault, and
prevent the occasion when it first offers it self. For know, that which a
devout and learned Father says concerning the dangerous Habit of sin, Aug.
Ser. 44.
is most true: Prima est quasi titillatio delectationis incorde, secunda
consensio, tertium factum, quarta consuetudo. Sin begins with an itch, but
ends with a skar. The first degree begins with delight, the second with
consent, the third with act, and the fourth with custom. Thus Sin by degrees
in men of all degrees, like a broad-spreading tetter, runs over the whole
beauty of a precious soul, exposing the fruits of the spirit to be corrupted
by the suggestion of the flesh. But too far (I fear me) have I digressed
from this last branch, whereof I was to discourse, to wit, of Habit, or Attire:
albeit I have enlarged my self in nothing which may seem altogether
impertinent to our present purpose. For discoursing of the vanity of women
(whose phantasticke Habits are daily Theames in public Theaters) I imagined it
a necessary point to insist upon: partly to dissuade those Sheepainters of this
flourishing Island from so base and prostitute practice. Base, for Festus
Pompeius says, that common and base whores, called Schaenicolae, used dawbing
of themselves, though with the vilest stuff. Partly to bring a loathing of
them in the conceit of all young Gentlemen, whose best promising parts use
often to be corrupted by their enchantments. Nazian. contra ^uli res immudice
comptas.
(...) etc. there is one flower to be loved of women, a good red, which is
shamefastness. Saint Hierom to Marcella says, that those women are matter of
scandal to Christian eyes, Hieron. de exitu Lea.
Quae purpurisso and quibusdam fucis ora oculos^ depingunt. I might here
likewise justly tax such effeminate Youths, whose womanish disposition has
begot in them a love to this hateful profession; but I will only use Diogenes
speech, Lacrt. lib. 6.
which he made to one that had anointed his hairs: Cave ne capitis
suaveolentia vitae maleolentiam adducat. Or that saying he used to a Youth too
curiously and effeminatly dressed: If thou go to men, all this is but in
vain; if unto women, it is wicked. So as, being asked a question of a Young
man, Lacrt. ibid.
very neatly and finely apparelled, he said, he would not answer him till he
put off his apparel to see whether he were a man or woman. There is another
Objection, which I imagine Youth will allege, to prove how expedient it is for
him to be choice or curious in respect of apparel. It gains him more
acceptance and esteem with men of eminent place. But harken how the Apostle
opposes himself to this; reproving such whose judgment consists in the eye
rather than in the brain, proceeding thus: If there come into your company a
man with a gold-ring, and in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor
man in vile raiment, James 2 ^*
and ye have a respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto
him, Sit thou here in a goodly place; 3.
and say unto the poor, Stand thou there, 4.
or sit here under my footstool: Are ye not partial in your selves, and are
become judges of evil thoughts? So as, howsoever these diffident worldlings,
Annulo magis credunt quam animo; Seneca.
It is not the Habit, but the heart which God accepts: yet most acceptable is
that Habit which is not so sumptuous as seemly, not so costly as comely. True
indeed it is, that the popular eye, which cannot distinguish of the inward
beauty, but observes rather what we wear, than what we are, admires
nothing more than the outward Habit; as we may read how much Herod, Act.
12.21, 22.
being arrayed in royal apparel, was applauded by the people, who gave a
shout, (...).
saying, The voice of God, and not of man. But that All-seeing and
All-searching ear of the Divine Majesty sees not as man sees. He prefers
L^zarus rags before Dives roabes. Though the one be clothed in purple and fine
linen, and the other seem despicable in the eye of the world, in respect of
his Nakedness; yet, Aug.
mortua necessitate, peribunt opera necessitatis: the one is translated to
glory boundless, the other to misery endless: for this sorrow which he here
felt, ended when he did end; but the joy which he obtained, exceeded all end.
Thus far have I labored to answer all such objections as might be proposed
in defense of this generall-approved vanity, concluding; Quod peccata Sericea
teterrima sunt vitia; No sins like to Silken sins, for they ever crave
impunitie, the foster-mother of all impiety. I intend yet to proceed in
decyphering the lightness of Youth, Three violent passions incident to Youth.
by expressing three grand Maladies incident to Youth; whereof I purpose to
dilate particularly, to move the Young man to be more cautelous of his ways,
in the mazie Labyrinth of this life. These three (for all the rest may be
reduced to them) are comprehended under Lust, Ambition, Revenge: of which
briefly, according to our former Method, we purpose here to entreat.

SO exposed is Youth to sense, LUST.
and so much estranged from the government of reason; as it prosecutes with
eagerness whatsoever is once entertained with affection. This might appear in
the ruins of Troy, occasioned by the unlawful love of Paris; where the
violent intrusion and usurpation of another Bed, brought an irreparable fall
to the Trojans. Some have given two reasons, Two reasons why Youth is ^aturally
subject to this ill^mited passion.
why Youth is more subject to this illimited passion, than any other age. The
first is, that natural heat or vigor, which is most predominant in Youth,
provoking him to attempt the greatest of difficulties, rather than suffer the
repulse where he affects. The second is, want of Employment: which begets this
distemperature; whence the Poet: Take away Idleness, and without doubt,
Cupids bow breaks, and all his Lamps go out.
This want of employment was it, which moved Aegistus to show himself more
familiar with Clytemnestra, than stood well with his honor; for had he ranked
himself with those valiant Greeks, whose resolute adventures gained them
general esteem, he had prevented occasion, and purchased himself equal
renown by his valor, as by vaiue expense of time he incurred dishonor.
Witty and proper was that elegant invention of Lucian, who faining Cupid to
invite the gods to an amorous feast, prevailed with all of them to give way to
Love, till he came to Pallas; but she was found conversing with the Muses, and
would admit of no time to enter parley with Cupid. True it is, that exercise
draws the mind from effeminacie, as remisnes^e feeds the desire, and adds
fuel to unlawful heat. And no less occasion gives wanton discourse, or
Lascivious Books to the enraged affections of distempered Youth: so as, much
more blessed were the State, if restraint were made of composing or publishing
such Subjects, where every leaf instructs Youth in a new lesson of folly.
Alcaeus, a man of good reputation and general observance in the Commonwealth;
what toys wrote he of the love of young men? All the writings of Anacreon, are
only of love. But most of all other, Rheginus even burned with love, as
appears by his writings. Yea even Philosophers (and that by the counsel and
authority of Plato, whom therefore Dicearchus did worthily reprehend) became
the commenders and honourers of love. Such Discourses should be thrown to the
darkest corner of our studies, as that of Ovids was by Augustus, which tend to
corrupt Youth, and divert his mind from the exercise of virtue. But alas; to
what height of licentious liberty are these corrupter times grown? When that
Sex, where Modesty should claim a native prerogative, gives way to foments of
exposed looseness; by not only attending to the wanton discourse of immodest
Lovers, but carrying about them (even in their naked Bosoms, where chastest
desires should only lodge) the amorous toys of Venus and Adonis: which Poem,
with others of like nature, they hear with such attention, peruse with such
devotion, and retain with such delectation, as no Subject can equally relish
their unseasoned palate, like those lighter discourses. Yea (which has struck
me to more admiration) I have known diverse, whose unriper years half assured
me, that their green Youth had never instructed them in the knowledge, nor
brought them to conceit of such vanities, excellently well read in those
immodest Measures; yea, and prompt enough to show proofs of their reading in
public places. I will not insist upon them, but leave them, to have their
names registered amongst those infamous Ladies; Semphronia, Scribonia,
Clitemnestra, Cleopatra, Faustina, Messalina, whose memories purchased by
odious Lust, shall survive the course of time; as the memory of those famous
Matrons, Octavia, Porcia, Caecilia, Cornelia, shall transcend the period of
time. To express what especial motives tend most to increase of this passion,
I think it not amiss: because I hold it necessary to propose the cause,
before we come to cure the effect. For I think, according to the opinion of
Socrates, that then my instructions have brought forth good fruit, when by them
any one shall be provoked to apply his disposition to the knowledge and
practice of virtue. An especial motive tending to the increase of this Passion.

Venus in vinis.


Which, the better to effect, you shall know, that there is no one Motive more
generally moving, or enforcing to an eager pursuit of our immoderate
affections, than curious or luscious fare, delicious liquors, which might
appear (if we should have recourse to History) in those prodigal feastings of
Anton. and Cleopatra: Nunquam e^o ebr^um pu^^bo cas^um. Hi^ron.
where no cost was spared to give more free course to lascivious desires. To
prevent this, (as may be probably gathered) Greece in her flourishing estate,
restrained women both public and private access to Banquets: and kinsmen
kissed their kinswomen, to know whether they drunk wine, Plato.
or no, and if they had, to be punished by death, Plutarch.
or banished into some Island. Plutarch says, that if the Matrons had any
necessity to drink wine, either because they were sick or weak, the Senate
was to give them license; and not then in Rome neither, but out of the City.
Macrob.
Macrobius says, that there were two Senators in Rome chiding, and the one
called the others wife an Adulieresse; and the other his wife a Drunkard; and
it was judged that to be a Drunkard was more infamy. Here we may collect what
strictness, even the Heathen used, to observe a moral course, and to repress
such inordinate motions, as most commonly invade the eminent'st States, when
long peace has rockt her people asleep, snorting in the downebed of
security. Sure I am, as there is nothing which brings either public or
private State to a remissness of government sooner than peace or plenty; so
nothing effatuates the understanding of man more, than excess in meat or
drink, subjecting the intellective part to the bondage of Sense. For what may
be the discourse of Epicurists, but lascivious, begot on excess of fare
curious and luscious? These are dilating ever on the rape of Ganimedes, Lais in
Euripides. Beauty is their object, and Vanity their subject. White teeth,
rolling eyes, a beautiful complexion (an exterior good) being that which
Euryala praised, when she washed the feet of Ulysses, namely, Gentle speech,
and tender flesh. Thus are their tongues tipped with vanity, their desires
aiming at sensuality, and their delights engaged to fleshly liberty. Amongst
the Romans, Venus or Cous was the best chance at dice: And no chance, (till
some heavy mischance over-take them) more happy in their opinion, than to
receive a loving smile or cheerful aspect from their terrestrial Venus. Some
Countries I have read of, whose natural baseness, being given to all avarice,
induced them to dis-esteeme all respects in this kind, and to make merchandise
of their women's honor. Such are the women of Sio reported to be, who are
reputed for the most beautiful Dames of all the Greeks in the world, and
greatly given to Venery. Their Husbands are their Pandors, and when they see
any stranger arrive, they will presently demand if he would have a mistress:
and so they make whores of their own wives, and are contented for a little
gain to wear horns: such are the base minds of ignominious Cuckolds. Here is
a dangerous I Will for our amorous Gallant, who makes his Travel (with grief I
speak it) too often the ruin of himself and his estate. Happy are those (but
too few are those) who with wise Ithacus stop their ears to these
Soule-tainting and Sintempting Sirens. Yet some there are, and some there have
been ever (I persuade me) whose noble conquests over themselves and their
own desires, have seconded, if not surpassed those many conquests which they
achieved in foraine Nations. As the admirable continency of Alexander the
Great, Q. Curt. lib. 3.
in sparing Darius wife and his three daughters. The continency of Scipio
during the space of four and twenty years, wherein his prosperous exploits
could purchase him no more glory, than in the besieging and taking of a City
in Spain, he gained him renown, by repressing his flame of Lust, when a
beautiful Maid was brought him: restoring her with a great reward to
Allancius, a Celtiberian Lord, to whom she was espoused. No less worthy was
that part of Marius, who having Sylla's wife and sisters in his power, sent
them nobly, unattempted. An example of like continency might be instanced in
Solomon the Magnificent, toward the fair Irene.
Greek; whom, albeit he entirely loved, yet to show unto his Peers, a
princely command of himself and his affections; as he had incensed them before
by loving her, so he regained their love by sleighting her; whence the Poet:
With that He drew his Turkish Symeter,
Which he did brandishore the Damsells head;
Demanding of such Ianizers were there,
If It were not pity shee'sd be slaughtered?
Pity indeed; but I perforce must do
That which displeases me, to pleasure you.
Many such instances, ancient and modern Histories afford, but I must not
insist on each particular, lest I should enlarge my self too much in this
Branch. My exhortation shall be to such, whose unmellow years crave
instruction, that they would betake themselves to employment: for Idleness
makes of men, women, of women, beasts, of beasts, monsters. And amongst
employments, ever mix such Readings as may minister matter, either Divine, or
Moral, to allay the heat of this distempered passion. We read of the Roman
Stilpho, that albeit he was naturally addicted to all incontinencie, yet by
reading certain precepts of Moral Philosophy, What rare effect the precepts
of Moral Ph^losophie wrought in Heathen men.
he became an absolute commander of his own affections. Hate to consent to
that, which so transformes man, as he wholly loses the true title of man, and
becomes merely bestiall. Nos qui accepimus rationis lucem communem cum
Angelis, non transiamus vitam in silentio cum pecoribus. Thou art beautified
with an Angelical feature; let it not participate of any inferior creature.
To be short, art thou a Gentleman? bear that posture still: stain not a
native glory with an infamous blemish. ^tiam seris ac B^b^^^ (...).

Ambr^s lib. 1. d^ ^^rah^m.


This vice of all others, derogates most from Honor: for we commonly say, Such
whose lightness incurres scandal, to have lost their Honor. O let not the
Honor of a generous mind suffer eclypse, for a minutes pleasure! Lais asking
of Demosthenes so much for one Nights-lodging, he presently replied: Vid. A^l.
Gell. i^ N^ct. Att^^s.
I will not buy repentance at so dear a rate. Dearer is the rate of shame,
than of Come. Prize Honor at that estimate, as the height of pleasure may
never have power to surprise it. Canna, wife to Synattus, whom one Synoris, of
greater authority than Synattus, loved: making no small means to obtain her
love, yet all in vain; supposed the readiest way for effecting his desire to
be the death of her Husband, which he performed. This done, he renewed his
suit, to which she seemingly consented. But being solemnly come into the
Temple of Diana for celebrating the Nuptials, she had a sweet potion ready,
which she drunk to Synoris, wherewith they both were poisoned, to revenge her
Husbands death. Here is a Pagan pattern of inimitable continency; who rather
than she would consent to contract Marriage with her Husbands foe, disvalued
all future hope of preferment, yea embraced Death, as a happy Agent of her
intended revenge. The wise (says that sententious Philosopher) may gather gold
out of dung; Seneca.
which may be thus applied. The wise Christian, may cull excellent flowers from
an Ethnicke garden: for the Envious man he is the Spider, which sucks poison
from the fragrant'st and freshest Flowers. I will conclude this point, and
entreat the generous affected, whose glory should be Virtues Booty, and whose
best beauty to be enriched by her bounty; to make Virtue their Prize, being so
praiseworthy of her self, as she needs no outward praise. To purchase which
incomparable blessing, I could wish, Gentlemen, that your resort to eminent
places be more spare, till you find in your selves an aptness to resist, if
any unchaste motion make assault. Yet good it were not to presume, upon one
single trial: for the disposition may be more temperate at one time than
another; and the assault also more perilous. -- Rara est concordia forma,
A^que pudicitiae. Iuven. Sat. 10.
To court Beauty is an enterprise of danger: for some I have known, who upon
their access to Beauty, have been freemen, who upon their return, became
slaves. But you will object; to vanquish where there is no assault made, is a
weak conquest; True, but to play with the candle till we suffer our wings to
be cing'd, is a greater folly. I would not hazard my honor upon those terms,
as by affronting temptation, to be caught. To conclude this Branch, as the
substance of the Soul is pure, so this mass of flesh is corrupt: stain not
the purity of the former, by conversing with the latter: for to parley with so
subtle an enemy, is to give way to his policy. Observing these, you shall go
to your graves with Honor; not to the graves of Lust, the Sepulchers of shame,
and receptacles of corrupted love. We will now descend to the second Malady
incident to Youth; Numb. 11.34.
that Eagle-soaring passion, Ambition.

AMBITION
THose who are affected to this, use to say with Tiridates in Tacitus: Sua
retinere, privatae domus, de alienis cer^are regia laus est. These can never
confine themselves to their own, raising their hopes above possibility: but
are building airie castles, of purpose to confront greatness. We shall never
hear them talk of any subject save soveraigntie or dominion. One termed an
Empire, a monstrous and untamed beast; and so may this Passion be well defined:
Nullus enim magnisc^^eris labor --

I^^ en. Sal. 14.


whose aim is only to purchase glory, albeit her aims be planted on
indirectest terms. We read how Pa^sanias killed Philip of Macedon only for
fame or vainglory: so did Herostratus burn the Temple of Diana at Ephesus,
with this resolution: because he could not by any act of renown eternize his
memory, he would gain him fame, though by an act of infamy. How violent these
Ambitious heads are, and have been ever, there is scarce any State which has
not felt: where civil wars have menaced no less danger to the State, than
foreign powers; private factions, than open hostility. In some likewise, so
deep impression has Ambition wrought, as the Envy which they conceive at
others greatness, deprives them of all rest: This appeared in Themistocl^es,
who walked in the Nightime in the open street, because he could not sleep:
The cause whereof, when some men did enquire, he answered, that the triumph of
Miltiades would not suffer him to take his rest. Tusc. l. Quaest. lib. q^art.
The like height of Ambition showed Alexander, weeping bitterly to see his
father win so fast before him, fearing nothing should remain for him to
conquer. Now, how naturally Youth is affected to this illimited motion, may be
observed even in usual games; where Youth, rather than he will endure the
foil, exposes himself to all encounters. It is glory which he aims at, and
before he lose it, he will hazard himself for it. His Prize is his praise: he
values nothing more than to get him a name, which may brute his renown, and
gain him respect with his Dearest. His disquiet, (for what is Ambition, but a
Distraction of the mind?) as to affect that best, which does afflict him most.
Augustus had broken sleeps, and used to send for some to pass the Night away,
in telling tales, or holding him with talk. See the misery of Ambitious
spirits, whose ends are without end, limiting their desires to no other period
then sole soveraigntie. Their ayrie thoughts (like Icarus wings) are ever
mounting, till the Sun, which they threatened, -- tolluntur in altum,

Vt lapsu gr^vi^reruam --


dissolve them. Inferior taskes they as much slight, as Eagles do Flies:
they love not to stoop to baseness, when many times lowest fortunes
entertain them with no less discontent, than despair can force them to. And
in their lowest ebb, when Hope forsakes them, and their nearest (like Tiberius
friends) shrink from them, and no comfort remains, save expectance and
sufferance of all extremities; you shall hear them upbraid Prince or State;
relating (with much vainglory) what dangers they have undergone for them.
Instance whereof, even in these latter times, might be produced; as in that
Ambitious Frenchman, the brave Byron, who seeing no way but one, burst out
into these violent extremes: I have received three and thirty wounds of my
body, to preserve it for him, and for my reward, he takes my head from my
shoulders: He now quenches the torch in my blood after he has used it. This
is the condition of high spirits, whose aims were transcendent, to close up
their Tragical scene with a vainglorious boast of what they have done: little
considering, how their Country might lawfully exact and expect as much as was
in them to perform, a^^ they still debtours to her, because they had their
being from her. Yet see (though sometimes they stand upon terms of resolution,
desiring to die standing;) when the sentence of death is pronounced, and all
future hope extinguished, they will be (as that great Frenchman was) Supple as
a glove: presenting their heads ^s willingly to the sword, as Agis did his unto
the halter. It is strange to note, how these men walk in clouds, imagining
themselves most secure, when imminencie of peril assures them nothing less.
The reason whereof may seem to be this; they flatter themselves in their
vanity, as Pigmalion with his Image, or Narcissus with his Shadow; reposing
more confidence in their own valor; and the aid, which ( Themistocles or
Pausanias-like) they contract abroad, linking and uniting themselves with
foreign powers, than on all the information of friends, or the persuasions of
a loyal and uncorrupted heart. Hen. the fourth whose Name deserves to be
enrouled among the ancient Worthies.
But these (as that Heroic Prince noted) must bow or break: be their persons
never so hopeful, or directions behovefull to the State, they must be curbed,
or the State endangered. Their propriety is ever to swim in troubled waters:
nor can they endure to be mated. Though their aims be to perpetuate their
greatness, yet those Beasts, which are bred about the River Hypani^, Aristot.
and live but one day, may oft-times compare with them for continuance: whence
the Poet says excellently, out of his own observation: Much have I seen, yet
seldom seen I have,
Ambition go gray headed to his grave.
There is nothing which the Ambitiou^ man hates so much as a corrivall; he
hopes to possess all, and without a sharer. But so indirect are his plots, and
so insuccessive their end, as he finds to his great grief, that the promise
of security had no firm foundation to ground on: nor his attempts that issue
they expected.

Now Gentlemen, you, whose better parts aim at more glorious ends, so confine
your desires to an equal mean, that mounting too high bring you not to an
irreparable fall. Chrysostom. in 2 Corinthians.
We are borne indeed (as that divine Father says) to be Eagles, and not
Iayes, to fly aloft, and not to seek our food on the ground: but our Eagle eyes
are to be fixed on the Sun of righteousness, not on temporal preferments.
We are to soar to the Tower from whence comes our help. For it is not
lifting up a man's self God likes, but lifting up of the spirit in prayer. Here
are wings for flying, without fear of falling: for other aims, they are but
as feathers in the air; they delude us, howsoever they seem to secure us. But
I hear some young Gentleman object, that it is a brave thing to be observed in
the eye of the world; to have our persons admired, our selves in public
resorts noted, yea our Names dispersed! indeed I grant; He who consists on
nothing more than shows;
Thinks it is brave to hear, Lo there he goes!
But such, whose solid understandings have instructed them in higher studies,
as much disvalue popular opinion, or the Corkie conceits of the vulgar, as the
Nobility scorns to converse with any thing unworthy it self. Their
greatness has correspondence with goodness: for esteem of the world, as in
respect of their own worth they deserve it, so in contempt of all outward
glory they disvalue it. Quantumcunque le dejeceris, humilior non eris Christo.
Come then (ye nobly affected Gentlemen;) would ye be heirs of honor, and
highly reputed by the Highest? Resemble the Nature of the Highest: who humbled
himself in the form of Man, Hieron.
to restore miserable man; vilifying himself, to make man like himself. It is
not, believe it, to shine in grace or esteem of the Court, which can ennoble
you: this glory is like glass, bright but brittle: and Courtiers (says one)
are like Counters; Plutarch.
which sometime in account go for a thousand pound, and presently before the
Count be past, but (...) single penny. It is more glory to be in the Courts
of the Lord, to purchase esteem with him, whose judgment never erres, and
whose countenance never alters. It is reported by Commine, in his French
Annals, that Charles, whom he then served, was of this disposition, that he
would make assay of the greatest matters, revolving in his mind how he might
compass them: yea perchance (says he) assayes far above the strength of
man. Semper hia^, semper tenuem qua v^s^^tur auram reciprecavit Chamaeleon.

Et ^ utat faciem vari^s sumitque colores, praeter rubrum and candidum.


See the picture of an Ambitious spirit, loving ever to be interessed in
affairs of greatest difficulty. Camelion-like on subtle air he feeds,
And vies in colors with the checkerd meeds.
Let no such conceits transport you, lest repentance find you. It is safer
choosing the Middle-path, than by walking or tracing uncouth ways, to stray in
your journey. Alciat.
More have fallen by presumption, than distrust of their own strength. And
reason good; for such who dare not rely on themselves, give way to others
direction; whereas too much confidence, or selfe-opinionate boldness will
rather choose to err, and consequently to fall, than submit themselves to
others judgment. Nil tam metuens, quam ne dubi^a^e aliqu^ de re videretur.
Of this opinion seemed Velleius the Epicurean to be, of whom it is said; that
in confidence of himself he was so far from fear, as he seemed not to
doubt of any thing. A modest or shamefast fear becomes Youth better: which
indeed ever attends the best or affablest natures. Such will attempt nothing
without advice, nor assay ought without direction: so as their ways are
secured from many perils, which attend on inconsiderate Youth. My conclusion
of this point shall be in a word; that neither the rich man is to glory in his
riches, the wise man in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength: for
should man consider the weakness and many infirmities whereto he is hourly
subject he would find innumerable things to move him to sorrowing, but few or
none to glory in. Again, if he should reflect to the consideration of his
Dissolution, which, that it shall be, is most certain, but when it shall be,
most uncertain: he would be forced to stand upon his guard with that
continual fear, as there would be no empty place left in him for pride. This
day one proud, as prouder none,
May lie in earth ere day be gone.
What confidence is there to be reposed in so weak a foundation; where to
remain ever is impossible, but quickly to remove, Petrarch. de remed. utrius
fort.
most probable? Then (to use Petrarchs words) be not afraid though the house,
the Body be shaken, so the Soul, the guest of the Body, fare well: for
weakening of the one adds for most part strength to the other. And so I come
to the last passion or perturbation incident to Youth.

REvenge, REVENGE.
is an intended resolve arising from a conceived distaste either justly or
unjustly grounded. This Revenge is ever violent'st in hot bloods, who stand so
much upon terms of reputation, as rather than they will pocket up the least
indignity, they willingly oppose themselves to extremest hazard. Now this
unbounded fury may seem to have a twofold relation: either as it is proper
and personal; or popular and impersonall. Revenge proper or personal, arises
from a peculiar distaste or offense done or offered to our own person; which
indeed has ever the deepest impression. Which may be instanced in Menelaus and
Paris; where the honor of a Nuptial bed, the Law of Hospitality, the
professed league of Amity, were jointly infringed. Or in Antonie and Octavius;
whose intestine hate grew to that height, as Antonies Angel was afraid of
Octavius Angel. Which hatred, as it was fed and increased by Fulvia, so was it
allayed and temp^red by Octavia: Appian. Alexan.
though in the end it grew irreconciliable; ending in blood, as it begun with
lust. Revenge popular or impersonall, proceeds extrinsecally, as from
factions in Families, or some ancient grudge hereditarily descending, betwixt
House and House, or Nation and Nation. When Annibal was a child, and at his
fathers commandment, he was brought into the place where he made sacrifice;
and laying his hand upon the Altar, swore, that so soon as he had any rule in
the Commonwealth, he would be a professed enemy to the Romans. Whence may be
observed, how the conceit of an injury or offense received, works such
impression in that State or Kingdom where the injury is offered, as Hate
lives, and survives the life of many ages, crying out with those incensed
Greeks; Homer. in Iliad. and Polybius apud Cu^i nem, lib. 3.
The time will come when mighty Troy must fall,
Where Priams race must be extinguished all.
But we are principally to discourse of the former Branch, to wit, of proper
or personal Revenge: wherein we shall observe sundry Occurrents right worthy
our serious consideration. That term (as I said before) usually called
Reputation, Facili redimunt qui sanguine famam. Martial. Epigr.
has brought much generous blood to effusion: especially amongst such, Qui
magis sunt soliciti vani nominis, quam propriae salutis: Prizing vainglory
above safety, esteem of valor above security of person. And amongst these,
may I truly rank our Martial Duellists, -- Impium est mortis statum
praeripere tempus.
who many times upon a Tavern quarrel are brought to shed their dearest
blood, which might have been employed better in defense of their Country, or
resistance of proud Infidels. And what is it which moves them to these
extremes; but (as they seem to pretend) their Reputation is engaged, their
Opinion in the eye of the world called in question, if they should sit down
with such apparent disgrace? But shall I answer them? The opinion of their
valor indeed is brought in question, but by whom? not by men of equal temper,
or maturer judgment, who measure their censures, not by the Last of rash
opinion, but just consideration. For these cannot imagine how Reputation should
be brought in question, by any indiscreet term uttered over a pot, whereof
perchance the Speaker is ignorant, at least what it meant: But of these
distempered Roisters, Galeatilepores. Pet. Mart.
whose only judgment consists in taking offense, and valor in making a
flourish; of these, I have seen One in the folly of my youth, but could not
rightly observe till my riper age: whose braving condition (having some young
gooselin to work on) would have made you confident of his valor: instancing
what dangerous exploits he had attempted and achieved, what single fields he
had pitched, and how bravely he came off: yet on my conscience, the Battle of
the Pygmeies might have equaled his, both for truth and resolution. Yet I have
noted such as these, to be the Bellows which blow the fire of all uncivil
quarrels; suggesting to young Gentlemen (whose want of experience makes them
too credulous) matter of Revenge: by aggravating each circumstance to enrage
their hot blood the more. Some others there are of this band, which I have
likewise observed: and they are taken for grave Censors or Moderators, if any
difference occur amongst Young Gentlemen. And these have been Men in their
time, (at least accounted so) but now their fortunes falling to an ebb, having
drawn out their time in expense above their means, they are enforced (and
well it were if Misery forced them not to worse) to erect a Sconce, whereto the
Roarers make recourse, as to their Rendevou: And hereto also resorts the raw
and unseasoned Youth, whose late-fallen patrimony makes him purchase
acquaintance at what rate soever: glorying much to be esteemed one of the
fraternity. And he must now keep his Quarter, maintain his prodigal rout with
what his Parcimonious ^a^her long carked for; prepare his Rere-suppers, and all
this, to get him a little knowledge in the Art of roaring. The proper (...).
And by this time, you may suppose him to have attained to some degree, so as
he can look big, erect his Mouc^atoes, stamp and stare, and call the Drawer
Rogue, drink to his Venus in a Venice-glasse, and to moralize her Sex, throws
it over his head and breaks it. But for all this, he has not fully learned
his postures: for upon discourse of valor, he has discovered his Cowardice;
and this gives occasion to one of his Cumrades to triumph ore his weakness.
Who entering upon terms of Reputation, and finding himself wronged, he would
gladly wipe off all aspersions, and gain him opinion in the eye of the world:
but recalling to mind, the dangers incident to Quarrels, he thinks it best to
repair to that Grand Moderator (whose long experience has made his opinion
authenticke) to receive satisfaction, whether he may put up the injury offered
him, without touch of disgrace. Now he must be feed for his opinion, (as if he
were some grave legal professor:) which done, his reply must tend to the
defini^tion of a wrong, and what the law of valor holds for satisfaction in
actions of that nature. Again, (for still he works on this Young-gallants
weakness) how the world esteems his Opponent to be a brave spark; one, whose
spirit cannot be daunted, nor fury appeased with less than blood: drawing him
in the end by some Rhetorical persuasion (as nothing more smooth than the oily
tongue of an insinuating foist) to some base composition, whereof he and his
accomplices are made equal sharers. Now Gentlemen, I could likewise produce
certain woeful occurrents, which have befallen some of your rank and
quality, and that within these few years, by consorting with such Grand
Cutters: who pressing them to offense, could not endure such affronts, but with
^^solution (which ever attends a generous spirit) encountering them, have been
utterly overthrown, either in doing or suffering. But you will ask me, how
should this be prevented? Can any Gentleman suffer with patience his Reputation
to be brought in question? Can he endure to be challenged in a public place,
and by that means incur the opinion of Coward? Can he put up disgrace
without observance, or observing it, not revenge it, when his very Honor (the
vital blood of a Gentleman) is impeached? Hear me, whosoever he be that
frames these Objections! I am not ignorant how many unjust and immerited
aspersions shall be thrown upon men of eminent'st desert, by such, whose
tongues are ever steeped in calumny: But who are these, save such as the glory
of Greece (the everliving Homer) displayeth in the contemptuous person of
Thersites; Homer. in Odyss.
whose character was, More deformed in mind than body? Their infamous and
serpentine tongues inured to detraction, deserve no other Revenge, (next legal
punishment) save avoiding their company, and bruting their baseness in all
Societies, where their names are known, to caution others of them. Seneca ad
Galion. de remed. fortuit.
I am spoken evil of (says Seneca) but the evil speak it: I should be
moved, if M. Cato, if wise Lelius, or the two Scipio's should speak this of me;
but it is praise for me, to have the evil displeased with me. It is true;
for as no imputation can truly be said to stain a pure or undefiled soul,
whose inward sincerity (like a brazen Wall) beats back all darts of envy or
calumny; so it is not in the power of the evil to detract from the glory of
the good: for what then should remain secure from aspersion of the vicious?
But I imagine, you will reply; it is not only the report or scandal of these
men of uncurbed tongues, (for so Pindarus terms them) but of such, whose
eminent esteem in the world, gives approbation to what they speak, which
awakes my Revenge. If they be as you term them, Men of eminent esteem, and
that esteem by merit purchased, (for all other estimation I exclude it:) I
need little doubt, but the distaste which you conceive against them, has
proceeded in some part from your self; and that upon maturer consideration you
should find your own bosom guilty to the cause of these aspersions. If
otherwise it happen, (as I grant it may) that upon private surmises, or
suggestions derived from some factious heads, these men of more eminent note
and esteem have brought your name in question, because (as they were informed)
you formerly aspersed a blemish upon their Honor: I would not have you to err
so far from your own judgment, as without further discussing the cause, to
fall into desperate extremes: for were it not much better for you to sift the
cause, how you both are abused, whereby that base suggestour might be duly
censured, and your wrongs mutually redressed, than to vow Revenge ere an injury
be offered? Yes Sir, believe it, much better and safer, and in the opinion of
discreet men, wiser: howsoever our hare-brain'd Gallant, whose property is to
act before he resolve, esteem it a derogation to ex^postulate on terms of
disgrace, but to publish war ere the league be broken. We account him who can
bear the most, to be the strongest; yet esteem we him who can bear injuries
most, to be the weakest; so ill disposed is man's temper, as for an opinion of
Reputation, he will incur apparent error. Now there is another Revenge,
which proceeds from a nature far more inglorious than the former. And that
is, when for some little distaste conceived against our inferior, (even in
worldly respects) we labor his undoing: yea many times, because he stands
too resolutely for right, we threaten his ruin: But true shall we find it:
As the high do use the low,
God will use the highest so. Quicquid a vobis minor extimiscet

Major hoc vobis Dominus minatur.

Horat.



And this might appear in poor Naboth, who because he would not give the
Inheritance of his Fathers, his Vineyard, he must be stoned. But of this
Revenge I am not to insist; for this is an evil more properly inherent to our
rich oppressors, who grind the face of the poor, 1 King. 21.3, 11.
and raise them an house to their seldom thriving Heirs out of others ruin.
Only my wish shall be, that their dwelling may be with Owls and Ostridges in
the wilderness, and not in the flowery borders of this Island, lest she be
forced to vie sighs for their sins. I might now in this Subject of Revenge,
enlarge my discourse by speaking of Anger, from whence Revenge may seem to
receive her original being: which Anger the Poet terms a short fury: Anger is
madness, Horat. l. 1. epist. 2.
and as strong
In force, but not in course so long.
For what differs an angry man from a madman, save only in this; his
violence of passion continues not so long: for the time it is as vehement and
as violent. Excellent therefore was that precept of Moderation given and
observed by that renowned Emperor Theodosius, drawn (as may appear in the
like example of Augustus) from a former pattern: of whom it is written, that
he would never in his anger proceed to Revenge, or so much as show any argument
of distaste, till he had repeated over the four and twenty Greek letters.
But to conclude this last Branch, my exhortation to all young Gentlemen shall
be, Basil. Homil. de Ira.

Greg. Moral. l. 5. cap. 32.


whose high spirits cannot endure affronts, that they would labor to
expostulate with passion; which if once protracted, will be sooner tempered,
meditating also of these divine places of Scripture: which receipts are indeed
most powerful and effectual to allay this Passion. We that are by nature
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
ought to give place unto wrath. For the wrath of man does not accomplish the
righteousness of God. Yea, we ought to imitate God, which if we will do, Romans
12.19. Iam. 1.20.
we must not continue in wrath, knowing, God will not contend, nor be wroth for
ever. He is slow to anger. Yea, Is^ay 57.16. (...). 1.2.3. N^mb. 14.18. Iam 1
1^. Prove 14 29. 1 Co^. 3.5. P^o^. 22 21. Ec^l^s. 8 15, 16. Prove. 15.1.18.
every man ought to be slow to wrath: For it is wisdom. If we will join in
the true Lovers knot, we must not be angry, for, true Love is not provoked to
anger. And if we will prevent the effect, we are to avoid the occasion;
therefore are we taught to have no familiarity, neither strive with an angry
man. Would we appease anger? we must do it by meekness. Lastly, may we be
angry? Ephesians. 4.26 27.
Yes, but how? Be angry, but sin not. Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath. Neither give place to the Devil. Thus have we run over all those
predominant humors, which bear most sway in distempered Youth. Let us now,
according to our former purpose, Physic prescribed, and ^e^ceits applied to
cure these maladies in Youth.
proceed in applying certain Receipts to cure these dangerous Maladies. Which
briefly (to avoid all curious divisions) may be reduced to these two: Active
and Contemplative. The one in exercising and performing the offices of our
Calling: The other in practicing works of piety, exercises of Devotion,
Meditation, Contemplation. For the former, to wit, Active, every action has
two handles (to use the Philosophers words; ^.
) the one whereof consists in plotting or contriving; the other in effecting.
Without the former, the latter is precipitate; and without the latter, the
former is frustrate: but both concurring, the Action becomes absolute. But to
speak generally of Action, as it is the represser, so Idleness is the
producer of all vice. Whence came that ancient Edict amongst the Romans, In
lib. de leg.
mentioned by Cicero; that no Roman should go through the streets of the City,
unless he carried with him the badge of that Trade whereby he lived. In so
much that Marcus Aurelius speaking of the diligence of the Romans, writes;
That all of them followed their labor. Now Gentlemen, I persuade my self, you
will most of you object and say with the displaced Steward in the Gospel, Luke
16.3.
We cannot dig: (and I could wish that many of our eminent ones, would add
unto it, and to beg we are ashamed.) It is true indeed; I know your Breeding
has been otherwise; but admit you cannot dig, do ye infer hence that ye
are exempted from all labor? In no case are you so to argue. What employments
deserve entertainment from a Gentleman.
There are other Taskes, other employments besides Manual and Mechanicke
labors, which require your furtherance. And these are Foreign or Domestical:
Foreign, as to benefit your Country by rare Discoveries, reconveying the rich
freight of knowledge (by conference with foreign Nations) to your Native
soil: or by personal adventure, to stand resolutely in defense of the Faith,
against those professed enemies of Christendom, the Turks; whose fury and
hostile cruelty, the Eastern parts (to our great grief be it spoken) have
already woefully sustained. Domestical; as in studying the practice of Laws,
or other humane studies, in laboring to determine differences betwixt party
and party, in chastising and due censuring, (as far as their callings give
leave) of such factious or litigious Sectists, as either in Church or
Commonweal disturb the quiet of the Realm, and distract the State with
frivolous or fruitless ambiguities. Here are Labors fit to entertain
Gentlemen, and naught derogating from men of eminentest descent or quality.
For in Actions of this nature have the best and most renowned States and
Princes in Christendom been trained and exercised: glorying no less in the
happy and successive management thereof, than in subduing the potent'st and
flourishing'st Kingdoms. Secondly, for the Contemplative, which participates
more of the mind: I could wish all Gentlemen (as they claim a prerogative in
height of blood) so to erect their Contemplations above the Sphere of these
lower and inferior Mortals, whose cogitations pressed down with the rubbish
and refuse of earthly preferments, cannot distinguish light from darkness:
that they may imagine (as in truth they ought) that whatsoever is sought
besides God, may possess the mind, Blos.
but cannot satisfy it. Now, of all exercises of Devotion, I must principally
commend Prayer; being (as one excellently notes) to be numbered amongst the
chiefest and choicest works of Charity. For by Prayer are dug forth those
treasures, which faith beholds in the Gospel: Chrysostom. lib. de ^rand. Deo.
being Gods Sacrifice, Man's Solace, and the Devils scourge. For the time and
place of Prayer, I will not insist much of it; howsoever, diverse more curiously
than profitably, precisely than wisely, have quarrelled about the place:
excluding withal, some places as unfit for Prayer. But in a word, for the
place of Prayer or Devotion, this shall be my conclusion; as there is no place
exempted from tempting, so there is no place excepted from praying: and for the
time, as we are continually assaulted, so are we exhorted to pray continually,
Luke 21.36. Romans 12.11, 12. Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.2, 3.
that we may be the better provided to resist those temptations which are
usually suggested. Amongst those many devout and divine Prayers commended to
Youth, none more needful or effectual than that of the Psalmist: Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth. Nor any Memorial more powerful, than
that of the Preacher: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Eccles.
12.1.
For by the Latter are we put in mind of him, whose grace is to preserve us
from sin; and by the Former to call on him, whose mercy it is to forgive
sin. Now Gentlemen, have I composed and perfected what I purposed touching my
first Observance, entitled Youth. Wherein I have enlarged my self so much the
more for two principal respects: The One, lest by being unprovided you should
fly away naked (as the young man in the Gospel) wanting sufficient instruction
to inform your weaker understandings: which moved me to amplify each
particular Subject with variety of Moral reading; because I knew how such
discourse would relish more pleasantly to a Young-mans palate, than graver or
more serious matter. The other, lest wanting a convenient foundation to work
on, the maine building might shrink. Now, this I purposely framed for the
Basis or groundwork, the rest as Stories, which are made to beautify the
foundation: for in these Observances ensuing I intend brevitie, yet with such
perspicuitie, as the Gentleman to whom I write, may the better understand
himself, and direct his courses to that Bent of Honor, whereto all generous
actions are directed.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of the diversity of Dispositions; The Disposition is not to be forced; What
Disposition is most generous.

DISPOSITION.
HOw different the Dispositions of men be, Observat. 2.
our usual converse and commerce with men may sufficiently instruct us. Yea
even in Youth, where the first Seeds of inclination are sown, we shall observe
such Diversity, The diversity of D^spositions.
as the grasse-piles of the earth may scarce vie with them for variety, the
stars or sands for multiplicitie. Where you shall note some Youths of such
well-affected or tempered Dispositions, as they show undoubted arguments of
future good: and these are such, whose Natures are rather to be cherished than
chastised, cockered than curbed: for the least distaste which their guardian or
Tutour can show, works such impression in them, as they could willingly choose
rather to suffer his correction than his distaste. Others there be, whose
perverse and refractory Natures are not to be dealt withal upon equal
terms: and these are the very Antipodes to those well-tempered Dispositions
which we spoke of before: for they ever walk in a contrary path, directly
opposite to such, whose native Affability gains them love by an inbred
courtesy. These ( Diogenes-like) are ever entering the Temple, Exeunti intro,
^n. ranti exeo. vid. Laert.
when others go forth; or repairing to the Market, when others come from it.
And these must taste of sharper censure; for Lenity will not prevail,
therefore rigor must. The like may be observed even in their Dispositions to
Learning: where we shall find Some apt enough to get, and as apt to forget:
Others more solid; though for the present slow, yet more retentive. And these,
as with hardness they get it, so hardly will they lose it; for their
difficulty in gaining, is supplied by a facility in retaining. Likewise, as
the principal works or faculties of our understanding be three; first to
Discourse, secondly to Distinguish, thirdly to Choose: we shall also observe an
admirable difference in these, in respect of their distinct Qualities. Where we
shall find one as apt to discourse, as unable to distinguish or choose; and
such an one has all his judgment in his tongue. Another of greater depth and
maturer judgment than the former, more able to distinguish or choose, than apt
to discourse: for though he want facility of utterance (which want is
generally supplied by more excellent gifts) yet so quick and subtle is the
piercing eye of his judgment, as he is no less prompt in conceiving, than
slow in uttering. Now to treat of the Dispositions of men's minds; it is
strange to see what difference appears in them, (even by natural and infusive
motion. Rome brought forth the Pisoes for frugalitie, the Metelli for piety,
the Appii for austeritie, the Manlii for affability, the Lelii for wisdom,
and the Publicolae for courtesy. Which conditions appeared so lineally in
their Successors, as they seemed representers of their Ancestors natures, as
well as features. Yet what reason can be given touching these distinct
affections, save those prime seeds sown in them by Nature, which produce not
only these Dispositions in themselves, but dilate or propagate their effects
in others, to wit, those in whom they have stamped a likeness both of image
and condition. A probable judgment of ou^ Dispositions, drawn from the
delights we affect, or company we frequent.
Now to collect or gather, how men are affected, there is no course more
direct, or in it self less erring, than to observe what delights they affect,
or what company they frequent. Augustus being at a combat, discerned the
inclinations of his two daughters, Iulia and Livia, by the company which
frequented them* for grave Senators talked with Livia, but riotous persons with
Iulia. Truth is, we shall ever se^ persons of like condition love to consort
together, for their quality or equality rather of Disposition moves a desire
of familiarity one with another. Likewise for delights, we shall ever observe
such, whose lighter Dispositions affect Liberty, to be frequenters of public
meetings, Agents in May-games, professed lovers of all sensual pleasures. Salist.
That Roman Curtezan Semphronia, was noted for her singing, sporting and
dancing, wherein she labored to show more art than became a modest woman,
with other motives of Licentiousness. But in my opinion, there is no one
means to sift out the Disposition of Man better, than by noting how he bears
himself in passion, Passion the best discoverer of our Disposition.
which is of that violence, as many times it discovers him, though his purpose
was to walk never so covertly from the eye of popular observance. Should we
have recourse to the lives of sundry Tyrants, whose outward appearance or
semblance promised much goodness: we might find sufficient matter to confirm
this argument. Some whereof (as Tiberius) so commonly carried and covered their
plots, as none could dive into their thoughts, pretending ever most
smoothness, when they intended a tempest. Yet if at any time (as it befell
many times) their Spirits became netled or incensed; so far did passion
transport them, Discovery of Disp^sitions in distempers.
as they apparently expressed their Natures, without further Character. Other
discoveries may be made, and those are the manifestest of all, how men are
affected or disposed when they are least themselves: and this is (with grief I
speak it, Non habet ulterius quod nostris potibus addat Posteritas --
Habebitur aliquando Ebrietati honor, and plurimum meri cep^sse, virtus erit.
Sen.

Non invenit crimen, etiam viri ^ortis accipit nomen, tanto nequior, quanto sub
p^culo invict^or.

Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 4.


for too highly does Albion labor of it) when Man, losing indeed that Name, at
least his Nature, becomes estranged from the use of reason, by drowning his
understanding with drunkenness. In high Germany, the parents of such children
as should be married, will see those which should be their sons in law to be
drunk before them, to see what Disposition they are of, before they marry
their children unto them. For they imagine, if they be subject to any especial
vice, they will then discover it, having no Lock to keep it secret. Yet in
this there are different humors which reign and rage according to the
Disposition of the person subject unto it: as we shall see one lumpish without
all conceit; another jocund and merry, apt for any conceit: one weeping, as if
some disastrous fortune had befallen him: another laughing, (...) if some merry
Scene were presented him. We read of two distinct conditions in Philip and
Alexander, when they were in drink; for the one showed his rage and fury
toward his foes, the other to his friends: the one whereof participates of
more true generous spirit than the other. For as nothing can be imagined more
ignoble, than to triumph over our friend, so nothing relisheth of more
resolution, than to show our spirit (so it be upon equal terms, and without
braving) upon our Enemy. But would you indeed see the disposition of Man truly
discovered, and the veil which kept him from sight, clear taken away? Then
come to him when he is advanced to place of honor or esteem; (for Promotions
declare what men be: Promotion held ever man's best Anatomy Lecture.
) and there you shall find him pourtrayed to life. Galba was esteemed in the
opinion of all, fit to govern till he did govern. Many have an excellent gift
of concealing and shadowing (which gives grace to any picture) so long as they
are obscure and private: but bring them to a place of more eminent note, and
give a luster to their obscurity, you shall view them as perfectly, as if
their Bodies were transparant, or windows were in their bosoms. Here you
shall see One unmeasurably haughty, scorning to converse with these Groundlins
(for so it pleases him to term his inferiors) and bearing such a state, as
if he were altered no less in person than place. Another, not so proud as he
is covetous: for no passion (as a learned Schooleman affirms) is better
known unto us than the coveting or desiring passion, Thom. in 12. quaest. 26.
a. 1.
which he calls Concupiscible: and such an one makes all his inferiors his
Sponges; and Ostridge-like can digest all metalls. Another sort there are,
whose well-tempered natures have brought them to that perfection, as the state
which they presently enjoy makes them no more proud than the loss of that they
possess would cast them down. Optanda ea est amissio honoris, quae facit nos
humiliores.
These ( Camillus-like) are neither with the opinion of Honor too highly
erected, nor with the conceit of Affliction too much dejected. As their
conceits are not heightened by possessing it, so they lose nothing of their own
proper height by forgoing it. These are so evenly poized, so nobly tempered, as
their opinion is not grounded on Title, nor their glory on popular esteem:
they are known to themselves, and that knowledge has instructed them so well
in the vanity of Earth, as their thoughts have taken flight, vowing not to
rest till they approach heaven. Pompey being combred with his Honor, exclaimed
to see Sylla's cruelty, Nihil (...) e^^quam been ^^se^are. Diodes. dict.
being ignorant after what sort to behave himself in the dignity he had; and
cried out, O peril and danger never like to have end! Such is the nature of
Noble spirits, as they admire not so much the dignity of the place to which
they are advanced, as they consider the burden which is on them imposed;
laboring rather how to behave themselve in their place, than arrogate glory to
themselves, by reason of their place. Neither are these sundry Dispositions
naturally ingraffed in men, merely produced from themselves, as the affections
or Dispositions of our minds do follow the temperature of our bodies; where
the Melancholy produces such, the Choleric, Phlegmatic, and Sanguine such
and such, according to Humors predominant in that body, whence these
affections are derived: but I say, these participate also of the Clime wherein
we are. For otherwise, how should our Observations appear good, which we
usually collect in the Survey of other Countries; noting certain vices to be
most entertained in some especial Provinces? As Pride among the Babylonians,
Envy among the Jews, L. Phi. l. 3.^.6.
Anger among the Thebans, Covetousness among the Tyrians, Gluttony among the
Sidonians, Pyracie among the Cilicians, and Sorcerie among the Egyptians, to
whom Caesar gave great attention, as Alexander was delighted in ^he Brachmans.
So as I say, our Dispositions how different or consonant soever, do not only
partake of us, but even of the Air or temperature of Soil which bred us. Thus
we see what Diversity of Dispositions there is, and how diversely they are
affected: Let us now take a view of the Disposition it self, whether it may be
forced or no, from what it naturally affects.

THe Philosopher says, The Disposition is not to be forced.
that the Disposition may be removed, but hardly the Habit. But I say those
first Seeds of Disposition, as they are Primitives, can hardly be made
Privatives: being so inherent in the Subject, Objection.
as they may be moved, but not removed. Not removed (objectest thou!) Why;
Disposition can be of no stronger reluctance than Nature; and we see how much
she may be altered, yea clear removed from what she formerly appeared. For
do we not (in the view of humane frailty) observe how many excellent wits
drained from the very Quintessence of Nature, as apt in apprehending as
expressing a conceit, strangely darkened or dulled, as if they had been steeped
in some Lethaean slumber? Nay do we not (in this round Circumference of man)
note diverse honest and sincere Dispositions, whose gain seemed to be
godliness, and whose glory the profession of a good Conscience, wonderfully
altered, becoming so corrupted by the vain pomp or trifling trash of the
world, as they prefer the puddle before the pearl, forsaking Christ for the
world? Do we not see how uprightly some men have borne themselves all their
time without stain or blemish: being all their Youth virtuously affected,
Sancti Iuvenes, Satanici Senes.
all their Middle-age charitably disposed, yet in their Old Age miserably
depraved? Again, do we not behold, how many women whose virgin-modestie and
Nuptiall-continencie promised much glory to their age; even then, when the
flower of Beauty seemed bloomelesse, so as their very age might make them
blameless, when their skin was seere, and their flesh saplesse, their breath
earthie, and their mouth toothlesse; then, even then fell these unweldie
Beldames to embrace folly, promising longer continuance to Pleasure, than they
could by all likelihood unto Nature? Now tell me how happened this? Were not
these at the first virtuously affected; if Disposition then could not be
forced, how came they altered? All these rivers of Objections I can dry up
with one beam, Hieron. cont. Lucif.
darting from the reflex of Nature. Thou producest diverse instances to confirm
this assertion, That Dispositions are to be forced from what they were
naturally affected unto. Resolution.
Whereto I answer, That Dispositions in some are resembled (and not improperly)
unto a Beam clothed or shadowed with a cloud; which (as we see) shows his
light sometimes sooner, sometimes later: Or (as by a more proper Allusion may
seem illustrated) may be resembled to the first Vt (...) ingentia, (...)
exigu^ (...) na^^u^tar ingenia. Qu (...), ut cum primis floribus arborum;
Hie^^^ citius ac celerius, illi autem faeli cius ac uberius gemmare solent and
germinaere.
Flourish in trees, which according to the nature or quality of the internal
pith, from whence life is diffused to the Branches, send forth their bloomes
and blossoms sooner or later. True it is you object, that to the outward
appearance, such men showed arguments of good Dispositions, for they were
esteemed men of approved Sanctity, making Conscience of what they did, and
walking blameless and unreproveable before all men: but what collect you
hence? That their Dispositions were sincerely good or pure, if Society had not
depraved them! No, this induction will not hold: it is the Evening crowns the
day. What could be imagined better, or more royally promising, than Nero's
Quinquennium? What excellent tokens of future goodness? What apparent
testimonies of a virtuous government? What infallible grounds of princely
policy, mixed with notable precepts of piety? Yet who knows not, how all the
vices of his Ancestors put together, Suet. tran. in vit. Ner.
seemed by a lineall descent to be transferred on him: being the Pattern and
Patron of all cruelty, the Author and Actor of all villainy, the plotter and
practiser of all impiety: so as, if all the titles of cruelty were lost, they
might be found in this Tyrant. How then do you say, that his Disposition was
naturally good, but became afterward depraved and corrupted? No, rather join
with me and say, that howsoever his Disposition seemed good during those five
years, wherein he dissembled with virtue, and concealed those many vices which
he professed and possessed afterward: yet indeed he was the same, though not
in show, yet in heart. Only now the Cloud being dispersed, his tyrannous and
inhumane nature became more discovered, acting that in public, which he had
long before plotted in private. For howsoever our Dispositions may seem
forced, from what they naturally or originally were; it is but a Deception,
they remain still the same, though advice and assistance may sometimes prevail
so much with them, as for the time they seem to surcease and discontinue from
their former bent; but returning afresh, they will Antaeus-like, redouble their
strength and become more furious. For resolve me, and show what may be the
effectuallest or powerfullest means to remove Disposition, or alter Man most
from what he may seem naturally inclined unto. Can Honor? No; for that man,
whose inclination is subject to change for any exterior Title, is not to be
ranked amongst these generous spirits, with whom I am only here to converse.
Stupent in titulis and imaginibus.
For these admire Titles, and assume a kind of affected Majesty, to make
their persons more observed. But tell me, what are these whom Honor has thus
transported, expressing state with winkes and nods, as if the whole posture of
State ^^^sisted in gesture, but mere Popin-jayes, who glory more in the
painting or varnish of Honor, than the true substance of it? And to speak
truth (as I had never fortune to dote much on an immerited Title, nor gloze
with counterfeit greatness) their Dispositions howsoever they seem to the
vulgar eye changed, they are nothing so: for their inclinations were ever
arrogantly affected, so as they no sooner became great, than they deblazoned
their own thoughts. Can Riches? neither; for such, whose imaginations are
erected above earth, scorn to entertain discourse with ought that may make
them worse: all in the world being either fumus or funus, Be^e e^ cui Deus
obtul^t Pa^^a quod satis est, manu Hor. Od l. 3. c. 24. Eccles 5.15. Nuga and
acl^rium.
a vanity or vexation, as the Preacher says. These conclude, that no Object
less than Heaven can satisfy their eye; no treasure less than eternity can
answer their desire; no pleasure save what has concurrence with felicity, can
gain them true delight. Now for these earthly Moles, who are ever digging,
till their graves be dug; their Dispositions are of baser temper: for they
can taste nothing but earthly things. They measure not estate by competence,
desiring only so much as may suffice Nature, but by Abundance; which fares with
them as liquor with an Hydropticke man, who, the more he drinks, Quanto magis
capi^, tanto magis cupit.

Quanto magis cupit, tanto minus sapit.


the more he thirsts: so the more they have, the more they crave; making their
desires as endless, as their aims effectlesse; their hopes as boundless, as
their helps fruitless. When their mouths shall be filled with gravel, and
corruption shall enter those houses of clay, for which so much Provision was
stored, and so small a share in the end contented. Can Acquaintance? No; for if
company better me (by an internal grace working secretly, yet effectually in
me) my Disposition consented, before such good fruit was produced: if it make
me worse, my Disposition, by consenting to suggestion, induced me that I should
be thereto moved. Yea generally, whosoever is wel-disposed, will keep no man
company, but either in hope to (...) him, or to be bettered by him: as he,
whose inclination is vicious and corrupt, leaves the company he frequents
ever worse than when he found them. For as a Plutarch. in Moral.
troubled fountain yields impure water, so an infected soul vicious actions.
Can Travel? No; for, give me a man that has seen Iudasses Lantern at S.
Denisses; the Ephesian Diana in the Louvre; the great Vessel at Heydelberge;
the Amphitheatre at Vl^smos; the Stables of the great Mogol; or the solemnities
of Mecha: yea all the memorable Monuments which the world can afford; or places
of delight to content his view; or learned Academics, to instruct and enrich
his knowledge; yet are not all these of power to alter the state or quality of
his Disposition: whence the sententious Flaccus; To pass the Sea some are
inclinde,
To change their air, Horat. l. 1. Epist. 11.
but not their mind.
No; should thou change air, and soil, and all, it were not in thy power to
change thy self: yet as soon thy self as thy Disposition, which ever
accompanies and attends thee, moving in thee a like or dislike, just as she is
affected.

HAving thus proved, What Disposition is most generous.
that the Disposition is not to be forced; we are now to descend to discourse
of the Noblest and most generous Disposition: which we intend to make known
by certain infallible marks, which seldom err in their attendance, being
vowed Servants to such as are virtuously affected. The first is Mildness; the
second Munisicence; the third Fortitude or Stoutnesse.

Mildness is a quality so inherent, Mildness.
or more properly individuate to a Gentleman, as his affability will express
him, were there no other means to know him. He is so far from contemning
the mea^^^, as his Countenance is not so cheerful, as his Heart
compassionate: though the one be no less gracious in promising, than the other
generous in his performing. He poizeth the wrongs of the weakest, as if they
were his own; and vows their redress as his own. He is none of these furly
Sirs, whose aim is to be capp'd and congied; for such Gentilitie tastes too
much of the Mushrom. You shall never see one new stepped into Honor, but he
expects more observance than an Ancient: for though he be but new come from
Mint, he knows how to look big, and show a storm in his Brow. This
Meekness admits of Humility to keep her company; in whose sweet familiarity
she so much glories, as she cannot enjoy her self without her. And in very
deed, there is no Ornament which may add more beauty or true luster to a
Gentleman, than to be humbly minded; being as low in conceit, as he is high in
place. With which virtue (like two kind Turtles in one yoke) is Compassion
(as I noted before) linked and coupled: which Compassion has many times
appeared in the renowmedst and most glorious Princes. When Pompeyes head was
offered to Caesar,
as a most grateful and acceptable Present, Plutarch. in vit. Pomp.
it is reported that he washed the Head with tears of princely compassion,
and inflicted due punishment upon his Murderers. The like is written of Titus,
that Love and Darling of Mankind, in his taking and destroying of Jerusalem,
using these words; Joseph. in Hist. Iud.
I take God to witness, I am not the cause of the destruction of this people,
but their sins: mixing his words with tears, and tempering his victorious
success with royal moderation. The like is related of Marcus Marcellus, who
having won the most flourishing City of Syracusa, stood upon the walls,
shedding plenty of tears before he shed any blood. In vit. Marcell.
And this Compassion attracts ever unto it a kind of princely Majesty,
gaining more love than any other affection. For as proud Spirits, whose
boundless ambition k^eps them ever afloat, till they sink down for
altogether, use to triumph in others miseries, till misery in the end find
them out: so these, in a discreet moderation or noble temper, will never assume
more glory to themselves for any exploit, how successively or prosperously
soever managed. Such is the native Modesty, wherewith they are endued, as
their victories are never so numerous or glorious, as to transport them above
themselves. Which Modesty surely becomes men of all Degrees, but especially
men of eminent and noble rank, to the end they may understand and acknowledge
in every action, Com^n.
that there is a God, from whom all things proceed and are derived. Now as
there is no glory equal to the command or soveraigntie over our own passions;
the conquest whereof makes Man an absolute Commander: so there is no ornament
which conferres more true or native grace to one ennobled by place or birth,
than to put on the Spirit of Meekness, being expressly commanded, and so
highly commended of God, as the goodness thereof is confirmed by a promise;
Matthew. 5.5. Dan. 10.12. 1 King. 21.27, 29.
The meek shall inherit the earth. So Humility is said to purchase Gods
favor; for by that one virtue we become to have a resemblance of him, whose
glory it was to disesteeme all glory to fashion us like unto himself. Now how
precious may that exquisite Treasure appear unto us, which conferres so much
light on us, as by it we are brought to know our selves: Deuteronomy. 8.16.
being strangers, as it were, and aliens unto our selves, till Humility took
off the veil, and showed man his Anatomy. So rare was this divine virtue, and
so few her professors in former time, especially amongst such whose titles had
advanced them above inferior rank, as the place which they held made them
forget the mould whereof they were made. An excellent historical demonstration
we have hereof, as we receive it from venerable Bede, Bid.
who reports (...) thus: Aidan a religious Bishop, weeping for King Osuinus,
and demanded by the Kings Chaplain why he wept; I know (said he) that the King
shall not live long: for never before this time have I seen an humble King.
Which happened accordingly, for he was cruelly murdered by Oswin. But (thanks to
him who became humble for us) we have in these declining days, among so many
proud Symeons, many humble Joseph's, whose chiefest honor they make it to abase
themselves on earth, to add to their complement of glory in heaven; so much
sleighting the popular applause of men, as their only aim is to have a sincere
and blameless conscience in them, to witness in that judicial day for them.
These have not (like those furies of revenge) hearts full of wrath, but with
all meekness and long-suffering will rather endure an injury, than inflict
too violent revenge, though they have ready power to effect or perform it. It
is reported of Thomas Linacres, a learned Englishman, much commended for his
sanctity of life, that when he heard it read in the fifth Chapter of S.
Matthew, Diligite inimicos; Bless them that curse you, etc. he brake forth
into these words: O amici, aut haec vera non sunt, aut nos Christiani non (...)
O my friends, either these things are not true, or we are no Christians! True
it is indeed, that so strangely are some men affected, as they tender revenge
equally dear as their own life: their plots are how to circumvent, their
trains how to surprise, their whole consultations how to inflict due revenge,
where they have already conceived distaste. And these are those Bulls of
Basan, who rome and roar, and when the prey falls, they stare on it, and
tear it with their teeth. On these men may that of the Poet be truly verified;
Nec leges metuunt, sed cedit viribus aequum, Maestaque victrici jura sub ense
jacent.
They fear no Laws, their wrath gives way to might,
And what they plot they act, be it wrong or right.
But how far the Disposition of these men may seem removed from the meek
and humble affected, whose only glory is to redress wrong, and render right
judgment unto all, there is none but may at the first sight apparently
discern. For these humble and mildly-affected spirits, stand so firm and
irremoveable, as no adversity can depresse them, no prosperity raise them
above themselves. Omnia adversa exercitationes p^tat. Seneca.
For adversities, they account them with that excellent Moral, nothing else
than exercises to try them, not to tire them. And for Prosperities, they
^eceive them as they come; not for much admiring them, as making a profitable
use of them; and with a thankful remembrance of divine Bounty, blessing God
for them. Cyprian.
These are those impregnable rocks (as one aptly compared them) subject to no
piercing; those green Bays in midst of hoarie Winter, never fading; those
fresh Springs in the Sandy Desert, never drying. Whose many eminent virtues,
as they deserve your imitation, (Gentlemen) so especially their Meekness,
being the first mark I took to distinguish true Gentilitie.

THe second was Munificence; Munificence.
that is, to be of a bountiful Disposition, open-handed, yet with some
necessary cautions, as to know what we give; and the worth of that person to
whom we give. For without these considerations, Bounty may incline to
profuseness, and Liberality to indiscretion. This moved that Mirror of Roman
Princes, the Emperor Titus, to keep a Book of the Names of such, whose
deserts had purchased them esteem, but had not as yet tasted of his Bounty.
So as, it is observed of him, that no day came over his head, wherein he
expressed not his princely Munificence to such, whose names he had recorded:
which, if at any time through more urgent occasions he neglected, he would use
these words to such as were about him: Amici, perdidimus diem. Sext. Aurel.
O my friends, I have lost this day! No less was the bounty which Cyrus
expressed, first in words, but afterward in deeds, to such Soldiers as took
his part against his grandfather Astiages; that such as were Footmen, Justin.
he would make them Horsemen, and such as were Horsemen, Cujus domus quosi
quaedam munificentiae, officina creder^tur.

Val. Max. lib. 5.


he would make them ride in their Chariots. It is said of the House of the
Agrigentine Gillia, that it seemed as if it had been a certain Storehouse or
repository of all Bounty. Such indeed was the Hospitality (esteemed in this
Island formerly, one of the apparantest Signalls of Gentry) which was shown to
all such as made recourse to that Mansion. And because I have accidentally
fallen into this Discourse, let me speak a word or two touching this neglect
of Hospitality, which may be observed in most places throughout this Kingdom.
What the reason may seem to be I know not, unless riot and prodigality, the
very Gulfes which swallow up much Gentry: why so many sumptuous and goodly
Buildings, whose fair Frontispice promise much comfort to the wearied
Traveller, should want their Masters. But surely I think, as Diogenes jested
upon the Mindians, for making their gates larger than their City; bidding them
take heed, lest the City run out at the gates: so their Storehouse being made
so strait, and their Gates so broad, I much fear me, that Provision (the life
of Hospitality) has run out at their gates, leaving vast penurious houses apt
enough to receive, but unprovided to releeve. But indeed, the reason why this
defect of noble Hospitality has so generally possessed this Realm, Pa^cos
^eavit aul^, plures perdidit:

Sed and hos quoque ipsos, quos ^eavit, perdidit. Farn. in Emblem.


is their love to the Court. Their ancient Predecessors, whose chiefest glory
it was to releeve the hungry, refresh the thirsty, and give quiet repose to
the weary, are but accounted by these sweet-sented Humorists, for men of
rusticke condition, mere homespun fellows, whose rural life might seem to
derogate from the true worth of a Gentleman, whose only humor is to be
phantastically humorous. O the misery of error! ^ow far has vanity carried
you astray (ye generous spirits) that you should esteem noble bounty, which
consists not so much in Bravery as Hospitality, boorish Rusticitie? How much
are you deluded by apish formalitie, as if the only quality of a Gentleman
were novell complement? or as if there were no good in man besides some
outlandish congie or salute? Alas Gentlemen, is this all that can be expected
at your hands? Must your Country which bred you, your friends who love you,
the poor, whose prayers or curses will attend you, be all deprived of their
hopes in you? No; rather return to your Houses, where you may best express
your Bounty, by entertaining into your bosom, that which perchance has been
long time estranged from you, Charity. For believe it (as assuredly ye shall
find it) that your sumptuous Banqueting, your midnight revelling, your
unseasonable rioting* your phantasticke attiring, your formal courting shall
witness against you in the day of revenge. Amos 6.11.
For behold the Lord commands, and he will smite the great house with
breaches, and the little house with clefts. Return therefore before the evil
day (...) distribute to the Necessity of the Saints, become good Dispensers of
what you have received, that ye may gain your selves grace in the high Court
of Heaven. But as for ye that put far away the evil day, Amos 6.3.5.7.
and approach to the Seat of iniquity; Ye that sing to the sound if the Violl,
and invent your selves instruments of Music, ye shall go captive with the
first that go captive. O misery! that Man with so beauteous an Image adorned,
with such exquisite ornaments of Art and Nature accomplished, to so high a
rank above others advanced, should delude himself so with the shade of
vanity, as to become forgetful of his chiefest glory* But experience (I doubt
not) will unseale those eyes which lightness and folly have blinded; till
which happy discovery of Youthful error, I leave them, and return to my
former Discourse. You may perceive now, how requisite Bounty is for a
Gentleman, being an especial mark (as I observed before) whereby we may
discern him. Amongst sundry other Blessings conferred by God on Solomon, this
was not one of the least, in that he gave him a large heart: Not only
abundance of substance and treasure to possess, but a large heart to dispose.
Indeed this is a rare virtue: worldlings there are, who possess much, but they
enjoy little, becoming subject to that which they should command. Nihil
liberale, quod non idem est justum. Cic.
The difference betwixt the poor wanting, and rich not using, is by these two
expressed; the one Carendo, the other Non fruendo. Of which two, the greater
misery is the latter; for he slaves himself to the unworthiest Servitude,
being a Servant to obey, where he should be a Master to command. To conclude
this point in a word; if we ought to show such contempt to all earthly
substance as hardly to entertain it, much less affect it; let us make it a
benefit, Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 23.
let us show humanity in it, by making choice of the poor, on whom we may
bestow it. This which we waste in rioting, might save many from famishing: let
us bestow therefore less of our own backs, that we may cloth them; less of
our own bellies, that we may feed them; less of our own palats, that we may
refresh them. For that is the best and noblest bounty, when our Liberality is
on such bestowed, by whom there is no hope that it should be required.

Fortitude.
THe third and last mark whereby a true generous Disposition is distinguished,
is Fortitude or stoutnesse: being indeed the argument of a prepared or composed
mind, which is not to be dismayed or disturbed by any sharp or adverse thing,
how cross or contrary soever it come. Excellently is this Fortitude defined by
the Stoics, terming it a virtue which stands ever in defense of equity: not
doing, but repelling an injury. Those Heirs of true Honor, who are possessed
of this virtue, dare oppose themselves to all occurrents in defense of
reputation; preferring death before servitude and dishonor. If at any time (as
many times such immerited censures occur) they die for virtues cause, they
meet death with a cheerful countenance; they put not on a childish fear,
like that Baendite in Genoa, who, condemned to die, and carried to the place of
execution, trembled so exceedingly, that he had two men to support him all the
way, and yet he shivered extremely. Maldon. in 26. Matt. cap 1.
Or (as Maldonatus relates) how he heard of those which saw a strong man at
Paris condemned to death, to sweat blood for very fear: proving out of
Aristotle, Arist. lib. 7. de Hist. animal. c. 16 and lib. 3. de part. anim.
cap. 5.
that this effect may be natural. But these, whose generous spirits scorn
such baseness, never saw that enterprise which they durst not attempt, nor
that death which could amate them; where Honor grounded on Virtue, without
which there is no true Honor, moved them either to attempt or suffer. But now
to wipe off certain aspersions laid on valor or fortitude: we are not to
admit of all daring Spirits to be men of this rank: For such, whose Ambition
excites them to attempt unlawful things; as to depose those whom they ought to
serve, or lay violent hand on those whom loyal fidelity bids them obey;
opposing themselves to all dangers to obtain their purpose, are not to be
termed valiant or resolute, but seditious and dissolute. Fortis non est qui in
arenam descendendo, dimicar^ audet, sed qui nocendi causam secum discu^t,
priusquam audet.
For unless the enterprise be honest which they take in hand, be their Spirits
never so resolute, or their minds prepared, it is rashness, but no valor,
having their actions ever suited by dishonor. Sometimes likewise the enterprise
may be good and honest; the cause for which they encounter with danger,
virtuous; the Agents in their enterprise courageous; yet the issue taste more
of despair than valor. 2 Machab. 14.
Example hereof we have in the Machabees, in the death of Razis one of the
Elders of Jerusalem, a lover of the City, and a man of very good report; which
for his love was called a Father of the Jews. One, who did offer to spend his
body and life with all constancy for the religion of the Jews; yet being
ready to be taken on every side, through the fury of Nicanor; who so eagerly
assaulted and hotly pursued him, he fell on his Sword: yea, when his blood was
utterly gone, he took out his own bowels with both his hands, and threw them
upon the people, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, that he would
restore them again unto him; And thus he died. Whence Augustine, that devout
Father, and most excellent light of the Church, concludes, that this was done
magne, non been, more resolutely than rightly: for he was not to lay violent
hand upon himself, though there were no hope of safety, but imminent danger
in respect of the furious and bloody enemy. Now this Fortitude, whereof we
here discourse, as it is grounded upon a just foundation, so it never ends in
baseness or rashness: in Baseness, as in not daring; in Rashness, as in too
inconsiderately attempting. It is so far from any act of Despair, as it
hopes so long as it breathes; for to despair, is to entertain the extremest
act of fear, which is far from her condition. Now to discourse of the aim
or end whereto all her actions are directed: The proper aim or end whereto the
actions of true resolution are directed.
it is not any peculiar interest which moves true resolution so much as public
good. For such, whose aims are glorious, are ever conversant in redressing
wrongs, ministering comfort both by advice and assistance to such, whose
weakness has felt the power of greatness. Cicero.
For as in every good man there is naturally implanted a desire of goodness;
so in every valiant man there is a native desire to gain honor by redressing
injuries: yea, admit no honor were to accrue unto him by endeavoring to right
or releeve such as are distressed, yet for virtues sake (which is a sufficient
reward to her self) he undertakes the task. For Charity, being a good and a
gracious effect of the Soul, In Lups. treatise of Charity.
whereby man's heart has no fancy to esteem, value or prize any thing in this
wide world beside or before the care and study of God; so inflameth a
well-disposed man, as his desire is only to do good, whereby he might in so
doing glorify God, the beginner and accomplisher of all good. Now there are
many motives to excite men to valor, as may be collected from Histories
properly and profitably tending to this purpose. But the usuallest motive is
Anger, being indeed the Whetstone of Fortitude: Cic. 4. lib. Tus. quaest.
Or the Princes presence; as we read of the Macedonians, who being once
overcome in battle by their enemies, thought the only remedy to animate their
Soldiers, was to carry Philip being then a child in a cradle to the field;
thereby stirring up the zeal of loyal and faithful Subjects to defend their
innocent Prince: and this Whetstone so sharpened their swords, that indeed they
won the battle. Or the renown of Ancestors; as the people of Tangia in
America always in their wars carried the bones and relics of their
memorable predecessors, to encourage their Soldiers with the memory of them,
to avoid and eschew all timiditie. So Tacitus reports how the Germans inflame
their spirits to resolution and valor, by singing the memorable acts of
Hercules. Or the sound of warlike alarmes; as the Nairians in India stir up
their people to battle, by hanging at the pu^mels of their swords certain
plates to make a noise, to animate and incense them to war. So Ale^ander the
great hearing Antigenida that excellent ^rumpetter sound his trumpet to
battle, was stirred up in such sort to fight, that his very friends were not
secure from blows which stood about him. Or the passionate effects of Music;
as S. Basil recounteth one Timothy to be so excellent in Music, that if he
used a sharp and severe harmony, he stirred up men to anger, and presently by
changing his note to a more remiss and effeminate strain, he moved them to
peace: both which effects he once produced in Alexander the great at a banquet.
Or opinion of the enemies cruelty; as in the year 1562 appeared in Agria a
City in Hungaria, engirt with long siege by Mahomet Bassa with an Army of
Turks amounting to threescore thousand, and battered with sixty Cannons; in
the City were only two thousand Hungarians, who with incredible valor
repelled thirteen most terrible assaults: resolved to endure famine, or any
extremity soever, rather than yield to their truculent and insatiable desires.
Wherefore they never came to parley of truce, but to answer their Enemies fury
with Cannons and Calivers. At last, when the Bassa had offered them many
favors, they hung over the wall a Coffin, covered with black, betwixt two
spears, signifying thereby, that in that City they would be buried. So the
Turks despaired of success, and the Hungarians, to their eternal glory and
renown, prevailed: preserving themselves and their City, whose liberty they
defended from the Turks (...). And hence I might take occasion to advance with
due deserved praise the glorious memory of such, whose resolution has had no
other aim, than defense of the Truth against those professed foes of
Christendom; The prudent observation of Cortugal, one of the Turkish Princes,
in his Oration persuasive to his Lord to besiege Rhod^s, was this.

Christianus occasus discordus intestinis corroboratur.


who have already taken possession of the Holy Land making the Keepers of that
Sacred Sepulcher (the most blessed Monument that ere was erected on Earth) to
pay them tribute, whose high-swelling pride is grown to that height, as their
Empire seems to labor with her own greatness. O what tender Christian eye
can behold these woeful distractions in Christendom, and abstain from tears?
To see Christian armed against Christian, while the common foe of Christians
laughs at these divisions, taking advantage of the time to enlarge his
Dominions. O who can endure to see Pagans and Infidels plant, where the blessed
feet of our Savior once trod? To hear Mahomet called upon, where Christ once
taught? To have them usurp and profane those Temples, where he once preached?
To rear them Altars for their false Prophets, where those true Prophets of God
once prophesied? To see Mahomets Oratorie erected, where the Jewish Temple was
once seated? To behold his Palace in the Cathedral Church of SAN SOPHIA, now
become his Seraglia; where stood once the High-Altar or Communion Table, and
Patriarchall Throne, now made, and so used as a Turkish Moschie, with unclean
hands polluted, by unbeleeving hearts possessed? alas for sorrow! that
Soveraigntie should so much blind, Sitting
or desire of command bear so much sway, that Christ's (...).
Enemy should get advantage by our discord. O thrice happy (and may it be
soon so happy) were the state of Christendom, if all civil and unnatural
broiles (for unnatural it is for Christian to shed Christians blood) were
appeased and ended! that they with one consent might assail this common
Enemy, marching even to Constantinople (once the glorious seat of a victorious
Emperor) crying with one voice, Down with it, Down with it even to the
ground. And easily might this be achieved, if Christendom would join mind
with might, that this Uncircumcised Philistine might be discomfited, till
which time Christendom can never be secured. But to conclude this Discourse,
(for I fear I have enlarged my self too much in my digression;) as Fortitude
is that (...) mark which gives a Gentleman his true character, showing
resolution as well in suffering, as acting: my exhortation to our English
Gentry shall be, that they so demean themselves, that their Country may be
honored by them, true worth expressed in them, and their Predecessors virtues
seconded, if not surpassed by them.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
What Education is; The effects of it. How a Gentleman may be best enabled by
it.

EDVCATION.
EDucation is the Seasoner or instructresse of Youth, Observat. 3. What
Education is.
in principles of Knowledge, Discourse, Knowledge.
and Action. Of all inferior knowledges, none more behoovefull than the
knowledge of Mans-selfe; of all superior, none more useful nor divinely
fruitful than the knowledge of God, who for Man gave himself. By view had of
the One, Man shall have a sight of his misery; by view had to the Other, Man
shall find cause to admire Gods Mercy. Hence that hony-tongued Father desired
that his Knowledge might extend it self only to these two: To know God; To
know himself. Vt cogn^s^am te; ut cognoscam me^ Bern.

Knowledge of God.


Now as the beauty and splendour of the Sun is best discerned by his Beams; so
is the greatness of God best apprehended by his Works. Whereof I may say, as
Simonides did of God, that when he had required but one day to resolve what God
was: when the day was expired, he was more unable to answer, than at the first.
So as Hermes terms the Sunbeams of God to be his Works and Miracles; the
Sunbeams of the World to be the variety of forms and features; and the
Sunbeams of Man, diversity of Arts and Sciences. Touching Knowledge, it is
in God to know all things; in Man to know some things: in Beast to know
nothing. As we cannot extend to the distinct knowledge of the Creator, so let
us extend our knowledge above the reach of the inferiour'st of Gods creatures.
It is written of Alcibiades, that he was skillful in all things, in all
exercises: so that he seemed in every Nation to obtain the conquest, in what
prize or masterie soever he took in hand. It is not for us to labor the
attaining of such exactness: (...). Luke 10.42.
Vnum est necessarium: One only knowledge transcends all others, the attaini^^
whereof makes the knower happy; as the want if makes Man, how knowing soever
in all other Sciences, most unhappie. For what skills it to have knowledge in
reasoning of high and deep points concerning the blessed Trinity, and want
Charity, whereby we offend the Trinity? Let us therefore esteem i^ the Crown
of our Hope, to attain to the excellent and incomparable knowledge of him who
made us, whose blood did save us, and whose holy Spirit daily and hourly
shields and shadows us. Knowledge of Man's self.
Next is to know himself; an excellent knowledge grounded on true Humility:
where Man shall find how many things he is ignorant of; and of these things
which he knows, how far short he comes of that perfection which is required
of him. It was a saying of a grave Philosopher, By learning always something,
I grow old. Now how fruitfully were our time from Infancy to Youth, (...).
Multum semper discens, senesco. Socrat.
from Youth to Manhood, from Manhood to Old Age employed, if our aims were
so to direct our knowledge, that we might attain the understanding and
knowledge of our selves. Then would not self-conceit transport us, nor opinion
of our own knowledge entrance us, but we would divinely conclude* we have
reaped more spiritual profit by dis-esteeme, than selfe-esteeme. Alphonsus of
Arragon answered an Orator, who had recited a long Panegyricall Oration in his
praise: Panorm. de reb. ^est. A^phon. lib 1.
If that thou have said consent with truth, I thank God for it; if not, I pray
God grant me grace that I may do it. The like temper I could wish in each
Gentleman, who in respect of means more than merit, shall many times hear
himself approved and applauded by such Tame-beasts or glozing Sycophants, who
feed on the Prodigalls trencher. Let not applause so much transport, or praise
so far remove man from himself, as to become (by the vain blast of others
breath) forgetful of himself. Humbly esteemed he of his knowledge, who
concluded: Socrat.
This I only know, that I know nothing. Nothing in respect of that I should
know* Nothing in respect of that which is enjoined me to know; Nothing in
respect of others who knew far more than ere I may know. Quomodo pros^cis,
sij^m tibi sufficis? Bern.
For (says Bernard) how can thou possibly be a proficient, if thou think
thy self already sufficient? But alas, how far has selfe-opinion estranged
Man from knowledge of himself; who rather than he will be found ignorant in
any thing, will assume upon him a supposed knowledge in every thing? He will
rather lie upon his knowledge, then seem defective in any knowledge. Whence
one speaking of the knowledge of Man's self, most divinely concludes; Nosce
teipsum first descending from Heaven to Earth, is now ascended from Earth to
Heaven, leaving miserable Man admiring his own feature, as if he were his
own Maker. And whence proceeds this, but because he has ascended unto that
Mountain, to which the first Angel ascended, Aug. in Soliloq. cap. 29.
and as a Devil descended? whereas, if he duly considered those many
imperfections whereto he is engaged; those many debts and bills of errors,
which, as yet, are undischarged; that natural or original sin wherein he
was conceived; and that actual sin wherewith he is daily polluted; he
would questionless conclude; Bernard. Medit. cap. 3.
What Is man whose first conception's misery,
Birth baine, life pain, and death necessity?
Which divine Meditation is of power to subdue the whole Man of Sin, and
bring him under the yea^^^^ of obedience, by an incessant consideration had of
Gods mercy, and man's misery; which may produce in him a more blessed effect,
by extenuating and humbling himself, both in respect of the Substance or
matter of his creation, and in respect of the irregenerate course of his
conversation: as also in contemplating the ineffable mercy of the Almighty;
whose grace it is, that directs miserable man, and reduces him from erring;
whose compassion it is, that raises him from falling; and whos^ tender mercy
it is, that supporteth him in his rising. Bu^ in my conceit, there is no one
motive more effectual, or divinely powerful, to bring us to a true and
perfect knowledge of our selves, than to observe with what passions or
perturbations we are encountered; especially when through immoderate excess,
we are in the cup of forgetfulness drowned. Which Saint Basil confirms,
saying: That passions rise up in a drunken man, like a Swarm of Bees buzzing
on every side. Which passions are not such as are prevented by reason, and
directed by virtue: for these are not altogether to be extinguished, as the
Stoics supposed, but to be provoked as movers of virtue, Plutarch. in lib. de
virtut. am^r.
as Plutarch teaches. But rather such distemp^red o^ indisposed affections as
are suggested to Man by his implacable Enemies: laboring to undermine and
ruin the glorious palace of his dear bought soul. M^tus anima (says S.
Aug.) quo^ Grae^ (...) appellant. Ex Latinis quidam ( ut Cic. 3. Tuscul.)
Perturbation^s dixerunt, alii affectiones, alii affectuo, alii expressas
p^ssiones vocaverunt. D^mascen define^h other affections of the mind.

Motio ^e^sualis appe^i^ivae virtutis, ob boni vel ma^i imaginationem. lib. 2.
de fi^. or^^^dox. cap. 22.

Zeno ap Cic. in 4. Tuscul. ita definit: Perturbatiose^ (...) avers^ recta
ratione contra natura^a (...) commotio. l^ vit. Ans^lmi.


Upon which affections seriously to meditate, were to expel all
selfe-conceited or opinion^ t^ arrogance; to become humble in our own
thoughts: concluding, that our knowledge is ignorance, our strength w^^knesse*
and our wisdom foolishness. Being (as one well observes) like a
Spring-locke, ready of our selves to shut, but not to open; apter to shut
grace from us, than to receive grace into us: or like stones upon the top of a
hill, by reason of our heavy and earthie nature, ready enough to tumble
down, but without the help or motion of another, slow enough to mount up.
Saint Anselme walking abroad in the field, and beholding a Shepherds Boy, who
had caught a Bird, and tied a stone to her leg with a thread; and ever as the
Bird mounted, the stone haled her back again. The venerable old man moved
with this sight, fell a weeping pitifully, lamenting the miserable condition of
Man, who endeavoring to ascend up to heaven by Contemplation, are detained by
the passions of the flesh; which enforce the soul to lie there like a Beast,
and not soar to heaven by that pro^er motion, which was first given her by her
Creator. ^ow to conclude this first point, (by making a fruitful use or
application of what has been already spoken) I could wish Young Gentlemen,
whose aims, perchance, are addressed to purchase rather the light freight of
foreign fashions, than the precious gemme of Selfe-knowledge, to be otherwise
minded, by conforming themselves to his Vt a Christo accepi^u^s benefici^l^^,
praes^^mus Christiani offium, (...) Christi (...) in humilitatis specul^^m,
(...) enim exemplam, (...) te dejeceris, (...). 1 (...). ^4.
pattern and example, who though he knew all things, boasted not of his
knowledge, but abased himself to make us rich in all spiritual knowledge. As
for such as are puffed up and know nothing, but dote about questions and strife
of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; we are taught
to withdraw our selves from them, because their fellowship is not of Light, but
Darkness; their knowledge no perfect nor sincere knowledge, but palpable
ignorance; their wisdom no sound nor substantial wisdom, but mere
foolishness. Their ways are not by the stocks of the Shepherds, but ragged
and uneven ways, leading their deluded followers headlong to all perdition. A
right profi^able exhortation to all such as are drawn away by strange doctrine.
Dear Christians, though I know this point to have been gravely and exactly
handled by many solid and learned Divines* whose holy oil has been
fruitfully employed in unmasking and discovering these dangerous Separatists,
who have sown the seed of pernicious doctrine in the ears of their weak
Auditory: yet I think it not amiss to press this exhortation further, lest
your speedy ruin prevent you of all hope hereafter. Beware of these
Pharisaicall Doctors, Sacerdot^s nominamu^, nonsumus. Greg. Humilium sumus
Doctores, supe^b^ae du^cs. ibid. Ne^o ta^ impius est, quem Haere^^cus impietate
non vincat. S. Hieron. lib 7. in Esa^m. Si enim Haeretici sunt, Christia^^ti
esse non possunt. Tertul. de praescript. c^p. 37. Cyprian de Vnitate. Et
Hi^^on. c^^tra Luciferianos.
whose purity only consists in semblance and outward appearance; whose
doctrine has ever a taste of pride; whose counsels ever tend to faction; and
whose ways are ever Antipodes to the truth. These are called Prophets, but
they are none: being humbl^ Teachers, but proud Doctors. Outwardly specious,
but inwardly vicious: having fair rindes, but false hearts: having a show of
godliness, but denying the power thereof. Come from among them and leave them,
for their ways lead to death, and their paths to destruction. Saint John would
not come in the Bath^ where the Heretic Cerinthus was. Another holy Man
(though most innocent) could endure to be accounted a Whoremaster, an unclean
person, and the like; but when one called him Heretic, he could bear no
longer. We have here (thanks to our Maker) more pleasant and delightful
Springs to retire to, than these troubled and corrupted Puddles, which taste of
nothing but pollution. Leave these, and love those. Where can there be Unity,
where there is no Conformity? Where a holy zeal or compassionate fervor,
when nothing is spoke but by the sons of thunder? Be ye wise unto salvation;
may godliness be your best knowledge; that, dissolved from this Tabernacle of
earth, ye may keep consort with the Angels in a blessed Harmony, because ye
resembled them on earth in mutual love and unity. And let this suffice for
the first branch, to wit, Knowledge: Now we will descend to the second, to
wit, Discourse, with some necessary Cautions very profitable, if put in use, to
direct (or rather limit) such, whose (...) liberal and profuse Speech often
times brings them within the censure of indiscretion.

DEmocritus calls Speech (...), Discourse.
the image of life, because it represents to man the occurrents and passages of
his life. Now forasmuch as through the subtlety of time, men use to shroud and
conceal their thoughts, by expressing least what they intend most; Speech
becomes a dark Image, representing man (...) as he is, Laert. lib. 6.
but as he seems. Diogenes wondered that men would not buy earthen pots before
they proved by the sound whether they were whole or broken: yet they would be
contented to buy men by their Speech. The old proverb used by Socrates, and
approved by ancient Philosophers, was this: Loquere ut te videam. Subtle
purposes were not then shadowed or gilded with fair pretenses; but so simple
were their meanings, as they needed no words of Art (merely invented to
delude) nor the gawdie ornaments of persuasive Oratorie to color them. But to
propose some necessary cautions worthy observation of the Generous in their
Discourse; I would have Young Gentlemen to beware especially of two errors,
usually occurring in Subjects of this Nature; Affectation, and Imitation: The
one for the most part arising from our selves, Two especial errors in^^dent to
Subjects of Discourse; Affe^tation. Imitation: whereof Gentlemen are seriously
caut^^ned.
the other from too ardent a desire of imitating others. The first sort
generally, are so miserably enamoured of words, as they little care for
substance. These are ever drawing a Leaden sword out of a gilded sheath; and
will not lose a dram of Rhetoric for a pound of Reason: having, as Theocrit^^
said of Anaximenes, a flood of words, but a drop of reason. Affectation
S^b^s^r^. 34
These are ever talking, till their Mint of words fail them, and then of
necessity they turn silent. These will lay themselves open to their
professedst enemy, so they may gain applause, and get the opinion of good
Speakers, being the only mark they shoot at. And indeed, these seldom hurt
others, but many times themselves: for these are those fools* which carry
their Hearts in their Mouths; and far from those wise men, which carry their
Mouths in their Hearts. Though discretion of Speech be more than Eloquence,
these prefer a little unseasoned Eloquence before the best temper of
discretion. And thus much of Affectation. Imitation.
Imitation tastes no less of barrenness, than the other of phantasticknesse:
though I must confess, this draws nearer true Humility, in that it
dis-values it self, to become a serious observer and imitator of others. But
great men especially cannot want imitators, be the occasion never so unworthy
imitation. If Caesar have an use to hold his neck aside in his discourse or
pleading, he shall have one to affect and imitate that deformity. If Vespasian
draw in his face in a purse, (as if it went hard with him) he shall have one
to represent it, as it were naturally. And, which is of all others most
intolerable, so habitually are these grounded on Imitation, as they are
conceited that nothing can so well beseem them, as this uncomely fashion which
they have observed, and now imitate in others. Whereas if they would consider
how nothing forced may appear with that decency, as when it is naturally
descended, they would ingenuously confess, that this apish or servile
imitation detracts much from the worth of man, who should subsist on himself,
and not rely on others postures. In brief, that Discourse is most generous,
which is most genuine: Nature may beseem that, which Imitation cannot: but to
address our selves to imitation of others, in that which even appears
ridiculous in the persons themselves, this infers gross stupiditie. It is
an excellent Lesson which a holy Father gives to all Discoursers, That they
should rather be given to hear than ^^ake^ and in matters of argument,
Vincent: de vit. spirit.

Ibid.

C^cero.


to assoile a needless question with silence. So as Cicero prefers wisdom
attired with ignorance, before speech attended by folly. Now because the best
of Discourse tends to persuasion, which is the life and efficacy of Speech;
and this persuasion consists on three parts; Pic Mirand. ad Her^* ol.
Life of the Speaker; Truth of the Subject; and Sobriety of Speech; of
necessity these three must be observed, ere we can have our Audience
sufficiently persuaded. Life of the Speaker.
First for the Life of the Speaker: if Speech (as we have said) be the Image
of Life, why should not we conform our Life to our Speech? We would be loath
to be taxed of indiscretion in our Speech; let us labor likewise to appear
blameless and unreproveable in our Life. For he that forgets to conform or
fashion his Life to his Speech, Iam. 1.24.
his Speech to his Life, is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a
glass: for he beholds himself, and goes his way, and straightway
forgets what manner of man he was. Wherefore Gentlemen, of all others, ought
to be most respective of their conversation: for a little soil is a great
blemish in them, whose Education promises more than inferior men. Such m^^,
for most part, gain best authority or approbation in Discourse, who have
been ever observed to speak probably, and not of Subjects above the reach or
pitch of humane conceit. Neither can any thing disparage or lay a deeper
aspersion upon the face of Gentry, than to be taxed for fabulous relations.
Especially therefore should they inure themselves to probable discourses, being
such as may gain them an opinion of reputation, and be a means to confer
more authority on their discourse. Truth of the Subject.
The second is the truth of the Subject, which must needs import much
authority: for how should we persuade, where the Subject admits no
probability of Truth? Therefore were it meet, that we make choice of what we
relate, not maintaining whatsoever we hear by report, for undoubted Trut^^ for
so should we be made Equites Asians. Iuvem.
Knights of post to all Newes-mongers, being no less ready to swear, than
they to report. I have casually fallen into the company of some, whose only
relation was noveltie: these would entertain no Discourse but foreign,
speaking as familiarly of the states of Princes, and their aims, as if they
had new crept from their bosoms. But alas, how ridiculous are these in the
sight of judicious men, whose eyes are not so sealed, but they may easily
discern the arrogancy of these, who affect rather to be admired than
believed? Excellent and proper for our present purpose, is that Fable of the
Fowler and the Bird: A Fowler having taken a Bird in his snare, was humbly
entreated by the Bird, that he would free her and give her liberty, and she
would requite this courtesy with three good Lessons; which (if duly observed)
would profit him more than her small body. Upon these conditions, the Fowler
was contented to release the poor Bird, provided, that the Lessons were so
profitable and useful unto him, as she pretended. Which, in brief, were
these: Not to lose a certainty for an incertaintie: Not to give credit to
things beyond probabilitie^. Nor to grieve for that which is past remedy.
These lessons received, the Bird was forthwith released: who being now at
liberty, and mounting aloft in the air, and triumphing in so blessed a
freedom, chanted out this merry Madrigall; Had thou known the wealth I
had,
Thou would nere have let me gone,
For it would have made thee glad
To enjoy so rich a one.
In my bladder there is a stone,
Then which, never earth brought forth
One of more unvalued worth.
This the discontented Fowler had no sooner heard, than presently he repented
himself of so rare and inestimable a loss; which the nimble Bird perceiving,
thus replied: How apt's man for to forget
What might give him most content?
Thou at Liberty me set,
When I taught thee, to repent
Nothing how the world went;
Nor what cross ere fell on thee,
If past hope of remedy.
But thou griev'st thou can not have
What thou can not get again:
Thus thou make thy self a slave
To thy self, and mourn'st in vain:
And long may thou so complain.
For my Lessons I was free,
Yet thou keep'st not one of three.
The perplexed Fowler inquisitive of knowing further, pressed the Bird again;
asking her in what particular he had broken any of her Lessons? To whom the
Bird, flickring a little with her wings, as one that gloried in her unexpected
Liberty, answered; The Lessons which I gave thou sleight'st,
And weigh'st them but a rash,
Or else thou would not lose one Bird
In hand, for two in Bush.
The next was, things incredible
Nere credited should be,
Yet thou beleev'st a precious stone
Worth worlds is hid in me.
The last, for things remediless
Thou never should complain,
And now when I am flowne from thee,
Thou wishest me again.
Many excellent Moralls are shadowed in these Fables, which may deserve
observation of the pregnant'st and maturest conceit; not only in the Subject
or substance of the admonition, but in the person which gives this admonition.
Where the Poets smoothly, but tartly, used to introduce Beasts, Birds, and such
like creatures; admonishing man, the noblest of all creatures, of his duty.
Yea of Beasts, they made choice sometimes of the grossest and contemptiblest,
as the Ass, to express the want of consideration in Man; whose diviner parts
drowned in the Lees of sensual corruption, or carnal security, become
forgetful of that, for which they were principally created. It were easy to
enlarge this Subject with much variety of examples; but my purpose is, in
digressions, rather to touch than treat. We have handled two particulars,
effectually moving to persuasion; The Life of the Speaker, that it be
unreprovable; The Nature of the Subject whereof he speaks, that it be
probable. Now we are to descend to the Third, Sobriety of Speech.
which is, Sobriety of Speech: an especial Motive to attention, being that
which Cicero much commends, and for which Hortensius was much commended.
Albeit, arguing in Sylla's cause, he was taxed by L. Torquatus, and called for
his too much effeminacie in apparel, as also for his too much action of body,
not only a common Actor, but even a Dionysia, who was famous for her moving and
wanton gesture. To whom Hortensius answered, Call thou me Dionysia? Sure I
had rather be a Dionysia than as thou art, Gell. in Noct. Attic.
Torquatus: (...): one without Learning, barbarous and uncivil. Now this
Sobriety consists not only in the pronunciation of Speech, but Sober carriage
or deportment of the Body, which indeed adds no little luster to Discourse. I
have observed in some, a kind of carelessness in their form of speaking;
which, though it gain approbation in men of eminent rank, it would seem
harsh and contemptible in men of inferior condition. Others there are, who can
never enter into any set or serious Discourse, but they must play with a
button, as if they drained their Subject from such trifling action: and These,
me thinks, resemble our Common-Fidlers, who cannot play a stroke, to gain a
world, without motion or wagging of their head, as if they had rare Crochets in
their brain: but this mimicke and apish action keeps small concurrence with
the Postures of a Gentleman, whose Speech as it should be free, native and
generous; so should the action of his body admit of no phantasticke imitation
or servile affectation, which expresses little, save a degenerate quality or
disposition. Others I have likewise noted, to conclude their Set speeches with
winkes and nods, as if the understanding of the whole world were confined to
the circumference of their brain: and these usually express more soliditie of
conceit in the action of their bodies, than the motion of their tongues. For
oft-times, through want of matter (being gravelled with an affected gravitie)
they are forced to trifle time in impertinences, and leave that matter
untouched for which they came. I could wish that Young Gentlemen would
principally observe this Lesson, to be sober in arguments of Discourse, but
especially in reasoning: for there is nothing that darkeneth or obscureth the
Light of reason, Immoderate passion, in arguments of Discourse and reasoning,
to be avoided.
more than the boundless effects of Passion, which makes a man forgetful of
that he should say, no less than indiscreet in that he does say. But
especially in public assemblies, where difference of judgments oft-times
rack our Speeches to a higher pin, ought deliberation to be had: for there we
cannot recall so soon what we have spoke amiss, as in private, where less
premeditation may afford matter of satisfaction. I approve likewise of his
opinion, who would have such, whose pleasant conceits minister content to the
Hearer, if they mean to jest publicly, and force their wits to stem the
stream of worlds judgments, (which, I say, are different, and therefore more
observant) that they use Pericles custom, who determining to speak any thing
publicly, desired the immortal gods, that no improvident word should pass
his mouth. Certainly, whosoever he be that speaks and never meditates, may be
compared to the unclean beast, who digests and never ruminates. Neither is it
hard to gather this, even by their Discourse, which consists merely on
ventositie, digressive and impertinent, spending much wind to small purpose:
resembling Pytheas that foolish Orator, Plutarch. in vit. Phoc.
who would never leave his babbling. He that meditates before he be prepared
(says one) builds his house before stones be gathered. But sure I am, he that
discourses before he be provided, serves up his dishes before they be
seasoned. Albeit Tiberius be said to do better in any Oration extempore,
than premeditate. Two powerful motives of persuasion; Vibemencie of Passion;
and Instancie of ^^monstration.
Now I could reduce these discursive motives of Persuasion, to two general
heads: to wit, vehemency of Passion; or instancie of Demonstration: and first
for vehemency of Passion, here may we produce an apt and proper example. There
came a man to Demosthenes, desiring his help to defend his cause, and told him
how one had beaten him: Demosthenes answered him again, saying: I do not
believe this to be true: the Plaintiff then thrusting out his voice aloud,
said: What, has he not beaten me? Yes indeed (quoth Demosthenes) I believe it
now, for I hear the voice of a man that was beaten indeed. Whence appears,
what effects vehemency of Passion produces, expressing her wrongs so well in
words, as they enforce belief to the Hearer. Likewise, because examples
illustrate, though they do not prove; touching instancie of Demonstration, we
have an excellent one in that of Cato: who determined to strike the Senate and
Romans in fear, discoursed at large of the Carthaginian wars, aggravating
the danger by proper circumstances, which threatened the public State; and
instancing the ruin of many eminent and flourishing States occasioned by the
security of their people. But they objecting again, that Carthage was far
from them; He showed them green figs, implying thereby that Carthage was not
far distant, for otherwise the figs would have been dried and withered.
These kinds of Discourses, seconded by instance, are very moving and
persuasive; for as Speech is called the object of the ear, so is such kind of
instance an object to the eye, which must needs be more persuading, because
visibly appearing. But we have enlarged this Subject too much; wherefore to
draw in our sails, and apply particularly, what in general has been
discoursed: I could wish Young Gentlemen considerate in what they speak,
because Speech is termed the Index of the Mind, and can best express him,
whether he taste of rind or pith. Now because moderation of the tongue is such
an absolute virtue, as it displayeth the wisdom of him that has it; whence
the wisest of all Princes, He that bridleth his tongue is most wise: I must
needs prefer discreet Silence before loquacitie, for, in much speech there
shall want no sin (says Solomon:) whereas Silence is exempted from all
Censure, Est ^n^m fi^eli ^^ta fill u^o merces. Ho^. car^d 3 od 2.
so it be mixed with discretion. It is said that Pythagoras would desire two
things of God (if the poss^bility thereof could stand with the conservation of
humane Society:) that he might not speak, that he might not eat: for by the
one, he should prevent offense in discourse, by the other, avoid surfeit
through excess. Whence the Poet; Silence is such a soule-entrancing charm,
It may do good, but can do little harm.
Albeit that Pythagorian silence I cannot approve of, being many times
prejudicial to the public state: for by silence (says the Orator) is error
approved, Silentio culpa crescit. I^dor.
the luster of virtue darkened, good and wholesome precepts suppressed; whereby
Youth might be instructed, private families directed, all inordinate motions
corrected, and the whole structure of this little world, Neque Imperiale est
libertatem dicendi negare, neque Sacerdotale quod senti^t, non ^cere. Ambros.
Epist. 17.
Man, rectified and repaired. But especially in divine professors and
dispencers of the sacred word, is Silence most hurtful: for these should be
shrill Trumpets in sounding and delivering the sweet tidings of salvation, the
tidings of peace and spiritual consolation. The Pastor (says a blessed
Father) by holding his peace, doubtlesly kills sinners: Greg.
that is, when he will not tell the house of Jacob his sins, nor Israel her
transgressions; but cries, peace, peace, when there can be no true peace: for
what peace unto the wicked, says the Lord? So as the word of the Lord which
came unto the Prophet, rouzed him up with this fearful caveat: Ezech. 3.18.
If thou give not the ungodly warning, he shall perish, but his blood will I
require at thy hand. With whom the Apostle harmoniously joyneth; 1 Cor. 9.16.
Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. For in that cause wherein the
faithful and painful Pastor is to please God, he is to slight the pleasure
or displeasure of men. Now Gentlemen, ye whose Education has engaged you
far in the expectance and opinion of others; ye whose more generous breeding
promises more than others; ye whose nobler parts should distinguish you from
others; let not those innate seeds of Gentilitie first sown in you, as in a
hopeful Seed-plot, be nipped in their rising: which, that ye may the better
prevent, exercise your selves in noble discourses, not wanton or petulant, for
these breed a dangerous corruption even in the life and conversation of man.
Ludev. Viv. instruct. christ. Mul.
Quintilian would not have Nurses to be of an immodest or uncomely Speech,
adding this cause; Lest (says he) such manners, precepts, and discourses as
young children learn in their unriper years, Ad^oque ut errorem cum lacte
Nutrici^ sugunt. Ci^.
remain so deeply rooted, as they shall scarce ever be relinquished. Sure I
am, that the first impressions, whether good or evil, are most continuate, and
with least difficulty preserved. How necessary then is it, that an especial
care or respect be had herein, Vb^ra la^^^ and luc^^, alent vo^ milit^^ Supremi
Ducis.
that choice be made of such, whose modest and blameless conversation may
tender you their breasts in your infancy, and furnish you with grave and
serious precepts in your minority? that your Knowledge may be fruitful; your
Discourses useful; and your actions in the eyes of the Almighty grateful. Of
which Action, we are now to speak; being the third Branch which we observed in
our definition of Education.

THat Education is the seasoner of our actions, Action.
we shall easily prove, if we observe the rare and incredible effects derived
from it: which, that we may the better do,
you are to know, that every Action has two handles; (...).
the One whereof consists in contriving; the other in performing. In the
former, we are to observe deliberation: whence the Orator; before we take any
thing in hand, Cic. S^n. de tranq. anim.
we are to use a diligent or serious preparation; that we may effect what we
intend, and more prosperously succeed in that we take in hand. In the Latter,
is diligence required; for what is premeditation or preparation worth, if it be
not by diligence seconded? When Annibal was a child and at his fathers
commandment,
he was brought into the place where he made sacrifice, Appian. Alexan
and laying his hand upon the Altar, swore, that so soon as he had any rule in
the Commonwealth, he would be a professed enemy to the Romans: nor did he
infringe the vow which his infancy had professed, but expressed when he came
to be a man, what he had protested to perform being a child. No device
unassayed, no Stratagem uncontrived, no Labor neglected, no Task unattempted,
which might confer honor on Carthage, or express his mortal and implacable
hate to Rome. The admirable effects of Education.
In this one example, we shall see the strength of Education: for though
Annibal had no cause personally given him, to vow all hostility rather on Rome
than any other place; yet in respect he received his breeding from such as were
professed foes to the Romans, he seconds their hate, resolving to live and die
Romes enemy. The like may be observed in the demeanor and conversation of men:
in which respect also, Education discovers her absolute power. Educatio and
doctrina efficient mores. Seneca.
For shall we not see some, whose fair outsides promise assured arguments of
singular worth, for want of breeding mere painted Trunks, glorious features,
yet shallow Creatures? and whence comes this, but through want of that which
makes man accomplished, seconding nature with such exquisite ornaments, as they
enable him for all managements public or private? Licurg^^ brought two dogs,
the one savage, wild and cruel; the other trained; to let the people see the
difference betwixt men brought up well, and badly: and withal to let them
understand the great good of keeping laws. Now what are these savage and wild
dogs, bu^ resemblances of such, whose untrained Youth never received the first
impressions of a generous Education? These, Without learning Hercules becomes a
Tyrant, Darius insolent, Achilles inordinate.
as they were bred in the Mountains, so their conversation is mountainous,
their behavior harsh and furious, their condition distempered and odious. Yet
see the misery of custom! what delight these will take in actions of
incivilitie! nothing relisheth with them, save what they themselves affect; nor
can they affect ought worthy approbation: for Education (which one calls an
early custom) has so far wrought with them, as they approve of naught
freely, affect naught truly, nor intend ought purposely, save what the
rudeness of Education has inured them to. These men's aims are so far from
attaining honor, as they partake of nothing which may so much as have the
least share in the purchase of Honor. Their minds are depressed, and as it
were earth-turned: for they aspire to nothing which may have being above them;
neither can they stoop any lower, for nothing can be under them. Nor can their
actions be noble, when their dispositions by a malevolent custom are grown so
despicable. Hence it is, Pars divina in homine mersa.

Sen.

Lips.


that the Philosopher says; The divine part in such men is drowned, because
not accommodated to what it was first ordained. For how is it possible that
their affections should mount above the verge of earth, whose breeding and
being has been ever in earth? Phavorinus.
They (says Phavorinus) who suck sowes milk, will love wallowing in the
mire: inferring, that as our Education has formed us, so will we address our
selves in the passage and current of our life. For as Nature is too strong to
be forced, so Education (being a second Nature) has kept too long possession
to be removed. She it is, that in some sort moldeth our actions and affections,
framing us to her own bent; as if we received all our discipline from her, by
whom we were first nourished, and since tutored. But you may object, if
Education express such power, as her first native impressions cannot be
suppressed; how did those men appear educated, whose first breeding was in
mountains, and afterward advanced to no less glory than a Diadem? Such were
Romulus and Remus; that translater of the Median Empire to the Persians,
victorious Cyrus; and he who from the Plow-stilts was elected Emperor, to wit,
Gordius. Surely their Education came far short of that which is expected in
the majesty of a Prince; yet what inimitable presidents of renown were these,
showing much resolution in conquering, and no less policy in retaining what
they had conquered? To begin with the first, to wit, Romulus; truth is, Vid.
Tit. Live. Luc. Flor. Plut. in vit. Romans Among Wolves was his Education, by
Vultures his Inauguration.
he laid the first foundation of a glorious and flourishing State; yet as his
Nurse was a Wolf, he played the Wolf to his brother. He planted his kingdom
in blood, as his infancy received food from her, whose native disposition
affects blood. Neither can I be persuaded, that his carriage could be so
civil, as that his first breeding left no relic nor relish of barbarism:
especially, when I read what injuries or indignities were offered the Sabines
by him, Hipastores pecorum, magis quam reges g^n^ium.
what cruelties were acted upon his own uncle, what impieties were committed
upon the neighboring Heards-men: the multitude whereof expressed how cruelly
he was naturally addicted, and that the first seeds which his savage Education
had sown in him, could hardly be suppressed. Touching Cyrus, Xenophon. in
Cyropaedia.
no question his breeding was not altogether in the Mountains, for he had
recourse or resort (though unknown) to Asti^ges Court, where he received no
small bettering in the progress of his reign. Neither (as it may probably be
collected) would Harpagus permit so great hopes, as were treasured in him, and
by all Auguries and Predictions likely to be confirmed of him, to be destitute
of instructions fit and accommodate for so high a person. Forels^, how should
such excellent Laws have been devised; such exquisite Cautions for state
government provided; the Empire of the Medes, with whom it had so long
continued, to the Persians peaceably translated, and without faction
established? These (I say) might probably confirm, how well this victorious
Shepherd was furnished with all precepts apt to inform him; stored with all
princely habiliments fit to accomplish him; and exercised in all regal
discipline, the better to prepare him against all occurrents that should
assail him. For the last, as he was from obscurity raised, so did he little in
all his time that could be worthily praised, being more skillful in setting of
a Turnep, than settling of a state; more experienced in correcting the luxurious
growth of his Vine, than rectifying those abuses raging and reigning in his
time: so as, his small acquaintance in state-affaires, during his Minority,
made him less affected to those employments in his riper years. Whereas, if we
reflect upon the noble and inimitable exploits of Alexander the great, whose
fame has given life to many Volumes, we shall see that his princely Education
gave him such rare impressions of glorious emulation in his father Philip, as
it raised him to those hopes he afterward attained. For where was that Enemy
he encountered with, that he overcame not? that City he besieged and won not?
that Nation he assailed and subdude not? yet who more mildly affected, Quint.
Curt. Plutarch. in vit. Alex.
though a Soldier; or more humble-minded, though a Conqueror? which may
appear by that answer of this invincible Chieftaine to his Mother; who
desirous to execute an innocent harmless man, the better to prevail with him,
remembered him, that her self for the space of nine months had carried him in
her womb, and for that reason he must not say her nay. But what replied he?
Ask (says he) good mother some other gift of me: for the life of a Man can be
recompensed by no benefit. Behold a princely disposition lively charactred,
having an eye no less to saving than subduing; Hominis enim sal^^ nullo
beneficio pensa^ur.
to receive mercy than to gain a victory; to preserve the conquered than
become a conqueror; to get a friend than to win a field! which, as it requires
a noble and free disposition, not engaged to cruelty, boundless ambition,
desire of triumph without compassion; so questionless it shows a composed,
civil, and generous Education: for these exclaim not with the Poet; Seneca.
Omnis in ferro est salus:
but esteem it the most glorious conquest to be subduers of their own wills,
preferring the saving of a life before the gaining of an Empire. Yet do I not
conclude these men to be exquisite, as if they were freed from all such
insulting affections as usually invade the breasts of these high aspirers: for
so should I renounce the credit and authority of all Histories.
Themistocles (as I have elsewhere noted) walked in the open street because he
could not sleep: the cause whereof when some men did enquire, he answered,
that the triumph of Miltiades would not suffer him to take his rest: Tusc.
quest. lib. quart.
see the strength of Ambition, how powerfully it subdued a man of approved
resolution and exquisite temper! Pausanias killed Philip of Macedon only for
fame and vainglory:
see the weakness of a high spirit, whom the least blast of flickring fame
could so transport, as to embrue his hands in blood to gain him an infamous
glory. No, my aim is rather to express the noble acts and achievements of
such whose breeding had sh^wne them as well by Precept as Example, what might
best become such eminent Personages. Hippocrates recounteth of a certain sort
of men, who to be different from the vulgar (being men more nobly descended)
chose for a token of their Nobility, to have their head like a Sugar-loafe:
and to shape this figure by Art, when the child was borne, the Midwives took
care to bind their heads with swathes and bands, until they were fashioned to
the form. And this artificialnesse grew to such force, as it was converted
into nature: for in process of time, all the children that were borne of
Nobility, had their heads sharp from their mothers womb. For the truth of
this Relation I will not argue much, but sure I am, if Art have such power on
the outward form, Education, which is termed a second Nature, can produce no
less effect from the inward man. Stilpho. Alcib^ades. Affrican. Marc^llus.
For have we not read, how diverse naturally addicted to all licentious
motions, by reading moral Precepts, and conversing with Philosophers, became
absolute commanders of their own affections? Have they not (some I mean, and
those of place and esteem) even in the height of their desires, when
opportunity was offered, an occasion ministered, and all motives to a sensual
banquet mustered, restrained their desires, subjected sense to the obedience of
reason, and became Kings by not consenting, whereas they had become despicable
Slaves by yielding? Yes, and in that more remarkable, that they were Heathens,
who had no knowledge of God, but directed by the light of Nature only. How a
Gentleman may be best enabled by Education.
What then may we imagine might be done by long Education and continual
practice, during the time of Infancy, which (as the Philosopher says) is that
smooth and unwritten Table, apt to receive any impression either of good or
evil? For which cause, as all times require instruction, so this time
especially, because subject to correction; which moved sundry Peers to send
for certain wise and discreet men to instruct their children during their
greener years. Achilles had his Phoenix, Alexander his For Aristotle,
howsoever termed his master, is thought to have flourished when he came to
riper years.

Vid Ep. Alexan ad Arist. conscriptam, de sit. and stat. Ind.


Calisthenes, Alcibiades his Socrates, Cyrus his Xenophon, Epaminondas his
Lycias, Themistocles his Symmachus: to whom they ought more (as they themselves
confessed) than to their own natural parents: for, from them (their parents I
say) they received only living, but from these they received means of living
well. But me thinks we decline rather to Knowledge than Action; let us
therefore press this point a little further, and return to where we left.
Three things moved Tiberius to send Drusus into Illyricum: ^he first was,
senescere militiae: the second, s^u diae exercitus parare: the third, simul
juvenem urb^no luxu lascivient^m melin^in castris haberi reabatur Tiberius.
Tacit.
During that prosperous and successive time of victorious Sylla, Pompey the
great, then a young man and serving under him, received such seasoning from his
military discipline, as made him afterward chosen amongst so many brave
Spirits, to try the hazard of fortune with the victorious Caesar. Nor was his
judgment inferior (if we may build on the credit of History) to his potent
Adversary, though Fortune made him her Slave, triumphing no less in the quest
of his death, than view of his conquest. Themistocles (whose name as we have
often repeated, so in all Records worthily renowned) having been trained from
his infancy in the discipline of war, became so affected, and withal so
opinionate in himself of Martial affairs, as being moved on a time at a
public feast to play upon the Lute, answered; I cannot fiddle, but I can make
a small Town a great City. See what long use in experiments of war had
brought a Noble Soldier to! His actions were for the public state; his aims
not to delight himself or others with the effeminate sound of the Lute,
Militis ira non lyra, sed t^ba so not.

^ne^ telis est nota chelys.


but to strike terror in his foe with his sharpe-pointed Lance. Now what
should we think of these, whose more erected minds are removed from the
refuse and rubbish of earth, (which our base Groundlins so much toil for) b^t
that their thoughts are sphered above the Orb of fear? Death cannot amate
them, imminent peril deter them, disadvantage of place or inequality of
power discourage them; this is their Canto, and they sing it cheerfully: The
only health (what is ever do befall)
That we expect, is for no health at all.
This might be confirmed by sundry Histories of serious consequence, especially
in those memorable Sieges of Rhodes, Belgrade, Vienna, and many other; where
the resolution of their Governors slighted the affronts of that grand Enemy
of Christendom, the Turk, and by their valor purchased to themselves both
safety and Honor. Thus far have we proceeded in our Discourse of Education,
which we have sufficiently proved to be a Seasoner of Action, as well as of
Speech or Knowledge. Neither in actions military only, but in all Manual Arts
practiced in Rome during her glorious and flourishing State: from which even
many ancient Families received their name, beginning and being. As the Figuli
from the Potters; the Vitrei from the Glaziers, the Ligulae from the Pointers;
the Pictores from the Painters; the Pistores from the Bakers. All which (as we
may read in most of the Roman Authors) had applied themselves, even in the
first grounds of their Education to these Arts, wherein they grew so excellent,
as they enriched their posterity by their careful industry. But to speak
truly of Action, as it is generally taken, neither Speech, nor Knowledge, of
which we have heretofore spoken, can well want it. Wherefore Demosthenes
defining the principal part of an Oration, Cic. in Bruto.
said, it was Action: the second the Same: the third no other than Action.
Isocrates.
Isocrates for lack of a good voice, (^therwise called the father of
Eloquence) never pleaded publicly. And Cicero says, some men are diserti
viri, but for lack of Action, or rather untowardnesse, habiti sunt infantes.
Whence it is, that Sextus Philosophus says, Sext. Philosophus.
our Body is, Imago animi. For the Mind is ever in action; it rests not,
but is ever laboring, plotting or contriving, addressing it self ever to
employment. The like affinity has Action with Knowledge: for barren,
fruitless and livelesse is that Knowledge which is not reduced to Action.
Whence it is, that many (too many, heaven knows) bury their knowledge in the
grave of obscurity, reaping content in being known to themselves without
communicating their Talent to others. But this is hiding of their Talent in a
Napkin, putting their Candle under a Bushel; resembling the envious spiteful
man, who will not open his mouth to direct the poor Passenger in his way, or
suffer his neighbor to light his candle at his: for both imply one thing, as
the Poet excellently sings; Eunius.
Who sets the trav'ller in his journey right,
Does with his candle give his neighbor light.
Yet shines his candle still, and does bestow
Light on himself, and on his neighbor too.
For this burying or suppressing of knowledge, it may be aptly compared to the
rich Miser, whose best of having is only possessing; for that Communicative
good he knows not, but admires so much the Golden Number, as he prefers it
before the Numbering of his days. Yea, as it is much better not to have
possessed, than to mis-imploy that whereof we were possessed; so is he in a
happier case who never knew any thing, than such a Man who knew much, yet never
made a Communicative or edifying use of his knowledge. As may appear by the
Parable of the Talents. The Contemplative part indeed affords infinite content
to the Spiritual man, whose more erected thoughts are not engaged to the
Meditations of earth, but are spheared in a ^ighe Orb. Plutarch. in vit.
Marcell.
This man's Mind, like Archimedes aim, should Enemies invade him, death and
danger threaten him, inevitable ruin surprise him, his desire is only to
perform his task, and that task the highest pitch of a soule-solacing
Contemplation. And this kind of Rapsodie, or intrancing of the Soul (as I may
term it) ministers unspeakable delight to the Mind of that man, who is
usually affected to these divine aspirations, as a godly Father terms them.
Yet these contemplative persons, whose retiredness of estate, immunitie, or
vacation from public government have drawn their affections wholly from the
thought of earth or conversing with men; as they relish more of the Cloister,
than society of Nature; more of the Cell or frocke, than Community which
affords the most fruit; so they never extend further than satisfying their own
disconsorting humor. Habet ornatum satu illo majore^; habet aliud spectaculum,
ad illud specta^ulum te compone. Quod e^go ^ibi est spectaculum? Coelum,
Angelorum inuum^ra multitudo. Chrysostom. hom. 28. in epist. 12. ad Hebraeos.
I confess indeed, their contemplations far exceed the worldly man's, for his
are to earth confined; or the voluptuous man's, for his are to pleasures
chained; or the ambitious, for his are to Honors gaged; or the deluded
Alchimist (whose knowledge is a palpable mist) for his are to impossible hopes
restrained; yet as profit and pleasure make the sweetest Music: so
Contemplation joined with Practice, make the fruitfullest knowledge. To
conclude our Discourse touching Education, on which as the principall'st
Seasoner of Youth, we have long insisted; may the first Seeds of your more
hopeful harvest, (worthy Gentlemen) be so sown, as they may neither by
extremity of Winter, that is, by too awful rigor, be nipped; nor by the
scorching heat of Summer, that is, too much connivencie of your Tutor, parched.
So may your Country reap what she has with long hope expected, and receive a
plentiful crop of that which she her self, by hopeful Education, has long
manured.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of the Necessity of a Vocation; No man is exempted from it; Of Vocation in
general; Of the Vocation of a Gentleman in particular; And how he is to employ
himself therein.

VOCATION.
VOCATION is a peculiar calling allotted to every one according to his degree.
Observat. 4.
Wherein we are to consider; First, a Necessity of Vocation; Secondly, no
Exemption from that Vocation: and first of the first. In that original or
primitive purity of man's Nature, I say before his Fall, there was no such
command exhibited, as was afterward enjoined. For then He was created pure,
and deputed Sovereign over a pleasant and flourishing Empire, a delightful
Eden, receiving no inhibition after so large and ample a commission, save this,
That of the Tree of good and evil, Genesis 2.17.
he should not eat of it. But when Adam had transgressed, this command was
forth with directed to him and his sin-stained posterity: in the sweat of his
face should he eat bread. Gen 3.19.
Then, then, and not till then began Adam to delve, Eve to spin; inferring that
the Sweat of their brows should earne them a Living. There were none that did
gallant it in the works of Qui luxuriant in verinium operibus. Chrysostom. tom
1. hom. 18. in G^xes.

Fe^untur quidam ex India vermiculi, hujusmodi facere vestes. Idem tom. 4. hom.
2. in 1 ad Timoth.


Worms. There were none that pierced the bowels of the Imus in viscera terr^,
and in sede maniaem op^s quaerimus; c^usque pen. tr^t luxuria Pl^n hi^t
Natural. lib 33.
Earth for precious stones to adorn them; None that had mind of precious Quid
me^^-rem pre^ios^rum aeromatum, quae ex India, ex Arabi^, and ex Perside
convehuntur. Sunt siuv, unguen^a pre tio^a, quae no^ ex Arabia, vel ex Perside,
sed ex ipso convihunt^r coelo, quae emuntur, non aura, sed fide non ficta.
Ch^ysost c. 1. tom. 4. hom. 2. in 1 ad Tim. August. tom. 10, Sermon. (...) Temp.
Odours and aromaticall sweets to perfume them. In brief, None held it then a
grace to have the outcast Animaltum que v^nto feruntur, delitiae. Clem. Alex.
Pad l^b. 2. cap. 10.
Feathers of Birds to plume them; The very excrements of Et sua v^s^^menta and
veste^st^ agulas sassumigant, and aspergunt: atque adeo ut ipsas propemodum
matulas. Clemens Alex. Paed. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Beasts to sent them; The bowels and entralls of Vermium texturae. Chrysostom.
tor. 1. hom. 37. in Genes.
Worms, to cloth them; The white excretions of Maximi antem pret^i Margarita
mulierum conclave invasit: ca aut^m nascitur in quodom ostre^. Cle. Alex.
Paed^g. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Shellfish to deck them. Those Leatherne coats were provided to cover man's
shame, and do evince him of Quae pecca^oremfactum convincerent. Aug. l. 11. de
G^ne^. edli er. and cap. 32.
Sin. They were provided likewise to repel the extremity of Dico
ergoho^inem, non al a de caisa opus habere vestimentis. qu^m ut teg it ^^
corpus, ad maxima frigora and vehementes aestus propul andos: h^c est vestus
s^^pus. Clem. d. ex. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 10. Verbera ventorum vitare imbrisque
^o^ct^s. Lueret. lib. 5.
Heat and Cold, to shelter him against the violence of all seasons. There were
other Vocations then intended and attended, other labors proposed and
sustained, other fashions used and observed than the vanities of this age,
where the Devil, that (...), that imitating and apish thing, as Libel de Imag.
Horat. l. 1. epist. 2.
Damascen calls him, peccati fomenta succendit, kindles those foments of sin to
train wretched man to the Lake of perdition. Hence it is, that he sets up that
vexillum superbiae, to which all the sons and daughters of vanity repair;
affecting incivilitie before modesty, inquiring after the fashion, not how
neat it is, but how new it is. These imagine it a Labor sufficient, a Vocation
for their state and degree equivalent, to spend the whole Morn till the
Midday in tricking, trimming, painting and purfling, studying rather to Die
well, than Live well. These are they who beautify themselves for the Stage, to
become deluding Spectacles to the unbounded affections of Youth. They make time
only a Stale for their vanities, and so prostitute their hours (those swift
Coursers of man's pilgrimage) to all enormous Liberty. These are Penelopes
wooers, gilded gallants, whose best of discourse is complement, or apish
formalitie, whose best thoughts reach but to where they shall dine, or the
choice of an Ordinary; and whose best actions are but ravishing of favors from
the Idols of their fancy. But how far short come these of that Necessity
of Vocation enjoined them? They think it sufficient so to attire themselves,
as they may become gracious in the eye of their Mistress: Ornamentum est qu^d
ornat: ernat autem quod honestiorem mulierem facit.

Plutari. in Praecept. Connubial. Hoc ipsum, quod vos non ornatis ornatus est.
Ambros. lib. 1. de Virg.

Ambros. tom. 4. lib. 1. Offic. c. 18.


whereas that, wherein they seem to themselves most gracious, to the eye of a
grave and considerate man may seem most odious: as in apparel, we say that
only to be commendable which is comely, that laudable which is seemly: for it
is an ornament which adorneth. Now how deformed are many of our rayments drawn
from foreign Nations, and as ill-seeming our Ilanders, as Cockle-chaines
Agricola's soldiers? Certainly, this attire becomes not a Christian, but
such as are prostitutes to the whore of Babylon. The garment of a true follower
of Christ, is innocence, which, because it cannot be simple or absolute, we
should endeavor to lessen our imperfections daily, becoming conformable to his
Image, who being free from sin, took upon him our sin, to free us from the
guile of sin, and punishment due unto sin. Let us therefore endeavor our
selves, I say, to attain the reward of our high calling in Christ: which that
we may the better obtain and purchase at his hands, Phil. 3.13, 14
by whom we expect reward, we are in the mean time to serve him in our
vocation here on earth, that we may reign with him in heaven. The necessity
of a vocation.
Now that there is a Necessity of Vocation enjoined all, of what rank or
degree soever, we may prove by many pregnant places of Scripture, inveighing
against Idleness, and commending employment unto us. Amongst which, that of
the Prophet Ezechiel may be properly applied to our purpose. Behold (says he,
speaking of the sins of Jerusalem) this was the iniquity of thy sister
Sodom; Ezech. 16 49.
pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her
daughters: neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. Again,
in that of the Proverbs: He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with
bread: Prove. 12.11.8 9.
but he that follows the idle, is destitute of understanding. Again: He that
is slothful in his work is even the brother of him that is a great waster.
Again, that of the Son of Sirach: If thou set thy servant to labor, Ecclus.
33.25.27.
thou shall find rest: but if thou let him go idle, he shall secke liberty.
Again: Send him to Labor that he go not idle: for idleness brings much
evil. This likewise the blessed Apostle admonishes the Thessalonians of, 2
These. 3.10, 11.
saying: For even when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there
were any which would rot work, that he should not eat. For we hear, that
there are some which walk among you inordinately, 12.
and work not at all, but are busy bodies. Therefore them that are such, we
warn and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and
eat their own bread. Again, that serious exhortation of the Apostle to
Timothy, describing the natures of such factious and busy bodies as intend
themselves to no settled employment: 1 Timothy 5.13
but being idle, they learn to go about from house to house: yea, they are
not only idle, but also pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things which are
not comely. Again, that express charge given by the Apostle touching every
ones distinct profession or Vocation: Let every man abide in the same vocation
wherein he was called. 1 Cor. 7 20.
See here how much Idleness is condemned, Health comes not from the clouds
without seeking, nor wealth from the clods without digging.
and Labor commended; the former being the mother of all vices; the latter a
cheerer, cherisher, and supporter of all virtues. For wherein may man better
express himself than in the display and dispatch of such offices to the
management and execution whereof he was first created? Virtue, as it consists
in action, time in revolution, so the maze of man's life in perpetual motion:
wherein non progredi est regredi, non procedere recedere est. It is given to
man to labor, for life it self is a continuate labor. See then the
Necessity of a Vocation, being a peculiar labor allotted or deputed to any
one person in particular. Vocation a peculiar labor or function, particularly
allotted to say one person.
Whence sprung up first the diversity of trades and occupations, which now by
process of time have aspired to the name of Companies, gaining daily new
prerogatives, the better to encourage them in their several Offices. It is a
saying of Cn. Bentatus; That he had rather be dead, than live dead: meaning,
that vacancie from affairs, and retiring from such actions as tend to the
conservation of humane society, was rather to die than to live. For Life, that
is compared to a Aliis micens, consumor.
Lamp or burning Taper, so long as it is fed with oil, gives light; being an
Emblem of man's life, which should not be obscured or darkened, but ever sending
forth her rays or beams both to light it self, and others. Whence the Poet;
Life is a Lamp whose oil yields light enough:
But spent, it ends, and leaves a stinking snuff.
Gellius compares man's life to Iron: Iron (says he) if exercised, A^l. Gell.
in Noct A^t c. Add quod ingenium lon^a ^a^igine lasum T^rpet, and est multo,
quam fuit ante, minus.

Vi^a quanto magis proced^^, tanto propues ad mortem accedit. Aug. Solil^^. c.
2. 2 Samuel 13.29. Ester. 7 10. 2 King. 19.37. Dan. 5.4. 2 Samuel 17.23. 2 King. 2
24. Ibid. 7 17. Luke 12 ^^. Gen 49 33. Act. 7.60. 1 Cor. 15.57. Ec^les. Hi^t.


is in time consumed, if not exercised, is with rust wasted. So as this rust*
which indeed is rest from employment, does no less consume the Light or Lamp
of our Life, than labor or exercise: for our life decays no less when we
are eating, drinking, or sleeping, than toyling or traveling about our worldly
affairs. So much of our life is shortened, as we are even in these things,
which preserve and sustain nature, employed: thus death creepes on us when we
least think of it, surprising us when we least expect it. Some with Ammon
carousing, others with Haman persecuting, or with Sanherib blaspheming, or with
Belshazzar sacrilegiously profaning, Ahitophel plotting, the Children mocking,
that incredulous Prince of Israel distrusting, or that rich man in the Gospel
presuming. Few or none with Jacob exhorting, with Martyr-crowned Steven
blessing, with the Apostles rejoicing, or with all those glorious Martyrs,
whose garments were deep died in the blood of zeal, singing and triumphing.
And a good reason may be here produced, why many die so woefully dejected: for
how should they cloze their days cheerfully, who have spent all their days
idly? Deuteronomy. 28.30.
If they that disobey God, shall plant the vineyard* and others shall eat the
fruit; how may those expect to be partakers of the fruit of the vineyard, who
neither obey God nor plant vineyard? How long have many, whose exquisite
endowments were at first addressed for better employments, stood idling in the
marketplace, never making recourse to Gods vineyard, either to dung or water
it, refresh or cherish it; laboring rather to break down her branches, than
sustain it? How many be there, who will rather employ whole years in
contriving some curious Banqueting House, than one month in erecting one
poor Almes-house? How choice and singular will the most be in their
Tabernacles of clay, Xista potius quam Zenodech^a, regia potius palatia, qu^m
tecta in panperum solatia, erigent.
while the inward Temple goes to ruin? As Charles the Emperor said of the
Duke of Venice his building, when he had seen his princely Palace like a
Paradise on earth: Haec sunt, quae nos invi^^s faciunt mori. They draw us back
indeed, and hale us from meditation of a more glorious building, which needs
not from the inhabitant any repairing. How necessary is it for us then, to
address our selves to such employments, as may confer on the state public a
benefit? For as we have insisted on the Necessity of a Vocation, so are we
to observe the conveniences of a Vocation. Which that we may the better do,
we are to consider three especial things, Three necessary considerations
touching the conveniencie of a Vocation.
which as Scales or Greeses may bring us to the right use and exercise of our
Vocation. The first Consideration is Divine, or to Godward; the second Civil,
or to Man-ward; the third Peculiar, and to our selves-ward. For the first,
because indeed the rest have dependence on it, and could have no subsistence
but from it; we are to consider by whom we are deputed to such a place or
office, A divine consideration.
(...) for what end. The person by whom we are so deputed, is God, who in his
goodness as he has bestowed an Image more noble and glorious on us than on
any other creature, so has he enabled us to execute our place under him with
due fear and reverence to his name, ever observing the end for which we were
to such places deputed; which is, to honor him, and be helpful unto others
who resemble him: which is the second Consideration we before observed, A
civil consideration.

Amore Dei amor vicini giga^tur; amore vicini amor Dei nutritur.


and termed Civil, because in civil society requisite to be performed. By
the love of God (says a good Father) is love to our Neighbor engendered, by
the love of our Neighbor is our love toward God increased. Now if we should
communicate all that we possess unto our Neighbors, and want this Love,
which only makes the work fruitful and effectual, we were but as tinkling
cymbals; O^atio inter maxima charitatis opera nume^and^ est.

The effect of prayer confirmed.


we are therefore incessantly to crave of God by prayer* which (as that godly
Divine says) is to be numbered amongst the greatest works of Charity; that he
would infuse into us the fervor of his Love, by which only is granted us to
^^^taine true Neighbourly Love, performing such works of charity in our
vocation, Exodus 17.2.
as we may preserve that union and communion, which members of one mystical
body have one with another. And this Love thus planted, cannot be so silenced
or smothered, but it will be discovered, and that by such effects as are
usually derived from charity: for these will not grind the face of the poor
by extortion, or draw tears from ^he Orphans eyes by oppression, or sow the
seed of dis^ord betwixt neighbor and neighbor by the spirit of Contention.
No, as they are placed in a vocation, they will show themselves to all
helpful, to none hurtful. They will be an eye to the blind to direct them, a
staff to the Lame to support them, a visitant to the Sick to comfort them, a
Samaritan to the w^unded to heal them, a garment to the naked to cover them,
meat to the hungry to releeve them, drink to the thirsty to refresh them:
being all unto all, that by all means they might gain some. These are the
effects of this Love, which with adamantine ties becomes linked to the love of
God, A peculiar Consideration.
and to man for God. The third consideration is peculiar; wherein we are
principally to take heed of self-love, a vice no less fatal than universal.
Which self-love as it has many branches, or sciens, according to the
disposition of the owner, so it produces no less variety of effects. The
Ambitious man being ever aiming, ever aspiring, thirsts after honor, and
never leaves hunting after it, till he fall with his own grandeur. His
pre-coloured flagge of vanity is displayed, and his thoughts (so open hearted
is he) as if he had windows in his breast, discovered. His agents are weak
and unsteady; his aims indirect and maligned by envy, concluding his Comicke
beginning with a Tragic Catastrophe. Yet see how self-conceit transports
him, Sycophancy deludes him, and an assured expectance of an impossibility
detaines him. Now see him uncased;
He uses rather with Catiline to speak much and do little, Vid. Salust. in
bell. Iug.
than with Iugurth to speak little and do much. He entertaines all with
broadspread arms, and proclaims Liberty, but none will believe him. For how
should he proclaim, or proclaiming confer that on others, which he enjoyes
not in himself? or how should he enjoy that inestimable Liberty, Nec enim
Libertas tutior ulla est, quam domino servire tuo. Prima est. Libertas carere
criminibus. Aug.
which the earthly-Sainted or contented only enjoy; when he is become a Slave
to his own unbounded desires, and through self-conceit, is made a prey to his
foes deceit, falling in that lowest, where his expectance raised him highest?
yet see whence these effects proceed! surely from no other spring than that
troubled wellspring of self-love, which leaves her distressed Master engaged
to sundry extremes. The like may be observed in the avaritious man;
(for to these two instances is my present discourse restrained:) whose misery
it is to admire rather than employ what he enjoyes. The difference betwixt the
poor wanting, and the rich not using, is by these two expressed; the one
carendo, the other non fruendo. Of these it may be truly said, that their
gain is not godliness, but their godl^^^ss^ is to reap gain. And though
apparent Damnum potius quam turpe lucrum eligendum est. La^rtius.
loss be to be preferred before filthy gain: yet they wholly and only
embrace such Omnes complectuntur ar^es ex quibus lucrum consiqui poterin^.
Plat. de leg. Lucri b^nus odor ex re qualibet. Invenal
arts, trades, or sciences, from which a certain gain may be procured. They
know (and that knowledge makes them more culpable) that Lucrum sine dan no
alterius fieri. non potest. Sen. lip st 95.
gain cannot accrue to one, without loss to another: yet they will rather
prejudice another in the greatest, than be an inconvenience to themselves in
the least. They have felt by experience, that wealth is a great nourisher of
vice, and poverty of virtue; yet will they erect an Idol to honor her by whom
vice is nourished, but disesteeme her from whom many virtuous motions and
affections are derived. True it is indeed, that when any Cum aliqua species
^tilitas objecta est, nos comoveri necesse est. Cic. de offic. 3. Omnes
appetinius utilitatem, and ad e^m rapunur. ibid.
Object of profit is tendered us, necessarily are we induced to condescend to
the means of acquiring that profit. Again, we all seek profit, and are (as
it were) haled unto it: yet this is to be intended such profit, as holds
concurrence with honesty. They know, (and woeful it is that they make no better
use of their knowledge) how Lucrum facit homines deteriores. Polit. 3.
Nisil^crum esset, nemo ficisset improbus.
gain makes men worse: and but for gain no man had been evil. For this
filthy Nam tale turpe lucrum accusatio Nature est. apud Stobaeum.
gain accuses nature, and reproves us, that our life being so short, should
have desires so long, laboring to join land to land, when so small a
scantling will serve our turn at our departing. They know how truly that
sententious Poet sung; Pecuniae st^dium, fidem, probitatem, ceteras. que bonas
arts subvertit. Horat.
Wealth disesteemes all Learning, and all arts,
Faith, honesty, and all our better parts.
There is a Voluntas fingendi, and mentiendi est eorum qui opes appetunt, and
lu^rum desiderant. Lact. desalsa relig.
native will or inclination to feining and lying in all such as seek after
wealth, and desire gain. See how servile and ignoble their Condition is, whose
affections, slaved to private profit, embrace any course how indirect soever,
for self-love, or selfe-gaine! That are ever harping upon that of the Poet;
Cl^rus ubique fuit, fortis, sapiens, etiam rex, and quicquid volet. Herat. Si
fortuna volet, fies de^betore Consul; Sivo' et haec eadem, fies de
consule^betor. Iuvenal. Sat. 7.
He shall be noble, valiant, wise, a Prince, or what he will,
That has but wealth, no matter how he got it, well or ill.
but how far short comes vulgar opinion of truth, whose judgment is in their
eyes or ears, no^ measuring man, nor his worth, by those nobler parts within
him, but by his wealth or habit, whose best of glory is without him? Little
know these earthworms how they shall be uncased, and with what misery then
enclosed. For if they did, they would prefer (right sure I am) the
inestimable purchase of virtue, before this rust or rubbish, which leaves the
possessor as full charged with care, as his chest stored with coin. Virtue is
of that noble and unconfined nature, as she Virtus nihil quod extra se est
quaerit. Pontan. lib. 2. de Prud.
seeks nothing that is without her; there is her glory. Again, there can be
no virtue which is not Nulla potest esse virtus nisi gratuita. Cic. in Tusc.
free and voluntary; there is her Liberty. Again, she Domat omnia virtus.
Salust. Quicquid homines arant, navigant, aedificant, virtuti omnia parent.
ibid.
subdueth all things; there is her sovereignty. Again, Virtuti fortuna cedit.
Plaut
fortune gives place to her; there is her precedence. For Nihileripit fortuna,
nisi quod ipsa dedit. Sen. de tranq. an.
fortune can take nothing away but what she herself gives. Again, they only
are Virtute qui praediti sunt, sol. sunt divites. Cicero.
rich which are enriched with virtue; there is her felicity. So as, howsoever
the Philosophers axiom be, that riches is a sign of eternal glory; sure I
am, that virtue directs man in this Maze of misery, to the true sight and
light of glory. This is that Morning-starre sent from that Sun of the Morning
to direct us; that Brazen wall reared by that Brazen Serpent to shield and
protect us; that fair Lilly of the valley cropped by that fairest often thousand
to beautify and adorn us; that sweet odoriferous plant budding out of the
root of Iesse to sweeten and perfume us. What skills it then, if we be deprived
of all, possessing virtue that includes all? The Levites who were chosen for
the Altar and for Gods own service, Deuteronomy. 10.9.
were to have no possessions: Pauperes eligit Deus ad haeredi tatem regni
caelest^s.
for the Lord was their inheritance. Again, God chooses the poor for an
inheritance of his heavenly Kingdom. Again, Blessed are you that be poor,
for yours is the kingdom of heaven. And again, Miserable are you rich men, 1
Cor. 1.28 Luke 6.20.24.
who in your riches have all your consolation. O Mors, quam amara est memorta
tuae, hom^ni habenti pacem in substantus suis!
Again, O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to that man, whose
peace is in his substance! Hence we see the difference betwixt the state and
condition of the worldling, whose affections are wholly planted and placed upon
earth, and his, whose desires transcend the pitch of earth, having his feet
below, but his faith above. The Poet very covertly and wittily in derision of
such, whose delights were wholly fixed on mould, Satyrically concludes; Non
sol (...) virtus, s^detian s^ma, d^cus, divina humanaque ^ul^bris diviti^s
parent.
Not only Virtue, winged Fame, and Honor too, I say,
But things divine and humane too, must Riches all obey.
But to return where we left; whence comes this so avaricious and illimited
desire, but only from a Self-love which these men have to their own private
and peculiar profit? Horat. l. 2. Sat. 3.
Which that we may the better p^^vent, being such a shelfe as it endangers the
ship that comes near it; we are daily to examine our selves, and observe
what especial affection we are most prone unto: which found out, we are to
apply such remedies, or receipts, as may best cure such enormities, as arise
from the vicious and corrupted source of our affections. Now to come to the
cure; because Medicines provided and not applied, are fruitlesly employed. Are
ye naturally subject to vainglory? Labor to suppress those motions even in
their rising, by becoming vile and contemptible in your own sight. Are ye
affected to wantonness and effeminacie? Impose your selves a Task, inure your
bodies to labor, reserve some hours for reading, as well those exquisite
Moral precepts of Heathen Writers, as those blessed Patterns of continency
recorded in sacred Writ. Are ye slaved to the misery of a worldling? Wrestle
with your affections, entertain bounty, affect hospitality, so in time ye
shall become weaned from base and servile Parcimony. We are to resist vices, by
practicing and doing acts of ^he contrary virtues.
To be brief, as Vices are best cured by their Contraries, ever oppose your
selves to that which your Natures affect most; for this is the way to make you,
that were slaves before, commanders of your own affections: which soveraigntie
surpasses all inferior command, for by this means you command those, who
have had the greatest Monarchs in subjection. Thus have we proposed the
Necessity of a Vocation, and what especial rules were to be observed in the
undertaking of that Vocation: which observed, ye shall confer no less good
on your Country, who expects much good from you; then ye shall minister
content unto your selves, finding all depraved or distempered affections buried
in you. And so we descend from the Necessity of a Vocation, to inquire whether
any from the highest to the lowest be exempted from it.

NO less authenticke than ancient is that position, No man exempted from a
VOCATION.
The higher place, the heavier charge. So as, howsoever that erring opinion
which vulgar weakness has introduced, seem approved, that Men whom Fortune
has made Great, may hold themselves exempted from all Vocations, because
either Nobleness of blood may seem too worthy to partake of them, or
greatness of Success (little subject to the fear of want) has made them too
high to stoop unto them: I may safely aver, that of all other degrees, none
are less exempted from a Calling than great men, who set like high Peers or
Mounts, should so over-view others, as their lives may be lines of direction
unto others. He sins doubly, that sins exemplarily: whence is meant, that
such, whose very persons should be examples or patterns of vigilancie,
providence and industry, must not sleep out their time under the fruitless
shadow of Security. Men in great place (says one) are thrice servants;
servants of the Sovereign, or State; servants of Fame; and servants of
Business. So as they have no freedom, neither in their persons, nor in their
actions, nor in their times. First, they are Servants to their Sovereign or
State, for as they are by place set near his Person, so are they with due and
tender respect ever to observe him, in affairs tending to the safety of his
Person, and general good of the State. They are Servants (likewise) of Fame:
for howsoever the actions of inferior men may seem slighted with neglect, or
clouded with contempt, they are sure to have their deeds bruted by Fame, either
to their glory or disgrace. Yea, Non Vestrae magis irae, quam famae consulatis.
Caes. inorat. pro Cat. de liber^ate vindicanda. Vide Salust.
these are also eager hunters after Fame, preferring opinion before all other
inferior respects, and wishing rather themselves to die, than it should die.
Whence it was, that Anaxagoras telling Alexander that there were many worlds;
Alexander wept, replying, That he had not won one: implying, that his Fame,
being that which he principally tendered, having scarce yet dispersed it self
to the circumference of one world; it would be long, ere it could diffuse or
dilate it self to many worlds. Lastly, they are Servants of Business; being
placed near the Helm of the State: and therefore, like wise and vigilant
Pilots, must be careful lest the Rudder of the State be not shaken by their
security. Neither is their State so sure, that it should move them to be
secure: for men in high places are for most part pursued by many Enemies, whose
eyes are ever prying into their actions, which they invert, by laboring to
bring the State in distaste with their proceedings. Now what means better to
frustrate their practices, than by a serious and cautelous eye to look into
their own actions? Diogenes being as^^d how one should be revenged of his
Enemy, answered; By being a virtuous and honest man. Which badge (I mean
honesty) as it should be the Cognizance of every Christian; so should it show
her full luster or splendor in these persons, whom Descent or Place has so
ennobled. Now these Enemies of Greatness, if right use be made of them, may
confer no small profit to such as they hate. NASICA, when the Roman
Commonweal was supposed to be in most secure estate, because freed of their
enemies, affirmed, that though the Achaians and Carthaginians were both brought
under the yoke of bondage, yet they were in most danger, because none were
left, whom they might either fear for danger, or who should keep them in awe.
This we shall find verified even in our selves: for tell me, are we not most
circumspect in all our actions, wherein we have to deal with our enemy? Are
we not fearful lest by some inconsiderate or prejudicate act, he take
advantage of us, and consequently circumvent us? So as our Enemies may be used
as Tutors or Monitors to instruct us, warning us to be advised what we
undertake, lest they take hold of us in our mistake. There is also another
benefit redounding to us, of which it were likely we should be deprived, if we
wanted Enemies, by whom this benefit is on us conferred. And it is this;
wanting Enemies, we many times make of our best friends, Enemies. Whence
Oenomademus in a faction in the I Will of Chios, counseled his fellows that they
should not expel all their Enemies, but still leave some in the City, lest
(quoth he) being void of all our Enemies, we should begin to quarrel with our
friends. Thus you see, how Men of Place are of all others least exempted from a
Vocation; for as Idleness would give them occasion to sin, so by their
Enemies should they be soon detected of shame: being more subject to
Detraction in those actions which are their best, than likely to plead a
protection for such as are their worst. We may well then conclude this point,
with that of a true and noble Historian; In maxima fortuna, minima licentia
est. Salust.
In the greatest fortune, there is the least liberty; for by how much any man
is higher placed, by so much is he more generally noted. We say, that there is
required the greatest care, - been paupertas Humilt tecto contenta late^,
Quatiunt al^as saepe procellae, Aut evertu fortuna ^om^s. Senec. in Agam.
Quicquid excelsum est, cadat. in Octav.
where there is the great^st danger: Now what danger more presently imminent,
or more powerfully violent, than highness of Place, threatening ruin daily to
the possessour? Where Honor feeds the fuel of Envy, and enmity ever pursues
in chase such as are advanced by fortune: whence our modern Poet excellently
concludes; Study thou Virtue, Honor's Envies bait,
So entering heaven thou shall be graduate.
How necessary then even in private respects to themselves is circumspection;
not only in laboring to prevent occasions of fear, but the final and fatal
effects thereof? So may those, whom either Fortune has raised, or Nobleness
of birth advanced, say with majestic Marius: Invident Honori meo^
ergoinvid^ant labori, and innocintiae, periculis etiam miris, quoniam per haec
illum cepi. Salust. in b^ll. lug.
They envy my Honor: Let them also envy my labor, innocence, yea, those
admirable dangers which I have passed, for by these was my Honor purchased.
Now then, how should such whose height of Place has raised them above the
lower rank of men, imagine that their Place may exempt them from their Task?
Offices are peculiarly assigned to all men, and Vocations to all ranks of men.
Whence came that ancient Edict amongst the Romans,
mentioned by Cicero in lib. de Leg. (as we have elsewhere noted) that no
Roman should go through the streets of the City, Cic. in lib. de leg.
unless he carried with him the Badge of that trade whereby he lived: in so much
that Mar. Aurelius, speaking of the diligence of the Romans, writes, That all
of them followed their Labor. So as, there was no difference betwixt the
Patricians and Plebeians; inter f^cem and florem civitatis (as one well
observes; Agendo, audendoque res Romana crevit. Salust.
) but an express task was imposed and exacted on every Subject. Whence it
grew that the Roman Empire became absolute Soveraignesse of many other ample
Dominions: whose flourishing estate (as it was described to King Pyrrhus)
appeared such; L. Flor. l. 1. c. 18.
That the City seemed a Temple, the Senate a Parliament of Kings. Neither is
it to be doubted, but even as God is no accepter of persons so his command was
general, without exception of persons; In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread. Genesis 3.19.
Albeit I do not hence conclude, that all are to intend the Plough, or betake
themselves to Manual Trades: for so I might seem to press that exposition
which a Friar once urged against Latimer, touching reading of Scripture in a
vulgar tongue: If the rude people (objected he) should hear the Scripture read
in English, the Plowman when he hears, He that holds the Plough and
looks back, is not apt for the kingdom of God; would thereupon cease to
plow any more: and the Baker, when he hears it read, A little Leaven
corrupts the whole lump; might be moved not to use Leaven at all: and when
the Scripture says, If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out; the ignorant
might be persuaded to pull out their eyes; and therefore it was not good to
have the Scripture in English. To which objection Latimer vouchsafed no other
answer than this: In iis linguis quas non in^^lligimus, surdi sumu^. Tusc. lib.
5.
He would wish the Scriptures to be no longer in English, till thereby either
the Plowman were persuaded not to plow; or the Baker not to bake. No, I am not
so stupid, as not to apprehend how several places or offices are deputed to
sundry men: how some are appointed for guiding and guarding the State; Hoc
nempe ^b homine exigitur, ut prosit huminibus si sieri potest, muli^; siminus,
paucis; siminus, proximis; siminus, sibi. Seneca de vita b^ata.
others for ranking and ranging Powers in the Field; others for teaching and
training of Youth in the School; others for propounding and expounding the
Laws of our Realm at the Bar; others for caring and curing of maladies in
the body; others for breaking the bread of life, and breathing the spirit of
comfort to the afflicted. Whence we gather, that of all degrees none are
exempted or excepted: a Vocation is proposed and imposed, which of necessity
must be by one or other observed and intended. A resemblance betwixt the
offices in the Body of a State, and a Body natural.
For as in the mutual offices of our Body, every member intends that peculiar
function or office to which it is assigned or limited; so in the Body of the
State (being all members depending and subsisting of that State) we are all in
our mutual places or offices to discharge that Task which is enjoined us.
Wherein I should think it convenient, if we observed the selfsame rule,
which the members of our Body use in the due performance of their offices. For
we see not one of them incroach or intrude into another place or employment:
The Eye it sees, and handles not; the Hand it handles, and sees not; the Palate
it tastes, and smells not; the Nose it smells, Oculus ad coeium, manus ad
clavam.
and tastes not; the Ear it hears, and walks not; the Foot it walks, and
hears not. And so of the rest: but contrariwise, how itching are men after
such employments as least concern them? How officious in business which least
touch them? The Dray-man he will play the Divine; a Dayrie woman the Physician;
the Collier the Informer; the Farmer the Lawyer. Wherein surely, I have
observed in the small Progress of this my Pilgrimage, no small inconvenience
redounding to the public State. For say, whence sprung all these Schisms in
the Church, these many rents in Christ's Seamelesse-coat, but from those, who of
Mechanickes became Divines, professing to teach, before they were taught?
Whence are so many men's days abridged, their easy maladies without hope of
being cured, but by means of these Horse-leaches, Experimenta per mories
agunt. Hippocrat.
who gain experience by the death of their Patients, professing themselves
Artists, before they know the definition of an Art? Whence are so many unjustly
vexed, so injuriously troubled, but by these base Informers, who become
disturbers rather than Reformers? Whence arise these differences, betwixt
party and party, but by means of some factious and seditious Instruments,
who like the Serpent Dipsas, suck the moisture and verdure of every hopeful
Plant, building their foundation on the ruin of others? Surely, as we have
Statutes enacted, of purpose to have such turbulent members duly curbed and
censured; so were it to be wished that such Laws as are to this end provided,
were likewise executed: for by this means the flourie borders of our Realm
should be stored with grave Divines, and learned Professors, leading their
flocks to the green pastures of ghostly instruction, not to the bypath of
error and confusion; with judicious and expert Physicians, who are not to
learn experience by the death of their Patients; with sincere and uncorrupted
officers, whose aim is not to gain, but to redress abuses; with upright and
conscionable Lawyers, whose desire is to purchase their Clients peace, and not
by frivolous delays to cram their purses. O what a golden age were this! when
each performing a mutual office unto other, might so support one another, as
what one wanted, might be supplied by another. Then should we have no Sectists
or Separatists divided from the unity of faith to disturb us; Faces, fauces,
and faeces insulae. Nunc (vt Hieron. ad Paul. conqueritur) scripturarum
interpretationem passim sibi vendicant omnes, hanc garrula ann^, hanc d^lirus
Senex, hanc Sophista verbosus, hanc universi praesumunt, lacecerant, docent
antequam discant.

See the first rising of all Novellisme and innovated doctrine, how and upon
what weak grounds planted, and how strangely by the bellows of Singularity
increased.


No artlesse Quack-salvers or cheating Mountebanks to delude us; no factious
Brands to set a fire of debate amongst us; no corrupt or unconscionable
Lawyers, by practicing upon our states, to make a prey of us. Then should we
hear no ignorant Laics familiarly disputing of the too high points of
Predestination, rejecting the ordinary means of attaining salvation: as may be
seen in the Synodals or Conventicles of many seduced souls, even in these
days, where some Barber is made a Cathedral Doctor, to improve, rebuke, and
exhort: but how is it possible that ought should be hatched but error, where
singularity grounded on ignorance is made a Teacher? S. Basil talking with the
Emperor Valens of matters of religion, and the Cook coming in saucily and
telling the holy man his opinion, that it was but a small matter to yield to
his master the Emperor in a word or two; and that he needed not to stand so
precisely in divine masters. Which seemed indifferent, or of no moment. Yea,
Sir Cook (quoth Saint Basil) it is your part to tend to your pottage, and not
to boil and chop up divine matters: and then with great gravity (turning to
the Emperor,) said, that those that were conversant in divine matters with
conscience, would rather suffer death, than suffer one jot of holy Scripture,
much less an article of faith to be altered or corrupted. So careful have
former times been of the reverence which ought to be had in dispensing the
heavenly Mysteries of Gods word: admitting none to so holy and high a vocation,
but such who had Vrim and Thummim, knowledge and holiness: beautifying their
knowledge, Exodus 28.30.
I say, with holiness of conversation: being not only Speakers but Doer^, for
no word-men but workmen are fit for the Lords Vineyard. The like complaint
might be made touching these Physicians of our Bodies: where artlesse and
ignorant Handicrafts-men, who perchance upon reading of some old Herball,
wherein were prescribed certain doubtful cures for certain Maladies, will
not stick to profess themselves Galenists the first hour: setting out a
painted Table of unknown cures to raise them credit. To whom in my opinion,
that Tale may be properly applied, which is related of one Alphonso an Italian;
who professing Physic, wherein his fortune was to kill oftener than he did
cure; one day as he and his man Nicolao rode on the way, he might see a great
multitude of people assembled upon a hill; whereof being desirous to know the
cause, he sent his man Nicolao to inquire further: who, understanding that
there was one to be executed for committing a murder, put spurrs to his horse,
and running with all speed to his Master, wished him to fly: wherewith
Alphonso not a little astonished; demanded the cause: Why Master (quoth
Nicolao) yonder is a poor wretch adjudged to die for killing one man, and you
in your time have killed an hundred. Neither are we less to grieve for the
pressures which burden our State by such, who sow the seed of discord betwixt
neighbor and neighbor, supporting Champertie and Emoracerie in buying of
Titles, maintaining suits out of a contentious or turbulent disposition. Which
enormities, as they are by apt and necessary Laws thereto provided, duly
censured; so were it to be wished, that for example sake some one, whom the
impunitie and indulgencie of this time has made too presuming, West. 1. West.
2.28. Ed. 1.33. Ed. 1.8. H. 6.19. H. 7.32. H. 8. and 18. El.
were punished according to the extremity of the Law thereto provided: for
then should we enjoy those happy Halcyon days, wherein Basil the Emperor of
Constantinople lived: who, whenever he came to his Judgment Seat, found
neither party to accuse, not defendant to answer. To this end then and purpose
tends our present discourse, that as a peculiar Vocation is deputed to every
one in this Pilgrimage of humane frailty; so he should not intermix himself
in affairs or offices of different nature. A man may be excellent in one, who
cannot be exquisite in many. Let us then so address our selves, as we may be
rather fruitful in one, than fruitless in many. Do we fear by being
excellent in one to purchase hate of many? Mala fama been parta d^iectat. Sen.

Nam vivos interdum fortuna, saepe invidia fatigat: ubi anima naturae cessis,
demptis obirectatoribus, ipsa se virtus magi^ magisque extollit. Salust.

Hominas inertissimi quorum omnis vis virtusque in lingua sita est. Salust. in
2. orat. Virtus per s^ amora atque aspera est. Ad virtutem una atque ardua via
est. Ibid.


Let us slight that hate which is procured by good means; for so long as we
live here, sometimes adverse fortune will cross us, often times envy curb us:
but where the mind has given way to the infirmities of nature, and bears
with a prepared mind whatsoever may be inflicted on her, she makes no account
of detraction; for that virtuous resolution which is in her, does daily more
and more raise and advance her. Neither are we to be strong in tongue and
weak in act; as those, whose only valor is vaunting, and honor verbal
glorying: for of all others, such men are the slothfull'st, whose force and
power is wholly seated in the tongue. No, rather let us know that virtue
consists in action, which by long habit becomes more pleasant than the habit of
vice, whose vain delights tender no less bitterness in the end, than they
did promise sweetness in the beginning. Agendo a^dendoque res Romana crevit.
Let our ear, as it is a sense of instruction, become a light of direction: for
then we hear with profit, when we reduce what we hear to practice. Thus
you have heard both of the Necessity of a Vocation, and how none is to be
exempted from a Vocation: wherein, Gentlemen, I could wish, that as birth and
breeding have advanced you above others, so you would show such arguments of
your birth and education, as may make you seem worthy of a glorious Vocation;
expressing such exemplary virtues in your life, as might gain you love even in
death. And so I descend to speak of Vocation in general; wherein I will be
more brief, because I have partly glanced at it in our former discourse.

Vocation in general.
VOcation may be taken equivocally or univocally: when we speak of Vocation
in general, it is equivocall; when of any special Vocation in particular, it
is univocall. Without Vocations no civil state can subsist; because Idleness
makes of men women, of women beasts,
of beasts monsters. It was one of the sins of Sodom, as we may read in
the Prophet Ezekiel. It was that which brought David the anointed of the Lord,
Ezekiel. 16.49. 1 Samuel 11.1.
nay the man after Gods own heart, to commit adultery. It was this which
moved Solomon to bid the sluggard go to the pismire to learn good husbandry.
Prove. 6.6.
To be short, it was this which moved the Prophets to denounce judgment upon
the flourishing'st Cities, Ierem. 34.2. Zeph. 1.4. Mic. 1.6. Ion. 3.4.
for their security. How necessary then is it for all estates to be careful,
lest they incur a heavy and fearful censure, to address themselves to
especial Vocations, beneficial to the state, and pleasing to God, whose glory
should be our aim, without any by-respect unto our selves? We shall see in
most places both at home and abroad, how such trades or Vocations are most
used, as may best suit with the nature and condition of the place. As in our
Port-townes traffic and commerce, conferring no less benefit to the state by
importance, than profit to other Countries by exportance. Again, in our Towns
lying further within Land, the inhabitants use some especial Trade to keep
their Youth in labor; whereby they become not only beneficial to themselves,
but useful and helpful unto others. Amongst which, I cannot be unmindfull of
the diligence of the Town of Kendall, and worthy care which they have to see
their very young children put to work, being a labor which requires no great
strength, to wit, Wooll-worke. Wherein, so approved has their care and
industry been, as they have gained themselves no small esteem in foreign
places, who are made partakers of the fruit of their labors. For I have known
a family, consisting of seven or eight persons, maintained by the work of two
or three stones of wool, which amounted not above thirty shillings: and with
this they maintained credit, living in an honest and decent manner. Whose
labors as they were laudable, so have they been no less furthered, favored,
and encouraged by our late gracious Sovereign of renowned memory; who, of his
princely clemency, has dammed all such impositions or heavy taxations as
might any way impair or impeach the free use of that Trade. Albeit now of
late, the Town of Kendall, so famous for Wooll-worke, by reason of a late
decrease or decay of Trade in those parts, is grown no less penurious than
populous: so as (with grief I speak it) such Inhabitants as formerly by their
pain and industry were able to give an alms at their door, are now forced
to beg their alms from door to door. The redress whereof, as it has
been by the Prince and those prudent guides and guardians of our State, the
Lords of his Privy Counsel, duly intended; so no doubt, but by their wise
care it shall be accordingly effected, and those poor people after so many
miseries sustained, wholly releeved; to the advancement of Gods glory, the
supportance of many a needful family, and the succeeding renown of his
Majesty, to whom every subject owes his life, love and loyalty. The like
commendation I could give to the Copperworkes used in the North; more
especially about Keswicke, where diverse Dutchmen being planted, have for many
years expressed no less judgment than industry in sundry excellent and
choice experiments, which to their succeeding fame may perpetuate their
memory. For these, like cunning and experienced Artizans, have to do in the
bowels of the earth, whence they dig copper, which with incredible pains
they bring to the Hammer. For so steep, ragged and cliffie are those
mountains, whence their Copper is dug, as it might seem a matter of
impossibility to effect so intricate a work; but so infatigable are the
Laborers which they employ, as their patience in suffering is no less to be
commended, than their skill in contriving to be admired. But to speak in
general of all vocations, sciences, Hin^ alii aliis artibus incumbunt; hi^n
mari navigantes, by in Monte pas^en^es and pastinantes, etc.

Visne procedere in Thessaham? artem disces bortulanam; visne in Barbariam?
artem experieris eq^^strem.


or Mysteries: we are ever to observe the place and conveniencie thereof, that
we may the better appropriate some especial vocation according to the
necessity and conveniencie of the place. As Shipmasters in places of traffic
and Navigation; Sheep-herds, Graziers and Farmers, in places of plantation:
according to that ancient proverb; Gardiners in Thessalie, Horsecoursers in
Barbary. Now if you should object touching the difference of vocations, that
some are more necessary than others: yea such as now seem most necessary, have
formerly (as may appear) been held Trades of indifferency: my answer is, I
grant it; yet not so altogether as some might object against the necessity of a
Smiths trade, by alleging that of the Prophet Samuel; 1 Samuel 13.19.
There was no Smith found thorowout all the Land of Israel. For this did not
infer that Smiths were of least use or employment in Israel, but rather the
necessity of them made so few amongst them, as may appear in the latter part
of the verse: For the Philistines said, lest the Hebrews make them swords or
spears. Here see the cause why there were so few in Israel, because they would
have been most useful and behooffull to the people of Israel. For this cause
were they banished, slaughtered and deprived of all means to assist their
distressed Country, whose people hid themselves in caves, 1 Samuel 13.6.
and in holds, and in rocks, and in towers, and in pits. For the first
Invention of trades, arts or sciences, as they were in time and by degrees
brought to perfection, so had they proper and peculiar persons, from whom they
received their beginning and foundation. Genesis 4.2. Genesis 9.20. Genesis 49.13. Genesis
4.22.
For example, tillage from Cain, pasturage from Abel, vintage from Noah,
navigation from Zabulon, brazery or Smith-worke from Tubal-kain, music from
Iubal; which by succession of time came to such perfection as they are now in.
The Satyr at the first sight of fire, would needs have kissed and embraced it,
but Prom^theus checked him. So highly admired were things unknown, and so
familiarly employed being once known. The like we may imagine at the first
rising of Trades, what difficulties attended them, and what imperfections were
incident to them; being like the Bears whelpe, ever in licking, before they
came to perfecting, ever in renewing and furbushing, ere they came to such
furnishing as they now express. Yea, if we should make recourse to al such
Scholasticke sciences or vocations (if I may so term them) as have the name of
Liberal Sciences: we shall find that in their infancy or minority, there
were many defects and blemishes in them, having not as then attained that
height or growth, which they have acquired at this day. For then we had not a
Quintilian to play the Grammarian; a subtle Scotus to play the Logician, an
eloquent Cicero for a Rhetorician; a learned Euclid for a Mathematician; a
studious Archimedes for a Geometrician; a famous Hippocrates to renown a
Physician; a sense-ravishing Orpheus to eternize the Musician. Many conclusions
were then to be sought and explored, ere such perfection as we now enjoy could
be attained. For to instance Grammar; how long may we imagine, Grammar.
and tedious might the task be, ere so many rules could be so aptly digested
and disposed? how long before such rules could be by authority of so
innumerable Authors approved? how long being approved, before they could so
generally and without opposition be received? The like may be spoke of Logic,
which is rightly termed the Lock of Knowledge, Logic.

Sera cognitionis, quae a cla^e artu re^eratur.


opened by the Key of Art: what subtle and intricate Sophismes? what formal
and effectual conclusions? what rules of art to direct them in the maine
current of their proceedings? Those four Questions produced by Arist. in his
posteriors, Arist. in poster.
how fit are they to be observed in the managing of every Subject: Quid
nominis, quid rei, qualis sit, propter quid sit? likewise his distinction or
division of Places; Topicall or Rhetorical, called insita, being intrinsecally
ingraffed or inserted in the Nature of the thing: also places derived ab
antecedentibus and consequentibus; as, the Sun has shone, whence it
follows, that day has appeared; the Sun is set, whence it follows that
Night is approached. Also places derived a comparatione majorum, minorum and
aequalium. As if Christ washed his Disciples feet, much more ought we to do
the same one to another. Likewise in those Local circumstances, very necessary
for searching and discussing the truth of any matter; Who, what, what time, and
where,
How, why, what helps were there.
Why; (...) Melch. Can. (...)
as the offense was more blameworthy in Judas* than if it had been done by
any other, being his Disciple; and so of the rest. All which, as they tend
properly to the office of an Orator; so minister they no little elegancie even
to our familiar discourse: wherein we most commonly (though we observe not so
much) use some one of these places, to aggravate or extenuate the Subject
whereof we speak. The like also of Rhetoric; Rhetoric.
what persuasive inductions, what powerful arguments are there to be found?
The definition whereof, if we should express in one word, it is, To make
great things little, and little things great. After Aeschines being banished
Athens, was come to Rhodes, he declared in an Oration the cause of his exile;
the Rhodians no less satisfied with the pregnancie of his reasons, than
ravished with the elegancie of his phrase, wondered at the Athenians who had
banished him so undeservedly. Eras. l. 8. apotheg.
O (quoth he) you heard not what Demosthenes answered to my reasons! This moved
Philip of Macedon in a treaty of league betwixt him and the Olynthians, to
demand of them their Orators; little doubting, Quint. Curt.
but having once deprived them of the Stays and supporters of their State, by
receiving them as Hostages, he might quickly receive the Province into his
subjection. It is above imagination to consider of the rare effects derived
from moving or persuasive Rhetoricians, resembling in some sort passionate
Actors; Who to move passion, - Sivis me flere, dolend^^ est Primu^ ipsi tibi,
tunc tua (...) infortaenia laedunt. Horat. de art. p^^t. Cic. l. 3. de Orat.
such an order keep,
As they feign tears to make their hearers weep.
Now the difference betwixt Actors and Orators (says Cicero) is, that the one
intermixeth levitie in their action, to make their hearers laugh; The other use
all gravitie, authority, and serious arguments (with a graceful insinuation)
to persuade. Wherefore those are accounted ridiculous, these esteemed prudent.
Neither is this excellency of theirs only in passion or efficacy of
persuasion, but in a subject of more admiration: which is, they can make black
seem white, and cloth that which in the eye of the world seems most
deformed, in a beautiful habit. Which Art Polycrates that Athenian Rhetorician
had, who praised the Tyrant Busyris; the like had Seneca, who praised the
dissembling Claudius; Favorinus, who commended the deformed Thersites; no less
elegant was Maro both a Port and (...); ^ho with I^orat^s for l^cke (...) good
voice oth^^wise called the Father of Eloquence never pleaded ^ublikely: he^
^ore was it laid of his Orations, that if Maro penned the^, and Cicero
pro^ounced them, nothing could be more exquisite.
Maro in commending his Gnat; Lucian a Fly; Apuleius his Ass; also Favorinu^
a Quartan Ague; Glauco, Injustice; Synesius, Baldness; Lucian, Flattery;
Erasmus, Folly. Which elegant Paradoxes they have so wittily and perswasively
handled, as they gained more approbation, than if they had been Themes
commonly received: for there is no discourse, of what nature soever, that can
comparably delight the Reader or Hearer, like these which seem opposite to
opinion generally received, yet by strong and effectual reasons use to be
proved and maintained. Neither was this Rhetorical Art less required in the
Camp than in the Court: for if we should peruse Histories both of ancient and
succeeding times, we should find what rare effects were brought to pass by
this smooth inducing Art of Rhetoric. How Soldiers became animated by
hearing their Leader play the Orator, in extenuating the Enemies power, in
proposing assured hopes of victory, and putting them in mind of their
Ancestors glory: Again, in showing them the benefit of a rich booty, promising
them much honor if they live, and no less memory of their valor if they
should die. The like (to descend to all those Arts whereof we have formerly
spoken) may be said of the rare and admirable effects of the Mathematics:
Mathematics.
what singular Conclusions have been drawn from thence by the Line of Art?
Libenter ign to quod m^ ^^ne Deus nol^^t.
What Secrecies above humane conceit have been drained and derived from that
mysterious knowledge? Wherein many have offended rather by being too curious,
than by being too little solicitous. Whence it was, that Euclid being demanded
by one too inquisitive in the secrecies of Heaven, touching a question, which
(as he thought) was more profound than profitable, he answered: Surely I know
not this, Caelera quidem nescio, hoc autem scio, quod dii oderi^^ curiosos.
Euclid.

Compescat igitur se humana temeritas, and id q^od n^n est, non quaerat, ne
illud quod est non in (...). Maxim. Sermon. 23.

Geometry.

Vid Plut. in vit. Marc^ll.

L. Flor. l. 2. c. 6.


but thus much I know, that God hates such as are curious searchers after his
secrets. I might here produce the Basis on which the study of the Mathematics
is grounded, as also the exquisite and admirable effects or conclusions from
thence derived, but I hasten to the rest. The power of Geometry was shown
sufficiently in that studious Artist Archimedes, who by his own proper power
repelled the whole force of Marcellus and all his Army, laying siege to
Syracusa: so as it was imagined that this one man did more good in defense of
the City by his Art, than all the rest of the inhabitants did by the force of
Arms. Neither had Marcellus (as it was generally thought) in long time
prevailed, although the City was in most places razed and ruined, if it had not
been by false and treacherous means privately yielded and betrayed. Where this
Mirror of his time, the famous Archimedes, was suddenly in his study
surprised, and by a common soldier much against Marcellus will) cruelly
murdered. Touching Physic, Physic.
what rare cures have been wrought by such excellent and expert Artists as
have professed this knowledge? It is wonderful to read, what perfection
Mithridates attained in this profession, being the first that found and gave
name to that known receipt against all poison, Mithridate: with which he so
inured his body, Vid App. Alex.
to repel the force of poison; as in his ebb and decrease of fortune, when he
had lost in one hour what he had in so many years gained, being deprived of
all means to cure his misery, he labored to find a way to end his misery,
and that was to deprive himself of life; which the better to effect, he
drunk poison; but so strongly had his former receipts fortified his body
against such banefull effects, as it would not work, nor as he expected,
produce that tragical issue with him. The rare cures of Dioscorides; the
admirable experiments of Hippocrates, L. Flor l. 3. c. 5.
to them that shall but peruse their Works, will confirm the excellency of
this Art: where the One concludes, that Art is long, Life short, Experience
deceiving: implying, that so rare an Art could not be attained, Hippocrates.
but by much industry; Life being so short, and a very Emblem of frailty,
was to be used tenderly; and Experience being so deceiving, was to be put in
practice carefully. They give us this precept; in sickness to respect health
principally, and in health action. Health, that we might be made for action;
Action, that we might the better preserve our health. Lastly Music, the
first beginning or invention whereof, Music.
as it merits admiration; so the perfection of it, at this day deserves
applause: Finding an open Torteise on the ground,
From it the Art of Music first was found.
So observes Du Bartas; which indeed may rather be limited to one kind of
Instrument, whereto the Torteise may seem to have resemblance, that is, the
Lute. Pythagoras chanced once into a company of Drunkards, where a Musician
ruled their lascivious Banquet: he presently commanded him to change his
harmony with a Dorion, (or an heavier tone) and so with this tragic melody
moved them to cast off their garlands, ashamed of whatsoever they had done,
being brought by the accent of grave and solemn Music to sobriety. Whence it
was, that Aristotle forbids in his Commonwealth certain lascivious
Music, and allows the Doricall, which is of another kind. The Arcadians by
Music were transformed from savage and barbarous people to civilitie, and
transported (as it were) from the violent current of natural cruelty, to
affability and courtesy. Shall we descend to some diviner effects of Music,
Vt lyram vel citharam percutiat, etc.
confirmed by holy Writ? Saul being vexed with an evil spirit, when David
played upon his Harp, he was comforted, and the evil spirit departed. Music
causes mirth and moan; 1 Samuel 16.23. Music has a different working,
Melody, Mirth and Melancholy.
divine mirth, as appears in Salomons Songs; a holy Turtle-like moan, as
appears in Ieremies lamentable Threnes, David's Penitential Psalms. Elizeus
prepared his spirit to receive the influence of prophecy by Music. 2 King.
3.15. Exodus 15.20.
When Israel had passed the Red Sea, Moses with the men, and Miriam the
Prophetess, sister of Aaron, with the women, sung Panegyries of praise to God,
with Hymns and Musical Instruments. Judith 16.2. Judge. 5.1.
The like did Judith, when she had vanquished Holofernes. So did Deborah, when
Sisera was discomfited. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 33.
Augustine reports of himself, what comfort he co^ceived at the beginning of
his Conversion; what tears he shed, and how he was inwardly moved with the
harmony and melody which was used in Churches: yet thought that holy Father
(as he rightly thought) that he offended when he was delighted more with the
note and melody of the song, than sense of the Psalm: Qui tam medico fle^u
voci^ faci^bat sona^e Lectorem Psalm^, ut pronuntianti vicinior esset quam
can^nti. ibid.
and therefore highly commends Saint Athanasius, who caused the reader of the
Psalm to sound out the words with so small a forcing of his voice, as it
seemed rather like one that did pronounce it, than one that did sing it. But I
fear me, I have struck too long on this string; wherefore, lest I should
wrong your generous patience too much, for whom I addressed my self at first
to this Task: I purpose now to descend from speaking of Vocation in general,
to speak of the Vocation of a Gentleman in particular; hoping to make amends
by refreshing you in this, whose patience I have so much tired in the other.

NOw are we to address our selves in a more restrained and particular
discourse, The Vocation of a Gentleman in particular.
to propose a Gentleman his Vocation; which, perchance, by our nicer and more
curious Gallants, whose sense consists in sent, will be distasted and
dispalated: but to such, whose understanding consists not in Perfumes, nor tie
themselves to the vain garb of complement, as the only posture whereon
Gentry relyes, these ensuing Observations will not (I assure me) seem
altogether unwelcome. S. Bernard writing to one Haimericus, Chancellor of Rome,
in his very first salutation, without further insinuation, Quae ret^osunt
oblivisci, and ad ea quae ante sunt Apostolum sequi. Epist. 15.

(...).


Wishes him to forget those things which are behind, and to follow the Apostle
to those things which are before. Which no man can do, that either stands
still, or is idle. Wherefore Hermes says generally, Nothing in the whole world
is altogether idle. The Wiseman has allowed a time for every thing else, but
for idleness he has allowed no time. Moses Arc had rings, Dial. 11. Exodus
24.14.
and bars within the rings, to signify that it was not made to stand still,
but to be removed from place to place. Genesis 28.12.
Jacobs Ladder had staves, upon which he saw none standing still; but all
either ascending or else descending by it. Ascend you likewise to the top of
the Ladder, to heaven, and there you shall hear one say, My Father does now
work, and I work also. Whereupon Basil notes, Psalm. 15.2.

(...),

(...).


that King David having first said, Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle;
adds then, not he that has wrought righteousness heretofore, but he that
does now work righteousness; even as Christ says, My Father does now work,
and I work also. Descend you likewise to the foot of the Ladder, to the earth,
and there you shall hear that Fig Tree accursed, which did bear leaves and no
fruit. Whereupon Theophylact notes, that John Baptist having first said, The
axe is laid to the root of the tree; (...).
adds then, Not every tree that has not brought forth good fruit heretofore:
but, every tree that does not now bring forth good fruit shall be cut down,
even as that fruitless Fig Tree was cut down, and cast into the fire.
Therefore we must so walk, as God seeing our continual fruitfulness, may
say of us, I see men walking like trees. Mark 8.24. 1 Cor. 15.58.
Men walk like Trees, when men are never idle, but always abounding in the
work of the Lord: As the Tree of Life every month brings forth twelve manner
of fruits. But that I may the better proceed in that which I have taken in
hand; you are to know, that the life of man is either active or contemplative,
so as all our employments have relation to the one, or to the other. Luke 10.39.
Which two were represented in Mary and Martha. The One whereof was very
attentive, sitting at Jesus feet, and heard his preaching: but Martha was
cumbred about much serving. 40.
The former sitting at Jesus feet, hearing him preaching, may signify likewise
the spiritual man, whose actions, affections, motions and intentions, are
wholly bent to the service of God, leaving all things to gain him, who left
his life upon the Cross to save him. The Latter being cumbred about many
things, signifies the Natural man, who betakes himself to the employments of
this life, ministering to the necessity of his family, laboring with his own
hands to get him a competent living. Neither are these to be divided one from
the other, partaking indeed so nearly one of another. For as we are not
altogether to imitate the Hermit or Anchorite in being wholly retired from the
world; so like the Libertine or loose worldling are we not too much to be
cumbred or entangled with the world. For the First, as it implies a kind of
hate to humane society; so the Latter inferres our too much care to the things
of the Body. Now to observe that golden mean, which may free us ^^om being
taxed by the one, or tainted with the other: ^ do think it fitting, that
Gentlemen should be sociably affected, ever with a reservancie, with whom they
keep company; Likewise from worldly affections weaned, that being on earth
they may have their minds seated above: being (I mean) so free in the inward
man, as rather than they will slave the noblest motions of the soul to the
unworthy bondage of the body, they will endure want, contempt, or whatsoever
the blind world can lay upon them. The Vocation of a Gentleman has relation
to emploiment public or private.
The Vocation of a Gentleman, without more curiosity of division, is either
public or private. Public, when employed in affairs of State, either at home
or abroad: at home, either in advising or acting; abroad, as by way of
embassage, or personal exploits in the field. Private, when in domesticke
business he is detained, as in ordering his household; or if not as yet
attained to the name of Householder, in laboring to know such things as may
ripen his understanding when he comes unto it. Touching the First, to wit,
Public affairs of State; as all are not fit for such a charge or burden; so
there is a necessity enjoined such, who are able to undertake so great and
weighty a Task, to submit themselves willingly to the command of their
Sovereign, whenever his pleasure shall be to make trial of their
sufficiency in affairs of State. In the carriage whereof, diverse necessary
cautions have been formerly observed by Statesmen. As first, to avoid all
occasions of distrust, never to show too much inwardnesse with foreign States:
for this may beget a suspect in your Prince, that your aims are neither fair
nor loyal. It was this which broke Byrons neck: being accused to have had
conference with one Picote, Objections framed against Byron, for his Treaty
with foreign States.
borne at Orleans, and fled into Flanders to have intelligence with the
Archduke, to which Picote he had given an hundred and fifty crowns for two
voyages to that effect. Likewise it was objected against him, that he had
treated with the Duke of Savoy three days after his coming to Paris. Likewise
the intelligence he had from the Duke of Savoy in the taking of Bourges, giving
him advice to attempt against the Kings Army. Likewise that he should bring
the King before Saint Katherines to be slain there: and to that end had
written to the Governor, giving him some tokens to know his Majesty.
Likewise, that he had sent La Fin to treat with the Duke of Savoy, and the
Count of Fuentes. To which, although he replied, and in some sort purged
himself, yet those treaties or parlyes which were proved against him, showed
him guilty of diverse indirect proceedings against him. It is dangerous
therefore to entertain conference with Strangers in matters of State: for
howsoever your aims may be faithful and honest, such Treaties may be so
racked and misconstrued by such as malign your greatness, as they will bring
you in danger, if not to final distress. It is no less dangerous to one
employed in affairs of State, Credulity in two respects dangerous to persons
employed in affairs of State. Credulity in believing the relations of others.
to be too credulous; and that in two respects: either by being too credulous
in giving trust to the relations of others, or by being too credulous in
imparting his thoughts to the secrecy of others. For the former, it detracts
much from the worth and estimate of man, yea (and if I may so say) argues great
indiscretion to have an care open to all reports, seconding whatsoever is
related, with an opinion of credulity. For such as these, whom either
greatness of Place by Descent, or some more noble and native characters of
personal worth have advanced, need not want for Relaters in this kind,
especially if they find them apt to believe whatsoever they shall be ready to
report. Neither are any sort of men more subject to the garb of strange and
novell relations than Travelers: who may arrogate to themselves a liberty of
invention in this kind, by authority. Whence it is said, that Travelers,
Poets and Liars, are three words all of one signification. Now there is no
means better to avoid the company of these fabulous Relaters, than by
interrupting them, or by requiting their Tales (to argue their incredibilitie)
telling stories far more strange, and indeed beyond the compass of common
sense.: whereof I have heard a merry conceited Tale to this effect: A certain
Traveller, or at least one who desired though he never deserved that title,
reporting wonderful and incredible things which he had seen in his travel,
amongst the rest related this: Upon a time it befell (said he) that I traveled
along a certain desert in Arabia felix, where I with others who then
accompanied me, were assailed by a violent shower, so as laboring to fly for
shelter to some covert, we might perceive a little Coppice, wherein grew great
store of Cabbages of such huge proportion, as the very leaves thereof (so
largely extended were the spurges) might by their greatness give shadow to
five hundred men. This Tale being told, one amongst the rest, to answer his
Tale, makes this reply by way of discourse upon such occurrents as had happened
him in his Travel, proceeding thus; It fortuned that I with some other
Gentlemen of eminent rank and quality, traveled near the Riphean Mountains,
in the clifts of which Mountains abundance of all metalls, but especially of
copper, is daily found: Now as we coasted along, we might perceive some three
leagues westward from those Mountains, a great number of people beating and
knocking with incessant labor, but for what end we knew not: wherefore with
one consent we resolved to approach nearer them, and see about what they so
eagerly labored. Where we found five hundred Braziers making of one Caldron,
which was of so huge proportion, as not any one of all those Braziers, though
they were all employed in one work, could hear one another strike. Good God
(quoth the former Traveller) for what use was so huge a caldron made? Surely
(replied the second) I cannot imagine for what use it should be, unless it
were to boil your Cabbage in. This present and pregnant answer so daunted that
fabulous Traveller, as he was ever after more sparing in discourse of his
Travells. A Statesman ought likewise to beware of giving credit to all forra
in relations: for diverse there be who presuming of the distance of place, will
invent and vent their inventions to curry favor: having so couched and
digested their new-minted News, as they pass for current, at least they seem
probable for the present. And herein certainly have many been abused, giving
approbation to what was spoken only by way of insinuation. The second respect,
wherein a Statesman ought not to be too credulous, Credulity in imparting his
thoughts to the secrecy of others.
is this; he must not be too open brested in imparting his thoughts to the
secrecy of others. For if we say, that even a private man committing his
secrecy to another, becomes his slave to whom he committed it: much more a
Statesman, whose affairs have no other limit than the public state, by
imparting his thoughts, or rather laying himself open to the trust or secrecy
of others, makes himself bound, where he was before free; yea, he endangers
the body of the State, whereof he is an especial member, by commending or
committing her private intendments to the hazard of rumor, For Cabinet
counsel this may be their Motto; Plenu^ sum rimarum.
which should not be so much as possessed of the least intelligence given in
matters of such maine importance. To be full of chinks in affairs of ordinary
consequence, implies a great weakness: but especially, where the state is
interested, there is enjoined that Comicke impreza: If wise, seem not to know
that which thou know: at least, divulge not thy secret'st thoughts to the
danger of discovery, whereby thou put'st thy head under another girdle. He is
my dear friend (says one) to whom I will impart my inferior aims; but he
shall be incorporated with me, to whom I will make known what may endanger
me. The like is requisite to be observed in affairs of State: where all
Counsels and Consultations tending to the safety and security of the public
state, should be laid up as a secret Treasure, and not discovered to every man's
trust. Vt T^^^au^us ^e^ositu^.
This that prudent and politic Statesman, Harpagus rightly understood, when
in disclosing a secret of state unto Cyrus that Persian Monarch, Le^oris ventri
(...) vento vulgi, (...).

Resolution in suffering neither price to draw him, nor power to overawe him.


he commanded such letters as included the Sum of his directions, to be
enclosed and sowed in the belly of a Hare, and so dispatched the Messenger
toward that victorious Commander. There is likewise required a noble and
prepared resolution in every Statesman: being so affected, as neither price
can taint him, nor power overawe him: addressing his aims wholly for the
benefit of the State, preferring death before his Countries prejudice. Of this
resolution or constancy of mind we have a notable example in Lewis Duke of
Bavaria commended for his constancy; Excitamur ad meliora magnitudine rerum.
Sal^^^.
in so much as being threatened by Albert the Marquess of Brandenburgh, that if
he would not condescend to some reasonable ransom for his liberty, he would
deliver him over into the hands of his enemy, answered, Ask that thing of me
being prisoner, that thou would ask of me as Liberty. Herodotus lib. 3.
(...).
The like we read of Pantaleon, who restrained in most strait bondage, was
never a whit dismayed, nor so much as sighed, when he beheld his son Paraxaspis
thrust to the heart. This resolution or stoutnesse of mind, might be
illustrated by diverse examples of the like kind, but my purpose has ever
been (because these do rather illustrate than prove or confirm) to take
them, Vid. Hotmaen de Legate. Legatus ipsa^ Re^pub. (...) suam attulsse ^idetur.

Advi^tutem laudis ^ue haben^as naturam, ine doctri^a, quam doctr^n^m ^ine
n^tura valu^sse. (...).


as it were by the way, but in no case to dwell on them: we will therefore
descend to foreign employments of State, as affairs of embassage or treaty
with any Prince or state. Now it is expedient that such as be employed in
affairs of this Nature, be choice and select men both in gifts of Nature, and
state-experience. For in Nature is the foundation laid, which by experience and
continual employment in state-businesse, uses to be stored, furnished, and
accomplished. So as I do not altogether assent to his opinion, who thought
that in choice of instruments to treat or negociate by way of Embassy betwixt
Prince and Prince; it is better to choose men of a plainer sort, who are like to
do that, that is committed to them, and to report back again faithfully the
success, than those that are cunning to contrive out of other men's business,
somewhat to grace themselves, and will help the matter in report for
satisfaction sake. For his conclusion agrees not with his premises; For (says
he) If you would work any man, you must either know his nature, and fashions,
and so lead him; or his ends, and so persuade him; or his weakness and
disadvantages, and so awe him; or those that have interest in him, and so
govern him. Now how should a man, whom a simple plainness only possesses,
one whom no diving or penetrating reach enableth, one whom the outward
semblance only instructs, how should he (I say) by working any man, either
know his nature or fashion, and so lead him; since his eye can reach no farther
than the outward seeming, which as often deceives, as it receives diversity of
habits which it wears? or how should he (I say) know his ends with whom he
treats and so persuade him, since politic men do usually pretend that which
they least intend: showing a fair gloss, and putting on a false face to
delude, and deluding to color their designs more cunningly? or how should he
discover the weakness or disadvantages of the person with whom he deals,
when his own weakness so disables him, as he oft-times lets opportunity
slip, when the best advantage is for him? or how discern those which have
interest in him, when his aims are only to conclude with him, with whom he
deals, without relation to any intercedent means to effect his business?
Neither is it to be doubted, but such whose understanding has attained a
higher pitch, will be as ready to do that which is committed to them, as those
on whom a more plainness has naturally seized: for these will duly consider
the great danger they are like to incur, if they should exceed their
Commission either in doing too much, or detract from their Commission in doing
too little. For in affairs of this nature especially, parum agendum est de
proprio, yea, though in the opinion of the party employed, it seem that he
could go more effectually to work, than just as his Commission directs him.
Manlius Torquatus commanded his son to be put to death, Disobedience punished
in attempts most successive.
for fighting (albeit prosperously) against his commandment. Pub. Crass.
Mutianus sending to his Inginer to send him the bigger of his two ship-masts
that he had seen in Athens, to make a Ram to batter down the walls; the
Inginer sent him the less, imagining it to be fitter: wherefore Mutianus sent
for the Inginer, and caused him to be so cruelly whipped with rods,
Virgi^^aedi^^ssit quibus (...) Plut. in a^o^^e^.
that he died therewith. If disobedience in such affairs as these, being of
lesser consequence, seemed among the Heathen cause sufficient to pronounce
sentence of death upon the offender; what may they deserve, who in conceit of
their own wisdom, dare take upon them directions of their own, without tying
themselves expressly to their commission? And of these there be two sorts: The
one, even in greatest and most important matters, will presume to take upon
them without direction of Autho^itie: wherein as they commonly err, so they
give advantage to him with whom they have to deal, of making his own bargain
upon such Terms as shall best please him: for how should one man's judgment
equal a whole judicious Counsel? So as in dealing with cunning persons, we
must ever consider their ends, to interpret their Speeches; and it is good to
say little to them, and that which they least look for. The other sort tie
themselves something more strictly or precisely to their Commission; for these
will be loath to disgresse from it in matters of weight and substance, but
rather in some impertinent ceremony or circumstance: as we read in the
general History of Spain, that there came two Ambassadors out of France
unto King Alfonfe the ninth, to demand one of his daughters in marriage for
their Sovereign King Philip; one of which Ladies was very fair, and named
Vrraca; the other nothing so gracious, and called Blanch. They both coming
into the presence of the Ambassadors, all men held it a matter resolved, that
their choice would light upon Vrraca, as the elder and fairer, and better
adorned: but the Ambassadors enquiring each of their names, took offense at
the name of Vrraca, and made choice of the Lady Blanch; saying, that her name
would be better received in France than the other. For matters of such
indifferency as these, it is not to be doubted but they are left to the
discretion of the instrument: but for affairs of State, as they require due
deliberation in discussing; so require they the joint assent and approbation of
the State ere they come to concluding.

THere are likewise public employments, How a Gentleman is to employ himself
in public affairs. cyprian.
wherein Gentlemen upon occasion may be interessed, which extend themselves to
military affairs: in which, as it is not the death, but the cause of the death
which makes a Martyr, so it is not the action, but the ground of the action
which merits the name of valor. That act of Razis, 1 Match. 14 46.
in taking out his own bowels, and throwing them upon the people,
it was an act (says S. Austin) that tasted more of stoutnesse than goodness.
Magne, non be ne. Aug.
For what could that act of his benefit his Country? wherein could it add
spirit to the distressed Maccabees? wherein allay the heavy burden of their
affliction, or minister the least relief in the time of their persecution?
That act of resolution by that noble Bohemian, as it tasted more of true
valor; so it reared a column of perpetuity to his ever-living honor; which
exploit is thus recorded: When Mahomet the second of that name besieged
Belgrade in Servia, one of his Captains at length got up upon the wall of the
City, with banner displayed. Another Bohemian espying this, ran to the
Captain, and clasping him fast about the middle, asked one Capistranus
standing beneath, whether it would be any danger of damnation to his soul, if
he should cast himself down headlong with that dog, (so he termed the
Turk) to be slain with him? Capistranus answering, that it was no danger at
all to his soul, the Bohemian forthwith tumbled himself down with the Turk
in his arms, Zieglerus l. de illustribus viris Germaniae. c. 98.
and so (by his own death only) saved the life of all the City. The like
worthy exploits might be instanced in those heirs of fame, the Rhodians, In
Turc. Histor.
in the siege of their City: the Knights of Malta in their sundry defeats and
discomfitures of the Turks: the inhabitants of Vienna, who being but a handful
in comparison of their enemies, gave them not only the repulse, but wholly
defeated their designs. This Valor or Fortitude, which indeed appears ever
in the freest and noblest minds, is excellently defined by the Stoics, Probe
definitur a Stoicu fortitud^, cum ^am virtutem dicunt esse propugnante pro
aequit^^. Cic.
to be, A virtue ever fighting in defense of equity. These who are professors
of so peerless a virtue, are more ready to spare than to spill: their aims
are fair and honest, free from the least aspersion either of cruelty or
vainglory: for as they scorn to triumph over an afflicted foe, so they
dislike that conquest (unless necessity enforce it) which is purchased by too
much blood. Salmacida spoli^ sine sanguine and sudore. Si. lib. 4.
The Salmacian Spoils relish better to their palate: for they are so full of
noble compassion, as the death of their enemy enforces in them tears of pity.
This appeared in those princely tears shed by Caesar at the sight of Pompeys
head; and in Titus that Darling of Mankind,
in those tears he shed at the sight of those innumerable slaughters
committed upon the Jews. Plut. in vit. Iul. Cas.

Joseph in bell. Iud.


Now as my purpose is not to insist on the postures of war; so I intend not
to dwell upon every circumstance remarkable in martial affairs, ^lementiam
tamen Imperatoris pro^ne^tia duceban^. lb.
but upon the maine scope of military discipline, whereto every generous and
true bred Soldier is to direct his course. Let your aim be therefore,
Gentlemen, to fight for the safety and peace of your Country, in the defense
of a good conscience, which is to be preferred before all the booties of war:
for as you have received your birth and breeding from your Country; so are you
to stand for her, Dulce and decoru^ est pro patria (...) Hor. li. 3. od. 2.
even to the sacrifice of your dearest lives; provided that the cause which you
entertain in her defense be honest, without purpose of intrusion into another
right, or laboring to enlarge her boundiers by an unlawful force. For
howsoever the ancient Heathens were in this respect faulty, being some of them
Truce Breakers, Poeni foed fragi. Cic. in offic. Nulla sancta societas, nec
fides regni.

Philip 4 1^. A glorious enterprise recommended to the undertaking of all
generous spirits.


others violent intruders or usurpers of what was little due unto them: we for
our parts have learned better things, being commanded no^ to take any thing
from any man, but in all things learn to be contented. But of all enterprises
worthy the acceptance of a Gentleman in this kind, if I should instance any
one in particular, none more noble or better deserving (as I have elsewhere
formerly touched) than to war against the Turk that professed enemy of
Christendom; the increase of whose Empire may be compared to the milt in man's
body; for the grandeur of it threatens ruin and destruction to all Christian
States, drawing light to his Half Moon by darkening of others, Totum adimit,
quo ingrata refulget.

Coping with the Persian Sap^r in titular insolence, who caused himself to be
styled, Re. R^gum, frater Solu and (...), particep^ Syderum.


and showing even by the multitude of his insolent Titles what his aims be, if
the Lord put no^ a hook in the nose of that Leviathan. Praiseworthy therefore
are those glorious, and (no doubt) prosperous expeditions of such English and
other Christian Voluntaries as have stood, and even at this day do stand
engaged in personal service against the great Turk: for these, though they
perish in the battle, shall survive time, and raise them a name out of the
dust, which shall never be extinguished. These are they who fight the Lords
battle, and will rather die than it should quail: These are those glorious
Champions, whose aim is to plant the blessed tidings of the Gospel once
again in that Holy Land, which now remains deprived of those heavenly
Prophets which she once enjoyed, of those godly Apostles which she once
possessed, of that sweet Singer of Israel with which her fruitful coasts once
resounded. O Gentlemen, if you desire employment in this kind, what enterprise
more glorious? If you aim at profit, what assay to your souls more
commodious? If you seek after fame, (the aim of most soldiers) what
expedition more famous? since by this means the practices of Christ's enemies
shall be defeated, the borders of Christendom enlarged, peace in Sion
established, and the tidings of peace every where preached. Besides, in assayes
of this nature, being taken in hand for the peace and safeti^ of Christendom,
assures more security to the person engaged: for little need he to fear a
strong foe, Non debet timere hostem forte^, qui dominum habet fortiorem.
that has a stronger friend. Admit therefore that you return, as one that
comes with red garments from Bozra, so as the Devil and his angels like
wild Bulls of Basan run at you, Esa. 63.1. Psalm. ^2.12.
you shall break their horns in his Cross for whom you fight. As we have
discoursed of employments public, which we divided into two ranks, Civil and
Military; and of the manner how Gentlemen are to demean themselves in Court or
Camp; so are we now to descend to employments private, wherein we purpose to
set down such necessary cautions or observances, as may seem not altogether
unprofitable or unusefull for the consideration of a Gentleman.

And first, How a Gentleman is to demean himself in private affairs.
I will speak of the employment of a private Justice of Peace, wherein he is
appointed and made choice of, not only to redress such annoyances as may seem
to prejudice the state of that County wherein he lives, and is deputed
Justice; but likewise to mediate, atone and determine all such differences as
arise betwixt party and party; for to these also extends the office of
Justice of Peace. Yea, we are to wish him to be, as well (...), as (...), a
Compounder, as a Commissioner of the Peace. Godliness should be their chiefest
gain, and right and peace their greatest joy: for such are both Pacidici, and
Pacifici, Pleaders for peace, and leaders to peace: Peace-lovers, and peaceable
livers. As for the rest, they are deservedly blamed, that confine all their
practice not within those ancient bounds, usque ad aras, but with those usual
bonds, usque ad crumenas. -- Sic crimine nota crumentaest.
The old position was, Justice is to be preferred before profit; but now the
terms are transposed in the proposition, and the avaritious desire of having
never disputes of the equity of the cause, but of the utilitie. Kind men such
are but where they do take, hardening their hearts against the cry of the
poor. If a man come to demand justice, Quid non speremus, si numm^s
possideam^? Omnia nummus habet, quod vult, facit, addit, and aufert.
he shall speed ill, having no money to give, no coin to present, no friends
to speak, his cause is like to fall. Suppose out of two mites he give one:
the rich adversaries horse eats up the poor Clients oats; there needs no
Oedipus to unfold this riddle: in the end the poor sheep, that lost but a
lock of his wool in the Country, This may be observed in Suits of Law, as
well as private affairs of Justice.
loses his whole fleece in the City; consumes what he has, spends his
time, loses his hope, and falls his suit, be it never so good and honest.
Whereas such (and of such we only speak) as do Deuteronomy. 10.18.
right judgment to the fatherless and widow, bear a resemblance of God, who
is a loving Father to the Orphane, and a gracious Judge to the widow. These
will not for conscience sake pervert the right of strangers, fatherless, etc.
for such as do so, shall be Deuteronomy. 27.13.
cursed upon mount Ebal: but these like pure Lamps, diffuse those divine
beams of unblemished justice, to all places where they reside, resembling
David, who 2 Samuel 8.15.
executed judgment and justice to all his people: or like that prophetical
Dove, Jeremiah, ever Ierem 22.3.
exhorting to execute righteousness and judgment. Or like that good Patriarch
Abraham, ever Genesis 18 19.
commanding his Household to do righteousness and judgment. For these know,
how Deuteronomy. 32.4.
all the ways of God are judgments. And that, 2 E^d^. 5.4^. Rom 11.^3 Psalm.
36.6.
just and like a great deep are Gods judgments. And the wicked Act ^4.26
tremble at Gods judgments. And the wicked Pro^. 28.5.
understand not judgments. And therefore strive against E^clus. 11.7, 8, 9.
Act. 18.4.6 1 Tim^ 15.19, 21.
perverse judgments. Because they know what 23.1.7 to 10.
equity is to be required in judgments. Having ever before their 2 Samuel 22.23
eyes Gods judgments. O how precious are the lips of these who preserve
judgment, being an honor to their Country, a pillar to the State, leaving a
memorable name to themselves, which as that princely Prophet says, shall never
rot! These are they, who have their faces Job 9.24.
covered, lest they should have respect unto the person; as godliness is their
gain and the preservation of a good conscience their principal aim; so if
there were neither reward here, nor elsewhere, for such as executed justice and
judgment; yet for conscience sake, and a sincere love they bore to truth,
would they continue in their zealous care to the profession and protection
thereof. These are not of that Leaven who turn Judgment to worme-wood, Amos
5.7.
and leave off righteousness in the earth. For such in stead of judgment and
equity, execute cruelty and oppression. These are not of that sort, Purpuram
negis quam Deum ^o kn^es.
who prefer the purple before the person, the person before the cause; never
examining the cause how good it is, but observing the man how great he is. No,
their counsels and consultations tend to the public peace, and the redress
of such enormities as arise from vicious humors, breeding and spreading in the
State. Now what employment more fitting or accommodate for a Gentleman of what
degree soever, than this, which inables him in affairs tending as well to
himself in particular, as the Stern of the State public in general? Would
you see errors and abuses in the State redressed? You are seated where by your
own authority you may have them reformed. Would you have Officers execute
their places under you honestly, being from corruption freed? Your Prince, by
especial notice taken of you, has so advanced you, that you may see all
Offices under you duly executed, and where default shall be, have them
punished. Would you further the poor man's cause, and see his wrongs releeved?
It is in your hand to effect that which you have desired. Would you purge your
Country of such superfluous humors, as from long peace and too much
prosperity have oft-times issued? You are those Physicians who may lance and
cure those broad-spreading sores, with which the State has been so
distempered. Would you curb factions and contentious members, Judges 15.4.
who like Samsons firebrarnds tied to Foxes tails, kindle the fire of all
division, and labor to have them extinguished? You have authority to see such
censured, that public peace (as becomes a civil State) might be
maintained. Two perilous shelfes which ind^nger Justice.
Now there are two extremes which (like two dangerous rocks) are carefully to
be avoided, lest the precious freight of Justice might thereby he enndagered.
The one is rigor, the other indulgence. I approve therefore of his opinion,
who would have intus mel, foris oleum; as well cordialls as corrasives: for as
some men (and those of the basest and servilest condition) are only to be
deterred from doing evil by the censure or penalty of the Law; So there are
others of a more generous and noble disposition, who are only to be reclaimed
by fair and affable means; and these are to be brought in rather by love than
awe. Sicut absynthia per sep^llunt morbo^, melle tamen ill^^iuntur, ut puerorum
a^as improvida ludificetur. Pic. Mi^and. ad Hermol.
For as wormwood of it self, expels diseases, yet is to be anointed with
honey, that the improvident age of childhood might be deluded, and they from
their Nurses teats the sooner weaned: so though this wormwood of rigor and
severity be of force to cure and expel most diseases raging or reigning; yet
being allayed with the honey of mercy and indulgence, it will sooner weane
children, that is to say, such whose soft and easy temper is best persuaded by
courtesy, than wormwood untempered, that is, than the Law to her highest
pin wrested. Indeed these Boanerges, the sons of thunder, are powerful in
deterring such, Mark. 3.17.
whose braving and domineering natures use to oppose themselves to right: for
persuasions are as little available to these, as to sow sand in the air;
wherefore as the Law has provided fit means to curb and chastise such, whose
obstinate and refractory natures will not by easy means be induced, so has
it qualified or attempered the rigor or bitterness of such provisions, where
there is assured hope, that the party by easier persuasions will be
reclaimed. For if we will resemble that absolutest pattern or abstract of all
Justice, God himself; we shall read that he came as well in a still voice, as
in Thunder. So as, albeit Exodus 19.18.
God when he delivered the Law, came down in the fire; And the Exodus 24.17.
glory of God appeared on Mount Sinai, as a consuming fire; And out of Gods
mouth went a 1 Samuel 22.9.
consuming fire; And in Gods wrath against Deuteronomy. 32.22.
Israel was kindled fire; And 2 Kings 2.11.
Eliah was taken up into heaven by a Chariot and horses of fire; And the Exodus
3.^.
Angel appeared to Moses in a flame of fire; And 1 Cor. 3.13.15.
every man's work shall be tried by fire; Yet God, as he is to the wicked a
Deuteronomy. 4.9.10.24. Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire: so to the godly he is a Exodus 13.21, 22. Number. 9.15.
comfortable fire. Be not then ever clothed with fire, reprove the enormities
of the State with the spirit of mildness, which if it will not prevail,
unsheath the sword of Justice, that such may be severely, curbed, who by
gentleness would not be cured. It is not to be doubted, but you shall
encounter with delinquents of several natures: the chastizing of both which
sorts is left wholly to your discretion: for many things, though expressly
enacted, are in respect of the manner, referred to your discretion to see them
executed. Many there are, who will rather die for the act, than discover the
act: like Epicharia a Libertine of Rome, who made privy to a conspiracy
against Nero, would not disclose the plotters thereof, though tormented with
cruel punishments: or Leena, who conspiratour against the Tyrant Hyppeas, was
not aghast at the death of her friends, though torn with extreme torments, but
resolute to the end, would not reveal her partners, but bit in sunder her own
tongue, and spit it in the Tyrants face. There are others likewise, who will
expose themselves to all extremities that Law can inflict,
only to gain themselves a name; such was Herostratus, who burned the Temple
of Diana of Ephesus, only for vainglory: but to these you are not to use
indulgence; for they that brave it in sin, esteeming mischievous practices to
be their chiefest glory, are fallen into that gall of bitterness, as in them
there is small hope of remedy. Better it is that one perish, than that unity
perish, Melius est quod periat unus, quam unitas. Qui malis parcit, bonis nocet.
and in these (sure I am) that maxim is true; He that spares the evil,
hurts the good. for it is impossible that any State should flourish with
increase of good men, where there is no difference made betwixt the good and
evil. Wherefore you are to deal in the State, Luxuriantes amputantur surculi,
ut genuini coalescant ^ami.
as skillful gardners or vine-dressers do with their Vines; they cause the
wild branches to be pruned, that their natural sciens may be better
nourished. Unfruitful members, and such as are more burdensome than behouefull
to a State, are to be purged and pruned, In putatiore sarmen^a sterilia
recid^ntur: ut ea quae praevalent uberius fructum serant. Greg. in Mor.
Exposit. in Job.
that such whose honest care and providence deserves due praise among you may
be the more encouraged, seeing these, who used to live on others labors, duly
punished. Yet in all your censures beware of this, that no personal distaste
aggravate in you the quality of the crime: I mean, let no private hate or
dislike to any person, cause you to punish him, for this is a partial and
indirect proceeding, relying rather upon the authority of your place, than
equity of the cause. Far more generous is it to bury all hate toward your
foes, especially when by means of your place, it rests in your power to spare
or punish. When Caesar commanded the demolished monuments of Pompey to be set
up again; Cicero told him that in erecting Pompeyes trophies he established
his own. And no less generous was Scaurus, Domitius his enemy, who when a
certain servant of Domitius came before the judgment seat to accuse his
master, he sent him home to his Master. The like of Cato and Murena. Be your
censures likewise free from passion; for there is nothing that so troubles the
pure current of Justice, or so much transformes man from himself, (...) giving
way to wrath. The saying of Archytas is much commended, who being angry with
one of his Hindes,
said; O how would I have beaten thee, had I not been angry with thee! Hear
the poor man's cause with an equal and impartial care; let not the greatness
of his adversary be any bar to his plea, or any hinderance to his cause;
bear your selves sincerely with all singleness, uprightly without partial
connivence; standing for your foe equally as your friend, Malle se in^er
i^imicos, quam amicos ^udicare dicebat. Laert. in vit. Bia^.
if your foes cause be as honest as your friends. It was Bias saying, that he
had rather be a Judge amongst his Enemies, than amongst his friends: and this
might probably be his reason; because his enemies would pry more narrowly into
his actions than his friends; and therefore his desire was to be by them only
approved, by whom he was chiefly observed. Yea, herein might you partake of a
right noble revenge upon your enemies; in showing apparent testimonies of your
care and zeal to the truth; in preventing all occasions of scandal; in
preferring justice even in cases which nearly concern your friend, before all
terms of friendship; Habeo in me, quod testetur p^o^^e.
having the testimony of a good conscience within you, as a wall of brass
against all opponents: for hence it was that Diogenes being asked how one
should be revenged of his enemy, answered, By being a virtuous and honest man.
For the whole life of every good man gives testimony unto God of the
integrity or uprightness of his conversation. Omni^ ^iorum vita testimonium
^edd^t Deo. Cypr. de duplo martyrio, initio.
But beware above all things (as I formerly noted) of accepting or respecting
persons; for this is the very bane of Justice. Let not the rich man with all
his presents tempt you, Proh pudor, secundum fortunam as^imatur persona, quum
potius secundum personam aestimada sit fortuna: ^am bonus reputatur quam dives,
tam malus quam pau^er; cum potius tam div^s sit reputandus quam bonus, tam
pauper quam malus. De contem. mund. l. 1. c. 16.
nor those many friends which he has laid up in store to speak for him, taint
you. Fie for shame (says Innocentius) now adays man is esteemed according to
his money, whereas rather the money should be esteemed according to the man.
Every one is reputed worthy, if he be wealthy, and naught if he be needy;
whereas rather every one should be reputed wealthy, if he be worthy, and needy
if he be naught. Marcus Caelius was said to have a good right hand, but an ill
left hand; because he could plead against a man better than for him. Be you so
equally handed, as poyzing the weight of the cause sincerely, you may minister
right judgment to all parties, being as ready to defend the cause of the needy,
as of the wealthy, giving him the best countenance, who has the best cause. It
was Romes fault, which presages Romes fall, to be facunda inimicuiis, faecunda
praemiis; far be it from our Island, who as she has enjoyed a long peace, so
ought she to become more thankful to that God of peace, who in his mercy has
strengthened her bulwarks, enclosed her as a hedged garden, fed her with the
flower of wheat, making her feet like Hindes feet to run the ways which he
has appointed. And so I come to speak of such private affairs as require the
care and charge of a Gentleman, even within the compass of his own family.

How a Gentleman is to demean himself in his own family.
IF there be any that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of his
Household, he denies the faith, and is worse than an Infidel, says the
Apostle. Now how careful should we be to remove from us, so hateful a title
as the name of infidel? Have we not our appellation from Christ? but in vain
are we named after Christ, 1 Timothy 5.8. Aug.
if we do not follow Christ. We were not borne to pass our time in an
improvident or careless sensuality; we were not created only to cramme our
selves, and spend our days in security; Man (says Job) was borne to labor,
as the sparks to fly upward; at least to provide for his own family, over
which he is made a master: by releeving them outwardly with all necessaries,
and inwardly with all good and wholesome instructions. Now to propose you a
form, in what manner you are to demean your selves toward all degrees within
your family: I shall little need, Ephesians. 5.21. adul^.
since the Apostle himself has so notably laid down every ones office or
duty: where he shows in what manner Wives are to submit themselves unto
their Husbands; and again, how Husbands should love their Wives, Even as
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. In the next ensuing chapter
he declares the duty of Children in these words; Ephesians. 6. ad 10.
Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. Then he descends
to the duty of Parents; And ye, Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath:
but bring them up in instruction and information of the Lord. Then touching
servants; Servants be obedient unto them that are your masters, according to
the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your hearts as unto
Christ. Concluding the last duty with Masters; And ye Masters do the same
thing unto them, putting away threatening: and know that even your master also
is in heaven, neither is there respect of person with him. Thus have we
briefly and cursorily run over those particular duties, deputed to every one
from the highest to the lowest in their peculiar places and offices; where we
can find no exemption from the servant to the master, Domus, (inquit
Aristoteles) est quasi parva Civitas, and Civitas quasi magna domus.

Every family a private Commonwealth.


but that certain particular duties are enjoined either. As every man's house
is his Castle, so is his family a private Commonwealth, wherein if due
government be not observed, nothing but confusion is to be expected. For the
better prevention whereof, I have thought good to set down sundry cautions, as
well for direction in affairs temporal, as spiritual; which observed, it is
not to be doubted but that God will give you all good success to your
endeavors. First therefore, in affairs Temporal I could wish you to observe
this course; so to provide for the relief and supportance of your family, as
you may not only have sufficient for yourselves, but also be helpful unto
others; sufficient for your selves in providing food and apparel, Genesis 28.20.
Deuteronomy. 10.18.
being all which Iaakob desired of God: and helpful unto others, in giving
food and raiment to the fatherless, in providing relief for the desolate and
comfortless, in harboring the poor, needy and succourlesse, and briefly in
ministering to the necessity of the Saints, and all such as are of the family of
faith. And because providence is the way, by which relief both to your selves
and others may be sufficiently ministered, beware of Prodigality, and excess;
lest you give your honor unto others, and your years to the cruel. Lest the
stranger should be filled with your strength, Prove. 5.9, 10. Prove. 6.^, 7.
and your labors be in the house of a stranger. Go rather to the Pismire, who
though she have no guide, governor, nor ruler, provideth in Summer her granary
for Winter. Neither is it sufficient to gather, but frugally to dispose of that
which is gathered. This Providence admits of no Vitellius break-fasts, nor
Cleopatra's bankets. Luke 15.16. Genesis 25.^3. 1 Samuel 14.27. Exodus 14.2.
The Prodigalls dainty tooth brought him to feed on husks. Esau's to sell his
birthright for a mess of pottage. Ionathans for a honey-combe to endanger his
life. The Israelites to murmr against Moses. Babylons golden cup, to fill her
full of abominations. I have observed, and no less admired than observed, how
some have consumed their estates in satisfying their appetites, and that only
in the choice of meats and drinks; and was not this a great vanity? That
those, whom meats, though less delightful, yet more healthful might have
sustained, and fewer diseases occasioned* could not content themselves with
that which might have better satisfied nature, but to show themselves Epicures
rather than Christians, will bestow the revenues of a Manor upon the
superfluous charge of a supper. For these are they, who like Ery^thous bowels,
will disgorge as much upon the boundless expense of their own Family, as
might serve well for releeving a whole Country. These are they who like the
Endive or Misselto, suck up all the native verdure and vigor of such plants
as they inwreath: for by their excess, though their own luscious palats taste
no want, the commonaltie feels it, when they go to the Markets, and find the
rate of all provision inhanced by such, whose Prodigality scarce extends a
provident eye to themselves, much less to the behoose of others. It is said of
Cambletes the gluttonous King of Lydia, that he dreamed he devoured his wife,
while they lay sleeping together in the same bed; and finding her hand between
his teeth when he awaked, he slow himself fearing dishonor. Howsoever the
History be authenticke; sure I am the Moral taxes such, whose Epicureall
minds are only set upon prodigal expense, without respect either of present
fortunes, or care to posterity, whose want is oft-times procured by their
riot. To be short, as Parcimonie is too late when it comes to the bottom; so
it may be with discretion used, when it is at the top: for I approve of his
opinion, who would have a Gentleman neither to hoord up niggardly, Nec sord^^e
custod at, nec prodige spargat. Salust.
nor lash out lavishly. For as the former argues a miserable and ignoble
mind, so the latter shows a mind improvident and indiscreet; both which are
to be so avoided; that a mean betwixt both may be duly observed. For as I
would have a Gentleman, even in arguments of outward bounty, show whence he
was descended; so would I have him keep a Hawke, left his too free disposition
be through necessity restrained. So as in matters of expense, I hold his
resolve authenticke, who said; I will never spare where reputation bids me
s^end, nor spend where honest frugalitie bids me spare. It is a good rule, and
worthy observation: for whosoever spares, when with credit and reputation he
should spend, is indiscreetly sparing: and whosoever spends, when with honest
frugalitie he may spare, is prodigally spending* Now in government of a
Family, as I would not have you too remiss; so I would not have you too
severe, toward your Servants (I mean) and those who have received their
several charge from you: this it was which moved the Apostle to exhort masters
to put away threatening; adding this reason: Ephesians. 6.9.
For know that even your Master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of
person with him. Therefore it was Saint Augustines prayer unto God, that he
would root out of him, all rashness, frowardness, roughness, unquietness,
slownesse, slothfulness, sluggishnesse; dullness of mind, blindness of
heart, obstinacy of sense, truculencie of manners, disobedience to goodness,
repugnance of counsel, want of bridling the tongue, making a prey of the
poor, showing violence to the impotent, calumniating the innocent, negligence
of subjects, Circa domesticos ^^veritatem. Med. cap. 1.
severitie toward servants, harshnesse toward familiars, hardness toward
neighbors. Hence note, how in this holy Fathers repetition and enumeration of
many grievous and odious sins, he touches severitie toward servants, as a
heinous and egregious offense: and not without great cause; Deuteronomy. 25.4. 1 Cor.
9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18.
for if we be taught not to muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn: and
that, we are to spare the life of our beast: much more ought we to have mercy
over such as partake with us in the same Image, which we have equally from him
received, by whom we live, move, and have our being. How highly to be condemned
was that act of Vedius Pollio, who tyrannized so much over his Servants, that
he caused one to be cast into a Fish Pond for breaking a glass.
I approve therefore of them, who put on the spirit of mildness toward such
as are deputed or substituted under them, bearing with one another weakness,
as those who have a compassionate feeling of humane infirmities, not laying
such heavy burdens upon them, as they themselves will not touch with their
finger, but will in some measure partake with them in all their labors. But of
all other vices incident to masters, there is none more hateful in the sight
of God and man, than the unthankfulness or disrespect of masters toward their
servants, when they have spent their strength, and wasted themselves in their
service. These like the Greyhound in the fable, may well say, that they see
nothing can please, but that which does profit: Iuvenes amarunt, ^^nes oderunt.
when they were young, able and fit to endure labor, they were respected;
whereas now being old, infirm, and helpless, either to themselves or others,
they are slightly regarded. Whereas, if they were thankful masters, these
whom they once loved for profit sake in youth, they would now love in age, in
respect of the profit they reaped by their youth. But, alas, do we not see how
nothing is more contemptible than an old Serving-man? He may say he was a man
in his time, but that is all. There is no man that will know him, since his
blew-coat knew no Cognizance; the loss of his Crest, makes him hang down his
crest, as one crest-fallen: so as the poor Lark may boast of more than he
may: Alauda crist^m h^bet. Proverb
for every Lark has his crest, says Simonides, but he has none. To redress
this, as in humanity you ought, so I know such as are Generously disposed,
will: that those who have deserved well under you, being now grown aged, yet
unpreferred, may by your care be so maintained, that their service of Labor
may be made a service of Prayer, offering their sacrifice of devotion unto God,
that great Master of a Household, that he in his mercy would give a happy
success unto all your endeavors. Now as the Labourer is worthy of his wages; 1 Timothy 5.18.
for, cursed is he that defraudeth ^he labourer of his hire: so there is an
especial care required in every servant to look unto that which is given him
in charge. For the better discharge whereof, it is enjoined you that be
Masters; not to be too remiss in your care and overseeing thereof; Domun^ suam
coer^er^ plerisqu^ haud minus arduum est, quam provinciam regere. Tacit.
for much oversight is usually committed for want of a good overseer. Admonish
your servants that they intend their charge; suffer them not to idle, but in
their peculiar places to do that which they in duty are to perform, and you
in reason are to expect. Wherein, as they proceed in diligence, so are you to
require their care with a cheerful thankfulness. If it be your lot to have
such an one as Iaakob was, (as rare it is to find such an one as he was)
reward him not with a bleare-eyed Loah, Genesis 29.23.
for a beautiful and fair Rahel: I mean, abridge not, nor scant not their
wages; for this is a discredit to your self, and a discouragement to your
servant. If he say, These twenty years I have been with thee: Genesis 31.38.
thine ewes and thy goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock
have I not eaten. Whatsoever was torn of beasts, Genesis 31.39.
I brought it not unto thee, but made it good my self: of mine hand did
thou require it, were it stolen by day, 40.
or stolen by night. I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in
the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. 41.
Thus have I been twenty years in thine house, and served thee fourteen
years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy sheep, and thou have
changed my wages ten times. If (I say) he has thus served you, and shown
faithfulness in that charge over which he was appointed, reward him with a
bountiful hand, and encourage his care with your best countenance. Whereas,
contrariwise, if you meet with such a Servant, Luke 12.45.
that says in his heart, My master does defer his coming; and shall begin
to smite the servants, and maidens, and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken;
you are not to use remissness to such a Servant, but to cut him off, lest you
give example unto others, by your indulgence, to be of the like condition. In
brief as a good servant is a precious jewel, tendering the profit and credit
of him he serves; so an evil servant, whose service is only to the eye, and
not for conscience sake, is a scatterer of his substance whom he serves;
aiming only at his own private profit, without least respect had to his
Masters benefit. Difference therefore you are to make of their care, in
cherishing the one, and chastising the other; which can hardly be effected,
unless you, who are to make this difference of your servants, have an eye to
their employments. Neither would I have your care so extended, as to afflict
and macerate your selves by your excessive care: a mean is the best both in
the preservation of health and wealth. Be diligent (says Solomon) to know the
state of thy flock, Prove. 27.23.
and take heed to thy herds. Yet withal note his conclusion: 27.
Let the milk of thy goats be sufficient for thy food, for the food of thy
family, and for the sustenance of thy maids. Whence you may observe, that to
gather is admitted,
so the use or end for which we gather be not neglected. Hydroptem habent
conscientia^. Aug.

Quanto magis bibunt, tanto magis ^uiunt.

Quanto magis capiunt, tanto magis cupiunt. Quorum sitis neque copia, neque
inopia minuitur. Salust. Vera inopia cupiditatum copia.


For such, whose Hydroptick minds are ever raking and reaping, yet know not how
to employ the blessings of God, by a communicative exhibition unto others, are
become vassals unto their own; making their gold-adoring affection an
infection, their reason treason, and the wealth which they have got them, a
witness to condemn them. But I have insisted too long on this point,
especially in framing my speech to you, whose more freeborn dispositions will
ever scorn to be tainted with such unworthy aspersions: wherefore I will
descend briefly to such instructions, as you are to use touching spiritual
affairs, being Masters of Households in your private families.

WE read that Abraham commanded his sons, How a Gentleman is to employ
himself in spiritual affairs within his family.
and his household, that they should keep the way of the Lord, to do
righteousness and judgment: And we are taught what we must do, returning
from Gods house to our own: and what we are to do sitting in our houses,
even to lay up Gods word in our heart and in our soul, and bind it for a
sign upon our hand, that it may be as a frontlet between our eyes. Genesis
18.19. 1 Chronicles. 12. Deuteronomy. 11.18.19.
And not only to be thus instructed our selves, but to teach them our children,
speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And not so only, but
thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, 20.
and upon thy gates. Whence you see, how no place, time, or occasion is to be
exempted from meditating of God: but especially in Households and Families ought
this exercise of devotion to be frequently and fervently practiced; for a
Blessing is pronounced upon the performance hereof, as appears in the
foresaid place, and the next ensuing verse, where he says, You shall do all
that I have commanded you, Verse 21. Consisting upon a precept and a promise.
that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land
which the Lord swear unto your fathers to give them, as long as the heavens are
above the earth. Mark the extent of this Blessing, Ostendit exemplo quod
promisit in praemio. Aug.
for it promises not only length of days to them that perform it, but even
to the children of them that perform it; and that in no unfruitful or barren
land, but in the land which the Lord swear unto your fathers to give them; and
that for no short time, but so long as the heavens are above the earth. So as,
this blessed promise, or promised blessing, is (as one well observes) not
restrained, but with an absolute grant extended: so that, even as the people
that were in the gate, and the Elders wished in the solemnizing of that marriage
betwixt Boaz and Ruth, Ruth 4.11, 12.
that their house might be like the house of Pharez; so doubtless, whosoever
meditates of the Law of the Lord, making it in his Family, as a familiar
friend to direct him a faithful counselor to instruct him, a sweet companion
to delight him, a precious treasure to enrich him, shall find success in his
labors, and prosperity in the work of his hands. But amongst all, as it is
the use or Masters of households to call their servants to account for the day
past; Nimium est negotii continere eos quibus praesit, nisi te ^ps^ contineas.
so be sure, Gentlemen, and you who are Masters of houses, to enter into your
own hearts, by a serious examination had every night, what you have done, or
how you have employed your selves, and those Talents which God has bestowed on
you, the day past; in imitation of that blessed Father, who every night
examined himself, calling his soul to a strict account, after this manner;
Anima mea quid fec^sti hodie? etc. Quod mal^^ h^die (...), lib. 3.
O my soul, what have thou done this day? What good have thou omitted? what
evil have thou committed? what good, which thou should have done? what
evil, which thou should not have done? Where are the poor thou have
releeved? the sick or captive thou have visited? the Orphan or widow thou have
comforted? Where are the naked, whom thou have clothed? the hungry, whom thou
have refreshed? the afflicted and desolate, whom thou have harbored? O my
soul, when it shall be demanded of thee, Quid comedit pauper? how poorly will thou look, when there is not one poor man that will witness thy alms?
Again, when it shall be demanded of thee, Vbi nudus quem amicivisti? how naked
will thou appear, when there is not one naked soul that will speak for thee?
Again, when it shall be demanded of thee, Vbi sitiens quem potasti? Vbi
esuriens quem pavisti? Vbi captivus quem visitasti? Vbi moestus quem relevasti?
O my soul, how forlorn, wretched, and uncomfortable will thy condition be,
when there shall not appear so much as one witness for thee to express thy
charity? not one poor soul whom thou have releeved! one naked whom thou have
clothed! nor one thirsty whom thou have refreshed! nor one hungry whom thou
have harbored! nor a captive whom thou have visited! nor one afflicted whom
thou have comforted! Veni ad judicium. Hieron.
Thus to call your selves to account, by meditating ever with S. Hierome of the
judgment day, will be a means to rectify your affections, mortify all
inordinate motions, purify you throughout, that you may be examples of piety
unto others in your life, and heirs of glory after death: concluding most
comfortably with the foresaid Father; If my mother should hang about me, my
father lie in my way to stop me, my wife and children weep about me, I would
throw off my mother, neglect my father, contemn the lamentation of my wife and
children, to meet my Savior Christ Jesus. For the furtherance of which holy
resolution, let no day pass over your heads, Paratum est cor^m^um. Ibid.
wherein you address not your selves to some good action or employment.
Wherefore Apelles posie was this, Let no day pass without a line. Be sure
every day you do some good, Nulla dies sine linea.
then draw one line at the least: according to that, Esaias 28.10. Choeneci ne
insideas.
Line upon line, line upon line. And Pythagoras posie was this, Sit not still
upon the measure of corn. Do not look to eat, except you sweat for it:
according to that, 2 Thessalonians. ^.10.
He which will not work, let him not eat. In my Fathers house (says Christ)
are many mansions. John 14.3.
So that no man may sing his soul a sweet requiem, saying with that Cormorant
in the Gospel, Luke 12.19.
Soul take thy rest: for in heaven only, which is our Fathers house, there
are many mansions to rest in. In this world, which is not of our Fathers
house,, there are not many mansions to rest in, but only Vine-yards to work
in. Wherein, because not to go forward, is to go backward, we are to labor
even to the day of our change. Hereupon Charles the fifth gave this Emblem,
Stand not still, Vlterius.
but go on farther; Vlterius: as God says to his guest, Luke 14.10. Nunquam
ei prae^sse fami^iae, quae parum studi^sa est divina gloriae.
Superius: Sit not still, but sit up higher. Doing thus, and resolving to be no
masters over that Family, whose chiefest care is not the advancement of Gods
glory, you shall demean your selves, being here worthy that Vocation or
calling, over which you are placed, and afterward, Philip. 3.14.
by following hard toward the mark, obtain the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of the difference of Recreations; Of the moderate and immoderate use of
Recreation; Of the Benefits re^ounding from the One, and inconveniences arising
from the Other; Of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman;
And how he is to bestow himself in them.

RECREATION.
RECREATION, Observat. 5.
being a refresher of the mind, The difference of Recreations.
and an enabler of the body to any office wherein it shall be employed;
brancheth it self into many kinds; as Hawking, which pleasure, one termed the
object of a great mind, whose aims were so far above earth, as he resolves
to retire a while from earth, and make an Evening flight in the air. Hunting,
where the Hounds at a loss show themselves subtle Sophisters, arguing by
their Silence, the game came not here; again, by being mute, it came not
there; Ergo, by spending their mouths it came here. Fishing, which may be well
called the Emblem of this world, where miserable man, like the deluded fish,
is ever nibbling at the bait of vanity. Swimming, an exercise more usual than
natural, and may have resemblance to these diving heads, who are ever sounding
the depths of others secrets; or smimming against the stream, may glance at
such whose only delight is opposition. V^d. Strab. Vid. Plut. Aul. G^ll. in
noct. At. Laert. in vit. Chyl.

L Flor. lib. 3. c. 8. Baleares narrat, a qua gente Balistas nomen dux^sse,
verisi. mil^ est, jaculandi art omnium facile principes esse.

Luculliani Horti. vid. Plut. in vit.


Running, a Recreation famously ancient, solemnized by the continued succession
or revolution of many ages, upon the Olympiads in Greece, so as the account or
yearly computation came from Races and other solemn games used on Olympus.
Wrestling, Leaping, Dancing, and many other Recreations of like sort, as they
were by the continuance of many years upon Olympus kept, and with public
feasts duly celebrated: so in many places of this Kingdom, both Southward in
their Wakes, and Northward in their Summerings, the very same Recreations are
to this day continued. Shooting amongst the Scythians and Parthians, was an
exercise of especial request, as afterward amongst the Amazonites, being women
expert above all people of the world in Shooting and practicing the Dart.
Bowling amongst the Romans was much used, especially in Lucullus time, whose
Garden-alleyes were ever stored with young Gentlemen, who resorted thither to
Recreate themselves with this exercise. The Greeks had a Cynosargu^, locus in
quo palestritae exercebantur; Cerostr^tum, in quo eorum corpora ungebantur.
Cynosargus, to train and exercise their Youth in Wrestling; and a Cerostrotum
to anoint their bodies in before they wrastled. The ancient Romans had a
Circus, quia aculeatis spiculis circunclusus. vid. Varro de antiq. Romans
Circus, to inure and practice their Youth against military service, wherein
they wrastled and contended. They used likewise, as the French do to this day,
the exercise of the Haec quae difficilis turget Paganica pl^ma, Folle minus
luxa est, and ^inus arcta p^la. Mar^ial lib. 14.45.
Ball, which play is never sufficiently praised by Galen: being an exercise
wherein all the organs or faculties of man's body are to be employed; as the
eye to be quick and sharp in seeing, the hand ready in receiving, the body
nimble in moving, the legs speedy in recovering. That Fencing also was of
much use and practice among the Romans, even in their height of glory, and
during the flourishing time of their Empire, may appear by that high
commendation which Cicero gives it, terming it, Fortissima adversus mortem and
dolorem disciplina.
The strongest and soveraignest exercise against death and grief. That Iusts,
Tournaments and Barriers (likewise) were amongst our ancient Knights usually
practiced and observed, both for gaining the favor of such Ladies as they
loved, as also for the honor of their Country, vanquishing such strangers with
whom they contended; may appear in Histories of all ages. Or to descend to
more soft and effeminate Recreations: we shall find, of what great esteem
Music was, even with some, who were in years as ripe, Vid. Plut. in Apotheg.
and in vit. Socr.
as they were for wisdom rare. Socrates, when he was well struck in years,
learned to play upon the Harp. Minerva and Alcibiades disliked the loud
Music of Dulcimers and Shalmes, but admired the warbling strains of the
Harp. Plat. in Repub. Vid. Plut. in vit. Lycurg.
Plato and Aristotle would have a man well brought up in Music. Lycurgus in
his sharp laws allows of Music. Chyron taught Achilles in his tender
years, Music. Achasia, with Diotima and Hermione, taught Pericles Prince of
Troy (or rather Duke of Athens) Music. Epaminondas of Leuctra, was
experienced in Music. Themistocles was less esteemed, because not seen in
Music. Alexander was so ravished with Music, that when he heard a Trumpet,
he used to cry ad arma, ad arma; not able to contain himself: so highly were
his spirits erected by the force of Music. Painting likewise among the
ancient Pagans, was for a Recreation used, though at this day, through the
dishonor our painted Sepulchers do to their maker, much abused. Fabius
surnamed Pictor, from whence the Fabii took their names, was a painter, for he
painted the walls of the Temple of Peace. Metrodorus a Philosopher and painter
of Athens, sent to by L. Paulus to bring up his children, and to deck the
Roman triumphs. Protogenes his table wherein Bacchus was painted, moved King
Demetrius lying at the City Rhodes, so much to admire his rare Art and
Workmanship, that whereas he might have consumed the City with fire, he would
not for the preciousnesse of that table: and therefore staying to bid them
battle, won not the City at all. So Campaspe pictured out in her colors by
Apelles; and Crotons five daughters, lively pourtrayed by Zeuxes, gained those
famous Artists no less honor. Howsoever his art was in painting, I cannot
choose but commend his quick wit in answering, being by them reproved whom he
most distasted; and thus it was. Two Cardinals reproving one Raphael a
painter, in that he had made the pictures of Peter and Paul too red, answered,
That Saint Peter and Saint Paul were even as red in heaven, as they saw them
there, to see the church governed by such as they were. This device or
invention of painting, was by the Pagans generally, but especially those of the
better sort, taken only for a recreation, and no trade or profession; laboring
to show their cunning in beautifying, garnishing and adorning the triumphs of
their Conquerours, or in decoring their Temples dedicated to the Gods. As the
Scythes used to erect Obeliskes or square stones upon the hearse of the
deceased, in number so many as he had slain of his enemies: where he that had
not slain an enemy could not drink of the Goblet, spiced with the ashes of
some memorable Ancestor, at solemn feasts and banquets. For other painting
(too much affected at this day) it was not so much as used by any Matron, Wife,
or Virgin, whose best red was shamefastness, and choicest beauty maiden
bashfulnesse:
only, as Festus Pompeius says, Nazian. contra ^ulieres immod^ce comptas.
Nescit equo rudis Haere^e ingenuus puer, v^narique imet ludere do^lior, seu
Graeco jubeas trocho, seu malis vetita legibus alea. Hor. Od. 4.8. Consule
Victori. in vit. Imperator. Stud^sus al^a lusor. ibid. Sue^. in Aug.
common and base whores, called Schaenicolae, used daubing of themselves,
though with the vilest stuff. But this may seem an art rather than a
recreation; we will therefore descend to some others, whose use refreshes and
recreateth the mind, if employed as they were first intended, being rather to
beguile time, than to reap gain. And first for the Antiquity of Dice-play, we
have plenty of authorities every where occurring: being much used by all the
Roman Emperors at banquets and solemn meetings, where they bestowed
themselves and the time, at no game so much as dice. So as, Augustus was said
to be a serious gamester at dice: affecting them much, when at any time he
retired from Court or Camp. Whence it is, that Suetonius brings in Augustus
Caesar speaking thus; Si quas manus remisi cuique exegissem: aut retinuissem
quod cuique donavi, vicissem, etc. If I had exacted those chances which I
remitted every one, and kept that which I bestowed, I had gotten by play;
whereas now I am a loser by my bounty. Though no game more ancient, or which
indeed requires a conceit more pregnant than the Chesse; which we read to have
been in great request amongst the ancient Romans, whereof we have a History in
the time of Caius Caligula, tending to this purpose. This Emperor being
naturally addicted to all cruelty, chanced one day amongst others to send for
one Canius Iulus a Philosopher of eminent esteem at that time: with whom,
after some conference, the Emperor fell into such a rage, as he bade him
depart thence, but expect within short time to receive due censure for his
boldness: For (quoth he) flatter not thy self with a foolish hope of longer
life, for I have doo^ed thee to be drawn by the officer unto death: But see
with what resolution this noble Canius bore himself! I thank you (quoth he)
most gracious Emperor, and so departed. Within some few days after, the
Officer (according to the Emperors commandment) repaired to the houses of
such as were adjudged, not by any legal process, but only by the Emperors
pleasure, to suffer death; amongst which, he made repair to Canius house, whom
he found playing at Chesse with one of his companions. The Officer without
delay gave him summons to prepare himself, for it was the Emperors pleasure
he should die: whereat, as one nothing amated or discouraged, he called the
Officer unto him, and Vocatu^ numeravit cal^ul^s, and Sodal^ suo; Vide^^nquit)
^e post mortem meam mentiaris te vicisse. Tum aun^^ns Cen^urion^: Te^u (inquit)
eris, uno me antecedere. Sen. de tranq. anim.
numbering the Chesse-men before him and his companion with whom he played: See
(quoth he) that after my death thou report not that thou had the better of
the game: then calling upon the Centurion or Officer: Be you witness (quoth
he) that I was before him one. Thus laughed this noble Philosopher at death,
insulting as much over death, as he insulted over him, who adjudged him to
death. This kind of game, now flater years is grown so familiar with most of
our neighboring Countries, as no one play more affected or more generally
used. So as we have heard of an Ape who played at Chesse in Portugal: which
employed, the daily use and practice of that game, brought the Ape to that
imitation. And certainly, there is no one game which may seem to represent the
state of man's life to the full, so well as the Chesse. For there you shall find
Princes and Beggars, and persons of all conditions ranked in their proper and
peculiar places; yet when the game is done, they are all thrust up in a bag
together: and where then appears any difference betwixt the poorest Beggar,
and the potentest Peer? The like may be observed in this stage of humane
frailty: while we are here set to show during the Chesse-game of this life, we
are according to our several ranks esteemed; and fit it should be so, for else
should all degrees be promiscuously confounded: but no sooner is the game done,
the thread of our short life spunne, than we are thrown into a bag, a poor
shrouding sheet, for that is all that we must carry with us: where there
shall be no difference betwixt the greatest and least, highest and lowest: for
then it shall not be asked us how much we had, but how we disposed of that we
had. Thus far have we discoursed of the first part, to wit, of the difference
of recreations: thinking it sufficient to have touched only such as are most
usual and known unto us. For some others, which we have purposely omitted,
lest our Mindian gate should grow greater than our City, we shall have occasion
to speak of some of them, when we are to discourse of such Recreations, as are
to be made choice of by Gentlemen of best rank and quality. In the mean time
we will descend to the second part, to wit, the moderate and immoderate use of
Recreation.

IF we eat too much honey, Of the moderate and immoderate use of Recreation.
it will grow distasteful; so in Recreations, if we exceed, they must needs
grow hurtful. I approve therefore of his opinion, who advises us to do with
Recreations, and such pleasures wherein we take delight, as Nurses do with
their breasts to weane young children from them: anoint them a little with
Alloes; Pic. Mirand. in Epist. ad Hermol.
sprinkling our sweetest delights with some bitterness, to weane us from them
with more easiness. Neither is it my meaning that Gentlemen should be so from
the pleasure of Recre^tion weaned, as if from society wholly estranged: for
this were like him, who became Hermit because he might not have her he loved.
But rather so to attemper or allay the sweetness of such pleasures or delights
as they betake themselves to, that they be never too much besotted with them.
This course that Gentleman took, who perceiving himself too much affected on
Hawking, resolved one day to weane his mind a little from it, by trying his
patience with some inconveniences incident to it. Wherefore he set a lazy
Haggard on his fist, and goes to his sport: where he finds store of game but
few flights; for wheresoever the Partridge flew, his Hawke never made farther
flight than from tree to tree, which drove the Gentleman faulconer to such
impatience, as he less affected the pleasure for long time after. The like I
have heard of a Gentleman who used much bowling: which Recreation he so
continually practiced, for the love he bore it, as his occasions were much
neglected by it, which to prevent, as he rode far for his pleasure, so he
stayed late ere he returned home, of purpose, so to become wearied, that his
mind by that means might from his pleasure be the sooner weaned. But these
experiments as they are often failing, where the mind is not come to settling: so
in my opinion there is no means better or surer to weane man, endued with
reason, from being too much captived or enchained with these pleasures, than to
consider what benefits redound from moderate Rec^e^t^on, and again what
inconveniences arise from immoderate delight therein. First then, let us
consider the end for which Recreations were ordained, and we shall find that
they were rather intended to beguile time, than to bestow our selves on them
all our time. Though many, too many there be, who will not stick to say with
him who sported himself in the warm Sun, Vtinam hoc esset vivere, would to
God this were to live; would to God this Recreation were a Vocation, this
pleasure my trade forever. No, as Recreation was at first intended for
refreshing the mind, and enabling the body to perform such offices as are
requisite to be performed: so is it not to be made a Trade or profession, as
if we should there set up our rest, and intend nothing else. Consider therefore
the Benefits which redound by a moderate or temperate use of Recreation.

FIrst it refreshes or cherishes the mind, The Benefits redounding from
moderate Recreation.

S^n de Tranq. anim.


accommodating it to all studies: clearing the understanding which would be
easily depressed, if either with worldly cares, or more noble and generous
studies wholly restrained. It is said of Asinius Pollio, that after the tenth
hour he would be retained in no business, neither after that hour would he
read so much as any Letter. Of Cato likewise, that he used to refresh his
mind with wine; the like of Solon and Archesilaus, that they would usually
cheer their spirits with wine: yet whosoever should object drunkenness to
Cato, might sooner prove that crime honest, than Cato dishonest. So as, whether
we believe the Greek Poet, It is sometimes pleasing to be a little madding; or
Plato, who in vain expulsed Poets the bounds of his Commonweal; or
Aristotle, That there can never be any great wit without some mixture of folly:
Nullum magnum i^ge^^um s^ne m^^tura dementia su^^. ibid.
we shall find, that even the gravest and most experienced Statists have
sometimes retired themselves from more serious affairs, to refresh and solace
their tired spirits with moderate recreations. The Poet excellently describes a
man buried in the deep slumber of contemplation, after this manner; He dies,
Horat. l. 1. ep. 7.
pent up with study and with care.
So were the Anchorites and Hermites in former time, being wholly divided from
society: yea so immured, as they seemed to be buried living. Whose
conversation, as (questionless) it argued a great mortification of all mundane
desires; so it ministered matter of admiration to such, who given to carnal
liberty, wondered how men made of earth, could be so estranged from conversing
with inhabitants of earth. But to leave these, and imagine their conversation
to be in heaven, Cellae and habitatio cognatae sunt. ^er. de vit. solitar.
though their habitation was on earth: we perceive hence, how beneficial
Recreation is to the mind, in cheering, solacing, and refreshing her, if used
with moderation. How it lessens those burdens of cares, wherewith she is
oppressed, revives the spirits, as if from death restored, cleares the
understanding, as if her eyes long time shut, were now unsealed, and quickens
the invention, by this sweet respiration, as if newly molded. Neither is this
Benefit so restrained, as if it extended only to the mind; for it conferres a
Benefit likewise to the body, by enabling it to perform such labors, Taskes
or Offices, as it is to be employed or exercised withal. There are two
proverbs which may be properly applied to this purpose: Non calatham Juno, non
arcum sen per Apollo Tendit, amant re^^iem corpora ^essa suam.
Once in the year Apollo laughes; this approves the use of moderate
Recreation. Apollo's Bow's not always bent; this shows, that humane
employments are to be seasoned by Recreation: we are sometimes to unbend the
bow, or it will lose his strength. Continual or incessant employment cannot be
endured: there must be some intermission, or the body becomes enfeebled. As
for example; observe these men who either encombred with worldly affairs, so
tie and tether themselves to their business, as they intermit no time for
effecting that which they go about: or such as wholly nailed to their Deske,
admit no time for Recreation, lest they should thereby hinder the progress of
their studies. See how pale and meager they look, how sickly and infirm in
the state of their bodies, how weak and defective in their constitution? So as
to compare one of these weaklings with such an one as intermits occasions of
business, rather than he will prejudice his health (...) serving times as well
for recreation and pleasure, as for employment and labor, were to present a
spectacle of Iuius Dwarf, Sueton. Tranq. (...).
not two foot high, and weighing but seventeene pound, with a Rhinoceros, Tiger
or Serpent of fifty cubits long: such difference in proportion, such ods in
strength of constitution. For observe one of these starved worldlings, whose
aims are only to gather and number, without doing either themselves or others
good with that they gather; with what a sallow and earthy complexion they
look, being turned all earth before they return to earth. And what may be the
cause hereof, Avari^i^ bellua ^e^a, (...), m^ol^anda est. Salust.
but their incessant care of getting, their continual desire of gaining, being
ever gaping till their mouths be filled with gravel. So these, who are wholly
given and solely devoted to a private or retired life, how unlike are they to
such as use and frequent society? For their bodies, as they are much weakened
and enfeebled, so is the heat and vigor of their spirits lessened and
resolved, yea their days for most part shortened and abridged: the cause of all
which proceeds from a continual secludi^g and dividing themselves from
company, and use of such Recreations, as all creatures in their kind require
and observe. For if we should have recourse to creatures of all sorts, we
shall find every one in his kind observe a recreation or refreshment in their
nature. As the Beast in his chase, the Bird in her choice, Domi-porta, Lamax;
qu^a ^^limum serpendo rel^nq^it. Vid Al^iat. in Embl^m. Aelian in not. hist.
the Snaile in her speckled case, the Polypus in her change, yea the Dolphin is
said to sport and play in the water. For as Rev. 4.^1.
all things were created for Gods pleasure, so has he created all things to
recreate and refresh themselves in their own nature. Thus far have we
discoursed of moderate recreation, and of the benefits which redound from it;
being equally commodious to the mind as well as the body, the body as well as
the mind: to the mind, in refreshing, cherishing and accommodating it to all
studies; to the understanding, in clearing it from the mists of sadness: so
the body, in enabling it for the performance of such labors, tasks, or
offices, as it is to be employed or interessed in. It now rests that we speak
something of her opposite, to wit, of immoderate recreation, and the
inconveniences which arise from thence; whereof we shall but need to speak a
word or two, and so descend to more useful points touching this Observation.

The inconveniences arising from immoderate Recreation. Immoderatione
rela^antur artus, imminuuntur ^i^s: moderatione religantur ar^us, reparantur
vires. Laert. in vit. Chyl.
AS the wind Caecias draws unto it clouds, so does immoderate recreation draw
unto it diverse and sundry maine inconveniences: for this immoderation is a
loosener of the sinews, and a lessener of the strength, as moderation is a
combiner of the sinews, and a refiner of the strength. So dangerous is the
surfeit which we take of pleasure or recreation, as in this we resemble Chylo,
who being taken with the apprehension of too much joy, instantly died. Now who
sees not how the sweetest pleasures do the soonest procure a surfeit? being
such as most delight, and therefore aptest to cloy. How soon were the
Israelites cloyed with quails, even while the flesh was yet between their
teeth, and before it was chewed? Number. 11.33.
So apt are we rather to dive than dip our hand in honey. Most true shall
every one by his own experience find that saying of Solomon to be; It is
better to go to the house of mourning, Eccles. 7.4.
than to go to the house of feasting: for there may we see the hand of God,
and learn to examine our lives, making use of their mortality, by taking
consideration of our own frailty. Whereas in the house of feasting, we are
apt to forget the day of our changing, saying with the Epicure, Eat, drink,
and play; but never concluding with him, To morrow we shall die. So apt are
we with Messala Corvinus to forget our own name, Man, who is said to be
corruption; and the son of man, worms meat. For in this Summer Parlour (...)
flourie Arbor of our prosperity, we can find time to solace and recreate
our selves; lie upon beds of ivorie, and stretch our selves upon our beds, Amos
6.4.
and eat of the lambs of the flock, 5.
and the calves out of the stall. Singing to the sound of the viole, and
inventing to our selves instruments of music like David. 6.
Drinking wine in bowls, and anointing our selves with the chief ointments,
but no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. In the year of Iubile all
captives were delivered, all slaves enfranchised, al debts discharged.
So universal are we in our Iubile, having once shaken off our former
captivity. To prevent which forgetfulness, it were not amiss to imitate the
Roman Princes, who (as I have elsewhere noted) when they were at any time in
their conquests or victorious triumphs with acclamations received, and by the
general applause of the people extolled, there stood one always behind them
in their Throne, to pull them by the sleeve, with Memento te esse hominem: for
the consideration of humane frailty is the soveraignest means to weane man
from vaineglory. Whence it was that Themistocles, when Symmachus told him, that
he would teach him the art of memory, answered, he had rather learn the art of
forgetfulness; saying, he could remember enough; but many things he could not
forget, which were necessary to be forgotten; as the overweening conceit of
himself, the glory of his exploits, and merit of his actions, the memory
whereof tended more to his prejudice than profit. But to descend to the
particular inconveniences occasioned by immoderate Recreation; we shall find
both the Mind and Body, as by Moderation cheered and refreshed, so by
Immoderation annoyed and distempered. It was a good rule which those great men
of Rome observed in their Feastings and Cup-meetings; Sen. de tranq. a^^m.
We will drink not to drown us, but to drown care in us. Not to reave
sense, but revive sense. Not as those who are ever carousing in the cup of
Nepenthe, steeping their senses in the Lethe of forgetfulness. For these, like
those b^se Elyots slaved to ebrietie, have buried that glory of man, the
reasonable part, in the lees of sensuality. These are so far from standing
upon their guard, Pl^t. in apotheg.
as the Devil may safely enter either upon the Fore-ward or Rereward without
resistance: for man's security is the Devils opportunity, which he will not
slip though man sleep. I read of one Leonides a Captain, who perceiving his
soldiers left their watch, upon the City walls, and did nothing all the day
long but quaffe and tipple in Alehouses near adjoining, commanded that the
Alehouses should be removed, Elian in vari^ Hist. l. 3 ca. 14.
being the Cittadels wherein they resided, from that place where they stood, and
set up close by the walls; that seeing the soldiers would never keep out of
them, at the least wise that they might watch as well as drink in them. These
were soldiers fit for such a Captain, and a Captain worthy the training of
such soldiers; being one who could sort himself to the necessity of the
time, and frame himself to their humor; when he could not bring them of with
more honor, yet he brought them to stand upon their guard, though they could
hardly stand to their tackling: so as I conclude, their March could not choose
but be lazy, when their heads were so heavy. Dies ^^^tos nolite inhonorare
(inquit Ignatius) ^u^d tamen agu^: isti, qui licentt^s ^^ulando crapule
^ndulge^^, (...) calices ^^nriendo ebrictatem fove^t?

Mel^^s est quod (...) de f^^erent. quam (...) de salt^ e^^. Aug sup. Ps. ^2.
Mark. 11 17.


Generally, but irregularly, is this broad-spreading vice of Drunkenness
holden now adays for a Recreation; so deeply rooted is the custom of
impiety, being once strengthened by impunitie. For what is our Sabbath
Recreation in City and Country, but drinking and carousing, imagining (belike)
that the Sabbath cannot be profaned, if we use not such works or labors
wherein our Vocation is usually employed? If the Jews made the Temple of God a
Den of thieves; we come near them in making that our Temple, which gives
harbor unto thieves. For what are our City or Country Alehouses, for most
part, but the Devils Boothes, where all enormities are acted, all impieties
hatched, all mischievous practices plotted and contrived? These are those
sinkes of sin, where all pollution and uncleanness reigns, where fearful
oaths and profanation rages, whence all sensual liberty arises. O
Gentlemen, let not this professed friend to security attend you! It will make
you unlike your selves, transforming that glorious image which you have
received, like Cyrces guests, Homer. in Odyss. Horat in Epist. L^ert. in vit.
Cleob.
who became Swine, by being too sensually affected. It was sage Cleobulus
saying, That ones servant made merry with wine, was not to be punished; for
(says he) in seeing him, thou shall see thy folly of drunkenness all the
better. Whence it was that some Countries have formerly used (though the
custom seem scarcely approved) to make their slaves or vassals drunk, to
show unto their children the brutish condition of that vice; whereby they might
be the better weaned and deterred from that, which through the liberty of
Youth is usually affected. For if we should but observe the braine-sicke
humors of these professed drunkards, we would rather admire how reason should
be so strangely drenched and drowned in the lees of senseless stupiditie, than
ever be drawn to become affecters of so loathsome a vice. Yet see the misery
of deluded man; how many, and those of excellentest parts, have been and are
besotted with this sin? for who ever lived, and showed more absolute
perfection in action and person, than that great Conqueror and Commander of
the whole world, Alexander the great? Yet what uncomely parts played he in his
drunkenness? How full of noble affability and princely courtesy being sober?
how passionately violent, once fallen to distemper? Witness the burning of
Persepolis, to which cruel attempt he was persuaded by a common and professed
Strumpet, even Thais, Vid. Quint Curt. lib. 5.
whom all Greece had (...) for a public prostitute. Likewise his killing of
Callisthenes, being one whom he so dearly affected, as he was never well, but
when he enjoyed his company. Of both which facts he so repented, as it was
long ere he would be comforted. Armatis, divum nullus pudor. Sil. Ital.
Neither only such as he, who was a Soldier, and therefore might seem
rather to claim in some sort a liberty in this kind: (for of all others, we
observe such as these to be more addicted to these distempers, than others
whose more civil and peaceable conversation have inured them to a better
temper:) but even those (I say) whose sincerity of life, and severity of
discipline had gained them all esteem in their Country, have been likewise
branded with this aspersion. As Censorius Cato, than whom none more strict or
regular; Asinius Pollio, than whom none more gracious or popular; Solon, than
whom none more legal; Archesilaus, than whom none more formal. Yet if we did
but note how much this vice was by the Pagans themselves abhorred, and how they
labored to prevent the very means whereby this vice might be either cherished
or introduced, we would wonder that moderation in a Heathen, should be so
weakly seconded by a Christian. Amongst them,
kinsmen kissed their kinswomen, to know whether they drunk wine or no; Plato.
and if they had, to be punished by death, or banished into some Island.
Plutarch.
Plutarch says, That if the Matrons had any necessity to drink wine, either
because they were sick or weak, the Senate was to give them license, and not
then in Rome neither, but out of the City. And how much it was hated, may
appear by the testimony of Macrobius, who says, That there were two
Senators in Rome chiding; Macrob.
and the one called the others wife an Adulteress, and the other his wife a
Drunkard, and it was judged that to be a Drunkard was more infamy. Thus you
see even in Pagans, who had but only the light of Nature to direct them, how
loath they were to drown the light of reason through drunkenness, being indeed
(as a good Father well observes) An enemy to the knowledge of God.
To conclude then this first point; may it be far from you Gentlemen, to
deprive your selves of that which distinguishes you from beasts: make not that
an exercise or Recreation, 1 Timothy 6.23. Modico vi^o utere.

Ecclesia matter est, noverca non est; libertas datur ad necessitatem, modo
^^^ibeatur ad vanitatem.


which refreshes not, but darkeneth the understanding. Drink you may, and
drink wine you may, for we cannot allow the device of Thracius, but we must
disallow Saint Paul's advice to Timothy, Use a little wine for thy stomachs
sake, and thine often infirmities. So as you are not enjoined such a strict or
Laconian abstinence, as if you were not to drink wine at all: for being
commanded not to drink, it is to be employed, not to use drunkenness, wherein
is excess; for in many places are we allegorically and not literally to
cleave to the Text. As for Origin, strange it is, that perverting so many other
places by Allegories, only he should pervert one place, by not admitting an
Allegory. For our Lord commanding to cut off the foot, or any part of the body
which offends us, does not mean we should cut off our members with a knife,
but our carnal affections with a holy and mortified life: whence it is, that
Ita evenit, ut cum aliqu^d ubi non oport^t adhib^tur, illic ubi oportet
negligatur.

Te^tul. l^b. de paeniten. in^tio.


Origin was justly punished by using too little diligence, where there was
great need, because he used too great diligence where there was little need. No
less worthy was In Apolog. c. 45. Dem^critus e^caca^do s^ips^^ ^n^ontinentiam
emendatione profitetur.

At Christianus solvis oc^lis faeminam videt, a^imo adve^su* libidines cacus
est.


Democritus error of reproving, who was blinded before he was blind: for a
Christian need not p^t out his eyes, for fear of seeing a woman, since
howsoever his bodily eye see, yet still his heart is blind against all
unlawful desires. Neither was Crates Thebanus well advised, who did cast his
money into the Sea, saying, Ego mergam vos, ne ipse merga^ a v^bis.
Nay sure I will drown you first in the Sea, rather than you should drown me
in covetousness and care. Lastly, Noctium Attic. l. 19. c. 13.

Homo miser vites suas sibi omnes de^runcat.


Thracius, of whom Aulus Gellius writes, was for any thing that I can see,
even at that time most of all drunken, when he cut down all his vines, lest
he should be drunken. No, I admit of no such strict Stoicisme; but rather (as
I formerly noted) to use wine or any such strong drink to strengthen and
comfort Nature, but not to impair her strength or enfeeble her. For as by a
little we are usually refreshed, so by too much are we dulled and oppressed.
There are some likewise, and these for most part of the higher sort (I could
wish they were likewise of the better sort) who repair to the House of the
strange woman, sleeping in the bed of sin, thinking so to put from them the
evil day: And these are such as make whoredom a Recreation, sticking not to
commit sin even with greediness, so they may cover their shame with the
curtain of darkness. But that is a woeful Recreation, which brings both soul
and body to confusion, singing Lysimachus song, Short is the pleasure of
Fornication, but eternal is the punishment due to the Fornicator: so as,
though he enjoy pleasure for a time, he shall be tormented for ever. But
consider this, Gentlemen; you (I say) whose better breeding has instructed you
in the knowledge of better things; that if no future respect might move you (as
God forbid it should not move and remove you from these licentious delights)
yet respect to the place whence you descended, the tender of your credit which
should be principally valued, the example which you give, Quo major, eo
^^^^ior; id^ue e^e^p^o perfice, (...) etiam ^e^^ ^^^endi exc^pla trib^as.
and by which inferiors are directed, should be of force to weane you from
all inordinate affections, the end whereof is bitterness, though the beginning
promise sweetness. It was Demosthenes answer unto Lais, upon setting a price
of her body, Non emam tanti paenitere: sure I am, howsoever this Heathen Orator
prized his money above the pleasure of her body, and that it was too dear to
buy repentance at so high a rate; that it is an ill bargain for a moments
pleasure, to make shipwreck of the souls treasure; exposing reputation and
all (being indeed the preciousest of all) to the Object of lightness, and
Subject of baseness, paying the fraught of so short a daliance with a long
repentance. Wherefore my advice is unto such as have resorted to the House of
the strange woman, esteeming it only a trick of youth, to keep their feet
more warily from her ways: Prove. 2.16, 17.
For her house draws near unto death, and her paths unto Hell. So as none
that go in unto her, shall return, neither shall they understand the ways of
life. Let such as have herein sinned, repent; and such as have not herein
sinned, rejoice, giving thanks to God, who has not given them up for a prey
to the lusts of the flesh; craving his assistance to prevent them hereafter,
that the flesh might be ever brought in subjection to the spirit. For as the
Lioness having been false to the Lion, Observations of admirab^e continency,
instanced in beasts and birds.

Vt er^ontur a muliere (...), etc. ibid. ve^s. 12. The publication of Secular
(...) used by the Heathen, was cried in these words: Conv^nite ^d ludos
spectandos, quo, neque spectavit quisquam, nec spectaturus est. Suet. in
Claudio, cap. 21. Po^. Virg. de invent. lib. ^. cap. 1.

O^id. Trist. l^b. 2.


by going to a Libard; and the Storke consorting with any other besides her
own mate, wash themselves before they dare return home; and the Heart, after
he has satisfied his desire, retires to some private or desolate Lawne hanging
down his head, as one discontent, till he has washed and rinsed himself, and
then he returns cheerfully to his herd again: so we cannot be unto God truly
reconciled, till we be in the flood of repentance thoroughly washed. Thus shall
you from the ways of the strange woman be delivered; thus shall your good
name, which is aptly compared to a precious ointment, remain unstained; and a
good report shall follow you, when you are hence departed. There is another
Recreation used by Gentlemen, but especially in this City; which used with
Moderation, is not altogether to be disallowed: and it is repairing to
Stage Plays, where, as they shall see much Lightness, so they may hear
something worthy more serious attention. Whence it is, that Thomas Aquinas
gives instance in Stage Plays, as ^ittest for refreshing and recreating the
mind, which likewise Philo Iudaeus approves. But for as much as diverse
objections have been, and worthily may be made against them, we will here lay
them down, being such as are grounded on the Sacred Word of God; and with as
much perspicuitie and brevitie as we may, clear and resolve them.

Plays were set out on a time by the Citizens for the more solemnity of a
league concluded betwixt the Cantons of Berna and Tiguris; touching which
Plays, sundry differences arose amongst the Ministers of Geneva, which could
not easily be determined, about a young Boy, Object. 1.
who represented a woman in apparel, habit and person: Primum quod urgent illi
Histri^mast: desumptum este Deutr. 22. de cultu mul^^br^, an pueris licu^^ e^m
assum^r^; earumque mores assimila^^?

V^i Bez^ omnes acquiescunt Theologi.


in the end it was agreed of all parts, that they should submit the
determination of this difference, with general suffrage and consent, to the
authenticke and approved judgment of their Beza, holden for the very Oracle
both of University and City. This controversy being unto him referred, he
constantly affirmed, that it was not only lawful for them to set forth and
act those Plays, but for Boys to put on women's apparel for the time. Neither
did he only affirm this, but brought such Divines as opposed themselves
against it* to be of his opinion, with the whole assent and consent of all the
Ecclesiastical Synod of Geneva. Now in this first objection, we may observe
the occasion, which moved these zealous and learned Divines to make a doubt of
the lawfulness of Stage Plays, because (said they) it is not lawful for men
to put on women's apparel, or women to put on men's. As we read how Stephanio,
an Actor of Roman Plays, was whipped, for having a man's wife waiting on him,
shorn in manner of a boy. Which doubt being so soundly and sincerely cleared
by so glorious a light of the Church, we will no longer insist upon it, but
descend to the next Objection.

Object. 2.
We are therefore to come to another place of Scripture, pressed likewise by
such as oppose themselves to the lawfulness of Stage Plays, as we find it
written in the 118. Psalm, Obiectio de sacra Scriptura sumpta and petita.
Turn away my eyes that I see no vanity. Which requires of us a twofold
consideration; Generally, for the whole nature of things, as in that place of
Solomon, Vanity of vanities, etc. in which sense I freely confess that
Stage Plays may pass under the name of Vanity. Specially, for subjects
vain, light, foolish, frivolous, fruitless, being such as are to be applied
or accommodated to no good use or profitable end; in which sense or
signification our Stage Plays may in no sort be termed vanity. Quam-plurima
in publicis Theatris sunt sp^ctanda, ad regendos mores, dirigendos motus,
corrigendos animi metus, admodum ^^i^^a.
For we shall gather, by a right use and application of such things as we
shall hear and see, many excellent precepts for instruction, sundry fearful
examples for caution, diverse notable occurrents or passages, which well applied
(as what may not be perverted) may confer no small profit to the judicious
hearer.

The third Objection may probably ground it self upon the testimony of Saint
Luke 6.24. Object. 3.
Woe unto those that laugh now, etc. Whence it may be gathered, that if the
Scripture condemn Laughter, then consequently Stage Plays also, whose
special aim and intendment is to make men laugh. But it is to be understood,
that Christ directs his speech to those perverse and malicious men, whose
mourning is but a dissembled sorrowing, outwardly grieving, and inwardly
laughing; who speak one thing with their mouth, but profess another thing in
their life: for this is not to be understood of the common society or
conversation of men, as if Christ should forbid any one to laugh at all; but
rather of immoderate laughter, whence is that of the Poet; Woe unto thee whose
Spleen affects laughter,
For thy short joy shall turn to sorrow after.
For as fear begets Humility, Vt metus humilitatem, sic nimia laeticia
gestit levitatem. Cic.
so too much mirth procures levitie. Much laughter corrupts manners, and
loses the sinews of their former strength, but a grave countenance is the
preserver of knowledge; yet adds Ecclesiastes unto this: Eccles. 3.22.
There is nothing better than for man to rejoice in his works; which David
confirms Psalm penult. So as, there is nothing by this Objection proved, but
what with all reason may be approved: for immoderate mirth is that which is
here condemned, being that which we have in this observation especially touched
and taxed: whence we may infer, that moderate delight tasting more of
sobriety than levitie, is not only allowed, but commended.

Object. 4.
The fourth Objection is taken from Saint Matthew, Chap. 12.36. But I say unto
you, that for every idle word, etc. of which word, that we may use no other
exposition, than what the ancient Fathers themselves have used; we will show in
this place their several expositions upon this parcel of holy Scripture.
Tertul. lib. de Patient.
Tertullian in his book of Patience, understands by every idle word,
whatsoever is vain and superfluous. But Theophylact by idle words
understands lies, Theophylact.
calumnies, all inordinate and ridiculous speeches. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, almost after the same manner interprets it, saying, that by
idle words are understood such as move uncomely and immodest laughter. Gregory.
Gregory understands by these which want the profit ever redounding from
modesty, and are seldom uttered upon any precedent necessity, things
frivolous, fables, old-wives tales. All which several expositions, as they
agree in substance, so do we cloze with them in every circumstance. For such
as these which corrupt Youth by light and scurrillous jests, so little are they
to be affected, as the very Stages where these are used, are to be hated.

Object. 5.
For the fifth, it is written to the Corinth. 10.7. and Exodus 32.6. The people
^ate down to eat and drink, and rose up to play: which argument is drawn
from Chrysostom, where he shows that by these words the Apostle meant two
maine inconveniences, being the effects of false worship, and endangering the
souls shipwreck, to wit, the Idolatry, or Idolomany of the Israelites done to
the Golden Calfe in Dan and Bethel. But far be this from the conceit of any
to imagine, that Stage Plays intended for modest delight and Recreation,
should ever move the Spectatour to such abomination. For so much ought
Stage Plays to be from introducing any such impiety, as they should not so
much as once present in their shows or Pagents, ought that might tend to the
depraving of the Hearer in matters of conversation, De Deo loqui etiam vera
periculosissimum est. A^nob.
much less in drawing their minds to any profane or Pagan opinion: which
should not be so much as once named, much less entertained amongst Christians.

For the sixth, Object. 6.
it is grounded on the foundation of the same Apostle, where in diverse places
he writes expressly against fables; as 1 Timothy 1.4. Give no heed to fables, etc.
Again, the 1 Timothy 4.7. But cast away profane, and old-wives fables, etc.
Again, the 2 Timoth. 4.4. Taxing such as shall turn their ears from the
truth, and shall be given unto fables. Again, 2 Pet. 1.16. The Apostles in
their doctrine were not directed by deceivable fables. In Com^d. de Th^ide.
But for these Comedians, let them speak for themselves, being such as follow
the steps of Terence, Menander, etc. Or may be properly referred to the Lesbian
rule of Menander, and the Lydian stone of Paul. For such as breed corruption in
our manners (that I may jumpe in opinion with Plato) let them fail to Anticyra
insula est O^tae monii Thessalio opposita, ubi Helleborus crevisse dicitur.
Anticyra, and undergo due censure for their error. But how worthy the works
of some of the Ancient Comedians have been, may appear by the Apostles
alleging diverse of their sentences in his Epistles, and vouchsafing to use the
name of their Poets, by a general title, 1 Cor. 15.33.
to approve some things in them worthy reading. As that of Luke 9.5. a proverb
used by Euripid. in his Tragedies; that also of Menander, made sacred by the
mouth of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.33. As it is likewise manifest, that the
same Apostle Paul used the authority of Aratus and Epimenides, Act. 17.28. All
which add a reverend approbation to the authority of Poets.

Object. 7.
The seventh Objection which these Stage-Antagonists frame, is taken from Ephesians.
5.4. where the Apostle wills and warns that these (...) etc. that is, such
things as become no man, and which our very ears should abhor to hear,
ought not to be so much as once named amongst Christians. Whereto I answer,
that as these things tending to lightness were inveighed against by the
Apostle, that he might leave unto us a more excellent pattern or example of
modesty, which is an ornament that suteth best with the children of God: So
there is none, having the light of grace in him, or fearing the judgment that
is to come, who will applaud these scurrilous jests, which are wont to deprave,
but seldom to edify the understanding: whereof the Poet speaks; Jests that
unseason'd are, I cannot bear,
For they distaste a modest bashful ear.
But it may be here again objected, Aut vi^. ul^m aut vehiculum. De civit.
Dei. l. 9. c. 5.
that every thing, being (as Augustine testifies,) either a hinderance or a
furtherance; these Stage Plays, which are properly called the Bellows of
vice, may rather seem a hinderance in the course and progress of virtue, than
any furtherance to him in his practice therein. Besides, Plays (says Ambrose)
ought not to be known of Christians, because there is no mention at all made
of them in holy Scripture. Whereto we briefly answer thus with Peter Martyr
that sound and profound Divine, that in holy Scripture we have (as it were) a
general rule set down unto us, touching all things mediate or indifferent, in
the number whereof are Plays necessarily included. Yea, but Augustine the
Prince of the Latin Fathers, seems to affirm, that even those Stages or
Theaters where their interludes were acted, Theatra Idolatri^is is De^um sacris
esse turp^ora, etc.

August^nus Latinorum patr^^^ Augustus. de ciuit. Dei. l. 2. c. 7.


were more abominable than those idolatrous sacrifices, which in honor of the
Pagan gods were offered. But hence is to be understood, that this holy Father
meant of such solemn Plays or Enterludes as were acted and usually celebrated
by the Heathen in the honor of their Father Nun^ sum designatus Aedilis, babeo
rationem quod a populo accep^ri^, mihi ludos sanctissimos maxima^um ceremonia
Cereri Liberoque (...) Cic. in Ver.

Quintilianus Hypocritam Hist^ionem appellat. Qui mores, motus, gestus,
incessus, voces, vultus, depo^ure and dediscere (quorum personas agunt) nulla
modo possunt. Elizabetha orbis Phaebe, inter mulieres Syb^lla, inter reginas
Saba.


Liber, and other Ethnicke gods, for the yearly increase of their fruits:
wherein many uncomely and immodest parts were played. Yea, but where shall we
find these Stage-actors in former times so much as countenanced, being such as
Quintilian terms expressly, Hypocrites, from counterfeiting the manner,
measure, motion, gesture, gate, grace, and feature of such persons as they
represent; whose fashion they often retain when they have resumed their own
Habit? yes, and by the eminent'st and noblest personages. Edward the sixth so
much approved them, as he appointed one who was a witty Courtier to be (as it
were) the chief master or disposer of the Plays, who by his office should
take care to have them set forth in a princely and sumptuous sort; which Office
to this day retains the name of the Master of the Revels. Likewise our late
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, rightly styled the worlds Phaebe, among
women a Sybilla, among Queens a Saba: how well she approved of these
Recreations, being (as she termed them,) harmless spenders of time; the large
exhibitions which she conferred on such as were esteemed notable in that kind,
may sufficiently witness. Neither did she hold it any derogation to that
royal and princely Majesty, which she then in her regal person presented,
to give some countenance to their endeavors, whereby they might be the better
encouraged in their action. Yea, if we would but peruse some books treating
of this subject, we should find Poets in general to have received such
countenance and approbation from the most eminent'st Princes, as their Poems
never wanted Patrons, nor the Authors themselves Benefactors: which by
instances I intend here to confirm, though the prosecution hereof may seem
digressive to our present discourse. We read how much Amyntas King of
Macedonia, Homerus Sophocles heroicus, Sophocles Homerus trogicus.
made of the tragical Poet Euripides, the Athenians of Sophocles; in what
price the noble and Heroicke poems of Homer were holden by Alexander, placing
them in that curious Cabinet which he got in the spoil of Darius; and not
only Homer the Father of the Poets, was so honored by him, but for his sake
all other meaner Poets: in so much as Cherilus no very good Poet, had for every
verse well made, a Philips Noble of gold, amounting in value to an Angel
English, Had Ovid supplied Cherilus place, he might by this means have
enriched his fortunes above the condition of a Poet.
and so for every hundred verses (which a cleanly hand could presently
dispatch) he had an hundred Angels. And since Alexander the great, how
Theocritus the Greek Poet was favored by Ptolomie King of Egypt, and
Berenice his wife. Ennius likewise by Scipio, Virgil and Horace by Augustus;
betwixt which two Poets the Emperor sitting one day, and one that might be
bold asking what he did; Marry (said he) I sit here between groanings and
tears; Sedeo inter suspiria and lachrymas.
for the one was ever sighing, and the other seemed as if he were ever weeping.
But to descend to our later times; how much were I^han de Mehune, and Guillamne
de Loris made of by the French Kings? and Ieffery Chaucer, Father of our
English Poets, by Richard the second; who, as it was supposed, gave him the
Manor of Newholme in Oxfordshire? and Gower by Henry the fourth? Harding by
Edward the fourth? Also how Francis the French King made Sangelais, Salmonius,
Macrinus, and Clemens Marot of his Privy Chamber, for their excellent skill in
Latin and vulgar Poesy. And Henry the eighth, for a few Psalms of David
translated and turned into English Meetre by Sternhold, made him groom of his
Privy Chamber. Also one Gray, in what favor grew he with Henry the eighth,
and after with the Duke of Somerset, Protector, for his Hunt is up, Hunt is
up? And Queen Marie, for one Epithalamie made by Vargus a Spanish Poet, at her
marriage with King Philip, solemnized in Winchester, gave him during his life
two hundred Crowns pension. Nor were Poets only eminent in this kind, but
esteemed for their universalitie of knowledge, apt for any office public; as
in the administration of Commonweals affairs, conduct of Armies, etc. for
we find that Julius Caesar was not only the most eloquent Orator of his time,
but also a very good Poet, though none of his doings therein be now extant.
Quintus Catulus a good Poet, and Cornel. Gallus Treasurer of Egypt; and Horace
the most delicate of all the Roman Lyricks, was importuned by many Letters of
great instance, to be Secretary of State to Augustus the Emperor; ^ego la^do
ruris amoeni Rivo^, and mus^o circumlita sa^a, nemusque. Hor. 1. epist. 10.
Carmin^ se^essum scribentis and otta quaerunt.
which he nevertheless refused for his unhealthfulnesse sake; and being a
quiet man, and nothing ambitious of glory, retired himself from public
deportments. And Ennius the Latin Poet, was with all respect entertained as a
fellow and Counselor by African, for his amiable conversation. So Antimenides,
of whom Aristotle reports in his Politics; and Tyrtaeus the Poet, though a
lame man, was chosen by the Oracle of the gods from the Athenians, to be
General of the Lacedaemonians Army. Nor may that noble and honorable memorial
of that worthy woman twice French Queen, Lady Anne of Britain, wife first to
Charles the eighth, and after to Lewis the twelfth, add less glory to this
exquisite Art; who passing one day from her lodging toward the Kings side, saw
in a Gallerie M. Allane Chartier the Kings Secretary, an excellent Poet,
leaning on a Tables end asleep, and stooped down to kiss him, saying thus in
all their hearings: We may not of princely courtesy pass by and not honor
with our kiss, the mouth from whence so many sweet ditties and golden poems
have issued. Frustra po^tas sores campos sui p^pulit. Sen. de Tranq. anim.
Yea Plato himself, howsoever he may be said to exclude diverse Poets the
bounds of his Commonweal, for their obscene and immodest labors, which
effeminated youth, training them rather to the Carpet than the Camp; yet wrote
he many Epigrams and excellent Poems in his younger years, before he intended
himself to Philosophy. For even in Fables appear Seeds of Virtues, Macrob. in
so^n. Scipionis.
as Macrobius testifies. Yea but our Stage-stingers, or Poet-scourgers, will
again object, that these Theaters, which were at first erected for honest
delight and harmless merriment, grow many times busy with States, laying
aspersions on men of eminent rank and quality; and in brief, Ad
reprebendenda abena ^acta atque dicta ardes omnia animus. Solust.
will spare none, so they may gain themselves by disparaging others. But I
must answer thus much for them, albeit, - Non me tenet aura Theatri; that such
as employ their pens in taxing or tainting any noble or meriting person in this
kind, deserve no better censure, than as they whipped, so to be whipped themselves
for their labor: for they must know (to use the words of one who was once an
eminent Statist) that some things are privileged from jest, namely, Religion,
matters of State, great persons, any man's present business of importance, and
any case that deserves pity; and generally, men ought to find the difference
between saltness and bitterness. Certainly, he that has a Satyricall vein,
as he makes others afraid of his wit, so he had need be afraid of others
memory. This was very straightly looked into by the ancient Heathens, who
ordained many strict Laws to punish such bitter Satyrists as touched the good
name of any Citizen, either in public Stage o^ any private work. The ancient
Romans had a Law enacted in their twelve Tables, that whosoever should impeach
any ones good name, o^ detract from the credit of his person either in verse or
action, should suffer death. So as Tiberius slew Scaurus, and not altogether
undeservedly, for writing a spightfull Tragedy against him. In like manner did
Augustus banish Ovid, for writing too wantonly toward some that were near
him. So Nero enjoined Lucan silence, for his (...).
smooth invection framed against him. So as, Stesichorus writing bitterly
against Helen, Aristophanes against Cleon, Eupolis against Alcibiades,
Callisthenes against Alexander, suffered equal punishments according to their
demerits. Eupolis atque Cratinus, Aristophanesque poetae. Horat. Sermon. li. 1.
Sat. 4.
This Eupolis is said to be o^^ of the first Comedians, and was drowned in
Hellespont, about the time of that famous Sea Fight between the Lacedaemonians
and Athenians: but I can scarcely assent to his opinion; for we find it
recorded, that he was thrown into the Sea by Alcibiades, for presenting him
on the public Stage, embracing Timandra in a lascivious sort; and that he used
these words: Often times, Saepius me Eupolis in Theatro demersisti, semel te in
mari demergam.
Eupolis, have thou drowned me upon the Stage, I will once drown thee in the
Sea. Thespis likewise is said to be the first inventer of a Tragic Scene, as
Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camenae Dicitur, et plaustris vexisse poemata
Thespis, Quae cancre^t agerentque peruncti ^aecibus ora. Horat. in art. poet.
Horace witnesses: Thespis some say inventing first the strain
Of tragic Scenes, grew famous in his vain;
Whose Actors, that ye might the better note,
With painted faces sung the lines he wrote,
Mounted in Chariots; which with greedy ears
The people heard, and hearing sent forth tears.
And in these did Satyrus (no doubt) among the Greeks show an admirable Art,
being so highly extolled by Demosthenes, (for unto him did this Satyrus propose
the first form of speaking plainly and articulately) as he was no less
praised by him, than the Roman Roscius was by Cicero, or Aesopus to whom Cicero
uses many titles of love and familiarity in his Epistles. For Roscius and
Aesopus were held the choicest and chiefest Orators, even at that time when the
Commonweal excelled not only in Eloquence, but also in Wisdom. The like of
Pilades and Hyla, Master and Scholar, who were such passionate Actors, as they
enforced admiration in the hearer. But to what end should I prosecute either
Comic or Tragic subjects any further? My opinion briefly is this; As Comedies
should breath nothing but Terences art, Cecilius gravitie, Menanders
sweetness, Aristophanes conceit, and Plautus wit: so Tragedies should relish
of nothing but of the royal and majestic measures of Sophocles, the
sententious fullness of Euripides, and the sincere integrity of Seneca. For
these which tend to corrupt youth, making their Stages Stews, or their Scenes
mere Satyrs, to detract from the credit or estimation of any person either
public or private; as their Authors deserve due punishment, so should they be
avoided: the former sort, because they are in danger to deprave us; the latter,
because perhaps we shall hear them touch the credit of such as are near us.
For such Enterludes (Gentlemen) as participate with neither of these, but in a
temperate and equal course mix profit with honest delight; you shall account
the time you bestow in hearing them, not altogether fruitlesly spent. For
albeit the Italians are held worthy before all others to carry away the Garland
for Poesy, being for number and measure fuller, and for weight and merit
better, as may appear in the happy labors of Petrarch and Boccace; yet if we
look homeward, and observe the grace of our presentiments, the curiosity of
our properties, and propriety of our action, we may justly conclude, that no
Nation is or has been so exquisite in that kind. But to draw in our sails
touching this Recreation; as I approve of the moderate use and recourse which
our Gentlemen make to Plays; so I wholly condemn the daily frequenting of
them: as some there be (especially in this City) who, for want of better
employment, make it their Vocation. And these I now speak of, be our Ordinary
Gentlemen, whose day-taske is this in a word: Cum fame cruciantur Christi
pauperes, effusis largitatibus nutriunt histriones. Greg.
They leave their beds, to put on their clothes formally, repair to an
Ordinary, and see a Play daily. These can find time enough for Recreation, but
not a minutes space for Devotion. So as I much fear me, when they shall be
struck with sickness, and lie on their deathbed, it will fare with them as it
fared with a young Gentlewoman within these few years; who being accustomed in
her health every day to see one Play or other, was at last struck with a
grievous sickness even unto death: during which time of her sickness, being
exhorted by such Divines as were there present, to call upon God, that he
would in mercy look upon her, as one deaf to their exhortation, continued
ever crying, Oh Hieronimo, Hieronimo, me thinks I see thee brave Hieronimo!
Neither could she be drawn from this with all their persuasions; but fixing
her eyes intentively, as if she had seen Hieronimo acted, sending out a deep
sigh, she suddenly died. And let this suffice to have been spoken of the
moderate use of this Recreation: upon which I have the longer insisted, because
I am not ignorant how diverse and different opinions have been holden touching
the lawfulness of Stage Plays, which I resolved to reconcile in as brief and
plain a manner as I could, before I descended to the rest.

For as much as we have begun to treat of such Recreations as require small
use or exercise of the Body, we will first proceed with such as follow, being
ranked in the same Siedge, because Recreations of the same nature: descending
from them to exercises requiring more alacrity of spirit, and more ability of
body. Of these, which may be rather termed exercises of the mind, than
exercisers of the faculties of the body, are Cards and Dice, a special
Recreation: merely invented and intended to pass tedious winter nights away,
and not to hazard ones fortunes at them, as many inconsiderate gamesters now
adays will not stick to do: which done, what ensues hence, but entertaining
of some desperate course, which brings the undertaker many times to an end as
unfortunate, as his life was dissolute? which makes me think I never see one
of these Gamesters, who in a bravado will set their patrimonies at a throw, but
I remember the answer of one Minacius, who having on a time lost at Dice not
only his money, but his apparel too (for he was very poor) sat weeping at
the portall door of a Tavern. It chanced that a friend of his seeing him thus
to weep and lament, Barthol. Merula. in Ovid. ^e a^^. amand. l. 2.
demanded of him, How it was with him? Nothing, (quoth Minacius;) why weepest
thou then, (said his friend,) if there be Nothing? for this cause do I weep
(replied Minacius) because there is Nothing. His friend still wondering; Why
then (quoth he) do thou weep thus, when there is nothing? for the very
same cause (quoth he) because I have nothing. The one understood, that there
was no cause why he should weep; the other wept because he had nothing left
to play. How many be there who may sing Lachrymae with Menacius, going by
weeping-crosse: being either by cross fortune, as they ascribe it, or rather
by flat cheating, as they may more properly term it, stripped of their
substance? Amongst the Romans, Can^^, canalicula seu ch^us, a^ua Romanos ^actus
erat omn^^um maxim inauspicatus, Hercules, Venus seu Basilicus, omnium
benignissimus. Vid. Laps. antiq. lect. lib. 3. c. 1.

Turn. adu. lib. 5. cap. 6.

In Tessera^io lada, Mydas ^actus erat f^^ t^^at^ssimus. Demp^t. antiq. Romans
lib. 5. cap. 1.


Venus or Cous was the best chance at Dice: but indeed the best chance that any
one can have, is not to throw at all. Howsoever, I could wish young Gentlemen
to beware of frequenting these common gaming houses, where they must either
have fortune with advantage, or else be sure to play like young Gamesters to
their own disadvantage. Truth is, I would have none to play much, but those
which have little to play. For these, as they have little to lose, so they
cannot be much poorer, if they lose all. Whereas such, whose Ancestors have
left them fair revenues, by investing them as Heirs to their providence; need
little to raise or advance their fortunes by these indirect means. For tell
me Gentlemen, do ye game for gain, or passing time? if for gain, it is
needless, ye have sufficient. If for passing time, your stake should be
less, and your care for winning, more indifferent. Besides, do ye not
observe what foists ye have daily resorting and frequenting these Houses;
whose purses are lined with cheats, and whose profession is only to sharke?
Shun their companies then, lest they prey upon you: whereby you shall make your
selves subjects both of want and weakness. Of want, by filling their purses
with your coin; of weakness, by suffering your selves to be made a prey of by
their cheats. If you will game, make choice of such as you know to be square
gamesters, scorning to bring their names in question with the least report of
advantage. As for tricks frequently used in these days, learn rather to
prevent them, than profess them: For I never knew Gamester play upon
advantage, but bring him to the square, and his fortune was ever seconded with
disadvantage. But above all, use moderation in Play, make not your Recreation a
distemper: and set up this as your rest, never to mount your stake so high, as
the loss of it may move you to choler. And so I descend to Recreations more
virile, wherein I will be brief, because I would hasten to the next branch.

In this rank may be numbered Hunting and Hawking; pleasures very free and
generous, and such as the noblest dispositions have naturally affected. For
what more admirable than the pleasure of the Hare, if we observe the uses
which may be made of it, as I have In a Treatise entitled; The Hunts-mans
Raunge.
elsewhere more amply discoursed; purposing here rather to touch them, than
treat of them? in her doubles, note her cunning; in the dogs, eagerness of
pursuing. Where all the senses remain for the time pleased, but when at
default, how much are they grieved? What an excellent Melody, or natural
Consort to delight the ear? What choice Objects to content the eye? what
odoriferous smells in the flourie Meads, to refresh the nose? only the Touch
and Taste must have their pleasures suspended, Velletque videre, non etiam
sentire. Actaeon apud Ovid.
till the sport be ended. Non sine lepore, tanto labor, pro uno Lepore homines
torqueri video; says one very wittily and elegantly. I can never choose but
laugh, to see what labor men will take for a poor Hare. What Mountains they
will climb, Quos montes ascendent, quas palades transibunt, quas vepres
sentesque sine sensu percur^ent, modo unum Lepusculum tanto sudore capiant?
what Marshes they will pass, what brakes and briars they will run through,
and all for a Hare? which may be an Emblem of humane vanity; where men
(miserable deluded men) will refuse no toil or labor to gain a trifling
pleasure. What indirect courses they will take for a moments delight, which is
no sooner shown them, than vanished from them? These pleasures are most
commonly affected by Youth, because they have agility and ability of body to
maintain the pursuit of them: whence the Poet; Horat.
The beardlesse Youth, when is guardians raines do yield,
Sports him in Horse and Dogs, and open field,
The reason may be this; he cannot endure restraint: for the heat of youth must
needs take air, or it choaks it self with too much holding. It must be
carried aloft on the wings of the wind, taking an Icarian flight, but never
fearing his fall. Such dogs as were presented by the King of Albanie unto
Alexander the Great, who would not stir at small beasts, but at Lions and
Elephants, are the fittest for his kennell; for Youth is no sooner moving than
mounting. Whence Ascanius in a youthful bravery; Wishes some Boar or savage
Lion should Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem. Virg.

Descend the Mount, and cope with him he would.
So subject is Youth to expose it self to all dangers, swimming ever with
bladders of vainglory, till they receive water, and it sink. There are some
also of these youthful Hunts-men, who when they cannot speed in their sport,
will rather buy it, than want it; that having their game on their back, they
may proclaim to the world, how they are masters of their profession. And these
are excellently displaid by the Poet, in the person of Gargilius; As once
Gargilius, -- ut o^^m Gargil^us, qui moan plagas, venabula, servos Dis^ertum
transi^e^orum, populumque jub^bat: Vnu^ ut e multis (Populo spectante) referret
Emp^um mulus ^p^um. Horat. Epist. lib 1.6.
who one Morn betime
Sent out his Servants forward to the chase,
With Hunting poles, and twisted nets of line,
To buy a Boar, which through the Market place
Laid on a Mule, as if his men had slain him,
Would, as he thought, eternal glory gain him.
So apt are many in inventing, and eager in pursuing ought which may raise them
a name, though in things merely indifferent. For as reputation is a common
conceit of extraordinary virtue, so every one labors to acquire the end,
albeit they miss the means of acquiring it. For how should any one imagine
(unless his conceit were wholly darkened) that these things could be any means
to perpetuate his name? But so soon transported is Youth with any fantasy
suggested, (albeit upon no sufficient ground builded) as whatsoever his conceit
whispers to him, that may tend to his praise, he entertaines it with a greedy
and eager desire, laboring to effect what may gain him popular esteem. Plato.
So as the Lover is never more blinded with affection toward his beloved, than
Youth is in affecting that which may cause him to be praised. To speak much
touching this Recreation I will not address my discourse: only this is my
opinion, that as it is generous, so generally is it most harmless, so it be
moderately used; for otherwise it may weaken or enfeeble the body, impair the
health, and be occasion of many inconveniences: for in my discourse upon the
particular branch of this Observation, I am only to approve of such
Recreations as are used with Moderation. As Hawking, which (as I before
observed) is a pleasure for high and mounting spirits: such as will not stoop
to inferior Lures, having their minds so far above, as they scorn to partake
with them. It is rare to consider, how a wild Bird should be so brought to
hand, and so well managed as to make us such pleasure in the air: but most of
all to forgo her native liberty and feeding, and return to her former
servitude and diet. But in this, as in the rest, we are taught to admire the
great goodness and bounty of God, who has not only given us the Birds of the
air, with their flesh to feed us, with their voice to cheer us, but with
their flight to delight us. The Eagle, which is indeed the Prince of Birds, and
the prime Hawke, was observed much among the ancient Romans in all their
Auguries: so as an Eagle hovering in the air, in the reign of Augustus, and
at last settling upon the name of Agrippa, and just upon the first letter of
that name, Vid. Sueton. Tranquil.
A. a lightning descending down from heaven, struck the first letter of his
own name out, C. whence South-sayers, by conjecturall arguments gathered, that
he should but live an hundred days after, and be afterward canonized for a
god: because Aesar, the residue of that name, in the Tuscane language signified
god. For the Romans, of all Nations under the Cope of heaven, relied most upon
the prophesying of Birds: so as we read, that they ever kept their Oscines or
Birds of Augury, by which they collected what their success should be, both in
peace and war. Albeit, some there were among the Heathen, who made small
account of them: so as Claudius Pulcher, when in taking his Auspicia, or the
predictions of his success before Sicily, the Pullets would not feed, He
commanded they should be plunged in the Sea, that they might drink, seeing
they would not eat. It is the saying of an ancient Father, That the piercing
eye of the Eagle exceeds the sight of all other Birds: Greg. in Moral. exposit.
in Job.
being of such sharp sight, as reflecting the beams of the Sun fixed upon
her she can look upon the Sun without shutting her eyes, which are not to be
dazzled, shine the Sun never so brightly. So as it is said, she makes a
trial of her brood when they are but young, by mounting up, and fixing their
eyes against the Sun: of which, if any be so tendereyed, as they cannot look
upon it, she disclaimes them; but such whose sharp sight can look steadfastly
upon it, she tenders them as her self. Whence many secret and sacred uses
might be gathered, (for this is but the type of a divine Moral) if I should
insist upon the exposition of that blessed Father; but I must briefly descend,
to speak of the Moderate use of this Recreation. This pleasure, as it is a
princely delight, so it moves many to be so dearly enamoured of it, as they
will undergo any charge, rather than forgo it: which makes me recall to mind
a merry tale which I have read, to this effect. Diverse men having entered into
discourse, touching the superfluous care (I will not say folly) of such as kept
Dogs and Hawks for Hawking; one Paulus a Florentine stood up and spoke. Not
without cause (quoth he) did that fool of Millan laugh at these! and being
entreated to tell the tale, he thus proceeded. Upon a time (quoth he) there was
a citizen of Millan, a Physician for such as were distracted or Lunaticke; who
took upon him within a certain time to cure such as were brought unto him.
And he cured them after this sort; He had a plat of ground near his house,
and in it a pit of corrupt and stinking water, wherein he bound naked such as
were mad to a stake, some of them knee-deepe, others to the groine, and some
others deeper, according to the degree of their madness, where he so long
pined them with water and hunger, till they seemed sound. Now amongst others,
there was one brought, whom he had put thigh-deepe in water: who after fifteen
days began to recover, beseeching the Physician that he might be taken out of
the water. The Physician taking compassion of him, took him out, but with this
condition, that he should not go out of the room. Having obeyed him certain
days, he gave him liberty to walk up and down the house, but not to pass the
out-gate: while the rest of his companions, which were many, remaining in the
water, diligently observed their Physicians command. Now it chanced, as on a
time he stood at the gate, (for out he durst not go, for fear he should
return to the Pit) he beckned to a young Gentleman to come unto him, who had a
Hawke and two Spaniells, being moved with the novelty thereof; for to his
remembrance, before he fell mad, he had never seen the like. The young
Gentleman being come unto him; Sir (quoth he) I pray you hear me a word or
two, and answer me at your pleasure. What is this you ride on (quoth he) and
how do you employ him? This is a Horse (replied he) and I keep him for
Hawking. But what call you that, you carry on your fist, and how do you use
it? This is a Hawke (said he) and I use to fly with it at Pluver and Partridge.
But what (quoth he) are these which follow you, what do they, or wherein do
they profit you? These are dogs (said he) and necessary for Hawking, to find
and retrive my game. And what were these Birds worth, for which you provide so
many things, if you should reckon all you take for a whole year? Who
answering, He knew not well, but they were worth a very little, not above six
crowns. The man replied; what then may be the charge you are at with your
Horse, dogs and Hawke? Some fifty crowns, said he. Whereat, as one wondering
at the folly of the young Gentleman: Away, away Sir, I pray you quickly, and
fly hence before our Physician return home: for if he find you here, as one
that is maddest man alive, he will throw you into his Pit, there to be cured
with others that have lost their wits; and more than all others, for he will
set you chin-deepe in the water. Inferring hence, The Romans, as (...)
accounted all Prodigalls madmen.

Cic. 3 de Offic. Horae non auri dispendium defleo.


that the use or exercise of Hawking, is the greatest folly, unless sometimes
used by such as are of good estate, and for Recreation sake. Neither is this
pleasure or Recreation herein taxed, but the excessive and immoderate expense
which many are at in maintaining this pleasure. Who, as they should be wary in
the expense of their coin, so much more circumspect in their expense of time.
So as in a word, I could wish young Gentlemen never to be so taken with this
pleasure, as to lay aside the dispatch of more serious occasions, for a flight
of feathers in the air. The Physician says, that it is the best exercise
which is, ad ruborem, non adsudorem; refreshing the spirits, and stirring up
the blood a little, but not putting a man into any great sweat: for he that
makes his Recreation a toil, makes himself likewise Pleasures Thral. Rrefresh
your spirits, stir up your blood, and enable your bodies by moderate exercise:
but avoid mixing of distemper with your pleasure, for that were not to refresh,
but depresse the spirits; not to stir up, but stop the course of blood; not
to enable, but enfeeble the body. And so I descend to the next branch,
treating of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman.

Of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman.
TO propose what Recreations may please best, I cannot, (because I know not how
you stand affected) but I shall, as near as I may, recount what especial
Recreations best sort and suit with your quality. Of all those which I have
formerly touched and treated, there is none but may be approved and entertained
with an equal indifferency, being (as I have said) tempered and moderated
with discretion. But some there are I have not touched, which may be so much
the more admired, for as much as they are by our young Gentlemen usually
affected; yea, and as especial Ornaments to grace and accomplish them,
generally esteemed: as Fencing and Dancing; the one to accommodate him for the
Court, the other for the Camp. Of which two Recreations, to give my opinion
freely, there is required a knowledge; but respectively, to such (I mean) as
only intend to Court or Gallant it: for these shall have occasion to make use
of their knowledge, in the one to grace and beautify them; in the other to
shield and defend them. Yet in neither of these would I have them to imitate
their masters: for ^o may they turn Cowards, and so show themselves true
Fencers. Or in their Dancing use those mimicke tricks which our apish
Professanes use: but with a reserved grace to come off bravely and sprightly,
rather than with an affected curiosity. You shall see some of these come forth
so punctually, as if they were made up in a suit of Wainscot, treading the
ground as if they were foundred. Others you shall see, so supple and pliable in
their joints, as you would take them to be some Tumblers; but what are these
but Iacke-an-Apes in gay clothes? But others there are, and these only
praiseworthy, who with a graceful presence gain them respect. For in
exercises of this kind (sure I am) those only deserve most commendation, which
are performed with least affectation. Now I have heard of some who could do
all this; show an excellent grace in their carriage; express themselves rare
proficients in all Schoole-tricks; being so much admired as who but they: yet
observe the cloze, and they spoil all with an English trick, they cannot
leave it when it is well. It is said of Apelles, that he found fault with
Protogenes, in that he could not hold his hands from his table: and right so
fares it with these young Cavalieroes, when they have shown all that may be
shown to give content, striving to show one trick above Ela, they halt in the
conclusion. For fence-play, I have known some puffed up with a presumption of
skill, to have been too apt in giving offense: so as, of professors of worth,
they became practicers of wrong. But see their unhappiness! this conceit or
overweening opinion of their surpassing skill, brings them many times to an
unexpected end, by exposing themselves to inevitable dangers. And this they do
either for vain glory, being ambitious after fame; or else out of a
quarrelling disposition, being no less apt to conceive or apprehend the
smallest occasion of offense, than to prosecute revenge upon occasion offered.
For the first, the bravest and noblest spirits have been affected to it, I
mean Ambition, but their ends were more glorious. As Themistocles, Who walked
in the night time in the open street,
because he could not sleep: the cause whereof when some men did enquire,
T^scul. lib. 4.
he answered, that the triumph of Miltiades would not suffer him to take his
rest. The like might be observed in Alexander, Who sighed that his father
should win so much,
and leave him so little to win. Qui^t. Curt. ^. 1.
So as, it is said that he wept, hearing that there was another world, saying,
He had not yet won one world. But with these it fares many times, as it did
with Marius, who not contented with the glory he got in the Cimbrian wars,
by seeking to augment it, did extenuate it. Yet are these more noble in their
aims, than such whose Ambition it is to commit all impieties, only to gain
them a perpetual infamy. As Pausanias, who killed Philip of Macedon,
only for fame or vainglory; so did Herostratus burn the temple of Diana,
to get him a name by an infamous act. For the latter sort, being such as are
given to quarrels, I have ever noted their gains to be small in all their
adventures. For what are these, but such as value blood at a low rate? they
pretend how their reputation stands engaged; they cannot put up such disgraces
but with touch of cowardice; and what a blemish were it, for ones Reputation to
be brought in question, upon terms so near concerning them, and not seek
revenge? where the wide world would take notice of their disgrace, pointing at
them in the streets, and saying, There go such and such who were most grossly
baffled; preferring their blood before their honor, their safety before their
reputation! O Gentlemen, how many of your rank and quality have perished by
standing upon these terms! how many, and those of the choicest and selected'st
rank, have exposed themselves to extremest danger, whereby they might gain
themselves the style of valiant! how many, even upon trifling occasions have
gone into the field, and in their heat of blood have fallen? He^ quantum potuit
terrae pelagiq^e parari, ho^ qu^m civiles hauserunt sanguine dextra!
Sure I am, their dear Country has felt their loss, to whom in all due
respect they should have tendered both love and life and not have made prodigal
expense of that, which might have been a means to strengthen and support her
state. Yet do I not speak this, as one insensible of wrong, or incapable of
disgrace: for I know that in passages of this nature, public imputations
require public satisfaction, so that howsoere the Divine Law, to which all
humane actions ought to be squared, may seem to conclude, That we are to
leave revenge to whom revenge belongs; yet so passionate is the nature of
man, and through passion so much weakened, as he forgets many times what the
divine Law bids him do, and hastens to that which his own violent and
distempered passion pricks him to. Now to propose my opinion, by way of
direction, in a word it is this. As one may be Ephesians. 4.26.
angry and sin not, so one may revenge and offend not, and this is by Romans
12.20. Prove. 25.21, 2^.
heaping coals of fire upon our Enemies head: for by this Pro. 15.1.18.
meekness is anger appeased, and we of our own fury revenged. But the best
means to prevent occasion of distaste in this kind, is to avoid the
acquaintance or society of such as are given to offense: whence it is that the
wisest of Kings exhorts us in these words: Prove. 22.24.
To have no familiarity with an angry man, neither go^ with the furious man. 25.
And why? Lest thou learn his ways, and receive destruction to thy soul. For
indeed these, whose turbulent dispositions are ready to entertain any occasion
of offense, albeit the occasion perchance was never intended, are unfit for any
company, or to pass time withal in any Recreation. So as, of one of these it
may be said, as was said of Scaeva, who showed apparent arguments of
resolution, to slave himself to the servile yoke of tyrannous subjection;
Infelix dominum quant a virtute parasti! Lucan.

How many courses, miserable man, have thou tried; How many ways have thou
traced; how many adventures entertained; to get thee a Master, Fury,
Archtrai^our to that glorious fortress of Patience? These are those
Bloud-hounds who are ever in quest, and are never satisfied in pursuit, till
their eyes become the sad spectators of a fall: yea, rather than these men will
be out of action, they will engage themselves in maintaining other quarrels; so
prompt they are to take offense, as a strangers engagements must be made their
own, rather than they will discontinue their former profession. Another sort
there are, who albeit they find ability in themselves to subdue and moderate
this passion of fury by the soveraigntie of reason, The saying of Adherbal,
Bomilcars son; Vincere scis Hannibal, sed uti victoria nescis. L. Flor. l. 2.
c. 6. Resembling Clement the fourth, who had a pregnant wit for projecting,
unfortunate for atchieving.
yet it fares with them as it did with Hannibal, Who knew better how to
conquer, than how to make use of his conquest: or as it is said of Glendor,
That he was more able to get a victory, than skillful to use it. So these,
though reason like a discreet Monitor advise them to moderate their passions,
yet so ambitious are they of popular praise, as rather than they will lose the
name of being esteemed resolute, they will oppose themselves to all perils, and
entertain a course in the eye of true valor most dissolute.

Yet respect to our good name, being indeed the choicest and sweetest perfume,
must not be so slighted, as to incur apparent terms of disgrace, and not
labor to wipe off that stain, Object.
by showing some arguments, that we have so much conceit as to apprehend what
an injury is, and so much spirit as to take revenge on him, by whom the
injury is offered.

Sol.
It is true, neither am I so stupid, as not to conceive how insupportable the
burden of those wrongs is, which touch our name. So as indeed, (to speak as a
man unto men,) these wrongs are above the nature of mortality to bear: for
the natural man tasting more of earth than heaven, whilst he ponders the
quality of his disgrace, and how far he stands engaged, in respect of the
opinion of men, to bear himself like himself, and not to bury such wrongs
in silence, as if senseless of the nature of an injury; he never considers
what the divine Law injoynes, but casts his eye upon the wrong he sustaines.
Wherein, if passion will needs over-master reason, (albeit I do not hold it
consonant to the Divine Law, Moral, or National, but to all generous spirits
experimentally useful) I could wish him to come off fair at the first, for
this either wins him the buckler, or loses it: so shall he ever gain to
himself an esteem of conceit, in knowing the nature of a wrong; and an
opinion of spirit, in daring to wipe off the disgrace that shall be laid upon
him. For this is my Position, Fail at the first, and fail ever: for as the
first onset terrifies the enemy, so in actions of this nature, the only means
to gain opinion is to come off bravely in the beginning. Now perchance it may
happen, that he from whom you have received wrong, will take no notice of your
distaste, but will do as he did, who receiving a Challenge upon some
personal touch, whereby he apprehended the occasion for his best advantage, of
making choice (as the Challenged may) of time, place, weapon, and second,
returned this answer to the Messenger; For the time, I know not when; for the
place, when that time comes, it shall be the Alps; for the weapon, it shall be
Guyes sword that slew the Cow on Dunmooth heath; and for my Second, it shall be
your self, that I may bring you within the compass of Duelloes. If with such
your fortune be to deal, (as many there are more valiant in tongue than hand,
more apt to offer wrong than tender satisfaction;) know thus much, that these
Alps which he has named, and whereto he never means to come, is what place
soever you shall meet him; the time, whenever you shall have fit opportunity
to encounter him; the weapon, though he choose it, you may refuse it, (because
it is too closely kept to come to) and make choice of your own weapon lest by
going to Warwick Castle to procure a sword, you forget your wrong before you
come there; and the Second, your only self; that as you are particularly
wronged, you may be particularly righted: for as the wrong touches you and no
Second, so you are to right your self without a Second. But the safest and
surest course (as I said before) not to partake with men of this condition, is
to refrain their company and conversation: for these fiery Spirits, Vid.
Homer. in Iliad.
who have Thersites tongue and Antaeus hand, are dangerous to consort with; for
they seldom resort to any meeting, but either they do hurt, or receive it. So
as, even in these tolerable Recreations of Horse-races, Cockings, Bowlings,
etc. you shall ever see these throw one bone or other to make differences
amongst men of quality and rank, wherein they will be sure to be interested
as Seconds, if not as principal Agents. My advice therefore is, that you avoid
their company, as disturbers of the public peace, interrupters of all honest
Recreations, and professed enemies to all civil society. For, as we read of
the Bird Curuca, Plin. in Not. ^ist.
that she will rather hatch the eggs of another, than hatch none at all; so
these will rather engage themselves in others differences, and like subtle
Spiders spin the web of dissension, than be without employment: but they hatch
the Cockatrice eggs, reaping the fruit of their labors to their shame. But
we have insisted too long upon them; wherefore we will return to our former
discourse. As we have briefly touched some Recreations well sorting with the
quality of a Gentleman, being such as tend especially to his accomplishment
outwardly; so are we now to treat of such as may confer no less benefit to
the inward man, by enabling him for matters of discourse. Of which rank,
Reading of History is to be accounted as one especially tending thereto;
Knowledges are as the Pyramides, whereof History is the Basis.
and that not only in respect of discourse, but in respect of discipline and
civil society; being there taught how to demean ^r behave our selves in all
our actions, how to moderate (...) ^ffections, how to gain worthy esteem both
in our ma^nagements public and private.

Cicero entering into the commendation of Histories, honors them with this
Rhetorical definition: Histories (says he) are the witnesses of times, De
Orat. 1. lib.
the light of truth, the life of memory, the mistress of life, the messenger
of antiquity: Whence Cicero moved Luccius to record his acts in his writings.
In which notable exemplification, he shows what excellent fruits may be
gathered from the select flowers of Histories. First, how the passages and
events of former times are there recorded; Secondly, how the truth of things by
the light of History is discovered; Thirdly, our memory is revived; Fourthly,
our life is directed; Fifthly, antiquities successively transscribed. In Tacitus
are three notes which are required in a perfect History; Annot. in Tacit. De
quo vere dici potest, ut inclytus ille L^psius de Gui^cia^dino testatus est;
"Prudens peritusque s^rip or, and qui tales Lectores suos facit.
First, Truth, in sincere relating, without having any thing haustum ex vano;
Secondly, explanation not only of the sequels of things, but also the causes
and reasons; Thirdly, judgment in distinguishing things, by approving the
best, and disallowing the contrary. Touching which three notes, we are to
observe first, that there is necessarily required in every History a sincere
relation of truth, foisting nothing in which may seem either fabulous or
impertinent. Likewise, it is not enough to lay down or explain the sequels or
issues of things, but the causes and reasons from whence those sequels issued.
Thirdly, there is required judgment in distinguishing probabilities from
improbabilities; never setting ought down for a grounded truth without
approved authority. Having thus proposed unto you the fruits redounding from
History, as also what is required therein, to make it more generally affected;
it rests now that I show my opinion to^ching your choice of Histories: of which
subject, because I have In the Survey of Histories; which might be rightly
entitled, The Muses Wardrobe, or The Noble-mans Lecture; dilating on the
various delights of History, the best accomplisher of true Gentilitie.

Historic^m nobilem and verum. Aug. de Civit. Dei, 4. l.


heretofore copiously treated, I will only speak a word, and so descend to the
last branch of this Observation.

Augustine in his fourth book De Civit. Dei, calls Salust, A Noble and true
Historian; noble in respect of his descent; true in respect of his discourse.
Neither does he indeed deserve any lesser title; for his phrase is elegant
without affectation, his discourse continuate without impertinent digression,
and the Series of his History stored with much sententious instruction. From
the depth of a princely judgment, Caesar's Commentaries have received most
noble approbation. But if you would take view of a flourishing State, Graecorum
Thucyd^dem and Herodotum, Latinorum Salustium and T. Livium facile principes
esse judicamus. L^^r. V^ll. in Pr^oem. Thucyd.
whose greatness never any attained to, being raised from such beginnings; be
acquainted with Plinius Junior wished he might be mentioned in the Histories
of Cornel. Tacitus, because he did foresee then succeeding memory.
Tacitus or Livie, where you shall observe the courses and passages of many
eminent Princes, how they bare themselves in their height, how in their hate.
Here you shall see, Those men, who (as Cosmo says) carry their heart in their
mouth, are more to be pitied than feared: for these judge men only by the
outward appearance. Whereas Tiberius gloried in nothing so much as in cunningly
cloaking his purposes with fair pretenses, going invisible, and deluding his
subjects resolutions with a seeming good. Here you shall likewise observe
others so obsequiously seeming, as they strove not only to satisfy the Non
solum onim^, sed etiam (...) Cic.
minds, but eyes of the Citizens, understanding well enough, that the common
sort of people were caught sooner by a ^
cheerful countenance, and a pleasing outward semblance, than any other
respect whatsoever. Some you shall see note much, yet will be seen to note
little: therefore Agrippina in Tacitus, knowing her life to be attempted by
Nero, knew well, that her only remedy was to take no notice of the treason: so
is Scipio described by Cicero, to be the most cunning searcher of m^ns minds;
and Sylla by Salust. Others you shall observe so much dejected presently upon
any loss sustained, (...) they entertain affliction with a desperate sorrow,
crying out with Afranius son, ^
Alas me wretched! or Philotas-like, receive such deep impression or
apprehension of their disgrace, as through it they are forced to lose the
faculty of speech. Whereas others, like Furius Camillus are neither puffed up
with honor, nor cast down with disgrace: as his Dictator-ship could not make
him too haughtily affected; no more could exile from his Country cause him to
be dejected. Such was the resolution of the ancient Romans, who at the
disaster of Cannae, when their utter ruin and overthrow was rung in every
place, did nothing unworthy themselves. Here you shall encounter with a
Iugurth, Speaking little, but doing much; There with a Catiline,
Speaking much, but doing little. Here one, in all men's opinions worthy of an
Empire before he had it, but most unworthy when he has it, exemplified in
Cicero said of Galba's leaden and lumpish body: His wit had an ill lodging.
Galba; there one much doubted before he have it, but generally loved when he
had it, exemplified in Who would have majesty preserved, virtute non cultu.
Ma^r^b. lib. 2. Saturnalium c. 5 Dion. l. 4 4.
Severus. Again, observe you may in the course of Histories, how justly God
has shown himself toward such as practiced treason against their Princes,
though they were heathens: find out one of all those who conspired Caesar's
death in the Capitol, who died in their bed. For no sooner had Antonie showed
in his funeral Oration the thirty three wounds wherewith Caesar was deprived
of life by his conspirators, and erected a Temple to Caesar, and sung a
mournful hymn in memory of Caesar; then Trebonius and Decimu^ were the first
that were dispatched, being of the conspiracy. Cassius likewise was killed on
his Birthday: who, some say, killed himself with the same dagger wherewith
Caesar was killed; yea, observe the misery of these Assacinates, being so
unhappy, as they could hardly find one so friendly, A^pianus Alex.
as to lend a hand to end their ^^sery. For Cassius offered his throat to
Pindarus his Page: Brutus to Strato, who denying to do it, was answered by a
servant; Votis tuis nec deerit amicus nec servus. Plut. in vit. Pomp.
The like revenge was inflicted on Septimius, for betraying his master Pompey.
The like on the Magi, for their treacherous attempts, after the death of
Cambises. The like on Bessus for his disloyalty toward Darius. Justin. Quint.
Curt.
And to descend to later times, even within the bounds of our own nation, what
just revenge seconded those perfidious Accomplices; Alectus for conspiring
against his dear Sovereign Carausius; and that Arch-traitour Edrike, for his
treacherous practices with Canutus the Dane, and breach of allegiance toward
King Edmond? V^d. Polydor. Fab. Stow. and al.
for seldom has any State in any age been so happy, as it has not bred a
Catiline with a Catulus, a Cethegus with a Curtius, a Sertorius with a Soranus,
a Quadratus and Quintianus with an Aemilius and Coriolanus. Besides, you shall
observe what justice and integrity appeared in the heathen, chastising such as
would be bribed or corrupted, though they were their enemies. So as,
Mithridates took Manius Acilius, Appian. Alex.
one of the chiefest Ambassadors of the Romans, and set him contemptuously
upon an Ass, till he was come to Pergamo, where he put molten gold in his
mouth; reproving the Romans for taking gifts. The like reward had Tarpeia,
being corrupted by T. Tatius to deliver the Capitol: for having betrayed the
gates of the Capitol to the enemy, I. Flor. l. 1. c. 1. Quint. Curt. l 3.
only upon promise, that they should throw her the bracelets, which they wore
on their left arms, this they accordingly performed, throwing also their
targets upon her, with which she was pressed to death. You shall likewise find
there, what reverence the Pagans showed to their Idolatrous Temples; and how
careful they were to observe their Country rites, which they esteemed sacred,
and what success ever followed the enterprises of such as committed,
sacrilege. The very heathen observed, The miserable ends of such as committed
sacrilege in their time. Virg. Aeneid. l. 2.
that after such time as the Grecians once offered violence to the Temple of
Pallas, that they lost all their hope, and never thrived after. Lactantius
reports of diverse who were grievously punished for their impiety and
profaneness toward the gods; as namely Fulvius the Censor, who for taking
away certain marmoreas tegulas out of the temple of Juno Lacinia, Lactant. de
o^^g. error. cap. 8.
was distraught of his wits. Appius Claudius for translating and conveying
those sacred relics which were before consecrate to Hercules, within a while
after lost the use of his eyes. Dionysius, who made a jest of Sacrilege, taking
a golden cloak from Jupiter Olympius his image, a woollen cloak being put in
stead thereof, saying, That a golden cloak was too heavy in Summer, and too
cold in Winter, but a linsie-woolsie cloak was fit for both; cutting off also
Aesculapius golden beard, saying, It was no reason that the son should have a
beard, and Apollo his father have none; and taking away certain cups of gold
which they held in their hands, saying, It was a great madness, to refuse them
offered; was for these driven into banishment. Pyrrhus, for robbing
Proserpina's treasury, suffered ship wrack not far from the shore. Zerxes,
who sent four hundred of his soldiers to Delphos, Valor. Max.
to spoil the Temple of Apollo, had them all destroyed, and burnt with thunder
and lightning. Marcus Cr^ssus, for taking a great mass of money out of the
Temple, which Pompey would not meddle withal, perished there with his whole
army. And here in Albion, we read of Brennus, who in his expedition to
Delphos, was by a sudden hurly-burly, or immoderate fear, through a noise
heard in the bowels of the earth, Vid. Chron.
(raised indeed by the lamentable shrikings and howlings of the distracted
Druids and ministers of Apollo) despairing of further success, perished with
all his army. Whence may be observed, how justly such (...) punished, who
contemned the religion of their Country, robbing their Temples, and enriching
themselves with the spoil of their gods: who, albeit they were Idols and no
gods, or rather Devils and no Idols, yet so ill was their success in all
their affairs afterward, as they attributed the cause of their miserable ends
to the contempt of their gods. But howsoever this may seem erroneously
ascribed, sure I am, that thus it may be rightly applied: that where God is
dishonored, his Temple profaned, and religion contemned, nothing can be
succesfully or prosperously concluded. What good moral men have flourished in
evil times.
It is wonderful to note in such evil times, so good men, as we shall every
where meet with in the course of Histories. An Aristides for Justice, a
Pelopidas for Temperance, a Numa for Prudence, a Trajan for Patience, an
African for Continence; all which in this Cleanthes Table, History, show
admirable virtues in a corrupt government. Again, reflect your eye on those
whose love to their Country deserves eternal memory; and you will no less
wonder at the greatness of their minds, than the happiness of those Realms
that enjoyed them. Plut. initio Apotheg. regum.
King Darius upon a time, by chance opening a great Pomegranat, and being
demanded of what he would wish to have as many as there were grains in that
Pomegranat? answered in one word, of Zopyrusses. Now this Zopyrus was a right
noble and valiant Knight, who to reduce Babylon to the subjection of his Lord
and Master, and defeat the traitorous Assyrians, suffered his body to be rent
and mangled, and being thus disfigured, fled straight-wayes to Babylon, where
the Assyrians were entrenched: whom he made believe that Darius had mis-used
him in this sort, because he had spoken in their behalf, counselling him to
break up his siege, and to remove his army from assaulting their City. They
hearing this tale, and the rather induced to think it true, because they saw
him so shamefully disfigured in his body, were persuaded to make him their
chief Captain: by which means he^ betrayed them all, Justin. lib. 1. in fine.
and surrendered both them and their City into his Masters hands. The like we
read of Codrus Prince of Athens, who according to the counsel of the Oracle,
sacrificed his life willingly, to preserve the Liberty of his Country. The
like did Gobrias, who offered his body to slaughter, to free his Country of a
tyrannous Traitor. Yet observe withal, the ingratitude of former Ages to men
of best deservings; Non dolenda solum sed periculosa etiam res est, cum
ingratis babere negatium. Senec.

Appian. Alexand.


which caused Aeschines say, That though the City of Thebes and Athens were
full of naughty men, yet not so full of any sort as of ungrateful men. This
felt Annibal, this felt Asdrubal, this felt African; while Asdrubal within,
must be accused by Asdrubal without: and noble African, than whom none ever
deserved better of his Country, O ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem! Valor. Max.
may beg a resting place for his bones, but must not have it. Again, it will
not be amiss to note the sundry occasions of wars, proceeding from the
sundry dispositions of men. Some strove for soveraigntie; others for
preservation of their Liberty: where, so eager was the one of gaining glory,
the other of defending their Liberty, they were many times brought to such
straights, Quint. Curt. l. 6.
as there was more room for beholders, than fighters, many bearing arms, but
could not use them. No less remarkable is it, to note what incredible exploits
have been achieved by a handful of men under a valiant Leader: where by a
more particular survey had of their actions, we shall find that observation of
Plutarch to be most true: Plut. in Apotheg.
Better is an army of Hearts, with a Lion to their Leader, than an army of
Lions with a Heart to their Leader: Q^anti dux, tant^^x^rcitus. L. Flor. l. 2.
c. 18.
An Army being said to derive her strength from her self, but her spirit from
her Captain. In ^ word, Gentlemen, to observe the revolution of times ^he
mutation of States, the Natures and dispositions of persons, the issues and
events of things, would (...) an employment of no less delight than profit;
Pecoribus fa^igatis quoque ve^o^^or domun gradus est. Sen. de ^^anquill. anim.
lib. 1. cap 1
conferring the ebbings and flowings of foreign estates with our own. But to
draw homeward, lest like Messala Carvinus by remembering the name of a stranger,
we forget our own: there is no History more useful, or relation more needful
for any Gentleman, than our own Modern Chronicles, where he shall observe
many notable passages worthy his reading. As first, how his Country was first
planted; how by degrees it became peopled; how to civilitie reduced; how by
wholesome Laws restrained; and how by the providence of the Almighty, in so
calm and peaceable manner established. Here he shall see a good King, but a
bad man; there a good man, but a bad King. Again, here he shall see the State
more weakened by civil broiles, than foreign wars: Security being no less
hurtful at home, than hostility abroad. Scipio used to have this sentence in
his mouth: That easy, favorable and affable Captains, were profitable to the
Enemy, which though they were beloved of their Soldiers, yet they set little
by them. This shall you see verified in the too much indulgencie of many of our
Captains, through which lenity they made many hopeful Soldiers, absolute
cowards. Again, to note the raising of many obscure persons to great honor;
as likewise the pulling down of many eminent houses and families, would enforce
no less admiration in us of Gods divine Providence, than of his secret
Justice, who pulls down, and sets up, as seems best to his wisdom. To
observe likewise, in the corruption of blood, what Noble Families have been
tainted, which by the Princes clemency were again restored. What dangerous
attempts and practices have been undertaken, not only to shake but supplant
the glorious frame of this Ila^d: As in the reign of King John.
laboring to divide and remove all succession to this Crown, from the Royal
Line of our Princes, and to in^est foreign Princes therewith: where an English
King was summoned to the French Kings Court, while Normandy was yielded by us,
the Welsh invaded us, Lewis with a speedy arrival accosted us, and John
himself was forced to leave us. Nay which was more, one of the Nurseries of
our Island was displanted: An. Dom. 1209.
for at that time was Oxford of her Students forsaken and abandoned, (which
before for the space of three hundred and nine years had successfully
flourished) so as not only the State, but Learning, the stern of State,
became much weakened. Yet observe, how happily this storm was calmed, when it
was least expected; for by the Vicount of Mellin his confession, lying then
upon his deathbed, was the whole practice of the French, by a Frenchman
discovered, which was no less happily afterward prevented. For King John,
being to repentance moved, took an oath before his Barons that all things
should be reformed, which the Barons likewise seconded with an oath to confirm
his proceedings. Having crossed the Seas to Jerusalem.
So John was absolved, and that Crown which he had before resigned, he forth
with resumed, being in this made more happy, in that being once so unhappie,
he came to defeat his foes, make sufficient trial of his friends, and recover
that by submission, which he had lost by his pride. Again, if we should but
read, and reading consider, how peaceful the government, how quiet the
sleeps, how cheerful the delights were of such as came by lawful and
lineall succession to the Crown; and the heavy Nights, troubled thoughts,
broken sleeps, and many tedious hours which those were owners of, who came by
usurpation to enjoy (with little joy) a princely Diadem; we should of
necessity conclude with Pompey; who being combred with his Honor, exclaimed
to see Sylla's cruelty, being ignorant after what sort to behave himself in
the dignity he had, and cried out: O peril and d^^ger never like to have an
end! For to use one example for all; who should but consider the practices
which Richard the third used to get a Crown, planting his Kingdom on an
indirect foundation, Blond, and those many strange passages and overtures which
happened in his Reign, with those fearful Visions which appeared to him
before his death, would certainly set down this for his rest: that it is not
what we have without us, but what we have within us that procures us peace or
disquiet. Whence Polydore Virgil upon that terrible dream of Richard the
third, Ideredo non s^it hominum, sed cons^ien^^a scelerum.

Polydor. Virgil.


the night before Bosworth field, in which he was slain, uses these words: I
do not believe that these were the ghosts of men that did affright him, but
the guilt of a troubled conscience that did torment him. Certainly, discourses
of this nature cannot choose but minister much profit with delight, and enable
you that are Gentlemen to entertain the time with much content to them that
hear you. For in this Treasury or Storehouse of History, you shall find
better means, than all the Helps to Discourse which our weak Pamphletters
can publish, to enable you for discourse in all companies. For to restrain or
tie your selves to a set form of discourse, as if you were to do nothing
without rules, were too pedanticall: besides, you should be sometimes so
scantled, for want of subjects, that unless the subject whereof you are to
discourse fall happily within your own Element, your Ship for want of
Sea-roome would run a ground. Whereas History (the sweetest Recreation of the
mind) will afford variety, (being not curtaild by Epitomees, which are the
Moths of History) both for table-talke to delight, and discourse of more
serious consequence. Which in my opinion would better seem a Gentleman, than
to entertain time in nothing but the cry of Dogs, or flight of Hawks;
which, as they are gentlemanly pleasures, and worthily approved (as I formerly
noted) so are they to be used but only as pleasures and Recreations: of which
to speak sparingly were much better, than only to discourse of them, as if
our whole reading were in them. Neither do I speak this without just cause;
for I have noted this fault in many of our younger brood of gentry, who either
for want of Education in Learning, or their own neglect of Learning, have no
sooner attained to the strength of making their fist a Perch for a Hawke, but
by the help of some books of faulconry, whereby they are instructed in the
words of Art, they will run division upon discourse of this pleasure: whereas,
if at any time they be interrupted by occasion of some other conference, these
High-flyers are presently to be mewed up, for they are taken from their
Element. Wherefore Gentlemen, let me advise you in a word, so to entertain time
in Recreation, as the pleasure you take therein, draw not your minds from more
serious and useful employments. I have proposed to you, and made choice for
you, of some Recreations which may no less delight and benefit your minds,
than these other active delights do your bodies; use them, and you shall find
such pleasure in them, as you may perceive profit and pleasure so equally
mixed, as if at first intended to make your delight perfect. And so I come to
the last branch, showing how a Gentleman is to bestow himself in them.

AS one said of Love, How a Gentleman is to bestow himself in Recreation.
that it should be a toy and no toil; so say I of Recreation; the spirits
should be cheered by it, not drowned in it; refreshed, not depressed. I do not
like of this eagerness after pleasure; for i^ argues too much sensuality; The
mind should ^e so tempered, as it may show an indifferency to the use of
pleasure. Which I have surely found, as a maine error in most part of young
Gentlemen; whose eager appetite so unmeasurably pursuing the quest of pleasure,
cannot contain it self from expressing outwardly, the love it conceives to
such a pleasure inwardly. So as I have observed some intraunced (as it were)
with joy in the chase of Hare, or the flight of Hawke; which in my opinion
argued much lightness: for no sooner was their pleasure at a stay or default,
than all their former delight was turned to a contrary passion. I commend
therefore his resolution who said; He was never so over-joyed with pleasure,
but he thought it good to allay that surpassing joy, with the remembrance of
the end of that pleasure. It is an excellent thing to moderate our joys, by
considering the shortness of them; and to allay the height of them, by
observing what breaches or intermissions are incident to them. Wherefore above
all, it becomes a Gentleman to be circumspect in this kind, for even by his
outward carriage may his weakness be discovered. Sure I am, there is nothing
that tastes more of true wisdom, than to temper our desires in effects of
joy: so as I cannot sufficiently wonder,
how Chylo being accounted one of the seven Sages of Greece, Desunctum asserunt
immod^^a laetitia and senii imbecillitate, etc. Laert. in vit. Chyl.
should be so overtaken with joy, as to die with excess thereof. The like we
read of Argia the prophetess, who being carried in a chariot of gold to the
Temple by her two sons, whereat she conceived no less joy than if her two
sons had been invested with the title of Emperors, through excessive joy
immediately died. But these passions rather become women than men, who should
be themselves still, but especially when they feel any such conceit
undermining them. It is written of Polycrates, that meditating one day with
himself, how he had never any thing which crossed him all his life, but
enjoyed all success both at home and abroad, so as he became fearful to his
foes, and powerful to his friends: resolved to try how he might cross his
good fortune, by a voluntary incurring of losing that he did exceedingly love.
Wherefore one day he went unto the Seaside, where taking off a Ring which he
did especially tender, he threw it into the Sea, intending thereby to cross
himself, whom fortune would not: but see how Polycrates was crossed in his
crosses: for not long after, a fisherman came and presented him the Ring he
had lost, having found it in the belly of a fish; which did not a little
trouble the Prince, saying; I perceive the gods owe me a displeasure, which
they will do when I least expect it, and make me so much the more
unfortunate, in that I never knew what misfortune meant. Which he afterward
found true, being deprived both of Crown and Dignity. Certainly, there is no
means better to attemper and allay ones joy conceived in the pursuit of any
pleasure, than to cross himself in the quest thereof: for this tastes of
true manhood, when one can master his affections, and stay himself in that he
loves. Neither is this hard to do being once assayed; for we shall find more
true content in the moderation of our pleasure, than in the pleasure it self.
I have heard of some young Gentlemen, who purposely crossing themselves in some
one pleasure or Recreation which they loved, and betaking themselves to their
chamber, apprehended such a deep impression of the fruition of their pleasure,
as they visibly (as it were) enjoyed that pleasure in their chamber, which
others enjoyed in the field. That conceit is strong I will not deny; but that
it should work so strange and strong an effect, I am doubtful: yet whosoere
they be (if any such there be) sure I am they may well cross themselves in
pleasures abroad, having such pleasant conceits within themselves. Now, as I
would have young ^entlemen to use moderation in the exercise it self; so would
I have them to observe like moderation in their expense or charge requisite for
that exercise or pleasure. It is dear bought pleasure that makes the
Posterity beggars. Nero was taxed for his prodigality, because he would have
his Fishing-rods of gold, Suet. in Nerone.
and his Nets of purest silk; Vitellius for his embroderie, as well as his
Epicurisme; Lucullus for his Gardens; Antoninus for his Bathes; Plut. in vi^.
Sext. A^^d. Herodian.
Caracalla for his Roabes; Commodus for prodigal expense in all Recreations.
Now what madness is it to bestow that to delight me, which I may wish one day
I had to sustain me? Virtu^ atqu^ sapientia maj r^n illis fuit, qui ex parvis
opious tantum emperiu^ secere, quam in nobis, qu^ ea b^ne parta vi^ retinemus.
Salust.
to bestow that on my pleasure, which I may chance need to releeve nature? We
have heard of one within this City, who like a prodigal Heir to his fathers
thriving providence, bestowed an incredible mass of money to satisfy his five
Senses: but sure I think he was distraught of his Senses, and therefore
quickly satisfied. It is no pleasure but a brutish affection, Maius d^decus est
pa^ta a^^ttere, qua ^ non omnino pa^avisse.

Peculatus ^rarii fastus est. Ibid.


which gives it self so over to delight it self, as rather than it will be
restrained or moderated, will engage credit, state and all to have her desires
fulfilled. Likewise in Games at Cards, Dice, Chesse, or such houre-beguiling
Recreations, I would not have our Gentlemen to play for that which may occasion
in them the least base or unworthy fear. You shall see some of these peasantly
Gamesters, who partly for desire of winning, or else for fear of losing, show
a perpetual palsy in their joints, so full of troubled thoughts they are, or
passionate fears, which apparently discover a baseness of disposition in
them, whom either hope of gain or fear of loss can drive to such extremes. I
would have you therefore so to bestow your selves in these, as they may never
force a change of color in you: for there is nothing that may derogate more
from the native Character of a Gentleman, than to express the least sembla^ce
of fear, for the loss of ought that he shall play. Neither is it any less
touch to a Gentleman, whose affections should be so composed as they may
express his Nature without any other Character, to fall into passion for ought
that he shall lose. Albeit I have heard of one, who (much subject to this
imperfection) chanced to be reproved by his friend, who in friendly and
familiar sort wished him either to learn more patience in gaming, or else to
surcease from game. What (quoth he to his friend) do thou think I am a
stock or stone, that I should have no sense of my loss? Surely I think there
is no man that knows how he comes by his money, but will be moved for the
loss of it. But I approve not of his Maxim: you shall see an old Gamester
bear all cross chances with an equal and undejected spirit, whereas our
young Gamesters (for passion is most incident to Novices) upon a cross throw,
pull their hair, tear the Cards, stamp and fret like gumm'd grogram: so far
they are from patience for want of experience. Their younger and unmellowed
years never felt the crosses of a Gamester, and therefore can hardly digest
them when they come. This the Philosopher seems to confirm, Assuetis nulla
fit passio.
saying; Nothing can be violent, being once habituate. For use or custom as it
makes perfectness, so it begets a composedness of mind, to endure with
patience whatsoever the extremity of fortune may inflict. But now in my
discourse of Passion, which makes men so much forget themselves, as they will,
rather than want a fit subject to revenge their ill fortunes on, minister
occasion of offense to their dearest friends; there is one thing which I would
have our young Gentlemen to take heed of, and that is, in their heat and height
of passion to forswear gaming at all, or with such an one, because they had
never fortune to be savers at his hands; yet, as men careless of what they
swear, without respect to what they formerly protested, presently fall, ^o
game again with the selfsame company which they had so lately abjured. A
doleful and woeful example we had of this within these few years of one,
whose more eminent parts interested him greatly in his Countries hope; yet
having dipped his hand in blood, was according to justice and equity adjudged to
die, which was afterward accordingly executed. This Gentleman, whose education
had been ever with the best, and in the most frequented places, used much
gaming, at which he had generally ill fortune; so as, feeling the smart of it,
he resolved, binding his resolution with a solemn protestation, that if ever
he gamed again, he might be hange^: which protestation was so usual with him,
as nothing more frequent. But see this Gentleman's miserable end! Within few
years after he suffered in himself what he had so often wished for himself.
Take example hence, you I say, who are so prodigal in oaths, vowing,
protesting, and swearing in your heat of passion, what you are no less apt to
forget having coold your passion. For though you little fear the effecting of
that which you wish to your selves, yet time may come when you would wish you
had not used those imprecations upon your selves. There is another thing
likewise which I could wish young Gentlemen to be mindful of, and it is to
make distinction of times for their Recreations: for as all times are not for
all pleasures, no more are pleasures for all times. We are therefore to
reserve so much time for our more serious affairs, as not to give way to
pleasure or delight, and so neglect what we should principally intend. (...).
No expense is more precious than the expense of time; which is rather employed
than wasted, when bestowed to the good and benefit of the imployer. So as, even
in matters of pleasure or Recreation, I could wish you to betake you to those
games which may best benefit your understanding; as in games at Cards, the Maw
requires a quick conceit or present pregnancie; the Gle^ke (because of
variety) requires a retentive memory. These are good exercisers of the minds,
and such, as being made Recreations only, and no tricks to circumvent, may
afford some help or benefit to the Gamesters understanding. Now therefore, do
not ( Theotimus-like) prefer lust before your eyes; prefer not any profit
you are to reap by gaming, before the inward benefit which you may reap by
conceiving. It is a mercenary Trade, to frequent Gaming-houses for gain, to
alter the property of a Recreation, and make that an anguish which should be a
solace, a torture which should be a pleasure. For what pleasure can that
Gamester enjoy by play, whose heart is surprised with hope, fear, passion,
despair, and a thousand perturbations, Suet. in Tiber.
which like Tiberius vision are ever startling him? Surely, if there be any
pleasure in these Recreations, those only enjoy it, whose minds are neither
cast down with the fear of loss, nor over-joyed with the hope of gain;
making this use of all adverse or cross fortune: How miserable is that man,
whose highest hopes rely on so light a mistress? How simple he, whose conceit
is grounded on the constancy of fortune, who is only constant in inconstancy?
How pitifully pitiless is his case, who puts finger in the eye, because he
has felt her frown? How forlorn is his hope, who having had experience of
the extremest affronts of fortune, is ever giving himself occasion of new
sorrowing? But contrariwise, how truly happy is he, who makes use of fortunes
braves, and receives what chance soever comes, with a cheerful brow? How
truly blessed he, who cares as little for the insults of misfortune, as he
prizeth all momentany success which so blind a Goddess can afford him? There
is no grief more base or unworthy, than that which takes beginning from loss
in game: for why will we make a voluntary hazard to procure us sorrow? why
should any one imagine himself to be more dearly tendered by fortune than
another? If you play square, without intendment of advantage, then expect no
more than another may look for, being equally interested in the share of
fortune. For in these Recreations, as it is mercenary gain, which is got by
game; so it is an indiscreet grief to sorrow in loss, or rejoice in gain.
Recreations are not to be used as men use Trades; From this inordinate desire,
spring two maine branches;

Cupi^itas acquire^di; avid^^as retine^di:

Eagerness of gaining; greediness of retaining.


these are to maintain us; the other to refresh us. So as they greatly pervert
the use of pleasure, which make it a daily Task, as many of our English
Gentlemen do; who made Heirs of their fathers providence, esteem it the
only Generous quality, to make use of their fathers coin, without respect to
his care. These are they who blemish their Descent, and detract from the glory
of their House, consuming the Sunshine of their days in works of darkness.
I have read a conceited Treatise composed by an Italian, entitled A
Supplication to Candlelight: discovering the abuses committed and curtained by
the silent and secret shade of night. Where it might be demanded, as God in
Esaias did ask the Devil our subtle Watchman, Custos quid de nocte? And there
he shows how a great office is not so gainful as the Principall-ship of a
College of Curtizans. For no Merchant in riches may compare with these
Merchants of maiden-heads, if their female Inmates were not so fleeting and
uncertain. Too many, I fear me, there be of these licentious Gamesters, who
make sin a Recreation, wantonning in the Lap of impudence, exposing their
estate and name to a miserable hazard: whose Youth, as it adds fuel to
desire; so Age, the truest Register of the follies of Youth, will besprinkle
those desires with the bitter tears of repentance: grieving to have committed,
what may hardly be redeemed. Blos.
For he that surceaseth but then from sin, when he can sin no more,
forsakes not his sins, but his sins forsake him. It is one thing to fall
into light sins, through occasion only, or humane frailty: and another
thing to fall through affected negligence and security. Far be the latter
from you, Gentlemen, whose aims ought to be so much the more glorious, as your
Descents are noble and generous. Though humane frailty move you to offend,
labor to redeem that time wherein you did offend, by vying sins with
sighs, those ungodly tares with incessant tears; for if you will live when
you be dead, you must die to sin while you be alive. And for as much as
pardon cannot be procured, but where repentance is renewed; Omnium notarum
peccatores; Et nulli ^ein^si poenitentiae ^a^i. Tertul. ac Poe^t^. in fine.
as we are omnium notarum peccatores, so should we be omnium horarum
poenitentes; as every hour sinning, so every hour sighing; as every hour
committing, so every hour bringing forth fruits of remission. Thus like
Hismenias the Thebane, who would show musicians of all sorts, to imitate the
best, and reject the worst; have I proposed and set down Recreations of all
sorts, making choice withal of such especial and select ones, as best sort
with the quality of a Gentleman, concluding how and after what manner he is to
bestow himself in them. Neither have I taxed any particular Recreation,
provided that it transgress not the bounds of modesty, but admitted it as
indifferent for the use of a Gentleman. Quicquid repre^endendum non (...) d^m
est. Sen. de bene^. l. 6 cap. 39.
Yea, such Recreations as may seem to undergo the censure of Lightness, have
I not only not reproved, but worthily approved, being with decency used.
Whereupon Gregory says, I admire King David a great deal more, when I see
him in the Quire, than when I see him in the Camp: when I see him singing as
the sweet singer of Israel, than when I see him fighting as the worthy warrior
of Israel: when I see him leaping, Davide^ s^lta^* ^em. (...) stupeo quam
p^gnantem.
than when I see him weeping: when I see him dancing before the Arc, than when
I see him drawing forth his army to the field. When David fought with others,
Mora. l. 27. c. 27. 2 Samuel ^.14. 1 Chro. 15.29.
he overcame others; he wounded others; he made others sick. But when he
danced before the Arc, and delighted himself, he was overcome himself, he
was wounded himself, he was sick himself. But this sickness did rather
affect him, than afflict him; joy him, than annoy him. I will play still (says
he) that others may still play upon me. For it is a good sport when God is
delighted, L^dam (inquit) ut illud. xi. Bonus ^udus quo M^ho^ iras^itur, and
Deus del^ctatur. Greg. Mag.
though Michol be displeased. Whence you see, that it is not the Recreation,
but the circumstance tending to that Recreation, which for most part gives
occasion of offense; as the Time when, Gods Sabbath is not to be dishonored,
nor our serious occasions intermitted; the Place where, the Holy ground is not
by the feet of Lightness to be profaned, nor Places where Justice is
administered, to the exercise of such delights inured; the Persons who, we must
take heed lest the weakest of our Brethren be scandaled, or offense to any by
our sports occasioned. Doing thus, we shall glorify God, not only in this
life, but in that best and blessed life which is to come; if we fall not back
into the same sins, but bid a long farewell to the illusions of the Devil;
if with diligent attention to the word of God, earnest desire of conversion,
and continual confession of our sins, we procure the careful eye of the
Almighty to watch over us. For it suffices him in his great mercy that we
surcease from sin, whereby we shall be more easily moved to the practice of
all good works. Wherefore to conclude this Observance with that exhortation of
golden-mouthed Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Genesis Tom. 5. Tom. 6. cap. 1.
to the end we may render more honor to his Sabbat^* Let not any one
henceforth be seen trying masteries on Horseback, nor spending any part of
the day in unlawful meetings; Let not any one henceforth consort himself in
games at Cards or Dice, or the tumultuous noise which arises from thence. For
I pray you answer me (says he) what profit is there in fas^ing, if all the
day eating nothing, you game, sport, swear and forswear, and so spend the day
in worse than nothing? Let us not, I beseech you, be so negligent in that
weighty affair of our salvation, but rather let our communication be of
spiritual things. And let every one take in his hand a godly book, and
calling his neighbors together, water both his own understanding and theirs
who are assembled, with heavenly instructions, that so we may avoid the deceits
of the Devil. Performing this, Gentlemen, your Recreations shall be healthful
to your selves, helpful to your Country, delightful to the virtuous, and
beseeming men of your rank, nobly generous.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of Acquaintance; Of the choice of Acquaintance; Of constancy in the choice of
Acquaintance; Of reservancie toward Acquaintance; Of the absolute end of
Acquaintance.

ACQVAINTANCE.
THe comfort of an Active life consists in society, Observat. 6.
as the content of a Contemplative consists in Privacie. Of the use of
Acquaintance.
Intermission of Action in the former, Cu^. Dentatus apud Senecam de tranq.
anim.
is a kind of death; Intention to Devotion in the latter, is a pleasant life.
For solitary places are the best for prayer; but public for practice. We
read that Christ went out into a solitary place, and there prayed: but he
entered into the Synagogue, and there preached; that such Libertines as were
there trained might be reclaimed. And Wisdom cries without, Mark. 1.35. Act.
6.9. Prove. 1.20.
and utters her voice in the streets, that her words might be practiced. As
there is no public State which can subsist without commerce, traffic, and
mutual society; so there is no creature living, whose life would not be
tedious, being debarred from all use of company. There are two Birds which are
noted both in divine and humane writ to be lovers of solitariness; the Owl in
the Desert, and the Pelicane in the Wilderness. Which two, among diverse other
birds, were accounted unclean, and therefore were not to be eaten by the
Jews. Deuteronomy. 14.16, 17.
As retiredness from occasions abroad, makes us more serious in occasions at
home: so this privacie or solitariness makes the memory more retentive in
affairs useful to our selves, but withdrawes our hand from affording help or
assistance to others. But life should be communicative; not only intending it
self; but laboring wherein it may do good to any.
For whereas Saint Bernard says, that the Bern. de vita solitaria.
affinity is near between the dwellers in a Cell and in heaven: it is to be
understood, that such whose mortified affections, and regenerate will have
concluded all Honores Mundi, tumores Mundi. Eucher. Epist. Par^ne de contempt.
mundi.
worldly honors to be worldly tumors; and all Omnis seculi honor, Di^boli
est negotium. Hill. can. 3. in Matthew.
secular honor to be the Devils traffic, have stepped near unto heaven.
Neither are we to conclude thence, that such who have to deal in the world, by
commerce at home and abroad, are excluded from this affinity. For there are
many (as we are to be charitably persuaded) who live in the world, and have to
do with the world, yet are not of the world; that is, are not so affected to
the world, as they could not find in their hearts to forgo all things they
have in the world, for the love of him that created the world. Yea, who will
not say, and with much comfort affirm, We will seek one good wherein
consists all good, and that suffices; we will seek one joy wherein
consists all joy, Quaeremus unum bonum in quo sunt omnia bona and sufficit.
Aug. Med.
and this only joys us. It is Greg. Diligenti Deum sufficit ei placere q^em
diligit, quia nulla major expetenda est remuneratio quam ipsa d^ectio.

^eo Magnus. Sermon. 7. dejejunio.


Grace and not the Place, which saves the soul. For as there may be a wolf
in sheeps clothing, so there may be a worldly mind in a Hermits dwelling.
Man's security is the devils opportunity, which may be found in the Wilderness
as well as in the World; neither is the one place less subject to temptation
than the other. The Wilderness is secret, yet Christ was tempted in it. The
Night is silent, yet does that princely Prophet warn us, To lift up our hands
in the night watches of temptation. For the life of man, as it is a continual
temptation, so is there neither time, place, sex nor condition exempted from
temptation. The Monks Cell and the Monarchs Court are equally subject to it.
This, devout Bernard seems to confirm in his description of such as professed
a Monasticke life, Mat. 4.1.3. Psalm. 63.4. 1 Timothy 2 8, Job 7.1.
saying; They were large promisers, but slow performers, faire-tongued
flatterers, but snarling back-biters, Bernard. in 4 lib. de consid. ad Eugen.

In codem l^b c. 4


simple-seeming dissemblers, but malicious betrayers. Again, We (says he)
receive all into our Monasteries, in hope to better them; whereas in the Court
it is more usual, to receive such as are good, than to make them good: for we
have found by experience, that more good men have decreased than profited in
it. Peri^lita^ur castitas in delaiis, humi^^tas in divit^^s, pietas in negotio,
veritas in ^^ultiloquio, charitas in hoc nequam saeculo. (...).
Hence we may conclude this point, that no place is privileged from temptation,
neither Cell nor Court: but those places are, and have been ever most subject
to danger, where men were left to themselves to enter lists with temptation.
Which proceeds either from the natural frailty of man, in that he falls
from best to worst; or his want of judgment to discern best from worst:
whence the Poet most divinely concludes; When want of judgment reigns in
humane breast,
The best is taken for worst, the worst for best.
God in his sacred wisdom having created man, thought it not good that he
should be alone; and therefore made him an help meet for him. It was an
excellent saying of that sage Cynicke, Genesis 1.18.
who seeing a young man all alone by himself, and demanding of him what he was
doing, I am talking (quoth the young man) with my self; Take heed (said he)
thou talk not with thine Enemy.
For howsoever Cato might say in respect of the inward delight he took in
Contemplation, I am never less alone, than when alone; we shall find this
true, that man is never more ready to give way to temptation, than when he is
alone. How needful then is Acquaintance, being indeed the life of the living;
the particular benefits whereof extend to discourse, advice and action?

Afranius.

Of the benefit we reap by Acquaintance in matters of discourse.


It is Experience has begot wisdom, and Memory as a mother has brought it
forth. Now, what experience could we gain, if we should only be left to our
selves, and have none to help us in treaties or matters of conference? It is
said of Demosthenes, that he recovered his speech only by direction; long would
it be ere we attained to any perfection of speech, either in manner or matter,
if we wanted these usual helps of conference, which enable us when, where and
how we should speak.
For as the Satyr was afraid at the first sight of fire; or that Captain, who
looking himself in a glass when he was angry, was affrighted with his own
countenance, so should we, having never consorted or conversed with men, stand
amazed when we approached their company. For what is it that ministers
boldness and audacity to men, save their usual frequent of assemblies? or
what is it, that so much benefits their knowledge, but their acquaintance with
such who are professants of knowledge? Plutarch reports, that Plato came
forth of Asia into Cilicia, for no other cause but only to see his dear
friend Phocion the Philosopher. See here the love of good men one to another;
for amongst evil men can be no true friendship. For it is the aim of
acquaintance that makes it good or evil; Amor ^ praesente g^nd^t, absente
dolet. Bern. sup. Cant.
as to insinuate ones self into acquaintance for their own ends, to wit, to
profit by it, or work on others weakness, this is acquaintance for
Macchiavells Scholars, whose principal aim is to undermine; and under
pretense of amity, shroud their villainy. These hold concurrencie with Friar
Clement, Nil interest habere ostium apertum, vultum clausum. Cicero.
Ravillac, Iaurequy, Baltazar Gerard. They have an open gate, but a shut
countenance; or if an open countenance, a close shut heart. Aristotle says,
that friendship is one soul which rules two hearts, and one heart which
dwells in two bodies. Whereas these men, No rush without mire, no corrupt
heart without sin.
whose acquaintance has relation to their own peculiar ends, have a heart and
a heart; a Heart outwardly professing, and a Heart secretly practicing; a Heart
outward, and a Heart inward; outwardly pretending, and inwardly plotting. These
are no Acquaintance for you Gentlemen* their Hearts are too far from their
mouths; learning to prosper by others errors. Yea, by often conversing and
practicing with others, no less cunning than themselves, they have so far
prevailed, as they are not only able to match them, Plin. in Not. hist.
but outstrip them: Serpens nisi serpentem comederit, non fit Draco: These are
they who hatch the Cockatrice eggs; come not therefore near them, for The
poison of Aspes is under their Lips. Yea, they suck the gall of Aspes, Job.
20.16.
and the Vipers tongue shall slay them. Yet, to leave you alone without
company, would make your life as much loathed, as choice of Acquaintance makes
you love it. He is a weak Prince that enjoyes an Empire without people; and no
less desolate or disconsolate is his state, who wants not for means, yet
wants a friend to whom he may impart his mind. Lend me your hands therefore
(Gentlemen) and I will direct you in a way how to make choice of Acquaintance
in matters of Advice, which is the second benefit redounding from the use of
Acquaintance.


IF a man (says Seneca) find his friend sad and so leave him; Of the choice
of Acquaintance in matters of advice.
sick without ministering any comfort to him; and poor without releeving him:
we may think such an one goes to jest rather than visit or comfort. Whence
we may observe the office or condition of a friend, who, if his friend be
sick, he will visit him; i^ sad, he will cheer him; if poor, he will
releeve him; if afflicted in mind, he will comfort him; otherwise his
friendship is but dissembling, his visiting him, a mere mocking of him. Job
called his friends Miserable comforters, Job 16.2.
because their discourses were rather afflictions than comforts, their counsels
rather corasives than cordialls, their exhortations rather scourgings and
scoffings, than soule-solacing refreshings. These do not advise friends; but
despise them; miserable are such Comforters. Wherefore I may well distinguish
Acquaintance into two sorts; the one Halcion-like, come to us in a storm; the
other Swallow-like, draw near us in a calm. The former sort observe
Periandors precept, Laert. in vit. Per^and.
Show thy self still the same, whether thy friend be in prosperity or
adversity: but the latter observe that sentence of Optatus, All for the time,
Omnia proten pore, ni^il pro veritate. Optatus l. 1. (...).
but nothing for the truth. All Acquaintance may be either compared to pitch
staining, o^to balm curing. He that touches pitch shall be defiled
therewith, says the son of Sirach; such is the nature of much Acquaintance,
Ecclus. 13.1.
especially in these latter days, where vanity is more affected, than the
practice of virtue, which should be only loved. Where many return worse than
when they went forth, confirming that sentence, Sanabimur, si separemur a
coetu. But Balm, it refreshes, cheereth, and cures; such is that
Acquaintance, whose conceits are delightful, discourse cheerful, and
instructions fruitful. These, if we be at any time doubtful, will advise us;
if in necessity, will releeve us; if in any affliction either outward or
inward, will bear a part with us, to allay grief in us. A little Stybium is
too much, such are the first; a great quantity of Styrax is too little, such
are the last. A Whose wood is sweetest, shade coolest, and coal hottest.
Iuniper-tree makes the hottest coal, and the coolest shadow of any tree: the
coal is so hot, that if it be raked up in ashes of the same, it continues
unextinguished by the space of a whole year: so does true friendship or
faithful Acquaintance; Fabiolae Maus. 15.
it affords the coolest shadow to refresh us, and the hottest coals,
implying fervor of affection, being once kindled, to warm us. When poor
Andromache craved Ulysses advice, what he thought best to be done in behalf of
her young son Astyanax; Conceal him (said he) this is the only means to
save him. Lat^at, hac uno s^^w. S^n. in Troad.
This showed his faithfulness in advising, albeit her Countries foe; for
otherwise he would have persuaded her to submit her self and him to the hand
of the merciless soldier, or reap a benefit by their bondage, making them
his own Captives: As it is in the fable of the Crow, who coming to the Eagle
that had got a Cockle, the fish whereof he could not get out neither by force
nor art, he counseled him to mount up on high and throw the Cockle down upon
the stones, and so break the shell: now all the while did the crafty Crow
stay below expecting the fall: The Eagle throws it down, the shell is broken,
the fish by the Crow is taken, and the Eagle deluded. Many such Counselors
there be, who advise not others for their good, but their own good. Others
there be, who make use of their friends or acquaintance merely for their own
ends; and rather than they will be prevented of their aims, they will expose
the life and safety of their friend to imminent peril. And these resemble the
Fox, who seeing a Chestnut in the fire, made use of the Cats foot to take it
out. But these are not those friends, whose advice is faithful, as their
friendship is firm and grateful. Their aims are indirect, their advice tends
to their own benefit, their counsel tastes of profit, and their directions
become as pitfalls to their friends. Those to whom I would have Gentlemen
known, are men of an other rank and quality, appearing like the Canii,
Senecae, Aruntii, and Sorani; whose admirable virtues were inimitable in so
corrupt a government. In Tiberius time.
Neither would I have them to shake off these friendly Monitors, if at any time
their advice relish not half well to their palate; but rather honor them for
their virtuous sincerity, as Epaminonda^ honored Lysias, Agesilaus Xenophon,
Scipio Penetius, Alcibiades Socrates, Achilles Phoenix, sent him by his father
Peleus. For such as will not endure a friendly reproof, I would have their
Acquaintance do with them as Plato did with Dionysius, who perceiving him to
be incorrigible, left him. The rebukes of a friend are better than the kisses
of an enemy; Pro. 27.5, 6.
for the one, though at first displeasing, tend (if rightly used) to his
conversion; but the other, though pleasing, tend (if not prevented) to his
confusion. Had Alexander understood this aright, he would have preferred the
faithful advice of his affectionate Clitus before all his conquests; for by
his instruction might he have learned Humility, which lesson had been worth
his worlds Monarchy. Had Nero that President of Tyrants, or Monster of men,
given care to the wise advice of his loyal and learned Seneca, he might have
found a Subject to love him, a Scholar to live with him, a Soldier to fight
for him, and a Mother to bless him. For surely, as of all possessions
friendship is most precious, being suited with virtue, without which there is no
true friendship; so are we to value the life of our friend as the crown of our
glory. Laert. in vit. Biant.
For tell me, are you fad? your friends conceit, as a sovereign receipt, will
cheer you. Are you disposed to be merry? Mirth alone, is a single consort,
your friend will partake with you. Suet. in August.
Would you have one to pass the tedious night away, in telling tales, or
holding you with talk? your friend will invent a thousand pastimes to cheer
you, and make the night seem less tedious unto you. Is the burden of your
griefs too heavy to bear? you have a friend to share with you in your burden.
In brief, want you comfort? he will supply it; want you means to releeve your
wants? he will afford it; want you counsel? he will impart it; want you all
that man can want? you want not a friend who will supply your wants with his
want. And so I descend from the benefit redounding from Advice, to the third
and last, which is the profit or benefit which redounds from one friend to
another in every peculiar action, exercise or recreation.

Cicero, Tusc. lib. 1.
the glory of Rome, and flower of Orators, exemplifying the prowess of
Themistocles and Epaminondas, uses these words; Of the benefit properly
derived from one friend to another in every peculiar action
The Sea shall sooner overwhelme the Isle it self of Salamine, than it shall
drench the remembrance of the Salamine triumph: and the town of Leuctra in
Boeotia shall sooner be razed, than the remembrance of the field there fought,
forgotten. But howsoever these Monuments may be razed or defaced by continuance
of time, sure I am that the love which they showed to their friends, even to
the apparent danger of their own lives, shall eternize their memory. Pelopidas
a noble Grecian, skirmishing with the Lacedaemonians against the Arcadians,
until such time as being hurt in seven places, he fell down at last for
dead. Then presently Epaminondas, out of a princely resolution and noble
affection to his distressed friend, stepping forth bestrid him, and fought to
defend his body, he alone against many; till being sore cut on his arm with a
sword, and thrust into the breast with a pike, he was even ready to give over.
But at that very instant, Plutarch. in Pelopida, initio.
Agesipolis King of the Lacedaemonians came with the other point of the battle
in a happy hour, and saved both their lives when they were past all hope. Here
see apparent arguments of true love, mixed with a noble and heroic temper: for
friends are to be tried in extremities, either in matters of state or life: in
state, by releeving their wants; in life, by engaging themselves to all
extremes, rather than they will suffer their friend to perish. These are they
who will latch the blow of affliction laid upon their friends, with the buckler
of affection; preferring death before their friends disgrace. Marcus Servilius
a valiant Roman, who had fought three and twenty combats of life and death in
his own person, and had always slain as many of his enemies as challenged
him man to man; Plutarch in Paulo Aemilio, fine.
when as the people of Rome resisted Paulus Aemilius triumph, stood up and made
an Oration in his behalf: in the midst whereof he cast up his gown, and
showed before them the infinite skars and cuts he had received upon his breast;
the sight of which so prevailed with the people, that they all agreed in one,
and granted Aemilius triumph. Here observe the tender respect of one friend
toward another honor: there is nothing unassayed, nothing unattempted, which
may procure or further it. For this friendship or combination of minds, as
there is nothing more precious, so there is nothing which does comparably
delight or solace the mind like unto it, Nihil lam aeque ^^l^cta^^ri^ an^num
quam am^^itia side is. Sen. in tranq. anim.
being faithfully grounded. Their discourse like some choice Music delights
our hearing; their sight like some rare Object contents our seeing; their
presence fully satisfies us in their touching; their well-seasoned jests (like
some delicious banquet) relish our tasting; and their precepts (like sweet
flowers) refresh our smelling. Vt flores qui odore delict^nt. Ibid.
Thus is every sense satisfied, by enjoying that which it loves: for as senses
wanting their proper objects, become useless; so men, whether in prosperity
or adversity, wanting friends to rely on, are wretched and helpless: So as
there is no greater wilderness than to be without true friends. For without
friendship, society is but meeting, acquaintance a formal or ceremonial
greeting. Whereas it is friendship, when a man can say to himself, The
expressive Character of a real friend.
I love this man without respect of utilitie: for (as I formerly noted) those
are no friends but hirelings, who profess friendship only to gain by it.
Certainly, whosoever has had the happiness to enjoy a true and faithful
friend, to whom he might freely impart the secrets of his breast, or open the
Cabbinet of his counsels, he (I say) and only he has had the experience of so
rare a benefit daily redounding from the use of friendship: where two hearts
are so individually united, as neither from other can well be severed. And as
it is certain, that in bodies inanimate, union strengthens any natural
motion, and weakneth any violent motion; so amongst men, friendship multiplieth
joys, and divides griefs. It multiplies joys; for it makes that joy
communicative, which before was single; it divides griefs; for it shares in
them, and so makes them less. Now perfection of friendship, is but a
speculation, if we consider the many defects which are for most part subject
to all worldly friendship: yea, and as the world increases in age, so it
decreaseth most commonly in goodness: Nam in soro sunt lites and ^c^^ones
mol^^stae Posidip. dict.
for in Courts, are suits and actions of Law; in Cities, tricks and devices to
circumvent; in the Country, engrossing and regrating, of purpose to oppress.
It is rare to see a faithful Damon or a Pythias; a Pylades or Orestes; a
Bitias or a Pandarus; a Nisus or Euryalus. And what may be the cause of this,
but that the love of every one is so great to himself, as he can find no
corner in his heart to lodge his friend in? In brief, none can gain friends,
and make a saving bargain of it, for now it is a rule commonly received; Si
quis in hoe mundo cunctis vult gratus haberi, Det, cap^al, quaerat, plur^ma,
pauca, nihil. Plato.
He that to all will here be grateful thought,
Must give, accept, demand, much, little, naught.
So as it may seem, it is not given to man to love and to be wise; because the
Lover is ever blinded with affection toward his beloved; so as, he
dis-esteemes honor, profit, yea life it self, so he may gratify his
beloved. But my opinion is quite contrary; for I hold this as a firm and
undoubted Maxim; that he who is not given to love, cannot be wise. For is he
wise, that reposeth such trust in his own strength, as if he stood in no need
of friends? Is he wise, who depends so much on his own advice, as if all wit
and wisdom were treasured in his brain? Is he wise, who being sick, would
not be visited; poor, and would not be succored; afflicted, and would not be
comforted; thrown down, and would not be raised? Surely in the same case is
he, who sleights the purchase of a friend, preferring his own profit before so
inestimable a prize. There is none, whether he be valiant, or a professed coward,
but may stand in need of a friend in a corner. For be he valiant, he stands
in need of a friend to second him; if a coward, he needs one to support him:
Therefore, whosoever wants fortitude, whether it be in mind or body, let
him embrace friendship; for if his weakness proceed from the mind, he shall
find a choice receipt in the breast of his friend, to strengthen and
corroborate him, so as grief may assail or assault him, but it cannot dismay
or amate him. Again, if his weakness proceed from the body, that weakness
is supplied by the strength of his friend, who will be an eye to direct him,
and a foot to sustain him. Telephus, when he could find none amongst his
friends to cure his wound, permitted his enemy to do it: and he who purposed
to kill Prometheus the Thessalian, opened his impostume with his sword. If such
effects have proceeded from enmity, what rare and incredible effects may be
imagined to take their beginning from amity? Than which, as nothing is
stricter in respect of the bond, so nothing is more continuate in respect of
the time: being so firm, as not to be dissolved; so strict, as not to be
anulled; so lasting, as never to be ended. Neither is this benefit, derived
from friend to friend, only restrained to matters of action or employment, but
extends it self to exercises of pleasure and recreation. The benefits which
redound from the mutual union or communion of friends in the exercise of
Pleasure.
For tell me, what delight can any one reap in his pleasure, wanting a friend
to partake with him in his pleasure? Takes he delight in Hunting? let him
choose Acquaintance that may suit him in it: not only a Hunter, but one whose
conceit (if occasion serve) can reach further; such an one I would have him as
could make an Emblem of the Forest where he raungeth, compose a Sonnet on the
Objects which he sees, and fit himself for ought he undertaketh. Of which
rank, was that merry Epigrammatist, (as it may be imagined) who being taxed
for wearing a horn, and could not wind it, made this reply; My friend did tax
me seriously one morn,
That I should wear, yet could not wind, the horn;
And I replied, that he for truth should find it,
Many did wear the Horn that nere could wind it:
Hows'ere of all, that Man may wear it best,
Who makes claim to it, Ioci non s^nt nimusalsi, multo minus insulsi; illi
enim multum officiuni; isti, nisi per cachinnum, parum p^oficiunt.
as his ancient Crest.
To interveine conceits or some pleasant jests in our Recreations, whether
discursive or active, is no less delightful than useful: but these jests
should be so seasoned, as they may neither taste of lightness, nor too much
saltness. Jests festive are oft-times offensive, they incline too much to
levitie; jests civil (for into these two are all divided) are better
relishing, because mixed with more sobriety and discretion. Vanitati prosrie
festivitas cedit. Cic. de orat. lib. 2.
Catullus answer to Philippus the Attorney, was no less witty than bitter:
for Catullus and he being one day at high words together; Why barkest thou,
quoth Philippus? Because I see a Thief, answered Catullus. He showed himself
a quick Anatomist, who branched man into three parts, saying, That man had
nothing but substance, soul, and body; Lawyers dispose of the substance,
Physicians of the body, and Divines of the soul. Present and pregnant was
Donato's answer to a young Gentleman, who beholding a brave company of amorous
Ladies and Gentlewomen, meeting Donato coming toward Rome, as one admiring
their number and feature, said; As many Stars (...) in the heavens be,

So many maids has Rome to welcome thee. As many kids as on the Downs we see,

So many Prostitutes in Rome there be.


Quot coelum stellas, tot habet tua Roma puellas.
by and by answered Donato; Pascua quot haedos, tot habet tua Roma-cinaedos.


Phaedro being asked, why in the Collects, where Christian Bishops and Pagans
be prayed for, the Cardinals were not remembered? answered, they were included
in that prayer, Oremus pro haereticis and schismaticis. Well requited was that
young Scholar, who giving his Master this Evening salute: Domine magister,
Deus det tibi bonum sero; was answered by his Master: Et tibi malumcito.
Witty, but shrewd was that answer of a Disputant in my time to his Moderator
in Posterior: who demanding of him what the cause should be, that he with whom
he disputed, should have so great a head and so little wit, replied; Omne majus
continet in se minus. A base mind was well displayed in that covetous man, who
unwilling to sell his corn while it was at an high price, expecting ever when
the Market would rise higher; when he saw it afterward fall, in despair hanged
himself upon a beam of his chamber; which his man hearing, and making haste,
cut the rope and preserved his life: afterward, when he came to himself, he
would needs have his man to pay for the cord he had cut. But I approve rather
of such jests as are mixed with less extremes: pleasant was that answer of
Scipio Nasica, Scipio Nasica.
who going to Ennius house in Rome, and asking for Ennius; Ennius bade his maid
tell him he was not within. So Ennius on a time coming to Scipio's house, and
asking whether he was at home? I am not at home, answered Scipio: Ennius
wondering thereat; Do I not know that voice (quoth he) to be Scipio's voice?
Thou have small civilitie in thee (answered Scipio) that when I believed thy
maid thou were not at home, yet thou will not believe me. Likewise to retort a
jest, is an argument of a quick wit; as Leo Emperor of Bizantium answered
one, who being crook-backt, jested at his bleared eyes; saying, Thou reprochest
me with the defect of nature, A tergo Nemesis.
and thou carriest Nemesis upon thy shoulders. Domitius reproaching Crassus,
that he wept for a Lamprey; Crassus answered, but thou have buried three wives
without one tear. Alexander asking a Pyrate, that was taken and brought before
him; How he durst be so bold to infest the Seas with his pyracie? was answered
with no less spirit, That he played the Pyrate but with one ship, but his
Majesty with a huge navy. Which saying so pleased Alexander, that he
pardoned him: reaping especial delight in that similitude of action, by which
was transported the current of the Kings affection. Other Conceits there are
more closely couched, covertly carried, and in silence uttered; as that of
Bias, who, when an evil man asked him what goodness was; answered nothing:
and being demanded the cause of his silence; I am silent (quoth he) because
thou inquire of that, which nothing concerns thee. The same Bias sailing on
a time with some naughty men, by violence of a tempest, the ship wherein they
were, became so shaken and tossed with waves, as these naughty men began to
call upon the gods; Hold your peace (said Bias) lest these gods you call upon
understand that you be here. But lest by dwelling too long upon jests, Lacrt.
in vil. Biant.
I forget the Series of my discourse, I will succinctly conclude this branch,
with my judgment touching Acquaintance in this kind. A rule of infallible
direction, touching ^h^^ce of Acquaintance.
As I would have Gentlemen to make choice of their Acquaintance by their sound,
so I would not have them all sound: Music does well with airs, but there is
no Music in that discourse which is all air. My meaning is, I would not have
these Acquaintance which they make choice of, all words or flashes of wit: for
I seldom see any of these who are so verbal, Quisquis plus justo non sapit,
ille sapit. Martial. l. 14.
much material; or these who are all wit, but through height of a
self-conceit they fall to much weakness. For these many times prefer their
conceit before the hearers appetite, and will not stick to lose their friend
rather than their jest, Those jests are best seasoned, that are least saked.
which in my opinion is mere madness: for he that values his jest above his
friend, over-values his conceit, and had need of few jests, or great store of
friends. I have known some wits turn wittalls; by making themselves Buffouns
and stale jesters for all assemblies. Which sort are fitter for Gentlemen to
make use of as occasion serves, than to entertain them as bosome-acquaintance:
for as the benefit which redounds to one from another in action, exercise, and
recreation, is mutually imparted; so is the danger no less incident one to
another, where the ends or uses are perverted. Thus far have we proceeded in
the discovery of those particular benefits which redound from discourse,
advice, and action, by means of Acquaintance: being the Cement which so
firmly joyneth minds together, as they may be encountered by extremes, but
divided never. Now for as much as the essential trial of Acquaintance
consists in matters of highest consequence, we are now to address our selves
to such a choice, as our choice may admit no change.

THe precept of that ancient Sage is worth remembering; Of the choice or
judicious approvement of Acquaintance, in affairs of highest Consequence.
A^icos sequere, quos non ^ud^at ^legisse. Bias. Neither Timist nor Timonist are
within the lists of Acquaintance to be entertained.
Follow such friends as it may not shame thee to have chosen. Certainly, there
is no one argument to evince man of indiscretion, more holding than this; That
he makes no difference or distinction in the choice of his friends. In which
respect, no man can be too wary or circumspect, because herein for most part,
consists his welfare or undoing. It were meet therefore that a Gentleman
made choice of such for his friends or acquaintance, as are neither Timists nor
Timonists, Fawners nor Frowners. For the first sort, they are for all seasons,
and all weathers; so as they may be fitly compared to the Hedge-hogge, who has
two holes in his siedge, one toward the South, another toward the North. Now
when the Southern wind blows, he stops up that hole, and turns him
Northward; when the Northern wind blows, he stops up that hole likewise, and
turns him again Southward. Such Vrchins are all temporizers: The Timist or
Time-observer displayed and displaced.
they turn as the wind blows, and suit themselves for every occasion. These
friends or Acquaintance who follow not us but ours, will be seen in all
Liveries: Princes have felt the inconveniencie of them, and inferior States
have not been free from them: but the highest States generally are most
subject to these retainers; For Princes by experience we have seen, Nec (...)

Abused most where most their trust has been.
Now there are two kinds of Princes (says Comines) the one are so cautelous
and suspicious, as they are scarce to be endured: for they are almost come to
that pass, as they think themselves ever deluded and circumvented. Such was
Dionysius the tyrant of Syracusa, who grew so suspicious, as he would not trust
any Barber to shave him, causing his own daughters to learn to shave. Others
there be, who are so far from harboring suspicion, as being of a dull and
lumpish wit, they scarce understand what is commodious for them, and what not.
Such was Domitian, who cared more for catching of flies, than retaining of
friends: being so far from preventing danger, as he never foresaw it, till he
felt it. In these there is small constancy of mind; for as they easily
discontinue friendship, they as easily decline from hatred and embrace
friendship. Constantine the great, being a professed foe to all these Timists,
Sext. Aurel. in Constant.
or temporizing Sycophants, was wont to call them Gnats and Moths that pester a
Princes Palace. So aspiring be their aims, so base their means; Who like base
Beetles as they have begun,
In every Cowsheard nestle near the Sun.
Whence, These Timists have resemblance to those applauding Parasi^es, by whom
Antiochus was at one time saluted both (...) and (...), a glorious Prince, and
a furious tyrant. Tam gravis ille mihi nigri quam limina ditis, Ore aliud qui
fert, aliud suo pect^re condit. Homer. lib. 2.
as it may be probably gathered, was that sentence derived, Amici Curiae,
Parasiti Curiae; fawning rather than friending, tendering only love where they
hope to receive gain. These, as they have Ianus front, for they carry two
faces under one hood, so have they Simons heart, professing love, but
practicing hate: of which sort the ever-living Homer thus concludes; (...),
(...).
There Is naught on earth I more detest,
Than sugared breath in Serpents breast.
Whence it was that the great spirited Byron, who showed more passion than
resolution at his death, howsoever during all his time none was ever held for a
more brave or noble Soldier; perceiving his trust (as he collected) betrayed
by La Fin, with whom he had conspired,
and by whom his practice was disclosed, he confessed that La Fin had bewitched
him, exhorting his Host to be wary of him, lest he should delude and
circumvent him with his impostures. For certainly, as more expressly appeared,
not only at the time of his execution, but in all the passages of his
practice, as he had reposed great trust in La Fin, in the whole management of
that business; so having seen his trust weakened, and those many protestations
of amity infringed, (though in practices of that nature there can be no true
league of friendship) it moved him no less to impatience, than the discovery
of his Treason. But these fawning friends or Timists which we have now in
quest, as they are only for the present time, so will they undertake many
times the most enormous and indirect course to raise their hopes, Cum Catilina
polliceri novas tabulas, proscriptiones divitum, magistratus, sacerdotia,
rapinas, ali^ omnia quae bellum atque libido victorum fert. Salust.
that can be devised. When the rash-aspiring Catiline had promised to divulge
those new tables, wherein were contained the proscription of the rich,
Magistracies, Priest-hoods, rapines, and all other insolences, which either
the shocke of war, or will of the Conqueror gives way to; he had followers
enough upon the instant to second him in his hateful courses: being such as
either his youth had made him acquainted with, or his dissolute course had
consorted with: which unhappy followers made him doubtless, more violent in
his attempts, and less considerate in his directions. How needful then is it,
to prevent the occasion of so maine an inconvenience? Plures homines pudore
magis quam bona voluntate prohibitis abstinent.
How expedient is it to avoid the frequent or society of such, as will not
stick to be assistants in mischief? How consequent a thing is it, to weane
ones self not only from their familiarity and inward acquaintance, but even
from so much as conversing with them or writing to them. Esse inter nocentes
(...) est. Cyprian. Epist. 2.
Themistocles was suspected to be known to Pausanias treason, although most
clear of himself, because he wrote unto him. For as the nature of man is
originally depraved, so by consorting with vicious men the arm of sin
becomes strengthened. The Fuller (as it is in the fable) would by no means
suffer the Collier to dwell with him under one roof, lest he should soil
what he had rinsed. Which fable has a moral relation to the course of our
life, and the nature of such as we usually consort with: for there is a
traffic or commerce as well of manners as persons, Ca^panus.
of virtues and vices, as other commodities. The Babylonian has been
naturally said to be arrogant,
the Theban passionate, the Jew envious, the Tyrian covetous, the Sidonian a
rioter, the Egyptian a sorcerer: neither did these nations keep these vices to
themselves, for they induced others likewise, to whom they had recourse and
commerce, to be affected to the like: for the very Egyptians had so bewitched
Caesar himself with their illusions,
as he gave great attention to them; as Alexander was delighted with the
Brachmanes. For Vice is such an over-growing or wildespreading weed, Peccatum
semper pregnans, (...) ex alio gig^^t.
as there is no soil wherein it likes not, no kind of nature (of what temper
soever) it invades not, and invading surprizeth not. To the Body, diseases are
infectious, Vitia m^bi sant an. mi. Sen.
to the Mind are vices no less obnoxious: for vices are the diseases of the
mind, as infirmities breed distempers and diseases to the Body. So as, V^tia
ad vi^inos serpunt and con^acta no^ent. ib.
whether we observe the state of Church or Commonweal, we shall find vices
to be of a nature no less spreading than diseases; neither the state or
Symptom of the mind less endangered by the infusion of the one, than the
body by the infection of the other. For as the state Politic is much weakened
by the haunt of these vices, so is that mourning Dove the Church, many times
afflicted to see herself torn with Schisms and divisions: where as ^
Waspes make honey-combes, so Marcionists make Churches. How needful then is
it to divide our selves from the consorts of vice, without entertaining the
least occasion that might induce us to give consent to her followers? Augustus
wore ever about him, for preservative against thunder, a Seals skin, which
Pliny writes checketh lightning; as Tiberius wore always about his neck a
Wreath of Laurel. But let us carry about us that Moli or herb of grace,
whose precious juice may repel the spells of so enchanting a Siren. For as the
Unicorns horn being dipped in water, cleares and purifies it, so shall this
sovereign receipt cure all those maladies, which originally proceed from the
poison of vice. Quae male ^^ssi^^tur, mis^r^ insicitur. Q^^t vit^a, tot
D^moni^. Tot Daemo^ia, quo^ (...).
The mind so long as it is evil affected, is miserably infected. For so many
evils, so many Devils, first tempting and tainting the soul with sin, then
tearing and tormenting her with the bitter sense of her guilt. Saint Basil
says, that passions rise up in a drunken man, like a swarm of Bees buzzing on
every side; whatsoever that holy Father says of one vice, may be generally
spoken of all: so as we may truly conclude with that Princely Prophet; They
come about us like Bees: though they have honey in their thighs, they have
stings in their tails, Si inrecentes (...) praemia. Salust.
wounding our poor souls even unto death. Requisite therefore is it to avoid
the society of such whose lives are either touched or tainted with any
especial Crime; these are dangerous Patterns to imitate, yea, dangerous to
consort with; for as the Storke being taken in the company of the Cranes, was
to undergo like punishment with them, although she had scarce ever consented
to feed with them; so be sure, if we accompany them, we shall have a share in
their shame, though not in their sin. Avoid the acquaintance of these Heirs
of shame, whose affected liberty has brought them to become slaves to all
sensuality, and sure ere long to inherit misery. Give no care to the Sycophant,
whose sugared tongue and subtle train are ever plotting your ruin; hate the
embraces of all insinuating Sharkes, whose smoothness will work on your
weakness; and follow the Poets advice: Avoid such friends as feign and fawn
on thee,
Gratia quae coeat fict^^ale-s^rta sodalis Est velut in Siculo Scylla cavenda
mari. Pub Faust. Andrel.
Like Scylla's rock within Sicilian Sea.
So dangerous are these Syrenian friends, that like the Sicilian shelves, they
menace shipwreck to the inconsiderate sailer. For these, as they profess
love, and labor to purchase friends; so their practices are but how to deceive
and entrap those to whom they profess love. Pro. 29.5.
Whence it is that Solomon says, A man that flattereth his Neighbor,
spreads a net for his steps. That is, he that gives ear to the flatterer,
is in danger, as the bird is before the Fowler. He whistleth merrily,
spreads his Nets cunningly, and hunteth after his prey greedily. And let this
suffice to be spoken for the Timist, who professes observance to his friend
only for his own end.

Now Gentlemen, as I would not have you to entertain time with fawnes, The
Timonist. or Time detracter discovered and discarded.
so neither with frowns. The former, as they were too light, so the latter are
too heavy. The one too supple, the other too surly. For these Timonists (for
we have done with our Timists) as Cicero said of Galba's leaden and lumpish
body,
His wit had an ill lodging, are of too sullen and earthy a constitution. It is
never fair weather with them, for they are ever louring, bearing a Calender of
ill weather in their brow. These for the most part are Malcontents, and
affect nothing less than what is generally pleasing: appearing in the world
naturalized Demophons whose humor was to sweat still in the shadow, Ar^st.
Hist. ani^n.
and snake in the Sun. So as, howsoever they seem seated in another Clime,
for disposition they are like the Antipodes unto us, Nosque ubi (...) oriens
(...) rubens (...) ^umina (...).
opposing themselves directly against us in all our courses. They are of
Democritus mind, who said, that the truth of things lay hid in certain deep
mines or caves; and what are these but their own brains? For they imagine,
there can be no truth, but what they profess. They proclaim defiance to the
world, saying; Thou miserably deluded world, thou embracest pleasure, Tu
voluptatem complecteris, nos compescirrus. Tu omnia voluptatis causa facis, nos
nihil. Sen. de malis accidentibus bonis. Lib. 1.
we restrain it. Thou for pleasure do all things, we nothing. Now who
would not imagine these Stoickes to be absolute men? Such as are rare to see on
earth, in respect of their austeritie of life, and singular command over their
affections? Such as are divided (as it were) from the thought of any earthly
business, having their Minds sphered in a higher Orb? Such as are so far
from intermedling in the world, as they dis-value him that intends himself to
negotiate in the world? Such, as when they see a man given to pleasure, or some
moderate Recreation, whereby he may be the better enabled for other
employments, slight him as a Spender of time, and one unfit for the society
of men. Such, as say unto Laughter, Thou art mad; and unto joy, what meanest
thou? Such as take up the words of that grave Censor in the Poet; Take thou
delight to trace those paths, Neu tihi pulchra patent caeci vestigia mundi,
^allere quae citi^ quam renovare solent?

where worldlings walked have,
Which seldom do refresh the Mind,
but often do deceive?
Yet behold, how many times these men's severity comes short of sincerity! They
will lay heavy burdens on others shoulders, which they will be loath to touch
with the tip of their finger. The Taskes which they impose on others are
insupportable, the pressures they lay on themselves very easy and tolerable.
Of this rank was Aglataidas, of whom that noble and faithful Historian
Comines writes, saying; While he served in the Camp he was of a most harsh
and austere condition, doing many things perversely, and desiring rather to be
feared than loved. Such was this Timon, from whose name we entitle these
frowning friends, who can hardly be true friends to any, being so opposite or
repugnant to all, as they can scarcely hold concurrence with any. Plutarch.
Neither was this Timon (as Plutarch reports of him) only harsh and uncivil
toward men, but toward women also: so as going forth one day into his
Orchard, and finding a woman hanging upon a wild Fig Tree: O God (quoth he)
that all trees brought forth such fruit! Unfit therefore was this Timon for the
Acquaintance of man, who professed himself so mortal and irreconciliable an
enemy to the sociablest and entirest Acquaintance of man. So as, these
Timonists are to be cashiered for two reasons; first, for their own harsh and
rough condition; secondly, for the unjust grounds of their opinion, which
dissents so far from society, as it disallowes of Marriage, the ordinary
means appointed to preserve society. So as, leaving them and their opinion,
as already evinced, we will descend to make choice of your nearest
Acquaintance, (I mean) the choice of your wife; the first day of which
solemnity promises either a succeeding Iubile, or a continued Scene of
sorrow, where naught is sung but doleful Lachrymae.

What directions are to be observed in the choice of a wife.
It was pleasantly spoken of him who said; Wives are young men's Mistresses;
Companions for middle age; and old-mens Nurses. The first sort take as much
content in wearing their mistress favor, as winning it; the second sort in
winning rather than wearing it; the third neither in wearing nor winning it,
but like children, to be cherished and cockered by it. The second sort are we
only to speak of, where wives are to be made companions, Genesis 1.13.
and such entire ones, as they are bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh.
In the choice whereof, we will propose such necessary cautions, as shall be no
less useful to your selves, if rightly observed, than motives of comfort, if
duly and exactly considered. He was reputed one of the wise men, that made
answer to the question; When a man should marry? A young man not yet, an elder
man not at all. Of which opinion was Arminius that Ruler of Carthage, The harsh
and heremiticall conceit of the Carthaginian Arminius, touching Marriage.
whose harsh conceit of marriage proceeding either from personal disabilitie,
or some experience of woman's levitie, deserves small approbation. For had it
been Arminius fortune to have matched with Arminia, he would doubtless,
rather have fallen into admiration of so sacred a rite, than into distaste of
it. For this Noble Lady, being bidden to King Cyrus wedding, went thither with
her husband: at night when they were returned home, her husband asked of her,
how she liked the Bridegroom, whether she thought him to be a fair and
beautiful Prince or no? Truth (says she) I know not: for all the while I was
forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon thy self. Or had Calanus
prevented Hiero of his choice, he would have fallen from his Stoicall dream to
a Nuptial song; for one of Hiero's enemies reproching him with a stinking
breath, he went home and questioned his wife why she told him not thereof;
but what answer gave this continent Lady? Surely (said she) I thought all men
had the same savor. Or had Timon attained the happiness to join hands with
Theogena, wife to Agathocles, he had not inveighed so much against the state of
Marriage; for this renowned Lady showed admirable constancy in her husbands
greatest misery, showing her self most his own, when he was relinquis^t and
forsaken of his own, saying, That she was not given him to be a sharer only
in his prosperity, Se non prosperae tantum, sed ^mn^ fortunae inssesocietatem.
but in what fortune soever should befall him. Or had Zenocrates enjoyed
Zenobia, he would no less have admired his fortune, than beshrewed himself
for depriving himself so long of so sweet a Companion. For this princely
Lady, after the death of Odonatus (though a Barbarian Queen) yet by her
reading of both Roman and Greek Histories, so managed the State after the
decease of her husband, as she retained those fierce and intractable people in
her obedience: being a woman no less absolute for learning, than discreet
governing: for she abridged the Alexandrian, and all the Oriental Histories,
(a task of no less difficulty than utilitie) whereby she attained the
highest pitch of wisdom and authority. -- vix ulla perennior u^na est Vel
tibi grata magis, proprio quam corp^re bustum Condere. -- und requiescit in
urna. Ovid. Met. lib. 4.
Or had Aristippus been so happy as linked himself with Artemisia, he would
have preferred so kind and constant a yoke fellow before all exterior
contemplations: for this chaste and choice Lady, after the death of her beloved
Mausolus, thought it not sufficient to erect a glorious monument in his memory,
but to enshrine him in her own body, by drinking his ashes, and interring him
in herself. Many such eminent women may we read of in Histories both divine
and humane, whose virtues have equalled, if not surpassed most men. So as,
howsoever it was the Milesian Thales his saying, that he had cause to give
Fortune thanks for three things especially; first, for that he was a man, and
not a beast; secondly, that he was a man, and not a woman; thirdly, that he was
a Greek borne, and not a Barbarian: Women there be whose more noble endowments
merit due admiration, because as in their sex weaker and inferior, so in the
gifts of the mind richer and superior. But now to our Choice: for it is to be
received as already granted, being by the authority of an Apostle confirmed,
that Marriage is honorable among all: Hebr. 13.4.
and every honorable thing is more eligible than that which is not honorable.
Arist. lib. 1. Polit. cap. 1. Eam ^ligas mag^^^^^, quem magis admire is (...)
^ideas, qu^m cum anci^^. S^neca.
So as he that shunneth Marriage, and avoideth society, is to be esteemed a foe
to humanity, or more than a man; as he whom Homer reprehendeth, saying: That
he was tribe-lesse, law-lesse, and houselesse. I could wish every young
Gentleman to make that Choice of his Mistress, which Seneca would have one
observe in the choice of a Master; Choose him for thy Master (says he) whom
thou may more admire, seeing him, than hearing him. Neither altogether, as
Egnatius in Catullus, is brought out showing the whiteness of his teeth:
Egnatius quod candidos habet dentes re^id^t usquequaque, seu aed rei ventum est
subsellium. Vid. Catull. in lib. E^eg.
for all outward perfections, are but as fuel to feed desire, without that
inward fair, which only makes woman worthy loving. For what is a beautiful
complexion, being an exterior good; or that which Euryclea his nurse praised,
when she washed the feet of Ulysses, namely, gentle speech, and tender flesh,
wanting those inward graces, which truly adorn and beautify women? So as it
is much better to follow his direction in the choice of a wife, who said, that
they were to be chosen Epictet. Enchirid.
Modestia non forma; which Modesty cannot admit of this ages vanity, where
there nothing is less affected than what is comely. For, Cypr. de discip^ina
and habitu virg.
these garish fashions agree well with none but prostitutes and shameless
women.
Petr. Mart. in 2 Reg. 9.30.
Neither can that face be a good one, which stands in need of these helps. For
Cyprian.
what madness is it to change the form of nature, and seek beauty from a
Picture? A^b^. Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Which Picture is vices posture, and the ages imposture. Hieron.
Neither do these affected trumperies, nor exquisite vanities become a
Christian. Iunius.
For what is more vain, than dying of the hair, painting of the face, laying
out of breasts? Aug. de Christ. fide.
Do not say that these can have shamefast minds, who have such wandering and
immodest eyes. Ambros. lib. 1. de offic. cap. 18.
For the habit of the mind is to be discerned by the carriage: so as even in
motion, gesture, and pace, is modesty to be observed. How miserable then is
the state of these phantasticke Idols* who can endure no fashion that is
comely, because it would not be observed? How base is her shape, which must
borrow complexion from the shop? Hier. ad Furiam de vid. Ser. Tom. 1.
How can she weep for her sins ( says S. Hierome) when her tears will
make furrows in her face? With what confidence does she lift up her
countenance to heaven, which her maker acknowledges not? Tertul. de hab. Mal.
cap. 7.
I would, I poor wretch ( says Tertullian) might see in that day of Christian
exaltation, whether with Cerusse, and Vermillion, and Saffron, and those tyres
and toys upon your head, you are to rise again! which if they do, they shall
certainly witness against them, Scult.
to receive the reward of their painting in a Lake of tormenting. Cyprian. in
lib. de hab. virg.
For these are they who lay hands upon God, correcting with a hand of contempt
the workmanship of God. These never carry a box of ointment to bestow on the
members of Christ, but a Vict. ad Salmonem.
box of complexion they have in readiness to bestow on a cheek. Which sort of
Wantons (for how should I otherwise term them) are well displayed by one in
their colors after this manner; Tho. Hudson.
She surely keeps her fault of Sex and Nation,
And best allows still the last Translation:
Much good time lost, she rests her faces debtor,
She Has made it worse, striving to make it better.
This introduced ulcer, which is now esteemed no sore, because custom has
taken away the sense of a sore, how much it was abhorred formerly, may appear
by that command or constitution purposely exhibited to restrain it. Clemens
Alex. constable. Apost. l. 1. cap. 9.
Do not paint thy face which God has made. But if our women would but
consider how hateful these abuses are in the sight of the Almighty, yea, how
much they were loathed even of all honest women in former ages, they would
distaste them, sure I am, far more than they affect them. For if we will
credit Saint Hier. de exitu Leae.
Hierome, writing to Marcella, who says; That those women were matter of
scandal to Christian eyes, which painted their faces and eyes with Vermillion,
and such like adulterate complexions. Yea he writes, That Maximilla Montanus
his Prophetess, a woman-devill, by command from him whom she served, did use
to paint. So Festus Pompeius says, That common and base Whores, called
Schoenicolae, used dawbing of themselves, though with the vilest stuff. So did
the Druids amongst the Romans, expressly shadowed by the Poet; Vict. ad Salmonem.
Preserve what Nature gave you, nought's more base
Than Belgian color on a Roman face.
Caesar. in Comment.
So did our ancient Britains, but not to make their faces more amiable, but to
appear more terrible to the enemy. Thus much, Gentlemen, I thought good to
write, before you make your choice, that you may see who are worth loving
before you make your choice. Nazian. contra multeres immodice c^mptas.
There is one flower to be loved of women, a good red, which is shamefastness;
Here make your choice, and you shall find far more content in a native than
artificial blush. For as Diogenes said to one that had anointed his hair;
Laert. lib. 6. Optimisunt odores qui adorant m^^s, al^te^ no^ sunt flores sed
faetores.
Take heed that thy smelling head bring thee not an ill-smelling life; so
beware lest these perfumed Ones become not polluted Ones. For whosoever shall
use them, I cannot choose but suspect them* howsoever I have read of some that
maintained the use of painting, grounded upon these ensuing respects; Lessius
dej^sti. (...) and jure. lib. 4. cap. 4 fol. 802.
Such a cause there may be (says one) that women may use painting, and without
sin: As for example, if it be done of purpose to cover any blemish or
deformity. Likewise, if the husband command that his wife should do it, to
the end that among other women she might appear more amiable. Which opinion
seems likewise confirmed by another, who affirms, Pet. Al^gora in Compend o
Manu^l. Navar. c 25* Numb. 19. f^l. 257.
That to receive more beauty by attire or painting, though it be a counterfeit
work, yet it is no mortal sin. So as Platina writes, that Paulus Secundus,
Bishop of Rome, used to paint himself. Whom if Diogenes had seen, he would
doubtless have said to him, as he once said to a youth too curiously and
effeminately dressed: If thou go to men, all this is but in vain; if unto
women, it is wicked. Wicked surely, it cannot choose, being (as it were) a
reproving or reforming of the Almighty, whose workmanship is so absolute, as
it admits of no correction. Take heed therefore that you be not taken with one
of these Idols, as Pigmalion was with his Image; but so direct your affections,
as she may be worthy your embrace, whom you shall choose. Which that you may
the better effect, follow the Sages advice in your choice: Laert. in vit. C^e^b.
Match with your equal. If not in fortunes, for so both may prove beggars, at
least in descent: so will she the better content her self with your estate,
and conform her the better to your means. For I have seldom seen any
difference greater, arising from Marriage, than imparitie of birth or descent,
where the wife will not stick to twit her husband with her Parentage, and
brave him with repetition of her descent. Likewise, as I would not have you to
entertain so maine a business without mature advice, so I would not have you
wholly rely upon a friends counsel; but as you are to have the greatest Oar
in the Boat, so to make your self your own carver: for he that is enforced to
his Choice, makes a dangerous bargain. Wherefore ground your Choice on Love,
so shall you not choose but like; making this your conclusion; To her in Hymen's
bands I Will nere be tide,
Whom Love has not espoused and made my Bride.
For what miseries have ensued on enforced Marriages, there is no Age but may
record: where rites enforced, made the hands no sooner joined, than their minds
divorced, bidding adue to Content, even at that instant when those unhappie
rites were solemnized. The next Observance in making your Choice, is matter of
Portion; a business not altogether to be neglected; for if she be a good wife,
a good Portion makes her no worse: and if an ill one, she had need of a Portion
to make her better. For he has a hard bargain that has neither portion in a
wife, nor out of a wife. We would account him a weak and simple man, that
would enter bond without either consideration or security to keep him
harmless. You are sure to be bound, be not so far from consideration, as
have nothing to show for your self for your own security. I can commend his
wit, who having made choice of a Proportion, moving enough to gain affection,
was not content so, but he must know further touching her Portion; that as her
Proportion procured love, so her Portion might enable him how to live: like a
quick Epigrammatist he proceeds thus; I got a Portion and Proportion too,
Portion and Proportion.

One got, the other I desired to know,
Which known, though at that season I was free,
A thousand pound cost me my Liberty.
O fool (quoth my Alexis) to be bound
To thraldomes yoke, to gain a thousand pound!
Content thee friend (said I) for wor'st thou what,
I have been bound for a less sum than that,
Yet nere was Bankrupt, but if so I doubt
To lose by th'bargaine, I will bank her out.
It is a true saying, Something has some favor; whereas he that neither gets
good wife nor good portion, will make but a hard saver. For he that wants a
wife to cherish him, had need of some money to cheer him. Having now made
choice of your wife, being so well disposed (as it is to be intended,) she
should not be much restrained: for she has already resolved to be no gadder,
but in resemblance of the Snaile, a good Housekeeper. The Grecians accustomed
to burn, before the door of the new married, the axletree of that coach,
wherein she was brought to her husbands house, letting her to understand, that
she was ever after to dwell there. Which custom she approves, having made
her family her commonweal, where she addresseth her self to govern without
intermedling in others affairs. Neither is she only to be freed from restraint
of liberty in going abroad, (for her occasions call her, or else she could be
contented to be housed for ever:) but in her desire of apparel, or any thing
else that she affects. For wheresoever Christ is, there is Vbi Deus est, ibi
p^dicitia. H^^^en. ad Furiam de vid. Sermon. Tom. 1.
shamefastness; like as wheresoever Antichrist is, there is Velamen istud
An^i^hristi. ibid.
shamelessness. And this chosen vessel well understands that all garish and
gorgeous attire, is the attire of sin, which she will not so much as partake
with, having learned how that Modesty is the only ornament which beseemes a
Matron. Wherefore, you should much wrong your Choice to restrain her from the
use of any pleasure which she affects: for so well disposed is she, as she
affects no other pleasure than to converse with Virtue, which she holds at
a higher rate than to be purchased with a mass of treasure. But admit it were
your fortune to bestow your self on one, whose Licentious affection might
second Faustina's, whose pride Sempronia's, and whose shrewd tongue Zantippe's:
you must make a virtue of a necessity, and so learn to inure you to patience,
as you may be able by continual exercise to encounter and subdue the
violentest passions. How wisely did Aurelius cover his Faustina's shame,
laboring to reclaim by mildness, when he could not prevail by bitterness?
How discreetly was Sempronia's proud humor curbed, and with as little
impatience as might be reproved? How resolutely did Socrates forbear his wife
Zantippe, though a froward woman, because he thought he might better and with
more patience converse with others? For Marriage is no such merchandise, as to
promise return with advantage to all factors. There is a ceremonial custom
used by the Duke of Venice upon the Ascension day, to go in a vessel called
the Bucentor, made Galley-wise, with other Nobles a mile or two into the Sea:
casting a Ring into it, (by which ceremony they wed the Sea) that it may never
leave the City upon dry land. Certainly, whosoever he be that marries a
wife, empledging his faith unto her by a Ring, must not think that he has
brought his ship to a perpetual harbor, but rather that he is now putting off
from Land, and entering the maine Ocean, where he is to encounter with many
violent blasts, contrary winds, surging waves, ebs and flows, which will not
end till his journey end. It were wisdom therefore to bear what we may not
avoid: considering, that as the Marriage state is subject to many occurrences,
so it is endowed with sundry excellent privileges, as the gravitie of the state
requires: Call. Rhod. lib. 12. cap. 8.
As in Rome, the Lex Iulia gave precedencie to him who had most children;
Privileges of Marriage.
and in Florence at this day, he that is father of five children, straightway
upon the birth of the fifth, is exempted from all Imposts, Subsidies, and
Lones. Also here in England, a married man (out of a tender respect to his
posterity) is not so soon pressed into the wars as single-men or batchelors.
Wherefore, as the state is more honored, so is more sobriety and government
in it required; bearing your selves patiently without bitterness, and
forbearing your wives for their sexes weakness.

Having thus far discoursed of Acquaintance both at bed and board; it were
not amiss, if we set down some especial directions, which might better
instruct you in the choice of them; Plin. l. 35. c. 10.
which, as Protogenes seeing but a little line drawn in a Table, knew
straight-waies it was Apelles doing, whom he had never seen; shall upon first
sight resolve you, that those friends, or Acquaintance, to which these
instructions shall direct you, are worthy loving and knowing. There is no one
note more infallible of true friendship, than to express a faithfulness in
misery: which faithfulness is ever found in these noble and generous
Dispositions, who can say with Chylo, Laert. in vit. Chyl.
That in all their lifetime they were never guilty of Ingratitude. So as
Nobility and Affability hold for most part concurrencie: whence the Poet; A
Disposition towardly and good,
Implies a generous and a Noble blood.
These keep continual records of courtesies received; with a Catalogue of
such friends as have at their hands worthily deserved. It is reported of Henry
the fifth, that he never promised any thing, but he registered and set it down
with his own hand. Such noble sparks are these, who, as they receive
acceptably, so they render back bountifully, making no other benefit of
Amity, than as of a mutual or reciprocal courtesy. Neither is it to be
wondered at, that I should here make choice of Descent or Birth, as an
especial or infallible note of true and faithful Amity: for there is a
natural strain in all creatures, which they take from the parents that bred
them; Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis: Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus -- Horat.
Strong men from strong their native strength do gather,
Both Bull and Horse take spirit from their father.
It is a common saying amongst us, That a Gentleman will do like a Gentleman;
he scorns to do unlike himself, for his word is his gage, and his promise
such a tie as his reputation will not suffer him to dispense with. Men of this
rank, as they are ready to bear an equal share in their friends misery,
(...).
so are they resolved with a spirit undanted, (if such be their chance) in
their own persons to sustain misery; for they esteem no man so unhappie,
Insel cem dicebat Bias qui far nequiret inselicita^em. ^aert.
as he that cannot bear unhappiness. In Sicilia there is a fountain called
Fons Solis, out of which at midday, when the Sun is nearest, flows cold
water; at midnight when the Sun is farthest off, flows hot water. Pomp.
(...) l. 1.
Such fountains are these firm friends, who, when the Sun shines hottest
upon you, with the rays of prosperity, will yield you cold water, no great
comfort or succor, because you need it not: but when the Sun is farthest
off, and the darkest clouds which fortune can contract, sit heaviest on you,
then they send forth hot water; they weep with you, there is hot water; they
suffer with you, there is hot water; they cheer you drooping, comfort you
sorrowing, support you languishing, and in your extremest fortunes are ever
sharing. Quorsum alter dives, alter pauper?

Theophrast. Nil habet infelix paupertas darius in se,

Quam quod ridiculos homines facit --

Iuven. Sat. 3.


These cry with Theophrastus, What care we if this friend be rich, that friend
poor, we are the same to either? Make choice therefore of these well bred
Ones, for though some degenerate, most of them hold. Whereas, contrariwise,
these who are of a base dunghill descent, it is seldom seen but they have
some base and unworthy condition; being generally all for the time, but little
for trust, or as Tops which always run round, and never go forward, unless
they be whipped. Such a Neuter among the Romans was Tully, who could not resolve,
whether he should take Caesar's part or Pompeyes part. Quem sugiam scio, quem
sequar nescio.

Homer. Iliad. 5.


Among the Grecians was Tydides, who could not determine whether he should
join himself with Achilles or Hector; (...).
Among the Persians was Nabarzanes, who seeing his Masters fortunes decline,
labored to join himself to him whose fortunes were in rising. Such were
Tiberius friends, who shrunk from him, hearing with patience, Tiberium in
Tiberim. And such were our Northern Borderers, who have been always
uncertain friends in extremities, and assured enemies upon advantage. Of which
it may be said, as was spoken of the Philosophers cloak, Pallium video,
Philosophum non video: I see the cover of a friend, Nihil turpius dubio and
incerto, pedem mono reserente, modo produc^nte. Sen. epist. 96.
but no friend. For as nothing is more hateful than a doubtful and uncertain
man, who now draws his foot back, and now puts it forward; so there is
nothing more distastefull to any man, than these fair protesting friends,
whose hollow and undermining hearts make a show of fair weather abroad, when
there is a tempest at home, coming toward you with their feet, but going from
you with their hearts. In brief, they are Danaus tubs, or running sieves that
can hold no water; leave them therefore to themselves, if you desire in safety
to enjoy your selves. Now, to the end I may acquaint you likewise with the rest
of such Motives to Love, as are powerfully working in the affection of the
mind; Sundry inducing motives to Love recounted. Parentage. Benevolence. Fame.
as we have touched the first Motive or inducement to Love, to wit, Parentage
or descent, which cannot so far degenerate from it self, but it must of
necessity show it self: so it attracts other motives of love unto it, as
Benevolence in rewarding; excellency or admiration proceeding from the fame of
such redoubted Hero's, as have their names charactred and engraven in leaves of
brass, to preserve their memory: as Solomon for his wisdom, whom, no doubt,
Nicaula Queen of Saba had a desire to see and be known to, through report of
his wisdom; so as her long journey seemed short, having understood that to be
true with her own ear, which she had only heard of before by report. How
much likewise was David affected for his Valor, in discomfiting the
uncircumcised Philistin? So was Alexander, whose report brought the Amazon
Thalestris from her own Country, of purpose to be known to so invincible a
spirit. So Hercules, Achilles, Dardanus, Diomedes, Scipio, Hannibal,
Constantine, etc. whose exploits purchased them Love to such as were never
acquainted with their persons. Pardoning likewise of injuries, Pardoning of
injuries.
is an excellent motive of Love. When Chylo's brother was angry that himself
was not made Ephorus as well as he: O (quoth he) I know how to suffer injuries,
so do not thou! Though Diogenes the Cynick answered uncivilly to Alexander,
when he came to his poor Mansion in Synope, his Philosophers Barrel, yet he
replied unto his Satyricall speech with no indignation; but said to such of his
attendants, as derided the boarish and exoticke speech of Diogenes, If I were
not Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes. The like instance may be confirmed
by holy Writ: where Miriam, for murmuring against Moses, was stricken with a
loathsome Leprosy: he could not suffer this condign punishment to be inflicted
on her, Numb. 12.10.13.
but demanded of God that he would cure her. Another motive to Love,
Concurrencie in hatred.
is Hatred, where an ill occasion procures among enemies a reconciliation.
Herod and Pilat enemies before, were reconciled in combining their powers
together against Christ. Mastives, if set together, will fight till death, but
in the presence of a Bull will join together. Compassion in affliction.
Sometimes mutual affliction procures mutual affection. Such resorted to
David, as were persecuted by Saul, 1 King. 22.2. 2 Samuel 15.37.
being such as were amaro animo. Where Saul's enmity brought David to a trial
of Hushai's faithful amity; where he found the words of Ecclesiasticus to be
true, Ecclus. 6.14.
A faithful friend is a strong defense; and he that finds such a one,
finds a treasure. For when we are in the greatest straights, such an one
shows the most strength: So as the Apostles words may be here verified,
Strength is made perfect in weakness. Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. 2 Cor.
12.7. Delivery from danger.
Where one afflicted friend supporteth another, by joining their strengths
together. Another motive there is, proceeding from some especial delivery from
danger: for who will not esteem him for a friend, who will expose himself to
danger, to deliver his friend? Judith 13.10.
Judith entered Bethulia with Holofernes head, and by that means preserved her
Country from ruin and desolation. Esther 8.11.
Esther procured the death of Haman, repealed those severe and cruel laws
enacted, proclaimed, and even ready to be executed by Hamans suggestion, in the
kingdom of the Medes and Persians; whereby she purchased eternal honor, love
and memory in her Country. The same love gained Moses for delivering the
Israelites from the thraldom of Egypt. Exodus 15.1. Joshua 24.31. Judge. 16.2.
Maccab. 13.15 V^d. Eccl. a cap 44. ad 51.
The like may be said of Joshua, Samson, Maccabeus, and many others frequent in
holy Writ. The Romans so highly honored and affected such as protected their
Country, and defended her Liberty, as they bestowed no less style on them
than Patres Patriae. Another motive there is, drawing one Enemy to love
another, induced thereto in respect of Compassion, Expression of virtue.
or some other princely virtue which he sees in him. 1 King. 24.26.
When Saul understood that David might have taken away his life, and would not,
Levavit vocem and flevit: his threats were changed into tears, and his passion
into a teare-swolne admiration, to see his foe so full of compassion.
Acknowledgement of injuries.
We are induced likewise to love them that tell and confess sincerely their
offenses; for an ingenuous acknowledgment of what is done, moves us to
commiserate his case by whom it is done, yea quenches all hate, A position of
Aristot. Rhet. 2. cap. 4.

Vt tenuissima scintilla quae in Oceanum demittitur.

Chrysostom. in hom. ad Pop.

Suffering of injuries. Bounty, or Munificense.

2 Cor. 9.7. Ecclus. 6.8.13.


as if a small spark were drenched in the Sea. Likewise in the toleration of
wrongs, we are enforced to love him who suffers them, and having power to
revenge, will not out of the nobleness of his spirit, do what he may. To
conclude, Bounty is a Motive to Love; for giving gifts gathers friends:
which Bounty is most worthy acceptance, when done with cheerfulness. Hilarem
datorem diligit Deus. Thus have we traced over such Motives as generally induce
or procure Love, Friendship, or Acquaintance; wherein observe the lesson of the
Son of Sirach: Depart from thine enemies, and beware of thy friends: for some
man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy
trouble. Now if you would understand, how a man may know a friend, you shall
find him described, and by certain infallible marks discovered in the twelfth
Chapter of the same book. But always, Ecclus. 12.8, 9. Ibid. cap. 13.6.8.
Obad. 7.
Beware (says he) of deceitful friends, lest feeling the bitterness of them,
you find the saying of the Prophet true: All the men of thy confederacy, have
driven thee to the borders: the men that were at peace with thee, have deceived
thee, and prevailed against thee: they that eat thy bread, have laid a wound
under thee: there is none understanding in him. Make choice then of him for
your Acquaintance, whom you may worthily esteem of as a second-selfe: so may
you communicate your counsels freely, Arist. Eth. lib. 4.
acquaint him with your griefs friendly, and share in comforts and afflictions
fully. Thus much for the choice of Acquaintance; wherein I have the rather
enlarged my discourse, because I know that as there is nothing more useful to
direction or instruction, than where good ones are elected; so there is nothing
more hurtful in the maine matter of discipline or conversation, than where ill
ones are affected and frequented.

MAny and singular were the commendations attributed to Augustus, Of Constancy
in the choice of Acquaintance. Ecclus. 6.7.5.
amongst which none more absolute than this: As none was more slow in
entertaining, so none more firm of constant in retaining; which agrees well
with that of the Son of Sirach: If thou gettest a friend, prove him first,
and be not hasty to credit him. But having found him, we are to value him
above great treasures: 14.
the reason is annexed: A faithful friend is a strong defense, and he that
finds such a one, finds a treasure. This advises every one to be no less
wary in his choice, than constant in the approvement of his choice; so as it
rests now, that we press this point by reasons and authorities, illustrating
by the one, and confirming by the other, how consequent a thing it is to show
our selves constant in the choice of our Acquaintance. There is no one thing
more dangerous to the state of man, or more infallibly proving fatal, than
lightness in entertaining many friends, and no less lightly cashiering those
who are entertained. Which error I have observed to have borne principal sway
in our new-advanced Heirs, A^arunt Solemn ardentem, oderunt arguentem.
whose only ambition it is to be seen numerously attended, phantastically
attired, and in the height of their absurdities humoured. These are they, who
make choice of Acquaintance, only by outward habit, or which is worse, by
roisting or russian behavior: with whom that false Armory of yellow Bands,
nittie Locks, and braving Mouchato's have ever had choice acceptance. And
herein, observe the misery of these depraved ones; who having made choice of
these mis-spenders of time, and abusers of good gifts, they will more
constantly adhere to them, than with better affected Consorts. Oh that young
Gentlemen would but take heed from falling unwarily upon these shelves, who
make shipwreck of their fortunes (the remains of their fathers providence;)
yea not only of their outward state, which were well to be prevented, lest
misery or baseness over-take them; but even of their good names, those
precious odours which sweeten and relish the Pilgrimage of man! For what more
hateful than to consort with these companions of death, whose honor consists
merely in protests of Reputation, and whose only military garb is to toss a
Pipe is stead of a Pike, and to fly to their Tinderbox to give charge to their
smoakie Ordnance, to blow up the shallow-laid foundation of that shaken
fortress of their decayed brain? These hot-liverd Salamanders are not for
your company (Gentlemen) nor worthy your Acquaintance; Vt ab iis meliores
fiant, aut eos quibuscum versantur, meliores faciant.
for of all companions, those are the worthiest acceptance, who are so
humble-minded and well affected, as they consort with others purposely to be
bettered by them; or being knowing men, by their instructions to better them.
That course which the ancient Vestalls observed, Inter Vestales hoc celebre
fu^t, primo discunt quid agant, pof^ea agunt quod discunt, tertio alios d^cent
quod discant and agant.
such useful Companions as these have ever seconded. They first learned what
to do; secondly, they did what they had learned; thirdly, they instructed
others to do as they had learned. Such as these were good Companions to Pray
with, to Play with, to Converse or Commerce with. First, they are good to Pray
with; for such as these only were they who assembled together in one place,
employing their time religiously in prayers, supplications, and giving of
thanks: and honoring him, whom all Powers and Principalities do honor with
divine Melody: Non est strepitus oris, sed jubilus cordis, non sonus labiorum,
sed mo^us gaudior^^, con. ordia voluntatum non cons^ nantia vocum; Parum enim
pro. lest sola voce cantare sine cordis intention. Bern.
which was expressed not so much with the noise of the mouth, as with the
joyful note of the heart, nor with the sound of the lips, as with the
soule-solacing motion of the spirit, nor with the consonance of the voice, as
with the concordance of the will: For, as the precious stone Diacletes, though
it have many rare and excellent soveraignties in it, yet it loses them all, if
it be put in a dead man's mouth: so Prayer, which is the only pearl and jewel
of a Christian, though it have many rare and exquisite virtues in it, yet it
loses them every one, if it be put into a dead-mans mouth, or into a man's
heart either, that is dead in sin, and does not knock with a pure hand. So
many rare presidents have former times afforded, all most inimitable in this
kind, as to make repetition of them, would crave an ample volume; we will
therefore only touch some special ones, whose devotion has deserved a
reverence in us toward them, and an imitation in us after them. Nazianzen in
his Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia, writes, that she was so given to Prayer,
that her knees seemed to cleave to the earth, and to grow to the very ground,
by reason of incessancie or continuance in Prayer; so wholly was this Saint of
God dedicated to devotion. Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his Aunt
Trasilla being dead, was found to have her elbowes as hard as horn; which
hardness she got by leaning to a deske, at which she used to pray; so
continued was the devotion of a zealous professor. Eusebius in his History
writes, that James the brother of our Lord, had knees as hard as Camels knees,
benumbed and bereaved of all sense and feeling, by reason of continual
kneeling in Prayer; so sweet was this Task, undertaken for Gods honor, where
practice made that an exercise or solace, which the sensual man makes a toil
or anguish. Hierom in the life of Paul the Eremite writes, that he was found
dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, lifting up his eyes: Etiam
cadaver mortui officioso gestu precabatur.
so that the very dead corpse seemed yet to live, and by a kind of zealous and
religious gesture to pray still unto God. So transported or rather intraunced
was the spirit of this lovely Dove, as even in death he expressed the practice
of his life. These followed Augustines rule in their form of Prayer: Quaerite
quod quaritis, sed non ubi quaritis. August.
Seek (says he) what you seek, but seek not where you seek. Seek Christ,
that is a good what. Seek what you seek; but seek him not in bed, that is an
ill where. But seek not where you seek: Moses found Christ not in a soft bed,
but in a bramble bush. For as we cannot go to heaven on beds of down, no more
can those devotions pierce heaven which are made on beds of down. Albeit,
every place is good, for as no place is freed from occasion of sin, so no place
should be free from Prayer, which breaks down the Partition Wall of our
sin. But certainly those downie Prayers taste too much of the flesh, to
relish well of the spirit; Delicatus magister est, qui pleno ventre dispatat de
^^junio.

Hieron.

Qui saturest pleno lauda^ jejuni^ ventre.


for as he is a delicate Master, who, when his belly is full, disputes of
fasting; so he is a sensual Prayer, who in his bed only, addresseth himself
to devotion. Neither are these only good companions to pray with, but also to
play with; I mean to recreate and refresh our minds with, when at any time
pressed or surcharged either with cares of this world, or in our discontinuance
from more worthy and glorious Meditations of the world to come: for as in the
former we are usually plunged, so by the latter we are commonly enfeebled, at
least wearied, if by some Recreations, to entertain and allay the tediousness
of more weary hours, we be not refreshed and solaced. Now in our choice of
Acquaintance, Ecclus. 13.16.
as like requires like, so are we to sort our selves to an equality both in
degree and condition. When some of Alexanders companions demanded of him,
Quint. Curt. l. 1.
if he would run a race with them; Willingly, (said he) if there were Kings
to run withal. For this parity breeds affection, and an equality of minds
in any recreation: while neither respect to an inferior rank begets contempt,
nor an eye to superiority begets fear. Amicitiae ut pares quaerunt itae and
faciunt.

Vt cuique est atas, ita quemque facetus adopta.

Hor. l. 1. epist. 6. Suaves omnes siunt sales Inter socios and sodalci.


Besides, as there is an equality of degree, so is there an equality of mind
concurring with that degree. There is no pleasure affected by one, which is not
entertained with free approbation by another: for in all their jestings,
sportings, and delightful meetings, they are provided of a disposition,
equally tempered to give a jest, and take a jest: having ever in mind that
common English proverb, Play with me, but hurt me not; jest with me, but shame
me not. For their sports, as they are harmless without guile, so their
conceits are pleasant without gall. There is neither saltness in the one, nor
harshnesse in the other. Neither do these make sport or pastime a vocation,
Quae demen^ia est potius trabis quam sequi? Seneca.

Nec quia delectat, placet; sed quia placet, delectat. ibid.

Engregium apud vos virtutis officium ^^^^ptates persuadere: Super mensam
recognoscentes omnia gentium animalia: and quo magis implentur, eo magis
inexplebiles. ibid.


as if they were borne to nothing else than Play: for these delights of theirs,
which are ever moderate, and therefore truly seasoned, they make use of, as
Physicians of sugar-plates, which they minister to their patients, to take away
the taste of a more bitter potion. It is worth observing, to note the excellent
use which these men make of Recreation. They can use it with such temperance,
as they can command the pleasure which they use, and not be commanded by it.
Their only pleasure is to contemn pleasure, yea even to dis-esteeme it in
their height of pleasure: neither, because pleasure delights, does it please
them, but because it pleases, it does delight them. It is the excellent'st
office of some men's virtue to persuade the use of pleasure, recounting at their
Table creatures of all sorts, with which by how much more they are filled, by
so much more their appetites remain unsatisfied. Briefly, whereas their
discretion has subjected appetite to reason, in gaming they play without
desire of g^ining; in Recreations of the Body, their aim is to refresh and
renew Nature, without any desire of mastery; in their solemn feasts, they feed
without sursetting; in their May-games, they are merry without exceeding; in
their flashes or encounters of wit, they are pregnant, present, and pleasant
without offending. Those are most fruitful and fertile in rendering fruit
(says the Philosopher) which partake most of cold and moist: which position
intends the conceptive part; but my assertion reaches further; for I
conclude, such as these being equally tempered, to be most copious in the
principal works or faculties of the understanding, being three; first to
discourse* second to distinguish, third to choose. Three faculties of the
understanding.
For the first whereof, it rests that we now proceed in proof, concluding;
These not to be only the best Companions to pray or play with (as we have
formerly proved) but to converse, or commerce with, as we shall hereafter make
manifest. Megabizes esteemed Alexander as a Prince, whiles he stood in his
School and said nothing; but when he began to talk of things which he knew
not, he said unto him, That even his little children would laugh him to scorn.
This speech of Megabizes proceeded (as may be imagined) from some words
uttered, or reasons alleged by Alexander, which relished little of
Philosophy, being a Study to which a Soldier is for most part a stranger.
But these men, whom we now have in hand, and whom we have made choice of, as
fit companions to converse and commerce with, These observe that maxim; He
that knows how to speak well, knows also when he must hold his peace.
are men of such singular discretion, as they will prefer silence before
discovery of their ignorance. These know for what end or purpose the bars and
gates of the lips and teeth (like a double ward) were ordained to limit or
restrain the Tongue. These observe, how man has two eyes to see with, two
nosthrills to breathe with, two hands to labor with, two feet to walk with,
but one Tongue to talk with; implying, that one Tongue requires as much
government as any two members of all the body. These think an hour before
they speak, and a day before they promise.
Neither only is their Speech wisely silenced, but when delivered, discreetly
seasoned. Seasoned with mildness and affability, without the least expression
of roughness or austeritie. Where two meek men meet together, their
conference ( says Bernard) is sweet and profitable; where one man is meek, it
is profitable; where neither, it proves pernicious. Neither in mildness and
affability only, but in the highest pitch of wisdom,
is their discourse seated. Whence it was (as I have heretofore noted) that
Aristotle debating of the convenience and propriety of discourse before
Alexander; maintained, In lib. de se^re^. s^cret^r.
that none were to be admitted to speak, but either those that managed his
wars, or his Philosophers which governed his house. Which wisdom of
discourse has been formerly so much affected,
as Plutarch reports that Plato came forth of Asia into Cilicia, for no other
cause but only to see his dear friend Phocion the Philosopher, and to
converse with him. This caused Nica^la* the Queen of Saba, to travel from her
own Country to Judea, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: yea, peruse those
Athenian Nights in Gellius, how and in what excellent manner, with what
variety of discourse, propriety of conference, strength of arguments those
Winter-nights were bestowed, and you shall find there fit companions for
Scholars, Soldiers, and all Generous professors. Neither are they consorts
only fit to converse with, but to commerce with also; for these are no bankrupt
merchants, or desperate factors, who use to dispense with conscience and
credit, rather than in a conscionable sort discharge their credit. So as, how
soever the Son of Sirach may seem to conclude, Eccl. 26.28, 29
There be two things, which me think to be hard and perilous; A Merchant
cannot lightly keep him from wrong, and a Victualler is not without sin. So
well and equally are the ships of these good merchants ballased, as rather than
they will make shipwreck of a good conscience, or run their reputation upon
the shelfe of disgrace, they will suffer the worst of extremes. These are none
of those, Talis substantia non est stabilis, aut ipsis inventibus est peritura,
aut a ma^is haeredibus est dissipanda.

Chrysostom. in Mat.


who make sale of deceitful commodities, to enrich their seldom thriving
progeny with impostures. These are none of those trifling Mountebankes, who
draw on customers with fair protests, and show strange experiments upon their
sophisticated oils, to delude the ignorant. These are none of our
inconsiderate Factors, who make exchange of English money with Indian trifles,
enriching foreign countries with our treasures, and fooling our own with their
feathers. These are none of our Sea-sharkes, who under pretense of merchandise,
exercise piracie; bearing the world in hand that they befriend us, when they
practice all hostility against us. These are none of our dangerous Spies, who
pretending they come to trade or commerce with us, arrive purposely to note
what strength is amongst us. No, these are Factors of better temper and more
honesty, hating deceit, though that might enrich them; scorning the
Mountebankes trade, though that might draw customers to them; discarding all
inconsiderate Factors, who give money for feathers, though in fooling others,
they might gain by them; cashiering all Sea-sharkes, who by piraticall
practices, use to support them; excluding all dangerous Spies, who to discover
others weakness, purposely embark them. In brief, would you have their
character? They can discourse of novelties without affectation, impart their
minds freely without dissimulation, valuing no loss so great, as the hazard of
their reputation. These are those friends which deserve your choice and
acceptance; These are they, who, as upon good grounds you have made choice of,
so should you be constant in your choice. For you are not to be so light in
the choice of your Acquaintance, as in the choice of your fashion; where every
giddie head sorts himself to what is newest, not what is neatest; for so
should you be ever choosing, and far from constancy in choosing. Rather
having got a friend and proved him, first in matters of small weight, and
afterward in affairs of greater consequence; labor by all means to retain
him, for you have found a treasure: Forsake not this old friend, Ecclus. 9.10.
for the new is not comparable unto him. You have got a friend, proved and
tried him to be no ambitious man, for ambition is fearful, and for the least
cross of fortune will forsake true friendship. You have got a friend, proved
and tried him to be no covetous man, for covetousness sells fellowship,
faith and honesty; to conclude, you have got a friend, who will not by glozing
deceive you; by aiming at his own private ends, entrap you; by hunting after
popular praise, disvalue you; or by consorting which Politic heads, endanger
you. Keep him then, and be constant in your choice, holding him so firmly
knit unto you, as if he were individually united to your self; for a friend,
(provided that he be such an one as we have charactred him) is a second-selfe,
Aristot. l. 4. Eth.
and therefore as impossible to be divided from you, as you from your self.
And may this suffice to be spoken touching constancy in the choice of
Acquaintance, wherein as we ought to be circumspect in our choice, so ought we
to be constant, having had proof of the faithfulness of our choice.

THere is nothing which argues more indiscretion, Of Reservancie toward
Acquaintance. Eccles. 6.7.
than an aptness of discovering our selves; so as, we are advised in getting a
friend, to prove him first, and not to be hasty to credit him. For albeit, the
precept may seem general, The secrets of our friend we may not discover; which
is confirmed by the Son of S^rach, Who so discovers secrets, loses his
credit, and finds no friend after his will. Yet, how many are there, who
either through unfaithfulness, Chap 27.16. to 22.
as they will not, have brought their friends to extremest hazard? Yea, not
only our common friends, but even those who sleep in our own bosom; as
Dalilah played with Samson, either simply or subtly will discover our
secret'st counsels to our enemy: so as, we may take up the complaint of
Samson, which he made in the discovery of his Riddle: If he had not plowed with
our Heifer, Judge. 14.18.
he had not found out our Riddle. Had not that woman by the River of Sorek,
that subtle Dalilah, Chap. 16.19.
betrayed his trust, how invincible had Samson remained, no less powerful to
his friends, than fearful to his enemies? Whence we may gather, how dangerous
it is to discover the secrets of our heart, even to those to whom we have
engaged our heart: for we ought not to give our friend power over us. This is
seconded by a divine precept: Eccles. 33.18.
Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over thee while thou
live; and give not away thy substance to another, les^ it repent thee, and
thou entreat for the same again. Whence we are advised to a twofold
reservancie; first in concealing our secrets; secondly, in retaining our
substance. For the first, he explaines himself more fully in the ensuing
verse; As long as thou live, and have breath, give not thy self over to any
person. Verse 19.
For the second, he gives a reason in the end of the former verse; Give not
away thy substance to another, lest it repent thee, and thou entreat for the
same again. Of which two parts, and the Reservancie which we are to observe in
either, my purpose is briefly and plainly to entreat; and first of the first,
to wit, Reservancie of secrets, wherein I will be as brief as the quality of
the Subject will suffer me.

Secrecy.
It is said of Geese, that, when at the change of seasons, they pass from
Cilicia, over the mountain Taurus, which abounds with Eagles; they carry
stones in their bills, for fear their cry should discover them to their
enemies. Reason should teach us that, which Nature has instructed them, lest
by diverting from the rule of reason, we become inferior to them, who never
had the use of reason. For there is nothing which detracts more from the glory
of man, than by too prodigal a discovery of himself, to lay himself open to
the trust of another: so as it may be positively averred, There is nothing that
betrayeth a man so much to ruin, Aditum nocendi perfido praestat sides.

Sen. in Ocdip.


as his own credulity. Dionysius gave straight commandment, the head of
Brias, one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, should be cut off, for telling
Plato, who had demanded of him what the Tyrant did, That he had stripped
himself by reason of the heat, and was painting in a Table. So tender were
Princes of the discovery of their actions, even in affairs of indifferency.
Let us imitate therefore that Grecian of former times, who being told that his
breath did smell, answered, It was by reason of the many Secrets, which had a
long while lain rotting, and put^ifying within him. Let our bosom (the
recluse of Secrets) be like the Lions den in the Apologue; toward the mouth
whereof, the prints and prickings of sundry sorts of beasts, might easily be
discerned, Sed nulla retrorsum, but from thence none at all. Let us always
talk with Harpocrates,
at the sign of the finger on the mouth; and learn of Anacharsis, that the
tongue has need of more strong restraint than Nature. Let us not be too
curious, 1 Samuel 6.19.
with them of Bethshemesh, in the search of other men's Secrets, nor yet too
careless with Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.13.
in the discovery of our own. Morality gives us a prohibition for the one, and
a precept for the other; Seek not to know that Secrecy Arcanum neque t^
s^rulaberis ullius (...); Comm^ss^m^ nelegis, and (...) tortus and ^ra. Her.

thy friend reserved has,
But keep what is tendered to thy trust,
though drunk with wine and wrath.
And indeed it is a profanation of duty to publish any thing we should not;
and too much insinuation to wind our selves in the privacie of others Secrets,
which make known we ought not. Those things therefore, which are to be
concealed, let us conceal them, Vt curia Martis Athenis, as close as either
silence or darkness will afford us means to keep them, both from eye and
ear: for the better effecting whereof, there is necessarily required in every
one a wise distrust, and slownesse of belief, wherewith the breast must so
equally be balanced, that he may steddily run on, without suffering shipwreck
in such a doubtful and dangerous course. It has been ever held a singular
argument of policy, to have an open face, Frontem a^eriat, mentem legate. Ci^.
but a shut heart; to give entertainment with a free and affable countenance,
but with a wise and discreet reservancie of our counsels, to prevent the
occasion of giving our friend power over us. Yea, but it may be objected, it
may sometimes fall out, that a friend cannot perform the office of a friend,
but by discovering the secret purpose or practice of another: For how could
faithful Jonathan advertise David of Saul's wicked purpose against him, 1 Samuel
20.12.
but by discovering what Saul in secret had imparted to him? How could he (I
say) have advertised David of his fathers fury, by shooting three arrows, 30.
but by discovering what his father had secretly intended against him? To which
objection it may be thus answered; That, as amongst evil men there can be no
true friendship continued, so neither are the Secrets of such men, tending ever
to mischief and effusion of innocent blood, to be concealed, but by all means
should be discovered, that such tragical issues might be prevented. Yea, but
it may be again objected, that admit this were so, may we not impart our
griefs to a friend, or communicate our counsels to one, whom we have made
trial of to be trusty and faithful? To which I answer, that we may, but
with this provision, that we never unrip our bosom so far, as to give our
friend power over us, in matters which may either concern life, state, or
name. For though your experience of the trust of such a friend has been long,
and those affairs wherein you have employed him, of serious consequence: we
have known many Comicall beginnings, have a Tragical Catastrophe; many
promising mornings turn to duskie afternoones; many fair glozing friends
recoile (like the Bat in the fable) and become either Neuters, or professed
enemies. So as, it was wisely answered by that learned Sage to one who demanded
of him, Quid difficile? arcana (inquit) retice^e, and ocium recte disponere.
Laert. in vit. Chyl.
what he thought to be the hardest thing in the world; To keep Counsel,
quoth he. We say, it is good sleeping in a whole skin; but how can our sleeps
be quiet, our rest from terrors freed, when we have lost our liberty by
committing our Secrets to others trust?
Yea, but friendship, being one soul ruling two hearts, Aristot.
or one heart dwelling in two bodies, loses her prerogative, if excluded from
partaking in her friends griefs or comforts: for would you think it well,
that your friend should find you sad, Seneca.
and so leave you; sick, without ministering any comfort to you; or poor,
without releeving you? Surely, you could not choose but think such an one
comes to jest, rather than to visit or comfort you. Now, how should he
comfort you, who is wholly ignorant of the cause of your discomfort; or how
minister any receipts to you, when he knows not what distempers you; or how
releeve you, when he knows not of any poverty that has befallen you? Whereto
I answer, that these are not to be numbered among those Secrets which we hold
unfitting to be imparted or discovered, by one friend to another; for the
discovery of these may profit, but cannot prejudice us. Whereas, the disclosing
of such Secrets as concern our name, may afterward brand us with infamy; or
such as concern our state, may bring us to poverty; or such as concern our
life, may weave our unhappie web in a fearful tragedy. Therefore it is good
counsel, not to give our friend power over us, but with a circumspect eye to
take heed whom we entertain as a friend; and of what nature those Secrets are,
which we impart to that friend. When that unhappie Emperor Commodus had
communicated his secret'st thoughts to Martia, his best affected Concubine; and
withal, how his purpose was, before many days were ended, Sext. Aurel. in
vit. Commodi.
to dispatch Laetus and Electus, two of his Senators: She perceiving how the
world went, and that the Emperor was no less inconstant in his love, than
illimited in his lust, discovered to the Senators what the Prince had intended
against them; which to prevent, with one consent they resolved to dispatch the
Emperor, and so rid them of all occasion of fear. Far more hateful was
that act of Bessus and Nabarzanes, in discovering the counsels of their
unfortunate Prince Darius; which discovery, though it deposed their Prince of
Crown, and deprived him of life, rewarded those disloyal Traitors with a
deserved end. Should we but take a view of the doubleness and deceitfulness
of friends, whose only aims are, for most part, to take advantage of our
opennesse, we should find, 2 Samuel 15.32.
though there be some Hushaies, or faithful friends, so there be some false
Brethren, who secretly (under pretense of amity) will labor to undermine us.
For if we be great, we shall have some to ply our vein, soothing us with the
height of our place, the eminence of our state, our easy access to a higher
step, if we will take hold of occasion; and with these are young men, whose
unripened judgments never attained to the discovery of persons, chiefly
pleased, and to these are their secret'st thoughts ever imparted; on these are
they wholly planted, and in these is their principal trust reposed: yet lo,
they trust in broken staves of reed, 2 King. 18.21.
on which if they lean, they will go through their hand and pierce it. Again,
are we rising to greatness, and in the first Spring of promotion? We shall
find these chattering Swallows ever flying about us, pretending friendship and
secrecy in our counsels; but misery attends us, if we entertain them. To be
brief, are we rich? If we have discovered any Secret to them, which may
prejudice us being revealed, we shall be sure to have that Secret vented, if
our hollow coun^ellour be not rewarded. Are we poor? though our state need not
fear undoing, our Secrets must be discovered, if the meanest may be gratified
by the discovery. Thus no Rank may be exempted, no degree freed from
prejudice, where counsels are disclosed. Indeed sometimes it happens, that a
friend discovers the secrets of a friend; because, out of the justness of
himself, and the integrity of his own conscience, which no respect will
suffer him to violate, he cannot endure the sinister or indirect practice of
his friend, and therefore discovers it to give means of prevention to the
innocent. Which may be instanced in the ^ ^ount of Melin his confession,
who lying upon his deathbed here in England, Stow Annal. in vit. Johan.
disclosed the purpose of King Lewis his Master, to the chief Peers and
Barons of the Realm; who considering the inevitable danger into which they
were falling, by giving free entry to the French King, wisely in time (and but
in time) expulsed him, receiving their unhappie deposed King, to avoid an
ensuing mischief. Now the occasion of this discovery, though it be diverse
ways conjectured, yet the probablest in my opinion is, to refer it to the
compassion which Count Melin had of the English Nation, whose state had been,
to the judgment of all men, grievously shaken, had Lewis, as he was already
arrived, been peaceably possessed of the same. Now to conclude this point, I
hold that English proverb worthy our remembrance, in affairs of Secrecy:
One may keep counsel, but two cannot: implying, that it is the safest and
surest course to be a man's own Secretary, so shall ^e not give his friend
power over him, but sleep quietly without fear of discovery, having none but
his own breast to betray him to his enemy.

Reservancie in respect of our Substance.
The second thing, which, as we formerly noted, requires a Reservancie in us
toward our Acquaintance, is a respect to our Substance; which should neither
be lashed out lavishly, nor hoorded up niggardly. And herein I have observed a
great vanity in young Gentlemen, Sal^st.
who are no sooner mounted in their fathers saddle, or made heirs of his
providence, than upon purchase of Acquaintance, (which a young master cannot
want) he begins to squander his revenues upon gifts, to feed his thirsty
followers: but see the issue of these bountiful Novices, they change their
Acres into pieces, and so peece-meale divide them, till they fall all into
pieces, and have not one piece to cover them. So as, it is true which the Poet
has observed; The Prodigal and fool gives
Prodigus and stu^tus donat quae spernit, and odit. Horat. l. 1. ep. 7.
what he scorns and hates,
And with his state makes other men
to glory in their states.
Wherefore the lesson is good, and well deserves our observation, which is
given to us by the Son of Sirach: that not only to our friends, Acquaintance,
or the like, but even to our children, whose natural respect to their Parents,
should bind them to be grateful, we should not be too forward in distributing
our Substance, concluding thus: Ecclus. 33 21.
For better it is that thy children should pray unto thee, than that thou
should look up to the hands of thy children. If we be advised to use this
Reservancie to our own, even those whose natural affection will enforce
bounty at the Parents hand, much more to our Acquaintance, whose pretended
semblances, or outward protestations many times tend rather by fawning to feed
on us, than by true profession of friendship to bestead us. Oh Gentlemen, how
many through too easy a hold have exposed themselves, as a prey to the
avaritious desires of their followers; where many times it falls out, that
the servant is able to purchase his master, having enriched himself by feeding
his humor! Yet see the unthankfulness of many of these; having made them a
garment of their masters shreads, and raised themselves to a great estate by
his prodigality, they can learn to put on a scornful countenance toward
their landlesse master, entertain him with contempt, forget his bounty, and
ascribe all to their own thriving providence, which proceeded merely from his
profuseness. So well can these thriving Timists, who raise their fortunes from
their masters ruins, shape themselves to all times, that they may profit by
all means. There are Acquaintance likewise, whose aims as they extend only to
themselves, so they will use any indirect course, how irregular soever, to
bring their purpose about. And of these, we had a late example, even in our
own Country, and within the walls of this flourishing City: which example,
that it might remain to the memory of succeeding times, for the benefit
whereof, as well as of these present, our labors should be addressed, I
thought good here to set down. There was a young Gentleman, whose profuser
course having consumed much of his means, was enforced, upon some present
extremities urging him, to make a morgage of a piece of land, which piece was
the very last which he had left him: the money being lent and spent, and now
the un-foreseene day of payment approaching, the young Gentleman driven to an
exigent, made recourse by chance, to an ancient Acquaintance of his, by trade a
Chandler, who was a monied man, and could find a friend in a corner, who upon
a commodious bargain would at any time bestead him of a good Sum. He, the
Chandler I mean, noting what benefit the Morgage of the young Gentleman's land
might be unto him, if he redeemed his estate, which now lay a bleeding, and
took the Morgage into his own hand, concluded with the Gentleman, and
releeved his present wants, proposing a certain day for redemption of the said
Morgage: which was kindly accepted of by the Gentleman, little thinking how he
fell from the fire into the flame, and by avoiding Charybdis, had fallen into
Scylla. The time now drew near, which was limited the Gentleman to redeem
the premises: whence a double care or fear ensued; a fear and provident care
in the Gentleman of procuring money to redeem it; a fear in the Chandler,
lest it should be redeemed, and so the hopes he had of so beneficial a
bargain frustrated. Which to prevent, (mark the impiety of the age even in
this one example) the Chandler against the day limited and prefixed, repaires
to a consort of opportunate Agents for his purpose; Assacinates fleshed in all
mischief, and ready to embrace any motion, or engage themselves in any action,
which might minister fuel to their riot. And these he acquaints (as it seems
their Acquaintance was ancient) how he knew of a rich Booty for them, if they
had hearts to attempt, and resolutions to effect, what their present wants
enforced them to attempt. They desirous to hear of that booty, promising him
reward if their purpose came to effect, pressed him (as little pressing needed
to such a base instrument) that he would discover, where this booty might be
purchased. He imparted his mind freely, and told them that such a Gentleman
(being the same who had made a Morgage of his land unto him) was to come
provided of a great Sum of money, upon such a day, and by such a place, as
gave opportunity for the attempt, which they might easily obtain, having none
but himself and his man to resist them. They, at the first seemed jealous of
him, imagining it was some fetch merely to entrap and circumvent them; but
being more confident upon his protestations, that his purpose was to benefit
them, not to betray them; they generally consented to this plot, provided that
they might have his company, not only to direct them, but share and partake
with them: whereto the Chandler condescended, choosing rather to be an
assistant in the practice, than prevented of his purpose. To be short, vizards
and disguises were provided, and all things fitted, that such an attempt might
be furthered: where, by direction of their Leader, they took their stand,
where the unfortunate Gentleman was to pass; who, within some few hours
after, came according to their expectance, provided of a Sum purposely to
redeem his estate (the last remainder of his fortunes) out of the hands of the
Chandler. But he is intercepted and bid stand, whose present occasions admit no
stay: and in brief, stripped of all his money, and bound, he and his man, and
thrown into a gravell-pit, where we leave them: and return to this
perfidious Chandler, who expecting to be a sharer as well in the stake, as in
the forfeiture of his estate, is by his witty Copesmates used after another
sort than he looked for; being bound hand and foot, and thrown into a ditch
adjoining; where he remained, till a Shepherds boy having occasion to come that
way, hearing one pitiously mourning, drew near to the place where he heard
the voice; but seeing only there bound in an ugly vizard, and disguised after
an uncoth manner, as one afraid, he run from him, albeit the Chandler humbly
entreated him, to lend his helping hand to loose him. The noise which the
Chandler made, desiring aid from the Shepherd, and the Shepherd denying aid to
the Chandler, was now come to the care of the afflicted Gentleman, and his man:
wherefore they sent out their complaint, as men pitifully distressed; which the
Shepherd hearing, came forth with to the place where they lay bound, and seeing
the Gentleman, and his man, lent them his helping hand, and delivered them from
their bonds: directing them withal, to the Pit where the Chandler his
treacherous Acquaintance lay, whom he knew by his disguise to be one of those,
who had taken his money from him: but having pulled off his vizard, and
perceived him to be none but the Chandler, his professed friend* you may
imagine what diversity of perplexed thoughts encountered him; but suspecting
the worst, which after proved the truest, he caused him to be brought before a
Justice, where he was examined touching the premises, which, to his shame he
confessed, discovering himself to be both Actour and Author of that
perfidious complot. For which, being committed, and legally tried, he was
adjudged according to his desert, to receive the condign punishment of death.
Whose goods being confiscate, our late Prince of renowned memory, out of his
royal compassion to the Gentleman's estate, allotted so much in his princely
bounty, as redeemed his engaged lands, repossessing him thereof to his great
joy, and an example to succeeding ages, not to repose too much confidence in
the profession of Acquaintance. Many examples of like sort (though this may
seem imparallel) might be here produced, but I cannot insist upon this point.
What has been herein discoursed, principally tends to this end and purpose,
to deter young Gentlemen from discovering themselves too openly to these
glozing and temporizing Acquaintance, whose only aim is to benefit themselves
by their weakness, and make their prodigality the only foundation of their
providence. Whence it is, that many times they become enrichers of their
retinue, but beggerers of their posterity. And which is of all others most
miserable, those, whose Sponges they were, and had squeased them of all their
fortunes, will contemptuously demean themselves toward them, and unthankfully
slight them, who by impoverishing their own means, have enriched them; whose
natures in the person of one especial ungrateful man, are to life expressed
by the Poet; Ragg'd rocks him bred, Nascitur escopulu, nutritus lacte serino,
Et dicam silices pectus habere suum. Ovid.
brute beasts him fed,
No thankfulness can enter
His seared Breast, or sealed Chest,
which is of flintie temper.
And let this suffice to be spoken of Reservancie toward Acquaintance, both in
respect of our secrecy of counsel; lest by discovering our selves either upon
confidence of another trust, or transported with passion, (the end whereof is
the beginning of repentance) we give out friend power over us, and so by too
credulous trust bewray our own weakness: or in respect of our Substance; by a
prodigal bounty to our friends and followers, without respect had of our
means, and so make our followers our masters. So as, it is right wholesome
counsel, which that wise Son of Sirach gave, and which we formerly
alleged, but cannot be too often renewed; Ecclus. 33.18.
Give not away thy Substance to another, lest it repent thee, and thou entreat
for the same again: 28.
concluding with this excellent precept; Be not excessive toward any, and
without discretion do nothing. Now excuse me, Gentlemen, if I have insisted
longer on these two points, than the quality of the Subject we have in hand,
might seem to require: for I am not ignorant how many of your rank have
unfortunately fallen on these two dangerous shelves, either, I mean, by too
open a discovery of themselves, or by too prodigal a hand in giving, what they
may afterward stand in need of to releeve themselves. But of these we shall
have occasion to speak more amply in our discourse of Moderation; mean time,
let this lesson be ever imprinted in the Tablet of your memory: Impart your
Mind, but not your Secrets; give where you see desert, but with such
Reservance, as it may neither repent you to have given, having extended your
bounty to such as are thankful; nor grieve you to have discovered your
selves, having imparted your mind to such as are faithful.

Of the absolute end of Acquaintance.
IT is a maxim in Philosophy: Whatsoever is, it is for some end: so as all our
counsels, and consultations, businesses and negotiations, have ever an eye or
aim to some special end, to which they are properly directed. For as we see
in Elementary bodies, every one by natural motion tends to their own proper
center, as light bodies upward, heavy ones downward, being places wherein they
are properly said to rest or repose: even so in Arts and Sciences, or the
proper Objects to which they are directed, and wherein they are peculiarly said
to be conversant, there is ever a certain end proposed, to which, and in which
their aims are limited or confined. Whence it is, that excellent Moral says,
Omni^ labor alisquo reseratur, aliquo respiciat, Sen. de tranq. anim. Cornel.
Gall.
That every Task, Labor or Employment must have reference and respect to some
end: which the Poet confirms, saying; All things which are, must have a
proper end,
To which by course of Nature, they do tend.
So as in my opinion, there is nothing which proceeds in a course more contrary
to Nature, than Suits of Law, whose Object is end without end; consuming time
and substance in frivolous delays, and multiplicitie of Orders, which like
Hydra's heads, by lopping off or annulling one, gives way to decreeing of
another. Now to enter into discourse of the absolute end of Acquaintance, we
are as well to reprove the indirect ends, which some make of it, as approve of
those good and absolute ends for which it was ordained. Wherefore to come unto
the point, we are to understand that Acquaintance is nothing else but a
familiar friendship, Seneca.
or friendly familiarity, which we have one with another. Now there is nothing
which does comparably delight the mind, like a faithful friendship; being, as
the Stagyrian Philosopher well defines it;
One soul which rules two hearts, Aristot.
and one heart which dwells in two bodies. So as, of all possessions
friendship is most precious, where we are to make no other estimate of our
friends life, Laert. in vit. Biant.
than of our own glory: a friend being nothing else than a second self, and
therefore as individuate as man from himself. How much then is this sweet
union or communion of minds abused, when friendship is only made a stale of,
professing love and familiarity only for our own ends? And where shall we
come, where this abuse of friendship and sociable Acquaintance is not
practiced? In the Court we shall find smooth and sweetsented friends, who make
friendship a complement, and vow themselves ours in Protests, Congies, and
Salutes: but whereto tend they, but to wind us in, and so become engaged for
them? For it stands with reason, think they, as we are familiar with them in
complements of courtesy, so they should be familiar with us in the Mercers
book. Too precious are these men's Acquaintance, and too heavy their
engagements; let us therefore turn from them, and travel toward the City.
And what shall we find there, but many dangerous and subtle friends, who like
politic Tradesmen, having heard of our estates, and how we are come to years
to dispose of them, will profess themselves to be our Contrymen, in which
respect we cannot choose, but make bold with them and their commodities rather
than any stranger? Yet it is strange to see how strangely and unconscionably
they will use us, making ever their commodities vendible with protestations,
and binding them upon us with terms of courtesy. We must then needs conclude,
that these men tender friendship but only for their own ends. We are
therefore to seek further, and descend to the Country, where we are likest
to find them. Yet see, the general infection of this Age! We shall find
there, even where simplicity and plain dealing used ever to keep home, great
monied men, who to enrich their seldome-prospering Heirs, will offer us any
courtesy, and to show they love us, they will lend us, to support our state,
and maintain our riot: but observe their aims; in feeding us, they feed on
us; in succouring us, they soake us; for having made a prey of us, they leave
us. Likewise, we shall find there, many Summer-Swallowes, and find that
Sentence in them verified; Though one Swallow make no Summer, yet one man's
Summer makes many Swallows. Where then shall we find them? Surely in all
these places which we have traced: for in the Court, we shall find friends no
less complete than complementall; in the City, friends no less trusty than
substantial; and in the Country, friends no less faithful than real.
Ecclus. 6.13.8.
Notwithstanding, we are taught to beware of our friends; and the reason is
this, for that some man (...) a friend for his own occasion, and will not
abide in the day of trouble. Having now made choice of such friends and
Acquaintance, as may seem to deserve both our knowledge and acceptance, we
are to respect the aim or end to which all friendship and Acquaintance may
truly and properly be referred. Which (as we formerly observed) is not only
matter of gain or worldly profit, as these Brokers and sellers of amity
esteem it: for, as much friendship may be found in Cheap amongst the Huxters,
or in Smith-field with the Horse-coupers, as these profess. But rather, how we
may benefit the inward man by a friendly conversation one with another. For
which cause (as we have elsewhere noted) came Plato forth of Asia into Cilicia
to see and converse with his dear friend Phocion,
Nicaula the rich Saban Queen, to visit Solomon; Brutus the sincere Roman, to
converse with Vtican. These, though Pagans, so highly valued knowledge, as
their aim was to entertain friendship with knowing-men, purposely to
increase, at least preserve their knowledge. For Learning, which is the
producer of knowledge, has ever had such exquisite and admirable effects, as
it has gained due and deserved esteem, not only in respect of opinion, but
title and honorable approbation. So as, Nathan Citraeus writes, In
It^nera^io. page 444.
that in Prage, an University of Bohemia, where John Hus, and Hierom of Prag^
professed, that, they that have continued professors for the space of twenty
years together, are created Earls and Dukes both together. And therefore their
style is to be called Illustres, whereas they which are singly and simply but
only either Earls or Dukes, are called Spectabiles. Neither makes it any
matter that they have no revenewes, to maintain Earledomes or Dukedomes: for
they have the title notwithstanding, even as Suffragans have of Bishops. This
esteem of Learning was no less effectually expressed by one, who encountering
with a Scholar, who through necessity was enforced to turn beggar, cried out;
A Scholar and a Beggar too! Scolasti^us and Mendi^u^; ^ S^^ulacea^a!

The Age is blind does plainly show.
Yet how contemptible Riches (that worldlings Idol) has ever been to these,
whose conceits were not engaged to pelf, nor their affections to desire of
having, may appear by the admirable contempt of diverse Pagans toward riches,
preferring a voluntary poverty before all worldly possessions. This might be
instanced in Anacharsis, who refused the treasure sent him by Croesus; Nonne
alterius seculi (...) est transire per terram auri sine auro? Bern. de Consid.
lib 4. Zeno noster cum omnis su^ audiret submersa, jubet (inqui^) ^e fortuna
expeditius Philosophari. Sen. de tranq. anim.

Morgam vos ne mergar a vobis. Magnum est malum non posse far malum. Sen.


in Anacreontes, who refused the treasure sent him by Polycrates; and Albionus,
who refused the treasure sent him by Antigonus. The like indifferency toward
riches, appeared in the admirable and inimitable patience of Zeno, who hearing
all his substance to be drowned by shipwreck upon the Sea; Fortune (quoth he)
bids me to address my self to Philosophy more speedily. The like in Mimus,
who threw his goods into the Sea, saying; Pack hence ye evils, for ye were
hindrances to me in my pursuit after better goods; it is better for me to
drown you, than be drowned by you. Whence it was that Demetrius was wont to
say, That nothing could be more unhappy than that man, to whom no adversity
ever happened: for that opinion, even amongst the Ethnicks has been generally
held for most authentic, That nothing can be truly said to be good or evil,
but a good or evil mind. Sen. de mal. accident. bonis. lib. 1.
Now whereas we have sufficiently proved, that no true friendship can be but
only amongst good men, (I mean morally or civilly good) and that aim in the
profession of friendship or Acquaintance, is either to better them, or be
bettered by them: we are in like sort to make this our aim or supreme end,
that having made choice of such whose eminent parts deserve our respect and
acceptance, we are to employ our time in conversing and conferring with them,
the better to enable us in employments public or private. Neither is this only
the absolute aim or end of friendship, for so we should infer that our
acception or intertainment of friends had reference only to our own private
ends, without relation to him with whom we have entered the lists of
Acquaintance. We are therefore to have an eye to these especial offices of
friendship, being such as deserve our observation and imitation, if so be we
deserve the name or title of friends. First is, if we see our friend doubtful
or unresolved, to advise him; Especial offices wherein friendship and
Acquaintance should be exercised.
if afflicted, to comfort him; if sick or restrained, to visit him; if weak
in estate or impoverished, to releeve him; if injured, to labor by all means
to right him; and in all things to be helpful to him, supplying his necessity
by apparent testimonies of our approved amity. It is reported, that on a time,
Duke Godwin bringing up a service to Edward the Confessors Table, he chanced to
slip with one of his feet, but to recover himself with the other; whereupon
presently he used these words in the Kings hearing; One brother supports
another. O (quoth the King) so might I have said too, if Godwin had not been!
meaning, that he was the cause of his brothers death, whose life was a staff
to his state, but his fall a weakening to his feet. Certainly, every faithful
friend should be as a Brother, or as in a natural body one member ministers
aid and succor to another; where the head cannot say to the foot, I have no
need of thee, nor the foot to the hand, but every one in their distinct and
mutual offices are ready to execute their several duties: So, I say, should
friends and Acquaintance be one to another; not in preying or feeding one upon
another, as if all were fish that came to net, for this were to make no
difference or distinction betwixt friend or foe, but for some intendment of
private benefit to dissolve the strict bond of friendship. Whereas a friend,
being indeed a man's second self, or rather an individuate companion to
himself, Arist.
(for there is one soul which rules two hearts, and one heart which dwells
in two bodies) should be valued above the rate of any outward good, Maxima
f^lici^as hujus mundi consistit in amicis. Boe^. de consol. Phil.
being such a happiness, as he gives a relish to the days of our pilgrimage,
which otherwise would seem like a wilderness: for the world, as it is both to
be loved and hated; loved, as it is the work of the Creator; hated, as the
instrument of temptation unto sin; ministers some few hours of delight to
the weary pilgrim, by the company and socie^ie of friends, recou^se and
concourse of Acquaintance, without which comfort, how tedious and grievous
would these few years of our desolate pilgrimage appear? How highly then are
we to value the possession of a good friend, who partakes with us in our
comforts and discomforts, in the frowns and fawnes of fortune, showing
himself the same both in our weal and woe? Nemo me amicus ben^sicen^ia, nemo
inferend^ injuria ^imicus superavit. Plut. in vit. Syll.
It is written of Sylla, that never any did more good to his friends, or more
harm to his enemies. Which princely courtesy to his friends could not choose
but increase them, howsoever his extreme courses toward his enemies might
seem rather to inrage than appease them. For as remembrance of benefits argues
a noble nature, so forgetting of injuries (having in the mean time power to
revenge) implies a bravely resolved temper. Posse and nolle, nobile.
Whence it was, that Themistocles, when Symmachus told him, he would teach him
the art of memory,
answered, he had rather learn the art of forgetfulness; saying, he could
remember enough, but many things he could not forget, which were necessary to
be forgotten. As the overweening conceit of himself, indignities done him by
his foes, opposition in the quest of honor, and the like; all which a great
mind could hardly brook, being so illimited as he can admit of no corrivall
in his pursuit of honor. But to descend to the greatest benefit which proceeds
from friendship, Commerce and Acquaintance: we shall find how miserable the
state and condition of this flourishing Island had been, whose Halcyon days
have attained that prerogative of peace, which most parts of Christendom are
at this day deprived of; had not the friendly compassion, and devout zeal of
sundry learned and faithful instruments of Christ, delivered her from that
palpable blindness and Heathenish Idolatry under which she was long detained
captive. Vsque ad adventum Christi, Brita^nia fertilis provincia tyrannorum,
and Scoticae gentes, omnesque usque ad Ocean^m per circuitum barbarae nationes,
Moysen Prophetasque ignorabant.
S. Jerome in the end of his Dialogue against the Pelagians writes thus:
Until the very coming of Christ, (says he) the Province of Britain, which
has been oftentimes governed by Tyrants, and the Scottish people, and all the
Nations round about the Ocean Sea, were utterly ignorant of Moses and the
Prophets. So that then, by the testimony of S. Jerome, all our Religion was
superstition, all our Church Service was Idolatry, all our Priests were
Painims, all our gods were Idols. And to appropriate to every Nation their
peculiar god, there was then in Scotland the Temple of Mars; in Cornwall the
Temple of Mercury; in Bangor in Wales, the Temple of Minerva; in Stow Annal.
in vita Morgani.
Malden in Essex, the Temple of Camdeni Britan. in Essexia.
Victoria; in Bath, the Temple of Apollo; in Leycester, the Temple of Ianus; in
York, where Peter's is now, the Temple of Stow Annal. in vita Bladud and Leyre
Regum, and Severi Imperatoris.
Bellona; in London, where Paul's is now, the Temple of Iuellus in Tractat. de
sacris Scripturis. page 129.

Act 19.28.


Diana. Therefore it is very likely, that they esteemed as highly then of the
Goddess Diana in London, as they did in Ephesus; and that as they cried there,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, so they cried here, being deluded with the
same spirit, Great is Diana of the Londoners. Even no more than 53. years
before the incarnation of Christ, when Julius Caesar came out of France into
England, so absurd, senseless and stupid were the people of this Land, that
instead of the true and ever-living Lord, they served these Heathenish and
abominable Idols, Templum Christi ^n te^ plum Iov^s, Mariae in Veneris diceres
^onversa. D Aeg^^^ius.
Mars, Mercury, Minerva, Victoria, Apollo, Ianus, Bellona, Diana, and such
like. And not long after, to wit, Anno Christi 180. King Lucius being first
Christened himself, forthwith established Religion in this whole Kingdom. But
thanks, thanks be to God, in the time of the New Testament, three and fifty
years after the incarnation of Christ, when Joseph of Arimathea came out of
France into England, many in this Realm of blind and ignorant Pagans, became
very zealous and sincere Christians. For Saint Philip the Apostle, after he had
preached the Gospel throughout all France, at length sent Joseph of Arimathea
hither into England: Who, when he had converted very many to the Faith, died in
this Land, and he that buried the body of Christ, was buried in Gildas* l^b de
victoria A^tchi A^.
Glastenbury himself. Also Simon Zelotes, another Apostle, after he had
preached the Gospel thorowout all Mauritania, at length came over into England:
who, when he had declared likewise to us the doctrine of Christ crucified, was
in the end crucified himself, and buried here in Nicephorus l. 2. cap 40.
Britain. About this time D^rotheus in Synopsi. cap. 23. Rom 16.10. 2 Timothy
4.21. The flourishing state of the Church, amidst many hoarie winters of
innovation.
Aristobulus, one of the seventie Disciples, whom Saint Paul mentions in his
Epistle to the Romans, was a reverend and renowned Bishop in this Land. Also
Claudia a noble English Lady, whom Saint Paul mentions in his second Epistle
to Timothy, was here amongst us a famous professor of the faith. Since which
time, though the civil state has been often turned up-side down by the
Romans, by the Saxons, by the Danes, by the Normans, yet the Gospel of Christ
has never utterly failed or been taken from us. This the holy Fathers of the
Church, which have lived in the ages next ensuing, do declare. Tertullian, who
lived Anno 200. writes thus; Advers. Iudae. cap. 3. H^spaniarum omnes termini,
and Galliarum diversae nationes, and Britanna um i^accessa Romany l^ca Christo
vero subdita.
All the coasts of Spain, and diverse parts of France, and many places of
Britain, which the Romans could never subdue with their sword, Christ has
subdued with his word. Origin, who lived Anno 260. writes thus; Hom. 4. in
Ezekiel. Qu^ndoterra Britanniae ant^ adventum Christi^n univ^ Dei cons ^sit
relig^onem? Nunc vero uni^^^sa terra cum leticia clamat ad Dominum.
Did the I Will of Britain before the coming of Christ, ever acknowledge the
faith of one God? No; but yet now, all that Country sings joyfully unto the
Lord. Constantine the Great, the glory of all the Emperors, borne here in
England, and of English blood, who lived Anno 306. writes in an Epistle thus;
Socrat. l. 1. c. 9.
Whatsoever custom is of force in all the Churches of Egypt, Spain, France,
and Britain, look that the same be like wise ratified among you. Saint
Chrysostom, who lived An. 405. writes thus; Hom. 18. in 2 Cor.
In all places wheresoever you go into any Church, whether it be of the
Moors, or of the Persians, or even of the very Isles of Britain, you may hear
John Baptist preaching. Saint Jerome, who lived Anno 420. writes thus; Epist.
ad Ev^grium. Anno 500.

Columbanus in Anglio, Palladius in Scoli^, Patritius in Hibernia s^o^uit.


The Frenchmen, the Englishmen, they of Africa, they of Persia, and all
barbarous Nations worship one Christ, and observe one rule of religion.
Theodoret, who lived Anno 450. writes thus; Advers. Grae. lib. 9.
The blessed Apostles have induced Englishmen, the Danes, the Saxons, in one
word, all people and countries, to embrace the doctrine of Christ. Gregory the
Great, who lived An. 605. writes thus; Epist. lib. 2. cap. 58.
Who can sufficiently express, how glad all the faithful are, for that the
Englishmen have forsaken the darkness of their errors, and have again
received the light of the Gospel? Beda, who lived Anno 730. writes thus;
Hist. lib. 1. c. 1.
England at this present is inhabited by Englishmen, Britains, Scots, Picts,
and Romans, all which though they speak several tongues, yet they profess
but one faith. Thus you see, how the Gospel of Christ, having been first
planted in this Land, by Joseph of Arimathea, and Simon Zelotes (in whose time
Aristobulus and Claudia, and not long after King Lucius also lived) has ever
since continued amongst us; as testifies Tertullian, Vide praeter caeteros
n^cn inu^ melyti nominis, vitam B^rnard^. lil. 2 cap. 7. and. Bernard. de
considerat. lib 3.
Origin, Constantine the Great, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Jerome, Theodoret,
Gregory, Beda, and many more, which might here have been alleged.

Now, how singular and exquisite a benefit have our Progenitors received, by
means of these faithfu^l professors of the Gospel, and first planters of the
Christian faith here in this Island? What a miserable famine of the Word had the
people of this Land sustained, if these faithful friends and sincere Witnesses
of the truth, had not loosed from the shore, and embarked themselves in danger,
to deliver them from the danger of souls shipwreck? In which danger, we
likewise had been sharers, had not this so rich a fraught, so inestimable a
prize rescued us from danger, and directed our feet in the way of peace. The
story of Theseus includes an excellent Moral; whose love to his dear friend
Perithous, the Poet laboring to express, shows how he went down to hell, of
purpose to deliver his friend from the thraldom of Pluto, under whom he
remained captive. Which without offense or derogation, Si mi^cere licet
figmentis sacra pr^fa^is.
may properly seem to allude, (next to that inimitable mirror of divine
amity) to these noble and heavenly Warriors, who descended (as it were) even
to the jaws of hell, encountering with the insolent affronts of many barbarous
Assassinates, ready to practice all hostility upon them. Yet see their
undanted spirits! their godly care inflamed with the zeal of devotion, and
their love to the members of Christ, kindled with the coal of brotherly
compassion, made them as ready to endure, as those hellish fiends and furies,
the enemies of the truth, were ready to inflict; choosing rather to perish in
the body, than to suffer the poorest soul, bought with so high a price, to be
deprived of the hope of glory. These were good and kind friends, being such as
would not stick to lay down their lives for their friends; suffering all
things with patience and puissance of mind, to free their distressed brethren
from the servile yoke of hellish slavery, and bring them by means of Gods
Spirit, by which they were directed, to the knowledge of the allseeing verity.
In upupae nido lapis est diversi coloris, qui tam occultae est virtutis ut
gerentem p^ane invisibilem ^od let.

Albert. Mag. Basil.


Such as these profess not friendship under pretenses or glozing semblances,
making their heart a stranger to their tongue, or walking invisible, as if they
had found the stone in the Lapwings nest; but as they are, so they appear,
affecting nothing but what is sincerely good, and by the best approved. Their
absolute aim or end of friendship is to improve, reprove, correct, reform,
and conform the whole Image of that man with whom they converse, to his
similitude whom all men represent. If at any time they enter into discourse, it
ever tends to fruitful instruction; if at any time they enter into serious
meditation of the world, their meditation is not how to purchase estate, or
fish after honor, or build a foundation on oppression, to enrich their
posterity with the fruits of their injurious dealing. No, they have the
testimony of a good conscience within them, which testifies for them, should
the world and all her Accomplices bandie against them. Wherefore, admit they
should be put to all extremities, and suffer all the indignities which envy or
malice could dart upon them, the weight of every injury is to be measured by
the sense or feeling of the sufferer; Omnis injuria in sensu patientis.
for the apprehension of the Sufferer makes the injury offered, Gravis est
miseria inique fere^ti, suavis au^em est divino amore serv^^t^.
great or little; if he conceit it small or no injury, howsoever others esteem
it, the burden of the wrong is light, and therefore more easily sleights it.

Now Gentlemen, we have traced over the whole progress of Acquaintance,
wherein if happily it be thought, that we have sojourned too long, my answer is;
that in passages of greatest danger, there is required more circumspection,
than rashly to go on without due deliberation. And what occurrent in all the
passage or pilgrimage of man, is beset with more danger than the choice of
Acquaintance; especially to you Gentlemen, whose means is the Adamant of
Acquaintance? We have therefore insisted the longer upon this Subject, that
you may be the less subject to such, who will wind them in with you, of
purpose to feed and prey on you. To cure which malady, no receipt more
sovereign, than to imprint in your memory that golden rule or princely
precept, recommended by that pious and puissant Saint Lewis to his son
Philip, in these words: Have especial care that those men, whose Acquaintance
and familiarity you shall use, be honest and sincere, whether they be
Religious or Secular; with whom you may converse friendly, and communicate your
counsels freely; but by all means avoid the company of naughty and wicked
men: Praecept. 9 vid. Gaguin. lib. 7. Hist. Franc. Sur. Tom. 4.
whose society ever tends to inordinate respects. Take these Cautions
therefore as the last, but not least worthy your observation. Be not too rash
in the choice of your Acquaintance, for that shows weakness; Nor inconstant
to those you have chosen, for that argues lightness; Nor too forward in the
discovery of your counsels, for so you might be taxed of too much opennesse;
ever aiming at that absolute end of Acquaintance, to profit more and more in
the practice of goodness. So shall God be your Guide, good men your friends,
and your Country where you had education, receive much glory from your life and
conversation.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Moderation defined; No virtue can subsist without it; Wherein it is to be
used; Wherein to be limited; Of the accomplished end which attends it.

MODERATION.
IN the whole progress of man's life, Observat. 7.
which is nothing else, but a medley of desires and fears; we shall find, that
there is no one virtue which does better adorn or beautify man, than
Temperance or Moderation; which indeed is given as an especial attribute to
man, purposely to distinguish him from brute beasts, whose only delight is
enjoying the benefit of Sense, without any further aim.

THis Moderation therefore, being a note of distinction betwixt man and beast,
let us draw near to the knowledge of this so exquisite a virtue; Moderation
defined.
which, that we may the better attain, let us first see how she is defined:
because every instruction grounded upon reason touching any subject, Omnis quae
a ratione suscipitur de al qua re institutio, debet a definitione p^oficisci,
ut intellig^tur quid sit id, de quo disputetur. Cic. offic. lib. 1.
ought to proceed from a definition, that we may the better understand what
that is, whereof we dispute. Moderation is a subduer of our desires to the
obedience of Reason, and a temperate conformer of all our affections, freeing
them from the too much subjection either of desires or fears. First, it
causes our Desires to be subject to the obedience of reason, pulling us
always by the sleeve, and remembering us how we are men and partakers of
reason, and therefore ought not to subject our Desires to the captivity of
Sense, as brute beasts which have no reason. Secondly, it is a conformer of all
our affections, freeing them from all unworthy subjection, either in respect of
our Desires or Fears: of our Desires, as having learned in all things to be
contented, whether that portion wherewith God has blessed us, be little or
great: of our Fears, as suffering no worldly thing to be so nearly endeered
to us, as to fear the losing of it, which we so dearly tender. For the first,
it is an excellent saying of a sage Moral, There is no difference between
having, Nihil interest an habeas, an non concupiscas. Sen.
and not desiring; for he that desires nothing, enjoyes more than he that
possesses the whole world; for his desires are satisfied, which the worldling
can never be, so long as his thoughts and desires are to the objects of earth
engaged: so as, the difference betwixt the poor wanting, and rich not using,
is by these two expressed, the one carendo,
the other, non fruendo: whereas, if the poor having little, desire no more
than that little which they have, they become rich in desire, and enjoy by
desiring little, more above estimate than the dunghill wretch (whose eyes
cannot enjoy themselves for coveting) will ever be master off. For as men sick
of an Atrophy, eat much, but thrive not; so these, though they devour widows
houses, feed upon the fat of the Land, lay land unto land, and hoord up
treasure to enrich a progeny of rioters, yet these seldom thrive with the fat
of their oppressions, but make oft-times as fearful ends, as their beginnings
were calm and prosperous. It is a singular blessing, which the Poet attributes
to one, who was not only rich, but could enjoy that he had freely; God gave
thee wealth, Dii tibi divitias dederant, artemque fruendi. Hor. epist. lib. 1.
and power to use it too,
Which these Earth-wormes of ours can never do.
Neither only in matters of Desire, are we to entertain the choice company of
Moderation, but in our Fears, where we many times fear to forgo, what we
already with much content enjoy. So as, the former direct their aim to what
they have not; but the latter stand surprised with fear, left they should
leese what they already have: the former argues an avaritious mind, who can
never confine his Desires to what it has; the latter a worldly besotted
affection, that can never find heart to forgo what it already enjoyes. A
Philosopher perceiving Dionysius to sit merrily in the Theater, after he was
expulsed his Realm, condemned the people who banished him: Certainly, this
Prince showed an admirable Moderation, both in respect of his Desires and
Fears; first, in his Desires, extending not his thoughts above that low verge
whereto his Tyranny had forced him; nor fearing any succeeding loss, being
above the reach of greater misery. This Moderation appeared in Furius Camillus,
whom neither Honor could too much transport, Plutarch. in vit. Camill.
nor disgrace cast down; bearing the former with no less temperance, than he
did the latter with patience; and esteeming it his only conquest, to conquer
passion in the height of affliction. It is likewise a great argument of
Moderation, when in extremity, we stand prepared to encounter with the worst of
danger, passing al inducements to fear, with a mind no less resolute than
cheerful, saluting affliction with a smile, and entertaining surmises of
danger with a jest. This did Cr^ssu^, who being willed by the Arabian guides to
make haste before the Moon was past Scorpio; (...). Alex.
But I (said he) fear more Sagittarie, meaning the Archers of Persia. There is
nothing which expresses more true worth in any man, than his constancy and
courage in the encounters of this life; imitating, in this respect, Vespasian,
who upon the instant of his Dissolution, when death had summoned him to make
present surrender, by paying his debt to Nature, of that short Lease of life,
which with many an unquiet hour he had traced, standing up upon his feet,
used these words; It became an Emperor to take his leave of earth standing:
implying, that the extremities which either Nature or Fortune could inflict
upon him, Plutarch. in vit. V^spas.
could not so much deject him, or by their assaults enforce him to do ought
unworthy himself. Whence we are taught (and well may this lesson deserve our
observation) to entertain this life with patience, Habere vitam in patientia,
^ ortem in des^d^rio. Sen.
expecting death with a desired assurances for there is no better means to
moderate the passions of Desire and Fear, than to enter into meditation of the
world; and withal to consider, how there is nothing of that esteem in the
world, that may seem worthy our Desire, coveting to have it, or worthy our
Fear, inwardly doubting to lose it. This serious consideration will be of
force to move the greatest worldling to a Moderation of his desires, subjecting
them to the obedience of reason. Whereas, if he should give reins to his own
Avarice,
Ericthous bowels could not contain more in proportion, than his in an
illimited desire and affection: for the World, being like a City without a
wall, a house without a door, a ship without helm, a pot without a cover, and
a horse without a bridle; has brought out people equally consorting with her
in nature and temper; of unbridled and uncorrigible dispositions, naturally
affected to all sensual liberty, preferring one minutes pleasure or profit,
Caberes Christi, quid gaudes? quia sucius es pecorum? Aug.
before an eternity of succeeding pleasures and profits, reserved for those
only whose lives are employed in promoting their Makers glory, being wholly
addressed to please him; and whose deaths, like the choicest odours, send out a
sweet smell, the perfume of a good and virtuous life, sending out a voice, even
in their last period to praise him. What admirable moderation diverse ancient
Princes have shown, especially in their contempt to the glory and pomp of
this life, Histories can afford sufficient examples; but to omit foreign
instances, my purpose is to insert here one of our own, which, by how much
more near us, by so much deeper impression should it enforce in us. Canutus,
that was absolute King almost of five Kingdoms, somewhat before the Conquest,
upon a time in his Progress riding near the Thames, light and sat down
before the shore: then, as it were to try a conclusion, he commanded the water
being now-ready to arise again and to ^low, not to come any nearer him. But
the water keeping his natural course, came up still higher and higher, till it
began to wet him. Whereupon to his Nobles, which were about him, Ye call me
(says he) your King and Master, and so indeed I am; and yet lo ye, I cannot
command so much as this little stream; but do what I can, that will do still
as it lift. Whereupon presently he posted to Westminster, and resigned his
Crown to the Crucifix there; neither could he ever after this be persuaded to
wear it any more. The like indifferency to all princely honors, showed those
memorable Saxons, Kingulfus, Iva, Ceodulphus, Eadbertus, Ethelredus, Keredus,
Offa, S^bbi, Sigeberius. Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, gave up his
Empire into the hands of the Princes Electors, and withdrew himself in the
year 1557. into a Monastery. The like of late years did his son King
Philip of Spain. Neither need we to exemplify this subject, touching
contempt of the world, only in such as the glorious light of the Gospel had
shone upon, but such whose times of darkness had never attained to so blessed
a Sunshine: As may be instanced in Dioclesian, Mihi credit, mori mallem quam
imperare. Oth^.
who voluntarily relinquished the flourishingest Empire in the world. Yea, to
add one example more, even amongst those, whose best Religion is Policy, and
whose only aims are to enlarge their own Soveraigntie. Amurah the second,
Emperor of the Turks, after he had gotten infinite victories, became a Monk
of the straightest Order amongst them, in the year of our Lord 1449. All which
may seem to confirm what Seleuchus being King was wont to say, Curia curis
stringitur, Diadema spinis cingitur. Aphorism.
That if a man knew with what cares a Diadem was clogged, he would not take it
up, though it lay in the street. So as, when the Romans had despoiled Antiochus
of all Asia, he gave them great thanks, saying, they had rid him of many
insupportable cares.

Now, as we have defined this virtue to be a subduer of our desires to the
obedience of reason, and a temperate conformer of all our affections; so are
we to direct our eye to the conclusion, to wit, a freer of the affections from
the too much subjection either of desires or fears. So as, we are here to
observe, that he is the man whom our definition only aims at, whose
well-tempered breast is neither transported with a desire of enjoying what it
has not, nor surprised with a fear of losing what it now enjoyes. Having so
much as may content him, the loss whereof should he sustain, could nere
deject him. Such an one the Tragic Poet entitleth a Prince, as one too worthy
to be numbered among the inferior rank: Sen. in Thiost.
Who fears, desires, and stifling cares suppress,
Are Kings at least, they can be nothing less.
For these are they who have absolute soveraigntie over their passions, and in
prosperity scorn as much to be proud, as in adversity to show themselves
base. Yea, they will rather entertain the extremest encounters that Misery
can lay upon them, than lose the least of that liberty of mind, with which
their noble temper has endued them. In brief, those only who dis-value
sublunary things, esteeming them as they are, only to minister to our
necessity, and not to rear them, as blind worldlings use, in the tabernacle
of their heart to commit idolatry, keep consort with this Definition; for the
golden mean, as it is only approved by them, so in a princely moderation of
their affections, they are ever readiest to enter lists with their own
passions, that if any either exceed or come short of this mean, they may so
square and hammer it till it be reduced to a proposed mean. And let this
suffice, for the Definition: we will now descend to the second branch, wherein
we intend to show, that no virtue can subsist without Moderation, being indeed
the temper which allayeth and aptly disposes all our actions, making them
equally seasoned, which otherwise would become violent and immoderate.

AS Moderation is a subduer of every inordinate or indisposed affection, No
virtue can subsist without it.
so is it a seasoner or temperer of all our actions, making them seem worthy
the title of virtuous, which without this temper would appear vicious. For
without this Moderation, he that is liberal should incur the name of
prodigal, the frugall the name of miserable, the resolute be termed dissolute,
the moral civil man a coward, the wise Stoicall, the regular merely formal,
the just rigorous, the merciful remiss. So defective is the structure of all
virtues, wanting the sweet temper of Moderation to season them. Neither
proceeds this from the malevolent or uncharitable censures of men, as former
times have been too apt to traduce or mis-interpret their best deservings, by
aspersing some unworthy blemish upon their demerits. As in Rome, if the Pisoes
be frugall, they are censured parcimonious; if the Metelli religious, they are
taxed superstitious; if the Appii popular, they are termed ambitious; if the
Manlii austere, they are styled tyrannous; if the Lelii wise, they are curious;
the Publicolae aspiring, if courteous: But merely upon the want or deficiencie
of such actions, which are not tempered with Moderation. For to give instance
in each kind; how nobly and invincibly did Alexander the great bear himself
in all exploits? how much feared abroad, and how much loved at home? how
af^able to his friends, and how terrible to his foes? Yet how much were all his
actions of valor and matchless resolution darkened through want of Moderation,
being so excessively given to passion in his drink, as his nearest and dearest
friends could not be secure from his fury? For howsoever those acts and
exploits of his against Darius, yea against all opponents, expressed the
nobleness of his person, with the continued attendance of succeeding fortune;
yet the death of Cly^us and depopulation of Persepolis, Quint. ^urt.
detracted as much from his glory, as ever his Conquests gained him glory.
Likewise, how just and sincere was Agesilaus held in all matters of justice?
Plutarch. in vit. Ages.
how free from this Ages stain, corruption? how far from personal respect,
or to be overawed by the offenders greatness? so as, like the worlds General
(of whom we even now made mention, and) of whom Plutarch reports, Plutarch. in
Alexandio.
that he used to shut the one ear with his hand, when he heard any accuser in
criminal causes, thereby (as he said) reserving aud^ence for the defendant;
semblably did this renowned Patron and Pattern of unblemished Justice: yet how
greatly did he eclipse those more glorious lights which shone in him, Plut. in
Apo^heg. Eras. in Apotheg. Ludens par impar, equita^sque in arundine longa.

Agis rex Lacedemon.


for want of moderating his affection toward his children? So as his riding
upon a cockhorse did no less argue his weakness, than his sincerity in
matters of Justice witnessed his uprightness. Lastly, how profoundly wise was
the Lacedemonian Chilo held to be, being numbered among the seven Sages of
Greece, and elected Ephorus, a place of especial honor and esteem? how
exquisite his sentences? how quick and pregnant his answers? how solid his
reasons? how absolute in all his proceedings?
Yet behold, for want of moderation of his passions, La^rt. in Chilo.
how childishly he gave way to excess of joy, whereby he was enforced to pay
his debt to nature. Whence we may easily collect, that no virtue, how Cardinal
soever, can subsist without the assistance of moderation, being that Lesbian
rule which directs the Model, and makes it truly accomplishd. All virtues
(says one) do make a Commonwealth happy and peaceable: but Temperance alone
is the sustainer of civil quietness; What excellent fruits are derived from
Temperance.
for it takes care that the Realm be not corrupted with riot and wanton
delights, whereby diverse States have been cast away. Or to descend more
particularly to those divine effects which this virtue produces, it hinders
dishonest actions, restrains pleasures within certain bounds, and which
makes men to differ from bruit beasts. Moreover, Homer. lib. 10. odyss.
this is that herb, which Mercury gave to Ulysses, lest he should taste of the
Inchanters cup, and so with his fellows be transformed into a Hog, wallowing
in the mire of all sensual delights. So as, whosoever is endued with this
virtue, Oculidolores. Plut. in vit. Alex.
stands fortified against all assailants; those eye-sores (for so Plutarch
calls them) I mean those attractive objects of lust cannot surprise him:
nor those worldly tumors (for so Eucherius styles them) I mean worldly
honors, Honores mundi, tumores mundi. Eucher. ^pist. Paraen. de contempt.
mundi.
entrap him. Nor those roabes or rags of shame, the gorgeous attire of sin,
(which Hierome calls Antichrists veil) delude him. Nor those Thieves of time,
(for so the Orator is pleased to call them) I mean friends and acquaintance,
Velamen istud Antich^^sti. Hieron. ad Furi^m de vid. Sermon. Tom. 1. Amici sures
temporu. Cic.
overjoy him. In brief, as the Unicorns horn being dipped in water, cleeres
and purifies it; so there is no poison either arising from the tempting object
of beauty, from the ambitious aspiring to honor, from the attire of sin or
cover of shame, or from those sweet time-beguilers our acquaintance, which is
not frustrated by this choice and sovereign receipt of Temperance. So as this
is that virtue, which (though in general it deserve to be affected of all)
great men ought specially to embrace, that by their example the common sort
might become temperate: for this is the reason why so many now adays live
riotously like beasts, namely, because they see Noblemen and Magistrates that
govern the Commonwealth, to lead their lives wantonly, as Sardanapalus did.
Arist. lib. 1. Ethic. cap. 5.
Whence it was, that the Poet so seriously concluded; Great is the crime, it
cannot choose,
If he be great that does it use.
For as we see in colors, there is none which discovers any soil or blemish
so much as white; or as we have observed in the eclipse of the Sun, that it
draws more eyes to view it, than the darkning of any inferior light; so
amongst the children of men, though sin be sin in every one, yet more
noted, and in that more exemplar, in these high peering Cedars, I mean our
Peers and Nobles, than in these lower shrubs, whose humble condition frees
them from like public observance. How necessary is it then for you, Gentlemen,
whose birth has ennobled you, whose breeding has enabled you, and whose more
generous spirits have emboldned you, to undertake assayes for the glory and
benefit of your Country, the better to express your love and allegiance to
your Prince: to become affecters and practicers of so singular a virtue, that
your lives might be patterns of Moderation unto others, seeing more eyes are
fixed upon you than on inferiors? You are the Molds wherein meaner men are
casten; labor then by your example to stamp impressions of virtue in others,
but principally Temperance, seeing no virtue can subsist without it. Accepit
luxuries sceptrum; quid sperandum est praeter nauf^agium? August.
It is dangerous (says Austine) when prodigality and riot sway a Scepter;
neither only is it dangerous for the person, whose illimited affections, of a
Prince make him a vassal; but for the whole body of the State, training it to
all impiety by his evil example. Plut. in Apoth.
The Laconians, by means of wise and temperate Princes, became admired for
their Moderation and continence: insomuch as their spare diet, their homespun
raiment, and their general hate to all excess, made them no less honored at
home, than feared abroad. Whereas contrariwise, the S^donians by following the
riotous examples of some of their licentious Princes, fell into all excessive
gluttony. So powerful and persuasive were the lives of Princes, to enforce
impressions of goodness or badnesse in the imitation of their Subjects. But to
take a review of those maine assailants of Temperance, Car^ and mundus
plenisunt sp^nis: conversari in his and non laedi, divinae potentiae est, and
non virtutis humanae. Bern.
lust, ambition, gorgeousness in apparel, luscious fare, company-keeping, and
the like, we shall find, that where this Temperance is, albeit these objects
even in their height should encounter him, the bait will be long laid ere it
can take him. For to run over all these, and illustrate them with proper
instances, we shall plainly show, that where a divine power is ready to
assist, and man no less ready, upon temptations approaching, to resist, all
these motives can take no place. What admirable Continency showed Alexander in
the conquest of his affections,
sparing Darius wife and his three daughters? Quint. Curt. li. 3.
how greatly did this worlds Monarch enlarge his glory by this only conquest?
Yet to reflect upon those objects of beauty, we shall find, if records be
true which write of them, that for beauty they were incomparably gracious, and
for state the choicest Dames of Persia. The like we read of Scipio, Cum de
virtutibus agitur, nulla excellent^or ^ernitur quam illa, quae in cast^s
ad^lescentibus invenitur. Salust. in Iug.
who being a young man of four and twenty years of age, of strong
constitution, and promising personage, in the taking of a City in Spain,
repressed his flames of lust, albeit a beautiful maid was brought him;
restoring her to a young man called Allutius, to whom she was espoused, with a
great reward. But incredible is the report of Zenocrates Continency, who lying
all night with Lais, though she used all the provocations and enticements she
could devise, yet he remained immovable to her voluptuous inducements. And to
close this illustration with an heroicke instance; Vid. Plutarch. in Apotheg.
Cleopatra in the last tragic Scene of her disasters, kneeling at the feet of
Caesar, laid baits for his eyes; but in vain; Q. Curt. lib 4. cap. 11.
her beauties were beneath that Princes chastity. Neither are Histories (those
precious treasuries of time) less plentiful in instances of Moderation
touching motives of Ambition. When all the worthy Romans (I mean such whose
demerits had gained them an eminent esteem with their Country) had a desire to
preserve their memories by erection of their Statues, Cato would not; and being
demanded the cause, answered; If I might choose. Mallem quaeri cur Statua m^hi
nulla posita ^it, quam cur sit.
I would rather have it asked why Cato has no Statues erected for him, than
why they are erected for him. Implying, that Virtue, which is the most
continued shrine, Cato. Seneca.
and as that sage Moral says* makes man a God, had more power to eternize
him, than all material Monuments, which, as they are subject to corruption, so
shall their names be; which are engraven on them. Praefulgebant Iunius and
Blaes^^^, eo ipso, quod effigies ^orum non visebantur. Tacitus.
From their contempt shown to these sumptuous covers of corruption, Iunius and
Blaesus, by the testimony of Tacitus, received no less glory; whose Statues,
because they were not engraven in stone, appeared more conspicuous to the eye
of the State. No less Moderation of his desires showed Agesilaus, that
princely pattern of Justice, who, when the Egyptians came forth of purpose to
adore him, for those numerous and glorious victories which he had achieved,
couched himself close upon the grass, without least show or semblance of
Majesty, expressing the humility of his thoughts, by the lowness of his seat.
But of all others, there is no one example, to instance a true Moderatour of
Ambition, like that noble and victorious Champion, Godfrey du Boloigne, whose
valor so bravely employed in expulsing the Turks and freeing Jerusalem, that
City of the great King, from miserable slavery, had gained him so deserved a
name, as it was thought fit his honorable service should be rewarded with a
golden Diadem; but how answered this glorious Champion? Far be it from me
(quoth he) to suffer the servants head to be with a Crown of gold paled, where
the Masters head was with a Crown of thorns pierced. To produce likewise
instances in such whose Moderation in attire, manifested their contempt to
these covers of shame, Plut. in vit.
we shall find Licurgus, Phocion, Pelopidas, with many others, such professed
foes to gorgeous apparel, Legitur in Gestis Romanorum, quod ille qui primi^us
inter eos vestem purpuream induit, a fulgure percussus est, and sic interut.

Faces faecesque superbiae, S^^ton


as they always retained their ancient country wear with such plainness, as
they expressed what they were, by the garments they wore. For a man's garment
(says the Son of Sirach) and his excessive laughter, and his going, declare
what person he is. Insomuch as Augustus Caesar bore always hatred to gorgeous
and sumptuous apparel, terming it the blazer and bruiter of our pride, the
nests to hatch the lascivious brood of Lechery. In like manner, to descend to
all those assailants of Temperance, we shall find many excellent subduers of
their own affections, using an admirable kind of restraint or Moderation in
their fare. The number of guests amongst the Romans in any solemn feast
privately observed, was not great; seldom times exceeding nine: whence Aulus
Gellius says, that the number of guests should begin with the Graces, and
end with the Muses; that is, they must not be fewer than three, nor more than
nine. Which use was occasion of that adage, Septem convivium, novem convitium
faciunt; Seven make a banquet, Aul. Gell. noct. Atti. l. 13. c. 11. Alex. Genesis
dier. lib. 5. cap. 21.
nine a riot. Albeit that luxurious Emperor Heliogabalus seems to have been
delighted with the number of eight, whence he invited to supper, to make his
feast more singular, eight bald ones, eight blind ones, eight gouty ones,
eight deaf ones, eight hoarse ones, eight very black ones, eight very long
ones, eight very fat ones, and eight hookenosed ones, being delighted with that
Greek proverb, (...): Stuckius de convi. lib. 2. cap. 2.
whose Ape, it seems, that late conceited Academicke was, who invited the
blind, lame, and deformed to a supper, for whom he had provided fowls, as
different to their pallat by nature, as they were to others in feature;
furnishing his feast with Owls, Cuckowes, Staniels, and Popinjayes, to make
himself infamously famous for his invention. But to proceed with these
Ethnicke instances of Moderation; Democritus preserved his life without any
other sustenance, save only the smell of hot bread, for the space of nine
days: which abstinence or restraint was not enjoined him, for neither his own
estate, nor any superior commanding power, had enforced him to that misery;
but purposely to prepare himself for celebrating with more solemnity the
feasts which were kept in honor of Ceres, called commonly (as I take it)
Buthysia; resembling in greatness of celebrity, and magnificence of state,
that huge sacrifice called Hecatombe. Pythagoras likewise was of that wonderful
Moderation in his fare, and that through no infirmity of Nature, in that he
could not, but through an incessant desire to his studies; with a vehement
affection to the preservation or propagation rather of all living creatures; as
he would desire two things of God, if the possibility thereof could stand with
the conservation of humane society; that he might not Speak, that he might
not Eat:
by the one to prevent offense in discourse, by the other avoid surfeit by
excess. Haec duo a Deo, mudo cum conservatione naturae stare ^oterint, unici
postulabat; ut a loquendo and edendo perpetuo abstineat.
So as, he commanded his scholars even in unreasonable things, as Birds,
Beasts, Fishes, etc. to abstain from cruelty; entreating both Fowlers and
Fishers to let go the foul and fish they had caught, or at least redeem them
with money, and let them go. But too immoderate was this care, and too foolish
this pity; for creatures were ordained for the use and service of man; he then
that neglects the use, neglects likewise the ordinance. But in Subjects of
Moderation, none more absolute, than where Nature is urged by necessity to
crave relief, and occasion is ministered, yet the desire restrained: as in
extremity of thirst, when Nature requiteth drink, which according to the
Philosophers axiom, Vltimum r* ^ugium nature, est potus. Axioma.
is the very last refuge of Nature, either through compassion or manly
Moderation her desire is restrained. This did Alexander, who out of a princely
Moderation or noble compassion, when he was almost consumed with drought,
having a head-peece full of water presented unto him, would not drink himself,
but offered it to his soldiers. Much to be admired was this act of Moderation,
and a motive of general affection; that a Prince urged by the extremest
effects of Thirst, and having occasion and means to satisfy the request of
Nature, yet moved with compassion toward his fellow soldiers (for so used he
to term them) he chused rather to want himself, than to be a wanting in any
compassionate office to their necessity. Certainly this act deserves so much
the more to be commended, by how much the extremity was greater which he
suffered. Darius, when in his flight he drank muddy and stinking water, said,
That he never drank a sweeter draught. Which implies, what torment he indures
who feels the extremity of thirst. The last assailant of Temperance (as we
formerly observed) was Company-keeping; which indeed is such a stealer of time,
or beguiler of tedious hours, as it makes passing of time a mere pastime. Yet
observe, what diligent care has been had, by making choice of such (as I have
elsewhere noted) whose society might better them. Peruse those Athenian nights
in Gellius,
and you shall find how fruitfully those nights were employed, Gellan Nect.
Attic.

Aug. de Academ.


how delightfully passed: making discourse of Philosophy, that well-consorting
Melody, which gave general content to all the Company. Besides, it is worth
our observation, to take a view of the special care diverse Ancients have had
of the Company they consorted with: having such in as great distaste that were
evil, as they bore all due reverence to such as were good. We read how the
Prienean Bias, having occasion to sail on a time with some ill-disposed men,
by reason of a violent tempest, the ship wherein they sailed was so shaken, as
these wicked men, moved rather by fear than devotion, begun to call upon their
gods;
which Bias hearing, Hold your peace (quoth he) lest the gods you call upon
understand that you be here; Laert. in vit. B^ant.
covertly taxing their impiety, and showing that their prayers would be little
acceptable to the gods. But an example much more divine, and so much more
deserving our imitation, may be here commended to us in the person of the
blessed Evangelist S. John,
who would not come within the Bath where the Heretic Corinthus was, August.
lib. 3. de Bapt. cont. Don. cap. 10.
so much did he hate the fellowship of him, who, to use Augustines words, Was
no fan for the Lords floor.

Thus have we run over those mainest and mightiest assailants of Temperance;
now let us, as we have illustrated each of them with proper instances of
Moderation, annex some reasons why these assailants of Temperance ought to be
restrained: and first for the first.

Lust, the sensual man's sin, is said to be a friend, which brings man in
acquaintance with the Devil, as Ebrietie is an enemy to the knowledge of God.
Ebrietas in^mica est cogni^oni Dei; Cupiditas (...) necessitudim Diabolt.

Ambrey. lib. 1. de Abraham.

Quil^xuriatur vivero mortuus est. Hier.


Besides, it is a vice detestable both to the brute beast and Barbarian; it
withdrawes the mind of the creature from meditation of his Creator; makes man
commit sin even with greediness; makes the Image of God companion for a
Harlot; makes him who should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a Cage of
unclean birds; prostitutes the glory of the soul to the pleasure of sin;
and prefers a sensual delight before the obedience of reason. He sells his
Birthright for less than a mess of pottage, exposing his soul to the
traffic of shame. He va^ues a minutes joy above all future delight; yea,
rather than lose his present content, he will suffer an eternity of torment.
This bleere-eyed Lover is so blinded with affection toward his beloved, that
he will rather lose his own soul, than lose that which he affects. Thus you
see the Lustful man uncased, his blindness discovered, his sundry weaknesses
displayed, and the heavy effects which from hence are derived: good reason
then have you to restrain an affection so over-spreading, a motion so mortally
wounded, a contagion so generally killing. Take into your consideration the
shortness of the pleasure, being but a moment; the vengeance or punishment due
to that pleasure, being eternal. What wise man, having nearly served his
apprentiship, will for a minutes pleasure forfeit his Indenture, and lose his
freedom for ever? We should hold him destitute of common sense, who having a
Princess offered him, will foolishly lose her for embraces of an Harlot. If
you will keep your selves unspotted till the day of his coming, you shall be
espoused to a princely Bridegroom, and receive Palms in your hands at his
coming. Go not in by the ways of the strange woman, but keep your beds
undefiled, knowing the state which you have undertaken to be honorable before
God and man. For I in no case will limit you to a monasticke or regular
restraint, but approve of both estates, I mean both the single and married
life, being undertaken in the fear of God, Bona est cas^itas conj^g^l^* mel^or
continentit vidualis, optima perfectio vi^ginalis. Beda. Qui non nuhent and
^xor^s non ducunt, sicut Adgeli in terra sunt. Ambros.

Supergreditur virginitas conditionem humanae naturae, per quam homo angel^s
assimilatur. ibid. Virginitas si lab^tur, nulla poenilentia reparatur
adintegritatem. Isid. de Sum. Bon.

A^denter loquor, cum omnia possit Deus suscitare, tamen non potest virginem
post rian^m. Valet quidem de poena ^^^^rare, sed non valet ^o ronare corruptam.
Hier.


worthy the acceptance of every faithful Christian. For the Virgins estate, as
it draws nearer to angelical perfection, so the Married to the preservation
of humane society or propagation. So as Saint Augustinemight seem rather to be
traduced, than truly alleged for this place, Virgins do more than lawful, as
Adulterers less: for my conceit shall ever be freed, from imagining so divine
a Father to approve of such an error: for both estates are commended; the one
good, the other better; both which titles, as they are by the Apostle on these
two estates conferred, so are they by us to be reverently esteemed. Briefly,
restrain all immoderate desires of the flesh, which fight against the spirit,
so shall you find that inward tranquillity which obedience to your lusts
shall never bring you.

Ambition, the second assailant of Temperance, is such an high-mounting bird,
as she uses to build her nest ever in the tallest Cedars, hatching her aeries
in the highest spires, to express her unbounded aims. This passion or
distraction rather, of all others, brings man soonest to a forgetfulness of
himself: ever aspiring, but never obtaining; ever sailing in a tempestuous
sea, attended by many hostile and piraticall adherents, whose aims are to
intercept all peaceable passengers, filling the whole State full of mutinies
and combustions. Pindarus describes him to be such an one, who strives to touch
the Clouds, and cope with Jove himself, but his aims draw him on to speedy
ruin. What reason then is there, to foster or cocker such a professed foe to
public and private peace? Who is he, having understanding, will receive into
his barge, where he is, a quarrellous turbulent fellow, who in desperate fury
will not stick to over-whelme the vessel, both of himself, and the rest that
consort him? Who is he, that will engage him in peril, when he may in safety
enjoy himself, and be free from danger? Who is he, that will desire to climb,
when he knows there is no means to save him from falling, being got up?
Surely the Ambitious man is ever environed with peril, yet such is his folly,
he will rather choose to incur danger, than lose the present opportunity of
acquiring honor. Besides, they whom this unbounded passion has once
surprised, are so much distempered, as of sleep they are quite deprived; which
disquiet proceeds either from emulation toward others, or an ambitious desire
of advancement in themselves.
For the first, Themistocles was wont to say, that Miltiades victory in
Marathon, bereaved him of his sleep. For the latter, Sylla could never take
rest, till by the terror of his legions, Velea, or Velleia. Alphons. in lib.
de Haeres. in verb. Tyrannis. S^to lib. 5. de lust. and lure. quaest. 1. artic.
3.
he had obtained the law Valeria to be made, whereby he was created Dictator
for eighty years; as Caesar the law Servia, by which he was made perpetual
Dictator. Albeit, having obtained what they desired, and arrived at the port
whereto their course was directed, they found an Empire to be a monstrous and
untamed beast, wounding them with many thornie cares, which deprived them of
all seasonable rest. Do you then love to be at peace, to enjoy perfect
liberty, to be divided from all occasions of disquiet? Restrain those Icarian
thoughts, whose soaring wings are ever laved in the depth of ruin. Confine
your thoughts within an equal limit; and let not your projectments be above
hope of effecting. Those braving builders of Babel, Si tanta humilitate se
deprimit divina majestas, superbire in quo andet and praesumit humana
infirmitos?

Aug. de const^ctu viciorum.


aimed at too high a story to bring their work to perfection. Let the
foundation be built on firm ground, and the building will prosper better. For
howsoever, fair pretenses may for a time appear in the habit of truth;
daubing up a rotten inside with a specious outside: He that sits in the
Heavens and searches the hearts and reins, shall have them in derision,
breaking them in pieces like a potters vessel. Restrain then this fury or
frenzy of the mind, and with timely Moderation so bound in and confine your
affections, as no aspiring thought may enter that place, which is reserved for
a higher place: so shall you enjoy more absolute content in restraining, than
enlarging your thoughts to the motives of Ambition.


Gorgeous attire, being the third assailant, moving man to glory in his shame,
Mihi m^^abile sit quod non enecentur, cum tancum onus bajalent. Clem. Alexand.
2. Paedag.
and gallant it in his sin, is to be especially restrained, because it makes
us dote upon a vessel of corruption, strutting upon earth, as if we had our
eternal mansion on earth. What great folly is it to prefer the case before
the instrument, or to bestow more cost upon the Sign than on the Inn? Me
thinks the bitter remembrance of the first necessity of clothes, should make
men more indifferent for them: if man had never sinned, his shame had never
needed to have been covered. O nobilem magis quam foelicem pannum! Stob. Ser.
47.
For sin was the cause of Adams shame, and his shame the cause he fled unto
the shade, which affoorded him Fig Leaves to cover his Nakedness. What vanity
then, yea, what impudence to glory in these covers of shame? Would any one,
having committed some capital offense against his Prince, for which he is
after pardoned, but on condition he shall wear a halter about his neck,
become proud of his halter, and esteem it an especial badge of honor? We are
all in the selfsame case; we have committed high treason against the King of
heaven, yet are we received to mercy, bearing about us those Memorialls of our
shameful fall or defection from our King; which should in all reason rather
move us to be ashamed of our selves, than to prize our selves higher for these
ornaments of shame. Sure I am, as he is a fond man that values the worth of
hi^ horse, Sen. Epist. 47.
by his sumptuous saddle or studded bridle; so h^ is most foolish, who estimate
a man by his garment* Yet see the misery of this age! the cover of shame is
become the only luster to beautify him: but be not ye so deluded; Visus jam
est vestis non tegumenti.

Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 16. Chrysostom. Tom. 1. Hom.


prize the ornaments of the mind for the choicest and chiefest beauty: far
be it from you to glory in this attire of sin, these rags of shame, these
worme-workes, which withdraw your eyes from contemplating that supreme bounty
and beauty, purposely to fix them upon the base objects of earth, which detract
much from the glory of a reasonable soul. The Swan prides not her self in her
blacke-feet; no more should you in these Covers of your transgression, which,
whenever ye look on, may put you in mind of your first pollution. No reason
then to affect these, which had man never sinned, he had never needed, being
before clothed with innocence as with a garment, and with primitive purity,
as with a raiment. Whence it appears, that many glory in the rags of shame,
while they glory in these roabes of sin: Now who, endued with reason, would
pride him in that which augments his shame, or esteem that a grace which
asperseth reproach on him? Nicetas says plainly; No punishment so grievous as
shame. And Nazianzen yet more expressly; Better were a man die right out, than
still live in reproach and shame. Ajax being ready to dispatch himself, used
these as his last words; No grief does so cut the heart of a generous and
magnanimous man, as shame and reproach. For a man to live or die, is natural;
but for a man to live in shame and contempt, Vivere and mori naturae functio:
Indi^^io esse proprio duc^^ur. Ambros. ep. 70.
and to be made a laughing ^^ocke of his enemies, is such a matter, as no well
bred and noble minded man that has any courage or stomach in him, can ever
digest it. Delight not then in your shame, but in a decent and seemly manner
affect that Habit most, which becomes most; restraining that profuseness,
which the vanity of this age so much exceeds in; and assuming to your selves
that attire which gives best grace to modesty, and has nearest correspondence
with Gentilitie. Neither is Luscious fare to be less avoided, or with less
strictness restrained. Many reasons whereof might be here produced, but we
will cull out the chiefest, to weane our Generous Vitellians from their
excessive surfets. Venture vitae Charibdis.

Diog. apud Laert.


First, dainty dishes are foments to wanton affections, begetting in the soul
an unaptnesse to all spiritual exercises: for this is a general rule, that
the body being strengthened, the soul becomes weakened: for fasting is a
preparative to Devotion, but riot the grand-master of Distraction. Look how it
is in the health of the body, Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Genesis
and so it is in the state of the soul: if a man have a good appetite, and a
stomach to his meat, it is a sign he is well in health; in like sort, if a
man be content to follow Christ for the Loaves to fill his belly, and care not
for the food of his soul, Impossible est hic implere ventrem and ibi mentem.
Hier. in epist.
questionless all is not well between God and him; but if he have a longing
and an hungring desire of the Word, then indeed his heart is upright in the
sight of God. For as Saint Augustine notes well; If the word of God be taken
by us, Si sermo meus caperetur, caperet: Nam si^ est sermo Dei, and sic esse
debet fidelibus, sicut pisci hamus; tum capit qu^ndo capitur, nec sit captis
injuris; ad salutem enim, non ad perniciem capiuntur.

Aug Tract. 42. in Johan.


it will take us. But what means may be used to procure this longing and
hungring desire in us? Not Luscious or curious fare; for that will move us
rather to all inordinate motions, than the exercise of Devotion: no, it is
fasting that makes the soul to be feasting; it is macerating of the flesh,
that fattens the spirit. For it is sumptuous fare, that is the souls snare:
Sagina corporis, Sagena cordis: It is the net which intangles the heart of man,
drawing her from the love of her best beloved Spouse, to dote on the adulterate
embraces of sensual beauty. Neither is it fare, but delight in fare; not
simply the meat, but the desire or liquorish appetite, which produces those
odious effects: as for example, when the loose affected man makes choice or
election of such meats, purposely to beget in him an ability, as well as
desire, to his sensual pleasures. Whence a learned Father most divinely
concludes: Aug. in l. Confess.
I fear not (says he) the uncleanness of meats in respect of their
difference, but uncleanness of desire in respect of concupiscence. Neither
does the kind or difference of the meat (says another) pollute so much, Blos.
Collyr. Haret.
as the act of disobedience, eating that which is inhibited. Now to propose a
rule of direction, not any one surer or safer can be set down, than what an
ancient Father has already proposed. Gregor. in Mor. exposit. in Job.
We nourish our bodies (says he) lest by being too much weakened, they fail
us; and we weaken them by abstinence, lest by too much feeding them, they
press us. So then, temper your desires, that neither too much restraint may
enfeeble them, nor excess surcharge them. For as the body being weakened, the
soul becomes strengthened; so where the body becomes too much enfeebled, the
performance of spiritual exercises is disabled. Qui per annos plurimos tecum
familiariter vixit, ad m^nsam tuam sedit, cibum de manu tua sumpsit, in sinu
tuo dormivit: cum v^luit, tecum colloquium habuit, lic j^re haer^ditario servus
tuus est. Bernard.

Aristot. de Historia animalium. lib. 6. cap 9.

Lucretius lib 6. Oppianus lib. 2. de venatione.


But in all things, take heed of pampering a disobedient servant; he sleeps in
your bosom, that imagines mischief against you. Who, the more he is fostered,
the more is your danger furthered; the more he is cockered, the more is your
heat of devotion cooled; chastise then this domesticke enemy in time, for he
participates of the nature of a Serpent, who spreads most his poison, where he
receives harboring. Now as the Philosophers observe of the Heart, that being
pursued by dogs in hunting, by reason of heat, and loss of breath, being tired
with the chase, he hasteneth to the Rivers; or wearied in fight with a Serpent,
or stung, or wounded by him, while the Serpent rests on the ground, he
seeks to some cold Fountain, whereby the infection of the venom received,
may be abated, and his former vigor restored. Even so, such as are wounded,
and stricken of the old Serpent, must have recourse to Christ, that Fountain
of living waters, that all sensual desires arising from excessive delight in
delicious fare, may be the better allayed. Neither only is restraint to be used
in the choice, and change of meats, but in the excessive use of drinks. The
reasons are two; the one is, it is an enemy to the knowledge of God; the other
is this, it is held to be an enfeebler or impairer of the memorative parts; for
you shall ever note that deep drinkers have but shallow memories.
Their common saying is, Ebriosus consundit naturam, amittit gratiam, perdit
gloria^^, incurrit damna^^onem aeternam. Ambros. lib. de Paenut.

Dum absorbent ^inum absorbentar a vino.

Vt cautes, evitemus cali^es, ni in ore na^seam, in mente nausragium sentiamus.
Pestis non saevius grassatur in urb^, quam Ebrieta^ in cord.


Let us drown care in healths: which drowning of care makes them so forgetful
of themselves, as carried away with a brutish appetite, they only intend their
present delight, without reflection to what is past, or due preparation to what
may succeed. O restrain then this mighty assailant of Temperance! Be ever your
selves, but principally stand upon your guard, when occasion of company shall
induce you; being the last we are to speak of.

This Company-keeping, how much it has depraved the hopefullest and
towardliest wits, daily experience can witness. For many we see civilly
affected, and temperately disposed of themselves, not subject to those violent
or brainsick passions, which the fumes of drink beget, till out of a too
pliable disposition they enter the lists of Good-fellowship (as they commonly
term it) and so become estranged from their own nature, to partake with
Zanies in their distempered humor. So as in time, by consorting with evil
men, they become exposed to all immoderate affections, such is the strength of
custom. Whence it is,
that Saint Basil says, Passions rise up in a drunken man (note the violence
of this distemper) like a swarm of Bees buzzing on every side. Bosil.
Now you shall see him compassionately passionate, resolving his humor into
tears; anon like a phrenticke man, exercising himself in blows; presently,
as if a calmer or more peaceable humor had seized on him, he expresses his
loving nature in congies and kisses. So different are the affections which this
valiant Mault-worme is subject to; yet howsoever, out of a desperate Bravado he
bind it with oaths, that he will stand to his tackling, he is scarce to be
credited, for he can stand on no ground. But to annex some reasons which may
effectually dissuade every generous-affected spirit from consorting with such
Amongst which consorts of death, if at any time it be your fortune to
encounter with these civil city-foists, whose Cheats are their Chequer, timely
discard them, lest untimely experience make you distate them.
Sociats as are a blemish to a Gentleman; imagine with your selves, how
mortally dangerous it is to enter an infected house; how fearful would any one
be of the state of his body, if he should have one in his company who had the
carbuncle or plaguesore running upon him? how much would he condemn his own
rashness to entertain any such in his company; and with what respect or
cautelous advice would he prepare to expel the poison of that infection, at
least to prevent the occasion? no cost might be spared, no care intermitted,
that some sovereign receipt might be procured, whereby the apparent danger,
into which his inconsiderate rashness had brought him, might be removed. Now
if our bodies, being but the covers of more curious and exquisite instruments,
Run with ye RO^ unto the Rose; The ROE must win, the Rooke must lose: For
Northern Rookes are little worth Compared with those the South brings forth.
be so especially tendered, with what respect ought we to provide for the
safety or security of our souls? The ground of a disease is to mix the sound
with the sick: now the souls disease is sin, wherewith she labors more
painfully than the body can do, being annoyed with any infirmity. Those that
are sick, are vicious men, whose disease though it be insensible, and in that
less curable, Senec. de tranq. anim. Bernard. August. Emissinus.
it breaks out into loathsome ulcers, which stain the pristine beauty of the
soul. Now as we serve so many vices, we serve so many masters; and so many
masters, so many devils: each one having so many devils, as evils. Which
miserable servitude to prevent (for no slaverie is baser than the service of
sin) the best and soveraignest receipt that may be applied or ministered to the
soule-sicke patient, Stultum est servire diabolo offenso, quinullo placatur
obsequio. Greg.
is the receipt of aversion; to turn aside from the ways of the wicked, and to
keep no company with the transgressour: for this aversion from the companions
of sin, is a conversion to the God of Sion. Would you then have God turn to
you? turn you from your sins. Would you be at one with your Maker? be ever
divided from these sensual mates, so shall you be made happy by the company
of your Maker. Would you be found at heart? leave to confort with these of an
uncircumcised heart, whose paths lead to perdition, and they that walk therein
shall be the heirs of shame. For howsoever these instruments of sin (as I
have sometimes observed) may make a show of godliness, or pretend, merely
under color to give a varnish to their vicious lives, a semblance of
goodness, yet it is but mere painting they deal with; they deny the power
thereof in their life and conversation. A ridiculous Actor in the City of
Smyrna, pronouncing, O coelum! O heaven! pointed with his finger toward the
ground: which, when Polemo the chiefest man in the place saw, he could abide
to stay no longer, but went from the company in a chafe, saying; This fool
has made a Solecisme with his hand: (...).
he has spoken false Latin with his hand. Such ridiculous Actors are these
time-spenders; they pronounce heaven with their mouth, but point at earth with
their lives; like wise Polemoes therefore stay no longer with them, if at any
time you have consorted with them: for their practice is only to gull the
world, and with smooth pretenses delude their unhappy consorts. Their
profession is how to play the hypocrite-christian, but being unmasked, their
odious Phisnomies are quickly discovered. Make use therefore of your
experience, and with all Temperance so counterpoize the weight of your
passions, as none of these assailants (though their incursions be never so
violent) may ever surprise the glorious fortress of your mind. Which the
better to effect, let Lust be counterpoized by continence; Ambition by
humbleness; gorgeous apparel by comeliness; luscious fare by abstinence; and
company-keeping by that sweet seasoner of all virtues, Temperance.
Thus you have heard, how, as without salt there can be no seasoning, no war
without discipline, no tillage without manuring, no estate without mannaging,
no building without a foundation; so no virtue can subsist without moderation.

AS we have hitherto expressed the dignity or sufficiency of this virtue,
Wherein Moderation is to be used.
in that it gives subsistence to all other virtues: so are we now to entreat
of the amplenesse of it, proposing such subjects wherein it is principally said
to be conversant. Now, though there be no humane action which is not subject to
many defects, being not thoroughly seasoned by this exquisite virtue, yet the
use thereof may be reduced to these two, as proper subjects wherein it is to be
exercised; Aurum horamque petunt, petendo perdunt, perdendo periunt.
expense of coin, and expense of time: for without moderation in the one, we
should be prodigal of our substance; without moderation in the other, we
should grow too profuse in the expense of that, which is more precious than any
earthly substance.

Now touching worldly substance, Expense of Coin.
as we are to be indifferent for the loss or possession of it, so ought we
to be careful in the use or dispensation of it. As it is not to be admired
when we possess it, no more is it to be altogether disesteemed, because we
stand in need of the use of it. Tertull. instit. lib. 3. cap. 23.
If money be so much to be contemned, (says an ancient Father) express thy
bounty, show thy humanity, bestow it upon the poor: so may this, which of
necessity thou must lose, releeve many, which otherwise might perish by
hunger, thirst, or nakedness. Thus to bestow it, were not prodigally to spend
it, but to lay it up in a safer Treasury, even in Christ's almes-box, to the
disbursers great advantage. Yea, but you will object, you have other means to
employ it in; you have a family to support, a posterity to provide for, a
state to maintain, and pleasures suiting with your rank and quality to
uphold; I grant it; and you do well in having a care to your family, for he
is worse than an Infidel that wants this care. It is commendable likewise in
you to have an eye to your posterity, for Nature requires this at your hand.
To maintain likewise your state, and to continue your pleasures suiting with
men of your rank; I allow it. But where, or in what sort must this be done?
For the place where, surely none fitter than your own country where you were
bred; setting up there your rest, where you received your birth. Let your
Country (I say) enjoy you, who bred you, showing there your hospitality,
where God has placed you, and with sufficient means blessed you. I do not
approve of these, This is excellently seco^ded by a Princely pen, in a pithy
Poem directed to all persons of rank or quality to leave the Court, and
return into their own Country.
who fly from their Country, as if they were ashamed of her, or had committed
something unworthy of her. How blameworthy then are these Court-comets, whose
only delight is to admire themselves? These, no sooner have their bedridden
fathers betaken themselves to their last home, and removed from their crazie
couch, but they are ready to sell a Manor for a Coach. They will not take it
as their fathers took it: their Country houses must be barred up, lest the
poor passenger should expect what is impossible to find, relief to his want,
or a supply to his necessity. No, the cage is opened, and all the birds are
fled; not one crum of comfort remaining to succor a distressed poor one.
Hospitality, which was once a relic of Gentry, and a known cognizance to
all ancient houses, has lost her title, merely through discontinuance: and
great houses, which were at first founded to releeve the poor, and such
needful passengers as traveled by them, are now of no use but only as
Way-marks to direct them. But whither are these Great ones gone? To the Court;
there to spend in boundless and immoderate riot, what their provident
Ancestors had so long preserved, and at whose doors so many needy souls have
been comfortably releeved. Yet see the misery of many of these rioters!
Though they consume their means, yet is the port they live at mean: for they
have abridged their family, reduced their attendants to a small number, and
(unnecessary expenses set aside) drawn themselves to within as narrow a
compass as possibly they may. For to take a view of those which are in
ordinary roll, you shall find none but a Page, a Coachman, a Lackey, and
perchance a Cook, if the vailes of the house will maintain one, or they be
not in fee with some City Cook, whom they usually repair to, at best betrust,
and so run on score quarterly. Now if you ask me, how their means should be
consumed, when they live at so low commons; my answer is, the less they bestow
on their Caterer, the more they bestow on their Tailor. They cut it out of the
whole cloth, and divide their acres peecemeale into shreds. Where their
phantasticke light-ones resort oftener to the house of the body-maker than the
soule-maker: affecting nothing more than what may make them most noted. But
observe the issue of these courses, Relata ad se magnitudine aeris alicujus,
quam quidam Eques Romanus dum vixit cclav* rat, culcieram emi cubicularem sibi
jussit: and praeceptum mirantibus hanc ratione redd^dit; Habenda est ad somnum
culcitra, in qua ille cum tanium d^beret, dormire pot^^it. Macrob. Saturn. l.
2. c. 4.
Gentlemen; when they have maintained their riot with much expense, and engaged
their means to these great monied men, whose Iubile it is to entertain
acquaintance with one of these green wits, they run upon the shelfe of ruin,
and make their posterity the heirs of want. Which having incurred, what
distracted and divided sleeps, what distempered thoughts, what hourly
afflictions may we imagine them to be subject to? For what engagement worse
than debt, when every shadow resembles a Sergeant, every familiar touch or
stroke of a friend, an arrest of an Officer? Augustus Caesar, hearing of them
talk in his Court, what a huge sum of money a certain Knight in Rome owed
at his death, and that all his goods were to be sold, to make payment of his
debts, commanded the Master of his Wardrobe to buy for him that bed, wherein
this Knight used to lie: For, says he, if I cannot sleep soundly in that bed
wherein he could sleep, that owed so much, then surely I shall sleep in
none. Surely, there is no affliction greater to a Noble Spirit, whose thoughts
cannot endure engagement, than to be subject to the extremity of an
unconscionable Creditor, who usually makes advantages his revenues, and
forfeitures the inhauncers of his fortunes. Neither is this respect to be had
only in the disposing of your selves in Court or City, but likewise in the
Country: for though it be best spent, which is bestowed in Hospitality, and
in releeving those hungry souls, whose express images require your charity;
yet are you to consider how charity begins with it self: so as, howsoever you
are bound to releeve and support those, whose present wants exact so much at
your hands, yet ever with reservancie of a competent or convenient providence,
so to sustain the want of others, as not to procure want to your selves by
sustaining others. But this needs little pressing: for experience shows, that
very small instruction will suffice any one to be provident enough in their
bounty or exhibition to the poor. Let us therefore divert the current of our
subject, and address our exhortation to you; purposely moving you to a
moderation of your expense in your pleasures, or those more easy vanities of
this life. As profit and pleasure make the sweetest Music, so there is no
pleasure, how incomparably delightful soever for the present, but it affords
much bitterness, having no respect to Providence. Now, as all virtues may be
comprised under the name of frugalitie, Frugall men being rightly styled, (...)
Tusc. l. 3.
provided that we understand it to be of that absolute power and command, that
neither excess nor diminution bear any sway in it, it appears that without
this frugall moderation no state can be well managed, no estate rightly
husbanded; so as, whether you have an eye to pleasure or profit, this
frugalitie or equally tempered providence must be Soveraignesse in both. For
first, there is no pleasure which has not respect to virtue: how then may that
properly be termed a pleasure, which has no relation to frugalitie, under
which name all virtues may seem to be comprised? Likewise, there is no profit
which is not joined with honesty; how then may that properly be termed a
profit, which has no respect to honest providence, upon which all profits are
truly grounded? The best course then that you can follow, either in your choice
of pleasures, or pursuit of profit, is ever to examine whether that pleasure
which you affect, have respect to virtue, or that profit which you have in
pursuit, be firmly grounded on honest providence: so shall neither pleasure so
much inthrall you, as to engage your fortunes to her, nor profit so entangle
you, as to neglect conscience for the love you bear her. Surely, there is
naught more dangerous to young Gentlemen, whose unriper years have not
sufficiently instructed them in the follies of vanity, than to give reins to
their desires, and so become Bondslaves to pleasure. For those that will deny
their eyes nothing that they can desire, nor resist their own wills in ought
that they affect, be they endued with never so much wisdom, it becomes
foolishness, being blinded with their own delights. They then only, whose
native temperance has prepared them, or continual wrestling with the
infirmities of nature has inured them, have attained this degree of
perfection; not only (I say) to use Moderation in their expense, but in their
restraint of every pleasure; laboring to become commanders of themselves in
the desires and affections of this life: which of all others make men the
absolutest conquerours. For man, whose natural pravitie, drawn from the
corruption of his first parents, is ever working in him new motions of
disobedience, lays continual siege and battery to the fortress of the
soul, suggesting to her motives of pleasure and delight, which the carnal man
will easily condescend to, because he favors not the things of the spirit.
Yea, how many do we see, who begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh,
making their end far worse than their beginning? How necessary then is this
Moderation, to curb or check such inordinate motion as arise in us, by reason
of our natural infirmity and weakness? Neither do I so much insist upon the
Moderation of your expenses, as if Coin were of that esteem, as it only
deserved respect. For if Riches increase, we are not to set our hearts upon
them; but rather to show our indifferency toward them in our free and
liberal use of them. Dona prius quam tempora dedit.
For he who gave gifts before he gave time, creating all things for our use in
the world, before he brought us into the world, without the use or ministry
of these could preserve and support us, whom he has appointed as governors or
rulers over all these: for he who created all things without means, can
likewise preserve those things which he has created without means. Yea,
though he has given us the fruits of the earth to feed us, the fells of
beasts to cloth us, Datur etiam vermibus nere^e viscer^bus, acuratiorem cultum
praebere hominibus. Vid. Pet. Mart.
yea, works out of the bowels of worms to beautify us; yet is he tied no
more to these exterior means, than he was before, creating all things
without means. No King is necessarily tied, that only pure Bullion should be
current among his Subjects, for if occasion serve, he may stamp Lether,
Brass, or any other metal, which being authorized by his image or
superscription, is not to be denied within his Dominions. Much more he, who
contains the world in his fist, restraines not his power to any outward means;
working sometimes with means, sometimes without means, sometimes against
means, sometimes above means. With means, as when he fed those which
followed him into the wilderness with bread; above means, when he fed so much
people with so little bread; without means, when he himself fasted so long
without bread; against means, when he caused the very Ravens to bring his
Prophet bread. No, this exhortation rather tends to move you to rely on Gods
providence, yet withal not to abuse those creatures which he has bestowed on
you, but to use them with Temperance, Sobriety, and Moderation: for what is it
to abound in all riches, surfeit in pleasures, enjoy the treasures of the whole
earth, yea to want nothing that either the eye can desire, Quo cumuli gazae, si
desin^ ossibus urrae?

Ensdem penates habu^t and regi^m, and rogum, and sepulchrum.

Valor. Max. de Tull. Hostil.


or the heart affect? Surely nothing; Alexander, the Monarch of the world, had
all other things save only a Sepulcher to bury him in, when he was dead; he
never thought of that: for alas, when corruption shall receive what Mortality
renders, and man after so many days passed over in delights, shall make his
bed in the dark, those perfunctory pleasures which he so much affected, those
temporary blessings which he enjoyed, shall be as if they had not been. So
moderate therefore your expenses in the use or dispensation of your earthly
Mammon, that it may appear, your hearts are where your Treasure is, and your
Treasure where your heavenly master is: for what is this world, but a List
environed with fearful Combats? Ambros.
So as the world is more to be feared when it smileth, Aug. Epist. 144.
than when it frowneth, and more to be taken heed of, when it allures us to
love it, than when it moves or induces us to contemn it. Bernard. de Adventu
s^rm. 1.
Howsoever, they who embrace the world, are like unto them, who are drowned in
waters; for their minds are so drenched in the depth of worldly affections, and
so entangled by the reeds and oaze of earthly vanities, Aug^st. in M^d. ca^. 9.
as they are divided from the Sailers Star, and the Haven of the ship-wrackt
soul, being miserably forced to grope in darkness, without a light to direct
them; and to remain woefully shelfed, being far from sight of haven to
receive them. And let this suffice to have been spoken touching Moderation in
your expense of coin; I mean, your frugall dispensation of such estates, as
God has blessed you withal; ever remembering that you must give account of
your Talent; not only (I say) of your Talent of knowledge, but of that Talent
of Substance, whereof in this life you were possessed. And so I descend to your
Expense of time, that precious Treasure which is incomparably to be valued
above all that we enjoy, because it affords a respit of using or employing,
whatsoever we enjoy.

Expense of time.
TIme is so absolute and sovereign a Regent, as he is all-commanding, but not
to be countermanded; whence we commonly say, that Time and Tide stays for no
man. There is nothing undertaken by man, which can be effected without the
attendance and graceful assistance of Time. Neither can experience be gained,
nor Truth, the Daughter of Time discovered, nor the issue of any man's
expectance attained, nor any thing worthy observance produced, unless Time
further it. There is nothing of consequence, Eucherius.
that can be done at an instant: great Taskes require long Time; neither can
we limit Time, Nil preciosius tempore, and heu nil hodie eo vilius invenitur:
transeunt di^ssalutis and nemo cogital. Bern.
but Time will limit us: whence it appears, that nothing can be intended, much
less effected, unless Time assist and second it. Time being thus precious, we
must of necessity value it above any inferior Substance, seeing without the
company of Time, we are wholly deprived of the use of our Substance. Whence it
was that a friend of mine caused these two verses to be set directly before his
Table of accounts; If Coins expense be such, pray then Divine
How rare and precious is the expense of Time.
Now there be three sorts of persons, with whom I am to encounter by way of
admonishment, for their abuse or careless expense of Time; the Ambitious,
Voluptuous, and miserable covetous person. For the first, he trifles away Time,
in the pursuit of impossibilities, spending his means, and misspending Time,
in hope of a day; which day he seldom or never sees, for his Time is a bridged
before it come: so as the date of his death anticipates the day of his hopes.
Now to point out the place of his abode, he is ever to be found in the
eminentest places, for obscurity fits not his humor, whose only aims are to
acquire honor. He is so far from moderating his humor, as he is humorously
conceited of his worth, and thinks whatsoever the Parasite says in his
commendations, to be no less than what he in his own proper person deserves,
For his Contemplations, they are ever mounting, yet seldom so high mounting as
heaven, for his thoughts are directed to another Sphere. He is prodigal in his
feasts, solicitous in the pursuit of friends, impatient in the quest of
rivalls, and importunate in the dispatch of his affairs: Majus dedecus est,
par^a amittere, quam non omnino paravisse. Salust.
and though it be a greater reproach to lose what is got, than not at all to
get; yet his aim is to get, though he foresee his loss before he get: and
though the least liberty be apportioned to the greatest fortune, yet in his
highest fortunes will he use the greatest liberty: the reason is, he conceits
himself to walk in a Cloud, where no popular eye can reach him. He is
unmeasurably opinionate, and admires his own knowledge, wherein he discovers
his own folly: for as he that seeks to be more wise than he can be, shall be
found to be less wise than he should be; so he who conceits himself more
wise than he is, displayes himself to the world what he is. So as it seems,
he differs in opinion from the Poet, who holds this as a maxim: He Is solely
wise, Martial. lib. 14.
who is not selfely wise,
But humble in the judgment of his eyes.
Now his daily Tasks may be aptly compared to Domitians sports, who spent the
whole day in catching Flies. For those many projects which he has devised,
those impossible aims he has contrived, Sext A^^el. in Domit.
those ayrie Turrets he has reared, fall in the end to nothing; and like those
misty conclusions of the deluded Alchymist, bewray the folly of him that formed
them. Ne quid us^uam honesti occu^^^^l (...).

Vid. Tacit.


And as Domitian grew ashamed of his own impieties, exiling all Arts, lest the
knowledge of them should bring him to a discovery of himself: so the ambitious
man whose aims are as boundless, as his purposes fruitless, when his eyes
begin to be unsealed, and those scales of ambition, which hindered his sight,
removed, he will then (if then be not too late) acknowledge his shame, Quam
quisque pess^me fici^, ^am maxim t^t^s est. Salust.
and ingenuously confess that his unbounded aims deserved no better guerdon;
for had his actions been sincere, they had made him more secure. Likewise for
the Voluptuous man, whose belly is his god, and sensuality his delight, let me
speak thus much: as his care extends but only to the day, slaving himself to
the pleasures of sin, and preferring the husks of vanity, before the
soule-solacing cates of eternity: so shall his misery appear greater, when
deprived of those delights, wherein his sole felicity consisted. This fleshly
Libertine mis-imployeth Time in two respects; first, in respect of himself;
secondly, in respect of those good creatures which were ordained for the use or
service of himself. In himself, by exposing so glorious an Image to the
subjection of sense, and mis-applying those gifts which he has received, being
diverted from those good offices, for which they were bestowed. In Gods good
creatures, by converting them to abuse, which were only ordained for use, and
turning them to wantonness, which were created for health and relief of
weakness. This is he, who makes life a merriment, his pilgrimage a pastime,
each year his Iubile. This is he, who turns fasting into feasting, praying
into playing, almsdeeds into all mis-deeds. This is he, whose sole delight is
in dainty feeding, to cause inordinate motions to be stirring, without least
respect at all of his souls starving. Cujus cupediae ^er ula mediae, cujus
januae ca^cera mendici.
This is he, whose dishes are the poor man's curses, and whose gate is the
beggars Iaile, where they are barred from least crumme of comfort. This is he,
who stalks and struts in the street; sends forth his eye to bring him in a
booty of Lust, or acquaint him with some new fashion, or delight him with some
vain show. This is he, who sends forth his ear, to convey unto him some
choice melody to intraunce him; his taste, with some luscious viands to provoke
him; his smell, with some rare perfumes to cheer him; his touch, with soft
clothing, or whatsoever may more effeminately move him. But where to shall
these outward delights avail him, when the cold earth shall e^tertaine him;
when he shall be divided from them, and they from him? Dan. 5.6.
When Belshazzar beheld the hand upon the wall, he was put quite out of his
humor of jollity; his cheerfulness was turned into pensiveness, his mirth
into mourning, his solace into sorrowing. Even so shall it fare with the
Voluptuous man, whose delight was only on earth; when that fearful and
ungrateful summons shall peremptorily injoine him to bid a due (a long a due)
to those sensual consorts which accompanied him, those inordinate meetings
which so much delighted him, yea, all those licentious pleasures which so
inchained him; he will exclaim (but in vain shall be those exclamations) and
curse the occasions of his misspent Time. O what a hard task would he endure,
to redeem what his Security has lost? What extremities would he suffer, what
difficulties undergo? How great and exceeding things would he promise? Pet.
Dam. de hora Mortis.
In what bonds of firm devotion would he stand engaged? Surely there is
nothing that either flesh could sustain, or Mortality suffer, which he would
not most willingly endure, to deliver his endangered soul from eternal
torments. Lastly, for the miserable Covetous wretch, who makes great use of his
Coin, but small use of his Time, treasuring up vengeance against the day of
wrath; how careful is he in making his barnes larger, in filling his chests
fuller, in inhauncing his rents higher; but how respectlesse of that supreme
good, wherein all happiness consists? See, how Menedemus-like, he is ever
digging and delving to raise a fortune for his seldom thriving posterity. Thus
lives he, to become an eternal affliction to himself; in whose person the
Poet very properly expressed a Misers nature after this manner; Sic mihi
divitias, samuli patie^dolahores, Nec minor est domino servus in aresu^.
Thus do I dig, thus do I delve
^'enrich my state thereby,
Yet th'poorest slave of all I have,
enjoyes as much as I.
This was one of those vanities which the wisest of Princes observed, Eccles. 4
8.
as incident to the children of men, that many gathered, yet knew not for whom
they gathered, having likewise no power to use what God had in his mercy
bestowed. Now to give this miserable Caitiffe his due Character: V^inam invidi
oculos haberent in ^mnibus locis, ut de omnibus soelicitatibus torquerentur:
Nam quanta sunt foelicium gaudia, tanti invidorum sunt gemitus. Seneca.
He is his own executioner, being good to none, but worst to himself. His eye
is so fixed on earth, as he finds no Time to erect it to heaven. He employes
so much time in getting and gathering goods, as he reserves no time for doing
good. He little observes how all earthly things are sweeter in the ambition,
than in the fruition, in the affection, than possession. Nor how the circular
World cannot fill the triangular Heart, no more than a Circle can fill a
Triangle; where still there will be some empty corners. He runs on still in
desire, laboring of a disease incurable, till Death cure him. He increases
his cares with his substance, and the more he adds to his estate, the more
he detracts from his content. The poor he has always with him, for he
makes all poor that deal with him. In brief, he is of all others most
miserable, because in his riches he has all his consolation: which, like the
Egyptian reed, will fail him in his confidence, leaving him bare and naked to
the testimony of a guilty conscience. Luke 12.
For how secure was the Rich-man (as he thought) when he invited his wretched
soul to take her rest, 19.
having much goods laid up for many years; but this selfe-securitie was the
occasion of his succeeding misery, 20.
for that night was his soul to be taken from him. It is a true saying, that
the Devil requires nothing of man but Security, for that gives him
opportunity of practicing his undoing. Now, how bitter is the remembrance of
Death, much more the unwelcome approach of Death to this miserable covetous
man, who has all his peace in his substance? For if nothing be so terrible as
Death, (as Aristotle writes:) which Antiochus feeling sensibly in himself,
cries out thus; 1 Mac. 6.11.
Oh into what adversity am I come, and into what flo^ds of misery am I now
fallen? He adds the reason anon after; 13.
For I must die with great sorrow in a strange Land. Surely then, to the
miserable worldling, who has made a covenant with sin, and a league with
transgression, must the approach of Death seem terrible, being to be divided
from the staff of his confidence, from thence to descend without least hope of
comfort to the land of forgetfulness: Fiori non potest ut male muriatur, qui
been vix^rit. Bl^s. Encli^id. pirvul. auth^r.
for, as it cannot possibly be, that he should die ill, who has lived well; so
it cannot be, that he who has lived ill, should die well: for as the Scorpion
has in her the remedy of her own poison, a receipt for her own infection; so
the evil man carries always with him the punishment of his own wickedness,
the which does never leave (so incessant is the torment of a guilty
conscience) to wound and afflict his mind, both sleeping and waking; so as, to
what place soever he betake him, he cannot so privately retire, but fear and
horror will awake him; nor sly so fast, though he should take the wings of the
morning, but fury and vengeance will over-take him. Having thus far proceeded
in the treating of such Subjects, wherein Temperance is required, and of such
assailants, by whom she is usually encountered and impugned: it rests now, that
I impart my advice briefly touching Temperance or Moderation of the Passions of
the mind, Moderation of the Passions of the mind reduced to two Subjects.
whereof (omitting the rest, as having elsewhere discoursed of them) I will
only, and that briefly, insist of these two, the passions of Joy and Sorrow.

Joy.
This passion (to insist on Joy first) requires direction, to order our desires
aright in the matter of Joy. Every man loves a glad heart; and wishes Joy, as
the fruit of his labors; Job 31.25. He^^er 5 11. Eccles. 2.2. Dan. 5.1, 2, 3,
etc.
but therein many mistake. First, one rejoices in his Substance, he has
gotten much. Secondly, another rejoices in his Promotion. Thirdly, another
doateth upon that mad mirth which Solomon speaks of. Fourthly, another
rejoices in a Table richly decked, an overflowing cup, a faring deliciously
every day. Fifthly, another rejoices at the destruction of him, Job 31.29.
whom he hates. Sixthly, another rejoices in sin, and wickedness. It is a
pastime to a fool to do wickedly. It is the Drunkards joy to be at the cup
early, Prove 10.23. Esaias 5.11. Job 24.15. Zeph 1 9. Genesis 21.9. Job 17.6. Psalm.
69.12.
and to sit till the wine has enflamed them. The twilight glads the heart of
the Adulterer. The Oppressor danceth upon the threshold of him that is
oppressed. Ismael geereth at Isaac. Holy Job was as a Tabret to the godless
ones; and the Drunkards made songs on David. But this is not that Joy which is
required, because the foundation of this Joy is grounded on sin: wherefore we
are to find a Joy more pure, more permanent: for the Joy of the wicked is
short, but the Joy of the righteous shall endure for ever. This Joy which we
are to seek, and whereon we are to ground our sole content, is no carnal but
a spiritual Joy: the Joy of our hearts, the divine Melody of our souls,
concluding with the blessed Apostle; God forbid that we should rejoice in any
thing, G^l. 6.14.
but in the cross of Christ, and him crucified: For in this did all the Saints
and servants of God joy, disvaluing all other joy, as unworthy the
entertainment of the soul. We are to rejoice likewise, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
forasmuch as God has called us not to uncleanness, but unto holiness. We
are to rejoice in the testimony of a good conscience, being that continual
feast which refreshes every faithful guest. We are to rejoice in our
brothers aversion from sin, and conversion to God; in his prosperity and
success in his affairs of state. But above all things we are so to moderate
our joy in the whole progress of our life, that our joy may the more abound in
him, who is the crown of our hope after this life.

The like directions are required in our moderation of sorrow: Sorrow.
for there is a sorrow unto death; which to prevent, understand this by the
way, that not so much the passion, as the occasion enforcing the passion, is to
be taken heed of. 2 Samuel 13.2.
Sorrow we may, but not as Ammon did, till he had defloured Thamar, for that
was the sorrow of licentiousness: 1 King. 21.4.
Sorrow we may, but not as Ahab did, till he had got Naboths vineyard, for
that was the sorrow of covetousness: Genesis 37.11.
Sorrow we may, but not as Joseph's brethren did, grieving that their father
should love him more than them, for that was the sorrow of maliciousness:
Jonah 4.1.
Sorrow we may, but not as Jonah did, grieving that the Ninivites were not
destroyed, for that was the sorrow of unmercifulness. Lastly, sorrow we may,
but not as the Or, Gederans. Joseph. li. 17 6.13. Matthew. 8.34.
Gergesenes did, grieving for the loss of their swine, for that was the sorrow
of worldliness. These sorrows are not so much to be moderated as wholly
abolished, because they are grounded on sin: but there is a religious and godly
sorrow, which, though it afflict the body, it refreshes the spirit; though it
fill the heart with heaviness, it crowns the soul with happiness. Quo
quisque sanctior, co ejus in orando fletus uberior. Aug.
And this is not a sorrow unto sin, but a sorrow for sin; not a sorrow unto
death, but a sorrow to cure the wound of death. By how much any one (says a
good Father) is holier, by so much in prayer are his teates plentifuller. Here
sounds the Surdon of religious sorrow, the awaker of devotion, the begetter of
spiritual compunction, and the sealer of heavenly consolation; being the way
to those that begin; Via est incipientibus: veritas est proficientibus: and
vita perfectis. Tho. a Campis in soliloq. animae. cap. 12.
truth to those that profit, and life to them that are perfect. But alas, the
natural man (says the Apostle) perceives not the things of the spirit of
God; for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. It is true; and this should move us to more fervor
of devotion, 1 Cor. 2.14.
beseeching the divine assistance to minister strength to our weakness, that
what is wanting in the flesh, may be supplied by the spirit: yea daily to set
our houre-glasse beside us, and observe those precious grains (the minute
treasures of time) how swiftly they run through the Cruet, whereof not one must
fall un-numbred: for as a hair of the head shall not perish, Bernard.
no more shall the least moment of time. Now how healthful were it (though the
carnal man distaste it) to vie tears with grains of sand, that our sins,
being as the Sands of the Seashore, that is, numberless, might be bound up
and thrown into the deep Sea of eternal forgetfulness: so as they may
neither rise up in this life to shame us, nor in the world to come to condemn
us. Surely, if you would know those blessed fruits which true penitent sorrow
produces, you shall find, that He who sowes in tears, shall reap in joy:
Neither can any one go to heaven with dry eyes. May your tears be so shed on
earth, that they may be bottled in heaven; so shall you bring your sheaves with
you, and like fine flower, being boulted from the bran of corruption, receive
your portion in the land of the living. And may this Sacrifice of tears which
you offer up unto him, whose eyes are upon all the ways of the children of
men, minister like comfort to your souls, as they have done to many faithful
members of Christ's Church. And let this suffice to have been spoken of such
Subjects, wherein Moderation is to be used: for to speak of Moderation of
sorrow for sin, I hold it little necessary, seeing most men (so insensible
are they of their inward wounds) come rather short of that sorrow which is
required,
than exceed in any sort the measure that is prescribed.

AS Moderation in all the precedent subjects is to be used, Wh^rin Moderation
is to be limited.
so in all and every of them is it to be limited; for to be so Stoically
affected (as we have formerly noted) as not to entertain so much as modest
mirth, or approve of the temperate and moderate use of those things, which were
at first ordained for the use and service of man, digresseth as far from the
rule of moderation in restraint, as the profusely minded Libertine does in
excess. How hard a thing is it then to observe with indifferency an equal or
direct course herein, when either by leaping short or over, we are subject to
error? So says blessed Cranmer; Some lose their game by short shooting, some
by over shooting: some walk too much on the left hand, some too much on the
right hand. Now to propose what form of direction is best to be observed
herein; we will take a view of those Subjects, whereof we formerly treated,
and set down in each of them what Moderation is to be used. All waters are
derived from three ways or currents: springing either by fountains and
spring-heads, from the bowels of the earth inwardly drained; by rivers and
conduits from those fountains derived; or hail and snow from the earth
extracted, where some ascend, some descend: so passions are three ways moved
in our bodies; by humors arising out of our bodies; by external senses, and
the secret passage of sensual objects; or by the descent or commandment of
reason. Now to insist on the motion or effect of each passion we shall not
greatly need, having sufficiently touched them in our former discourse; we
will therefore upon a review of those several Subjects, Lust, Ambition,
Gorgeous apparel, Luscious fare, Company-keeping, etc. reduce them and the
occasion of them to those three troubled Springs, from whence miserable man, by
means of the immoderate appetite of sense, sucks the banefull poison of sin;
The Concupiscence of the Flesh, the Concupiscence of the eyes, and the Pride of
life: for whatsoever is in the world (as a good Father notes, Aug. Soliloq.
cap. 12.
and as the blessed Apostle himself affirms) is one of these. As first,
whatsoever suiteth or sorteth with the desire or delicacie of the flesh, 1 John
2.16.
ministers fuel or matter to feed the Concupiscence thereof. Now this fleshly
Libertine takes no delight in the Spirit, Concupiscence of the flesh.
but in the Flesh; he loves to be clothed in purple and fare deliciously every
day; he loves to keep company with those consorts of ruin and misery, who
drink till they be inflamed, and delight themselves in the pleasures of sin.
Secondly, whatsoever relisheth of vanity, ministers him objects of content, to
feed the unsatiate concupiscence of his eyes: which eyes, like Dinah, stray
from him, Genesis 34.1.
fixing themselves upon some vain object, which suits ever best with his
choice, who owes them, and so conveyes some present but perfunctorie delight
unto him. As if he be covetous, they show him Naboths vineyard; 1 King. 21.2. 2 Samuel 11.2. Judith 16.11. Genesis 25.30.
if wanton, a beauteous Bersheba, or the sandals of Judith, which ravished the
eyes of Holophernes; if dainty-toothd, Jacobs red pottage; if proud, the silks
of Tire; in brief, they fit every one with an object according to his
condition. Lastly, whatsoever may minister content to the proud and high-minded
man, who walks upon his Turrets, saying, Is not this great Babel which I have
builded? Dan. 4.17. Esther 7.10. Dan. 5.1.
is suggested to him; putting him in mind of Hamans honor, but never of
Hamans Ladder; telling him of Balthazars birthday, whereon he feasted royally,
but never of his last day, Dan. ^.30. Acts 12.22.
whereon he died fearfully; showing him Herod's garment which shone as the
Sun, and of his applause, The voice of God and not of man; but never of the
eclipse of that Sun, Qui modo immortalu vocabar, etc. Eusebius.
when he became so loathsome, as his smell could be endured by no man. Now to
propose our rules of limitation in the Moderation of these: As we are
commanded to subdue the flesh with those inordinate affections, which arise
from the infirmity thereof; so are we not enjoined to kill the flesh, for so
should we disgresse from the rule of humanity: for no man hates his own
flesh, Ephesians 5.29.
but loves and cherishes it. No; our righteousness in this life, which may
be rather said to consist in the remission of sins, August* de civil. Dei, l.
19. c. 27.
than perfection of virtues, as it is to be furthered by all ordinary and
direct means, so are we not to transgress that law, line, or limit, which is
prescribed. We must not cut off our members with a knife, but our carnal
affections with a holy and a mortified life.
Whence it is, that Origin was justly punished by using too little diligence
where there was great need, Tertul lib. de poenilen, initio.
because he used too great diligence where there was little need. For, gelding
himself, he prevented himself of a greater conquest: Quem de stumine Gallo,
qu^ per Phrygiam labitur, propinasse ar^itremur; de q^o quicunque bibit,
tautepere insanire solet, ut seipsum illico castraturus est. Pump. Laetus de
sacerd. Blos.
for there is no mastery to get the mastery of sin through disabilitie. For
as he that surceaseth but then from sin, when he can sin no more, forsakes
not his sins, but his sins forsake him; so he who disableth himself for
committing sin, lest his ability should draw him to sin, disableth not his
sins, but his sins disable him: for howsoever he has disabled the act of
sin, he has not suppressed the occasion, which rests not so much in the act,
as in the desire to sin. No less worthy was Democritus error of reproving,
who was blinded before he was blind: for a Christian need not put out his eyes
for fear of seeing a woman; Tertul. in Apolog. c. 45.
since howsoever his bodily eye see, yet still his heart is blind against all
unlawful desires. The princely Prophet says indeed, Psalm. 11.8.
Lord turn away my eyes from vanity; but this turning does not so much imply
the look of the eye, as the lust or assent of the heart. Neither is it so
requisite to make a covenant with our eyes that they shall not look upon a
woman, as to make a covenant with our hearts that they may never lust after a
woman. In like sort, if any intemperate or immoderate desire to luscious fare
or delicious drink should surprise us, whose subtle fumes unrivet each joint
of the memory, and loosen the cement which held it fast;
(for you shall ever note, as I said before, that deep drinkers have but
shallow memories:) we are so to prevent the abuse, that we contemn not the
moderate and healthful use of them. For as to use them in excess is to abuse
them, so not to use them at all is to contemn or neglect Gods providence in
them. We must not say with the Epicure, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall die; but rather let us eat and drink, as if to morrow we should die;
remembering that strict account which every one must give of the use or abuse of
Gods creatures: for it is not the use, but abuse which produces sin. So as
Thracius,
whom I formerly touched, and of whom Aulus Gellius writes, Noctium Atticarum
li. 19. c. 13.
covertly glancing at his folly, was for any thing that I can see, even at that
time most of all drunken, when he cut down all his vines, lest he should be
drunken. Likewise in the quest or pursuit of honor, as it is ambition to hunt
after it, undeserved; so it is the most apparent testimony of true and
approved virtue, to obtain it undesired. For this reluctancie to receiving of
honor, can never be without some mixture of pride: for they would have the
world to observe, how well they deserve it; and again, their humility (which
is seldom in these without some tincture of vainglory) in that they so
little desire it. So as, these popular and fiery spirits, whose only aims are
to dignifie themselves, deserve no sharper curb for over-valuing themselves,
than these, who pride themselves in their humility, deserve for counterfeiting
a kind of debasing or dis-valuing of themselves to the eye of the world.
Whence I might take occasion to speak of those precise Schismatics, who
cannot endure any precedencie or prioritie of place to be in the Church, but an
equality of Presbytery; but I will leave them to a sharper censure, till they
be thoroughly cured of their distemper.

Now for the second motive to sin, Concupiscence of the eye.
which is the Concupiscence of the eye; as it is so to be moderated that it
stray not, so should it be so directed that it sleep not; sleep not, I say,
in the survey of that, for which it was created. The eye strayeth, when it
coveteth what it should not; it sleeps, when it retireth from what it should:
it strayeth, when it lusts after a strange woman* it sleeps, when it
reads not the Law of God, to reclaim it from lusting after a strange woman:
it strayeth, when it lusts after Naboths vineyard; it sleeps, when it looks
not after Gods vineyard. Neither is the eye so to be limited, as if
contemplation were only intended; for as it is not sufficient to pray, unless
we practice as well as pray; so is it not sufficient to look upon the Law,
unless we live after the Law on which we look. We read that Abraham
buried Sarah in the cave of Ma^pelah, Genesis 23.19.
that is, in a double Sepulcher. He that burieth his mind in knowledge only,
without any care of practice, he buries Sarah in a single Sepulcher: but he
that buries his mind, as well in the practice and feeling of religion, (which
is all in all) as in the knowledge and understanding of it, he buries Sarah in
a double Sepulcher: and so must all we do which are the true children of
Abraham: for then with Abraham burying our spirit in a double Sepulcher, we
shall with Elizeus have a double Spirit; 2 King 2.9 15.
a spirit that as well does, as teaches. Otherwise, we are but tinkling
Cymbals, making only a sound of religion, without any sound or sincere
profession: 1 Cor. 13.1.
being (as that honey-tongu'd Father says) in body inward, Corpore interius,
sed cord exterius. Bernard. Med. cap. 8.
but in heart outward. Now the eye, as it is the tenderest and subtilest organ
of all others, so should the object on which it is fixed, be the purest and
clearest of all others. The Eagle accounts those of her young ones bastards,
which cannot fix their eyes upon the Sun, and with equal reflection (as it
were) reverberate the beaming vigor or splendor thereof: which should be the
Emblem of divine contemplation; teaching us, that howsoever we have our feet
on earth, we are to have our eyes in heaven: not by prying too saucily into
the sealed Arc of Gods inscrutable will, but by meditating ever of him, so to
rest in him, that after earth we may for ever rest with him. It is observed by
professed Oculists, that whereas all creatures have but four muscles to turn
their eyes round about, Columella lib. 5. cap. 9.
man has a fifth to pull his eyes up to heaven. How far divert they then
their eyes from the contemplation of that object, for which they were created,
who cannot see their neighbors ground but they must cover it, nor his beast
but they desire it, nor any thing which likes them, but with a greedy eye they
heart-eat it? So large is the extent or circuit of their heart to earthly
things, as they can see nothing but they instantly desire; so strait is the
circumference of their heart to heavenly things, they set no mind on them, as
if altogether unworthy their desire. So as I cannot more aptly compare these
idolizing worldlings to any thing, Foetorem quem ab ibis p^i^s emisissel, ob
ore denuo recipit. Pl^n. in Na^* bist. Aelian. Gerson.
than to the bird Ibis, which is of that filthy nature, as she receives those
excrements in at her mouth, which she had purged before from her guts. Neither
do they resemble this bird only in respect of their bestiall or insatiate
receipt, but also in the unbounded extent of their heart. Oris Apollo writes,
that the Egyptians when they would describe the heart, paint that bird which
they call Ibis; because they think that no creature, for proportion of the
body, has so great a heart as the Ibis has. Neither has our worldly Ibis a
less heart to the filthy desires of the world, being of necessity forced to
leave the world, before he can leave desiring the things of this world: for
their eyes, Satan-like, come from compassing the whole earth, esteeming no joy
to the worldling, like much enjoying: yet am I not so rigorously affected, or
from feeling of humanity so far estranged, as with Democritus, to move you to
pull out your eyes, that the occasion of temptation might be removed, by being
of your eyes, those motives to temptation, wholly deprived. Ariost^.
Nor with that inamored Italian, to wish you to fix your eyes upon the beams
of the Sun, till they were ^eared, that the sight of your Mistress might not
move your disquiet. No; enjoy your eyes, and make them directers to guide you,
not as blind or deceitful guides to entrap you; Erga mundum hab^amus oculum
re^ortum.
use the object of this Sense, but weane it from assenting to concupiscence;
concluding ever with that good remembrance, May that object be from our eyes
removed, which makes us from our dear Lord divided.

Now for the last Motive, Pride of life.
which is the Pride of life; it was Lucifers sin, and therefore should be
each true Christians scorn. August. Soliloq. cap. 2^.
For this sin (says an ancient and learned Father) are the children of the
kingdom thrown into utter darkness: and whence comes this, but because
they ascend up unto that Mountain, unto which the first Angel ascended, and
as a Devil descended? He who entertaineth this Motive, is an ambitious man,
who (as one rightly observes) may be well and fitly similized with the
Chameleon, who has nothing in his body but Lungs; so the badge of the
ambitious is to be windy and boisterous: whereas, if he would measure all his
undertakings, rather by the dignity of the thing, than the Ambition of his
mind, he should find as much content as now he finds disquiet. It was the
rule of a wise Statesman, and well deserves it the observance of every private
person, Omnia metiri malim dignitate quam ambitione. Pl^n. in epist.
but especially of such who sit near the Stern of State; not to suffer any
ambitious heat transport him, but to measure a^l things according to their
dignity and worth: and withal, rather to refer the opinion of themselves and
their actions to the censure of others, and freely put themselves to be weighed
in the judicious scale or balance of others, than to be approvers of
themselves without the suffrage of others: for certainly, as there is no
humor more predominant than Ambition, nor apter to make man forgetful of
himself; so he who is of a haughty and proud disposition Judging of another
consists in these three points: First, when a man does well, to say he does
evil.

Secondly, when a man does evil, to say that man does worse.

Thirdly, when a thing is doubtful, to take it in the worser part.

Vid. Annal.

Stow.

Laert. in vit. Pittaci.


dis-values all others, purposely to prize his own deserts at an higher
estimate. I remember with what character that proud English Cardinal was
decolored, who bare so great stroke in this Kingdom, as it was in his power
to shake the foundation of Monasteries, and from their ruins to raise his own
structures; that he was so puffed up with Ambition, as he preferred the
humor of his person, before the discharge of his Profession. Surely that
sentence was verified in him, Promotion declares what men be; for never was
his Nature thoroughly discovered, nor his inside displayed, till his outside
was with the Cardinals Pall graced. How necessary is it then for man, being
more subject to Pride himself in his height, than with patience to receive a
fall, to learn how to moderate his acception of honor, before he come to
honor? For I do not so limit him, as if he should not at all receive it, but
rather how he should demean himself having received it. Neither in Ambition
only, but in that attire of ^in, gorgeous apparel, is the like limitation to
be used: for herein are we to observe such decency, as neither the contempt
thereof may tax us of irregular carelessness, nor affectation thereof evince us
of too singular niceness: for the former, as it implies a careless
indifferency, so the latter argues an effeminate delicacy: for God hates no
less in man this sloth and sluttishnesse, than he hates too much neatness
and niceness. Yea, I have oft-times observed no less pride shrouded under a
threadbare cloak, than under a more sumptuous coat. So as, Antisthenes went
not far a wrong, who seeing Socrates show his torn cloak, showing an hole
thereof unto the people;
Lo, quoth he, through this I see Socrates vanity. It is not the Hood which
makes the Monk, Pallium video, Philosophum non video.
nor the Cloak which makes the Philosopher; but the Disposition of the mind,
which makes him a true or false professor. It is good therefore, in the use of
these things to observe the end for which they were ordained; now apparel was
not ordained to pride us in it,
but to be kept warm by it. Comment in 1 Regum cap. 1.
Peter Martyr shows, that Clothing does keep the body warm two ways: By
keeping in the natural heat of the body; and by keeping out the accidental
cold of the air. This then being ordained for necessity, is not be used for
vainglory: for howsoever (to such excess of vanity is this age grown) that
fashion is esteemed neatest, which is newest; discretion will inform you
better, and tell you that fashion is of all other the choicest, which is the
comliest. But that these three maine Motives to temptation, and professed
assailants of Moderation, I mean, Concupiscence of the flesh, Concupiscence of
the eyes, and Pride of life may be the better resisted, Chrysostom. lib. de
orand^ Des.
incessant Prayer is to be used. For Prayer is Gods honor, Man's armor, and
the Devils terror; it is Gods oblation, Man's munition, and the Devils
expulsion. By Prayer are those Treasures dug, which faith in the Gospel
beholds. As it is then Gods Sacrifice, let it be Man's Exercise, that it may
defeat the Devils malice: saying with blessed Augustine; August. Soliloq. cap.
1^.
Behold, O Lord my God, the whole world is full of the snares of Concupiscence,
which they have prepared for my feet, and who shall escape them? Truly he, from
whom thou shall take away the pride of his eyes, that the Concupiscence of his
eyes may not seize on him; and from whom thou shall take away the Concupiscence
of the flesh, that the Concupiscence of the flesh may not surprise him; and
from whom thou shall take away an irreverent and unbridled mind, that the
pride of life may not craftily deceive him. O happy he, to whom thou shall
do this, surely he shall pass his days in safety! Thus far have I
proceeded in discourse touching both manner and matter, how and wherein
Moderation is to be limited. Where, in the pursuit of honor, as I would have
you no Canius, too Stoically to contemn it; so no Cassius, too tenderly to
affect it: Likewise in the pursuit of Wealth, as I would have you no Mimus, too
scornefully to hate it; so no Midas, too slavishly to hug it: Likewise in the
pursuit of Fancy, as I would have you no Arminius, too severely to loath it;
so no Arsenius, too dearly to love it: Likewise in Fare, as I would have you
no Pythagoras, too rigorously to abstain it; so no Diagoras, too riotously to
epicure it: Likewise in Apparel, as I would have you no Diogenes, too
carelessly to use it; so no Demosthenes, too curiously to choose it: Lastly, in
Pleasure, as I would have you no Philopomenes, too strictly to despise it; so
no Philoxenus, too highly to prize it. For Origin himself eunuching,
Democritus his eyes blinding, Crates his money drowning, and Thracius his vines
destroying, no less offended (as we have before observed) in exceeding the
limit by Nature proposed, than the Libertines of their time, came short of that
rule which Moderation had prescribed. But drawing near shore, I am now to
descend to the last branch of this Observation, treating of the Accomplished
end which attends Moderation.

AS there is no Art or Science which has not some especial end, Of the
accomplished end which attends Moderation.
to which it is properly directed; so is there no Virtue which works or
actuates not for some end; in the acquisition whereof it is fully satisfied.
Now touching this end, whereto all virtues were and are properly directed; both
Heathen and Divine Philosophers with one consent have concluded it to be that
Summary or S^preme good, than which nothing could be better in respect of the
fullness, higher in respect of the worthiness, or safer in respect of the
securenesse. But how different in opinion the ancient Philosophers have been
touching this Summary or Supreme good, what it should be, or wherein it might
be properly said to consist; there is none having been conversant in their
Ethics, but he sufficiently knows it. Lib. de Philosophi^ apud Aug. de
Civitate Dei. lib. 29. cap. 1.
So as Varro reports, that these ancient Philosophers have held and
maintained two hundred threescore and eight several opinions concerning
Felicity. Where some placed their Summary good in Honors or preferments,
others in Pleasures or delights, but few in that true or accomplished
Felicity* the testimony of a good conscience, which only makes man happy; and
without which, enjoying all, he enjoyes nothing: for were this Felicity or
accomplished end, to which all virtues are properly directed, to be found on
Earth, then were the hopes of many good and virtuous men frustrated, whose
thoughts are so far above the foundation of earth, The difference betwixt the
Ethnic and Christian Ethick, in the opinion of Felici^ie.
or all those perfunctory delights, which this low Theater can afford; as they
have esteemed such men of all others most miserable upon earth, whose thoughts
were not erected above earth, but sla^ed to the desires of this life; as if
their hopes extended no further. No; in vain were those many sighings and
groanings in the spirit, those incessant labors and watchings, which the
faithful so willingly undergo, if there were no happiness save only in
enjoying the delights of this life; the fruition whereof, as they tender no
true sweetness, so are they ever attended by sharp repentance. For howbeit,
every one be reputed worthy, if he be wealthy, and naught if he be needy; yet
when Sin, having three punishments, Fear, Shame, and Guilt; Fear of
judgment, Shame of men, and Guilt of conscience: shall convent and convict
him, he shall find that riches cannot deliver in the day of wrath. So as
howsoever the sin seem sweet, the sting of sin shall wound his heart: Prove.
10.17.
For the bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but his mouth shall be filled with
gravel. Likewise the High-minded man, whose heart has been only set on
Titles of Honor, howsoever he seemed raised or reared above the pitch of
common earth, disdaining these poor wormelings, who had the selfsame Maker,
though inferior to this high Cedar in honor; when he shall be forced to call
Corruption his mother, and worms his brethren and sisters; when he must leave
that high Babel, which his pride erected; those worldly swelling Tumors, his
slippery honors, which he once enjoyed; those Sycophants, the followers of
greatness, which he so much affected; yea, the world it self, where all his
imaginary glory was stored; he shall then find goodness to be far better
than greatness, and worldly dignity to add fuel to those Violls, which he
has worthily incured. Likewise the Voluptuous man, as he has enjoyed the
pleasures of sin for a season, sported him in his beds of Ivory, feasted
royally, fated deliciously, and fed all his miserable senses with a loathed
satiety, he shall feel that the pleasure of sin was final, but the
punishment due to sin eternal; he shall feel a worm ever gnawing, never
ending; fiery tears ever streaming, never stinting; grief ever griping, never
ceasing; death ever living, never dying: yea, that worm which gnaweth and
dies not, that fire which burns and quenches not, August. Bernard.
that death which rages and ends not. But if punishments will not deter
us, at least le^ rewards allure us. The faithful cry ever for the approach of
Gods judgment; the reward of immortality, which, with assurance in Gods
mercies, and his Sons Passion, they undoubtedly hope to obtain; with
vehemency of spirit inviting their Mediator; Revel. 22.10.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Such is the confidence or spiritual assurance
which every faithful soul has in him, to whose express Image as they were
formed, so in all obedience are they conformed; that the promises of the
Gospel might be on them conferred and confirmed. Such as these care not so
much ^or possessing ought in the world, as they take care to lay a good
foundation against the day of trial, which may stand firm against the fury of
all temptation. These see nothing in the world worthy their fear. (...).
Nazian.
This only (say they) is a fearful thing, to fear any thing more than God.
These see naught in the world worthy either their Qui nil habe^ in m^ndo quod
appetat, nihil est quod de mundo per timescal. Cyprian.
desire or fear; and their reason is this, Quis ei deseculo metus est, cui in
seculo Deus tutor est? ibid.
There is nothing able to move that man to fear in all the world, who has God
for his guardian in the world. Neither is it possible that he should fear the
loss of anything in the world, who cannot see any thing worthy having in the
world. So equally affected are these toward the world, as there is nothing in
all the world, that may any way divide their affection from him, who made the
world. Therefore may we well conclude touching these, that their Light shall
never go out: For these walk not in darkness, nor in the shadow of death, as
those to whom the light has not as yet appeared: for the Light has appeared
in Darkness, De hac die lux pr^ficit, sed nox deficit. Aug.
giving light all the night long to all these faithful believers, during their
abode in these Houses of Clay. Now to express the Nature of that Light, though
it far exceed all humane apprehension, much more all expression: Clemens
understands by that Light, (...) appellat Clemens.
which the Wise-woman, to wit, Christ's Spouse, kept by means of her candle
which gave light all the night long, the heart, and he calls the Meditations
of holy men, Candles that never go out. Saint Augustine writes, among the
Pagans in the Temple of Venus, there was a Candle which was called
Inextinguishable: whether this be or no of Venus Temple, we leave it to the
credit of antiquity, August. de Civil. Det. lib. 21. cap. 6.
only Augustines report we have for it; but without doubt in every faithful
hearer and keeper of the Word, who is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, there is a
Candle or Light that never goes out. Whence it appears, that the Heart of
every faithful soul is that Light which ever shines, and his faith that
virgin Oil which ever feeds, and his Conscience that comfortable Witness
which assures, and his devoted Zeal to Gods house, that Seal which
confirms him to be one of Gods chosen, because a living faith works in him,
which assures him of life, howsoever his outward man, the temple of his body,
become subject to death. Excellently says Saint Augustine: Tract. 49. in Job.
Vnde mors in anima? quia non est fides.

Vnde^ ors in co^po^e? quia non est anima. Ergo animae tuae anima est fides.


Whence comes it that the soul dies? because faith is not in it. Whence that
the body dies? because a soul is not in it. Therefore the soul of thy soul
is faith. But forasmuch as nothing is so carefully to be sought for, nor so
earnestly to be wrought for, as purity or uprightness of the heart: for
seeing there is no action, no study, which has not his certain scope, end,
or period; yea, no Art, but labors by some certain means or exercises to
attain some certain proposed end; (which end surely is to the Soul at first
proposed, but the last which is obtained:) how much more ought there to be some
end proposed to our studies, as well in the exercises of our bodies; as in the
readings, meditations, and mortifications of our minds (passing over corporal
and external labors) for which end those studies or exercises were at first
undertaken? For let us think with our selves, if we knew not, or in mind
before conceived not, whither or to what especial place we were to run, were
it not a vain task for us, undertake to run? Even so to every action are we
to propose his certain end: Vid. Lansparg. in Pharetra divini Amoris.
which being once attained, we shall need no further striving toward it,
being at rest in our selves by attaining it. And like end are we to propose to
our selves in the exercise of Moderation, making it a subduer of all things
which fight against the spirit, which may be properly reduced to the practicing
of these four; overcomming of anger by the spirit of patience; wantonness by
the spirit of continence; pride by the spirit of humility; and in all things
unto him whose image we partake, so nearly conformed, that like good
Proficients we may truly say with the blessed Apostle, We have in all things
learned to be contented.

For the first, Anger.

This might be instanced in our late Fleet^street tumult.


to wit, Anger, as there is no passion which makes man more forgetful of
himself; so to subdue it, makes man an absolute enjoyer of himself.
Athenodorus a wise Philosopher, departing from Augustus Caesar, and bidding him
farewell, left this lesson with him,
most worthy to be imprinted in an Emperors breast; Plutarc. in Apotheg. Roman.
That when he was angry, he should repeat the four and twenty Greek letters.
Which lesson received Caesar as a most precious jewel, making such use
thereof, as he showed himself no less a Prince in the conquest of this
passion, than in his magnificence of state, and majesty of person. No less
praiseworthy was that excellent soveraigntie which Architas had over this
violent and commanding passion,
(as we have formerly observed) who finding his servants loytering in the
field, or committing some other fault worthy reproof, like a worthy master,
thought it fit first to over-master himself, before he would show the
authority of a Master to his servants: wherefore perceiving himself to be
greatly moved at their neglect, as a wise Moderator of his passion, he would
not beat them in his ire, Cic. Tusc. lib. 4.
but said; Happy are yea, that I am angry with you. In brief, because my
purpose is only to touch these rather than treat of them, having so amply
discoursed of some of them formerly; Ir^ mort^lium debet esse mortalis. Lactant.
as the Sun is not to go down upon our wrath; so in remembrance of that
Sun of righteousness, let us bury all wrath: so shall we be freed from the
viols of wrath, and appear blameless in the day of wrath. For in peace shall
we descend to our graves without sighing, if in peace we be angry without
sinning.

Wantonness.
Secondly, wantonness, being so familiar a Darling with the flesh, is ever
waging war with the spirit; she comes with powdered hair, painted cheek,
straying eyes, mincing and measuring her pace, tinkling with her feet, and
using all immodestie to lure the unwarie youth to all sensuality.
These light professors (as S. Jerome to Marcella says) are matter of scandal
to Christian eyes; those eye-sores which wound the inward man with the sting of
anguish. Now what receipt better or more sovereign to cure this malady, than
to take away the cause which begets this infirmity? And what may we suppose
the cause to be, but the complace^cie of the flesh? when we labor to satisfy
our desires, and give easy reins to our affections. August.
For the flesh while she is obedient, becomes a servant to the soul: she
governs, the other is governed: this commands, that is commanded: but
having once begun to usurp, she will scarcely ever become a faithful and
loyal subject. What necessity then is there enjoined us to stand upon our
guard, when we have a Tarpeia within our gates, ready to betray us to our
professed enemy? With what continual and incessant labor ought we to employ
our selves, that this untamed Iebusite might be so tired and wearied, that all
inordinate motions might be extinguished, which by sloth and want of employment
are ever cherished? Let us then embrace Continence, and by power of so good a
spirit dispossess the bad. Let us not entertain those dangerous motives to
sin, which like a Snake in the bosom, will wound us to death. And what be
those motives? Wanton thoughts, and wanton words, which corrupt men's manners
with wicked works. It is a sure note, and worthy observance; whenever any
thought is suggested to you, which tastes of evil, make the door of your
heart fast, lest you give actual possession to the Devil. Wanton words
likewise are dangerous motives to incontinence; the habit whereof being once
attained, will hardly be relinquished.
So as Speech, which Democritus calls the image of life, being exercised in
scurrilitie, seems to deface that image, by laying on it the dark and sable
color of death. For as muddy water is an argument that the fountain is
troubled; so filthy words are witnesses that the heart is corrupted. A good
Tree brings forth good fruit, a pure Spring clear water, and an incorrupt
heart words tending to the edification of the hearer. Now he, who uses his
tongue to filthy communication, incurres a threefold offense: First, in
dishonouring God; Secondly, in sinning against his own soul; Thirdly, in
ministering matter of scandal or offense to his brother. How necessary is it
then, to keep a watch upon our mouth, and a gate of circumstance unto our
lips, that we offend not with our tongue; which like the poisonous Adder,
stings even unto death, wounding the soul with an incurable dart? Neither do
I, speaking of wantonness, only restrain my discourse to incontinence, but
to whatsoever else may properly tend to the complacencie or indulgence of the
flesh; as to tender obedience to her in the desire of luscious and lascivious
meats, or the like; including all such as turn the grace of God to
wantonness, making a profession of faith, but denying the power thereof in
their life and conversation.

Thirdly, Pride.
Pride, that Luciferian sin, whose airie thoughts are ever mounting, must be
subdued by the spirit of humility. We would hold it to be no faithful part
of a subject, to make choice of no liverie but his, who is a professed foe to his
Sovereign. And what I pray you, do we, when we attire our selves in the
habiliments of Pride; not only outwardly in gorgeous apparel, choicest
perfumes, and powdered locks, but likewise inwardly, in putting on the spirit of
Pride, attended by scornful respects, disdainful eyes, and haughty looks?
Can we be truly termed Subjects? May we, wearing the Devils crest, partake of
the seamlesse coat of Christ? May we expect a Crown after death, that oppose
him who wore a thorny Crown, to crown us after death? No; as the Soldier is
known by his Colors, the Servant by his cognizance, the Sheep by his mark,
and Coin by the stamp; so shall we be known by our Colors if we be
Christ's Soldiers, by our Crest or Cognizance if his followers, by our mark if
his Sheep and Lambkins, by our stamp or superscription if his Coin or
Starling. August.
O know, by how much we are the humbler, by so much to our Beloved are we the
liker! Let us resemble him then in all humility, that afterward we may
reign with him in glory. Lastly, that we may become conformable unto him,
whose image we have received, we are to learn of the blessed Apostle, in all
things to be contented. Content (says the Proverb) is worth a Crown, but
many Crowns come far short of this content. Now to propose a rule how this
Content may be acquired, were a Lesson well worthy our learning: which I could
wish might be as soon learned as proposed: Wherein true content properly
consists.
for Content, briefly, consists in these two; To be free from desiring what we
have not, to be free from fearing to lose what we already have. Now he, who
sees nothing in the world worthy desiring, cannot choose but be free from fear
of losing, being so indifferent touching the world, or whatsoever else he has
in enjoying. For he that neither has, nor so^th ought in the world which he
esteems worthy his love, enjoys naught but he can willingly be content to
leave; for no man fears the loss of that which he does not love. But to draw
nearer a point: these two passions or affections of desire and fear; desire of
having more than we have, fear of losing what we already have, may be
properly said to have a threefold respect; To the goods or endowments of the
Mind, of the Body, and of Fortune. For the first, The goods of the Mind.
Plato in Tymaeo.
Plato in his Tymaeo says; If a man lose his eyes, or feet, or hands, or
wealth, we may say of such an one, he loses something; but he who loses his
heart and reason, loses all. For in the womb of our Mother, the first thing
which is engendered or participates form, Pri^um eritur, pos^remum moritur.
is the heart, and the last which dies is the same heart. So as properly it
may be called Reasons Treasury or storehouse, where those divine graces are
seated, which confer the best beauty to man, giving him a note of distinction
from other creatures, the more to dignifie man. For howsoever all creatures
have hearts, yet only to man is given an understanding heart. Other creatures
have hearts indeed sensible of present pain, but they cannot recall to mind
what is past, or probably collect by what is past, the seasons of times, or
issues of affairs likely to ensue. In the heart of man, there is the
reasonable power, with which he governs himself; the irascible power, with
which he defends himself; and concupiscible, by which he provideth for
things necessary to releeve himself. Now admit we were deprived of that
principal blessing, the intellectual part, so as like raving and raging
Orestes, we were forced to take many blind bypath, wanting the means of
direction by reason of our woeful distraction, and crying out with Octavia in
Seneca; O, to the spirits below that I were sent,
For death were easy to this punishment!
Admit, Quis me S^ygias mittet ad umb^as? Morijuvabit, poena nam gravior nece
est. Sen. in Octav.
I say, all this; yet is the afflicted soul to be content, abiding Gods good
leisure, who as he does wound, so he can cure; and as he opened old Tobiths
eyes, so can he, when he pleases, where he pleases, and as he pleases,
open the bleered eyes of understanding; so with a patient expectance of Gods
mercy, and Christian resolution to endure all assaults with constancy, as he
recommendeth himself to God, so shall he find comfort in him, in whom he has
trusted, and receive understanding more clear and perfect than before he
enjoyed. Or admit one should have his memorative part so much enfeebled,
Messala Corvin.
as with Corvinus Messala he should forget his own name; yet the Lord, who
numbreth the stars, and knows them all by their names, will not forget him,
though he has forgot himself, having him as a Signet upon his finger, ever in
his remembrance. For what shall it avail, if thou have memory beyond Cyrus,
who could call every soldier in his army by his name, when it shall appear
thou have forgot thy self, and exercised that faculty rather in remembering
injuries, than recalling to mind those insupportable injuries which thou have
done unto God? Nay more; of all faculties in man, Memory is the weakest, first
waxes old, and decays sooner than strength or beauty. And what shall it
profit thee, once to have excelled in that faculty, when the privation thereof
adds to thy misery? Nothing, nothing: wherefore, as every good and perfect
gift comes from above, where there is neither change nor shadow of change, so
as God takes away nothing but what he has given, let every one in the loss
of this or that faculty, refer himself with patience to his sacred
Majesty, who in his change from earth will crown him with mercy. The goods of
the Body.


Secondly, for the goods or blessings of the Body, as strength, beauty,
agilitie, etc. admit thou were blind with Appius, lame with Agesilaus,
tongue-tied with Samius, Plut. in vit. Aut. Gel. Noct. Attie^. 5 c. 9. Sutton.
Tra^^. Homer. in odys.
dwarfish with Ivius, deformed with Thersites; though blind, thou have eyes to
look with, and that upward; though lame, thou have legs to walk with, and
that homeward; though tongue-tied, thou have a tongue to speak, and that to
Godward; though dwarfish, thou have a proportion given thee, aiming heavenward;
and though deformed, thou have a glorious feature, and not brutish to look
downward. For not so much by the motion of the body, and her outwardly working
faculties, as by the devotion of the heart, and those inwardly moving graces,
are we to come to God. Again, admit thou were so mortally sick, as even now
drawing near shore, there were no remedy but thou must of necessity bid a
long a due to thy friends, thy honors, riches, and whatsoever else are dear
or near unto thee: yet for all this, why should not thou remain contented?
Art thou here as a Countryman, or a Pilgrim? No Countryman sure, for then
should thou make earth thy Country, and inhabit here as an abiding city. And
if a Pilgrim, who would grieve to be going homeward? There is no life but by
death, no habitation but by dissolution. He then that fears death, fears
him that brings glad tidings of life. Therefore to esteem life above the
price, or fear death beyond the rate, are alike evil: for he that values life
to be of more esteem than a pilgrimage, is in danger of making shipwreck of
the hope of a better inheritance; Certum est quod morieris, incertu^ est
quando, quomod^, aut ubi; quoniam ^bique te mors expectat, tu quoque si sapiens
sueris, ubique eam expect. bis. Bern. in Med. 3.
and he that fears death as his protest enemy, may thank none for his fear
but his security. Certainly, there is no greater argument of folly, than to
show immoderate sorrow either for thy own death, or death of another: for it is
no wisdom to grieve for that which thou can not possibly prevent, but to
labor in time rather to prevent what may give thee occasion to grieve. For
say, is thy friend dead? I confess it were a great loss, if he were lost; but
lost he is not, though thou be left; gone he is before thee, not gone from
thee; divided only, not exiled from thee. A Princess we had of sacred memory,
who looking one day from her Palace, might see one show immoderate signs or
appearances of sorrow, so as she, moved with princely compassion, sent down
presently one of her Pensioners to inquire who it was that so much sorrowed,
and withal to minister him all means of comfort; who finding this sorrowful
mourner to be a Counselor of State, who sorrowed for the death of his
daughter; returned directly to his Sovereign, and acquainted her therewith. O
(quoth she) who would think that a wise man and a Counselor of our State
could so forget himself, as to show himself a child for the death of his
child! And surely, whosoever shall but duly consider man's frailty with deaths
necessity, cannot choose but wonder why any one should be so wholly destitute
of understanding, to lament the death of any one, since to die is as necessary
and common as to be borne to every one. Excutit redeuntem natura, ut intrantem.
Sen.
But perchance it may be by some objected, that the departure of their friend
is not so much lamented, for that is of necessity, and therefore exacts no
tears of sorrow, being, if spent, as fruitless as the doom reverselesse; but
their sudden or inopinate departure. Whereto I answer, that no death is sudden
to him that dies well: for sudden death has properly a respect rather to the
life, how it was passed or disposed, than to death, how short his summons were,
or how quickly clozed. Io. Mathes. preaching upon the raising up of the woman's
son of Naim by Christ, within three hours afterward died himself: The like
is written of Luther, and many others. As one was choked with a fly, another
with a hair, a third pushing his foot against the tressall, another against
the threshold falls down dead: So many kind of ways are chalked out for man,
to draw toward his last home, and weane him from the love of earth. V^^^
introitus, innumeri exitus. Menander.
Those whom God loves, says Menander, die young: yea, those whom he esteems
highest, he takes from hence the soonest: And that for two causes; the one is
to free them the sooner from the wretchedness of earth; the other to crown
them the sooner with Happiness in Heaven: For what gain we by a long life,
or what profit reap we by a tedious Pilgrimage, but that we partly see,
partly suffer, partly commit more evils? Nazian. in suneb. orat. pro Casario.
Priamus say more days and shed more tears than Troilus. Let us hence then
learn so to measure our sorrow for ought that may or shall befall us, in
respect of the body, that after her return to earth, it may be gloriously
reunited to the soul, to make an absolute Consort in Heaven.

Thirdly, The goods of Fortune.
and lastly, for the goods or blessings of Fortune; they are not to command us,
but to be commanded by us; not to be served by us, but to serve us. And because
he only in the affairs of this life is the wealthiest, who in the desires of
this life is the neediest; and he the richest on earth, who sees little worth
desiring on earth: we are so to moderate our desires (as I have formerly
touched) in respect of those things we have not, that we may labor to
over-master our desires, in thirsting after more than we already have; likewise
so to temper and qualify our affections in respect of those things we have, as
to show no immoderate sorrow for the loss of those we have, but to be equally
minded, as well in the fruition of those we have, as privation of those we
have not. For of all others, there is no sorrow baser nor unworthier, than that
which is grounded on the loss of Ox, or Cow, or such inferior subjects.
Neither incur they any less opinion of folly, who carried away with the love
of their Horse, Hound, or some such creature, use for some prize or conquest
got, to rear in their memory some Obeliske, or Monument graced with a
beauteous inscription, to preserve their fame, because (poor beasts) they have
nothing to preserve themselves: for howsoever this act seem to have some
correspondence with gratitude, laboring only to grace them who have graced us,
rearing a stone to perpetuate their fame, who memoriz'd our Name by speed of
foot; yet is it gross and so palpable to those, whose discretion is a moulder
of all their actions, as they account it an act, worthier the observation of an
Heathen than a Christian. Cimon buried his Mares, bestowing upon them specious
Tombs, when they had purchased credit in the swift races of the Olympiads.
Xan^ippus bewailed his Dogs death, which had followed his master from Calamina.
Alexander erected a City in the honor of Bucephalus, having been long
defended by him in many dangerous battles. And the Ass may well among the
Heathen be adorned with Lillies, Violets and Garlands, when their Goddess
Vesta by an Asses bray, avoided the rape of Priapus. But howsoever these
actions among Pagans might carry some color of thankfulness, rewarding them,
by whose speed, fury, agilitie, or some other means, they have been as well
preserved as honored: yet with Christians, whose eyes are so clearly opened,
and by the light divine so purely illumined, would these seem acts of
profaneness, ascribing honor to the creature, to whom none is due, and not
to the Creator, to whom all honor is solely and properly due. In brief, let
us so esteem of all ^he goods and gifts of Fortune, as of Vtensils, fit for
our use and service, but of the Supreme good, as our chiefest So^ace: For he
who subjected all things to the feet of man, Aug. Soliloq. cap. 20.
that man might be wholly subject unto him, and that man might be wholly his,
he gave man dominion over all those works of his: so he created all outward
things for the body, the body for the soul, but the soul for him; that she
might only intend him, and only love him, possessing him for solace, but
inferior things for service.

Thus far,
Gentlemen, has this present discourse enlarged it self, to express the rare
and incomparable effects, which naturally arise from the due practice of
Moderation, being indeed a virtue so necessary, and well deserving the
acquaintance of a Gentleman, (who is to be imagined as one new come to his
lands, and therefore stands in great need of so discreet an Attendant) as there
is no one virtue better sorting his rank, not only in matters of preferment,
profit, or the like; but in matters of reputation or personal engagement,
where his very name or credit is brought to the tesh. Look not then with the
eye of scorn on such a follower: but take these instructions with you for a
farewell. Does Ambition buzze in your ear motions of Honor? This faithful
Attendant, Moderation, will dissuade you from giving way to these suggestions,
and tell you, Ambition is the high road which leads to ruin, but Humility is
the gate which opens unto glory. Does Covetousness whisper to you matters of
profit? Here is one will tell you, the greatest wealth in the world, is to want
the desires of the world. Does Wantonness suggest to you motives of Delight?
Here is that Herb of Grace, which will save you from being wounded, and salve
you already wounded. In brief, both your expense of Time and Coin, shall be
so equally disposed, as you shall never need to redeem Time, because you never
prodigally lost it; nor repent your fruitless expense of Coin, because you
never profusely spent it. Thus if you live, you cannot choose but live for ever:
for ever, in respect of those choice virtues which attend you: for ever, in
respect of your good Example, moving others to imitate you. And for ever, in
respect of that succeeding glory which shall crown you.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of Perfection; Contemplative and Active; The Active preferred; Wherein it
consists; Of the absolute or Supreme end whereto it aspireth, and wherein it
rests.

PERFECTION.
WE are now to treat of a Subject, Observat. 8.
which, while we are here on earth, is far easier to discourse of, than to
find; for Perfection is not absolute in this life, but graduall. So as,
howsoever we may term one perfect or complete in respect of some especial
qualities, wherewith he is endued; yet, if we come to the true ground of
Perfection, we shall find it far above the Sphere of Mortality to ascend to:
for man, miserable man, what is he, or of himself what can he, to make him
absolutely perfect? Exceed can he in nothing but sin, which is such a
natural imperfection, as it wholly detracts from his primitive Perfection.
Time was indeed, when man knew no sin, and in that ignorance from sin
consisted his Perfection. But no sooner was that banefull Apple tasted, than in
the knowledge of sin he became a professant. We are therefore to discourse
of such Perfection, as we commonly in opinion hold for absolute, though in
very deed it appear only respective and definite; for to treat of that
Perfection which is transcendent or indefinite, were to sound the Sea, or weigh
the Mountains, so far it exceeds the conceit of man: yea, I say, to task
humane apprehension to the discussion of that sovereign or supreme Perfection,
were as unequally matched, as ever were earth and heaven, strength and
weakness, or the great Behemoth, and the silliest worm that creeps in the
chinkes of the earth. Let us address our selves then to this Task, and make
this our ground, that as no man is simply good but God; so no man is absolutely
perfect till he be individually united to God; which on earth is not granted,
but promised; not effected, but expected; not obtained, but with confidence
desired, when these few, but evil days of our Pilgrimage shall be expired:
yet is there a graduall Perfection, which in some degree or measure we may
attain, becoming conformable unto him, whose Image we have received, and by
whom we have so many singular graces and prerogatives on us conferred. And this
Perfection is to be procured by assistance of Gods Spirit, and a desire in man
to second that assistance by an assiduall endeavor. Which devout and godly
endeavor, that it might be the better furthered, and his glory, by whose grace
we are assisted, the more advanced; needful it were to reduce to our memory,
daily and hourly these two maine Considerations. First, those three professed
Enemies that infatigably assail us, which should make us more watchful.
Secondly, Two Considerations of maine consequence.
that faithful friend, who so courageously fights for us, which should make us
more thankful: for our Enemies, as they are some of them domestic, so are
they more dangerous; Bern. Mod. 15.
for no foe more perilous than a bosom foe. Besides, they are such pleasing
Enemies, as they cheer us, when they kill us; sting us, when they smile on us.
And what is the instrument they work on, but the soul? And what the time
limited them to work in, but our life? Which humors do swel up, sorrows bring
down, August. Manual. cap. 8.
heats dry, air infect, meat puff up, fasting macerate, jests dissolve,
sadness consume, care straitneth, security deludeth, youth extolleth, wealth
transporteth, poverty dejecteth, old age crooketh, infirmity breaks, grief
depresseth, the Devil deceives, the world flattereth, the flesh is delighted,
the soul blinded, and the whole man perplexed. How should we now oppose our
selves to such furious and perfidious Enemies? Or what armor are we to provide
for the better resisting of such powerful and watchful Assailants? Certainly,
no other provision need we, than what already is laid up in store for us, to
arm and defend us, and what those blessed Saints and Servants of Christ have
formerly used, leaving their own virtuous lives as Patterns unto us. The
Christians complete Armor.
Their Armor was Fasting, Prayer, and works of Devotion; by the first, they
made themselves fit to pray; in the second, they addressed themselves to pray
as they ought; in the third, they performed those holy duties, which every
Christian of necessity ought to perform.

And first, Augustine.
for Fasting, it is a great work, and a Christ^^^worke; producing such
excellent effects, as it subjects the flesh to the obedience of the spirit;
making her, of a commander, a subject, of one who took upon her an usurped
authority, to humble herself to the souls sovereignty. Likewise Prayer, how
powerful it has been in all places, might be instanced in sundry places of
holy Scripture. Sicut nullus locus vacat a peccando, ita nullus locus vacet a
precando.
In the Matthew. 4.1.3.
Desert, where Temptation is the readiest; In the Luke 19.47.
Temple, where the Devil is ofttimes busiest; On the Mark 4 38.
Sea, where the floods of perils are the nearest; In 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
Peace, where security makes men forgetfull'st; And in Exo. 17.11.12
War, where imminent danger makes men fearfull'st: Yea, whether it be with
Daniel in the Dan. 6.22.
Den; or Manasses in the 2 Paralip. 37.
Dungeon; whether it be with holy David in the 2 Samuel 12.20
Palace; or heavenly Jeremy in the Ierem. 37.15.
Prison: the power and efficacy of Prayer, sacrificed by a devout and zealous
believer, cannot choose but be as the first and second rain, fructifying the
happy soil of every faithful soul, to her present comfort here, and hope of
future glory elsewhere. Thirdly, works of Devotion, being the fruits or
effects of a spiritual conversation; as ministering to the necessity of the
Saints, wherein we have such plenty of examples, both in divine and humane
writ, as their godly charity, Qui copiosiores sunt, and volunt pro arbitrio
quisq^e suo quod visum est contribuuill, and quod ita colligitur apud
praepositum deponitur, etc. Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
or zealous bounty might worthily move us to imitate such blessed Patterns in
actions of like Devotion. For such were they, as they were both liberal, and
joyed in their liberality, every one contributing so much as he thought fit, or
pleased him to bestow. And whatsoever was so collected, to the charge or trust
of the Governor, or Disposer of the stock of the poor, was forth with
committed. Here was that poore-mans Box, or indeed Christ's Box, wherein the
charity of the faithful was treasured. Neither did these holy Saints or
Servants of God, in their Alms eye so much the quality of the person, as his
Image whom he did represent. And herein they nourished not a sinner, Non
peccatorem, sea j^stum panperem nu^rit, quia in illo non culpam, sed naturam
diligit, etc. Greg. Mag.
but a righteous beggar, because they loved not his sin, but his nature.
(...) now, because we are to treat of Perfection, in each of these we are to
observe such cautions, as may make the work perfect without blemish, and pure
from the mixture of flesh.

As first, in that godly practice of fasting, to observe such mediocritie, as
neither desire to be known by blubbered eyes, The fruit of Fasting.

Vid. Cyprian. sermon. de jejuni^ tom. 2.

Basil. de jeju^. homil. 1.

Tertul. lib. de jijun.


hanging down the head, nor any such external passion may tax us to be of
those Pharisees, whose devotion had relation rather to the observance of man,
than the service of God; neither so to macerate the body, as to disable it for
performing any office which may tend to the propagation of the glory of the
Highest. For the first institution of Fasts, as it was purposely to subdue the
inordinate motions of the flesh, and subject it to the obedience and observance
of the spirit; Origin. hom. 10. in Levit.
so diverse times were by the ancient Fathers and Councels thought fitting to be
kept in holy abstinence, of purpose to remove from them the wrath of God,
inflicted on them by the sword, pestilence, famine, or some other such like
plague. S. Gregory instituted certain public Fasts, resembling the Rogation
week, with such like solemn processions against the plague and pestilence, as
this Rogation week was first ordained by another holy Bishop to that end. Vid.
Bedem; qu^ viro vere venerabil^ (tes^im^nio Polydori) nihil fuit castiu^, nihil
melius, nihil verius, etc. Polydor. lib. 1.

Greg. in Mor. Expos. in Job.


As for the Ember days, they were so called of our ancient forefathers in this
Country, because on those fasting days men ate bread baked under embers or
ashes. But to propose a certain rule or form of direction, there is none
surer or safer, than that which we formerly proposed; So to nourish our bodies,
that they be not too much weakened, by which means more divine offices might be
hindered; and again, so to weaken our bodies, that they be not too much
pampered; by which means our spiritual fervor might be cooled. For too
delicate is that master,
who, when his belly is crammed, Hieron.
would have his mind with devotion crowned.

Secondly, The power of Prayer.
for Prayer, as it is to be numbered among the greatest works of charity, so of
all others it should be freest from hypocrisy: for it is not the sound of the
mouth, but the soundness of the heart, which makes this oblation so
effectually powerful, and to him that prays, In Dei auribus d^siderium
vehemens clamor magnus est; remissa inten^io, vox submissa. Bernard.

Greg. in dialog. Nazian. in Epitaph. Gorgon. sororis ejus. Eusebius. in hist.
Hieron. in vit. Paul. Er^mit.


so powerfully fruitful. It is not beating of the breast with the fist, but
inward compunction of the heart, flying with the wing of faith, that pierces
heaven. For neither could Trasilla's devotion, whereof Gregory relates, have
been so powerful, nor Gorgonias supplication, whereof Nazianzen reports, so
fruitful; nor James the brother of our Lord his invocation, whereof Eusebius
records, so faithful; nor Paul the Eremites daily oblation, whereof Jerome
recounts, so effectual; if pronunciation of the mouth, without affection of
the heart; beating of the breast, without devotion of mind; dejection of face,
without erection of faith, had accompanied their prayer. For it is not hanging
down the head like a bulrush, which argues contrition, but a passionate
affection of the heart which mounts up to the throne of grace, till it purchase
remission.

Thirdly, for Almsdeeds and other works of Devotion, being the fruits or
effects of faith, as they are sweet odours, and shall not lose their reward,
being duly practiced; so we must take these three cautions by the way, lest
such sweet fruits be corrupted. The first is, Vid Dict. Andr. in Tortura Tort.
to give our own, and not another, for that were robbery: The second is, to
give to the poor, and not to the rich in hope of commodity: The third is, to
give in mercy or fellow-feeling of others wants, and not for vainglory. For
howsoever the poor need not care for any of these respects, because he is
rewarded; yet the giver is to care, because his reward should hereby become
frustrated. Certainly, there is nothing which relisheth better to the palate of
our Maker, than ministering relief to the needy Beggar, who is Gods beggar, as
a holy Father calls him, Greg. Nazian.
and therefore should be releeved for his cause that sent him. Those Goats set
on the left hand do affright me, not because they were robbers, but because
they were no feeders; says Nazianzen: therefore are we willed to feed the
hunger-starved soul, lest want should famish him; for if we suffer him to die
for food, we, and none but we did famish him. Thus if we observe aright the
zealous and religious practice of those blessed Patterns, who have gone before
us, and have left their memorable lives as examples to be imitated by us, we
shall in some measure attain to that Perfection, whereof we now discourse;
laboring so to moderate our affections herein, as neither vainglory, nor any
other fleshly respect may interpose it self in actions of such maine and
serious consequence. For albeit, as I formerly noted, no man may come to that
absolute Perfection, either in matters of knowledge, or practice of life, as if
nothing could be further attained, but that the very highest pitch of
perfection were acquired; yet are there degrees which in some measure may be
attained, if those virtues which conduce to this perfection be duly practiced.
For, it is not professing of virtue, but practicing; neither practicing of one,
but all, which gives life to this perfection. For he whom we sincerely perfect
call,
Excells not in one virtue, but in all.
Which perfection far exceeds all others, derived from some exquisite
knowledge in Arts or Sciences; for these, how absolute soever they be, come
far short of that perfection which longer time and experience might bring
them to.
Alcibiades is reported to have been so skillful in all Arts and Exercises,
that he won the prize in what enterprise soever he took in hand; which was no
small glory, when in the Olympian or Istmian games he no sooner appeared, than
those who were to contend with him, were forth with dismayed: yet came this
perfection short of that whereof we now discourse. For it may be probably
gathered, that, albeit he was the activest in his time on Istmus, yet all the
activest youths, of Greece were not on Istmus, or if they were, yet the whole
world had youths more active, and in all parts more absolute than there were in
Greece. For to seek perfection on earth, either in respect of mind or body,
either in ability of the one, or excellency of the other, were - in aethere
quaererenidum; he only being most perfect, who acknowledges himself to be
most imperfect. Cicero brings in M. Antony, Cicero 1. lib. de Orat.
saying, that there be many follow, and yet come not to the perfection. Which
he might have instanced the best in himself: for who, for discipline more
exquisite, for attempts in his own person more valiant, for ripeness of wit
more pregnant, or for tongue more powerfully persuasive than M. Antony? Yet to
observe how much those more excellent parts were disabled, that light of
understanding darkened, that pregnancie of wit rebated, that persuasive Orator
by a wanton Oratresse seduced; yea, even that Mirror of men blemished, might
move us freely and ingenuously to acknowledge, as there is nothing more
variable than man in respect of his condition, so nothing more prone to evil
in respect of his natural corruption. So as, howsoever he may seem in some
sort perfect, either in moderating his affections with patience, or subduing
his desires with reason, yet there is ever some one defect or other that
darkens those Perfections. Wherefore as Marius bombasted his stockins to give a
better proportion to his small legs; if any one would have his good parts set
out, he had need to wear some counterfeit disguise to cover his wants, and so
gall the world, as Juno deceived Ixion with a cloud. Truth is, that the
worthiest men have been stained with some notable crime. Plut. in vit.
Caesar, though he (...) mo^derate, yet was he incontinent: Alexander, though
continent, yet was he immoderate: Sylla, though valiant, yet was he violent:
Galba, though eminent, yet was he insolent: Lucullus generous, yet delicious;
Marcellus glorious, Cicer. 4. lib. Tuscul.
yet ambitious; Architas patient, yet avaritious; Archias pregnant, yet
lascivious. So as Homers understanding, Platoes wit, Diogenes phrase, Aeschines
Art of Oratorie, and Ciceroes tongue, could not assume to themselves such
perfection, as to free them from other blemishes, which detracted as much from
their worth, as these perfections added to their glory. For howsoever that
saying of Solon may seem authenticke; (...) Solonis dict.
All things among men are sound and perfect; it is to be understood, that he
meant of dealings or commerce among good men, whose word is their bond, and
whose profession is to deal uprightly with all men. (...) 2 Physic.
All things among such men are sound and perfect, for no commodity can move
them to infringe their faith, or falsify their word for any advantage. But it
may be objected, if none can be perfect, whence is it that we read, we ought
to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect? Matthew. 5.48. Heb. 6.1. 1 Cor.
1.10. Coloss. 1.28.
or how is it that Paul exhorts us to perfection? or how may we be presented
every man perfect in Christ Jesus? Surely not of us, nor of our selves, but
through him who became righteousness, and all perfection for us, that he might
perfect that in us, which was far from us, without his especial grace
working or operating in us. Yet are we to labor and strive hard toward the
mark that is set before us, not ceasing till we become conformable unto him,
and be made perfect in him. But become conformable unto him we cannot, unless
we take delight in contemplating him, to whom our desire is to be conformed.
We will therefore descend to the second branch proposed, to wit, the
Contemplative part of Perfection, wherein we shall easily find what divi^e
comfort is ministered to the mind, in contemplating Him, who distinguished Man
from the rest of his creatures, by a reasonable mind.

IT was the saying of a Heathen, If God took delight in any felicity, Of the
contemplative part.
it was in Contemplation. To the free use whereof, even those which are (as
Hortensius called L. Torquatus) unlearned, rude and ignorant, may be admitted.
For howsoever some have been pleased to term the Images of Saints, Laymens
books; sure I am, whosoever he be, be he never so simple or ignorant, that
contemplateth God in his creatures, shall find sufficient matter, in that
voluminous book of his Creation, to move him to admire the workmanship of his
Maker. For the heavens are his, Psalm. 89.11.
the earth also is his; and he has laid the foundation of the world, and all
that therein is. So as, even from the Cedar of Lebanon to the grass upon the
wall, has he shown his power and his might to the ends of the world. Now to
the end this Contemplation might not be hindered by any worldly objects, we are
to withdraw our eye from the Creature, and fix it wholly upon our Creator. For
how can any one behold the glory of heaven, when his eyes are poring upon
earth; or how should he, whose affections are planted upon his gold, erect his
thoughts to the contemplation of God? So as we must not only leave whatsoever
we love on earth, but even leave our selves till we become wholly weaned from
earth; so shall our affections be in heaven, though our temporary plantation be
on earth. For what are these Ostrich-winged worldlings, who never fly up,
stooping to every lure that either honor, profit, or preferment cast out, but
base Haggards, who lie down and dare not give wing for fear of weathering?
Whereas these high fliers, whose aims are above earth, are ever meditating of
earths frailty and heavens felicity. August.
These consider how the solace of the captive is one, and the joy of the
freeman another. These consider, how that he who fighs not while he is a
Pilgrim, shall not rejoice when he is a Citizen. These consider, that it is an
evident sign that such an one hates his Country, who holds himself to be in
good state while he lives a Pilgrim. These will not prefer the husks of
vanity before those inestimable treasures of glory. These, and only these,
value earth as it should be valued, desiring rather to leave earth, than set
their love on ought upon earth. Lanspurg.
Neither can death take any thing from him going out of the world, who sets his
love on nothing in the world. Whereas it is much otherwise with them, whose
eyes are accustomed to darkness; for they cannot behold the beams of that
supreme verity: neither can they judge any thing of the light, whose
habitation is in darkness: they see darkness, they love darkness, Aug.
Soliloq. cap. 34.
they approve of darkness, and going from darkness to darkness, they know
not whither they fall. 2 Timothy 4.10. Acts 8.11.
Such was Demas, who forsook his faith, and embraced this present world. Such
was Simon Magus, who bewitched the people with sorceries, to gain himself
esteem in the world. Acts 19.24.
Such was Demetrius the Silversmith, who brought great gains unto the
Crafts-men, and mightily enriched himself in the world. And in a word, such
are all those whose eyes are sealed to heavenly Contemplations, but opened to
the objects of earth, prizing nothing else worthy either viewing or loving. It
is rare and wonderful to observe what admirable Contemplations the Heathen
Philosophers enjoyed, though not so much as partakers of the least glimpse of
that glorious light which is to us revealed! How deeply searching in the
influence of Planets, how studious after the knowledge of Herbs, Plants, virtue
of Stones, which enforced in them no less admiration, than delight in so sweet
a Contemplation? Now if the Heathens, who had no knowledge of God, but only a
glimmering light of Nature, being not so much (I say) as the least beamling in
comparison of that glorious light which we enjoy, conceived such sweetness in
the search of causes and events, preferring their contemplation before the
possession of earth, or all that frail earth c^uld promise; what surpassing
comfort or ineffable sweetness are we to conceive in the contemplation of
God, the one and only practice whereof makes man blessed, although in outward
things he were the poorest and needfullest in the world? Ignoravi, quod ^an
s^^vis, O bone Jesus, esse^ tuus emp^e^us, tam b^nestus at^actus tuus, tam
debciosus convictus tuus. Bonave^^.
The blessed Saints and faithful servants of God have been so ravished with
this sweetness, as they were drunk with joy in contemplation of the Highest.
For either honor or preferment, they were so indifferent, as they rejected it;
and for riches so equally contented, as they dis-valued it, selling their
possessions, and laying the money at the Apostles feet. Yea Peter, to instance
one for all, no sooner tasted this sweetness, than forgetful of all inferior
things, he cried out as one spiritually drunk, saying; Lord, August. Soliloq.
Cap. 22.
it is good for us to be here; let us make us here three Tabernacles, let us
stay here, let us contemplate thee, because we need nothing else but thee: it
suffices us, Lord, to see thee, it suffices us, I say, to be filled with such
sweetness as comes from thee. One only drop of sweetness he tasted, and he
loathed all other sweetness. What may we imagine would he have said, if he
had tasted the multitude of the sweetness of his divinity, which he has laid
up in store for those that fear him? N^^ invenio quid licentius appellandum
ex^^limenus coelum ^^eli domino, quam contemplantem etc. Aug. M^^ c. 19.
Surely, the contemplative man, whose affections are estranged from earth, and
seated in heaven, makes use of whatsoever he sees on earth, as directions to
guide him in his progress to heaven. His eyes are not like the Ambitious man's,
whose eyesore is only to see others great, and himself unadvanced: nor like
the Covetous man's, whose eyes ( Tarpeia-like) betray his soul, seeing nothing
precious or prosperous which he wishes not: nor like the Voluptuous man's,
whose sealed eyes are blind to the objects of virtue, but unsealed to the
objects of vanity, seeing nothing sensually moving which he affects not: nor
like the Vainglorious ma^s, who practices seldom what is good or honest for
the love of goodness, but to be praised and observed. Whereas, the true
Contemplative man loves virtue for virtues sake, concluding divinely with the
Poet; This amongst good men has been ever known,
Virtue rewards herself, herselfe's her crown.
And for these light objects of vanity, he as much loathes them, as the
Voluptuous man loves them; and for coveting, he is so far from desiring more
than he has, as he is indifferent either for enjoying or forgoing what he
already has; and for aspiring, he holds it the best ambition of any creature,
to promote the glory of his Maker. He is ever descanting on this divine ditty;
O how glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God! for his thoughts
are sphered above earth, and lodged in the Contemplation of heaven. And if so
be, that he chance to fix his eye upon earth, it is, as I said before, to
direct his feet, and erect his faith to the Contemplation of heaven. August.
Soliloq. cap. 21.
For by consideration had to these temporal goods (to use the words of a
devout Father) he gathers the greatness of the heavenly Council:
comprehending by these little ones, those great ones; by these visible, those
invisible ones: For if the Lord show or rather shower so great and innumerable
benefits from heaven, and from the air, from the land and sea, light and
darkness, heat and shadow, dew and rain, winds and showers, birds and fishes,
and multiplicity of herbs and plants of the earth, and the ministry of all
creatures successively in their seasons ministering to us, to allay our
loathing, and beget in us toward our Maker, an incessant longing, and all this
for an ignoble and corruptible body; what, how great, and innumerable shall
those good things be, which he has prepared for them that love him, in that
heavenly Country, where we shall see him face to face? If he do such things
for us in this prison, what will ^ee do for us in that Palace? Great and
innumerable are thy works O Lord, King of heaven! For seeing, all these are
very good and delectable, which he has equally bestowed upon both good and
evil: how great shall those be which he has laid up only for the good? If so
diverse and innumerable be the gifts, which he bestows both upon friends and
foes; how sweet and delectable shall those be, which he will only bestow upon
his friends? If such comforts in this day of tears and anguish, what will he
confer on us in that day of Nuptial solace? If a prison contain such
delights, what, I pray you, shall our Country contain? No eye (O Lord)
without thee, has seen those things which thou have prepared for them that
love thee: for according to the great multitude of thy magnificence, there is
also a multitude of thy sweetness, which thou have hid for them that fear
thee: for great thou art, O Lord our God, and unmeasurable neither is there end
of thy greatness, nor number of thy wisdom, nor measure of thy mercy, neither
is there end, nor number, nor measure of thy bounty: but as thou art great, so
be thy gifts great: because thou thy self art the reward and gift of thy
faithful warriors. Thus is the spiritually Contemplative man ever employed,
thus are his affections planted, thus his desires seated, caring so little for
earth, as he is dead to earth long before he return to earth; drawing daily
nearer heaven, having his desire only there, long before he come there. Now to
instance some, whose profession was merely contemplative, having retired or
sequestered themselves from the society of this world, we might illustrate this
subject with many excellent Patterns in this kind, as those especially who
strictly professed a monasticke life, becoming severe Enemies to their own
flesh, and estranging themselves from conversing witt^man. Which kind of
discipline, as it was in respect of humanity too unsociable, so in respect of
themselves, doubtless, sweet and delightful; being so intraunced with divine
contemplation, as they forgot earth and all earthly affections. Veni^^ ad (...)
perfectio est. Caesar Arelat^nsis. hom. 23. p. 14. Aug. in ^^tract. de Anton.
E^cmita hoc ^ef^rt, q^em. Damas^^n: pri^um monasticae vitae professorem vocat.
vid. Histor. Barla^m. vid. Paul^ Diaconum.
Of this sort, you shall read sundry examples; whereof one more memorable than
the rest might be instanced in him, who reading that sentence of holy
Scripture, Go and sell all that thou have, presently imagining it to be meant
by him, did so. The like contempt toward the world, might be instanced in holy
Jerome, Paulinus that good Bishop of Nola, and many others, upon which I would
be loath to insist, for brevity sake. Neither certainly can they, whose thoughts
are erected above the center of earth, having their Hearts planted where their
treasure is placed, deigne to fix their eye upon ought in the world, because
they see nothing worthy affecting in the World: for they think godliness is a
great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6.18, 19.
if a man be content with that he has. They do good, being rich in good
works, and ready to distribute, and communicate; laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, Philip. 4.11.
that they may obtain eternal life. Yea, they have not only learned in
whatsoever state they are, therewith to be content, but wholly to relinquish
both self and state to advance the glory of God. But it may be now well
objected, that these men whereof we now treat, are fitter for a Cell than a
Court, and therefore too regular masters, to have young Gentlemen for their
Scholars: for how should these, whose education has been liberty,
conversation public society, and who hold good fellowship an appendice to
Gentry, betake themselves to such strictness, as to be deprived of common
air, live remote from all company, passing the remainder of their days in a
wilderness, as if they had committed some egregious fact that deserved such
severe Penance? mistake me not, my meaning is much otherwise: for as I would
not have Gentlemen Libertines, so I would not have them Hermits; for the first,
as they are too prodigally secular,
so the latter are too severely regular. Neither am I ignorant how a Magis
resistit ignis fe^ro quam ligro, sed cum ignis vincat utrunque, intensior est
calor in ferro quam in ligno. Stoll. de contempt. m^nd. Quod tentationi
quorundam Sanctorum assimilari potest: Acrius tentationi resistunt, susceptam
tamen aliius retinent.
Cloister may be no less shelter unto error, than a more public place of
delight or pleasure. But my discourse touching this Contemplative Perfection,
was purposely to draw the Curtain from before the Picture, and to show to
their eye that fair Idaea, or feature which has been so long shadowed; I
mean the fair and beautiful structure of the inward man, which so long as it
is darkened with these bleere-eyed Leahs, these objects of vanity, cannot enjoy
it self, but peece-meale, as it were, divided from it self, seems wholly
deprived of life, for a Heart divided cannot live. And what are these objects
of vanity, whereon the eye of your Contemplation is usually fixed, but those
soule-soiling sores of this Land, Pride and Voluptuousness? With what
greediness will a young gallants eye gaze upon some new or phantasticke
fashion, wishing (O vain wish!) that he had but the brains to have invented
such a fashion, whereby he might have given occasion to others of imitation and
admiration? With what insatiablenesse, will he fix his eye upon some light
affected Curtezan, whose raiment is her only ornament, and whose chiefest
glory is to set at sale her adulterate beauty? No street, no corner but gives
him objects which draws his eye from that choicest object, whereon his whole
delight should be seated: No place so obscure, wherein his Contemplative part
is not on the view of forbidden objects greedily fixed. How requisite then were
it for you, young Gentlemen, whose aims are more noble than to subject them to
these unworthy ends, to take a view sometimes of such absolute Patterns of
Contemplative Perfection, as have excelled in this kind? But because a
threefold cord is hardly broken, I will recommend unto your consideration a
threefold Meditation, the daily use and exercise whereof may bring you to a
more serious view of your own particular estate. A threefold Meditation of
necessary consequence.
First is, the worthiness of the soul; secondly, the unworthines of earth;
thirdly, thankefulnes unto God, who made man the worthiest creature upon earth.
For the first: What is she, and in glory how surpassing is she (to use the
selfsame words which an holy Father uses) being so strong, Aug. Med. c. 27.
so weak, so small, so great, searching the secrets of God, and contemplating
those things which are of God, and with her piercing wit is known to have
attained the skill of many Arts for humane profit and advantage? What is she,
I say, who knows so much in other things, and to what end they were made, yet
is wholly ignorant how herself was made? Vita corporis anima, vita animae Deus.
A Princess surely; for as a Queen in her Throne, so is the soul in the
body; being the life of the body, as God is the life of the soul; being of
such dignity, as no good, but the Supreme good, may suffice it; of such
liberty, as no inferior thing may restrain it. August. Manual. cap. 25.
How then is the soul of such worthiness, as no exterior good may suffice
it, nor no inferior thing restrain it? How comes it then, that it stoopes to
the Lure of vanity, as one forgetful of her own glory? How comes it then to
be so fledged in the Viscus est amor possessionis, affectus cognatio^^,
cupidi^a h^noris, and (...) voluptas. Bern. Med. 14.
bird-lime of inferior delights, as nothing tastes so well to her palate, as
the delights of earth? Surely, either she derogates much from what she is, or
there is more worthiness on earth, than we hold there is. Having then taken a
short view of the dignity or worthiness of the soul; let us reflect a little
upon the unworthiness of Earth, and see if we can find her worthy the
entertainment of so glorious a Princess. Earth, as it is an heavy element,
and inclines naturally downward, so it keeps the earthly minded Moule from
looking upward. There is nothing in it which may satisfy the desire of the
outward senses, much less of the inward. For neither is the eye satisfied with
seeing, be the object never so pleasing, nor the ear with hearing, be the
accent never so moving, nor the pallat with tasting, be the Cates never so
relishing, nor the nose with smelling, be the Confection never so perfuming,
nor the hand with touching, be the Subject never so affecting. And for those
sugared pills of pleasure, though sweet, how short are they in continuance, and
how bitter, being ever attended on by repentance? And for honors, those
Snow-balls of greatness, how intricate the ways by which they are attained,
and how sandy the foundation whereon they are grounded? How unworthy then is
Earth to give entertainment to so princely a guest, having nothing to bid her
welcome withal, but the refuse and rubbish of uncleanness, the garnish or
varnish of lightness? For admit this guest were hungry, what provision had
Earth to feed her with, but the Husks of vanity? If thirsty, what to refresh
her with, but with Worme-wood of folly? If naked, what to cloth her with, but
the cover of mortality? If imprisoned, how to visit her, but with fetters of
captivity? Or if sick, how to comfort her, but with additions of misery? Since
then, the worthiness of the soul is such, as Earth is too unworthy to
entertain her, expedient it were that she had recourse to him that made her,
and with all thankfulness tender herself unto him, who so highly graced her.
Let man therefore in the uprightness of a pure and sincere soul weaned from
Earth, and by Contemplation already sainted in heaven, say; What shall I render
unto thee, O my God, for so great benefits of thy mercy? What praises, Aug.
Med. c. 15.
or what thanksgiving? For if the knowledge and power of the blessed Angels
were present with me to assist me, yet were I not able to render ought worthy
of so great piety and goodness, as I have received from thee: yea surely, if
all my members were turned into tongues to render due praise unto thee, in no
case would my smalnesse suffice to praise thee, for thy inestimable charity
which thou have shown to me unworthy one, for thy only love and goodness
sake, Non est aequum tempore and die memoriam benefi^it definir^. Cicero.
exceeds all knowledge. Neither is it meet that the remembrance of a benefit
should be limited by day or date; but as the benefits we receive are daily, so
should our thankfulness be expressed daily, lest by being unthankful, God take
his benefits from us, and bestow them on such as will be thankful. And let
this suffice for the Contemplative part of Perfection; descending briefly to
that part, which makes the Contemplative truly perfect by Action.

WE are now to treat of that, Of the Active Part. Omnia volumus scire, nihil
agere.
which is easier to discourse of than to find: for men naturally have a desire
to know all things, but to do nothing; so easy is the Contemplative in
respect of the Active, so hard the Practicke in respect of the Speculative. How
many shall we observe daily, Gasper. in Hippolit.
propounding sundry excellent Observations, divine Instructions, and
Christian-like Conclusions touching contempt of the world, wherein this Active
Perfection principally consists, (...). Gell. Noct. Att^^ lib. 17. cap. 19.
Luke 18.21.
yet how far short come they in their own example: so easy it is to
propound matter of instruction to others, so hard to exemplify that
instruction in themselves? This may be instanced in that Ruler in the Gospel,
who avouched his integrity and Perfection, concluding, that he had kept all
those Commandments which Christ recounted to him, from his youth up: yet when
Christ said unto him, 22.
Sell all that thou have and distribute unto the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come follow me: we read, he was very sorrowful; for
he was very rich. 23.
So miserable and inextricable is the worldlings thraldom, when neither the
incertainty of this life, nor those certain promises made unto him, in hope of
a better life, can weane him from the blind affection of earth. Necessary
therefore it is, that he, who desires to attain this Active Perfection, unto
which all good men labor, moderate his desires toward such things as he has
not, and address himself to an indifferency of losing those things which he
already has: Multi miscrisunt magis habendo quod amant quam carendo. Amando
enim res noxias, niseri habendo sunt miseriores. Aug.
for he, whose desires are extended to more than he enjoyes, or who too
exceedingly admires what he now enjoyes, can never attain that high degree of
Active Perfection. The reason is, no man whose content is seated on these
external flourishes of vanity, can direct his Contemplation, or erect the eye
of his affection to that eternal Sun of verity, whom to enjoy, is to enjoy
all true Perfection; and of whom to be deprived, is to taste the bitterness of
deepest affliction. Now, how are we to enjoy him? Not by knowledge only, or
Contemplation; but by seconding or making good our knowledge by Action: for we
know, that there is a Woe denounced on him, who knows the will of his Father
and does it not; when neither his knowledge can plead ignorance, nor want of
understanding in the Law of God, simplicity or blindness. We are therefore
not only to know, but do; know, lest ignorance should misguide us; do, lest
our knowledge should accuse us. Behovefull therefore were it for us to observe
that excellent precept of holy Jerome: Sic vivite, ut nemo de vobis male loqui
absque mendacio possit. Hieron. epist. ad Coelum de instit. matris.
So live (says he) that none may have just cause to speak ill of you. Now,
there is nothing which may procure this good report sooner, than laboring to
avoid all means of scandal; as consorting with vicious men, whose noted lives
bring such in question as accompany them. This was the cause (as I formerly
noted) why Saint John would not stay in the Bath wih the Heretic Corinthus.
O how many, and with much grief I speak it, have we known in this little
Island, well descended, with choicest gifts of nature accomplished, of their
own disposition well affected, who by consorting with inordinate men have
given reins to liberty, and blasted those fair hopes, which their friends
and Country had planted on them! how requisite then is it, for every one whose
thoughts aim at Perfection, to consort with such as may better him, and not
deprave him;
inform him, and not corrupt him? For if there be a kind of resemblance
betwixt the diseases of the body, Morbianimi sunt vitia.
and the vices or enormities of the mind; what especial care are we to take,
lest by keeping company with those who are already depraved, we become
likewise infected? Men would be loath to enter any house that is suspected only
to be infected; which if at unawares they have at any time entered, they
presently make recourse to the Apothecary to receive some sovereign receipt to
expel it. And if men be so afraid lest this house, the body, which like a
shaken building menaceth ruin daily,
should perish, Petrarch.
what great respect ought to be had to the soul, which is the guest of the
body? Shall corruption be so attended and tendered, and the precious image of
incorruption lessened and neglected? God forbid; specious or gorgeous
Sepulchers are not so to be trimmed, that the cost bestowed on them should
cause the divine part to be wholly contemned. To remove which contempt (if any
(...) there be) I will recommend to your devoutest meditation these two
particulars. Two especial memorialls recommended to our devoutest meditation.
1. The Author of our Creation. 2. The End of our Creation.

First, who it was that made us: Secondly, for what end he made us: To which
two briefly, we intend to refer the Series of this present discourse. For the
first, we are to know that no man is his own Maker: It is he that made us, who
made all things for us, that they might minister unto us and to our necessity,
ordaining these for our Service, and himself for our Solace. He it is who has
subjected all things to the feet of man, that man might wholly become subject
unto him: yea, and that man might become wholly his, he gave man absolute
dominion over all those works of his; creating all outward things for the
body, the body for the soul, and the soul for himself. And to what end? Even
to this end, that man might only intend him, only love him, possessing him to
his Solace, but inferior things to his Service. Now, to dilate a little upon
this great work of our Creation, August. Soliloq. cap. 20.
we may collect from sacred Scripture a fourfold Creation or Generation. The
first in Adam, who came neither of man nor woman; the second in Eve, who came
of man without woman; the third in Christ, who came not of man but woman: the
fourth in us, who came both of man and woman. For the first, as he had from
Earth his Creation, so it showed the weakness of his composition, the
vileness of his condition, with the certainty of his dissolution. For the
second, as she had from man her forming, so it figured their firmness of
union, inseparable communion, and inviolable affection. For the third, as he
came only of woman, so he promised by the Seed of the woman, to bruise the
Serpents head, who had deceived woman, and restore man to the state of grace,
from which he had fallen by means of a woman. For the fourth, as we came both
from man and woman, so we bring with us into the world that Original sin,
which we derive both from man and woman, the sting whereof cannot be rebated,
but only through (...), who became man borne of a woman. But in this great
work of our Creation, we are not to observe so much the matter, as quality and
nature of our Creation. For the matter of our Creation, or that whereof we be
composed, what is it but vile earth, slime and corruption? So as, howsoever we
appear beautiful, specious and amiable in the sight of man, whose eye is
fixed on the external part, yet when the oil of our Lamp is consumed, Ecce
pulchru^ ac p^^tiosis lapide patre ^ad^ver tegentem! Gasp. in He^aclit.
and we to dust and ashes reduced, we shall deserve no better inscription than
this; Behold a specious and precious shrine covering a stinking corpse!
Wherefore ought we to observe the internal part, and the especial glory we
receive by it: for hereby are we distinguished in the quality of our Creation,
from all other creatures, who govern their actions by Sense only, and not by
Reason. Hence it was that,
that divine Philosopher gave God thanks for three especial bounties
conferred on him: Plato.
First was, For that God had created him a reasonable creature, and no brute
beast; Secondly, For creating him a man, and no woman; Thirdly, For that he was
a Grecian, and no Barbarian. This it was which moved that blessed and learned
Father Saint Augustine to break out into this passionate rapsodie of spirit.
Aug. Soliloq. c. 9.
Thy hand could (O Lord) have created me a stone, or a Bird, or a Serpent, or
some brute beast: and this it knew, but it would not for thy goodness sake.
This it was which forced from that devout and zealous Father this emphaticall
discourse or intercourse rather with God; who upon a time walking in his
garden,
and beholding a little worm creeping and crawling upon the ground, In Vit.
Anselm.
presently used these words; Dear Lord, thou might have made me like this
Worm, a crawling despicable creature, but thou would not, and it was thy
mercy that thou would not; O, as thou has^ ennobled me with the Image of thy
self, make me conformable to thy self, that of a worm I may become an angel;
of a vassal of sin* a vessel of Sion, of a shell of corruption, a Star of
glory in thy heavenly mansion. And in truth, there is nothing which may move us
to a more serious consideration of Gods gracious affection toward us, than the
very image which we carry about us: preferring us not only before all the rest
of his creatures in sovereignty and dominion, but also in an amiable
similitude, feature, and proportion; whereby we become not only equal, but
even superior unto Angels, Aug. Soliloq. c 8.
because Man was God, and God Man, and no Angel. To whom are we then to make
recourse to, as the Author of our Creation, save God, whose hand has made and
fashioned us, whose grace has ever since directed and prevented us, and whose
continued love (for whom he loves, he loves unto the end) has ever extended
it self in ample manner toward us? How frivolous then and ridiculous were
their opinions, who ascribed the Creation of all things to the Elements, as
Anaximenes to the piercing Air; Hippeas to the fleeting Water; Zeno to the
purifying Fire; Zenophanes to the lumpish Earth? How miserably were these
blinded, and how notably evinced by that learned Father, who speaking in the
persons of all these Elements, and of all other his good creatures, proceeds
in this sort? Aug. Soliloq. c. 31
I took my compass, (says he, speaking to God) in the survey of all things,
seeking thee, and for all things relinquishing my self. I asked the Earth if
it were my god, and it said unto me that it was not, and all things in it
confessed the same. I asked the Sea, and the depths, and the creeping things in
them, and they answered, we are not thy god, seek him above us. I asked the
breathing Air, and the whole Air, with all the inhabitants thereof made
answer: Anaximenes is deceived, I am not thy God. I asked the Heaven, Sun,
Moon and Stars: neither are we thy god, answered they. And I spoke to all
these who stand about the gates of my flesh, tell me what you know concerning
my god, tell me something of him: and they cried out with a great voice, He
made us. Then I asked the whole Frame and fabric of this World, tell me if
thou be my god? and it answered with a strong voice, I am not, said it, but by
him I am, whom thou seek in me, he it was that made me, seek him above
me, who governs me, who made me. The interrogation of the creatures is the
profound consideration of them, and their answer the witness they bear of
God, because all things cry, God has made us: Romans 1.20.
for as the Apostle says, the invisible things of God are visibly to be
understood by those things which are made, by the creatures of the world. Thus
we understand the Author of our Creation, of whom seriously to meditate, and
with due reverence to contemplate, is to die to all earthly cogitations, which
delude the sinne-belulled soul with extravagancies. And let this suffice for
the first Memorial or Consideration, to wit, who it was that made us; we are
now to descend to the second particular, which is, for what end he made us.

He who rested not till he had composed and disposed in an absolute order of
this Universe, The end of our Creation.
proposed us an example that we should imitate: So long as we are Pilgrims here
on earth; so long as we are Sojourners in this world, we may not enjoy our
spiritual Sabbath; we may stay a little and breath under the Cross, after
the example of our best Master, but rest we may not. For what end then did he
make us? That we might live such lives as may please him, and die such deaths
as may praise him; lives blameless and unreproveable; lives sanctified
throughout, pure without blemish, fruitful in example, plentiful in all holy
duties, and exercised in the works of charity, that he who begets in us
both the Will and the Work, may present us blameless at his coming. Now,
that our lives may become acceptable unto him, to whose glory they ought to be
directed, we are in this Taberna^le of clay to address our selves to those
studies, exercises and labors, which may benefit the Church or Commonweal,
ministering matter unto others of imitation, to our souls of consolation, and
in both to Gods name of glorification: Wherein appears a maine difference
betwixt the Contemplative and Active part: for sufficient it is not to know,
acknowledge and confess the divine Majesty; to dispute or reason upon high
points touching the blessed Trinity; to be rapt up to the third heaven (as it
were) by the wings of Contemplation; but to address our selves to an actual
performance of such offices and peculiar duties, as we are expressly enjoined by
the divine Law of God. Our Lord in the Gospel, when the woman said, Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, Luke 11.27.
and the breasts that gave thee suck: 28.
Answered, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep
it. And when one of the Jews told him that his mother and brethren stood
without, desiring to speak with him; He answered, and said unto him, Math.
12.47.
that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? 48.
And stretching forth his hand toward his Disciples, 49.
he said, Behold my mother and my brethren: 50.
For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is
my brother, and sister, Vid. Aegid in hunc locum. ^^ria Quart. and Quint. Hebd.
Prim.
and mother. It is not knowledge then, but practice which presents us
blameless before God. Therefore are we exhorted to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling. Not to idle out our time in the marketplace, as such
who make their life a repose or cessation from all labors, studies, or
virtuous intendments. Of which sort those are, (and too many of those there
are) who advanced to great fortunes by their provident Ancestors, imagine it a
Task worthy men of their places, to pass their time in pastime, Nec prederunt
hic divitiae divitibus, nec parents filiis, nec Angeli ipsi proderunt.
Chrysostom. Ille Ind^x nec gratia p^evenitur, nec misericordia iam fectitur, nec
pecunis corrumpitur, nec satisfactione v^l poena mitigabitur. August.
and employ their days in an infinite consumption of misspent hours, for
which they must be accomptants in that great Assize, where neither greatness
shall be a subt^^^^g to guiltiness, nor their descent plead privilege for
those many hours they have misspent. O how can they answer for so many vain
and fruitless pleasures, which they have enjoyed, and with all greediness
embraced in this life? Many they shall have to witness against them, none to
answer for them: for their Stoves, Summer arbours, Refectories, and all other
places wherein they enjoyed the height of delight, shall be produced against
them, to tax them of sensual living, and witness against them their small
care of observing the end for which they were made. O Gentlemen, you whose
hopes are promising, your more excellent endowments assuring, and your selves
as patterns unto others appearing, know, that this Perfection whereof we now
entreat, is not acquired by idling or sensual delighting of your selves in
carnal pleasures, which darken and eclypse the glory or luster of the soul,
but in laboring to mortify the desires of the flesh, which is ever levying
and levelling her forces against the spirit! Now this Mortification can never
be attained by obeying, but resisting and impugning the desires of the flesh.
Wherefore, the only means to bring the flesh to perfect subjection, Singular
precepts of Mortification.
is to cross her in those delights which she most affects. Does she delight
in sleep and rest? keep her waking; takes she content in meats and drinks?
keep her craving; takes she solace in company? use her to privacie and
retiring; takes she liking to ease? inure her to laboring: Briefly, in
whatsoever she is delighted, let her be always thwarted; so shall you enjoy
the most rest, when she enjoyes the least. Hence it was that Saint Jerome, that
excellent pattern of holy discipline, counsels the holy Virgin Demetrias,
to eschew idleness: exhorting her withal, Hieron. ad Demet.
that having done her prayers, she should take in hand wool and weaving,
after the commendable example of Dorcas, Act. 9.39.
that by such change or variety of works, the day might seem less tedious,
and the assaults of Satan less grievous. Neither did this divine Father advise
her to work, because she was in poverty, or by this means to sustain her
family; for she was one of the most noble and eminent women in Rome, and
richest; wherefore her want was not the cause which pressed him to this
exhortation, but this rather, that by this occasion of exercising herself in
these laudable and decent labor, she should think of nothing, but such as
properly pertained unto the service of God: which place he concludes in this
manner. Ibid. prope finem.
I speak generally, no raiment, ornament, or habit whatsoever shall seem
precious in Christ's sight; but that which thou make thy self, either for
thine own peculiar use, or example of other Virgins, or to give unto thy
grandmother, or thy mother, no, though thou distribute all thy goods unto the
poor. See how expressly this noble woman was enjoined to her task, that by
intending herself to labor, she might give less way unto error.
Certainly, as man's extremity is Gods opportunity, so the Devils opportunity is
man's security: we are then principally to take heed lest we give way to the
incursion of Satan, by our security of life and conversation. And what is it
that begets this security, Idleness begets security, properly termed
the Souls Lethargy.
but Idleness, which may be termed, and not improperly, the Souls Lethargy?
For nothing can be more opposite to this Actual Perfection, than restor
vacancy; we say, virtue consists in Action; how then may we be said to be
favorers, followers, or furtherers of virtue, when we surcease from Action,
which is the life, light, and subsistence of virtue? Wherefore, as it is little
to read or gather, Parum est legere, aut colligere; sed intelligere, and in
formam redigere, hoc artis, hoc laboris est. Casman.
but to understand and to reduce to form what we read, gather or understand;
for this is the ornament of Art, the argument of labor: so it is little or to
no purpose, that we know, conceive or apprehend, unless we make a fruitful
use of that knowledge by serious practice, to the benefit of our selves and
others. I have known diverse Physicians, some whereof were of great practice,
but small reading; others of great reading, but small practice; and I have
heard sundry men of sufficient judgment confidently aver, that in cases of
necessity they had rather hazard their lives in the hand of the Practicke than
Theoricke: and their reason was this; though the Practick had not exercised
himself in the perusal of books, he had gained him experience in the
practice of cures; and that the body of his patient was the only book within
his Element. To which assertion I will neither assent, nor wholly dissent; for
as he that practices before he know, may sooner kill than cure; so he who
knows, and seldom or never practices, must of necessity, to get him
experience, kill before he cure. But sure I am, that many ignorant Laymen,
whose knowledge was little more than what nature bestowed on them, by means of
regular discipline, and powerful subduing of their own affections, have
become absolute men; being such as reached to as high a pitch of Actual
Perfection, Vid. Histor. Barlaam.

Aug. in retract.


as ever the learned or profoundest man in the world attained: for it is
neither knowledge nor place, but the free gift of Gods grace, which enableth
the spiritual man to this Perfection. Bernard.
Now, forasmuch as not to go forward, is to go backward; and that there be
two Solstices in the Suns motion, but none in times revolution, or in a
Christians progression: the only means to attain this Actual Perfection, at
least some small measure or degree therein, A Christians Ephemerides.
is every night to have our Ephemerides about with us, examining our selves
what we have done that day; how far we have profited, wherein benefited our
spiritual knowledge. Again, wherein have we reformed our life, or expressed
our love to Christ by communicating to the necessity of his Saints. By which
means, we shall in short time observe what remains unreformed; esteeming it
the sweetest life, every day to better our life. But principally, are we to
look to our affections which rise and rage in us;
and like the Snake in the fable, pester and disturb the inner house of man:
for these are they, Basil.
which (as Saint Basil says) rise up in a drunken man (drunk I mean with all
spiritual fornication) like a swarm of Bees buzzing on every side. When the
affections of men are troubled, they change them like Circes cups, Plutarch. in
moral.
from men to beasts. Neither is it so ill to be a beast, as for man to live
like a beast. O then, let us have an eye to our affections; let them be
planted, where they may be duly seasoned! Earth makes them distastefull; let
them be fixed then in heaven, the only thought whereof will cause them to be
delightful. And to conclude this branch; it will not be amiss for us, to
counterpoize our affections (if we find them at any time irregular) with
weights of contrary nature; Revel. 9.1.
as if we find our selves naturally affected to Pride (that Luciferian sin)
to counterpoise it with motives of Humility; as the vileness of our
condition, baseness of our composition, and weakness of our constitution: or
naturally inclined to Covetousness (that Mammons sin) to give, Coloss. 3.5.
though the gift afflict us, liberally, that our forced bounty may in time
weane us from our inbred misery: if of grating oppression, or grinding
extortion (that Ahabs sin) let us make restitution with good Zacheus, 1 King.
21.4 16 Luke 19 8.
and though we cannot do it so frankly as he did, yet let us do it as freely
as we may; that our restitution may in some sort answer for our former
oppression: if of excess in fare and gluttony (that Dives sin) let us so
moderate our delight in feeding, Luke 16.19.
that our delight may be to sustain Nature, and not oppress her with
exceeding: if of Lust or sensuality (that Ammons sin) where that sin may
abound, ^ Sam. 13.2.
the Sense is obeyed, let us subject all our delights to the government of
reason, and reason to the sovereignty of grace, that the flesh may be resisted
in what it most affects, and in that seconded, wherein it least delights:
Gen 3.1. and 37.4
if of Envy, (that Serpentin^ sin) let us entertain brotherly love, for
Envy can bear no sway where Love reigns: Genesis 4 5.
if of Wrath (that Cains sin) embrace Patience; so shall Fury be suppressed,
where Patience is lodged: Prove. 26.15.
if of Sloth, (the Sluggards sin) let us inure our selves to some Exercise
that may most delight us, so in time we may become exercised in Taskes of
greater difficulty: being first from Sloth weaned, afterward to greater
labors inured. Thus to fight were to vanquish; thus to enter lists, were to
reap spiritual solace; for through him should we triumph, who sees us
fighting, cheeres us failing, and crowns us conquering. And this shall suffice
to have been spoken of the Active part of Perfection, purposing according to
our former method, to compare the Contemplative and Active together; the parts
or properties of both which being duly examined, it shall more plainly appear
how the Active is to be preferred.

IT is a barren faith, The Active part preferred.
we say, that is not attended on by good works; and no less fruitless is
that knowledge which is exercised only in Contemplation, and never in Action.
We are therefore with Elizeus to have a double spirit; a spirit that as well
does, as teaches; not only a profering of words, Agapetus.
but also an offering of works. So as, it is not breathing or moving, or
talking, which argue a spiritual life; but abounding plentifully in all holy
duties, expressing those effectual and powerful fruits of a living faith by
works of charity and obedience, which may any way tend to the glorifying of
God, edifying our neighbor, or conforming our selves to him,
whose Image we bear. Now, as there is no confort comparable to the testimony
of a good conscience, Bern. de interdomo. c. 1.
being that inseparable companion which shall attend us to glory or confusion
(...) there is no punishment, torment or affliction so grievous as shame;
N^cetas. u. Nazianzen. Ambros. epist. 70.
which deriveth the cause, ground, and beginning, either from doing that which
we ought not, or from not doing that which we ought: as the comfort we reap
from the testimony of a good conscience, deriveth properly the primary cause
and effect from doing that which we ought, and abstaining from doing that which
we ought not. And what be those works which are principally commended unto us,
Anime tuae gratum feceris si misericors fu^ris. Bern. de m^do been vivendi.
but works of charity and devotion? For to our own souls (says a devout
Father) shall we be right acceptable and grateful, if we compassionate the
estate of our poor brother, by being merciful: yea, there is nothing that
commends more a Christian man, or argues a Christian-like affected mind,
Nil magis commendat Christianum animu^ etc. Ambros. 1. Tim. page 8.

Tract. 5. in Ioh.


than to show compassion to those that are afflicted. For in this there is a
resemblance betwixt the Creature and Creator, loving, as he himself loved;
showing compassion, as he showed. O let me commend this so commendable and
generous a quality, Dives factus est propter pauperem, and pauper propter
divitem; pauperit est rogare, divitis erogare. August.
to your admittance, Gentlemen! for believe me, there is no one property that
shall better accomplish you, no armory that may more truly deblazon you: for it
is a badge of Gentry to show compassion toward misery. What profit shall you
reap, if having only superficially read some Treatise tending to the comfort
of such as are either in body afflicted, or in mind perplexed, or in both
distressed; if you apply not these directions of comfort to them thus miserably
dejected? What reward, He preaches best, Qui dicit non lingud sed vita. Aug.
s^r. 18. de verb Dom.
I say, shall you receive, upon the account by you given, of the Sick which
you have visited; when having known how to comfort men in their affliction,
you have not ministered the least comfort to them in their visitation? Or when
you shall be demanded, where are the hungry which you have refreshed, the
thirsty whose thirst you have quenched, the naked whom you have clothed, the
miserable oppressed soul whose case you have not (...) pitied but redressed?
And you shall answer, how you did indeed visit them, but minister small comfort
unto them; you knew them to be oppressed, and the way to redress them, but
other occasions detained you, as you could not releeve them: Nay rather, have
you not added worme-wood to their affliction? Have you not surfetted in their
suffering, fatned your selves in their famishing, and raised your states by
their ruin? Were not your tables stored, when they were starved; did not you
feast, when they fasted; did it not affect you to see them afflicted? If at any
time you felt this in your selves, let the doleful remembrance thereof produce
torrents of tears from your distreaming eyes; supply your manifold misdeeds
with many almsdeeds; your transgressions with compassions; your oppression
with fourfold restitution; that your sin may no more be had in remembrance:
yea, let me use that exhortation to you, which a learned Father used upon like
occasion; Charitas viscera tua percutiat. August.
Let charity smite your bowels; see not the Image of your Redeemer disgraced,
but forth with labor to right him; see him not oppressed, but to your power
redress him; see him not starve, if you have bread to releeve him; or thirsty,
if you have drink to refresh him; or naked, if you have a garment to cloth
him; or in any sort distressed, if you have means to succor him. Vt a Christo
accepimus beneficium, praestemus Christiani officium, praebendo membris Christi
hospitium.
Oh consume not that on prodigality, which might procure the prayers of many
poor souls for you! their prayers are your praises; their morning and evening
sacrifice, way-marks to direct you unto Paradise: take heed then you offend
none of these Little ones, but cheer them; be not as thorns in their eyes, or
pricks in their sides, but minister all necessary comfort unto them. Now, if
this appear a matter of difficulty, pretending that the supportance of your
state exacts so much of you, as you can reserve nothing to exhibit upon these
works of charity; hear me whosoever thou (...) make this objection:
Provocaris Christian, provocaris a vidua in certa^en August.
Be provoked, O Christian, be provoked by the widow of Sarepta to this
encounter! Encounter I call it, because the flesh suggests sundry occasions to
avert thee from it. That charitable widow, 1 King. 17 15.
though she had but a little meal, she imparted of that little to a Prophet;
though she had but a little Oil, yet she freely bestowed it to refresh a
Prophet. The woman of Samaria, when Jesus said unto her, Give me to drink,
John 4.7.9
answered; How is it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me, which am a
woman of Samaria? Sundry such like answers will flesh and blood make, to
dispense with works of Charity: or like the answer of churlish Nabal; Who is
David, and who is the son of Iesse? There be many servants now adays, that
break away every man from his master: 1 Samuel 25.10.
Shall I then take my bread and my water, and my flesh which I have killed for
my Shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? O let not
these objections divert the current of thy compassion! Eye not so much his
Country, whether neighbour-borne, or a stranger, as his Countenance, the
express Image of thy Savior. But to descend to some reasons, why the Active
part of Perfection is to be preferred before the Contemplative; this amongst
others is the most effectual and impregnable. In that great day of Account,
when the sealed book of our secretest sins shall be unsealed, our privatest
actions discovered, our closest and subtillest practices displayed, and the
whole inside of man uncased; it shall not be demanded of us, Eo d^e in qu^
ratio reddetur, quid fecimus, non quid novimus, quaeretur.
what knew we, but what did we. Fitting therefore it were to prefer Action
before Knowledge in this life, being so infallibly to be preferred after this
life. Howbeit, greater is their shame, and sharper (doubtless) shall be their
censure, whose education in all Arts divine and humane has enabled them for
discourse, fitted or accommodated them for managements public or private; yet
they, giving reins to liberty, invert their knowledge to depraved ends, either
making no use of such noble and exquisite indowments, or which is worse,
employing them to the satisfaction of their own illimited desires. O happy had
these been, if they had never known the excellence of learning, for ignorance
is to be preferred before knowledge loosely perverted! Object.
Yea but, will some object, I cannot see how any one should observe a Law
before they know it; wherefore, as I think, Knowledge is to be preferred,
because by Knowledge is Action directed. Sol.
It is true indeed, Knowledge directs and instructs, for otherwise we should
grope in darkness; neither do I exclude all Knowledge, but admit so much as
may instruct man sufficiently in matters of faith; put him in remembrance of
heaven, whose joys are ineffable; of Hell, whose pains are intolerable; of
the last judgment, whose sentence is irrevocable. So as I exclude only this
gross ignorance, or blind Paganism, for to these is the way to heaven
closed, because they are divided from that light, without which the celestial
way cannot be discerned. Whereas then I have so much insisted heretofore upon
the Contemplative part of Perfection; my aim was to show how those, who
continued in a Contemplative and solitary life, sequestring themselves from the
cares and company of this world, doubtlesly conceived ineffable comfort in that
sweet retirement: yet in regard they lived not in the world, the world was not
bettered by their example. But in this Active Perfection, where the Active part
no less than Contemplative is required, we intend those who do not only know,
but do* and in the Actions of this life, Luke. 5.16.
use to make their Lights so shine before men, Object.
that they may see their good works. Yea but, it may be again objected, all
sins be properly called (...), and bear the name of ignorance; how then may
we exclude any knowledge? Sol.
Every Sin indeed implies an ignorance of the creature toward the Creator;
which ignoran^^ imports rather a forgetfulness. For admit a man should steal,
commit perjury, or any such act contrary to the express will and commandment
of God; it were to be imagined, that this breach or transgression of the divine
Law, proceeded not of ignorance: for he could not choose but know, that consent
to any of these incurred the breach of his Law: but rather it may be said, he
had not God before his eyes, but out of a wilful forgetfulness, violated the
ordinances of God. The Active preferred before the Contemplative for two
respects.
But to conclude this Branch in a word, the Active is to be preferred before
the Contemplative, for two respects; The first whereof has relation to our
selves; The second to others. To our selves; having account to make for the
Actions of our life; how we have employed or bestowed those Talents which he
has lent us; what use, profit, or benefit we have made of them; in what
spiritual affairs have we been exercised, in what holy duties trained! Have
we not preferred private profit before the testimony of a good conscience? Have
we not labored to inhaunce our means by sinister and indirect courses? Have
we not withdrawn our hand from releeving our needful brother, or defrauded
the labourer of his wages? Have we not consorted with the evil doer, and
encouraged him in his sin? Have we not hindered some pious work tending to
the honor of God, and imitable for example of others? Have we propagated the
Gospel, comforted Sion when she mourned, repaired those breaches which were in
her, and received those in peace which blessed her? Have we only sought the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof; esteemed godliness to be
great riches; left our selves and all, to be followers of him who gave us
dominion over all? If we have done this, as we are here in the Alpha of grace,
we shall be there in the Omega of glory: here initiate, there consummate; but
having known the will of our Father, and done it not; read principles or
instructions of a good life, and observed them not; conversant in deep
mysteries, and applied them not; studied in all Arts and Sciences, and
practiced them not; how miserable is our knowledge, pronouncing on us a heavier
judgment! Wherefore in respect of our selves, whether our knowledge be great
or little, if our conversation be not in heaven, though our habitation, during
our Pilgrimage, be on earth; our knowledge is but as a tinckling Cymball, and
shall smally avail us before the high Tribunal. For knew we the power and
virtue of all creatures, of all plants and vegetive bodies, from the Cedar of
Lebanon, to the Hyssop upon the wall, yet were this knowledge fruitless, being
not seconded by a life conformable to that knowledge.. Secondly, in respect of
others; Action is the life of man, and example the direction of his life. How
much then do such men prejudice those who live in the world, that betake
themselves to a private or retired life, estranged from humane society, and
ending their days in some solitary cave, as men divided from the world! For
howsoever their manner of life be religious, their discipline strict and
rigorous, and in their devotion fervent and zealous; yet they deprive others of
the benefit, which they might reap by their example. Wherefore most safe and
sure it is (to use the words of a judicious Author) for those who have a desire
to take upon them a solitary life, G^spar. in Heraclit. cap. 2. Mundum ex animo
prius fugare, quam mundum sugere.
to retire and withdraw their affections before they withdraw their bodies from
the world, and to force the world to fly from their mind, before they fly
the world; lest going out of the world, they carry about with them the world.
For as he may live ill, who lives apart from the society of men; even so,
though they fly not into the wilderness, yet may they fly the world, and
amidst the crowd of people live solitary by an inward contemplation of the
supernall glory; and in midst of a clamorous Court confer with themselves,
and converse with God: in the mean time, whatsoever they know or can do, that
may any way tend to the common good, benefit or utilitie of humane society, to
effect it accordingly, Nec divinitus acceptum talentum^n terram defodere. ibid.
and not bury that talent in the ground, which they have received from above;
which rule they are to observe after the example of the most holy and excellent
men of both Orders, Ecclesiastical (I say) and Secular. Thus far have we
proceeded in the examination or discussion of these two especial parts of
Perfection, Contemplative and Active; wherein by manifest and infallible
arguments we have proved, how the Active part is to be preferred, both in
respect of our selves and others; because a life well acted shall minister most
comfort to our selves, besides that light of example which it yields unto
others. Now as the Active is preferred, it rests that we show you wherein
this active part of perfection consists; which discovered, that whereof we
treat, and would gladly find, may be the sooner attained.

Wherein the Active part of Perfection consists.
THere is no building, which, as it relies on a foundation, consists not of some
material composition; no body but it consists of nerves, arteries or sinews,
which cement the lineaments together; no confection which consists not of some
simples, for otherwise it were not mixed, but simple and uncompounded. The like
may be said of this choice and exquisite Confection, this Active part (I mean)
of perfection. For as all Rivers tend to the Sea, to make one Ocean; all
Creatures to make one Universe; so all Virtues aim at Perfection, which once
attained, they surcease from action. Now in this discourse of Active
perfection, the period of Man, we do not mean of that absolute perfection or
accomplishment, which admits no blemish or imperfection: for we are to
seek that above us, not below us; for our righteousness, justice, and
perfection is such in this life, as it rather consists in the remission of
sins,
than perfection of virtues. Yea we sin daily; so as properly we can
attribute nothing to our own strength but weakness, Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 19.
c. 27.
to our own ability but infirmnesse, to our resolves but uncertainnesse, to
our wills but untowardnesse, to our affections but depravednesse, nor to the
whole progress of our lives but actual disobedience. But rather (I say) we
mean of that Christian perfection, which every one in this Tabernacle of clay
is to labor for; that we may become perfect through him, who became weak
that we might be strengthened, hungry that we might be nourished, thirsty that
we might be refreshed, disgraced that we might be honored; yea, who became
all unto all, that by all means he might gain some. But wherein may this
Actual perfection be properly said to consist? Active Perfection consists in
Mortification of action and affection.
In Mortification; which like the swift gliding torrent of Hydaspes, divides or
dilates it self to two channels; Action, and Affection: Action in expressing
it; Affection in desiring to express it Action in suffering; Affection in
desire of suffering. The one actuating no less in will, than the other in
work. Where the Action being more exemplar, and in that more fruitful, gives
precedencie to Affection, which concurres with the act to make the work more
graciously powerful. For, where a work of Mortification is performed, and a
hearty desire or affection to that work is not adjoined, that Action may be
properly said to be enforced, rather than out of a free or willing disposition
accepted. Now this twofold Mortification extends it self properly to these
three Subjects; Mortification extends it self in a threefold respect, to
these three distinct subjects.

1. Life. 2. Name. 3. Goods.
Mortification in our disesteeme of life.


Life, Name, Goods. Life, which even Humanity tendreth; Name, which a good man
before the sweetest odours prefers; Goods, on which the worldling, as on the
Supreme good, relieth. For the first, many excellent and memorable examples of
sundry devout and constant servants of Christ Jesus, are in every place
frequent and obvious; who for the confirmation of their faith, and the
testimony of a good conscience, joyfully and cheerfully laid down their
lives, esteeming it an especial glory to be thought worthy to suffer for him,
who with all constancy suffered, to become an example of patience to them:
which were easy to illustrate by the sufferings of many eminent and glorious
Martyrs. Prudentius writes, that when Asclepiades commanded the tormentors to
strike Romanus on the mouth, the meek Martyr answered; I thank thee, O
Captain, that thou have opened unto me many mouths, whereby I may preach my
Lord and Savior: Tot ^ece laudant ora, quot sunt vulnera: Look how many
wounds I have, so many mo^thes I have to praise and laud the Lord. Ignatius
words were these, to witness his constancy at the time of his suffering:
Frumentum sum Christi, Iren. advers. haeres. lib. 5.6.28.
and per dentes bes^earum molor, ut mundus panis Dei inveniar. I am Christ's
corn, and must be grownd by the teeth of wild beasts, that I may become pure
manchet for the Lord. It is reported that blessed Laurence, being laid upon the
Grediron, used these words to his Tormentors: Turn and cut, it is enough.
Saint Andrew, when he went to be crucified, was so rapt with joy, as he
rejoiced unmeasurably in that blessed resemblance of his Masters death. Blessed
Bartholomew willingly lost his skin for his sake, who had his skin scourged,
that he might be solaced. John drank a Cup of po^son, to pledge his Master in
a cup of affliction.
Thus Laurences Gridiron, Andrews Cross, Bartholomews Skin, John's Cup,
expressed their Mortification, by a willing surrender of their life, for his
sake, who was the Lord of life: Yea, should we survey those strange invented
torments, during the bloody issue of the ten Persecutions, which were contrived
by those inhumane Assacinates, whose hands were deepe-died in the blood of the
Saints, we should no less admire the constancy of the persecuted suffering,
Eusebius. in Eccles. Hist.
than the cruelty of the Persecutors inflicting: What rackes, hooks, harrowes,
tongs, forkes, stakes were purposely provided to torment the constant and
resolute Professors of the truth, wearying the tormentors rather with
tormenting, than abating any part of their constancy in the height and heat of
their tormenting: Ruffinus lib. 10 hist. cap 36.
Yea, they were solaced in the time when they suffered; esteeming (...) multis
the^a est, mihi litera foelix.

Si (...) soi bit, scribit and ill. (...).


death to be such a passage, as might give them convoy to a more glorious
heritage. Neither did these blessed Professors of the faith, receive comfort by
the eye of their meditation firmly fixed on heaven, but by the compassion and
princely commiseration of diverse eminent and victorious Emperors bearing
sovereignty then on earth. Constantine the Great used to kiss the eye of
Paphnutius, which was bored out in M^^ciminus time. The like noble and princely
compassion we read to have been showed by Titus, Trajan, Theodosius, and many
other Princes graciously affected toward the poor afflicted and persecuted
Christians: Yea, God moved the hearts of those, who naturally are most
remorselesse or obdurate, in commiserating the estate of his afflicted. Which
may appear by the Iaylor in the Acts, Act. 16 33.
who washed Saint Paul's stripes and wounds. O how comfortable were these
passions or passages of affliction; these tortures or torments, the trophies of
their persecution* The blessed memorial whereof shall extend the date of time,
receiving a crown of him, who is the length of days. So, as King Alexanders
Stagges were known an hundred years together by those golden collars, Plin.
lib. 8. c. 32.
which by the Kings commandment were put about their necks; or as King
Arthurs body being taken up somewhat more than six hundred years after his
death, was known to be his by nothing so much, as by the prints of ten
several wounds which appeared in his skull; so these glorious stampes of their
passion, shall appear as trophies to them in the day of exaltation; because,
as they lost their lives for the testimony of the Gospel, they shall find
them recorded in the book of life, receiving the crown of consolation, for
the deep draught which they took of the cup of affliction. Aug. Tract. 49. i^
Johan.
And reason there is, we should disvalue our l^ves for the profession of our
faith, since forlorn and miserable is his life, that is without faith. For if
the Heathen, whose future hopes were fixed on posterity, and not so much as the
least knowledge of eternity, dis-esteemed their lives to gain them renown, or
propagate their countries glory; much more cause have we to subject our lives
to the censure of death, having hope after death to live in glory. It is
reported; that the body of Cadwallo, an ancient King of the Britains,
Hollinshed.
being embalmed and dressed with sweet confections, was put into a brazen
image, and set upon a brazen horse over Ludgate, for a terror to the Saxons:
and Zisca, the valiant Captain of the Bohemians, commanded that after his
decease his skin should be flayed from his body, to make a drum, which they
should use in their battles, affirming that as soon as the Hurgarians* or any
other Enemies, should hear the sound of that drum, they would not abide but
take their flight. This moved Scipio to appoint his Sepulcher to be so placed,
as his image standing upon it, might look directly toward Africa, that being
dead, he might still be a terror to the Carthaginians. If respect of Pagans to
their Country, or an eye to popular glory did so inflame them, as their
Countries love exceeded their love of life, surviving in their death, and
leaving monuments of their affection after death: how lightly are we to value
the glory of this life, if the loss thereof may advance our Fathers glory;
or ought tending to the conservation of this life, Cyprian. Contrariisunt
illis sactiosi ^aeretici, quorum conscientia usque adio sunt amplae, ut in
illis civitatem december millium civium aedificare possis, quemadm^dum quidam
Magnum Alexandru^ depinxit. Aegid. in 1 Thessalonians. 5.

Tertul. 4. l. cont. Marcionist.


being assured by him, whose promises fail not, by such a small loss, to
gain eternity? Now, as it is not the death, but the cause of the death, which
makes the Martyr; we are to know, that to die in the maintenance of any
heretical opinion is Pseudo-martyrdom: for howsoever those Arrians, Manichees
and Pelagians; those Macedonians, Eutichees and Nestorians; yea, generally all
Heretics were constant and resolute enough in seconding and maintaining their
erroneous opinions: yet forasmuch as the cause, for which they contended, was
Heresy, tend it might to their confusion, but never to their glory: for as
honey-combes (says learned Tertullian) are by Waspes composed, so are Churches
by the Marcionists (and consequently by all Heretics) disposed: in whose
Synodals or conventicles, many thousands are perverted, none converted, or to
the Church of Christ faithfully espoused.
Whereas Truth, which may be pressed, but not oppressed, assailed, but never
soiled, like the green Bay Tree in the midst of hoarie winter, or a fresh
Spring in the sandy desert, appears most glorious, when her adversaries are
most malicious; bearing ever a countenance most cheerful, when her assailants
are most dreadful. Neither only in this glorious act of Martyrdom, but in all
inferior works, the affection of the mind, In omnibus quae agimus, finem
intentionis, magis quam actum operationis intendit. August. Soliloq. cap. 14.
as well as the action of the man, is to be considered: for God himself, who
has an eye rather to the intention than action, will not approve of a good
work done, unless it be well done. As for example; when the Pharisie fasted,
prayed, gave alms, and paid tithe of all that he possessed, he did good
works, but he did not those good works well: the reason was, he exalted
himself in his works, Luke 18.14.
without attributing praise unto him, who is the beginner and perfecter of
every good work: for his fas^s were hypocritical and not of devotion, his
prayers ineffectuall, because they sounded of Ostentation, his alms
unacceptable, because exhibited only for observation, and his (...) abominable,
being given to celour his secret oppression: for which cause did our (...)
pronounce a woe upon them, Luke 11.42.
saying, Woe unto you Pharisees; for (...) tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner
of herbs, and pass (...) ^^dgement and the love of God: these ought ye to
have done, and not to leave the other undone. Whence it appears, that the work
it self was approved, but the manner of doing it reproved; for that they
preferred the tithing of (...) and Rue before the judgment and love of God;
yea, so they preferred it, as the one was performed, while the other of more
serious and consequent importance was omitted. Whence we are cautioned, that in
our works of Mortification, we do nothing for any sinister or by-respect; but
only for the glory of God, to whom, as all our Actions are properly directed,
so are they to have relation only unto him, if we desire to have them accepted.

Is it so, that this Actual Perfection is to be acquired by Mortification,
wherein is required not only the action but affection? And that we are even to
lay down our lives, if the cause so require, to promote the glory of our
Maker? Tell me then, Gentlemen, how far have ye proceeded in this spiritual
progress? Have ye unfainedly desired to further the honor of God, repair
the ruins of Sion, and engage your own lives for the testimony of a good
conscience? have ye fought the Lords battle, and opposed your selves against
the enemies of the Truth? Have ye shut the door of your chamber, the door of
your inner Parlour, I mean your heart, from the entrance of all earthly
affections, sensual cogitations, and expressed true arguments of
Mortification, the sooner to attain this high degree of Christian Perfection?
Have ye made a covenant with your eyes not to look after the strange woman, a
covenant (I mean) with your hearts never to lust after her? Have ye weaned
your itching and bewitching humors, from affecting foreign and outlandish
fashions, which howsoever they be to fashion conformed, they make man of all
others most deformed? Have ye done with your reere-suppers, midnight revels,
Curtain pleasures, and Courting of Pictures? Have ye left frequenting
Court-maskes, Tilt-triumphs and enterludes; boasting of young Ladies favors,
glorying more in the purchase of a glove, than a Captain in the surprizall of
a Fort? Have ye cashiered all those Companions of death, those seducing
Consorts of misery, and betaken your selves to the acquaintance of good men,
conceiving a settled joy in their society? O then thrice happy you! for having
honored God, he will honor you; having repaired the ruins of Sion, he will
place you in his heavenly Sion; or engaged your lives for the testimony of a
good Conscience, he will invite you to that Continual feast of a peaceable
Conscience; or fought the Lords battle, he will say you have fought a good
fight, crowning you after your victory on earth, with glory in heaven; or shut
the door of your Chamber, and kept the room clean and sweet for your Maker,
he will come in and sup with you, that you may rejoice together; or made a
covenant with your eyes not to look after the strange woman, with those eyes
ye shall hehold him, who put enmity between the Serpent and the Woman; or
weaned your itching and bewitching humors from affecting Outlandish fashions,
madding after phantasticke habits (for Parum res^rt, vesti^ tua an S^ricea an
Cilicea, modo pudica sit, non meretricia.
stuff it skils not, whether silken or woollen, so the fashion be civil and
not wanton) you shall be clothed in long white roabes, and follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes; or done with your midnight revels, and Court pleasures,
you shall be filled with the pleasures of the Lords house, and abide in his
Courts for ever; or left frequenting Maskes, Tilt-triumphs and Enterludes, the
glorious Spectacles of vanity, you shall be admitted to those angelical
triumphs, singing heavenly Hymns to the God of glory; or cashiered those
companions of death* whose end is misery, you shall have the Saints for your
companions, and share with them in the Covenant of mercy. Do ye not hence
observe what inestimable comforts are reserved for those who are truly
mortified? mortified, Lanspurg. in Pha^etra divini amoris.
I say, in respect of your contempt to the world, which is expressed by ceasing
to love it, before you leave it. Who would not then disvalue this life, and all
those bitter sweets, which this frail life affords, to possess those
incomparable sweets which every faithful soul enjoys? Yea, but our silken
worldling, or delicate Wormeling will object; this discipline is too strict for
flesh and blood to follow. Who can endure to yield his head to the block, or
his body to the faggot, when the very sight of death in another, ministers to
the beholder motives of terror? Surely, this is nothing, to him that duly
considers, how he that loses his life shall save it, but he that saves his
life shall lose it. What is a minutes anguish to an eternity of solace? We can
endure the launcing or searing of a putrified member, and this endures as long
as our time of wrestling with our Dissolution, Ibid.
which brings us to our Savior: nor skils it much, what kind of death we
die, seeing no kind of death can hurt the righteous, be the terrors and
torments of death never so numerous. Scire debes, quod quamvis de mor^e
meditari sit horribile, de statu finalis judicii cogitare, ut aestimo, non
minus est sormidabile: quia nullus tunc polerit fall^re sapientiam, flectere
just tiam, inclinare clementia^, declinare ultionis and justae retributionis
sententiam. Bern.

Mortification in our dis-respect of fame or report.

Mortification in averting our ear from our ^wne praise.


The way then to contemn death, is to expect it, and so to prepare our selves
for it, as if we were this very hour to encounter it; resolving never to go
with that conscience to our bed, with which we durst not go to our grave;
being so uncertain whether before the next morn we shall be taken out of our
bed, and shrouded for our grave. And this shall suffice touching our
Mortification or Contempt of life, if with such a sacrifice we may be thought
worthy to honor him, who gave us life.

We are now to speak of Mortification in respect of name or report; wherein,
you are to understand, that this is twofold: First, in turning our ears from
such as praise us; Secondly, in hearing with patience such as revile us. For
the first, it is and has been ever the condition of sober and discreet men to
avert their ear from their own praises; at least with a modest passing over
such virtues as were commendable in them: which modesty appeared in Alphonsus
Prince of Aragons answer to an Orator, who having repeated a long Panegyricall
oration in his praise, replied, If that thou have said consent with truth,
I thank God for it; if not, I pray God grant me grace that I may do it.
Pha^^orin. lib. 1. de rebu^ gest. A^b^ns.
Others likewise we read of, who could not with patience endure their persons
or actions to be praised above truth: this princely passion appeared in
Alexander, who hearing Aristobulus, a famous Greek Historian, read his writings
purposely penned upon the memorable acts he had achieved, wherein he commended
him far above truth: being mightily incensed therewith, threw the book into
the river, as he was sailing over Hydaspes, saying withal, he was almost moved
to send Aristobulus after. Neither indeed will any wise man endure to hear
himself praised above truth, seeing, no less aspersion may be laid on his
person by being too highly praised, than if he were discommended: for should we
praise one for his bounty, who is publicly known to the world to be
par^^monious; or for his humility, who is naturally ambitious; or for his
continency, who is licentious; our praises would not tend so much to his
honor, as to the display of his nature: yea, even he himself, guilty in
himself, would tax us, knowing that he the least of all others deserved these
praises from us. Ealaus, D. Augustini judicio, unice approbanda est, quando nec
laudantem adulatio movet, nec laudatum tentat elatio.
It is flattery (says one) to praise in absence; that is, when either the
virtue is absent, or the occasion is absent. But in the report of our own
praise, admit we should deserve it; the safest course is to withdraw our ear
from hearing it, lest vainglory transport us upon hearing of those praises
which are spoken of us: for if our aims be only to purchase popular esteem,
preferring the praise of men, before the praise of God, or the testimony of a
good conscience; as our aims were perverted, so shall we be rewarded. Now
there is no better means to abate or extenuate this desire of praise in us,
than duly to consider whose gifts they be, that deserve this praise in us: for
were they our own, we might more properly be praised for them; but they are
Gods, and not ours, therefore is the praise to be ascribed unto God, and not
unto us. For he that would be praised for Gods gift, Aug. Soliloq. c. 15
and seeks not Gods glory, but his own in that gift, though he be praised by
men for Gods gift, yet is he dispraised by God, for not seeking Gods glory, but
his own for this gift: and he who is praised by men, God dispraising, shall
not be defended by men, God judging, nor be delivered, God condemning. Whereas,
he that loves God, will choose rather to be deprived of all future glory, than
detract by any means from God the Author of all glory. Let us then so avert
our ear from selfe-praise, or ought else that may beget in us vainglory or
ostentation, that we may become like unto him, who dis-esteemed all worldly
praise from the hour of his birth to the hour of his passion. Mortification
in suffering aspersions laid on our good name.
Secondly, we are to hear with patience such as revile us: and reason good;
for observing this, a blessing is pronounced on us: Blessed are ye^ (says the
Lord of all blessing) when men shall revile you, and persecute you, Matthew.
5.11, 12.
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake: Rejoice, and
be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you. Yea, not only the Prophets, but even Him,
of whom all the Prophets bare witness; yet became he as one that did not
hear, having no rebukes in his mouth. When he was tempted in the wilderness,
the Scripture was his armor of resistance; when he was reviled on the Cross,
he prayed for his enemies, Quod si ipse Dei Filius a Diabolo in Eremo tentatus
fuit; qu^ Eremita^um idem non expectet? G^sper. in H^ra^lit^.

Vid. Aegidium in hunc locum.


to express his heavenly patience. Now, if the Son of God was in the desert
tempted, what Hermit can expect to be from temptation freed? If the Master be
reviled, how may the servant look to be entreated? For howsoever some, or
indeed most of the ancient Fathers, doubt whether the Devil did know that
Christ was God or no; touching that parcel of Scripture, wherein Christ was
tempted in the Defart; yet may it appear probable by inference from the text
it self, that after Jesus had said unto him, Matthew 4 7, 8.
It is written thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God; the Devil took him up
into an exceeding high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them; saying, All these things will I give thee, if
thou will fall down and worship me. Whence I collect, that after Christ had
told him that he was God, 9.
he continued his temptation; which was an argument to evince him of palpable
ignorance; or of distrust to Christ's speech, which argued his diffidence: but
our purpose is not too curiously to insist upon these subtle digressions; Tota
vita Christi in terris quae per hominem gessit, disciplina morum fuit Omnia
bona mundi Christus contempsit, quae contemnenda docuit: and omnia mala
sustinnit, quae sustinenda percepit; ut in illis non quaereretur faelicitas,
neque in istis timeretur infaelicitas. Aug. dever. rel.
it sufficiently appears, that Christ who ought to be every faithful
Christians pattern, was reviled, yet opened not he his mouth; but with sweet
silence and amiable patience offered his prayers unto his Father for them, who
maliciously offered him upon the Cross; leaving us an example of admiration
and imitation, that following him and suffering with him, we might likewise
reign and remain with him: yea, but will our spritely-stately Gallant object;
can any man, who knows the value of reputation, with patience suffer public
disgrace? Is there any punishment so grievous as shame? Yea, were it not better
for a man who is eminent in the eye of the world, to die right out, than still
live in reproach and shame?
For a man to live or die, is natural; he performs but that task to which
all mortality is enjoined; Ambros. epist. 70.
but for a man to live in shame and contempt, and be made a spectacle of
disgrace to the world, The commendation shall ever live which A^b^ose gives to
Theodosius the Emperor; Beneficium se p^tabat accepisse august (...) o^iae
Theodosius, quoti^s rogabatur ignoscere. Optabatur in co, quod timebatur in
aliis, ut irasceretur. De ob^t. Theo.
an apparent touch or taint to his friends, a laughing stock of his enemies, is
such a matter, as no well-bred and noble minded man, that has any courage or
stomach in him, or tenders his esteem, can ever digest it. True it is, that
flesh and blood will suggest many such objections; and if there were nothing to
be valued so much as worldly esteem, or popular grace, which relyeth on
opinion, as soon lost as got, there were some reason to stand so punctually
upon terms of reputation; but the eye of a Christian ought to extend it self
to an higher object. We are exhorted to heap coals on our enemies heads* to
render good for evil; and to be revenged on them by well doing. Diogenes being
asked how one should be revenged of his enemy, answered, by being a virtuous
and honest man.
What matter then though all the world revile us, Cha^o^ nec Lethis caeca
Charybdis saedoru^ sacras sorde Charites.

S^crat. in Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 21.


having a sincere and unblemished conscience within us, to witness for us?
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History writes, that Athanasius being accused
by one Iannes, to have killed Arsenius, and after to have cut off his hand,
that he might use it to magic and forcerie, cleared himself notably of this
slender: having by good hap found out Arsenius, The Arrians scandalized the
great Athanasius.
who lay hid for the nonce, he brought him before the Council of Tyrus,
whereto he was convented, and there he asked his accuser, whether he ever knew
Arsenius or no? He answered, Yes: then Athanasius called him forth, with his
hands covered under his cloak, and turning up the one side of his cloak,
showed him the one of his hands; and when most men surmised, that the other
hand at leastwise was cut off* Athanasius without any more ado, casts up the
other side of his cloak, and shows the second hand, saying, You see Arsenius
has two hands, now let mine accuser show you the place where the third hand
was cut off. Whence two remarkable considerations are recommended unto us:
malicious subornation in the accuser; gracious moderation in the accused. For
the former, let the speech of a Heathen man for ever be printed in your hearts;
who when his friend came unto him, and desired him to take a false oath in a
cause of his, made answer: (...). You must (says he) bear with me, there are
many friends to be gotten if I lose you; but if by forswearing my self I lose
the favor of God, I cannot get another, there is but one God. For the latter
as soft words pacific wrath, so by a pleasant conceit he cooled all wrath;
fleighting so much the aspersion of his accuser, as even of his enemies he
gained him honor. To instance which Moderation or patience, even in sundry
Heathen men, toward such as aspersed disgrace upon them, were it not that I
fear enlarging of this branch too much, I might produce many heroicke and
princely examples, Plutarch. in vit.
as Vespasian, his son Titus, Marcellus, Demetrius; yea, the stiff and
rough-hew'd Hercules, who cared not a fly for backbiting terms. But I am to
use a word or two unto you, Gentlemen, by quest of inquiry how you are found
affected herein, and so descend to the third and last Branch arising from this
Subject.

Have ye not delighted in hearing your own praise, but reproved such as
praised you, or turned your care from their applause, le^t it should transport
you? Have ye distributed to the poor, without looking who saw you? Have ye
fasted without hanging down your head, to cause men observe you? Have ye
prayed with zeal, fixing your eye only on God, that he would look on you? Have
ye performed the works of charity, and that for conscience sake, and not for
vainglory? Have ye not too Pharisaically prided your selves in your own
integrity? Have ye ascribed to your selves shame, and to God the glory? Have
ye heartily wished rather to be deprived of all hope of glory, than by your
means to detract in any wife from Gods glory? O then happy and blessed are
you! for having turned your ears from the applause of men, you shall receive
applause from Angels; or having distributed to the poor without looking who
saw you, you shall be plenteously rewarded by him, whose eyes are ever upon
you; or fasted without hanging down your heads, to cause men observe you, you
shall feast with him, who will erect your heads, and with glory crown you; or
performed works of charity for conscience sake, and not for vainglory, your
works shall go before you, and be accounted for righteous through him who
shall cloth you with glory; or not too Pharisaically prided your selves in
your own integrity, you shall become justified with the Publican, and admitted
to honor by humility; or ascribed to your selves shame, and to God the glory,
God shall wipe off your shame, and bring you to the full fruition of his glory;
or heartily wished to be deprived of all hope of glory, rather than by your
means to detract in any wise from Gods glory; your desire of advancing Gods
glory, shall after your passage from this vale of misery, estate you in the
inheritance of glory. Again; have ye heard with patience such as revile you?
Have ye answered them as he did, who being accused by his enemy of one sin,
accused him likewise of ignorance, saying, Thou accusest me of one, when I am
guilty of a thousand? Have ye not stood upon terms of reputation, but with
patience suffered all disgraces? Have ye overcome your enemy with mildness?
taken revenge on him by your virtue and goodness? Fortified your selves
against all calumny, with the spirit of patience? O then right blessed are
you! for having heard with patience such as revile you, an eternal blessing is
pronounced on you; or having been as ready to condemn your selves, as others
to accuse you, your purged conscience shall freely acquit you; or not stood on
terms of reputation when men disgraced you, you shall be graced in heaven,
where no disgrace shall touch you; or overcome your enemy with mildness, the
mild Lamb shall crown you with happiness; or taken revenge on him by your
virtue and goodness, you shall be refreshed with the fountain of sweetness;
or fortified your selves against all calumny with the spirit of patience, with
Palms in your hands shall ye sing with joyfulnesse. Gather, O gather hence
with ineffable Solace is conferred on the patient! whatsoever he suffer here,
shall in superabundant measure be recompensed elsewhere. But it may be
objected, that some aspersions are not to be borne with: for those scandals
which are laid upon our persons, where our faith is not taxed or touched, may
be more easily endured; but where these are struck at, they are not to be
suffered. To confirm which, we read how Peter and John having by prayer and
imposition of hands, given the holy Ghost, and Simon the Sorcerer saw that
through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was given, he offered
them money, saying, Act. 8.17, 18, 19.
Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the
holy Ghost. But Peter incensed herewith, 20.
said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the
gift of God may be purchased with money. Whence it appears, that out of a
holy zeal, one may show passion toward such as detract from the honor of
God, or asperse a blemish upon his servants in the work of their ministry.
The like we read of Paul, that glorious vessel of election, conceiving much
indignation against one, who had withstood the word; 2 Timothy 4.14.
saying, Alexander the Coppersmith did me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his works. The reason is inclusively annexed; of whom be thou
ware also, 15.
for he has greatly withstood our words. The like spirit of zeal might James
and John be said to be of, who when they saw that the Samaritanes would not
receive Christ, Luke 9.54.
said; Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and
consume them, even as Elias did? But how this passion of theirs was approved,
may appear by the ensuing verse; But he turned and rebuked them, 55.
and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. Now to clear this
objection, there is no Pattern which we ought sooner to imitate than Christ
himself, who is the master of truth and directs us in all truth; who as he
was most blameless of all others, for in his mouth was never guile found, yet
was he in his own person more blamed, in his doctrine more reproved, in his
miracles more injured than all others: John 7.20. Matt. 9.34.
for one while he is accused to have a Devil; anon, that he casts out Devils
through the prince of the Devils; anon, that he is a man gluttonous and a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. Yet what answer vouchsafed he
unto all these save only this, Matt. 11.19. Act. 2.13.
Wisdom is justified of her children? Now I know there are differences of
Scandals or aspersions, Scandalum Pharisaeorum. Scandalum Pasillorum. Scandalum
activum. Scandalum passivum.
where some leave deeper impression than others do: for as the name is more
precious than any earthly substance, so it receives the deepest stain, when
the estimation of our faith is questioned, being the very maine foundation
whereon all religion is grounded, and the perfection of that building which
makes a Christian rightly accomplishd.
Saint Basil could show himself calm enough in his conference with the
Emperor, till a Cook came in, and saucily told him, he did not well to stand
so precisely upon such small matters, but rather to yield to his master the
Emperor in a word or two: for what were those divine affairs whereon he so
much insisted, but such as with indifferency might be dispensed? But what
answered this reverend Father? Yea Sir Cook (quoth he) it is your part to tend
your pottage, and not to boil and chop up divine matters, which, as they
little trouble you, so in weight and consequence are far above you. And then
with great gravitie turning to the Emperor, said, that those that were
conversant in divine matters, which were principally to be intended, would with
conscience rather suffer death, than suffer one jot of holy* Scripture, much
less an article of faith to be altere^ or corrupted. Another holy man, though
most innocent, could endure to be accounted a whoremaster, an unclean person,
and the like; but when one called him an Heretic, he could bear no longer: so
near be we touched, when our faith is questioned. But as we have a noble and
glorious Pattern, who showed himself a Conqueror in his suffering, let us
wrestle with flesh and blood, that suffering all things for him and with him,
we may after our conquest joy in him and with him. And let this be sufficient
to have been spoken of Mortification in respect of our name or esteem in the
world, laboring daily to dis-value and huminate our selves while we are in
the world.

If it be no great thing to leave our substance, Mortification in our contempt
of all worldly substance.
but our selves; let us at least leave our substance, that we may the better
enjoy our selves. It was the wise exhortation of the wisest of Princes; Honor
the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thy increase:
Prove. 3.9.
annexing a promise to this precept; 10.
So shall thy barnes be filled with plenty, and thy press shall burst out with
new wine. But forasmuch as many things are required to the mortification of
this earthly Mammon, we will reduce them to two especial heads, the better to
retain in memory this means of mortification: Two remarkable considerations:
first, by whom these blessings are conferred on us; secondly, how they are to
be disposed by us.

Non dabit quod non habet. Aug.


1. to consider from whom we have received these worldly blessings: 2. how to
dispose of them, lest they become cursings of blessings. For the first, we are
positively to set down, that every good gift and every perfect gift comes
from above; the beasts that graze on a thousand hills are his; the treasures of
the earth are his: for from whom should we think are they derived to us, but
from him by whom they were created for us? He who never had it, how can he give
it? but he who has all, guides all, governes all, and is all in all, is
sole-sufficient for all. He it i^ then that makes rich and makes poor,
exalts and humbles, sends forth his waters out of their treasuries, and
all things are drowned, shuts them in their treasuries, and all things are
dried. He it is that makes the fruitful barren, and the barren fruitful. In
stead of the thorn shall come up the fur tree, Isa. 55.13.
and in stead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree, and it shall be to
the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off. He it
is that made Heaven and Earth and all things, replenished Heaven and Earth with
all things, giving Man dominion over all things, that Man might be subject unto
him who made all things. Now as he gave them to man, so are they to be disposed
of by man, to his glory who made man. And how is that? Not in laying land unto
land with the oppressor; Isa. 55.13.
nor in repairing to the house of the strange woman with the adulterer; nor
consuming your substance in excess with the rioter; nor hoording up vengeance
against the day of wrath with the miser; nor grinding the face of the poor
with the extortioner: but rather distributing freely of that which you have,
and communicating to the necessity of the Saints: so shall you make to your
selves friends of your unrighteous Mammon, and shall be fed with Manna in the
Courts of Sion. Luke 16.9.
Gainful is the use of that money, which is put out to the works of charity:
which be it more or less, cannot but be exceeding great, being given with
devotion, and the work attended by singleness of heart and sincerity of
affection; for where a sincere will is not joined with the work, the work
cannot be effectual to the doer, howsoever it may seem fruitful to the
beholder. Ac which sort of men, who erect sumptuous works rather for
popularitie and affectation, than piety or sincere affection, the Poet
pleasantly glanceth; Signa viis reparant, ut nomina nota relinquant, Ma^more
quae sculpto romen manis bab^nt.
THESE Statues rear in public ways,
as trophies of their love,
Which, as they hear, in passengers
will admiration move,
And gain a fame unto their name,
which may survive in them:
But trust me, Sirs, these works of theirs
show them vainglorious men.
Which works, howsoever useful unto others, were better undone than done in
respect of themselves: for to glory in our works, does not only derogate from
our works, but denounce upon us greater damnation, ascribing to our selves what
duly, properly, and solely ought to be attributed to the glory of God. But to
draw nearer the point we have in hand; there is nothing that weaneth our minds
more from the meditation of God and mortification to the world, than our
earthly affections, which bear such sway over us, as they will not suffer
those divine motions or meditations to take root in us. This is excellently
shadowed in that Parable of the great Supper, Luke 14.16, 17, etc.
where many guests were invited, but all with one consent began to make their
excuse: the first he had bought a piece of ground, and he must needs go see
it: the second had bought five yoke of oxen, and he must go prove them: and
another had married a wife, and therefore he could not come. These, though the
fatlings be provided, the choicest dainties prepared, wherewith their
hunger-starved souls might be refreshed, cannot come; the world must detain
them, their earthly respects inchaine them, their sensual delights restrain
them: they cannot come, though often invited, nor re^ort to this great Supper,
though all things be provided. These seldom or never take into their more
serious consideration the state of the blessed in Heaven, or the state of the
damned in Hell. Neither can the joys of the one allure them, or the pains of
the other deter them. These will dispense with the word for the profit of the
world, Poenitentia dol^rum, non rem^ssionis ^e^catorum.

Chrysos^ ho^. 7. in Johan.

Aug lib. 1. de ci (...). Dei, c^p. 18 Greg. l^b 20. Me^a^. cap. 12.


and enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, deferring repentance till it be
past season. Saint Chrysostom relates how Paulus Samosetanus that
arch-heretike, for the love of a woman forsook his faith. Saint Augustine
relates diverse, who denied the torments of Hell to have eternity, thereby to
flatter their affections with a pretended assurance of impunitie. Saint Gregory
imputes it to avarice and covetousness, that many forsake their faith. These
follow not the example of sundry devout men, the memory whereof is recommended
unto us in holy writ; who being possessors of lands, or houses, sold them, and
brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet: and distribution was made unto every man according as he had
need. Act. 4.34, 35.
The like contempt, in respect of earthly substance, we read to have been in
many noble and equally affected Pagans, as Crates, Bisias, Zeno, Bias,
Anacreon, Anacharses; who, though they had scarce the least glimpse of an
eternity, yet they dis-valued the substance of earth as the subject of
vanity. But I must now draw in my sails, and take a view of your dispositions
(Gentlemen) how you stand herein affected; that seeking what I expect to find,
I may no less glory in your aversion from earth, than if you were ascending
Jacobs ladder, to have your names enrolled in the kingdom of heaven.

An accurate repetition and connection of the precedent Meditations.
Have ye honored the Lord with your substance, and tendered him the first
fruits of his bounty? Have ye acknowledged every good thing to come from him,
as from the fountain of mercy? Have ye subjected your selves unto him, as he
has subjected all things to your soveraigntie? Have ye disposed of them
soberly and solely to his glory? Have ye been oppressors, and with good
Zacheus made fourefold restitution? Have ye not exposed your inheritance to
riot and pollution? Have ye not hoorded up vengeance against the day of
affliction? Have ye not grinded and grated the face of the poor with
extortion? Have ye distributed freely, and communicated to the Saints
necessity? Have ye made you friends of your unrighteous Mammon, and so made
your selves way to the heavenly Sion? Have ye done these works of compassion
with singleness of heart, and without affectation? Have ye been by no
earthly respect detained from coming to that great Lords Supper, to which you
were invited? O then in a happy state are you! for having honored the Lord, he
will fill your barnes with plenty; or having acknowledged all good things to be
derived from his mercy, he will give you a fuller taste of his bounty; or
subjected your selves to his obedience, he will cause every Creature to do
you service; or disposed of them soberly and solely to his glory, he will
exhibit his good gifts unto you more fully; or been oppressors, and made
restitution, you shall with Zacheus become vessels of election; or not exposed
your inheritance to riot and pollution, you shall be safe from the doom of
confusion; or not grinded the face of the poor with extortion, the poor shall
bear record of your compassion; or distributed freely to the Saints
necessity, he that sees in secret shall reward you openly; or made you
friends of your unrighteous Mammon, Manna shall be your food in the heavenly
Sion; or done these works singly, and without vainglory, you shall be
clothed with the garment of mercy; or not detained by the world from going to
that great Lords Supper, ye shall be graciously admitted and exalted to
honor. Thus to dispose of the substance of the world, is to despise the world:
preferring one meditation of the pleasures and treasures of heaven, before the
possession of the whole earth; and esteeming it far better to be one day in
the House of the Lord, than to be conversant in the Palaces of Princes. O then,
ye whose generous descents and mighty estates promise comfort to the
afflicted, relief to the distressed, and an hospitable receipt to all such as
repair to you for succor or comfort; minister to the necessity of the
Saints, be liberal and open handed to the poor, having opportunity, do good
unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith, Gal. 6.10.
be exercised in the works of the spirit and not of the flesh, so shall ye
build upon a sure foundation, and in the inheritance of Gods Saints receive a
mansion. Turn not (I say) you ear from the cry of any poor man, lest his cry
be heard, and procure vengeance to be powered on your head. Pity the moanes of
the afflicted, wipe off the tears of the distressed, comfort those that mourn
in Sion. The ordinary form of begging in Italy is, Do good for your own
sakes. Do good for your own sakes, for your own selves, for your own
souls. No Nullum Deo grati (...) sacrificium, quam zelus (...). Greg. in hom.
12. sup. Ezech.
sacrifice to God more grateful, to your selves more useful, or to your own
souls more fruitful, than to be zealous in all holy duties, and compassionate
to the needful: Nam qui non ardet, non accendit. Bernard.
for he that in himself burns not in devotion, can never inflame another with
the zeal of devotion: Nec lucere potest, nisi prius ardeat. Aquin. in 5. Johan.
neither can any one shine, unless before he burn; shine in the works of
compassion, unless he burn before with the zeal of a devout affection. So as
many though they be Lucerna quoad officium, extinctae quoad effectum. Ibid.
Lights in respect of their ministry or office, yet are they Snuffs in
respect of their use, effect or service. Exhibit therefore freely of those good
gifts and bounties which God has bestowed on you, and show your liberality
now in the opportunate time; for as there is a time when none can work, so
there is a time when none can give: give it then in your life time, that you
may express your charity with your own hand, Quod emittitur voluntarium est:
quod amittitur necessarium. Ambros.
and not by way of Legacy: for many make good wills, which I much fear me
proceed not of good will, being rather by the sentence of mortality enforced,
than of their own charitable disposition affected, to leave to the poor
afflicted of the world, which they so exceedingly loved, while they sojourned
here in the world. And what shall these bountiful Legacies avail them, these
charitable Wills profit them, when they shall make their beds in the dark, and
enter parlie with their own Consciences, whether this coacted charity of
theirs proceeded from compassion or compulsion, leaving what they could no
longer enjoy, and giving that which was not in their power to give? Surely, no
more benefit shall this enforced charity confer on them, than if they had
sown the sand: for fruitless is that work which deriveth not her ground from
a pure intention or sanctified will. In the Eastern countries, they put coin
in the dead man's hand, to provide for him after his departure hence. Qui a die
in d^em deserunt, donec Parcae cuncta auserunt.
The like provision carry these along with them to their graves, who defer
giving, till they cannot give, making their Executors their Almoners, who many
times defeat the poor, or number themselves in Beadroll of the poor; whereby
they gull the deceased, enriching their own coffers with the poor man's box.
Non memini me legisse mala morte mortuum, qui liben^er opera (...) exercuit.
Hieron. in epist. ad Nepotianum.
O Gentlemen, you whose corpse are followed with many mourners, and oft-times
inward rejoycers; send out those sweet odours of a good and devout life before
you; dispense and dispose faithfully, in whatsoever the Lord above others has
enriched you; defer not your charity to your death, lest you be prevented of
your charity by death; bethink your selves how you would be provided if that
great Master of accounts were this hour to call you before him, and make your
reckoning with him; would you not be glad, if your conscience told you, how you
had been faithful disposers or imployers of those Talents which were
delivered to you? Would not your hearts rejoice within you to have such a
Testimony, Quam immensa est laetitia de recordatione transacta virtutu! etc.
Bern. in fest. omnium Sanctorum. sermon. 2.
as the witness of an undefiled or spotless conscience within you? Would it
not intraunce you with an exceeding joy, to hear that happy and heavenly
approbation, Well done, good and faithful servants, you have been faithful
over a few things, I will make you rulers over many things: enter ye into the
joy of your Lord? If this could not choose but joy you, so dispose of your
earthly Mammon, that you may be partakers of this surpassing joy in the Courts
of Sion. And so I descend to the last Branch of this last Observation,
expressing that object of ineffable consolation, whereto this Active Perfection
aspireth, and that spiritual repose of heavenly solace and refection, wherein
it solely and properly rests.

MAN is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward, being here a sojourner
in the Inn of this world; Job 5.7.
and drawing every day nearer and nearer the end of his Pilgrimage; The
absolute or supreme end whereto this Actual Perfection aspireth, and wherein
it solely rests. Chrysostom. Aug. Soliloq. c. 2.
where man's life is the Travelers emblem; his form of living, the very
mirror of his sojourning; his home returning, the type or figure of his
dissolving. In which progress or journall of man, by how much more the
Sun-diall of his life proceeds, by so much nearer the nightshade of death
approaches. Yet, behold the misery of man! His desires are daily to disquiet
and disturb himself: for show me that man howsoever affected, or in what
degree soever placed, whose desires are so firmly fixed, as his mind is not
troubled in the pursuit of that whereto his aims are directed. For to begin
with the Highest, because his thoughts are ever aspiring'st; does the Ambitious
man aim at honor or preferment? Behold, he purposes with himself to gain
or attain such a place under his Prince, not so much for his own ends (as he
pretends) but to be useful to his friends, and behovefull to his Country;
but since that hour, he entertained the first infant thoughts of Ambition, he
has felt sufficiently the danger of that infection: reaping no other fruits
but distractions, in respect of Competitours, or want of enjoying himself,
being pestred by multitudes of Suitors. Or is he covetous? There is nothing
which he eyes or beholds upon this, Universe, tending to profit, or promising
hope of profit, which he presently conveyes not to his heart, coveting
whatsoever he sees, and seeing nothing that he does not covet: he tumbles and
tosses, and will not suffer his eyes to slumber, T^rent. in Heauron.

Plan. in Rudente.


but like miserable Menedemus in Terence, or greedy Gripus in Plautus, he
afflicts and torments himself, making his own desires his own disquiets. Or
is he Voluptuous? His fond affection procures in him this frenzy or
distraction: He goes to the house of the strange woman, gives ear to her
incantation, sports with Ismael, lusts after her beauty in his heart: and is
taken with her eyelids; yet see how sensuality brings him to misery! Prove.
6.25.
by means of this whorish woman, he is brought to a piece of bread: and the
adulteress will hunt after his precious life: but to pass over these, and
take a view of such whose course of life seems better disposed, than to
converse with the world, either by ambitiously aspiring to Honor, the great
man's Darling; or by too eager a pursuit after Riches, the worldlings Mammon; or
by too hot a quest after pleasure, the wantons Minion. For to reflect a little
upon the aims of such who affect Contemplation, and every day better their
knowledge in the serious or exquisite search of the natures, virtues, or
operations of all creatures; we shall find, to use the words of Solomon, That
even in these there is vanity and affliction of spirit: Ecclus. 1.23.
for howsoever, Wisdom raines down skill and knowledge of understanding,
exalting them to honor that hold her fast; yet Salomons conclusion after the
search of wisdom and folly, Eccles. 1.18.
is definitively this; In much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. For should man labor to engrosse all learning,
knowledge and wisdom, his labor were but vain, and his search fruitless;
seeing he, whose understanding was deepest, conceit quickest, and wisdom
greatest of all them that were before him in Jerusalem, has thus concluded:
16.7.23.24.
All this I have proved by wisdom; I said, I would be wise, but it was far
from me. Adding the reason hereof; That which is far off, and exceeding
deep, who can find it out? For be our search never so curious, or desire
covetous in the pursuit of knowledge, we shall find by daily experience our
own weakness: where though our wills be strengthened, our abilities are
weakened,
being ever more hopeful in our undertakings, than powerful in our
performance; Scire omnia volumus, nihil agere. Gasper. in Herac. cap. 2.
yea, it is a property inherent to us, and naturally ingraffed in us, to have
an itching desire of knowing all things, but of doing nothing: yet neither in
knowledge nor action may we satisfy our desire or affection: vain and
endless therefore is our search in the former, as weak and fruitless is our
pursuit of the latter. There is no end of writing many books, no end of
reading many books, no end of storing our Libraries with many books: Sub
quorum velamine, frequenter magna avaritia comperitur. Vincent. de vit. Spirit.
cap. 1.
for under the cover of these, much covetousness oft-times lurketh. These are
not of that inestimable price, (though they contain much spiritual comfort)
as may fully store or enrich the heart; fully replenish or satisfy the heart;
fully settle or establish the heart: for where the desires of the heart are not
fulfilled; how can she hold her self su^ficiently enriched? Or where her
desires are not accomplished; how may she rest satisfied? or being not there
seated, where her desires are settled; how can she be quieted? Hence it is, that
a devout Father compares his Heart unto a Mill; Sive dormiam sive vigil^m,
somniat: and cogitat quicquid ei occurrit. Bern. Med. cap. 9.
For as a Mill (says he) swiftly wheeleth and turns about, and refuses
nothing, but whatsoever is put upon it, it grindeth: but if nothing be put upon
it, it consumes it self: so is my unstable heart always in motion, and never
rests: but whether I sleep or wake, it dreameth and thinks of whatsoever
it encountreth. Can then neither Honor, nor wealth, nor pleasure satisfy this
unconfined Heart? can neither Honors surprise her, wealth enjoy her, nor
pleasure intraunce her? No; these are vanity, and lighter than vanity,
receiving their true color from the Poet, who bestows on them this
portraiture; Wealth is a wave, Honor a bait of death,
In (...) honorem (...) ne praeveniatur, in possidendo valde si^et ne privetur.
Catching at which wee'r caught and choked therewith.
For tell me, is not the Ambitious man as fearful to incur disgrace, after
he is received to his Princes favor, as he was jealous of a Competitor before
he got into favor? again, Cui tam d^^st quod habet, quam quod non hab^t.
is not the miserable rich man, who reposeth all comfort in his substance, all
his consolation in his riches, as fearful to lose what he already enjoyes,
as he was doubtful of prevention in what he now enjoyes? Or is not the
voluptuous carnal man, whose only delight is daliance with his perfidious
Dalilah, Adeptae voluptatis Coronidem si quares, poenitentiam invenies.
stinged with as much grief after his desires are satisfied, as he was stirred
with delight before his pleasures were effected? Or is not the Contemplative
man, whose aims being higher, Cum se cuncta novisse putat, plura se ignorasse
quam didicisse, indies sentit.
should tender him content in fuller measure, afflicted in mind, when he
finds himself come short in knowledge of what he expected, and reads every
day something which he never before observed? What content then in these
flourishing May-buds of vanity, which in repentance and affliction of spirit,
do only show their constancy? So as one well observes, If man should not be
afflicted by God, Si a Deo non affligotur homo, seipsum effliget. in Herac.
cap. 3.
yet should he be afflicted by himself; consuming himself with his own
envy, rancour, and other distempered affections, which have more fury and
torment attending on them, than the evil it self which procures them. Yet
behold the wretched condition of unhappie man* I^a de humano arbitratu
pensitatur divinita^, nisi Deus homini placuerit, Deus non erit. Tertul in
Apol. cap. 5.
Though neither Honor be permanent, nor from peril freed, nor Riches
prevalent to make him after death the better friended; nor pleasures so
excellent, as to free him from affliction when they are ended: yet are they for
most part preferred before those heavenly honors which are ever permanent, and
never altering; before those incorruptible riches, which enrich the soul after
death without decreasing; and before those ineffable pleasures, where neither
desire breeds longing, nor satiety lothing. So as, I cannot more fitly compare
the actions of these sensual affected men, than with that childish act o^ the
Emperor Honorius, Ibid. cap. 3.
who taking especial delight in a Hen called Roma: upon a time understanding,
by report of such as told him, that Roma was lost, he exceedingly lamented:
whereupon some of his familiar friends, and such as were near him, Vid. vit.
Honor.
noting his error; It is not your Hen that is lost, but your City Roma, that
is taken by Alaricus King of the Goths. Wherewith coming a little to
himself, he seemed to bear with much more pa^ience the surprise of the one,
than the loss of the other. O childish simplicity! you say well; yet the like
is in us. We cannot endure that any one should steal from us our silver; yet
either honor, riches, or pleasure may have free leave to steal away our
heart. We would by no means be defrauded of our treasure; yet it troubles us
little to be depraved with error. We avoid the poisons of the body, C^rporis
vitamus venena non animi. ibid. in Herac.
but not of the mind; intending more the diet of the body, than the discipline
of the mind. Since then, in these external desires, this Actual Perfection,
whereof we have formerly treated, may receive no true rest or repose; Quis
vicinus malus, quis latro, quis insidiator tibi tollit Deum? Et potest tibi
sollere totum quod possides corpore, non libi tollit eum quem possides cord.
Aug.
for to those it only aspireth, wherein it rests: we must search higher for
this place of peace, this repose of rest, this heavenly Harbor of divine
comfort: we are to seek it then while we are here upon earth, yet not on
earth: would you know, what this sovereign or absolute end is, wherein this
Actual Perfection solely rests, wherein the Heart only glories, and to the
receiver, long life, with comfort in abundance amply promises? Hearken to the
words of Jesus the Son of Sirach: Ecclus. 23.28.
It is a great glory to follow the Lord, and to be received of him is long
life: Nor skils it much, how worldlings esteem of us; for, perhaps, they will
judge it folly to see us become weaned from delights or pleasures of the world;
to see us embrace a rigorous or austere course of life; to dis-esteem the pomp
and port of this present world. This (I say) they will account foolishness;
Beati qui ex eorum numero esse merentur, quos mundus pro stultis, Deus pro
sapientibus habet. Bl^s. Euchirid. parvul. (...).
But blessed are they who deserve to be of that number, which the world
accounts for fools, God for wise men. But miserable is the state of these
forlorn worldlings, whose chiefest aim is to circumvent or entrap their
brethren, making their highest aims their own ends, and accounting bread
eaten in secret to be the savourest, and stolen waters the sweetest: for these
never drink of their own Cisterne, or feed of the flesh of their own fold;
but partake in the spoil of others, yet wipe their mouths as if they were
innocent: but behold this Haman-policy shall make them spectacles of final
misery; Esther 7.9, 10.
wishing many times they had been less wise in the opinion of the world, so
they had relished of that divine wisdom, which makes-man truly happy in
another world; Ecclus. 1.15.
even that wisdom (I say) who has built an everlasting foundation with men,
and shall continue with their seed: neither can this divine wisdom choose but
be fruitful, standing on so firm a root; or the branches dry, receiving life
and heat from so fair a root. Now to describe the beauty of her branches
springing from so firm a root; with the solidity of her root diffusing pith to
her branches: 20.
The root of wisdom (says the wise Son of Sirach) is to fear the Lord, and
the branches thereof are long life. Multi miseri sunt metu, ne miseri fiant:
multi meri metuentes, moriuntur. Gasp. in Herac.
This fear, where it takes root, suffers no worldly fear to take place. Many
worldlings become wretched, only through fear lest they should be wretched;
and many die, only through fear lest they should die: but with these, who are
grounded in the fear of the Lord, they neither fear death, being assured that
it imposes an end to their misery; nor the miseries of this present life,
being ever affied on the trust of Gods mercy. How constantly, zealously, and
gloriously many devout men have died, and upon the very instant of their
dissolution expostulated with their own souls, reproving in themselves their
unwillingnesse to die, may appear by the examples of such, whose lives as they
were to God right pleasing,
so were their souls no less precious in their departing: The reason of his
frequent repetition of sundry sentences, similitudes, and other memorable
discoveries thorowout this Book.
upon some whereof, though I have formerly insisted, yet in respect that such
memorable Patte^nes of sanctity cannot be too often represented, I thought good
purposely (as usually I have done in all the Series of this present Discourse,
where any remarkable thing was related, to have it in diverse places repeated)
to exemplify this noble resolution or contempt of death, in the proof and
practice of some one or two blessed Saints and Servants of God. Jerome writes
of Hilarion, that being ready to give up the ghost, he said thus to his soul;
Go forth my soul, why fear thou? Hier. in vit. ^jus.
Go forth, why tremblest thou? Thou have served Christ almost those threescore
and ten years, and do thou now fear death? Saint Ambrose when he was
ready to die, Pontius in sine vitae ejus.
speaking to Stillico and others about his bed; I have not lived so among you
(says he) that I am ashamed to live longer to please God: and yet again I am
not afraid to die, because we have a good Lord. The reverend Bid, whom we may
more easily admire, than sufficiently praise for his profound learning, in a
most barbarous age, when all good literature was in contempt, being in the
pangs of death, said to the standers by; I have so lived among you, that I am
not ashamed of my life, neither fear I to die, because I have a most gracious
Redeemer. He yielded up his life with this prayer for the Church; O King of
glory, In vit. Bedae.
Lord of Hosts, which have triumphantly ascended into heaven, leave us not
fatherless, but send the promised Spirit of thy truth amongst us. These last
funeral Tears, or dying men's Hymns, I have the rather renewed to your memory,
that they might have the longer impression, being uttered by dying men, at the
point of their dissolution. And I know right well (for experience has informed
me sufficiently therein) that the words of dying men are precious even to
strangers; but when the voice of one we love, and with whom we did familiarly
live, calls to us from the Deathbed, O what a conflict do his words raise!
How strongly do grief and affection strive to enclose them! knowing that in a
short space, that tongue, the organs whereof yet speak, and move attention by
their friendly accents, was to be eternally tied up in silence; nor should the
sound of his words salute our ears any more: and certainly, the resolution of
a devout dying man, being upon the point of his dissolution, cannot but be an
especial motive to the hearer, Sepulchra enim non tam mortuo rum quam
viv^ntium memoriae condita sunt.
of Mortification. Which was one cause, even among the Heathens, of erecting
Statues, Obelisks, or Monuments upon the Dead; that eying the Sepulchers of
such noble and heroic men, as had their honor laid in the dust, they might
likewise understand, that neither resolution of spirit, nor puissance of body
could free them from the common verdict of mortality: which begot in many of
them a wonderful contempt of the world. Albeit, it is to be understood, that
Christians do contemn this world much otherwise than Pagans: Ambitio his dux;
^llis, amor Dei. Gasp. in epist. ante Hera^lit.
for ambition is a guide to these, but the love of God unto them. Diogenes trod
upon Platoes pride with much greater selfe-pride: but the Christian with
patience and humility surmounteth and subdueth all worldly pride; being of
nothing so careful, as lest he should taste the Lotium of earthly delights,
and so become forgetful with Ulysses companions of his native Country. Mean
time he sojournes in the world, not as a Citizen, but as a Guest, yea as an
Exile. But to return to our present discourse now in hand; in this quest after
that sovereign or supreme end, whereto all actual perfection aspireth, and
wherein it rests, we are to consider three things: 1. What is to be sought;
2. Where it is to be sought; 3. When it is to be sought. What we are to seek.
For the first, we are to understand that we are to seek only for that, the
acquisition whereof is no sooner attained, than the mind, whose flight is
above the pitch of frailty, is fully satisfied. Now that is a blessed life,
when what is best, is affected and enjoyed: for there can be no true rest to
the mind in desiring, but partaking what she desires. What is it then that
we seek? To drink of the water of life; where our thirst may be so
satisfied, as it never be renewed; our desires so fulfilled, as never higher or
further extended. He that has once tasted of the fountain named Clitorius
fons, (and choice is the taste of such a fountain) will never drink any wine;
Vitruvius, l. 8. c. 3.
no wine mixed with the dr^gs of vanity, no wine drawn from the lees of
vainglory: the reason is, he reserves his taste for that new wine, which he
is to drink in his Fathers kingdom. August. Manual. cap. 8.
And what kingdom? The kingdom of heaven; a kingdom most happy, a kingdom
wanting death, and without end; enjoying a life that admits no end. Ibid. cap.
7.
And what life? A life vital, a life ^empiternall, and sempiternally joyful.
And what joy? A joy without sorrowing, rest without laboring, dignity without
trembling, wealth without losing, health without languishing, abundance without
failing, life without dying, perpetuity without corrupting, blessedness
without afflicting, where the sight and vision of God is seen face to face.
And what God? God the sole-sufficient, summary, supreme good: that good which
we require alone; Luke 18.19.
that God who is good alone. Trinita^ divinarum pers^narum est summum bonum,
quod purga^issimis mentibus cernitur.

Aug. 1. de Trin. cap. 2.


And what good? The Trinity of the divine persons is this summary good, which
is seen with purest minds. The Heart triangle-wise resembles the image of
the blessed Trinity; which can no more by the circumference of the World be
confined, than a Triangle by a Circle is to be filled. So as the Circular world
cannot fill the Triangular heart, no more than a Circle can fill a Triangle;
still there will be some empty corners: it says, so long as it is fixed on
the world, Sheol, it is never enough: but fixed on her Maker, her only Mover,
on her sweet Redeemer, her dearest Lover, she chants out cheerfully this Hymn
of comfort; Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. She then may rest
in peace. And what peace? A peace which passes all understanding. She then
may embrace her Love. And what Love? A Love constantly loving. She then may
enjoy life. And what life? A life eternally living. She then may receive a
Crown. And what Crown? A Crown gloriously shining. This Crown (says S.
Peter) is undefiled* which never fades away. (...).
The Greek words which S. Peter uses, are Latin words also; and they are not
only Appellatives, being the Epithetes of this Crown, but also Propers; the
one proper name of a Stone, the other of a Flower: Isidorus E^ymol. l. 16. c. 4.
for Isidore writes, there is a precious stone called Amiantus, which, though
it be never so much soiled, yet it can never at all be blemished; and being
cast into the fire, it is taken out still more bright and clean. Also Clemens
writes, that there is a flower called Amarantus, which being a long time hung
up in the house, yet still is fresh and green. To both which, the stone and
the flower, the Apostle, as may be probably gathered, alludeth in this place.
Here then you see, what you are to seek. For are your desires unsatisfied?
here is that which may fulfill them. Are your souls thirsty? here is the Well
of life to refresh them. Would you be Kings? here is a Kingdom provided for
you. Would you enjoy a long life? a long life shall crown you, and length of
days attend you. Would you have all goodness to enrich you? enjoying God, all
good things shall be given you. Would you have salvation to come unto your
house and secure you? rest you in Christ Jesus, and no condemnation shall draw
near you. Would you have your consciences speak peace unto you? the God of
peace will throughout establish you. Would you have your constant'st Love ever
attend you? He who gave himself for you, will never leave you. Would you have
him live ever with you? Leave loving of the world, so shall he live ever with
you and in you. Would you have a Crown conferred on you? A Crown of glory
shall empale you. August. Manual. cap. 34.
Seek then this one good wherein consists all goodness, and it suffices.
Seek this sovereign or summary good, from whence comes every good, and it
suffices. For he is the life by which we live, the hope to which we cleave,
and the glory which we desire to obtain. Ibid. 12. Aliud noli petere, uni
sus^^ce, quia una tibi sufficient. Aug. in Psalm. 26.
For if dead, he can revive us; if hopeless and helpless, he can succor us;
if in disgrace, he can exalt us. Him then only are we to seek, who, when we
were lost, did seek us; and being found, did bring us to his sheepe-fold. And
so I descend from what we are to seek, to where we are to seek, that
seeking him where he may be found, we may at last find him whom we so long
have sought.

Where we are to seek.
For the second, we are to seek it while we are on earth, but not upon earth,
for earth cannot contain it. It is the Philosophers axiom, That which is
finite may not comprehend that which is infinite. Now that supreme or
sovereign end* to which this Actual Perfection is directed, whereto it
aspireth, and wherein it rests, is by nature infinite: Ena without end,
beginning and end, imposing to every creature a certain, definite or
determinate end. The sole solace of the Soul, being only able to fill or
satisfy the Soul, without which all things in heaven or under heaven, joined
and conferred together, cannot suffice the Soul. So boundless her extent, so
infinite the object of her content. How should Earth then contain it, or to
what end should we on Earth seek it? Seeing, whatsoever contains, must of
necessity be greater than that which is contained. But Earth being a mass of
corruption, how should it confine or circumscribe incorruption? Seeing nothing
but immortality can cloth the Soul with glory, it is not the rubbish or
refuse of earth that may add to her beauty. Besides, the Soul while it
sojournes here in this earthly mansion, she remains as a captive enclosed in
prison. What delights then can be pleasing, what delicates relishing to the
palate of this prisoner? She is an exile here on earth: what society then can
be cheerful to one so careful of returning to her Country? If Captives
restrained of their liberty, Exiles estranged from their Country, can take no
true content either in their bondage, be it never so attempred; nor in their
exile, be they never so attended; how should the Soul apprehend the least joy,
during her abode on earth? Where the treasure is, there is the heart: her
treasure is above, how can her heart be here below? Mortality cannot suit with
immortality, no more can Earth with the Soul. Whereto then be the motions of
our Soul directed? To Him that gave it; no inferior creature may suffice her,
no earthly object satisfy her, nothing subject to sense fulfill her. Aug. Med.
c. 19.
In Heaven are those heavenly objects, wherewith her eye rests satisfied; in
Heaven are those melodious accents, wherewith her ear rests solaced; in Heaven
those choicest odours, wherewith her smell is cherished; in Heaven those
tastfull'st dainties, wherewith her soul is nourished; in Heaven those
glorious creatures, wherewith herself is numbered. What difference then betwixt
the satietie and saturitie of Heaven, and the penury and poverty of Earth?
Here all things are full of labor, Eccles. 1.8.
man cannot utter it: The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled
with hearing: whereas in Heaven there is length of days, and fullness of joy
without ending. And wherein consists this fullness? Even in the sweet and
comfortable sight of God. But who has seen God at any time? To this, blessed
Austine answers excellently. Aug. Med. c. 28.
Albeit (says he) that summary and incommutable essence, that true light, that
indeficient light, that light of Angels, can be seen by none in this life,
being reserved for a reward to the Saints only in the heavenly glory; yet to
believe, and understand, and feel, and ardently desire it, Sipes i^ terris,
sp^^ s^t in coelis.
is in some sort to see and possess it. Now, if we will believe it, though
our feet be on earth, our faith must be in heaven: or understand it, we must
so live on earth, as if our conversation were in heaven: or feel it, we must
have so little feeling of the delights of this life, as our delight may be
wholly in heaven: or desire it, we must hunger and thirst after
righteousness, to direct us in the way which leads to heaven. It cannot be
(says a devout holy man) that any one should die ill, Blos. Enchirid. pa^vul.
autb.
who has lived well. We are then to labor by a zealous, religious, and
sincere life, to present our selves blameless before the Lord at his coming.
O if we knew (and gross is our ignorance if we know it not) that whatsoever
is sought besides God, possesses the mind, Ibid.
but satisfies it not! we would have recourse to him, by whom our minds might
be as well satisfied as possessed. But great is our misery, and miserable our
stupiditie, who, when we may gain heaven with less pains than hell, Minore
negotio nobu coelum comparare possumus, qu^agrave;m infernum. Ibid. Hilar.
^nar. in p. 118.
will not draw our foot back from hell, nor step one foot forward toward the
kingdom of heaven. Yea, when we know, that it pleases the Devil no less
when we sin, than it pleases God to hear us sigh for sin; yet will we
rather please the Devil by committing sin, than please God by sending out
one penitent sigh for our sin. For behold what dangers will men expose
themselves unto, by Sea and Land, to increase their substance! Again, for
satisfaction of their pleasures, what tasks will they undertake, no less
painful than full of peril! A little expectance of penitential pleasure can
make the voluptuous man watch all the night long, when one hour of the night
to pray in would seem too too long. Early and late to enrich his careless
heir, will the miserable wretch address himself to all slavish labor,
without once remembering either early or late to give thanks to his Maker.
Without repose or repast will the restless ambitious Spark, whose aims are
only to be worldly great, task himself to all difficulties to gain honor,
when even that which so eagerly he seeks for, often times brings ruin to the
owner. Here then you see where you are to seek; not on earth, for there is
naught but corruption; but in heaven, where you may be clothed with
incorruption: not on earth, for there you are Exiles; but in heaven, where you
may be enrolled and infranchised Citizens: not on earth the grate of misery;
but in heaven the goal of glory. In brief, would you have your hearts lodged,
where your treasures are locked; all your senses seated, where they may be
fully sated? your eye with delightfull'st objects satisfied, your ear with
melodious accents solaced, your smell with choicest odours cherished, your
taste with chiefest dainties relished, your selves, your souls amongst those
glorious creatures registered? Fix the desires of your Heart on him, who can
only satisfy your heart; set your eye on him, whose eye is ever upon you, and
in due time will direct you to him; intend your ear to his Law, which can best
inform you, and with divinest melody cheer you; follow him in the smell of
his sweet ointments, and he will comfort you in your afflictions; taste how
sweet he is in mercy, and you shall taste sweetness in the depth of your
misery; become heavenly men, so of terrestrial Angels you shall be made
Angels in heaven; Bernard.
where by the spiritual union of your souls, you shall be united unto him who
first gave you souls. And so I come to the third and last; When we are to
seek, lest seeking out of time, we be excluded from finding what we seek,
for want of seeking in due time.

If words spoken in season be like apples of gold with pictures of silver; When
we are to seek.
sure I am, that our actions being seasonably formed or disposed, cannot but
add to our souls much beauty and luster. Eccles. 3.1.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven: which season neglected, the benefit accruing to the work is likewise
abridged. There is a time to sow, and a time to reap; and sow we must before
we reap: sow in tears, before we reap in joy. Seek we must before we
find; for unless we seek him while he may be found, seek may we long ere
we have him found. After the time of our dissolution from earth, there is no
time admitted for repentance to bring us to heaven. Hoc momentum est de quo
pendet aeternitas. Either now or never; and if now, thrice happy ever. Which is
illustrated to us by diverse Similitudes, Examples, and Parables in the holy
Scripture: Genesis 25.34.
as in Esaus birthright, which (once sold) could not be regained by many
tears; and in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, where Abraham answered Dives,
after he had beseeched him to send Lazarus, Luke 16.24.
that he might dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool his tongue; 25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
And in the Parable of the ten Virgins, Matt. 25.3.
where the five foolish Virgins took their Lamps, and took no oil with them;
4.
but the wise took oil in their vessels with their Lamps; and when the
Bridegroom came, those that were ready, 10.
went in with him, and were received: but those foolish ones, 11.
who were unprovided, though they came afterward crying, 12.
Lord, Lord, open unto us, could not be admitted. For know, dear Christian,
and apply it to thy heart, (for knowledge without use, application, or
practice, is a fruitless and soulebeguiling knowledge; D^us (...) promisin^^^
(...) prom^sit. Aug.
) that he who promises forgiveness to thee repenting, has not promised thee
to morrow to repent in. Why therefore deferrest thou till to morrow, when thou
little know but thou may die before to morrow? This day, this hour is the
opportunate season; take hold of it then, lest thou repent thee, when it is
past season. Man has no inte est in time, save this very instant, which he
may properly term his: let him then so employ this instant of time, as he may
be heir of eternity, which exceeds the limit of time. Matthew. 11.16.
Let us work now while it is day, for the night comes when no man can work.
Why therefore stand we idling? Why delay we our conversion? Why cry we with
the sluggard, Yet a little, and then a little, and no end of that little?
August.
Why to morrow, and to morrow, and no end of to morrow, being as near our
Conversion to day as to morrow? Why not to day as well as to morrow, seeing
every day brings with it her affliction, both to day and to morrow? Meet it
is then for us, to make recourse to the Throne of mercy in the day of mercy,
and before the evil day come, lest we be taken, as he who beat his fellow
servants, when the great Master of the Household shall come. Ierem. 22.30.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord! Earth by creation, earth by
condition, Eccles. 12. a verse. 1. ad 8.
earth by corruption. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while
the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in them. While the Sun, or the light, or the Moon, or the Stars
that be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain. In the day when
the Keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow
themselves, and the grinders cease, because they are few, and those that look
out of the windows be darkened: And the doors shall be shut in the streets,
when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the
bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low. Also when they
shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the
Almond tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire
shall fail: because man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streets. Or ever the silver coard be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or
the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the Cisterne.
Genesis 3.19.
Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it. Hence then are we warned not to defer time,
lest we neglect the opportunate time, the time of grace; which neglected,
miserable shall we be, when from hence dissolved. Yea, but will some object;
True repentance is never too late: which is most true; A^g^st.
but again I answer, that late repentance is seldom true. Repent then while
ye have time; for as in Hell there is no redemption, Poenitent^^ poe^ae; non
paena poe^ntenti^.
so after death there is no time admitted for repentance. O remember that a
wounded conscience none can heal;
so that, like as the Scorpion has in her the remedy of her own poison; so
the evil man carries always with him, the punishment of his own
wickedness, the which does never leave to torment and afflict his mind both
sleeping and waking. So as, the wicked man is oft-times forced to speak unto
his conscience, 1 King 21.20
as Ahab said to Eliah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Now there is no
better means to make peace with our consciences, than to set God continually
before our eyes, that his Spirit may witness to our spirits, that we are the
children of grace. Wherein many offend daily, who promise to themselves
security, either by sinning subtly or secretly. Subtly, as in dazzling or
deluding the eyes of the world with pretended sanctity, and concluding with the
Poet; That I may just and holy seem,
Da mibi (...), da ^^stum, sanctan^ videri, Noctem p^ccatis and fraudi^us
obji^e nubem.
and so the world deceive,
And with a cloud my cunning shroud,
is all that I do crave.
But such Hypocrites will God judge, and redouble the viols of his wrath upon
their double sin. Secretly, when man in the foolishness of his heart
commits some secret sin, N^llus est ^n ri^^a, nullaes qu^ me e^aud^at. Eras.
Dial. (...). (...) Deus omnia vina^x.
and says, Who sees him? There is none looking through the chinke to see me,
none that can hear me, but simple fools: how much are these deceived? Is
there any darkness so thick and pal^able, that this (...), the piercing eye
of heaven cannot spy thee through it? O if thou hope by sinning secretly, to
sin securely, thou shall be forced to say unto thy God, as Ahab said unto
Elijah, 1 King. 21.20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Nay, O God, terrible and dreadful thou
have found me. And then let me ask thee in the same terms that the young
Gallant in Erasmus asked his wanton mistress; Annon pudet id fac^re in
conspectu Dei, ac te^^ibus sanctus Angelis, quod p^des facere in consp^ctu
hom^^um?
Art thou not ashamed to do that in the sight of God and witness of holy
Angels, which thou art ashamed to do in the sight of men? Art thou so afraid
of disgrace with men, and little carest whether thou be or no in the state of
grace with God? Art thou more jealous of the eyes of men, who have but power
only to asperse a blemish on thy name, or inflict a temporal punishment on thy
person, than of his, who has power to throw both thy soul and body into the
burning Lake of perdition? Quid si tuta possint essescelera, si secura esse non
possunt? vel quid prod^st nocentibus habuisse latendi facultatem, cum latendi
fiduciam non habent?

Sen. epist. 97. Bernard. de vita Solitaria.

Sen. epist. 11. August. Man. cap. 19.


It was a pretty saying of Epicurus in Seneca; Whereto are offenses safe, if
they cannot be secure? Or what availes it guilty men to find a place to lie
hid in, when they have no confidence in the place where they lie hid in?
Excellent therefore was the counsel of zealous Bernard, and sententious
Seneca, that we should always, as in a mirror, represent unto our eyes the
example of some good man, and so to live as if he did always see us, always
behold us: for we, who know that the eyes of God are upon all the ways of
men, and that no place so remote, no place so desert or desolat^, as may divide
us from his all-seeing presence, ought to be in all our works so provident and
circumspect, as if God were present before our eyes, as in truth he is. And
therefore Prudentius in one of his Hymns give this memorandum; Think with thy
self, Quicquidages mundo fur^i^ve pa^amve memento, Inspectatorem semper adesse
Deum.

Prudentius hymnorum. l 1. cont. Symmach.


if thou from sin would free thee,
Be It day or night, that God does ever see thee.
O then let us fix our thoughts upon God here on earth, that we may gloriously
fix our eyes upon him in heaven! Let us so meditate of him here on earth, that
we may contemplate him there in heaven! So repent us to have dishonored him
here on earth, that we may be honored by him in heaven! Let us become humble
Petitioners unto him, and prostrate our selves before his footstool: of whom
if we beg life, his hand is not so short^ed, August. Solil^q. cap. 11.
as it will not save; his ear so closely stopped, as it will not hear: it is
reported, that when a poor man came to Dionysius the Tyrant, and preferred his
petition unto him standing; the imperious Tyrant would not give ear unto him;
whereupon this poor Petitioner to move him to more compassion, fell down
prostrate at his feet, and with much importunity obtained his suit: after all
this, being demanded by one why he did so;
I perceived (quoth he) Dionysius to have his ears in his feet, Aures babet in
pedibus. Ari^lippus.
wherefore I was out of hope to be heard till I fell before his feet. But God,
who intends rather the devotion of the heart, than the motion of the hand, or
prostration of the body, will hear us, if we ask faithfully, and open unto
us, if we knock constantly, and having fought a good fight, crown us
victoriously.

Thus you have heard what we are to seek, where we are to seek, and when we
are to seek. What; a Kingdom, not of earth, but of heaven. Where; not on
earth, nor in earth, but in heaven. When; while we are here on earth, that
after earth we may reign in heaven. What; a Garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. 2 Timothy 4.8. Matthew. 13.44. Matthew. 10.16. 1 Cor. 2.7. 2 Cor. 3.17.
a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed. What; a crown of righteousness, a
precious pearl, a hid treasure. What; wisdom, health, wealth, beauty,
liberty, and all through him who is all in all. Aristippus was wont to say,
that he would go to Socrates for wit, but to Dionysius for money: whereas this
we seek, and seeking, hope to enjoy, confers upon us the rich treasures of
wisdom, and abundance of riches for evermore. For, first seek we the kingdom
of heaven, Matthew. 6.33. Isay 56 7. Matthew. 21.13. Numb. 11.7. Romans 9.8. 2 Samuel
5.7.9. Luke 17.21.
and the righteousness thereof, and all things else shall be ministered unto
us. Secondly, where we are to seek. Where; in Heaven, the House of God, the
City of the great King, the inheritance of the just, the portion of the
faithful, the glory of Sion. Where; not without us, but within us; for the
kingdom of God is within us. So as I may say to every faithful soul, Intus
habes quod quaeris; That is within thee, Qui amat destderare, desideret amare.
Bern. de amore Dei. cap. 3. Vid. Greg. Mor. lib. 18. cap. 28.
which is sought of thee. It is God thou seek, and him thou possessest; thy
heart longs after him, and right sure thou art of him, for his delight is to
be with those that love him. Lastly, when; on earth: when; in this life: when;
while we are in health; while we are in those Tabernacles of clay; while we
carry about us these earthen vessels; while we are clothed with flesh; before
the evil day come; or the night approach; or the shadow of death encompasse
us; now in the opportunate time; the time of grace; the time of redemption; the
appointed time while our peace may be made: not to defer from youth to age,
lest we be prevented by death before we come to age; but so to live every day,
as if we were to die every day, that at last we may live with him who is the
length of days. What remains then, but that we conclude the whole Series or
progress of this Discourse with an Exhortation to counsel you, an instruction
to caution you, closing both in one Conclusion to persuade you to put in daily
practice, what already has been tendered to you.

Now, A pithy Exhortation.
Gentlemen, that I may take a friendly farewell of you; I am to exhort you to a
course Virtuous, which among good men is ever held most Generous. Let not, O
let not the pleasures of sin for a season, withdraw your minds from that
exceeding great weight of glory kept in store for the faithful, after their
passage from this vale of misery! Often call to mind the riches of that
Kingdom after which you seek: those fresh Pasture^, fragrant Medows, and
redolent Fields diapred and embrodered with sweetest and choicest flowers:
those blessed Citizens, heavenly Saints and Servants of God, who served him
here on earth faithfully, and now reign with him triumphantly. Let your Hearts
be enditers of a good matter, and your voices viols to this heavenly measure. O
how glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God* as the habitation of
all that rejoice is in thee! Thou art founded on the exaltation of the whole
earth. There is in thee neither old age, nor the misery of old age. Aug. Man.
c. 17.
There is in thee neither maime, nor lame, nor crooked, nor deformed, seeing
all attain to the perfect man, to that measure of age, or fullness of Christ.
Who would not become humble Petitioner before the Throne of grace, to be made
partaker of such an exceeding weight of glory?

A powerful Instruction.
Secondly, to instruct you where this Crown of righteousness is to be sought;
it is to be sought in the House of God, in the Temple of the Lord, in the
Sanctuary of the most High. O do not hold it any derogation to you, to be
servants, yea, servants of the lowest rank, even Doore-keepers in the House of
the Lord! Constantine the Great gloried more in being a member of the Church,
Majorem si^i gloriam con^erri existimabal, in seipsum e^^ibendo membrum
Ecclesiae, quam caput imperii. Vid. Eusebius.
than the Head of an Empire. O then, let it be your greatest glory to advance
his glory, who will make you vessels of glory! But know, that to obey the
delights of the flesh, to divide your portion among Harlots, to drink till the
wine grow red, to make your life a continued revell, is not the way to obtain
this Crown. Tribulation must go before Consolation; you must clime up to the
Cross, before you receive this Crown. The Israelites were to pass through a
Desert, before they came to Canaan. This Desert is the world, Canaan heaven. O
who would not be here afflicted, that he may be there comforted! Who would not
be here crossed, that he may be there crowned! Who would not with patience
pass through this Desert, only in hope to come to Canaan! Canaan the
inheritance of the just; Canaan the lot of the righteous; Exodus 3.8.
Canaan, a fat Land flowing with milk and honey, Canaan, an Habitation of the
most holy; Exodus 15.13.
Canaan, a place promised to Abraham; Canaan, the bosom of Father Abraham,
even Heaven; but not the heaven of heaven, to which even the earth itself is
the very Empyraean heaven, Genesis 12.7. Luke 16.22. August. Soliloq. cap. 31.
for this is heaven of heaven to the Lord: because known to none but to the
Lord.

Thirdly, and lastly, that I may conclude, and concluding persuade you; A
persuasive Conclusion.
neglect not this opportunate time of grace that is now offered you. I know
well, that Gentlemen of your ^anke cannot want such witty Consorts, as will
labor by their pleasant conceits to remove from you the remembrance of the
evil day: but esteem not those conceits for good, which strive to estrange
from your conceit the chiefest good. Let it be your task every day, to provide
your selves against the evil day; so shall not the evil day, when it comes,
affright you, nor the terrors of death prevail against you, nor the last
summ^ns perplex you, nor the burning Lake consume you.
O what sharp, extreme, and insuperable taskes would those woeful tormented
souls take upon them, if they might be freed but one hour from those horrors
which they ^ee, those tortures which they feel! O then, while time is granted
you, omit no time, neglect no opportunity! Be instant in season and out of
season, holding on in the race which is set before you, and persevering in
every good work even unto the end; Because they that continue unto the end,
Matthew. 10.22.
shall be saved. What is this life but a minute, and less than a minute, in
respect of eternity? Yet if this minute be well employed, it will bring you to
the fruition of eternity. Short and momentanie are the afflictions of this
life; Hebr. 10.^6. Prove. 16 32.
yet supported with Patience, and subdued with long sufferance, they crown the
^ufferer with glory endless. Short likewise are the pleasures of this life,
which as they are of short continuance, so bring they forth no other fruit than
the bitter pills of repentance: whereas in heaven there are pleasures for
evermore; comforts for evermore; joys for evermore: no carnal, but cordial
joy; no laughter of the body, but of the heart; for though the righteous
sorrow, Greg. in Moral. Exposit. in Job. Blos. Euchirid. parvul. auth.
their sorrow ends when they end, but joy shall come upon them without end. O
meditate of these in your beds, and in your fields; when you are journeying on
the way, and when you are sojourning in your houses: where compare your
Court-dalliance with these pleasures, and you shall find all your rioting,
triumphs and revelling, to be rather occasions of sorrowing than solacing,
mourning than rejoicing! Bathe you in your Stoues, or repose you in your
Arbours; these cannot allay the least pang of an afflicted conscience. O then
so live every day, as you may die to sin every day: that as you are ennobled
by your descent on earth, you may be ennobled in heaven, after your descent to
earth.

Laus Deo.
Totum hoc ut a te venit, totum ad te redeat.
A Gentleman
IS a Man of himself, without the addition of either Tailor, Millener,
Seamster or Haberdasher. Actions of goodness he holds his supreme happiness:
The fate of a younger brother cannot depresse his thoughts below his elder. He
scorns baseness more than want; and holds Nobleness his sole worth. A Crest
displayes his house, but his own actions express himself. He scorns pride,
as a derogation to Gentry; and walks with so pure a soul, as he makes
uprightness the honor of his Family. He wonders at a profuse fool, that he
should spend when honest frugalitie bids him spare; and no less at a miserable
Crone, who spares when reputation bids him spend. Though heir of no great
fortunes, yet his extensive hand will not show it. He shapes his coat to his
cloth; and scorns as much to be beholden, as to be a Gally-slave. He has
been youthful, but his maturer experience has so ripened him, as he hates to
become either Gull or Cheat. His disposition is so generous, as others
happiness cannot make him repine, nor any occurrent save sin make him
repent. He admires nothing more than a constant spirit, derides nothing more
than a recreant condition, embraces nothing with more intimacie, than a
prepared resolution. Amongst men he hates no less to be uncivil, than in his
fear to Godward to be servile. Education he holds a second Nature; which
(such innate seeds of goodness are sown in him) ever improves him, seldom or
never depraves him. Learning he holds not only an additament, but ornament to
Gentry. No complement gives more accomplishment. He intends more the tillage of
his mind, than his ground; yet suffers not that to grow wild neither. He
walks not in the clouds to his friend, but to a stranger. He eyes the Court
with a virtuous and noble contemplation; and dis-values him most, whose sense
consists in sent. He viewes the City, with a princely command of his
affections. No object can withdraw him from himself; or so distract his
desires, as to covet ought unworthily; or so intraunce his thoughts, as to
admire ought servilely. He lives in the Country without thought of oppression;
makes every evening his days Ephemeris. If his neighbors field flourish, he
does not envy it; if it lie fit for him, he scorns to covet it. There is not
that place he sees, nor that pleasure he enjoyes, whereof he makes not some
singular use to his own good and Gods glory. Vocation he admits of, walking
in it with so generous and religious a care, as he makes Piety his Practice,
acts of Charity his Exercise, and the benefit of others his sole solace. He
understands that neither health comes from the clouds without seeking, nor
wealth from the clods without digging. He recommends himself therefore in the
morning to Gods protection and favor, that all the day long he may more
prosperously succeed in his labor. He holds idleness to be the very moth of
man's time; Day by day therefore has he his task imposed, that the poison of
idleness may be better avoided. He holds, as Gods opportunity is man's
extremity; so man's security is the Devils opportunity. Hoping therefore he
fears, fearing he takes heed, and taking heed he becomes safe. Hospitality he
holds a relic of Gentry: He harbors no passion but compassion. He grieves no
less at another loss than his own; nor joys less in another success
than his own peculiar. Recreation he uses to refresh him, but not surprise
him. Delights cannot divert him from a more serious occasion; neither can any
houre-beguiling pastime divide him from an higher contemplation. For honest
pleasures, he is neither so Stoicall as wholly to contemn them, nor so
Epicureall as too sensually to affect them. There is no delight on mountain,
vale, coppice, or river, whereof he makes not an useful and contemplative
pleasure. Recreation he admits, not to satisfy his sense, but solace himself.
He fixes his mind on some other subject, when any pleasure begins too
strongly to work upon him: He would take it, but not be taken by it. He
attempers his attractivest pastimes with a little Alloes, to weane him all the
sooner from their sweetness. He scorns that a moment of content should
deprive him of an eternity of comfort. He corrects therefore his humor, in
the desire of pleasure, that he may come off with more honor. Acquaintance he
entertaines with fear, but retains with fervor. He consorts with none, but
where he presumes he may either better them, or be bettered by them. Virtue is
the sole motive of his choice: He conceives how no true amity, nor constant
society can ever be amongst evil men. He holds it a blemish to the repute of
a Gentleman; and an aspersion to his discretion, to make choice of those for
his Associates, who make no more account of time, than how to pass it over.
Conference he affects; and those he admits only into the list of his
discourse, whom he finds more real than verbal, more solid than
complementall. He will try him before he rely on him: but having found him
touch, they touch his honor, that impeach him. Moderation in his desires,
cares, fears, or in what this Theater of Earth may afford, he expresses so
nobly, as neither love of whatsoever he enjoyes can so enthrall him, nor the
loss of what he loves can any way appall him. A true and generous Moderation
of his affections, has begot in him an absolute command and conquest of
himself. He smiles, yet compassionately grieves, at the immoderation of poor
worldlings in their cares and griefs; at the indiscretion of ambitious and
voluptuous Flies in their desires and fears. Perfection he aspires to; for no
lower mound can confine him, no inferior bound impale him. Virtue is the
staire that raises to height of this Story. His ascent is by degrees; making
Humility his directresse, lest he should fail or fall in his progress. His
wings are holy desires; his feet heavenly motions. He holds it the sweetest
life to be every day better, till length of days reunite him to his Redeemer.
He has played his part on this Stage of Earth with honor; and now in his Exit
makes heaven his harbor.

FINIS.
EMBLEM.
WIth a Climacterick year this Work began,
Which is expressed when Sev'ns and Nines do meet,
Held fatal to this short-spun thread of man;
And with same number ends the final sheet
Of these Observances, whereof I treat:
Threescore and three is held the dangerous year,
And just so many sheets shall you find here;
But not a leaf to give a life to fear.
Upon the Errata.
HOwsoever some no less justly than confidently might ^vouch, quod plura non
dantur vulnera mi^^ti^n praelio, ^uam authori in prelo; Yet must I ingeniously
wipe off this aspersion from my judicious friend and Artist, an ornament to his
Profession. Whose s^dulous care toward me and others, has already gained him
a deserved esteem and approvement of all Authors. Truth is, Gentlemen, when
you encounter with any Erro^s (as they are individuates to all Labors) you are
to impute the E^^or to the absence of the Author. Whose affairs in the
Country took him from cares of the City: Or to explain himself more fully,
that he may come off fairly; and possess him of your opinion more freely; He
was called away from Laurence Jury, by the impannel of a Northern Jury, and
pressed to attendance by an Old Bayliffe of the Country, when his occasion lay
for the Press in the old Bailey near the City. In a word, had not a Nisi prius
interposed, these Errors by a Quest of in juiry had been prevented. It is your
generous Candor to recti^ie him with your pens, who solely for your sakes
undertook this pains.

ERRATA.
Vtilitas Erroris,
Humilitas Authoris.

Page 12. lin. 35. for Harparates read Harpocrates. p. 20. l. 7. for stanes r.
stains. p. 29. this marginall distich omitted; " Est Venus in vinis, vinis
Venus illita venis; "Sint procul a mensis vina Venusque meis. p. 35. l. 9. for
as r. is. p. 38. l. 6. for Comine r. Commes p. 64. l 23. for stare r. seize. p
112. marg. for utilitas r. utilitatis. p. 106. l. 10. A branch of Vocation
undistinguished. p. 149. l. 31. for enndagred r. endangered. p. 157. l. 18. for
Hawke r. hanke, * which inverts sense. p. 159. l. 17. for enevors r. endeavors.
p. 166. l. 10. for smimming r. swimming. p. 170. l. 33. for thrust r. t^ussd.
p. 236. l 16. * A branch of Acquaintance undistinguished. p. 241. l. 23. *
Another undistinguished. p. 250. l. 26. for (...) r. (...). p. ib. number. for
295. r. 296. p. 321. l. 22. for wounded r. wounding. p. 323. l. 18. for 80. r.
8. p. 324. l. 35. for estimate r. estimates. p. 326. marg for Charibdis r.
Charybdis. p. 357. marg. for felicie r. felicity. p 369. l. 12. for say r.
saw. p. 406. l. 2. for less r. Ishai. p. 421. marg. for percepit r. praecepit.
Sundry marginall notes you shall find obscured, which by your candor may be
cleared.


