PHYSIC FOR THE SICKNESS, Commonly called the PLAGVE.

With all the Particular Signs and Symptoms, whereof the most are too ignorant.

COLLECTED, Out of the Choycest Authors, and Confirmed with good Experience;
for the Benefit and Preservation of All, both Rich and Poor.

By STEPHEN BRADWELL, of LONDON PHYSICIAN.

LONDON, Printed for BENJAMIN FISHER, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Talbot in Aldersgate Street. 1636.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHRYSTOPHER CLEYTHEROWE Lord Major, and to THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVL, THOMAS SOAME, and JOHN GAYER, Sheriffs of this Renowned City
LONDON. STEPHEN BRADWELL, wishes continuance of all Earthly comforts, and
assured Hope of Heavenly Happiness.
RIGHT HONORABLE, and RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL.
SOLOMON says, Eccles. 3.7.
There is a Time to keep Silence, and a Time to Speak. From this Rule take I
this boldness, upon a just occasion to present this my duty and care to this
Fame-crown'd City, in You; who are indeed Her Threefold faculty of life: I
confess my self to You a Stranger, but yet I am a Son of London: in her
womb had I both Birth and breeding. Her danger is apparent, She grows sick;
and I (having skill not only to see it, but also to do something hopeful in it)
dare not be silent; It is now my Time to speak. Let your Noble favors then
strengthen this weak Hand which a Sons duty reaches forth to a Mothers support.
Grateful Pity commands me thus to do; and my knowledge both by Reading and
Experience justifies the act. Yet such is the nature of Detraction (who is
grown a Giant in this Age) that if a man will seem to show that he knows more
in some things then many others; he shall thereby the more embolden those that
know less to cry him down I have cause to speak this, and thereupo^ have cause
also to fly to the shelter of your Honored wings for protection; which
obteyn'd (as from your farre-fam'd Goodness I have assurance, I shall) I will
remaino.

To your Honor and your Worships a most obliged Servant. STEPHEN BRADWELL.

TO ALL THAT HAVE Cause to love LONDON.
Fly not from Her, because she is falling sick; but rather join your hearts
in Prayer, and your hands in Bounty to cheer her up. You love her, or at least
have cause so to do: for some of you have received Pleasures, some Profits,
some Preferments. You have moreover a long time in her enjoyed a secure Peace,
that sweetened the other Benefits. Prague cannot boast it, nor many other Cities
beyond the Seas: You walk in Scarlet, when others have waded in Blood: You
wore Weapons only for Fashion, when others were armed perforce: You have seen
with Pleasure glorious Musters, when others have with horror felt the Swords
fury. And now because the peaceful Dove has a few sick feathers on her, will
you leave her? Do not. In the last great Visitation I found and saw it, that
want was a main fuel to nourish that infectious flame: It were deep
Ingratitude to let her suffer so any more. Your fair Houses, rich Furniture,
delicious Fare, and curious clothing; yea your full content, and variety of
pleasure will cast it in your teeth, that London gave ye all these. Stay then;
you that are Rich, to help the Poor; and you that have true skill in Physic
to help the sick. But Mountebancks go quack in the Country among the
contemners of Learning: Though Death can do enough without you, yet you save
her reputation, in often taking her office from her. And O London, and you that
love her; suffer not the stayne of vnskilfullnesse to be stuck upon our
Natives: That you should need the help of Strangers, to whom our constitutions
are not so well known: A Spaniard (as they called him) had such grace given
him in the last great Visitation, as if no Englishman could so well tell how to
save the lives of his own, English: but by his work, his workmanship was
known to other workmen; And some now live that dare truly say, many died
under his hand, that under some of ours might (in all likelihood) have
recovered. I have but my Mite to offer, but as much water as the palm of my
hand will hold, to cast into this new-kindled Fire. But even this (this little
Book I mean) may be so well used, being added to others greater measures, that
it may help to quench it, ere it rise to a Flame, if the Heavenly Physician
see it so good. It is to that end I publish it. That others that had not like
experience of the last great Sickness (as there are but few living now, that
tarried here then) may hereby receive some help, and instruction: especially in
knowing the Plague by his true Signs; a thing much suspected in many that take
it upon the^. And for my Self, I will add my hearty prayers to Almighty God to
be merciful to this City, and (if it be his blessed will) to sheath his
Sword, and unbend his Bow; that the dreaded afflictions of Pestilence and
Famine may be averted from us.

Grant this O merciful Father, for the bitter Sufferings of thy blessed Son
JESUS CHRIST our only Savior Amen.

This shall be the continual Prayer of Him,

That truly loves, and tenderly pityes LONDON in her Calamity, STEPHEN
BRADWELL.
From my Study in Golding-lane, May, 17. 1636.
PHYSIC FOR THE SICKNESS.
THe word Plague in English, signifies, The Names of the Contagious Sickness.
A Sharp Punishment of what kind soever. As we may read many were the Plagues
inflicted on the Egyptians: and some of us in Indignation will threaten to
plague those that highly offend us. But it is usually and most properly taken
for that dreadful affliction which in Latin is called Pestis, or Pestilentia;
in Greek (...), which signifies A Deadly Fretting, and it is the same with
(...) a (...), quod efficiat Defectum Hominum. Or (...), Pernities seu Exitium.
Hippocrates gives it a name of distinction, calling it (...), Morbus Communis,
a Common or popular Disease.

But we must understand that there are two sorts Two sorts of Plagues.
of Plagues that be Epidemicall. Viz. A Simple, and a Putrid Plague.

The Simple Plague, The Simple Plague.
] is The very Influence of the striking Angel executing the vengeance of God
upon the Bodies of Men. This kind of Plague arises from no distemper of Blood,
putri^action of Humo^s, or influence of Stars; but falls merely from the
immediate stroke of Gods punishing Angel (Such were the Plagues, Exodus 12 Number.
11.16.25. Also, 2 Samuel 24. and 2 Kings, 19.) whereof some dye suddenly without
any precedent complaint or conceit of Infection. Others again, though they be
sick before they dye; yet their first taking has been after an extraordinary
manner. For I observed in the last great Plague here in London, (Anno 1625.)
That some felt themselves manifestly stricken, being sensible of a blow
suddenly given them, on the Head, neck, back, or side: Sometime so
violently, that they have been either almost, or altogether over-turned: and
after these and such like strokes some have dyed, and those that recovered,
escaped without humane help: For this kind of Plague, as it is rare, so it is
also by all Art of Man incurable. The Remedy
Therefore no Method but Repentance, no Medicine but Prayer, can avert, or
heal this stroke: Of all Antidotes for the Body, that Triacle which is made
o^ the Flesh of earthly Serpents, is the best esteemed: But for the Soul, that
only which is made of the Blood of that Brazen Serpent that was lifted up on
the Cross for our sins. He that by a lively Faith applies the benefit of
our Blessed SAVIORS Sufferings to the sickness of his Soul, shall
undoubtedly recover (if not health here) heaven hereafter.

The Putrid Plague, The Putrid Plague.
] is a Popular Feavor venomous and Infectious, striking chiefly at the Heart,
and for the most part is accompanied with some Swelling, which is either called
a Blayne, a Botch or a Carbuncle, or else with Spots called GODS Tokens. This
comes of Putrefaction of the Blood and Humors in the Body, which it pleases
God sometimes to make the Instrument of his punishing Justice, mixing it with
the Simple Plague before mentioned.

This Putrefaction may be caused by the Influence of the Stars, The Causes.
who do undoubtedly work upon all sublunarie bodies. For Astrologers are of
opinion, that if Saturn and Mars have dominion (especially under Arts,
Sagitarius, The Stars
and Capricorn,) a Pestilence is shortly to be expected. Or if these two (the
most Malevolent) be in Opposition to the gentle Planet Jupiter; as the Poet
sings: -- Caelitus imbuitur tabe ^ifflatilis aura
Mars quando obijcitur Falcitenensque Iovi.


The Winds The Winds.
likewise are led into their motions by the motions of the Stars; The Planets
(especially the Sun) by extracting the earths exhalations (which are the
substance of the Winds) do set them so on work. And the Winds are some by
nature wholesome, and some unwholesome. The South Wind blowing from the Meridian
is of nature hot and moist, and full of showers. Now when by the influence of
the Planets this Wind blows long and brings continual rain, it causes
much moisture in all Airie and Earthy bodies, and so much the more by how much
the milder it is. This moisture being in such abundance cannot be digested nor
attenuated by the Suns heat; and therefore settling together it must needs
putrify; and that so much the sooner, because the heat of the Sun (not
being able to extract all) does inflame the remnant, by which inflammation the
putrefaction becomes the greater. In this manner are the winds in cause: and
moreover they do sometimes transfer the Contagion from one region to
another; as Hippocrates affirms the Plague to be brought over the Sea from
Aethiopia into Greece, by the South Wind.

The Cure of these Causes is the same with the former.
Now if the Stars be pestilently bent against us, neither Arts nor Arms,
Perfumes nor Prayers, can prevail with them, who have neither pity nor sense,
nor power to alter their appointed motions. But He that commands their
course, and alters them at his pleasure: He that made the Sun and Moon to
stand still for Iosuah, yea drew the Sun ten degrees back for Hezekiah,
and caused the Stars to fight in their courses against Sisera. He, and He
only is able to heal all infections that can arise from their influences. The
Cure of this Cause therefore is the same with the former.

Common Causes.
Other Causes there be also of this Putrid Plague. Namely, corrupt and
unwholesome Feeding, stenches of unsavorie and rotten Dung-hils, Vaults,
Sinckes, Ditches and dead Carions; as the Poet affirms; -- Corpora faeda
iacent, vitiantur adoribus aurae.

These are the Maintaining Causes of the Contagion after it is begun. So is
likewise the unseasonablenesse of the Weather: Quum tempestiva intempestive
redduntur: as says Hippocrates, When the weather is unseasonable for the
season of the year; being hot when it should be cold, moist when it should be
dry: and on the contrary.

This kind of Plague is by Art curable in as many as it pleases GOD to send
and sanctify the right means unto.

The former is most properly called The Plague, The Putrid Plague, is rightly
called the Sickness.
being the immediate Stroke of Gods hand. This, The Sickness, because
infectious, and many times Curable.

For this therefore do I intend to prescribe a course of Physic, such as
both my much reading, and also my manifest Experience in the last great
Visitation, have preferred to my best approbation.

Wherein I will first open the way of Preservation, The Method of this Treatise.
after that, show the Signs of being Infected, and then the Course of Cure.

In the way of Preservation, Preservation.
it is first necessary to be considered, whether it be Infectious or no: And
then who are most or least subject (according to natural reason) to receive
this Infection.

This Putrid Plague, The Plague is Venomous.
is (as I have said i^ ^he Definition) venomous, which is granted of all both
Physicians and Philosophers. Now by Venom or Poison, we commonly understand
some thing that has in it some dangerous subtle quality that is able to corrupt
the substance of a living body to the destruction or hazard of the life
thereof. This working is apparent in this Sickness, by his secret and
insensible insinuation of himself into the Vital spirits, to which as soon as
he is gotten, he shows himself a mortal enemy, offering with sudden
violence to extinguish them. His subtle entrance, his slye cruelty, his swift
destroying; the unfaithfulness of his Crisis, and the other Prognostic
signs; and the vehemency, grievousnesse and ill behavior of his Symptoms,
all being manifest proofs of his venomous quality. For in this Disease the
Seidge, Urine, and sweat, have an abominable savor, the breath is vile and
noisome: Ill colored Spots, Pustles, Blisters, swellings, and ulcers full of
filthy matter arise in the outward parts of the Body: Such as no superfluity
or sharpness of Humors, nor any putrefaction of matter (without a venomous
quality joined with it) can possibly produce.

But though it may thus by the Learned be acknowledged to be Venomous; yet is
it by many of the Ignorant sort conceited not to be Infectious. It is
Infectious.


To satisfy such, I define Infection or Contagion to be That which infecteth
another with his own quality by touching it, whether the medium of the touch
be Corporeal or Spiritual, or an Airie Breath. Of this kind there are diverse
Diseases that are infectious, though not so deadly as the Plague. As for
Example, Itch and Scabbinesse, Warts, Measels, small Pox, the Veneriall Pox;
these by rubbing, and corporeal touches do infect: Also soar Eyes do by
their Spirituous beams infect other eyes: And the Pthisick or putrified Lungs
do by their corrupt breath infect the lungs of others. But the Plague infects
by all these waye^, and such sick bodies infect the outward Air, and that
Air again infects other Bodies. For there is a Seminary Tincture full of a
venomous quality, that being very thin and spirituous mixeth it self with the
Air, and piercing the pores of the Body, enters with the same Air, and
mixeth it self with the Humors and spirits of the same Body also.

For proof of this, we see by daily experience, that Garments, Coffers, nay
walls of Chambers will a long time retain any strong sent, wherewith they have
been fumed. Now the Sent is merely a Quality, and his substance is the Air,
which is also the Vehiculum wherein it is seated and conveyed. So does the
Pestilent Infection take hold, though not sensibly (for the strongest Poisons
have little taste or smell) yet certainly; as experience testifies: for
Garments, and Household Stuff have been infected, and have infected others. As
Fracastorius tells of a Furred-Gowne, that was the death of 25. Men in Verona,
Anno 1511. who one after another wore it, thinking still they had ayred it
sufficiently. And if Alexander Benedictus may be believed, Feather-beds will
keep the Contagion seven years. Other experiences we have also of live
Poultry, which being applied to the soars, are taken away dead, having not
been wounded, crushed, nor hurt any whit at all. And many that have been
Infected, have plainly perceived where, and of whom they took it.



Causes for this. The first and Principal Cause is the Protection of the
Almighty, which preserves some as miraculously as his Justice strikes others.
Thus through his Mercy he often preserves those that with faithful and
conscionable care do Christian offices about the Sick; being warrantably
called thereto, and not thrusting themselves either presumptuously, or rashly
into the business without a just, and reason-rendring Cause. For GOD has given
his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways, as the Psalmist sings.

And secondly, every pestilent Contagion is not of the same nature, nor has
equal conformity with every Constitution, Age, or manner of Living: For some
Contagion is apt to infect only the Sanguin complexion, some the Choleric,
some the Phlegmatic only: Some Children, some Youths, some those of Ripe
age, some Ancient people; some the Rich, and other the poor only: And where
the Seminary Tincture has no Analogy, there is none, or very flight
Infection.

And first those are most apt to be Infected, Who are most apt to be Infected.
that have thin Bodies and open pores; and whose hearts are so hot, that they
need much attraction of Air to cool them.

Also, they whose Veins and Vessels, are full of gross humors, and corrupt
juyces (the venomous matter being thick, and therefore unapt to breath through
the pores) their putrefaction is increased by the inward heat, and so driven to
malignitie; and thence onward to a Pestilent quality. Hence those bodies that
are moist and full of Phlegmatic humors, whose veins are straight (and
therefore apter to intercept then entertain those well well concocted juyces
that would make the purest Blood) and the thickness of whose skin denies the
transpiration of excrements: these are easily poluted and infected.

And such are Women, especially women with child; for their bodies are full of
excrementitious humors, and much heat withal, which is as oil and flame put
together. Also Virgins that are ripe for marriage, are apt to receive
infection, and being once stricken, seldom or never escape without great
means. Quia spirit^osum semen in motu cum sit facilo succenditur; vel quia
intus detentum facile corrumpitur, and in veneni perniciem abit. Mindererus de
Pestilen. c. 10.

Also young Children, in regard of their soft, tender, and moist bodies; and
likewise because they feed on moister meats, and feed with more appetite then
judgment.

Likewise, the more Pure and delicace Complexions, whose blood is finer and
thinner then others, is so much the more apt to receive mutation: and the
Contagion insinuates it self into all the humors; But first and most easily
into Blood; Choler next, more slowly into Phlegm, and most rarely into
Melancholy.

Those that are fearful likewise, as I shall prove anon, when I treat of
Passions of the Mind.

Those that are very Costive, or have their water-stop'd; the noisome vapors
that are by these excrements engendered, make the body apt to infection. And
such as in former times have had customary evacuations by sweat, Haemerrhoids,
Vomitings, Menstrua, Fontanels, or other like vents for noxious humors; and
have them now stopped.

Those that Fast too long (their bodies being empty) receive more air in then
they let out: and (their spirits being weakened for want of due nourishment)
they have less strength to resist the contagion.

On the other side Gluttons and Drunkards (let them argue what they will for
the filling of the veins, as they use to say, to keep out the evil air) can
never be free from crudities and distempered blood; which easily takes
infection: As Hippocrates testifies, when he says: Corpora impura quo magis
aluntur; eo magis laeduntur. Impure bodies the more they are nourished the more
they are endangered.

Poor people (by reason of their great want) living sluttishly, and feeding
nastily and unwholsomly, on any food they can with least cost purchase, have
corrupted bodies, and of all others are therefore more subject to this
Sickness.

And yet the Rich are also as subject in too much pampering diet, bringing
themselves thereby to an Athleticke habit, which Hippocrates in the third
Aphorism of his first hook, proves to be very dangerous at all times.

Furthermore, nearenesse of Blood or Kindred, by Sympathy of nature, is another
aptness.

And lastly, those that are continually conversant with the sick, are in
greatest danger, though many escape through Gods merciful protection.

But Old folks, whose bodies are cold and dry, Who are least subject to be
Infected.
Confident Spirits, whose very courage is an Antidote, if they keep their
bodies clean by a regular course of life. And those that have the Gout, in
whom the nobler parts of the body do expel the noxious humors to the ignobler.

Milch-Nurses because their Children suck the evil juyces from them with
their milk. These are in the way likely to escape: but if the Nurse be
infected, the child cannot recover it.

Also those that have Fontanels, or any other kind of Issue; as Ulcers,
Haemerrhoids, or plenty of other evacuations, whereby the hurtful humors are
dreyned away.

And lastly, those that keep themselves private; using good Antidotes and
means praeservative: such are least subject to Infection. Diogenes Laertius
lib 2. says, that Socrates (by temp^rate and discreet (...) lived in Athens
diverse Plague-times, yet was never touched with it.

(...)
Now what this Diet Preservative is, I will b i^fly show you.

Diet consists of Six Points. viz.
Air. Meat and Drink. Repletion and Evacuation. Exercise and Rest. Sleep
and Wa^ching. Passions of the Mind.
They are composed also in these two Verses.

Aer, Esca, Quies, Repletio, Gaudia, Somnus:
Haec moderata juvant, immoderata nocent.
These indeed are the six Strings of Apollo's Vial, wherein consists the
whole harmony of health. If these be in tune, the body is sound: But any of
th^se too high wrested, or too much slackned (that is immoderately used) makes
a discord in nature, and puts the whole body out of tune.

For Air first.

(...) Air (...).
Air is that which we draw in with our breath continually, and we cannot live
without it one minute; for it is the food of our Spirits, and therefore we had
need take heed that the air we draw be pure and wholesome. The whol^ stream of
Opinion runs upon a cold and dry Air, so commending the North and East
winds, as most wholesome: What most unwholsom.
and condemning the Hot and Moist Air engendered by the South and West winds,
as the fittest matter for infection, because most apt to putrefaction. So
Hippocrates (in the 2d. of his Epidem.) says, that in Cranon a City of
Thessalie, there arose putrid Ulcers, Pustuls, and Carbuncles, through the hot
and moist constitution of the air. And Galen (in 1. de Temperam. c. 4.)
affirms, that the hot and moist constitution of the air, does most of all
breed pestilent diseases. And from these mouths, a multitude of late Writers
have learnt to speak the same thing. Yet we know that the hot and dry weather
also, may cause a contagious air. So says Avenzoar in his 3. Book, 3. Tract.
and 1. chap. And Titus Livius (in lib. 1. decad. 4.) records, that Rome was
infected with the Plague by a Hot and Dry distemper of the Air. We also may
remember, that the Summer 1624 was an extreme dry and parching Summer: and we
cannot forget that this last Summer was not much unlike like it. The Contagion
indeed this year was begotten beyond Sea, and was rocked hither in sick
bodies; but our Air I fear will prove a Nurse though not a Mother to it: This
Spring answering to the sore-past Summer in heat and drouth.

Now to avoyde the mischiefs of unwholesome air; Hippocrates the Prince of
Physicians, H w we may guard us from unwholesome Aires.
(in his Book de Natura humana) gives this counsel. Providendum est ut quam
paucissimus aeris influxus corpus ingrediatur, and ut ille ipse quam peregrinus
existat: Regionum etiam locos in quibus morbus consistat, quantum ejus fieri
potest permutare oportet.

Others advise in threee words. Cito, Long, Tarde, which Iordanus calls an
Antidote made of 3. adverbs, thus versifying upon them.

Haec tria tabificam pellunt adverbia Pestem;
Mox, Long, Tarde; Cede, recede, redi.
But I will not teach to flee; for too many with Dedalus put on wings the last
great visitation, that with Icarus dropped down by the way. Only my counsel is
this. The Authors counsel for without doors.
Let every one keep himself as private as he may: Shun throngs of people, and
all wet, close, and stinking places. Walk not abroad before, nor after Sun.
Keep moderation between heat and cold in all things; yet rather incline to
heat a little, because of drying up superfluous moystures. Let the streets be
kept clean; washing the channels every morning and evening, and sweeping away
all dirt, leaves, stalks, and roots of herbs, and offals; leaving no
dunghils nor other noisome matter in the streets. But the water is most to be
used in hot and dry, the fire in hot and moist weather chiefly.
Also in the evenings it is good to purify the air with Bonefires, but
especially with Fireworkes: or rather with discharging of pieces: for Gunpowder
is exceeding drying by reason of the Salt peeter and Sulphur with which it is
made, and by the crackes that it gives, the Air is forcibly shaken and
attenuated, and so opened to let in that purification, which is immediately
made by the fire that goes along with it. This way is commended by Levinus
Lemnius, de Ocultis Naturae Mirac. lib. 2. cap. 10. Also by Crato in consilio
275 By Raymundus Mindererus lib. de Pestilentia cap. 20. and all the late
Writers.

Within doors observe, For within doors.
that little houses must not be pestered with many Lodgers, for it is best (for
those that are able) to have shift of Beds and Chambers to lie in, that the
air in them may be kept free and sweet. Keep every room daily very clean,
leaving no fluts corners. Let not Water stand so long in any vessel as to
putrify; which in hot weather it will soon do. Make Fires every day in
every room, in quantity according to the largeness of the room, and the
temperature of the weather. Perfume them and all the household stuff in cold
and moist weather with Frankinsense, Storax, Benjamin, Pitch, Rosin, Lignum
aloes, Lignum Rhodium, Iuniper-wood, or the Berries. In hot and dry weather
with Rosewater on a hot Fire-shovell, or some such like cool fume in a
perfuming-pot. Strew the Windows and ledges with Rue, Wormwood, Lavender,
Marjoram, Penyriall, Costmary, and such like in cold weather; but in hot with
Primroses, Violets, Roseleaves, Borrage, and such cooling scents.

For Garments, Garments best guarding the vital parts.
avoid (as much as may be) all leather, woollen, and furs: also velvets,
plush, and shagge. Choose such as may be watered, as chamlets, grograms,
paropas, philip and chenyes, and such like: for their gumminesse excludes the
infectious air best. Have shift, and shift often; and still as clothes are
left off, perfume them well.

Beware of buying old clothes, Bedding or such like stuff: for if they have
been used by the infected, they are very dangerous, as I told you before in
the authority of a furred Gown, and Feather-beds.

What to hold in the mouth
Carry in your mouth a piece of Citron-pill, or for want of that, of Lemon
pill; a Clove, or a piece of Tormentill Root. Or if any will resort to me in
Golding lane, I will soon provide for them Lozenges to hold in their mouth,
sit for their constitution, and such as I have had good experience of, the last
great Plague time.

What to (...).
Carry in your hand a Lemon stuck with cloves, sweet Marjoram, Lavender, Balm,
Rue, or Wormwood; as the constitution of your brain shall require. For believe
by my experience, that many did inflame their brains, and so fell into the
Sickness they shunned in the last great Contragion, by smelling to, and
carrying things in their mouths too hot for their complexion. Camphor.
Camphor also, though it be accounted an excellent cool fume for ill aires,
yet those that have cold and weak stomachs are very much weakened by the use of
it.

But beware of unsavourie smells and stinking odours. For though Dioscorides
commends Galbanum, and Cardan the burning of Leather, Averroes a potion of
Urine, and others the smelling to Horse-dung: yet I stand to it, that sweet and
pleasing odours are more proper; because they dilate, restore and comfort the
Spirits; whereas the contrary do contract, and repugne them; and so weaken the
faculties. I intend to have also preservative waters to dip Spunges in for
several Constitutions, to be carried in Boxes to smell to: As also,
preservative Pomanders of choice virtue.

The next point of Diet, is Meat and Drink. Meat and Drink.
Let your meat be always good and sweet, temperate betwixt hot and cold, and
not too moist or fl^shie: easy of digestion, and such as makes the best Blood.

Such are Beef, Mutton, Lamb, Kid, Flesh.
and Cony. Turkey, Capon, Pullet, Partridge, Pheasant, Pigeons, Turtles,
Larkes, Black-birds, Thrushes, and Finches. All Water-fowles are naught. The
Hearts of Red and Fallow Dear, are special good: so also are those of young
Steeres, Calves, Kids, and Lambs: being cordial, both by reason of Sympathy,
and solidnesse of the flesh, which causes them to be the less corruptible.

Of Fish, (which should be eaten but seldom, Fish.
though it be of the best kind) the elected are fresh Salmon, Trout, Barbell,
Shrimps, Playse and Flounders, (when they are firm, not flashy) Smelts,
Makarell, Gudgion, Mullet, Soale, Gurnard, Lobster, and Cray-fish. But Eeles,
Lamperns, and Lampreys, with all such as delight in Mud, are to be avoided.

Eggs Eggs.
of Hens and Turkeys, are good.

Oil and Butter, Oil and Butter.
are kinds of Antidotes against venom; and Butter-milke may now and then be
used by hot Constitutions.

Fruits Fruits.
must be eaten but sparingly.

Those that we may be most bold withal, are sour Cherries; Plums, and
Gooseberries before they be full ripe, having a sour taste. Also Peaches,
Quinces, Pomgranads, Oranges, Limons, Medlars, Services, Mulberries, Raspes,
Strawberries, and Currants, which being not full ripe are astringent, but ripe
do loosen the body. But of Walnuts, Filbers, and Small-nuts, the elder are the
better Dried Fruits also are good, whether they be Pears, Plums, Cherries,
Figs, Raisons, or Prunes. Moreover, Pease, Beans, and Artichokes, may be used
sometimes by lean and spare Bodies. If other Fruits that are colder and
moyster be longed for; eat after the man Orange with a little fennel and
salt.

The best Roots Roots.
are Onions, Leekes, and Radishes, for these are virtuous against venom. But
they offend hot heads, and weak eyes.

Of Herbs; Herbs.
Rue, Wormwood, Balm, Mints, Pennyryall, Rosemary, Sage, sweet Marjorum, and
Time. For Sallets and Sauces, Burrage, Buglosse, Violets, Fennel, and
especially Sorrel; Olives also, and Capers.

Sharp Sauces.
Vinegar, Verjuice, juice of Limons and Oranges; which for their dryness
resist putrefaction, and for their coolness, Feavors. But those colder
stomachs that are offended with them, may temper them with Wine and Spices.
Yet there must be cautious usage of hot spices, and all salt meats, lest they
inflame the Blood; though in regard of their drying and heating quality they be
useful in some bodies, and at some times; especially for cold and waterish
stomachs: Others must mix them with Vinegar, Verjuice, or the juice of Limons
or Oranges.

Note here, That Vinegar Vinegar good.
is of a special virtue against putrefaction, as AMBROSE PAREY in the 8.
Chapter of his Book of the Plague proves, by the use of it in washing dead
bodies with it before they are Embalmed, that they may keep sweet the longer.
But it is not so good for Women, But not for Women.
because it offends the Mother (as CRATO affirms, Consil. 275.) therefore
they must allay it with white Wine and Sugar.

Note also, that Cabbages, Coleworts, Lettuce, Dangerous things.
Pompions, Musk-Mellons, and Coucumbers, are very dangerous meats in
contagious times; neither do I approve of any other roots, then Garlic, for
rusticke bodies; and for others Onions, Leekes, and Radishes (as I said before)
only.

Roasting is the best way of dressing Flesh, Dressing of Meats.
and Frying or Broyling of Fish.

Broths Broths.
are but for Sick and weak ones fit: And then they must be sharpened with a
little Vinegar, or juice of Lemmons. For (as MANARDUS says, lib. 5. Epist. 3.)
the body ought rather to be dried then moystened.

And so then for Drink, Drink.
it must be as little as may well be borne; good and pure, whether it be Beer,
Ale, or Wine, (for Mede, Vsqubaque, Bragget, etc. I account them rather
Medicines then parts of Food) But neither heady, too sweet, nor too small. To a
weak stomach and a feeble Nature, Wine is an Antidote against all Poisons;
Wine for whom fit.
as CELSUS lib. 8. de Re Medica cap. 27. affirms. And Senectutis summa est
medicina, as A^TIUS teaches, Tetr. 1. sermon. 4. cap. 30. But let not those that
are young and strong, make a common use of them in Contagious times: For it
must needs breed Inflammation, after which follows Putrefaction, which is a fit
host to entertain such an ill guest as the Pestilence.

Wheaten-Bread Bread.
of a Day old, and a little leavened is absolutely the best for healthy people.
Light Biskets also with Anise-seeds is very good.

Quantity of Meat and Drink.
For the strict Quantity of Eating and Drinking, I cannot stint every man's
stomach; but must conclude with HIPPOCRATES, Aph. 17. lib. 1. Concedendum est
aliquid Tempori, Regioni, Aetati, and Consuetudini. The Season, Place and
Custom, must bear some sway in these things. Only beware of Sacietie or
Glutting: For the same Hippocrates in his 17th. Aphorism, in the 2, Book.
Says, that Meat and Drink immoderately taken, causes Sickness. For from
thence arise Crudities, which (says GALEN, in Comm. 2. in Hippocr. de Nature.
Humana) breed new Diseases. Therefore hearken to AVICEN, Who advises always
to rise from Meat with some remainder of appetite: for within half an hour,
or thereabouts, as soon as the meat first eaten begins to digest, our
hunger cease. lib. 1. Fen. 3. Doct. 2. cap 7. And hence it is, that some
(greedily following the sense of their appetite-onely) over-charge their
stomachs even to vomiting, before they feel themselves satisfied: because
though the vessel be over-full, yet appetite is not app^ased till Concoction
have begun her work upon some part of that which is already received.

And here I cannot but justly tax those that give up themselves to disorderly
Diet. Gluttony and Drunkenesse
For the lives of many are so monstrous, that HELIOGABALVS was but a pingler to
them.

The Dutch may yield up their seas of Drinking, and strike sail to the
English. Men loose their good names, and are feign to get new ones, as to be
called Blades and Roarers, as if they had been begotten by drunken Cutlers, or
brutish Bulls. There was one DIOTEMVS of Athens, that was called the Tunnell,
for his filthy delight in Drink, and drinking in a Tunnell. What do many in
this Land (too too many in this City) but rise to Drink, drink to fall, fall
a sleep of necessity, and ere they are half sober, fall a drinking drunk
again. That as VALERIVS AVRELIANVS the Emperor was wont to say of BONOSVS, a
Spaniard, Such are borne, not to live, but to drink.

If any of that Luxurious sect beat this time sober, The dangers of Surfeiting.
let them but listen to the testimonies of learned Experience, and they will
tell them into what bodily dangers they plunge themselves by this detestable
disorder.

HIPPOCRATES has an Aphorism to this purpose, Lib. 2. Aph. 17.
that Meat and Drink immoderately taken causes Sickness.

PAVLVS AEGINETA goes yet further, saying; De Re Medica lib. 1. c. 32.
That the Veins being filled too full, are afflicted, distended, or else
broken: obstructed, filled with wind and overcharged. And of all diseases,
he affirms, That over-charging of the vessels is the worst.

In com. 2. Hipp. de Natis. (...).
GALEN affirms, that Drunkenness, and Crudities (which arise from
intemperance) do breed new diseases.

Li. de Causis Morborum, cap. 3.
And in another place, he says, Whereas Wine moderately taken increases
Natural heat; as being his proper aliment: by Drunkenness comes
Astonishment of the Brain, Falling sickness, or some maime either to sense or
motion. And so, the best meats which afford most nourishment, being
immoderately eaten, engender cold Diseases.

De R^movendis Nocumentis in Regimina Sanitatis Tract. 4. cap. 1.
But AVICEN more particularly lays down the dangers that follow this
over-repletion, in these words. Eating much nourishes not; but fills the Body
with Crudities, and raw humors, stops the pores, weakens the powers of Nature;
causes putrefaction, mixed feavors, short breath, Sciatica and joint Aches.

Ibidem, cap. 19.
Again, in another place he speaks Drinking, thus: Much drinking of Wine in
Sanguine and Chollerick Complexions, over-heats the blood, and causes Choler
to superabound; and by too much repletion of the veins and Vessels, there may
follow a hot Apoplexy, and sudden death. In Cold Complexions, it breeds
diseases of the Sinews; and that for two causes. The first is the
over-moystning of the Nerves; the other the turning of the drink into Vinegar
before it it can pass through the Body. So the Nerves are by the former
relaxed, and by the latter corroded, whereupon follows the cold Apoplexy,
Astonishment, Senslesnesse, Lethargy, Palsy, Trembling of the Limbs, and
convulsions of the Mouth.

And what these have said of Wine, the same is true likewise of all other
strong Drinks. I hope these lines will keep such men the soberer in this
dangerous time; and in that sober tune, the time may touch their heart strings
so, that Sobriety may let in Religious meditations (which continual
Drunkenesse has locked out of doors.) And then Repentance may draw them to
GOD, and him nearer to them; and so they may become new Creatures. Which the
Father for his Sons sake grant.

In the mean time, Restorative Diet for sick ones.
let those that are in health eat Flesh; but the Sick the Juices of them
rather, because aliment must be made more easy and quick for their supply.
And for such weak ones, Veale, Chicken, Caponet, Partridge, and Pheasant, are
to be boiled till all the virtue of the meat be boiled out, and then the Broth
to be strained hard, that the flesh may be left juicelesse, so will all the
strength of the meat be in the broth; which you may spice with some of these
powders following:

Take of Red Saunders half an ounce, Cynnamon iij. drains and half, Saffron
half a dram. Make them into fine Powder.

Or else

Take of Cynamon half an ounce, Cloves and Saffron, of each half a dram, Red
Coral ij. Scruples. And the weight of all in Sugar. Make of them a fine Powder.

But Women (dum Menses of fluunt) must not use Saffron so much. For such
therefore this Powder is better.

Take Harts-horne, red and yellow Saunders, of each ij. drams, Cloves and
Cynamon, of each one dram.

Make a fine Powder.

Let all be more sparing in Diet now, then at other times: Eat little, and
Drink less. But never go out of doors Fasting.

Take therefore first of some Antidote, Antidotes.
of which kind the Apothecaries shops are (or ought to be) always stored with
these: That is, Theriaca Andromachi, Theriaca Londinensis, Venice Triacle.
London Triacle. Mitridate.
Mithridatium Damocratis, Electuarium de Ovo Imperatoris, Antidotus magna
Mathioli, Confectio Liberans,


Dioscordium. Of any of these, take the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Confectio Alkernes, Confectio de Hiacyntho.
Of either of these, take the quantity of an Hazell nut.

If you would choose to take a Powder rather; Pulvis Contra Pestem Montagnanae.
half a Dram.

Of Waters, there is --

Aqua Angelicae,

Aqua Theriacalis. Of either of these half an Ounce, either with white Wine
and a few drops of the juice of a Limon;

Or, Aqua Bezoartica Langii. Aqua Calestis Mathioli, for the richer sort, with
a drop of Oil of Vitriol, in half an ounce of either.

But for such as abhor the taste of Physic, and had rather take their
Antidote in form of Pills then otherwise; let a skillful Apothecarie make this
mass of Pills.

Pillula Marsilii Ficini.
Rs. Zadoariae, ligni aloes, agrimonia, croci, Aristolochia rotunda, Dictamni,
gentianae, cort. citri, sem. citri, anascrup. 1. Coriandri praeper.
tormentillae, santali rub. corallii, r^b. spodii, Myrobalan. Emblic. ana drach.
2. Terrae sigill. drach. ij. Boli Armeni drach. 3. Cum Syrupo ex Acetositate
citri fiat Massa.

Of which ten, fifteen, twenty, or two shillings grains may be taken at once
in one, or two, or three Pills, as the party can swallow them in bigness.

Those that are offended with the heat of Triacle, or other of the hot
Antidotes above named: may use this Opiate made by an Apothecarie; which is
excellent for hot complexions.

Opiata frigida Palmarii:
Rs. Flor. buglossi, borraginis, cariophyllorum, rosrub, horum separatim
conditorum ana. unc. 1. Terra Lemniae, boli Armeni, scobis cornu cervim, una
drach. ij. Margarit. praepert. drach. 1. ambari grisei, scrup. ss. Sir. de
succo Bugl^ssi, q. s. Fiat Opiata, s. a.

The dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg.

For Women with child.
Neither must women with child be overheated with common Antidotes. Therefore
theirs must be only of Terra Lemnia, Bole Armoniack, Harts-horne; Conserves
and Syrups of Roses, Violets, and Betony. Or a little Mithridate, with twice,
as much conserve of Borrage or Buglosse. Likewise, the species de gemmis frig.
or of Diamargar. frig. in Borrage, Buglosse, and Carduus water. Or else such
may have this Antidote made for the^.

Rs. Cornu carvi, Cynamonni, nucis moschatae, santalorum omnium, ana drach. 1.
Rad. Angelicae, tormentillae, Enulae, camp. ana drach. ss. f. Pulvis subt.
Dein. Accipe Conservae buglossi, and borraginis, ana drach. iij. cum aquali
quantitate Sir. e Limonibus and rosis siccis. Fiat Conditu^. s. a.
For young Children, For young Children.
there is nothing better or fitter then Bole Armoniack, or Terra Lemnia, with a
little Tormentill root, or Citron pills, made into fine Powder, and mixed with
their meats, butter, and broths; for their breakfasts. And because they are
not much to be tampered with by internal medicines, anoint the region of
their heart with oil of Hypericon, every morning and evening: or with oleo
Scorpionium, or oleo corcino: or else let them commonly wear next their skin
over their heart, such a Quilt as this.

Take of red Roses 2. drams, red saunders, red corrall, and spodium, of each
one dram, Zedoarie, lignum aloes, cynnamon, cloves, citron pill, saffron, of
each half a dram. Sew it up in a piece of red Sarcenet or Calico, moysten it
with a little Rose-vineger; so heat it and apply it warm. And when it waxes
dry moystit, and heat it so again
And take this note Note.
by the way.

When you suspect a Child to have the worms in a contagious time, use not
Wormseed, nor those common trifles; but order him as in danger of Infection:
for that disease coming of so much putrefaction as it does, is apt to receive
contagion, as tinder to take fire. Give it (therefore) ten or twenty grains of
this Powder following.

Take of Harts-horne one dram, citron pill, roots of Angelica, and Tormentill,
Rheubarb, and Coralline, of each half a dram.

Make all into a fine powder; and give the aforesaid quantity in a little
Carduus water, sweetened with some sugar.

After the taking of any of these Antidotes, Breakfasts.
abstain from all meat and drink for two or three hours. And then eat a
piece of Bread and butter strewed with a little grated Nutmeg. Or Bread and
Sallet-oyle, spiced with the powder of Tormentill roots. Or a piece of Bread
sopped in White Wind, allayed with a little Vinegar.

Let your Dinner be about high noone, Dinner and Supper.
and then eat not of above two or three several dishes. Your Supper at five or
six a clock in the evening, and then let one dish suffice. For it is a pretty
saying, and worth the noting. In the Morning a little is enough, at Noone
enough is but a little, but at Night, a little may be too much.

Bed time.
Go not to bed till three or four hours after Supper, lest sleeping upon a
full stomach, you hinder digestion. And so I bid good night to the second
Point of Diet.

The third Point, is Repletion, and Evacuation. Repletion and Evacuatio^.
When you arise in the morning rub your sides, arms, thighs, and legs
downward gently, your clothes being on, comb your head and rub it. Hake, spit,
and blow your nose, to evacuate the excrements of your head and stomach. Then
assay to make water, and to go to stool, and labor to bring your body to this
daily custom. For The body ought especially to be kept free from
superfluities: says Galen. lib. 1. de Differ. Feb. cap. 4. Therefore if you be
costive, use some supposistory or Clyster; and suffer not two whole days to
pass without such evacuation.

It is necessary that every one that has so much understanding, do learn to
know whether he be Phlethorick For Phlethoricke people.
or Cacochymick; If Phlethorick (that is full of blood, as those that live in
high feeding) it will appear by his high color, full veins, pulse greater
and more frequent then it used ordinarily to be, pursinesse, heaviness and
dullness of body, and such like signs. If you be costive, take a common
Clyster first; then be let blood, according to the appointment of some skillful
Physician, and so ordered afterward according to Art.

If Cacochymick, For Cacochymick.
that is, full of gross and corrupted humors, (which will appear by the
palenesse and ill color of the face, defective strength, and the like. He must
be well purged, which none but a Physician can safely prescribe, and that upon
examination of his Body and Urine.

But as a general General purgings for all sorts.
rule, all do appoint some purging medicine twice or thrice in a week, to
keep the Body free from the increase of superfluous humors. To this purpose
the Pills of RUFFUS (which are common in every Shop) are very apt and good. Or,
if you please use these of mine, whereof I had happy experience in the last
great Visitation.

Rs. Aloes Rosatae, unc. 1. Bradwels Pills.
Rhabarbari, Croci, ana drach. 3. Myrrhae, drach. 6. Santali citrini, drach. 1.
Ambari grisei, scrup. 1. Cum syrupi de succo citri, q. s. fiat s. a. Massa
Philularum.
Make Pills of 8. 10. or 12. grains a piece; and take 2 or 3. at a time; either
at bed time, or after the first sleep: you may take them in Syrup of Roses, or
conserve of Violets: or if you will, in the yolke of a rear egg. And it is
good to drink after them when you rise in the morning, in cold weather a little
draught of white Wine mixed with Balme-water. In hot weather, White Wind and
Succorie-water, with a drop or two of oil of Vitrioll in it.

But those that cannot take Pills, may have this Syrup made for them. which for
his excellent virtue in this case, is called Syrupus Divinus, the Divine Syrup.

Syrupus Divinus Sancti Ambrosii.
Rs. Cort. citri, rad cappar. berber. santal. rub. and citrin* spodii, ana
drach. 1. Carryophyll. borrag. buglossi, mellissae, cichorei, ana unc. 1.
Acetosae, Hepaticae, marrubii, ana unc. ss. Thymi, Epithymi, Scariolae,
Rhabarb. fol. senae, rad. polypodii, ana drach. 1. Succorum absynthii,
fumariae, ebuli, Plantagenis, Myrobalanorum Chebul. and citrin. ana. drach. 6.
Cum sacchari li. 2. ss. fiat Syrupus s. a. and Cum aceti succi cydoniorum q. s.
reddatur dulce acidus.

Take two or three spoonefuls of this, more or less as it works: But keep
very warm, for it causes sweat as well as seidge. In a Manuscript of my
Grandfather BANISTERS, I find this called St. AMBROSE his Syrup. The same a
little altered is in RENODAEVS his Disponsatorie; and he has added two drams
of Diagredium. Let men of judgment do as they please; I like it best as I have
set it down. RENODAEUS gives it this Title (not acknowledging any Author)
Syrupus qui reddit corpus mundum a superfluitatibus; and per consequens, cor,
cerebrum, hepar et omnia alia membrae confortat. Which commendations agrees
with my Title: for it is worthy of all commendations.

That Morning that you take your Purging Medicine, you must forbear your other
Antidote.

Women with child, What Purge for women with Child.
must be kept solluble only with mild Suppositories, and gentle Glysters,
wherein a little new drawn Cassia is to be used. Or else a mild Potion made
with some Pectorall Decoction, and a little Cassia: for stronger purgatives,
will endanger abortion. But these ought to be directed by a good Physician.

Young children For young Children.
also with a Violet comfit, (for a Suppository) dipped in sweet sallet oil: or
else a little Cassia newly drawn, dissolved in a small draught of
Chicken-broth; or a little Manna in the like broth, or in posset-drinke.

Beware of Bathings, Bathings.
especially in open standing waters, within the Region of the Air infected.

If Urine or Menstrua stop, Courses stopped.
repair speedily to the Physician for counsel.

Fly Venus Venus.
as far as you may, for in these times she has but an ill name.

Sweat Sweat.
coming easily of it self; and within doors (the house being well aired) is
good, so it exceed not. But abroad it is dangerous.

Lastly, it is good to keep open all Issues, Issues.
and running sores; because Nature will labor to expel any venom to such a
Common-sewer.

The fourth Point, is Exercise and Rest.
Laziness increases superfluous humors, and over-violent labor, wastes
away the nourishing ones. But moderate exercise Exercise how.
(ad ruborem non ad sudorem) stirs up and nourishes Natural heat, helping
Concoction and Evacuation; if also it be used in seasonable times and
convenient places. What.
The best Exercise is walking with a little stirring of the arms. Where.
The Time, in the morning: and the place, either in a pure air abroad, or in a
purified air at home, in some large room, where is little or no company, by
the heat of their bodies and breaths, to distemper the Air. But at all times
beware of taking cold; for great colds and rheumes do easily putrid Feavors,
and they as easily prove Pestilent.

Sleep and Watching is the fifth point.
Sleep either immoderate or unseasonable, hinders digestion, and causes
crudities, quels the vital and dulls the Animal Spirits. Watching also
overmuch, dries up and inflames the good Blood, and weakens all the powers of
Nature.

Let your sleep therefore be seasonable, and not superfluous. Not upon your
dinner, unless custom commands it; and then take it but vapping for half an
hour or so, sitting in a Chair upright.

Three hours at least after a light Supper go to Bed; where let five or six
hours suffice for sleep. Lie conveniently warm, the Chamber doors and
windows being shut to exclude the night air. But beware of sleeping or lying
on the ground or grass: for the nearer the earth the more deadly is the Air.
And the immediate stroke of the cold vapors rising from the ground is
dangerous at all times.

The Sixth Point of Diet, is Passions of the Mind.
All kinds of Passion, Passions.
if they be vehement, do offer violence to the Spirits; yea though they be of
the better and more natural sort.

As Laughter Laughter.
(if unbridled) does run even life out of breath, and greatly perplexeth the
Body: in so much as the breast and sides are pained, the breath is straightened,
and sometimes the Soul it self, is (as I may say) laughed out of her skin.

For so it is recorded of CHRYSIPPVS, Examples.
That only upon the sight of an Ass eating Figs, he brake into such an
unmeasurable laughter, that he fell down and dyed.

And XE^XIS that excellent Painter (who made a most curious beautiful Picture
of the Spartan HELEN) upon the sight of a very ill-favored old woman, burst
out into such a profuse laughter, that he laughed himself to death.

Now this is a disease of the Spleen, called Risus Sardonius, with which I
have known some of my acquaintance not long ago grieved.

But sometimes immoderate Joy, Joy.
lives not to the age of Laughter, when it binds the vital Spirits so close
together that it choakes the heart instantly: For so SOPHOCLES the Tragedian,
receiving a wonderful applause of the people for the last Tragedy he wrote;
was so over-joyed at it, Examples.
that he became a Tragedy himself and dyed upon it.

The like is recorded of one RHODIAS DIAGORAS, who when he saw his three Sons
all at one time crowned with victory at the Olympian games, ran to meet them:
And while he embraced them in his arms, and they planted their Garlands on
his head, he was so overcome with joy, that he turned their Ensigns of
victory into the penons of his Funeral.

Sorrow Sorrow.
on the other side afflicts the Heart, disturbes the Faculties, melts the
Brain, vitiates the humors, and so weakens all the principal parts; yea,
sometimes sinkes the Body into the grave.

Examples.
As ADRASTVS King of the Argives, being told of the death of his Son, was
taken with so violent a Sorrow, that he fell down and dyed immediately.

And so IULIA the Daughter of Julius Caesar, and wife to POMPEY, when she
heard the tidings of her Husbands death, made that hour the last witness that
she had lived only to hear it.

Anger Anger.
is also so furious a Passion, that it violently disturbes the Spirits and
Faculties; as appears by the shaking and tossing of the Body too and fro; the
fiery sparkling of the Eyes, the color coming and going, now red, now pale;
so that all the humors appear to be enflamed (especially Choler,) and the
Spirits hurried this way and that way: sometimes thrust outward, and presently
halled in again. By which violent motions an unnatural heat in the Spirits,
and corruption in the humors are ingendered. Hereupon many times follow
Burning Feavors, Palsies, violent Bleedings, loss of Speech, and sometimes
Death it self.

Examples.
NERVA the Emperor being highly displeased with one REOVLVS, fell into such a
fury against him that he was stricken therewith into a Feavor, whereof he dyed
within a few days after.

WENCESLAVS King of Bohemia, in a rage conceived against his Cup Bearer, would
needs kill him presently with his own hand; but his endeavor was his own
deaths man, striking him with a Pa^sey, that shook him shortly after into
ashes.

VALENTINIANVS the Emperor, in a fierce fury would needs destroy the whole
Country of Sarmatia; but his unruly rage brake a vein within him, and his own
life-bloud ended his bloody design.

In the year of our Lord 1523. A poor old man in the North part of Devonshire
(dwelling in a part of a little Village called Little Podderidge) came to a
Worthy Knights house (Sir THOMAS MONK by name) dwelling in the same Parish,
(which was called St. Merton) in whose house I at that time was. And the old
man standing at the Buttery hatch to receive some Beer: because the Buttery
maid did not presently fill his Tankerd at his call, he fell into such a fury
against her, that with the very passion, he presently fell down, was taken up
for dead; was with much a do by me recovered to life and sense, but never
spoke again, and dyed within two days after.

Fear Fear.
likewise gathers the heat and Spirits to the heart, and dissolves the Brain,
making the moisture thereof shed and slide down into the external parts,
causing a chillness and shaking over all the Body; and falling upon the gullet,
makes one to swallow when they should speak: It abuses the Fancy and Senses,
brings a Lethargy upon the Organs of motion, and condemns the heart to deadly
sufferings.

Examples.
As CASSANDER the son of Antipater upon the sight of ALEXANDER the Great's
statue, was stricken with such a terror, that he could hardly make his legs
leave trembling so far as to carry him out of the place.

Nay to come nearer to our purpose. In the last great Plague-time here in
London, in Anno Domini 1625. One George Bicker-staffe a Tailor dwelling in
Silver-Street, having charge of the house of the Right Honorable the Lord
WINDSOR in Mugwell-streete, (where I then Lived) and coming thither one
Evening in the twilight; as he was standing all alone in the Parlour, sudainly
a great noise came rattling down the Stayres, from the upper rooms. At which
(although my self have been eye witness of manly valor in him at other
times) he was so beyond reason affrighted, that he ran out of the house into
the Street, half breathless, and almost speechless, looking very ghastly;
which made many inquire the cause; which as soon as he could make them
understand, some boldly ventured in, and found nothing but a Fawn, that had
been tied up in the Garden, and was now got loose, and (the Hall door being
left open) had got up into the great Chamber. The neighbors made themselves
merry with the Tailors manhood: But he went home (it being the Fifteenth day
of October) fell into a Feavor, which turned within a few days into the
Plague, whereof he dyed on the Six and twentieth day of the same month:
having continued in perfect health from the beginning of the Contagion to this
forementioned hour of his misinformed fear. Now this Fear did not arise
from danger of Infection, and yet it drew it on. How much more then does the
fear of the same cause work it? I need bring no Examples for proof: for in
every place I hear living witnesses of such as dyed of the Plague, stricken
only with the fear of it: And therefore I cannot think any man's ignorance
can plead against it.

Yet I will give a reason for it; How Fear brings Infection.
because of all Passions, Fear is the most pestilently pernicious: And this it
is: Fear enforces the vital Spirits to retire inward to the heart: By which
retyring they leave the outward parts infirm, as appears plainly by the
palenesse and trembling of one in great fear. So that the walls being forsaken
(which are continually besi^ged by the outward air) in comes the enemy boldly;
the best spirits that should expelled them having cowardly sounded retreat: In
which withdrawing, they draw in with them such evil vapors as hang about the
outward pores; even as the Sun draws toward it the vapors of the Earth. And
hence is it, that Fear brings Infection sooner then any other occasion.

This therefore; The way of curing Passions.
and all other Passions must (by a wise watching over our selves) be beaten
off, whenever they but offer to set upon us. But these are diseases of the
Soul, whose Physicians are Divines. They must Purge out the Love of this
World, and the distrust of GODS Providence, minister the Cordials of Faith,
Hope, Patience, and Contentedness; and Ordain the strict Diet of Holy
Exercises. We that are Physicians to the Body, are but Chyrurgians to the
Soul; we can but talk of Topicall remedies; as to apply Mirth, Music,
delightful business, good Company, and lawful Recreations; such as may take
up all time from careful thoughts and passionate affections: Then have we
done. And so have I now with the six Points of Diet; and likewise with the
first part of my Method, which is the way of Preservation.

The Manner of taking Sick.
The second Part (which now succeeds) discovers the Manner and Signs of being
Infected.

It strikes first at the Heart.
The Manner is, that It strikes chiefly at the Heart, (as I said in the
Definition:) which is apparent by this, that at the first Infection or instant
of being taken, the vital Faculty sinkes, and languishes, the whole strength
of the Body is suddenly turned to weakness; the vital Spirits are greatly
oppressed and discouraged. Whereas the Animal Faculty commonly remains (for
a while) in good plight, and perfect in the use of Sense, Understanding,
Judgment, Memory, and Motion. The Natural Faculty also is not so presently
hurt, but there is Concoction and all other functions performed by the Liver,
Stomach, Guts, Reins, Bladder, and other parts, as Nature requires. Though
indeed in a little time (the Venom being very strong) these and the Brain
also are overcome. As appears by the Symptoms that follow; as Lethargies,
Frenzies: Vomitings, Fluxes, etc. which I shall reckon up in the Conclusion.

Take notice therefore, That as soon as the venomous matter strikes to the
Heart; that the Contagion has now found out the Prince of the Vital parts: who
if he want armor of proof to resist (either of Natural strength, or forged
out by Arts Cyclops, the Physician) is presently taken prisoner by his venomous
enemy; Signs and Symptoms.
who soon after takes possession of the Arteries, and Veins.

In this conflict; the Pulse The Pulse.
(which uses to be the truest intelligencer of the Hearts well of illfare)
becomes now languishing, little, frequent, and unequal. Languishing, by reason
that Native heat lessens, and a heat contrary to Nature increases: Little,
because oppressed: Frequent, from Natures strife: Unequal, partly from the
Feavor, and partly from the Malignant vapor that besiedgeth the Heart.
Concerning the Pulse also, Rodericus a Castro; de Peste Hamburgensi, has this
Sign in these very words. Manus, dum Medico porrigunt Pulsum, quodam modo
retrahuntur cum tremore; quod a veneno fit cor ipsum pungente, and Signum mihi
diutina experientia indubitatum est, ut eo solo saepissime Pestilentem affectum
cognoverim. This have I also tried and found true.

And from this ground did I find another that never failed me; If in reaching
out the hand the former sign appeared not; then if I suspected it to be the
Plague^^, I would touch the Pulse something hard, and if it were the Plague it
would not fail Cum tremore manum retrahere. The reason is, the stopping of the
course of the Pulse drives the venom something back to the heart, by which is
caused a kind of sudden Passion.

The Eyes.
The next Sign is, the enemies Ensign hung out at the windows; The Eyes are
various in turning, and sometimes fiery shining; the looks sad, and the Face
changing color: which show that the radical humor begins to waste, and the
Spirits to wax dry and enflamed.

Then follows Lightness or Giddiness of the Head; Giddiness.
Drouth, and Bitter taste in the mouth, which proceed from the superfluity of
Choler, aggravated by the mixture of the venomous vapors.

Vomiting Vomiting.
likewise of vicious matter, being (according to redundancie of any of the
humors) sometimes waterish, of Phlegm; sometime yellow or greenish, of
Choler; sometimes leaden or blackish, of Melancholy. But this is from the
virulencie of the Venom, vexing the veins and fibers in the coat of the
Stomach: not from any strength of Nature to expel the poison; as appears in
that no ease, but increase of accidents succeeds the exoneration.

After which, follows a painful Hicket, or Yexing; Hicket, or Convulsio^ in
the Stomach.
by the progress of the venom working convulsively on the fibers of the
Stomach.

Shortness of breath also, Short breath and sighing.
and often sighing show the heart is enflamed, and would feign exchange the
overheated air within the body, for that which is cool without.

Then begin the Spirits to sink, Sinking of the Spirits, and Fever.
through the fierce gripe of the venomous vapor that now insults over the
yiedling heart. The external parts become cold and shake-ripe, while the
internal are over-hot with the inflammation of the Bowels.

By this time the venom is gotten up into the watrish humors of the Brain, and
infecting them, Pains in the Head.
causes Head ache: while the hot vapors (getting betwixt the two mother
membranes) cause painful prickings there, whereupon follow restlessenesse of
the Body, and Lack of Sleep, Lack of Sleep.
and upon these Frenzy, except the Brain be full of moisture; and then the
head is over-heavie and Lethargick. Extreme Drowsinesse.


Sometimes also the Venom works it self from the substance of the Brain into
the Sinews, causing Cramps, and Convulsions. Cramps and Convulsions


The Urine is altogether untrue, therefore unworthy the fellowship of faithful
signs. Urine utterly false.
And the most faithful, are the Soars, and Spots (if they be right) called
Gods Tokens.

But before we describe them, The Authors observation.
let me express my sorrow for what I had daily observation of, in the last
great Visitation. Many undertook the cure of the Plague then, who knew no more
then to sweat the Patient, and apply outward drawing medicines to the Soars:
nay the Chyrurgerie work was well performed by some, and yet I dare say many
dyed for the lack of skill to encounter these symptoms now specified. And yet
there are many more such; all which I will reckon up, to see if I can shake the
consciences of such impudent Quack-salvers, as dare without learning venture to
enrich themselves by filling Graves.

There is commonly, 1 Trembling of the heart, fainting or sowning. 2 A Feavor,
though not easily discerned at first. 3 Cardialgia, commonly called Heart-ache.
4 Vomiting, and Loathing in the stomach. 5 Extreme Thirst, and vile taste in
the Mouth. 6 Headache, and pricking pains there. 7 Swimming, or Vertigo. 8
Loss of Memory, and Foolish behavior. 9 Want of sleep. 10 Delirium, or
Frenzy. 11 Convulsions, or Cramps. 12 Lethargy, or extreme Drowsinesse. 13
Sharp pains in the Ears. 14 Opthalmia, or inflammation of the Eyes. 15
Bleeding at the Nose. 16 The tongue and mouth enflamed and furred. 17 Spitting
of Blood. 18 Squinansie. 19 Pleuresie. 20 Very short Breath, and continual
sighing. 21 Dry Cough. 22 Iaundise. 23 Swelling of the Belly with external
pain. 24 Colic, and Iliak Passions. 25 Extreme Costinesse. 26 Worms. 27
Flux of the Belly: either Lieuteria, or Diarrhaea. 28 Bloody Flux. 29 Swelling
of the Testicles very painefully. 30 Suppression of Urine. 31 Extreme heat,
and pain in the Back. 32 Swelling of the Feet and Legs with intolerable
pain. 33 And sometimes, Such immoderate Sweat horribly stinking, that it
affrights the Physician from his course of sweating the Patient, and yet for
all this sweat the deadly danger increases.


And not one of these Symptoms can be cured by the common Method of such
cases: Because of the venomous quality that is mixed with them.

When I had well informed my self of these things, and saw how little they
were regarded of others. I was stricken with wonder to see, with what peaceable
consciences some men went a killing. And I began to doubt whether it were not
better for a man to be at peace with Ignorance, then to carry his trembling
heart in his hand, as I did all that time. Yet then it pleased God to bless my
labors and counsels, and to let a very small number fail under my advice.

But to go forward, The faithful Signs.
I must enlarge my self a little in the discovery of the most faithful and
apparent Signs (which are the Botch, the Blayne, the Carbuncle, and the Spots
called Gods Tokens:) because the Searchers do sometimes mistake.

The Botch, The Bubo, or Botch.
is a hard Tumor, rising in the glandulous parts called the Emunctories: which
are in three places on each side of the Body: viz. under each ear (or
sometimes under the Laws or Chin) in the Arme-pits and in the Groynes. This
Tumor lies sometimes very deep in the flesh, only to be found by feeling,
nay sometimes also scarcely to be felt; but if you touch the place there is
pain. But for the most part it swells out to the bigness of a Nutmeg or a
Wall-nut, yea even to the size of a man's fist, or a penny loaf. Also sometimes
it is round, sometimes ovall; sometimes long and slender as ones finger. I saw
a Boy of ten years old in Seething-lane, that had one risen in his left
arme-pit, which ran from thence backward upon the shoulder blade, making a
Semicircle thereon, and so turning downward toward the backbone: as if under
the skin had been laid a good big cord in the form almost of a Sickle. The Boy
was not heart-sicke but at the first taking, and by Gods blessing and good
means, this tumor sunk again, and vanished without any suppuration.

But some again are flat, broad, and spreading even over half the Thorax, (as
I have seen one.) They are of color various, according to the humor
praedominant. At the first it is commonly something moveable, but grows
afterward more indurate and fixed. It rises for the most part with a pricking
pain; and as it grows greater is more dully painful; and seems to the
Patient as a weight or burden.

It comes of a venomous matter, putrefying and poisoning the blood which is
thick, gross, and excrementitious of it self, and something flegmaticke.
Nature therefore labors to drive forth this venom into the e^unctories, which
are the sinkes and receptacles of excrementitious humors.

When they rise under the Jaws they show the strength of the Brain; in the
Arme-pits of the Heart; and in the Groines of the Liver. According to the
quantity of the humors infected, so the Botches are bigger or less, and more
or fewer in number; and according to the malignancie of the humor are their
colors whiter, redder, more bluish or blackish; whereof the latter is still
the worse.

The Blayne, The Blayne.
is a kind of Blister, somewhat like one of the Swine-pocks, of a Straw-colour
for the most part; but sometimes of a bluish or leaden color, (but then it is
apt to turn to a Carbuncle) and when it runs affords filthy matter of the
like complexion. Round about the Blister, there is a red fiery circle (yet
nothing so fiery as that of the Carbuncle) the whole taking up the breadth of a
groat, six pence, or nine-pence: I have seen the breadth of a large shilling;
but very rarely. These will rise in any part of the Body or limbs; sometimes
one alone, sometimes two or three, but never many. When the matter is run
out, the hoven skin falls and dryes up to a crusty scab, and so falls off.

These show, that Nature is strong to expel the venom speedily, and that the
humors infected are not superaboundant. For many that have these, are not sick
at all: and the most recover with good looking to.

The Carbuncle, The Carbuncle.
is a little venomous pustle with a broad compass of a deep redness about
it, wonderful angry, and burning like a fire-coale; thence comes his name
Carbunculus. It rises like a little Blyster, producing an ash-colored, or else
a blackish crust. Sometimes it rises in many pustles like burnt blysters on the
outer skin; which being broken and the matter run out, the like crusty escar
grows over it till it fall off. It appears in any ^^rt of the Body or Limbs;
many times on the Breast, sometimes in the face, I have seen one on the very
tip of the nose. With it goes always these evil companions, Itching,
Inflammation, and Irrosion; for it is so full of burning poison, that it
consumes the flesh, and will in a short time (if it be not well looked to) eat
so deep and large a hole, as if the flesh were hollowed with a hot iron.

It arises from the same cause with the Botch, but the Blood is more hot,
black, thick, and faeculent; proceeding for burnt Choler, or adust
Melancholy.

The Spots (otherwise called Gods Tokens The Tokens.
) are commonly of the bigness of a flea-bitten spot: sometimes much bigger.
Their color is according to the praedominancie of the humor in the body:
namely Red, or reddish if Choler; Pale-blew or Darke-blew if Phlegm; and Leaden
or Blackish if Melancholy abound. But they have ever a circle about them. The
Red ones a purplish-circle, and the others a redish circle. They appear most
commonly on the the breast and back: and sometimes on the neck, arms, and
thighs. On the Breast and Back, because the vital Spirits strive to breath
out the venom the nearest way. In some bodies there will be very many, in some
but one or two, or very few; according to the quantity of the venom, and the
strength of the Spirits to drive them out. They usually show themselves on the
3. 4. 5. or 7. day; Sometimes not till death, the venom yet tyrannizing over
the dead carkas. Sometimes they appear together with the sores; but for the
most part without. The cause is the venomous matter condensed and hardened in
the act of penetrating the the pores of the skin; if they be skillful dissected
in the dead body, you may find some half way deep into the flesh, and some in
muskles of the Breast have bin followed with the incision knife even to the rib
bones. The reason why they are thus congealed is, the thicknes of the venomous
matter, and the coldness of it: for it is the most Phlegmatic part of the
blood, yet mixed also with the other humors according to the colors. They
appear in dead bodies most, because Nature fainting in her labor to thrust out
the venom through the skin, life's heat going out, the privation thereof, and the
nearness of the outward air do congeale the^ presently: and because many
times at the last gasp nature gives the stoutest struggle, it comes to pass
they are not so far thrust forth as to appear, til death.

All these Symptoms must be looked to very diligently and skilfully. As for
the Sores, there are many good and known medicines, and hands skilful enough in
Chyrurgical way. And I understa^d the College of Physicians have a Book now
coming forth full of good Medicines. Whether the Tokens bring always certain
Death, as is believed
Therefore I will here desist. But me thinks one pulls me by the sleeve, and
asks me what I mean, to say that all these Symptoms must be looked to; Do I
mean the Tokens? (for they were the last of them.) Yes, even the Tokens; Mr.
JOHN BANISTER.
my Grandfather in a Manuscript of his of the Plague, affirms that he
recovered some that had the best colored of them, and those but few also. And I
have often heard my Father (who was an honest true tongued man, and a skillful
full Physician) say: that in the year 1593. my Mother (being then visited with
this sickness) had (besides a Carbuncle under the tip of her left left ear)
two Spots on her breast. And she was recovered, and lived till the year 1629.
yet the spots appeared together with the Carbuncle, which is accounted a
prognosticke to have no hope of curing the soar, or caring for the life of the
Patient. To this, let me join an experience of mine own, in the last
dreadful Visitation, Anno 1625. My self did in Golding-lane recover a woman
that was sick of the Plague in Childe-bed, (and that very case alone is rarely
cured) who besides other Symptoms, as her sudden taking, faintings, and
Pestilent Feavor; had two Spots on her breast of a reddish color with purple
circles. I discouraged not those about her, because I meant to try what might
(by Gods assistance) be done, the Child dyed, but she recovered, and is alive
at this day.

Now if any man shall say, these last were spots of a Malignant Fever only. I
answer, they were not Purple but Red ones, and circled with purple Circles, so
are not the faint Spots.

But if my skill in these Spots shall yet be doubted. Know that this was when
there dyed betwixt Four and five Thousand of the Plague that week: And I will
believe no man that shall tell me, that any Malignant Feavor must not needs
turn to the Plague it self within the air of London at that time.

Thus much for the Signs of the Pestilence in them that Live.

There remain also some few other Signs besides these, Other signs of the
dead of the Plague^
by which you may know a Body to be dead of the Plague, though neither Soar,
nor Token appear.

HEURNIUS says, Heurnius de Peste.
they are known from others that dye of the Plague, by these Marks. The Nose
looks blew, sometimes blackish blew, as if it had been beaten or bruised. The
like Color is in the Ears and Nails. And their Bodies are ever worse
colored then other dead bodies be. But add to this one Sign more, approved
by Experience and standing with good reason. viz. That whereas other dead
Bodies must be laid out straight while they are warm, or else when they are
cold they will be too stiff to be straightened: In those of the Plague (or
Poisoned either) the flesh is soft, and the joints limber and flexible, after
the Body is cold. Which shows the vileness of Putrefaction in all the humors,
and moist parts of the Body.

And now having found out (by certain Signs) the way to know this Sickness^
from all others: It will not be amiss out of learned Authority to teach you
how to know, whether a man at the first taking or soon after, be likely to be
recovered or no.

To know whether a man taken with the Sickness, may be likely to recover or no.
If one be taken with the first Signs of Sinking of his Spirits, causlesse
Sadness, shortness of Breath on the sudden, that he cannot forbear
Sighing, yet knows no cause why; Sick heartedness, etc. If this happen at his
Meat, or presently after; let him if he can, Vomit: If he offer and cannot:
Help him with a little Warme-water and Oil: Or dip a feather in Linseed oil;
or Oil of Scorpions, and thrust it into his throat. Then: or if he be taken
betwixt Meals or Fasting. Make this Draught for him: Take of Bole-Armoniack,
j. dram, powdered. Juice of Oranges, half an ounce. White Wine, an ounce.
Rose Water, ij. ounces.


Mix them together, and give it.

If he Vomit it up again, it is a Sign the venom is abundant, and has
gotten great power over the vital parts. Therefore wash his mouth with a
little white Wine, and give him the same Potion again. If he again cast it
up, repeat the Wine lotion, and this Potion again, three times. This is taken
out of the second Canon of Avicen, by Guaynerius, who testifies upon his own
knowledge, that never any that at first kept it without Casting it up again,
dyed of that Sickness.

GUANERIUS was an excellent skillful Physician; And AVICENNA was accounted a
Prince of Physicians, they may therefore be believed. Yet I would have none so
superstitious in the certainty of this safety; as generally all are in the
deadliness of the Tokens: Of which, I am persuaded any might recover that have
the best colored of them; but that the custom of Ignorance has driven away
all use of means upon the very appearance of the Spots. This I durst not hide;
yet perhaps like Cassandra, I may be but laughed at for telling the truth. But
this is no time to laugh, Let every Man rather be to his own Soul and Family
an AARON, to take with speed his Censor of Repentance, and fill it with fire
from the Altar (of the exceeding great and precious Promises of CHRIST) 2. Pet.
1.4.
and put the Incense of faithful Prayer thereon; and run quickly, Number. 16.46.
and make an Atonement: for there is wrath gone out from the Lord; The Plague
is begun.

Jn the Great Visitation, Anno, 1625. I made these Preservative Compositions.
Preservatives Inwardly.
1 MY Electuarie (which I call Antiloymon.

The price is 2. s. an Ounce.

The Quantity one or 2. Drams on a knifes point.

2 My Plague Powder, 9. d. a Dram.

The quantity, half a Dram, in White wine, Carduus water, or Posset-ale.

3 My Powder of Life. This is used only in very weak bodies for Preservation,
and in Cure is beyond my modesty of Expression. But I reserve to my self how
it is to be used.

The price is 3. d. a Grain.

And the ordinary dose, is 8.10. or 12. grains.

4 For the more Ordinary sort of People, I had (with happy success) also (I
praise God) My Liquor of Life.

The price 5. s. a Pint.

The quantity at once, 2. 4. or. 6. spoonefuls; as the Age or strength
requires.

But observe that these Quantities are for Preservation only: But in Cure of
the Infected, Note.
they must be doubled.

1 Also, Lozenges, Outward.
or Troe^isks to hold in the Mouth. At 12. pence an Ounce. 2 Pomanders, 5. s. a
piece. 3 Sweet Waters for Spunges, 3. s. 6. d. a pint. 4 Sweet Waters to be
cast on a hot Fire-shovell to perfume a Chamber, 3. s. a pint. 5 Perfumes to
burn, wherewith to air Clothes, -- 16 pence an ounce.
All these are temperate and Catholicall, that is generally fit for all
Constitutions. And were All the Inventions of my Grandfather Mr. JOHN BANISTER
that famous both Physician and Chyrurgion in this City. And now if any shall
desire them, I will quickly Prepare them again. I will nor brag what they did,
nor court men's belief like a Mountebanck. I am known to many, and the Iudious
are like enough to trust me by that I have written.

I live in Golden-Lane, over against the Sign of the Golden Flower de Luce.

The Lord of Heaven in mercy look down upon this City.

FINIS.

