A MEDITATION OF MAN'S MORTALITY. CONTAINING AN Exposition of the Ninetieth
PSALM.

By that Reverend and Religious Servant of GOD Mr WILLIAM BRADSHAVV, sometime
Fellow of Sidney College in CAMBIDGE.

Published since his decease by THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of
ROTHERHITH.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for Fulke Clifton, and are to be sold on
New-fish street hill under Saint Margrets Church. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND RELIGIOUS THE Lady GRACE DARCY, increase of all
Spiritual grace and true comfort here, with assurance of eternal glory and
happiness hereafter.
GOOD MADAME,
These holy and heavenly Meditations were by the Author of them at first
conceived upon occasion of the decease of that Religious Gentleman, of blessed
memory, your dear Father, under whose roof he then lived. Since which time
it has pleased God to give you further occasion of Meditation in this kind,
(not to mention the loss of the Author himself, which I well know, very
feelingly affected you) by renting from you as it were the one half of your
self, that worthy Knight, that was one flesh with you while he lived, and
continues one spirit with you notwithstanding his decease. It has pleased God
thus by sundry crosses successively to exercise his graces in you, and to
preach that unto you by real, and those domestical, (I may well so call them)
Sermons, that this Discourse and Treatise mainly tends unto. Neither ought it
at all Prove. 3. 11, 17. Heb. 12. 5, 6.
to dismay or discourage any of Gods Children, when they shall consider, how it
pleases God to follow them with Crosses, either in this kind, or any other.
Lam. 3. 27. Heb. 12. 10.
It is for our good, that we be trained up in the school of afflictions. The
Spirit of God pronounces them Job 5. 17. Psalm. 94. 12.
blessed, that are corrected and instructed. And the very Heathen themselves
have held them Bias (...). Infaelicem dicebat cum, qui infaelicitate^ non
tulisset. Laer. Nihil mihi videtur infaelicius eo, cui nihil unquam evenit
aduersi. Demetrius Cynicus apud Senec. de provid. c. 3. Hinc Amasis Polycrati;
(...). Neminem unquam novi, aut fando audivi, qui non ad extremum funditus
perierit, postres omnes prosperegestas. Herodot. hist. l. 3.
unhappy, that had never tasted of any unhappiness. Happy are we that ever
we came into this School, so be we prove not truants in it, but Psalm. 119.
67, 71.
come better out of it then we came in. Now this how it may be effected, this
blessed servant of God now with God, having long been experienced, and well
profited therein, does from the Spirit of God speaking by Moses the Man of God,
here manifest. In regard whereof I have the rather made choice to address that
to your LADIESHIP, which your wel-deserving both of the Author and his issue
does otherwise give you good interest in, and a just title unto. And so wishing
unto your self, and all other that shall make use of it, that benefit by it,
that by the Author was at first intended in it; with thankful acknowledgement
of your great love and kindness showed both to him while he lived, and to his
poor Widow and Fatherless ones since his decease, I take leave, and rest

Your LADIESHIPS to be commanded in the Lord THO: GATAKER.

A MEDITATION OF MAN'S MORTALITY.
A GODLY MEDITATION ON PSALM 90. A Prayer of Moses the Man of God.
THis Psalm is a Meditation of Man's Mortality: An Argument that all of us
have most feeling Occasions to think of, and to be affected withal.

This Meditation is conceived in the form of a Prayer, as is expressed in the
Title; and is apparent by the Psalm it self: For the Prophet directs his
speech unto God; and therein teaches us;

That our Meditations, and thoughts, and affections in and about this Argument,
should be holy and religious, such as are fit to be presented to God himself.

And that in our Meditations hereof we should withdraw our selves into the
presence of GOD; and as it were in a special manner make him acquainted with
them: For this is a means to reap found and true comfort thereby.

The Author of this Meditation was Moses, as appears also by the Title;
Howsoever some upon no good ground suppose, that it was a Psalm of David made
in the person of Moses. And albeit it be not set down or mentioned in any
other of Moses his works; yet that no whit hinders, but that it may well be
his, as all Circumstances in it do well fit thereunto. Neither indeed had any
man after Moses more cause to meditate on this Argument, and to be thoroughly
affected therewith.

Now Moses the Author of it is here described to be the Man of God: that is, a
special and more then ordinary Servant of God. So that it is as if it had
been said; That famous and renowned Servant of God was in manner as follows,
affected with the consideration of Man's Mortality; and upon the same penned
this Psalm, that other of Gods servants might learn of him, how in like
manner to be affected therewith.

Whence we learn:

1. That every true Servant of God has and ever shall have just cause to
meditate of, and in most feeling manner to be affected with the consideration
of this matter. Yea, the greater and more worthy Servant of God one is, the
more deeply will he be affected therewith.

2. That this is a part of our special service, wherein we shall show our
selves to be Men and Women of God in a special manner, to meditate seriously
hereon, and to be affected herewith; As the neglect thereof is a special sign
of one that is no Man of God.

3. That the Servants of God herein had need not only of general Rules, but
of special patterns and directions, how and in what manner to be have
themselves in this consideration; least on the one side they be swallowed up in
the gulf of despair, or on the other side encouraged and hartned on to
profaneness, making that cursed and damnable use thereof, that Epicures use
to do, saying, Let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall Esai. 22. 13. 1
Cor. 15. 31.
die: Let us be merry while we may.

The Psalm it self consists of 1. A Preface. 2. A Complaint. A Petition.



IN the Preface, the Prophet prayseth God: and by praising him labors to
moove God the rather to hearken unto the Complaint and Petition, that
afterward he is to make.

And indeed this is a special means to make our Complaints to be regarded of
God, and our Petitions granted, when in the making of them, we shall bring
hearts possessed with the love of God, and our mouths filled with his praise.

For there is no true Child of God, be his soul never so deeply possessed with
sorrow and plunged in misery, but he shall find Arguments of the praise and
glory of God in the very midst of his misery. Neither will God find mercy to
be moved with their Complaints, nor regard their Requests, that in the
apprehension of their miseries have no hearts to conceive, or mouths to utter
his praise.

So that would we move the Lord to Compassion in our misery, and to grant our
requests? Let us in the first place stir up our hearts, to consider Gods
goodness, and praise, and to manifest the same in the midst of all Gods
Judgments; else it will nothing boot us to beg, or to complain. Those
therefore that in the sense of their misery, can find no true and hearty
matter to praise and glorify God, though they should rend the Heaven with
their cries, and beg and ask from morning to evening, yet cannot look to
receive any comfortable answer at Gods hands. So that herein we should examine
our hearts and affections. For look with what measure of the love of God, and
of the acknowledgement of his goodness they are replenished, in that measure
may we hope that the Lord will hearken unto us.

The Prophet prayseth the Lord 1. For his goodness toward his people. 2. For
his worthiness in himself.


IN the first he manifests his thankful mind to God for his kindness passed;
in the other his hope and confidence in God for the time to come.

VERSE. I. Lord, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations.
IN this first part, the Prophet acknowledges, That God at all times, and in
all ages has had a special care of his Saints and Servants, to provide for
them all things necessary for this life; For under the name of dwelling place,
or Mansion house, the Prophet understands all helps and comforts necessary
for this life, both for maintenance and protection. For the use of such houses
was wont to be not only to defend men from the injury of the Wether, and to
keep safely, within the walls and under the roof, all other things necessary
for this life; and to be a place of abode, wherein men might the more
commodiously provide for all other things necessary, and walk in some Calling,
profitable to their neighbor, and to the glory of God: But also to protect
them from the violence of bruit Beasts and rage of enemies. Now the Prophet
herein seems to note a special and more immediate providence of God toward
himself, and the people of God: (For of all kind of people they seemed to be
most forsaken and forlorn:) That whereas the rest of the world, seemed to have
their habitations and Mansions rooted in the earth, and so to dwell upon the
earth; to live in Cities and walled Towns in all wealth and State; Gods
people were as it were without house and home. Abraham was called Hebr. 11. 8,
9.
out of his own Country, from his fathers house, where no doubt he had goodly
buildings, and large revenues, and was commanded by God to live as a Forreiner
in a strange Country, amongst savage people, that he knew not; and to abide in
Tents, Boothes, and Cabins, having little hope to live a settled and comfortable
life in any place. In like manner lived his posterity, Isaac, Jacob, and the
twelve Patriarks, wandering from place to place, in the Land of Canaan; from
thence translated into the Land of Egypt; there living at courtesy, and as it
were Tenants at will, and in such slavery and bondage, that it had been better
for them to have been without house and home. After this for forty years
together, (at what time this Psalm was penned,) they wandered up and down in a
desolate Wilderness; Remoouing from place to place, and wandering as it were in
a maze. So that of all the people of the Earth, Gods own people had hitherto
lived as Pilgrims and banished persons, without house or home. And therefore
the Prophet here professes, that God himself more immediately by his
extraordinary providence, for many ages together had protected them, and been
as it were a Mansion House unto them; That is, The more they were deprived of
these ordinary comforts of this life, the more was God present with them,
supplying by his extraordinary and immediate Providence, what they wanted in
regard of ordinary means.

The due consideration of this point may minister matter of great Joy and
Comfort to such children of God as are thoroughly humbled with the
consideration of Man's Mortality in general, or of theirs, that they rely and
depend upon in special: and it may serve as it were for a bottom, and for
brinkes to keep their sorrow within bounds and compass. For surely this
cannot but be a means of great sorrow and trouble of mind to them that live
and depend upon others, (especially when any feeling occasion shall be offered
unto them) to consider the mortality of these that they depend upon, and from
whom they receive the comforts and means of this life, upon whose life and
breath, under God hitherto they have enjoyed their Mansion, or dwelling places.
Neither can it be less sorrow and trouble for these upon whom others depend,
to consider their own Mortality, when they shall have wife and children, or
any other depending upon them, living and breathing as it were by them; It
cannot I say, but go near their hearts, if they love those that are under
them, to think, that they are but mortal and frail flesh, that they know not
how soon they shall be called from them, and that then they shall leave them
destitute of those comforts and helps which now they have by them. Sorrow
herein, especially when by the hand of God we shall be called to think of our
Mortality, can hardly keep it self within bounds and compass. But if we
could meditate of that which the Prophet here speaks, it would support and
uphold us, and keep our fears and sorrows within bounds and compass.

Hence then we are to learn:

1. That God is in all those means and comforts, and stays that we have in
this life: That we should not live in any dwelling place, under any person with
any comfort or content, were it not by the Providence of God, and such a
Providence as Gods child shall (if he rouse up his thoughts) have such a sense
and feeling of the same, that he shall see and feel God in the means: and
shall acknowledge, that though he have had a house to dwell in, and other helps
of this life, yet they are nothing without God, that it is he indeed that is
his dwelling, his living, his maintenance, etc.

2. That the more that God withdraws these means from his children, the
poorer and more uncertain their states are in their houses and Farms, or
places of abode, the more shall they find the Lord to be himself all these
unto them. For his Providence herein is never more felt then when they are most
destitute of all outward helps and means.

3. This is a Doctrine of comfort, not only in regard of our selves, but of
those we shall leave behind us. Every man cannot leave his wife or children, or
servants houses to dwell in, though they desire and endeavor it never so much.
Yet this may be a ^ay unto us, and may moderate our griefs herein, That God
himself is a dwelling house unto all (...); and certainly will provide for all
his, whatsoever shall be needful and the more destitute and forlorn we leave
them, when through mortality we shall be taken away from them, the more he
will be an habitation and Mansion house unto them; which is a surer house then
any of our houses of stone and clay: And this we may be sure to leave our wives
and children, if they be Gods.

4. The more experience we shall have of this good Providence of God, the more
let us be ready to give the praise and glory thereof to God: And show our
selves in our deepest thoughts of Mortality to be such as yet do acknowledge
God to have been in all ages an habitation unto his, and at all times unto us.

5. Let us delight only in this Mansion, which we cannot let nor loose: which
will not leave us, when we leave this world, but will abide by us for ever.

VERSE. 2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed
the earth; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.
THE second Argument of Gods praise is from his worthiness and excellency of
himself; That he is a God eternal and immutable; one that ever has been,
and ever shall be the same; in whom there is no alteration, nor shadow Iam. 1.
17.
of change. He was God before the Mountains were brought forth, yea, before
the earth was made, and he will be God for ever and ever: And those properties
and qualities that are in him; were ever in him, and will be in him for ever
and ever. This praise of God does fit that present Argument which the Prophet
has in hand: And tends to moderate and keep in compass immoderate sorrow
that may arise either from the consideration of our own Mortality, or the
Mortality of any other. For that, notwithstanding the changes and alterations
that we see in the world, that may discourage us, and breed distrust and
diffidence in us, yet, if we be the true Children of God, we have had a true
feeling and sense of his love and special Providence over us. And if we have
once felt it indeed, there is no cause but to hope for the continuance thereof.
For as he is an eternal God, so his love is an eternal love; it was before
all Worlds, and shall be for ever and ever.

Is therefore the hand of God upon thee? Do thou see and feel thy self to
be mortal? Do thou see those thou dependest upon to be such? What? Do thou
think therefore that God that did love thee, and that in his love raised up
these and these means for thee, is mortal also and mutable? No: Though he
change and alter the means, and thereby would have thee to fear and tremble
before him; yet do not thou for all that despair? Be thou still the Child of
God: Let no changes either threatened or effected change thy mind and affection
to God: and though God shall for a time humble thee, and seem for a time to
thrust thee from thine house, and all comforts of thy life, to make thee to
know thy self; yet his affection is the same to thee that ever it was; it can
no more change then he does change. And therefore as God out of his eternal
love has heretofore been good unto thee, so be thou assured, that out of the
same love he will continue so to be in the midst of all changes and alterations
whatsoever.

The particular description of Gods eternity and immutabilitie fitteth this
place and Argument. What more firm then rocks and mountains! What more
stable then the earth that never Psalm. 93. 2. And 78. 69. Eccles. 1. 4.
remooues out of his place, nor moves in his place? Yet that God, which is
eternal, which was before they were made, is more immouable then they. The
greatest Mountains upon the earth, yea, the earth it self shall sooner be
moved and removed, then he, not only in his nature, but in his affection and
disposition. And though we had never such certain dwelling places in this
World, though our houses were built upon the firmest Rocks and highest
Mountains; yet we should not be sure, except the Lord himself be our
dwelling place. Our confidence in such places is nothing without him. What
says the Lord by his Prophet to the Edomites, Obadiah 3. 4. The pride of thy
heart has deceived thee thou that dwell in the Clefts of the Rock, whose
habitation is on high; that says in his heart, Who shall bring me down?
Whereas if the Lord be our dwelling house, we Psalm. 18. 2.
are sure and safe. For he is a Rock, a Castle, a Fort, a Secret place to all
his.

VERSE. 3. Thou turnest man to destruction, saying, Return, ye Children of Adam.
HIs complaint is to God, as to the Author of our mortality: and that
mortality which is from God he sets forth. 1. By diverse Comparisons, 2. By
the cause that moves God to make man see such mortality.

In the first place the Prophet conceiueth of God as of a Potter, that having
of dust tempered a mass and framed it into a vessel and dried it, does
presently, within a minute of an hour after, dash it again in pieces, and
beat it to dust, in passion as it were speaking unto it, Get thee to the dust
again.

The word here translated Destruction, signifies a Beating, or Grinding, or
Pounding of a thing to Powder. And the Prophet seems to allude to the third of
Genesis, where God speaks of Adam, Dust thou art and to dust thou shall
return, as if he should Genesis 3. 19.
say: O Lord, thou that have made and framed man of the dust of the earth, thou
beatest him to dust again: And as thou made him by thy Word alone, So with
thy Word thou suddenly turnest, and beatest him again to dust; as a man that
makes a thing, and presently marres it again.

Hence we learn:

1. That as it is God by whom we live; So it is he by whom and whose means we
die: By what means soever men come to their ends, whether by a timely or
untimely death, God has the maine stroke. The sword that takes away our life,
must go out of his mouth, before we can die. Its he that says, Return, Oh
son of man! before a man can return to dust. So then let us not so much
regard the threats and brags of men: but let us that fear death, fear the
Lord that gave life. For he only quickneth, he only kills. Deuteronomy. 32. 39. 1 Samuel 2. 6.


2. He does it with a word, against which is no resistance, when that word is
once come out of his mouth, it is not all the diet Physic, and help, and
prayers in the world that can save the life, And this he can do suddenly, in
the twinkling of an eye. And therefore we should, as we love our lives, fear
him, and take heed how we offend and displease him, that can with a word turn
the strongest man into dust.

3. The style that God gives to man, when he calls him out of this world, is
the Child of Adam, and of Dust: as if he said; Thou art but the Child of dust;
of dust thou art made; thou art sprung from them that were but dust, and which
are all turned unto dust; go thou also to dust.

So that we should think seriously of the matter that we are made of, and be
humbled with the consideration thereof; And herein justify the Lord in his
dealing. For why may not he that has made us of dust, turn us again unto
dust?

And this should teach us to take heed how we place our maine and principal
hope in Man, who is but the child of dust, who must return to dust Psalm. 146.
3, 4.
as soon as God calls him, and bids him return.

4 This shows the absolute power which the Lord has over these bodies of
ours. A Potter has not more power over the vessel of clay that he makes.
Which as it should teach us to take heed how we murmur and repine against GOD
for ought he does in this kind: so it should likewise admonish us, to use our
bodies whilst we have them, and before we and they return to dust again,
to his glory; That so from dust they may be raised again by him to
immortality.

VERSE. 4. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday that is past,
and as a Watch in the night.
THe Prophet shows further in this part of his complaint, that God does as it
were suddenly raise up a man and break him again, because that in his eyes a
thousand years are but as yesterday that is passed; and as a watch in the
night. Now if it be so with God in regard of his eternity, that a thousand
years are but as yesterday, and the fourth part of a night; then surely in his
eyes the life of man, though he should live to threescore and ten, is but
short; as short as if a man should make a thing, and mar it within a quarter
of an hour, yea, in the very same minute or moment almost.

Hence we learn.

1. Not to measure length of time by the time we spend here, though we were
sure to live till eighty or a hundred years, but to measure it by Gods
eternity; to consider what it is in respect of God, and of theirs that live
with God, and are in grace and favor with him. For surely when they have
enjoyed his presence a thousand years in all bliss, they are no whit then
weary thereof, nor is it but as if they had been with him but an hour.

2. This is a terror to the wicked, for though they be a thousand years in
hell, yet with God it is but as yesterday. Which shows the extreme folly of
them, that for a little pleasure in this life, which is so uncertain, and so
momentary, do so little regard eternal woe.

3. The consideration of this should persuade that God has made us for another
end then to live here. For we may not think he would with such endeavor make
Man in his own Image, to destroy it suddenly again, and to no other purpose;
But he destroys man, and makes him return to dust again, that he may
translate him to another condition of life. And therefore our life here is but
a way to another.

VERSE. 5. Thou carryest them away as with a Flood --
THE Prophet having before showed what mortality God has subjected the sons
of Adam unto: how he does make them, and as it were the same day, yea, the same
hour that he has made them, mar and destroy them again, a thousand years
in his sight being as yesterday, or but as it were the eyghth part of a day.

He proceeds now to set forth this condition of Man more plainly by three
Comparisons.

In the first Comparison, he resembles him in respect of his life to those
things that are violently carryed-away in an Inundation. As we see in great and
extraordinary floods and inundations, all that is in the way, Beast and
Cattle, and all that are within the force of the stream are carried violently
away; so it is with man: God does as it were set open certain flood-gats
against him, and by violent streams and inundations of waters, as it were, he
sweepes him away. For (as he showed us before) the time that we live here,
though we live more then the ordinary period of man's days is with God but a
very short time, but as a watch in the night, the fourth part of the night. It
continually flows, and flows faster, swifter, and with greater violence then
the strongest stream; and it carries us with it; and the course thereof we
cannot stay, no more then the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, or the courses of
the Sun and Moon. Against this stream we cannot swim, but the more we
shall strive against it, the faster we shall be carried away with it.

Hence the Prophet teaches us.

To meditate seriously of the swift passage of our days, how our life runs
away like a stream of waters, and carries us with it; our condition in the
eyes of God, in regard of our life in this world being but as if a man that
knows not how to swim, should be cast into a great stream of water, and
headlong carried down in it, so that he may sprawle sometime, lift up his head
or his hands, cry for help, catch hold of this thing and that for a time; but
his end will be drowning, and it is but a small time that he can hold out, but
that as it carries him away, so it will swallow him up. And surely our life
here if it be rightly considered, is but like the life of such a person, as is
violently carried down a stream. All the actions and motions of our life, and
for it, are but like unto the striuings and struglings of a man in that case:
Our eating, our drinking, our Physic, our sports, and all other means, they
are but like his motions, that is violently carried down the stream: When we
have done what we can, die we must, and be drowned in this Deluge.

The use of this consideration may be to teach us.

1. The vanity of Men, that think here upon earth, to build them everlasting
habitations, and never to be removed; and that trouble their minds about
nothing but how they may get sure houlds and tenures here. Alas what vanity
were in this man that is carried down a violent stream of water, that has no
hope to recover himself, but is sure, howsoever for some small time he
breathes and has his senses, to be drowned out of hand, yet whilst he breaths
and has his senses, to be thinking, and fore-casting of building of houses, of
purchasing lands, of planting orchards, and of providing this thing and that
thing for his use for forty or sixty years to come.

2. This should teach us in the want of the means of this life, for our selves
and posterity, to be content to take it less to heart, then worldly and
covetous persons use to do. Who in fears and distrusts in regard of the time
to come, how they shall do when they are old and not able to work, how they
shall live when such and such friends be gone, how their children shall do when
they are dead; many times in the abundance, for the present, of those things
which others before their eyes do want, live most miserably and uncomfortably,
yea, a life worse then death, and that only for thinking of the time to come,
whereas if these persons would think how mortal they, and their children are,
how short a time they have to live here, how they are carried away as it were
with a flood, they and their children, and all else, these matters would never
so much run in their heads, neither would they vex and trouble themselves and
others so much about them as they do: But now we dream of immortality in this
life, and put from us as much as we can the hour of our death, So living and
desiring to live here, as if we should live ever here, or there were no living
else where. Were not they stark mad that seeing their children carried away
with a flood, struggling and breathing in the waters for life, and ready to be
drowned, and no hope of pulling them out, would be carking and caring, and
vexing themselves, how they should provide for them? Nay, let Christians,
seeing their lives are so short, here comfort themselves in their wants and
their childrens, and labor so that small time they have to live, that after
this short and transitory life, they and their children may live eternally in
Heaven.

-- They are as a sleep. --

THE second Comparison follows, wherein the Prophet compares the life of man
and all the pleasures and sorrows accompanying the same to a sleep. Alas,
what sooner passes away? What is easier broken off then sleep? how short also
are the pleasures and sorrows that are in sleep? Surely the whole state and
condition of a man in this life is but like the state and condition of a man in
sleep: all things fall out so like in either.

Our life may be compared to sleep in four respects.

1. In regard of the shortness of it. 2. In regard of the easiness of being
put out of it. 3. In regard of the many means to disquiet and break it off.
4. In regard of the many errors in it.
For the first three; sleep is but short: and the sweeter it is, the shorter
it seems to be. And as it is but short of it self, though it should last the
full swinge of nature: So the soundest sleep, is easily broken; the least
knock, the lowest call puts men out of it; and a number of means and occasions
there be to interrupt and break it off. And is not it so with the life of man?
Is not the longest life short? Is it not the shorter, the sweeter and fuller of
contents it is? And is it not easily taken away? Are there not many means to
bring us unto our ends? Even as many as there are to waken us out of sleep?

For the fourth, how many errors are we subject to in sleep?

In sleep the Prisoner many times dreams that he is at liberty; he that is
at liberty, that he is in Prison; he that is hungry, that he is feeding
daintily; He that is in want, that he is in great abundance; He that abounds,
that he is in great want. How many in their sleep have thought they have
gotten that, which they shall be better for for ever, and when they are even in
the hope of present possessing some such goodly matter, or beginning to enjoy
it, or in the midst of their joy, they are suddenly awaked, and then all is
gone with them, and their golden fancies vanish away in an instant. So for
evil and sorrow as well.

And is it not just so in the life of Man? Whose life passes sooner away or
swifter then theirs that have most comforts and sweetest? Whose life is longer
then theirs in seeming, that live least at ease? Who are ordinarily more bound,
more in trouble, have greater vexation, and disquiet, then those that have most
liberty and abundance? Who are freer and more at liberty, and want least,
then they that have least? How ordinary a thing is it for men in the most
abundance to be least satisfied? And in the poorest cottage to find the
greatest content? And how suddenly are men even as if they had been in a
dream cut off from all their hopes, all their delights and pleasures, that in
this world they enjoyed?

The use hereof then is;

1. To teach us, to account of the things that merely concern this life, the
profits, the pleasures, the honors of it, but as of dreams; such as are
transitory, and pass away as a sleep, that we can have no certainty or
assurement of, but such as we may be deprived of even as easily, as we may be
broken of our sleep.

2. To watch and take heed how we look to place any settled comfort in this
life, or the things of this life. For we shall find as many errors in it and
the things thereof, as we do in sleep. Men may fancy this and that, but the
issue will be nothing: no more then of him who going to bed hungry, dreams he
eats, etc.

3. This should teach Christians not to envy, and malice the comforts, honors,
and prosperity of wicked men: for they are but as dreams: thou have much
cause, have thou not? to envy a poor man, that he should fare daintily in a
dream.

4. It should make us think the less of the sorrows and miseries of this
life, that either our selves or others endure. Our selves here are but as a
sleep. The sorrows that we endure here, especially for righteousness, are
but as a dream. Our sleep will soon end, and our sorrows will end with
them, and we shall see that we were but deluded herein.

5. Never to think that we do the actions of Men that are truly waking, but
when we do the actions that concern the life to come, where we shall ever
watch, and need no sleep; where we shall ever rejoice, and never be deluded.

-- In the morning they are like grass that grows.

VERSE. 6. In the morning it flourishes, and grows up: in the evening it is
cut down, and withers.
THE third Comparison follows, wherein the life of Man is compared to grass.
That as it is with grass; A man shall see it flourishing in the morning, and
the same day cut down and withered; So is man; This day flourishing and
lusty, and to morrow laid in the dust; Nay, as it were in the morning well,
and before night he and all his strength and glory vanished and gone.

1. The consideration of this should teach men in the midst of all their glory
and state in this life, to think what a fading thing it is, how soon it is
cut down and withered. And therefore we should take heed, how we set our hearts
upon these transitory things: for, as Meadows, when they are most pleasant,
and fullest of variety of flowers, they are then suddenly cut down, and all
the beauty of them vanished; So it shall be with all things that in this world
we delight in, whether life, or honor and riches, though a man flourish never
so much in them; yet as it were the same day, they shall be taken from him, and
he from them; and then their hearts will be as gone with them, that had their
hearts before set on them. Let us therefore learn to set our hearts upon
another life, and the things thereof: and then we shall be sure never to loose
that we love. And let us strive to be Plants in Gods house, living Plants,
trees of righteousness, Planted by the rivers of his Sanctuary. And then we
shall never be cut down: Our leaves shall never fall, our branches never
wither.

2. Let us learn so to love this life, and all things of this life, as matter
that we must part with, that we have no Lease or Assurance of for one day. And
where God makes them instruments of comfort and help unto us, if we enjoy them
day after day, let us bless God for it, and count every day that he lends us,
and every blessing that he bestows upon us day after day, an advantage unto us
more then we deserve.

3. Let us every morning, fit and prepare our selves for cutting down. Though
we be never so lusty, and flourish never so much, yet let us consider, that
we are but as grass; and though this morning we flourish, yet before night we
may be cut down and withered; and all our glory and comforts lie in the dust.
It were well with us if we so lived, that when death shall come to cut us
down, we could not say, I little thought that I should die so soon.

And for others whose lives are dear unto us, and whose deaths may be a
judgment unto us; let us so set our sins before our eyes, that they may be a
means to work in us an holy and religious fear of their death, in the midst
of these comforts and contents we receive from them; And how strong and
flourishing so ever we shall see them in the morning, yet let us think with
fear, that before evening they may be cut down, and we may loose them, and all
the comforts that depend upon them.

VERSE. 7. For we are consumed in thine anger; and by thy wrath are we troubled.
HItherto the Prophet in his complaint has set forth by Comparison, what great
mortality God has brought upon the Children of Adam. Now here in this verse
he shows the cause thereof; The anger of God. Adam and all the sons of Adam
have offended him: and therefore he has brought this universal mortality and
deluge upon man. And this Anger of GOD he sets forth;

1. By the cause. 2. By the greatness.
Concerning the anger of God, we must not think, that it is a perturbation of
mind in him, whereby he indeed fretteth, and is vexed within himself, as men
use to be, whose wrath and anger does ordinarily more hurt and torment
themselves, then those they are angry withal. But it is in God an holy and
just disposition, to inflict deserved punishment upon his creature. Though God
therefore have absolute power of his own free will to destroy the creature
which he has made without any cause, yet he does not destroy man without some
special cause, and motive thereunto. And this cause is not a pleasure and
delight, as though it should be a sport and pastime of God to make and mar so
excellent a workmanship of his own; as it is with Children to kill Flies, or
Huntsmen to kill wild Beasts. Neither is any special profit, or use, any cause
thereof; As it is the cause, why Husbandmen cut down grass, not that they are
angry with it, or that they place any delight in so doing, but for necessary
use and benefit. But the true and immediate cause is Anger; that which is the
cause of mortality in war. God has been provoked by us. And as a mighty
King being provoked by his subjects, nothing follows but death; so is it with
God.

1. Hence then we learn to labor to see, and behold the wrath and anger of
God, in sickness, distresses, old age, death, and in that mortality that we
see in this world; and upon special occasion to acknowledge it.

And it should teach us, to fear and tremble before him, and to take heed, how
we farther provoke him to wrath.

2. We should admire the goodness and grace of God, that his wrath being so
universal upon all the sons of Adam, yet in this wrath he should remember
mercy, and raise those again to life, even to eternal life, that in anger he
has wounded to death.

3. We should labor more to see the wrath of God in our accursed estate after
this life. God does but play with us, as it were, in taking away our lives
here. And if the first death be such a sign thereof, what a sign thereof is it
in them in whom there appear fearful and prodigious fignes of the second
death, which is eternal, wherein a man shall for ever die, and yet never be
dead.

VERSE. 8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee; our secret sins in the
light of thy countenance.
THat wrath of God from which proceeds mortality, and all the troubles and
calamities and alterations of this life that attend upon the same, is set forth
here; 1. By the cause, 2. By the greatness of it.

The cause is the remembrance of our sins not known only but secret.

Whence we learn, that

1. It is sin, that first kindled that fire of GODS wrath, whereby we are
consumed on this wise. God is not angry with his creatures for nothing. But
there is a just cause of that wrath of God, from whence proceeds the
mortality of mankind. Yea, the greater and more infinitely wise the Majesty
of God is, the greater must that cause be that provoke him to wrath. Its
weakness to be provoked with a small matter: Weakness nor no property of
weakness can befall the Almighty God. Sin therefore, whatsoever it is, can
be no small matter, no trifle, that prouokes the infinite Majesty of God to
wrath, and to such a wrath as has such deadly effects.

The use of this then is.

When we see any signs of Gods displeasure in the world; (as which way almost
can we turn our eyes but we see it? even the very prints of death, how his
footing is in every Town, yea, in every House?) presently to think of sin,
and the greatness thereof, and to make it a means to make us have it in great
detestation, in whom soever it is.

2. It is our sins that have provoked God to this wrath. It was not the sin
of Angels, that made God thus angry with mankind: Nor the sin of any
particular persons that made him angry with them all. But it is our own sins,
that have done this: All of us, every mothers son have our parts, and have
joined hands in provoking the Lord to bring this universal mortality upon the
world:

The true use therefore, that we are to make of this, Is not so much to think
of sin in general, or of this or that bodies sin, when we see the general
judgments of God; but to see and look after our own sins, wherein we have
trespassed against God, and broken his Law; and not rest till we have found
them out. Especially when the Lord by any special judgment shall come nearest
unto us; (As the Lord has lately to this family:) If we hereupon do not make
a special inquisition after our sins, and so by Repentance make our peace
with God, we have cause even every one of us to fear a greater stroke, though
this has made many of our hearts to ache.

3. They are not only our greater sins, that have provoked God; but all our
sins, great and small; not our public only, and known sins, but our
special and hidden ones; every one of them has his part herein. And if we
will not have this wrath of God to pursue us eternally, we must learn hence,
not only to hate and forsake our greater sins, and to repent of those that
are great and notorious, but even of our smaller sins, of our lighter vanities
also. Yea, herein we should not content our selves with leaving those sins
which other and our selves know to be sins; but we should seek after our
secret and hidden sins, whither there be not some sins in us that we nourish
in our selves, and know not to be sins. And to this end, we should diligently
search into the Law of God, and not be at rest till we have taken notice of
them: and give no leave of continuance to any the least sin, but hate and
forsake all.

4. That all our sins are present before GOD. Our great, our small, our known,
our secret sins, they are all in his presence, they are before his eyes, he
knows them, he sees, and beholds them. This should make us the more afraid and
ashamed to sin; because there is no sin how secret soever, but we do it in
the face of God, he looking on. A servant that has any grace or love in him,
whatsoever he may do behind his masters back, yet he will not do that before
his Masters face which may provoke and displease him; many things he does
privately, that if he thought they would come to his Masters knowledge, he
would not do them: But there is no sin ever so secret, though committed in
our Closet, yea, though in our own breasts only, but he knows it, and sees
it, and beholds the committing of it.

Further, this notes the hay nousnesse of all sin. For those trespasses that
are committed before the face of a Governor, are accounted contempts. So is
every sin committed; it is committed in the ear and eye of God: and is
therefore the more grievous and odious.

5. God needs no other light to discern our sins by, but the light of his
own face. It peirceth through the darkest places: the brightness thereof
enlightneth all things, discouers all things. So that the sins that are
committed in deepest darkness, are all one to him as if they were done in the
face of the Sun. For they are done in his face, that shines more, and from
which proceeds more light then from the face of the Sun. So that this, it
ought to make us the more fearful to offend, He sees us when we see not him,
and the light of his countenance shines about us, when we think our selves
hidden in darkness.

6. They are not only then in his sight when they are a committing, and whilst
the deed is doing; but ever after, when the act is past and gone, and
forgotten, yet then is it before the face of God, even as if it were in
committing: And how should this make us afraid to sin? When our sins are
not only in his sight while they are a committing, but so continue still for
ever after they are past and done.

7. Gods sets our sins before him; this shows he is so affected with them, he
takes them so to heart, that he does in a special manner continue the
remembrance of them. As those that having had great wrong, will store it up, or
register it, or keep some remembrance of it or other, least they should
forget, when time shall serve, to be quit with those that have wronged them;
so does God, and his so-doing is a sign, that he takes our sins deeply to
heart; which should teach us to fear the more how we offend him. When God in
any judgment of death, or sickness, or loss of friends shows his wrath, we
should think and meditate of this; especially when he comes nearest us, Now
the Lord looks upon my sins; they are now before him; and we should never
rest till we had by repentance moved him to blot them out. Yea, to this end we
should our selves call them to remembrance. For the more we remember them, the
more God forgets them: the more we forget them, the more God remembers them;
the more we look upon our selves, the more he turns his eyes from them.

And this also we are to manifest and acknowledge, as here Moses does unto God
himself by Prayer.

VERSE. 9. For all our days (...)*
go back again in thy wrath. --
HItherto of the cause of that wrath of GOD which moves him to smite the world
with such mortality. Now here he further sets forth the same by the effects
and degrees thereof in respect of that present Argument he has in hand.

1. That our days do as it were go backward in his wrath: That whereas God
gave us being to live, our life and our being is nothing else but a going
backward as it were to death, and to nothing. Even as if a stranger being
suddenly rapt and carried the mid way to his home, where are all his comforts,
he should spend all the time that is behind, not in going forward to his home,
but in going backward to the place from which he was suddenly brought. All the
sons of Adam as soon as they have being and live are brought suddenly a
great part of their way: And whereas they should go forward and live longer
and longer, they from their first beginning to live go backward again to
death, and to nothing. This is the sum in effect with that which the Lord
says in the beginning of the Psalm, Thou Verse 3.
bringesi man to destruction; saying, Return again ye sons of Adam: As if he
should say, Thou make a man, and when he is made, he in thy wrath does have
to nothing else, but destruction, and to be marred again. Thus do our days
as it were go backward, and we in them return from whence we came.

Our lesson then hence is this.

That our life in this life is nothing else but a returning back again unto
death. Every man, whilst he is here, walks to the house of his grave; and
though he be a little longer in going back unto the earth, then he was
coming from it; yet he does nothing while he is here but go back to it. Yea,
our days pass away in such a manner, as if a man, being a child should
suddenly be made a man; and after that should presently go back again, and
be a child. So that though we have here some time of growth and strength; yet
the more we grow in strength and years, the nearer we draw still to the place
from whence we came. In so much that there be none of us but are nearer to our
end to day then yesterday, and this hour then the hour that is past. And
though some walk backward more slowly somewhat then others do; yet all go one
way; and no body knows how swiftly, or how soon he shall come to his end.

The use hereof.

1. This should teach us every day to meditate and think seriously of our
death, and the grave. It is the place that we are continually travailing unto.
All the days and years we live, go backward as it were with us, and carry us
backward thither. So that which way soever our faces are, we move and go
thitherward. Since Adams fall all men are condemned and adjudged unto one death
at the least; and our life here is nothing else but a going to the place of
execution. How then should we not think of our end? Is it possible for
condemned Malefactors, whilst they are going to the place of death, to forget
wher-about they go? And yet though all our life be naught else but a leading
to death, yet ordinarily nothing less troubles our minds; and we so live, as
if death should never come near us, or we it. Nay, though we see many both
near us and far off us die before us, and we know that our condition is the
same; yet we lay it little to heart, as if we alone were exempted from the
common condition of all Adams issue.

2. This should teach us also, whilst we do live here, to behave our selves in
that manner, that we may die with comfort. And this should be it that in this
life should most trouble us, and about which we should most beat our brains,
how we should so die that we might eternally live. But alas that which runs
altogether in our minds whilst we live here, is about the means of our living
here, how we shall do for this year and the next, and the other year after
that; and how our children should do after us: never taking thought for the
maine: which is as if parents and children being altogether drawn upon a Sled,
or carried in a Cart, for diverse days to execution, and the means of this
life being left them only for this end, to bring them thither; they should
never trouble their minds about that that they were drawn unto, but should
be carking and caring, how they should do, and their children for this thing
and that thing concerning this life.

The second point is that our days go thus backward in the wrath of God: that
is to say; through the just judgment of God upon the sin of Man it comes to
pass, that our days thus return and go backward, and pass away.

This then is our lesson:

That every day whilst we live here is a day of wrath; an evil day, subject
to some judgment or other. Few and evil (says old Jacob) be the days of my
Pilgrimage. All things under the Sun are Genes. 47. 9. Eccles. 2. 11, 17.
nothing but matter of vanity and vexation of spirit. The best of Gods Saints
have found nothing here that this life and world has brought forth, but matter
of sorrow. What day is it that passes over our heads, but we might easily
perceive it (if we were not besotted,) marked with Gods wrath, bringing with it
some judgment and Memorandum or other of Gods anger for sin? There is not a
day nor hour that passes over our heads, but that we might, if we looked
about us, and considered the judgments that some way or other cleave to us,
See, that it is in some respect or other passed away in wrath.

The use of this serves:

1. To reprove those that have no sense and fecling thereof; but so pass away
their time and days whilst they have them, as though they were under no wrath
and judgment at all; But all were well and sure between God and them: That
glory in their days past, how merrily they have lived, and how many comforts
they have had; such as never felt any wrath of God past, nor fear any to come,
but say ordinarily in their madd moods; Away with sorrow; let the world slide,
etc.

2. It should teach us to labor every day that passes, to mark and observe
wherein God has manifested unto us his wrath for sin. For there is no day
but brings terrible remembrance thereof, not in others only, but in our
selves. So that if we consider the Revolution of times, we shall be able to
say, that there is not a day, nor an hour passed over our heads, but it is
marked with the wrath of God by some judgment or other for sin: yea, and the
very passing of it away (it uses to go in such a manner) is in wrath.

3. The more our days that are gone, are passed in wrath, the more in those
that are to come we should labor to appease and pacify that wrath, and seek
after the means of our attonment with God. Its a desperate madness, when we
shall perceive that God for the time past has showed himself angry with us,
to have no care for the time to come, to prevent further indignation.

4. This should make the children of God that have any grounded hope for life
to come, to lessen their stay on and delight in this life; and delight in their
hope and means of that life, wherein never a day shall pass away in wrath, but
all in love, favor, and glory; and wherein the days of our life shall not be
a returning to death, but a going on from life to life, and joy to joy; when we
shall live to live; and the longer we shall live, the longer we shall have to
live; and that in all happiness and glory, which days and times shall never
wast. Whilst we live here, (if we had hearts to consider of things as they
are,) there is never a day goes over our head, but yields matter of sighing,
and groaning under some act or other of Gods wrath, do we the best we can.
Yea, let a man have the greatest causes of comfort, both for this world and the
world to come, that the world can afford, or that any man ever had, yet when he
shall sum up his accounts, he shall find the days he lives here are but days
of evil; and he shall see more cause of sorrow and mourning then of joy. Let
this therefore win us from this life, and the days thereof; And let the bitter
of Gods wrath here make us the more seek after the days of eternity; wherein
there shall be no sense thereof in the least cross or affliction.

-- We spend our years as a tale that is told.

THe Prophet here further amplifieth the aforesaid effect of Gods wrath:
showing in what manner our days pass away, even as a tale that is told, a
meditation or thought that is conceived and gone. A tale is quickly told; a
word is soon spoken, and a thought or meditation is soon conceived. So are
the years of a man, especially if we compare them with things above, and with
the days and years that we are to live in heaven. So that let a man look
back to the time passed, and wisely judge of it, and set to it the uttermost
of the time to come, and all will appear to pass away from us, either as the
time wherein a tale is told, or those things pass away that are told in a
tale, which is very quickly and speedily.

1. This shows the vanity of them that make such a-doe for states, and
titles, and tenures for this life. Oh they think it a goodly matter, if they
have and hold a thing for so many lives, and for theirs and their childrens
lives. And yet alas it is, if it be compared with the life of Heaven, but as if
it were a tenure for the space of a tale telling, or a word spoken. And what
madness then is it, that most men show, to hazard the one to get the other,
that they care not almost how they break the Laws of God and Man for it?
Surely the little faith and hope or none that we have of the life to come,
makes persons so dote and mad upon the titles and tenures of this life, which
are of the same nature that our days and years are, they pass away all alike.

2. It shows also the vanity of such, who as though their days and years
would never come unto an end, spend day after day, and year after year in
that they call pas-time: whereas time passes away of it self swift enough,
and that in Gods wrath. It were more agreeable to reason, if it could be, to
use means to hold and continue time, rather then to pass it away.

3. Let this teach us, whilst we have it, to make the best use we can of it.
When our years are gone, we cannot revoke them. How soon they are gone, the
holy Ghost here teaches, and we may feel by our own experience. Therefore
whilst we live here, let us not so much trouble our thoughts about the means
of this life, as about devising how we may employ our time, and spend our life
to best purpose.

4. Though we are to count the shortness of our lives, in regard of the misery
thereof, and in regard of the life which follows, a blessing; Yet in it self
we should not so account of it: but tho it be miserable, and the longer it is
the longer it keeps us from a better; yet the very shortness of this
miserable life is to be considered as an effect of Gods wrath: And therefore it
is a blessing of God, if we know how to use it, to live long here, though we
should live as miserable a life as any ever lived. Neither should we endeavor
or desire to do any thing to shorten the same.

VERSE. 10. The days of our years are seventy years: and if by reason of
strength they be eighty years, yet is their strength then labor and sorrow:
for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.
IN these words the Prophet proves that which he said before, that we spend
our years as a tale that is told. The years of them which ordinarily live the
uttermost of their days is but threescore and ten, and if any live till
eighty through strength, yet is their strength then labor and sorrow, etc.
Now if the longest period of days that men ordinarily live, be so short a
time, and the longest time flies so fast, then well might the Prophet say,
That our days pass away as a tale that is told. For those who by reason of
their strength live till 2 Samuel 19. 35.
eighty years, either they are men that undergo in this life many labors
and travels, and then their very strength brings nothing unto them but matter
of labor and sorrow; For, the stronger a man has been, and the greater
labors and travels he has undergone, the more full of aches and pains is his
old age wont to be: Or they live merrily and chearefully, free from ordinary
passions and grievances; And then their life flies away, and when they are
brought to these years, their days are but days of sorrow, and that with
them the rather, because they cannot follow those delights then, that formerly
they have done. Howsoever it be, there are none commonly whose days have
seemed to them to pass swifter away, then those that lived the longest; None
are less weary of life, nor more unwilling to die commonly then they. The life
therefore of such, though full of never so much sorrow and trouble flies away.
And such is the love that ordinarily we bear to this life, that though death
come not till eighty years, yet it seems then to fly unto us.

The Doctrine is plain.

That our days are now but seventie years, that is to say; The time, that
ordinarily man do not pass in this life, is no more; or if more, their life
after is but a Death, and Death comes flying.

1. This then should teach us also to remember Eccles. 12. 1.
our Creator betimes in the days of our youth. Alas, not one of a hundred of
us live till sixty or seventy years, or if we live longer, and have spent
that time in profaneness, except the Lord show more then ordinary mercy, we
shall be no more fit then to honor our Creator then so many dead men. The
longest that we can hope to live and not be children again is eighty years;
and then commonly we are as children again mewed up, and our children are
either Parents or Lords over us, using us as innocents.

2. It shows the strange folly of so many of us as are come to the height and
middle of our Age, yea, to be fistie and upward, yea, to be sixty, etc. We
can talk of our days past, and of things we did forty years since, as if
they were done but yesterday; and for the time to come, though we have no
reason to hope it should be as much as we have spent, and though we may
presume it will fly as fast away as that which is past in the whole, though
not in the parts; yet we live as though we had a 100 years, yea a 1060 years
to come. Yea, You shall have many that are of 60. 70. yea, 80. years, that have
no more care to fit them to death, but put the hour thereof as far from
them, as if they were in their freshest youth. If some lived a 100. some 500.
some a 1000. some 10000. years amongst us; as now they live some 5. some 10.
some 40. some 60. some 70. etc. there might be some color for this folly: but
seeing one of 500. lives not til 60. one of 5000. til 80. one of 100000. till a
hundred: None till 200. what madness it is then, especially in those that have
passed the greatest time they can expect, to have no care of the hour of
death, and of the account they shall then make, when their whole time is but
short, as a tale that is told: As you shall have old men in a tale of less
then an hour long, run over all their life.

VERSE. 11. Who knows the power of thine anger? Even according to thy fear,
so is thy wrath.
THE Prophet in this 11. verse, concludes his Complaint; and in the same
complains of the dullness of Mankind, that whereas GOD shows such signs of
his wrath, they have no sense or understanding of the power thereof.

The second part of this verse, is somewhat doubtful: word for word in the
Hebrew it is thus. And according to thy fear thy wrath. Our Translatours (as
you hear) translate it otherwise; and therein follow learned men that went
before them. And the words, if necessity require it, will bear such a
construction, and teach a profitable truth; to wit, That howsoever the wicked
do not know the (...) of Gods wrath; Yet those that fear God, know and
understand the same. But I had rather here take the words more simply, and read
them thus.

Who knows the (...) of thine anger; and of thy power
wrath according to thy fear?

That is to say; How rare a thing is it, to find a man, that has any true
sense and understanding of this thy mighty wrath, or that makes any religious
use thereof?

The first Doctrine we hence observe is;

That Christians ought to mark and observe the power and force of Gods wrath,
in all those particulars, wherein he shows it. It is not enough for us to
know, that God is a merciful God, and loving, and gracious, but we must know
also, that he is an angry and a wrathful God: yea, that he is exceedingly
angry, when he is provoked the unto. And therefore we must not only consider,
and understand the signs, tokens, and effects of his love and kindness in the
world, but the signs of his wrath also. For in both he manifests himself; and
from both he looks to reap glory: and he is no less powerful in the one
then in the other: And in our lives and conversations there is as much use of
the one as of the other. Yea, a man shall never be able to discern or make any
good and true use of Gods love, That does not first regard, mark, and labor
to understand his wrath.

The second Doctrine is;

That it is not enough to know that God is angry; but that his anger is
powerful, he is mighty in his wrath, (Vanae sine viribus irae, That anger
that is without strength is nothing:) and therefore to be feared and trembled
at. Many of us can talk of and observe the wrath of God in this or that
particular: but we use to make a matter of nothing of it; we are not ordinarily
affected with it so much as with the anger of any man that has but the least
power to hurt us. But the less we mark and know it here, the more we shall
know and feel it hereafter.

The third Doctrine:

That the greatness and force of Gods wrath shines and shows it self in the
mortality of mankind aforesaid. So that if there were no other Argument to
show that God is angry, and that his anger is exceeding powerful; The general
mortality of mankind is sufficient to show the same. Who can deny that he
was angry when he drowned the whole world; when he destroyed the first borne
in Egypt; when he overwhelmed the host of the Egyptians in the red Sea; when
he destroyed all his own people in the Wilderness that came out of Egypt?
Verily if we could well consider of the matter, It can be no less sign of
Gods wrath, that at some time or other after, after some manner or other, every
man in the world must die; And that so many Ages before us are dead.

The fourth Doctrine.

That it is a rare thing for any man to conceive aright, or to understand that
God is angry: or that there is any such fear in his anger. Many so live and
follow such courses, as if they were persuaded, that God could not be angry, or
that, if he were angry, it were as easy a matter to please him, as a child.
Hence when they have over-shot themselves in any sin, if they say, God
forgive me, or, I cry God mercy, they think all is well, and they shall never
hear more of the matter. When men trespass against a man, if they think they
have hindered themselves by it, how careful, how diligent are they to pacify
his anger, and to seek to regaine his favor and good will again? Whereas the
neglect hereof to Godward, when they have offended him, shows evidently that
they little regard his anger, or esteem it not prejudicial at all to them.

The fifth Doctrine;

That it is not enough, to know the force of Gods wrath; but we must make a
right use thereof: We must thereby be stirred up to fear the Lord, and to
tremble before his Majesty; and take heed how any thing may either incense, or
continue his anger.

And we should take heed also how his anger prouokes us to anger, or to any
sin whatsoever, that may further provoke him.

VERSE. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.
HItherto of the Prophets Complaint of the mortality of Mankind.

Now unto this Complaint he annexeth certain petitions; wherein he craves of
God such gifts and graces as are most needful for men in respect of their
mortality aforesaid.

In which Petitions the Prophet prays;

1. For divine Instruction. 2. For divine Consolation.
His Petition for divine Instruction is contained in this twelfth verse; and
there are four things therein expressed:

1. The gift desired; 2. The persons for whom it is desired; 3. The means
whereby the gift desired may be obtained; 4. The end for which it is desired.
1. The gift and grace desired is that we might so number our days, etc.

Now to number our days is rightly to judge and discern of that time, that we
have to live in this world.

This numbering of our days, consists in these particulars.

1. In a due consideration of the uttermost time that we can hope to live here;
which is but till we be 70. or 80. years of Age. Not one of five thousand
lives longer; or if he live some few days or years longer, his life is unto
him but as death: the world grows weary of him, and he of the world. So that
we so live here, as men that make account to live no longer.

2. In comparing the smallness of this number, with that number of days that
we shall live in another world. Alas, what is eighty years to eternity?
When we shall lie a thousand thousand years, and be as far from death as
the first day we began to live.

3. In considering how much of our time is already past, that cannot be
revoked: and that we must deduct and draw out of that number of 70. or 80.
some of us have spent of the maine sum 10. 20. 30. 40. years: and so the one
and better half is gone.

4. In considering the uncertainty of those days that are to come; that there
is not a day nor an hour that we can make any certain reckoning off, that it
shall be a day or an hour unto us: it is the present instant only that we are
sure off.

5. In making account, as for the time past, so for the time to come, that a
great part of it shall be spent in sorrow, and travail, and pain, and
distraction. So that if we shall deduct all those days, which when they are
come, we shall wish they were gone; and before they do come, we wish they
might never come, it will diminish the maine sum exceedingly.

The second point is the persons for whom this grace is desired.

The Prophet desires it for himself, and for all Gods Children; Teach us,
says he, to number our days.

Whence observe we, that it concerns every Child of God to be skillful
herein, even in the numbering of his days: that is, to consider seriously of
the shortness and uncertaintie of his life in this world, and accordingly to
make reckoning and account of his time here. So that the fewer our days are,
the better use we should make of them. The more uncertain our time to come
is, the better we should employ the time present. For those things that we
number and reckon, we use to make reckoning off: And those things that we make
reckoning of, we do not negligently and carelessly spend. So that the spirit
of God teaching us to number and reckon our days, teaches us therein to make
reckoning of them, and in that regard not to mis-spend them.

Now first this condemns the practice of most men; especially, our Gentlemen,
and many of their Servants: who care not how they pass away day after day, and
week after week; as though nothing were more troublesome to them then the day
present. To day they wish for to morrow: when to morrow is come, they are as
weary of it; and devise this and that, not to make use and benefit of the day,
but to spend it and pass it away with idleness: and they think that day is
best spent, that is most lightly, and merrily flowne over their head.

2. This should teach Gods children to repent them unfeignedly of so many days
as have passed over their head without profit: And it should teach them to make
more use of the time to come: Even to resolve with themselves, that no day to
come shall pass away vainly and idly; but that they will make some special
use and reckoning of it: And therefore this day to think what good use they
shall put the morrow to, if God spare them life, and so one day after another.
But the Heathen Painter will rise up in Judgment to condemn many of us
Christians: If any day had passed, wherein he had not done some work belonging
to his Art, It is reported he would have sighed and said, Oh this day have I
drawn never a line. What a shame then should it be for any Christian to pass
day after day without drawing any line, or doing ought that to their Christian
profession appertains?

The third Point, to wit; the means by which the Grace desired is to be
obtained, is by being taught of God. So that it must be obtained,

1. In general, by Teaching: 2. In special, by divine Teaching; 3. This
divine Teaching is to be obtained by Prayer. 4 This Prayer must be stirred up
by a sense of our mortality.
1. The first lessen hence then is this, that

The best of Gods children stand in need to be taught to number their days.
If Moses the great Prophet of God, among the rest desired to be taught herein,
it shows that he had not yet thoroughly learned it: and if he had not, who
can say that he has? There is none therefore too good to be taught this: for
certainly we shall the best of us in our experience find it, that we are very
dull and ignorant in this duty. And though we be taught to do and practice it
at some time; yet often we are as far to seek in it as if we had never heard
of it; never thinking of our end, how short our time is, how many days we have
already spent, how few are to come; but we commonly live as though we had so
many days to live, as it were vain and idle to bestow time to number them, as
though we might well spare the numbering of them.

The second lesson;

That except God teach this duty, all other teaching is in vain. It is not
all the wit and learning in the world, that can truly teach it. Though
Philosophers, Orators, and Divines should use the utmost strain of their wits,
they cannot without a special aid and help of God learn this lesson
thoroughly, but they will some way or other sail in it: Those therefore, that
in any good measure have learned it, have been taught it of God.

We should therefore try our ability herein: and if we find that in some good
measure we are enabled to do this duty, let us acknowledge that we have
therein received special grace and favor from God. For without his special
blessing and instruction, we shall never make any good and holy use of those
days and times that we live here; but we shall suffer day after day to pass
over our heads without making any reckoning and account at all of them. This
shows the difficulty of this work.

The third lesson is,

That the special means to move God to teach us to make reckoning and account
of our days, as matters of worth, is Prayer. This the Prophet teaches in his
own example, and speaking in the person of all Gods people: So that those that
have a heart to call upon God herein, shall be sure to find God ready herein
to assist them. If the Spirit of God to this purpose have made a Prayer in the
name of Moses, and the whole Church, surely, if Moses or any servant of God
shall with a good heart make that Prayer, they shall be sure therein to
obtain their desire.

The fourth lesson;

That to stir up our Prayer to God, herein we must be deeply possessed and
affected with the sense of our mortality. And surely, if we did seriously
consider that which has been taught us in the words going before, it could
not but make us to pray earnestly to God for this grace: And there was never
earnest Prayer made to God, that went empty away.

The fourth and last point in this Petition is, why and to what end we are to
number our days thus; to wit, that so we may apply our hearts unto wisdom:
that is, that so we may spend that small and uncertain time, that we have to
live here, in those things that may be most for our behoose and advantage. And
how is that done? surely, by seeking for and pursuing after, whilst we live
here, the means of Gods favor, and life eternal. For therein consists true
wisdom; and this alone deserves the name of Wisdom: all other severed from
this, or not subjected to this, is but mere folly and madness; though it be
esteemed wisdom of those that are possessed with the same folly and madness
themselves.

Now to apply our hearts hereunto, is to bend and spend the strength of our
thoughts and affections that way: that as we see worldly minded men, how their
mind runs altogether upon the world, and the means of this life, and the
humoring and pleasing of them that they look for most from; and all the
stream of their affections flows that way: They are never so merry, as when
the world and the means of this life comes in upon them: they are never so
sad and heavy, as when they have lost, or are in danger to loose any thing
thereof: All the power and faculties of soul and body are set on work, one
way or other about them; at least the very strength of them: So should our
hearts and affections be set upon and carried after this true wisdom, being
seriously bent unto the speedy, and earnest, and constant pursuit of the
grace and favor of God, and life everlasting, and the means whereby they may
be achieved.

Now hence in general we learn*

1. That till we come to number our days, as is aforesaid, all our labors and
endeavors are about naught but stark folly: such as we shall never reap any
sound or solid fruit therefrom, but that which in the end shall be vanity and
vexation of spirit.

2. That we should never think either our selves, or others truly wise, or to
follow wise courses indeed, till we have learned in the first place to number
our days. Yea, till then, the wiser we are, the greater fools shall we show
our selves, though for our humane wisdom we were fit to give Princes
counsel.

3. That it is not enough for the Child of God in a slight manner to follow
Wisdom, but he must set and apply his heart unto it in the same manner, as a
covetous man sets and applies his heart to the getting of goods, an
ambitious man of honor, a voluptuous man of his pleasure, or the like.

More specially we shall by this means, and in this manner apply our hearts
unto Wisdom; when upon the serious consideration of our mortality and
uncertain estate here, and the few days we have here to live; we shall
carefully endeavor,

1. To waine our selves by degrees from the love and delights of this world,
and of the things thereof: since the time we have to enjoy them is so short and
uncertain. For there is no greater bane to the soul then the love of this
world: and no better means to make us out of love therewith, then to number
our days that we have to live therein, in manner aforesaid.

2. To make no reckoning or account of this life, or of any thing concerning
this life any further then it may further us unto the life to come.

3. To count all those days lost, that are not spent in the furthering of us
unto eternal life.

4. To judge the loss of any hope or certainty in this life, to be a good
change for any hope or certainty in the next life.

5. To keep our selves free, as much as we may, from all distractions, and
from whatsoever may hinder us in the pursuit of this wisdom.

6. To make no reckoning of more then the time present; and therefore not to
put off our Repentance, or the pursuit hereof, from this day to that day, as
if we were sure of so many and so many days.

VERSE. 13. Return, o Lord. --
THE second Petition follows, wherein the Prophet prays for divine comfort
and consolation, by reconciliation unto God, and the sweet effects and fruits
thereof: that God would be pleased to minister comfort unto him and to his
Church by being pleased to be reconciled in mercy unto them, and by giving them
a lively sense of the same.

Whence out of the Order that the Prophet uses here, we may note by the way;

That in the sense of Gods wrath for sin we must first desire wisdom, and
all the effectual means thereof, that is, the true knowledge and
understanding to do Gods will, and to please him, before we desire that he
should be reconciled unto us, or expect any drop of sound comfort from him. It
is senseless and against common reason, that in the sense of Gods wrath we
should desire or hope for his favor, and yet continue in our folly and wicked
courses still. And yet this is the course that most men take, when they lie
under any judgment of God; they can call for and hope for mercy and favor,
and pray God to help them: but in the mean while they have no desire nor
purpose to seek after true wisdom, that is, the sure and certain means
whereby to please God. But if ever in the sense of Gods wrath thou desire that
God should be reconciled unto thee, desire first that thine heart may be
applied unto wisdom.

Now in this Petition of divine Consolation he prays;

1. For the grace of Reconciliation itself. 2. For the feeling and effectual
fruits of it.
The reconciliation of God to them is noted out principally by two terms;

1. Of returning, 2. Of repenting.
First, He prays the Lord to return again: therein resembling God to one
that turns his back toward us, and in his anger is gone away, and departed
from us. Whence

1. We may note a difference between Gods Child and the wicked. The wicked
they in their heart desire the Lord in this life to go far from them: and
they are best content when they think God farthest off them. But the Children
of God are otherwise affected. This is their greatest misery and woe in this
life, when the Lord is far off them, and when he hides his face from them.
They are not so deeply affected with the absence and departure of any, as of
God. You shall see in many places of the Psalms, how David complains Psalm.
13. 1. And 27. 9. And 88. 14. And 143. 7.
of nothing more then this.

2. As the Children of God desire nothing more then the face and presence of
God: so when God turns his face from them, and is departed, they easily
discern it, and have lightly a sense and feeling of it; so that as they are
able to discern and feel his presence, so have they a lively sense and
feeling of his absence. And those that never felt the one, cannot possibly
feel the other, they that complain not of his absence, never felt his
comfortable presence.

3. Note the effect of sin even in Gods own Children. It makes the Lord in
their own sense and apprehension to have forsaken them, and to be gone away
from them. And if he be gone, all blessings are gone with him; and nothing can
appear but terrors and cursings.

4. In that he calls upon the Lord not to come, but to return; that is to say,
to come back again to the place from whence he is gone: it shows, that Gods
people have had a sense of his presence, before they felt his absence and
departure. Those only desire the presence of God, and bewail his absence,
that have had former experience of the sweetness and comfort of his presence.
Till God show unto us his goodness and kindness, it is not possible for us to
desire his presence, but still the more rather to hate it and fly from it.

5. Note a property of Gods child, that is, to run after God, and to follow
him the faster, the faster he departs from him; to seek him the more, the more
he hides himself; to labor to please him the more, the more he sees him
offended: And never to give over, till he be sure of Gods favor: and not to
fear that he will turn again to their hurt, but to their good.

6. We learn here, that in the sense of our It was delivered shortly after
the, decease of Mr Alex. Redich.
Mortality, (especially when the Lord shall come near unto us, as he has
done of late to this Family, whence the members thereof are scattered, etc.)
we should labor therein to see the Lords anger against us, and in it behold
him as it were; after a sort departed from us: and therefore we should call
upon him to return again. And calling upon him servently, upon such occasions
as these, out of a sense of his displeasure, and of our sins the cause
thereof, the Lord will in mercy return to us again; And some way or other
bring with him as great a comfort and blessing, as he has taken away from us,
reparing in his blessed time the ruins and breaches thereof.

-- How long? --

THis is an argument to move the Lord to return; as if he should say, Oh Lord
now return; for, thou have been a long time absent.

Whence we learn, that

1. God uses many times to be a long time absent from his Children, as one
that had utterly forsaken them, and meant never to look after them more.

2. His children are sensible thereof; and measure the time: And the longer he
is away, the more they desire him.

3. A special means to make the Lord after his long absence to return, is to
urge him herewith.

-- And let it repent thee concerning thy Servants.

HItherto of the first Act of Reconciliation; to wit, that God would Return;
that is, show himself a loving and gracious God unto them, as formerly he had
done.

Now secondly, he desires that it would repent him: whereby we are not to
conceive, that the Lord can repent in any such manner as man uses, that is,
that he is indeed grieved and troubled for any thing that is done, wishing it
had not been done; Or, that in any thing his mind is altered and changed. God
is not as man, that he Number. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 19.
should repent; Seeing he does not, nor can do nothing, but it is for good
ends; and he ever obtaines his ends; and he never does any thing, but he does
it with that wisdom, that it is better done then left undone. Repentance in
God is nothing else but a surceasing of his former course; When after he has
corrected and chastened, he shows love and mercy, which under his chastisement
did lie hid. Yet in every such change, the Lord seems to us, to be like a
person that is sorry for that he has done, performing such like actions, as
repenting persons use to do in the like case.

For as a Father, after he has corrected his child, shows no signs of sorrow
for that he has done, so long as the child continues stubborn; but after
that he has amended his fault* and is sorry for it, the Father presently
burns the rod, or by some such sign shows as if he were sorry; yea, and
bestows some gift on the child, as if he had done him wrong, when it is
indeed neither so nor so, but only a testification of his love more plainly
to the sense of the child, that was hidden under correction before. So that, as
the child thinks, his Father hates him, when he corrects him, and repents his
hatred, when he cease to correct; So Gods children in a manner so conceive of
God; and God is pleased that they should after some sort so esteem of him.

1. Then God is said to repent, when upon our repentance, he cease to correct
and punish us: For God does not always incessantly and continually beat his
children, but he uses mercy and moderation in the correction of them: like a
kind Father, who though some time he beat his child till the blood follow, and
the child thereupon can apprehend nothing but that he is a cruel and hard
hearted Father; yet those stripes are moderated with mercy; he will not break
the bones of the child, nor continually lie beating of him, but will stay his
hand; especially then when he has obtained his end, that his child is humbled
and sorry for his fault.

2. God does not so only, but often as a loving Father or Mother uses to do,
he manifests a kind of wrath against the rod, wherewith he corrected his
child, That is, those whom he has raised up to afflict his Children withal,
whom he calls the rod of his indignation; he punishes them as though Esai. 10.
5.
he were angry with himself, and with the instruments that he made or used to
that end.

3. God does not so only, but if his child be soundly humbled under his hand,
labors to see his fault, and acknowledge it, God will show some way or other
special kindness, he will recompense his child as it were for the hurt he
has done him, as though he had wronged him. So that God will never show
himself more kind to any then to those that he has corrected; He will
double and treble his kindness unto them.

And the Prophet in praying thus, and teaching us to pray thus, teaches us to
hope; and embouldeneth us in all our afflictions or chastisements to crave this
at Gods hands. Yea, the unfeigned begging of this will be a means of obtaining
so much.

1. Therefore hence let us learn lying under Gods hand, though for a long time
together, not to despair, as though when God showed himself once angry, there
were no hope or expectation, that he would ever again show himself
merciful. Nay, God is a God of mercy; and the Psalm. 86. 25,
more wrath he shows to his child, the more mercy and grace he will show.

2. This should not discourage us that trust in God, to see the enemies of Gods
children afflict and vex them, and triumph over them. God is a Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
God that will repent; and when he repents, woe to them: for Gods children
shall fare the better for the evil that is done unto them; and they the worse,
though they have been instruments of Gods own wrath and indignation in those
evils, that his Children at their hands have endured.

3. There is an holy grieuing and angring of God, when under his hand we can so
humble our selves, that we make him as it were sorry and angry with himself,
that he has beaten us. We have no other means, when God punishes us, to
grieve and vex him. We cannot make him any other-wise to repent of the evil
that he has done unto us.

-- Concerning thy Servants.

IN these words is implied a motive, to stir up the Lord to grant this
request: as if he should say, We are thy servants; ergo let it repent thee
concerning us.

Note we hence;

1. That under Gods correction his Children still remain the servants of God.
Yea, the more he corrects them, the more studious they are to serve him.

2. That the only way to make GOD repent him of the judgments he brings on
us, is to manifest and profess that we are his servants.

3. That those that are not the servants of God, have no cause to hope, that
God will repent him of any evil toward them. But they are to expect rather
evil upon evil, and judgment upon judgment; till they come to everlasting
judgment.

VERSE. 14. Oh satisfy us early with thy mercy: that we may rejoice and be glad
all our days.
HItherto the Prophet prayed for Reconciliation it self: now he prays for
the feeling and effectual fruits of it.

These feeling and effectual fruits of it, are a lively sense of Gods mercy,
and a fullness of joy, arising and issuing therefrom. For the Child of God
can have no hope of comfort, but in the hope of Gods Reconciliation: nor hope
of Gods Reconciliation to him, but in the sense of his mercy. And where there
is a lively and full sense of his Mercy, there cannot but be sound, solid, and
lasting joy and delight in that soul.

Where note also;

That Gods children are not wont to content themselves with a mere fancy and
imagination of Gods savor: but they are never at rest, till they feel it in
the signs and fruits of it.

Now for this mercy the Prophet prays;

1. In general in this Verse; 2. In special in the next.
In the general there is a Petition, and a reason thereof rendered.

The Petition is for Mercy wherein he prays;

1. For the Grace it self; 2. For the measure of it, 3. For expedition in the
granting of it.
The first act or effect of Reconciliation is the work of Mercy; when the Lord
manifests that he is affected with compassion toward those servants of his,
whom he has formerly afflicted.

Whence we note:

1. That there is no cause to hope that God is reconciled unto us, till he some
way or other show mercy upon us.

2. That there can be no unfeigned desire of mercy till we feel our own
misery, and our just desert; till we have a sense of the just judgment of God
upon us for our sins: Our misery is his mercy.

3. That there is no hope of mercy, where men feel not the want of it, and
earnestly beg it at Gods hands.

Secondly, he desires to be satisfied with it.

Whence we note:

1. That nothing will satisfy Gods Children but Gods mercy. All is as nothing
to them without it.

2. That they desire not only mercy, but that they may rest in it, and be
content with it. They desire nothing but that, making no doubt but that having
that; they shall have all things together with it.

3. That they desire not some small drop of it, but crave such a measure of it
as may even fill and satisfy their souls.

Thirdly, his suite is that they may have this mercy early; that they may have
the sense and feeling of it betimes.

Where observe we;

1. A difference between Gods children, and wicked worldlings. Gods children
desire to have Gods mercy betimes: whereas the wicked put it of still from time
to time; they desire, with Balaam Number. 23. 10. to have it in the end; but they
care not for it early.

2. That those that will be satisfied early with Gods mercy, must early
repent, and early seek after it, and early desire and pray for it.

The reason follows, That we may rejoice, and be glad all our days.

Whence we note;

1. That Gods children may lawfully desire to rejoice and be glad all their
days.

2. That true joy and gladness springs from the mercy of God, and our
assurance of it.

3. That Gods children desire no other joy or gladness, then that which
springs from the same.

VERSE. 15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us,
and the years wherein we have seen evil.
AFter the general suite for mercy, follows a more special suite for the
same:

Wherein,

1. In special the Church calls upon God himself to make her to rejoice;
and that according to the degree and proportion of her former affliction.

2. She in her Prayers beggeth the special means thereof.

In the first we learn.

1. That the Church being humbled with the sense of Gods wrath, no body can
comfort her and rejoice her but God only. For if the Fountain be bitter, how
can the streams be sweet? If God the Fountain of all Goodness afflict us
with evil, what hope can we have of God from any other? If the Almighty
wound us in his wrath, who can heal us? Or if any shall heal one wound, shall
we not have cause to fear two for that one? To rejoice in any thing else,
when God is angry with us and smites us, is as if whilst we are in the paws
of a Lion, and ready to be devoured, we should then be delighted with the
Friskes and Gambols of Apes and Munkies. To seek for comfort and delight in
any thing else, whilst God is angry with us, is as vain as if a man in his
drought being kept from water, should think to quench his thirst by drinking
of Brine.

The use hereof.

1. This should teach us in our miseries and afflictions in the first place to
labor to see Gods hand in them; That it is God that chasteneth and afflicts,
and makes us sorrowful; And when we see that, it should teach us to fly to
him for comfort and ease; and never to expect it els-where. Yea, herein we
should in our afflictions approve our selves to be Gods children, if we can
seek to him for ease and comfort that has smitten us; And the contrary is a
sign of a Graceless child, who at that time that he knows his Father is
exceedingly wrath with him, and has been corrected by him, will never seek
to him, but sport and delight himself with the servants, or with Dogs.

2. In comforting others that are afflicted under the sense of Gods wrath, It
should teach us to speak in that manner to them, that they may discern that
God speaks in and by us, and that that comfort that we desire to possess
them with, is a divine comfort, and has his ground from Gods own word. Else
all comfort will be but vain. Yea, we shall show our selves but lewd and
profane persons, if we shall endeavor to comfort Gods child by any other
kind of comfort, then that which proceeds from God; this being to teach them to
despise God, as it is a despising of ones Parents for a child whilst his
Father is wrath with him, and is smiting of him, to laugh at and be merry with
others.

3. Gods child in his sorrow should desire no other joy or gladness, but what
God makes him: as indeed no other joy can make him truly glad again, but
that which proceeds from him that before made him sad.

In the second place we learn.

That in the midst of the signs and tokens of Gods wrath, Gods child may have
hopes and encouragements of joy and comfort even in God: That God that humbles
his child will comfort him, if whilst he is humbled he show himself to be
the child of God, and do not stubbornly carry himself under the rod, but
submit himself and pray unto him for comfort. For Gods spirit would never have
taught his Church to have asked this of God, if God herein would not be ready
to yield to his child.

The measure of joy that the Church craves from God is according to the days
and years of their afflictions, a joy answerable and proportionable to their
affliction: that as God had a long time, for many days and years afflicted
them, so he would be pleased to send them answerable comfort.

Whence by the way we may note;

1. That the special affliction and calamity of Gods Church in the Wilderness
seems to be an occasion that moved the Prophet to pen this Psalm concerning
the frailty and mortality of Man in general, teaching us upon the like
special occasions to meditate of this Argument.

2. That it is no new thing, That God should humble and afflict his Church, not
for an hour or a day, but for many days and years together sometimes: which
should teach us the more patiently to bear shorter afflictions; and in our
affliction from day to day and year to year wait the Lords leisure for
deliverance.

But the special point we are to note is this; That the Church in this does
imply an Argument to move the Lord to make them glad, yea to make them glad for
a long time, because they have for a long time bin afflicted; as if he should
say, Oh Lord thou know how many days we have been afflicted, yea, how
many years we have seen evil, therefore accordingly make us glad.

Whence we learn.

That there is a proportion between the afflictions and miseries of Gods
children, and their comforts.

Are they greatly afflicted? Surely they shall have great gladness. Are they
days, months, and years chastised? They shall accordingly rejoice. Yea, the
greatness of our afflictions are as it were a bond, and do tie the Lord to
make us glad. So that we cannot use a more forcible reason then this to induce
him thereunto. And why? Surely because the Lord is a most merciful and kind
Father: and therefore cannot but please and delight his child the more, the
more he has afflicted him; especially, if under his affliction he shall show
himself a dutiful child.

This should teach us to be of good comfort in our greatest and longest
afflictions; yea, to be the more comforted for them, so we make true use of
them. For these are tokens and sore-runners of great and lasting joy. If we
call upon the Lord, though it be long ere he hear us, yet at length he will
hear us; and the longer it shall be before he hear, the more he will glad us
when he hears us. So that when he comes to make us glad, he will pay us
usury, nay, use upon use And we should rather fear then otherwise, when we
never saw any evil days, or saw it but for a few days. For how glad and
merry soever we have been; yet we have cause to fear that the Lord did
never make us merry. And our sorrow to come shall be according to the days
and years of that mirth which is not of the Lords making.

VERSE. 16. Let thy work appear upon thy servants: and thy glory unto their
Children.
HItherto of the measure of Gladness that the Church desires.

The means of Gladness follows, which he craves 1. In general. 2. In
special.


In general. 1. That the work of GOD may appear upon his servants. 2. That
his glory may appear unto their Children.


His work in this place signifies the issue and fruit of their afflictions.
So that the Church prays here that God would manifest unto her, that good
work that he has aimed at all this while in afflicting her.

The very afflicting of his Church is a work of God: but that more especially
is his work, which by afflicting her he propounds to effect. The Hewing,
Squaring, and Sawing of Timber is the work of the Carpenter: but his special
work indeed is the House, that by means thereof he works: So the melting,
refining, and polishing of Silver or Gold is the work of the Goldsmiths, but
more especially the Cup or Boule that by that means he frames.

Hence we may learn.

1. That God many times hides the special end, why he does afflict us. He
beats his Church sometimes for a long time together; and the Church neither can
tell the special cause why, nor what will be the issue or consequent of it.
Ordinarily Parents never correct their Children but beforehand they acquaint
them with the particular fault, and the child can guess at the end that his
Father aims at: So does God many times, and his children also can see in the
very rod of God, their fault, and what God aims at in the same; But sometimes
they cannot for their lives for a long time, though at length they shall see
it. God puts them often into the fire, he hammers them often over and over again:
but what piece of work the Lord will make of them, they no more know sometimes
then the iron upon the Anveile knows what the Smith will make of it, whether a
Lock or a Key.

2. Though the Church or Gods child do not yet see what the work of God will
be, yet how hardly soever God does deal with them, though he cast them never
so often into the fire, and hammer and beat them never so much, yea, though they
have an apprehension of his wrath therein, which is not in the Smith when he
beats his iron; yet the child of God presumes that that work (...) God is
good, and that there will a good issue and blessed effect spring therefrom.
Hence they pray Job 1^. ^
and desire earnestly to see the same: and prayer is a means to obtain the
sight of it.

3. This is a special means to make them glad, when the Lord shall manifest
unto them the blessed fruits and effects of his affliction. Yea, till then they
cannot be soundly made glad; though the Lord should surcease to afflict them.
But when that work appears, then they cannot but be glad, yea, so glad that
they shall bless the day that God did chastise them, when they shall see the
evil that God kept them from, and the good he has effected by the same. As
David Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. So that
how bitter and sharp soever thine affliction be, yet comfort thy self in
this; thou art under the Lords hammer, and when the work he aims at is
finished, and appears, thou shall be glad and rejoice in God. When therefore
we lie under any cross, let us possess our souls with patience, till the
work of the Lord appear; and then we shall be glad.

The Church in this Petition gives her self again the title of Servants, that
is to say, persons both bound and ready to yield all obedience, and to
perform any service to God that he shall put them unto. So that this is an
argument to move the Lord to grant this request, and a means to obtain it,
for one to be Gods servant even under affliction: for to none else shall ever
this work appear to make them glad, but rather to add unto them cross upon
cross. So that the more serviceable and dutiful we be unto God in our
afflictions, the more we shall discern the work of the Lord in them, and
such a work as shall make us rejoice according to the proportion of our
afflictions.

The second means in general follows. And thy glory unto their Children,
that is to say, that our children may see the glorious fruit of this affliction
in us, that so they may not be discouraged thereby to serve thee, but rather
the more hartned, when they shall see what a glorious work thou have wrought
in and upon us by afflicting us.

So that by making good use of our affliction, not only our selves, but our
posterity also shall fare the better for it, the Lord will work such a work
thereby as shall not only make us glad, but make his glory shine in the eyes
of our Children, and them that shall follow after us; so that they shall have
occasion to bless God for us. Hence it is, that the blood of Martyrs is the
seed of Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
Gods Church: and that wicked persecutors are so crossed in their maine ends,
that in the end the contrary to their hopes falls out.

VERSE. 17. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and establish
thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hand establish thou
it.
THE more special means of Gladness follows.

1. That the beauty of the Lord her God be upon her, as if he should say,
That by this means she may be purged from that corruption which was the cause
of provoking the Lord unto wrath; and that the image of God thereby may be
renewed more and more in her, and may appear so to be to others. For then the
beauty of the Lord is upon us, when we are like to him and resemble him in
holiness and righteousness; when we shine by his beams; when our wills are
conformable to his will, and when we give entertainment to all his Ordinances;
and when to this end he vouch safeth his Church all the ordinary means of
salvation. Where this is wanting, all other beauty and glory is but as a gold
Ring in a swines snout, and as a painted Sepulcher, having nothing but filthy
and loath some matter within it.

Whence we note; that

Gods children afflicted, count piety, religion, and the fear of God their
greatest beauty and ornament; yea, by afflictions God is wont to bring them to
an higher estimation of these graces, and a purer use of his ordinances then
formerly they had. And then may we well deem that our afflictions have done
good on us, when they have brought us into a further measure of liking, and
high esteem of spiritual graces, and a greater conformity unto God in them.

2. That the Lord would establish upon them the work of their hands. By vouch
safing a prosperous success, and good issue to their attempts and endeavors.

Whence we observe; that

Gods children can never hope to thrive or prosper in ought, so long as God is
offended with them, or has for their sins estranged himself from them. All
that while they sail but against the wind, and strive against the stream, in
whatsoever they attempt and put their hand unto: all is sure to go cross with
them, and nothing to be established or brought to any good issue. They shall
but do and undo, and be as far; when they have wearied and tired out
themselves, though they should labor like Horses, and even work their hearts
out, from effecting of ought, as they were when they first set hand to their
work, till God vouch safe to turn unto them, and with his favor and
assistance graciously to strengthen them, and to establish their endeavors upon
them. Yea, by afflictions God often fitteth men for a blessing in this kind,
which when we have made that holy use of that we ought, we may well hope that
God returning again in mercy unto us, will give better success then ever
before to all our affairs.

FINIS.

