THE Poets VVillovv: OR, The Passionate Shepherd: With sundry delightful, and
no less Passionate Sonnets: describing the passions of a discontented and
perplexed LOVER. Diverse compositions of verses concording as well with the
Lyricke, as the Anacreonticke measures; never before published: Being reduced
into an exact and distinct order of Metricall extractions.

Artem qui tractant Musicam, haec legant, and Poesem ament.

Author: Impresse.

Nec mori timeo, nec opto.
Imprinted at London by JOHN BEALE, for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his
shop at Holborne bridge. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT VVORTHIE GENTLEMAN MASTER WILLIAM ASCHAM REPLENISHED WITH THE
BOVNTIES OF Art and Nature.
Molli discumba* via. Scu Haec via illi summa.
IF those be patrons fittest for our labors,
Whose virtuous actions merit our respect,
Who fitter then your self for to protect,
Our infant Poems with your mature favor?
Whose fragrant bosom ever had that savor,
And perfect relish, that the pure effect
Of your sincerest love would think no shame,
To take in worth what from Pernassus came.
Believe me Sir, those many well tuned strains
Of your concording virtues have produced
These harsher poems: let me be excused
Since what I write concerns poor homely swains.
That used to frolic in the spacious plains,
My muse with no Cadmean drops infused
Shelters her humble self under your wing,
Which if you grant, she may securely sing.
Call but to mind the seedplot of your youth,
Stagyras wellspring, Britons Hesperie,
Which at one time received both you and me,
You to grow up, me to admire your growth,
Hoping to see that which might glad us both.
Your inward graces, graced outwardly.
For now my Poems relish when they find
So great a fortune in so great a mind.
If I should speak but what I do conceive,
I should make stale those merits of your own,
In showing them which be already shown,
Yet if I were but able to engraue,
In monumentall tablets, you should have
The highest place because the highest grown
In ripe and pregnant judgment which approve,
Both art and nature bear you special love.
Long may you flourish in the grouth of time,
To be a refuge to the muses nine,
Diuinest shades should shadow powers divine,
That when poor Celsus writes in ragged rhyme,
He may receive protection by your shrine,
Whose beauteous rays with more perfection shine,
Then the malignant censures of the worst
Shall ere raze out, if that their gall should burst.
More could I write (for subject had I still,
Of writing more and more,) but modesty
Tells me your virtues would not praised be,
For virtues praise does from her self distill,
Wherefore I curbd th'intention of my will,
Ioying to see these honors which I see,
So well portraid in you, that your worth,
Makes the earth glory in so great a birth.
Your virtues admiror humbly devoted, RICHARD BRATHVVAYT^.

Hinc mea musa gemit, quae seria non sera currit,
Non matura satis carmina: causa nimis.

Upon the illustrate Prince Henry, the Authors long meditated tears: Draigned
from a fresh renewing spring ever distilling: Some whereof the passionate
Elegiake offers to His never dying monument.
Do weep to see him dead? or thou do come
To view him living in his dying tomb?
Living (said I) and dying? yes: his death
Seems to infuse in him a living breath,
That being dead to earth, earth might transpose,
His earthy corpse unto eternal ioies.
Deadiyes, and alive too; this seems strange:
For single death he gets a double change:
Of life and death: death to shut up his eyes,
Life to enthrone him in heavens paradise.
^ere heir unto a king, but there he sings
A glorious p^ean to the king of kings.
A good exchange: what better? none to thee,
Translated prince: yet no change worse to me,
And to the state: O envy that our will
Should so depraved be, to wish him ill,
For our own private good: Great good indeed,
And to be wished for: O where shall we read
So many virtues charactred in youth,
So rare a mirror in the Court of truth.
So pure intentions seconded by same.
So hopeful diuinations in his name.
So general affection as nere any,
In one heart, kept the hearts of half so many.
Is It then impiety to weep, or show
Our zeal to him? whom there was none did know
That by relation wept not; O I see,
In every face the face of Niobe,
Senseless and speechless: yet in sense and speech
Thus much entire affection seems to teach
Posterity hereafter: as't appears
Both sense and speech supplied are by tears.
Tears inundation, so as we might fear,
And not without just cause some deluge nere,
But that we see a rainebow which portends
Heaven has imposd unto our sorrows ends
And limits, which ore past can hardly be,
So soon slip griefs out of our memory.
So soon? indeed too soon: poems in black
Resemble the blacks we wear upon our back.
Which whilst we follow the sad mournful beer,
Some more for fashion then compassion wear.
Unworthy mourners, do your griefs extend
No further? must your tears with his blessed end
Expire together? why then I pray re^ire
Let our sole notes since that our notes be higher
And far more shrill, supply your place: i will find
Motives of grief unto th'immotiu'sts mind.
You are blind with tears, I but of late began,
One eye may see more then another can*
Why should men think th'inuention half so rare,
Or worth record: to bring a stream: from Ware,
Of pure spring water? for without less charge
I could have dreind a river full as large
Without ere pumping for it: and with a sluse
As artificial: which could no way choose
(Such is the force of an obsequious pity)
But convey water to most parts o'th city.
And this without a Jacobs staff, or ought
Save the dimensions of an aierie thought;
Which measures each p^oportion, only grief
Excepted, which the measure of relief
Could never compass: yet there would be fault
In my conueiance, for my spring is salt
And mixed with briny vapors which distill*
Like pond or marish waters from a hill.
But theirs more sweet, so could I mine allay,
If I had been at so much cost as they.
Next wonder that we have obserud this year,
Is that the winter did like spring appear,
Garnisht with varied flowers, and every sweet
Checkerd with borders for the Syluans meet
To frolic on: and why? they are of that nature,
That when they are merry, they presage some creature
Of worth or admiration must commend,
Their bones to rest by some approaching end.
Ill natured bugbeares, why should you delight,
To see that sun lodge in eternal night
That gave a luster with his sparkling eye
To every plant within his Monarchy
Each humble spray or flower that grew in the field
Of honor, would he honor with his shield
Of eminent respect* respect less you,
That never give to merit what is her due.
But I must cease, that I may weep the more,
For ceaselesse though I weep, I have tears in store
Two buckets to one well, both of them goes,
The one for my tears, the other for my woes,
That tears and woes contracted both in one,
May pierce in time this monumentall stone.
THE Argument of this Treatise.
BERILLVS an Arcadian shepherd, who frequented the flowrie plains of Ida; and
indeed no less musical, then pastoral: For his learning famous, for his
measure in all compositions curious, for his censure in modern presentiments,
no less affected, then by his fellow-inhabitants admired; fell in love with a
Nymph of the adjoining mountain, hight Eliza: of parentage honorable, of
beauty incomparable, and endowed with all graces internal; which made her no
less beloved, then desired, even of the greatest: for her demerits were such,
as Arcadia resounded with her praises, Long had she (even of ^^ natural love
unto retirednes) sequestered her self from the public concourse of the world,
professing as it seemed a ves^all life: when now (being of great expectancie,
as the only daughter to her father) she^ was moved by her friends to address
her self for proceedings both more answerable to her Fortunes, more
correspondent to the general intentions of her friends, and more aequiualent
to her years, being now in the flower of her Time, and increase of estate.
After a modest, yet halfe-assenting repugnance, she condiscended to their
request: leaving Vesta and her retired habitations, and now consecrating her
lays and hymns to Hymen, wishing no doubt, his furtherance to her otherwise
affected disposition. It chanced that (on a solemn festival day) when all
shepherds leaving their pastures, and making recourse to a Temple erected
near to the foresaid mountain, they offered sacrifice to Pan (the shepherds
God) that he would preserve their flocks, and give increase unto their herds,
according to the custom of Rome, where the Lupercalia be solemnised by the
mountain Palatine: the Parilia were kept in honor of Pales, for the
preservation of cattle: such were the feasts of these Arcadian shepherds. Now
in the performance of their vows to Pan, ere their solemnities were half
finished, came in Eliza with other amiable maids, to see the order (as it
seemed) of the shepherds in the celebration of their festiuals. The passionate
shepherd Berillus, who before had conceived no little affection of the demure
carriage, modest gate, and well-respected, and reputed conversation of Eliza,
had no sooner fixed his eyes on her, then his sacrifice was ended, his devotion
cooled, and those many orisons which he made to Pan, converted to the honor of
his Saint and shrine Eliza. Much love he professed by his eye: for though Pan
had his knees, yet that honor was but external, Eliza had his heart, no less
reuerencing her presence, then he did Pan with outward appearance. Eliza at
last observed (as what woman, if fair, knows not her Beauty?) that
irreuerberate fixing of his eyes, by the transparent characters of his looks,
measuring his love, she (not to dant the poor shepherd) gave him a modest
smile, which gave no less content to Berillus, then if Pan had descended and
confirmed their vows with his presence.

The sacrifice ended: yet the flame which appeared at the sacrifice not
extinguished in the love sick shepherds breast, continued his passions, not
hopeless, because resolved such Beauteous colors could not be soiled with the
blemish of a remorcelesse heart: but as the Syreus never portend more rain,
then when their voice is most delightful, nor the Crocodyle more pernicious,
then when feigned semblances show her tears most remorcefull, so this bitter
sweet, seemed to entertain pity, and to accept of the poor shepherds
sacrifice, registring his sobbes, sighs, and unfeigned passions in the Tablet of
her heart: vowing acceptance if her parents assent confirmed her election. But
see that general vice (innate to her sex,) leuity of mind, estraunged her
intentions, and made the forlorn shepherd more wretched, in that his former
hopes had made him blessed: she contemnes his gifts, scorns his suite,
plays upon his simplicity: so as the shepherd surprised with a sympathy of
passions, in that his hopes and great expectances are made abortments: proined
of their expected growth, and blasted in the prime of his affections, sits
descanting of his discontents: making his pipe the surdon of his sorrow: to
express his languishments more fully, in an abrupt strain of discords (as
that harmony best suites with his present fortunes) lying dejected on the
ground (best repose for his declining hopes) thus intimates his own misery:
shadowing (though covertly) woman's inconstancy: shutting up his ode with this
conclusion: They are happy, who have seen (and by seeing) have been cautioned
of a lovers misery, and woman's obduracie, hating where they propound most
evident and infallible Testimonies of their sincerest love.

THE PASTORAL.
IN Arcadie, a place of great renown
Famous for flowery pastures, there remaind
A youthful shepherd, who upon the down,
Hight Idas plain, such honor had obtaind
Amongst all shepherds by his trophies gaind,
And worthy feats in every May game showen
That his atchieuements were so glorious grown,
As he the flower of shepherds still was named
Nor of that honor might he be ashamed,
For many shepherds the^ there were* whose grace
In active fears put Heroes out of place.
Tmolus was one of such a noble spirit*
Adornd with beauty and perfection too.
That in all actions he the (...) did merit
Decking with laurel his victorious brow.
Was praisd of all, yet never would he hear it,
Nor of vain glory least appearance show:
Such store of graces from his mind did flow;
Of able body, and of pregnant wi^,
That even these times have much admired it:
For many lays would Tmolus ofttimes make
In divine measures for Amyclas sake.
Next him was Thyrsus of a comely hew
A pure complexion, and a pleasant grace,
Who to his friends proved faithful still and true,
With painted smile nere would he soil his face:
For he descended from a noble race,
As his admired virtues still did show:
For fame and honor ever did reuew,
The spacious mansions of this shepherds place
Walking with honor in his parents trace,
Such was this Thyrsus ( Thyrsus was his name)
Nor of that title might he thinke't a shame.
Pelorus was the third, a lusty swain
That used to graise his cattle by the river
Euenus hight: where often he would complain,
Of his hardhearted love: nor would he ever,
Those pensive odes (in silent woes) contain
But chaunts his passions ore and ore again:
Such brinie streams could be exempted never,
For light (which lightsome seems) his ioies disseuer
Making his comforts barraine: O how feign
Would he have glad himself with harmony,
But what he sought could not effected be.
O my Laerte (would this shepherd say)
Why do exile me from thy presence dear?
Why should thou with thy loure benight my day,
And rack my intrals with perpetual fear?
I pray thee (love) more cheerfully appear,
Feed not my passions with a long delay,
But let the night at last my griefs allay,
That I some pleasant harmony may hear,
Sounding a concord in my doleful ear,
O be so kind, that if no day, yet night
May yield me comfort and renew delight.
Thus would Pelorus iterate his woe
And make the pastures echo with his voice,
For to what cave so ere this swain did go
He made it answer with an horrid noise,
For where he was, no creature could rejoice,
Since what he did, his cattle would do so,
Both food and water willing to forgo,
And frame their routing to their Masters choice
A discord well concording with his voice,
His flocks were thankful to deplore his fall
Mourning to hear their Masters mournful call.
Many fine bowers this shepherd vsd to frame
Of myrtle branches, and of poplar green,
Wherein he vsd to endorse his lovers name,
Whose curious works to this day may be seen,
Which cannot choose but aeternise his fame
And that renowned house from whence he came,
For few such swains on earth have ever been
Of such respect, such virtue, such esteem:
But he is gone, and has deprived the earth
Of her chief beauty, portraied in his birth.
Tymallus was the next, who for his strength
Antaeus like, regaind the highest prise
Amongst all shepherds, but the fates at length
Seemed to oppose his worthy enterprise,
Shutting the glorious splendour of his eyes,
(Themselves contented in our discontents)
Changing the nature of those elements,
Which in Tymalius did so sympathise,
That I have heard, though this same shepherd dies,
Yet every year the inhabitants receive,
Where he is interd sweet odors from his grave.
O thou perfumed vrne that do contain
Within thy shrine and s^ble monument,
The famous relics of a noble swain,
Mansion of honor, virtues continent,
Shine ever bright to grace that ornament
Which thou possessest: let no priuat^ slain
Blemish that poor remainder, whos^ pure name
Makes earth, no earth, but as an element
Drawn from the earth, to raise her excrement,
Rest thee Tymallus in thy house of clay,
Whilst we relate thy actions every day.
But now must I leave these, and come to him,
Whose sacred muse pearceth the aerie clouds,
And with Berillus excellence begin
Some higher strain; leaving the silent wods,
The silent shades, the pastures and the floods*
Which cherished the swains: now must I trim
With varied colors every branch and limme
Of my discourse: that such as understood
Of this Berillus, may wish him some good,
And add some proper actions of their own
To those of his, and make them better known
It chanced on a time, the swains agreed
To celebrate the festiual^ of Pan,
Pan was the God, by which their flocks did feed,
And their increase on Ida first began,
Therefore each swain with all the speed he can,
Came with sweet incense from his flourie mede,
To sacrifice to Pan of all their breed,
One with a kid, another with a lamb,
Or some young suckling wained from the damme,
Among whom Berillus came, willing to offer,
To Pales incense, and to Pan an heifer.
Unto the Temple which erected was,
N^^re to the foot of Idas sacred moun^,
From whence a Nectar riuolet did pass,
Which was enst^led Cytheraeas fount,
Came all these shepherds, who with great account,
And solemn honor offered in that place,
The firstlings of their flocks were wont to grase
Upon the neighbor plains, or which were wont
To brouse the flourie vale, or feed upon it,
Each offered what they had, fruits of their border,
The best the first, the residue in order.
Amidst these solemn feasts, obsequious vows,
Came in Eliza, one of beauty rare,
With other virgins, for what end heaven knows,
Save to perplex such as religious were:
Such tempting creatures wanton women are,
Seducing us with smiles and seeming shows,
far worse then the fury of external blows:
For those shed blood, these do torment with care
And vex us with new sorrows, till despair
Surprise our minds, our solace dispossess,
Making us objects of times pensiveness.
Noe sooner had he spied (aye me too soon)
The Siren countenance of this seeming sect,
Then incense, Censor, coals, and all thrown down,
fixing his eyes on her, showd his intent,
Having our heart there where our eyes be bent,
To such a passion he in fine was grown,
That he could scarcely vouch himself his own,
But pitching there his camp, his fort, his tent,
Confined himself within her element,
For he transported was (poor harmless man,)
To Elizas Altar from the shrine of Pan.
Shall I adore (quoth he) a rural God,
A pasture Saint, a sheepish deity,
When a more heavenly creature makes abode,
Cheering my comforts in variety,
Promising pleasures in sacietie?
No, no, her presence far more comforts bode
Then Pan ere had: too long my feet have stood,
Too long my knees have bowed (poor Pan) to thee
I see a Saint that better pleases me.
This said (his incense from his shrine berest)
Unto his goddess goes, the Altar left.
Like to a forward wooer trained long
In lovers vows, and solemn protestations,
He takes her by the hand: and softly wrong
Her tender pulse, augmenting sundry passions
Of an unfeigned love (Heavens inuocations)
Making his heart the subject of his tongue,
His tongue the Herald of events to come,
Calling the Gods to record his intentions,
And all those acry powers whose blessed conuentions
Confirm each action both in heaven and earth,
The fatal end drawn from a fatal birth.
If that I love not (honored queen) quoth he,
Mirror of beauty, diamond of fame,
If that I ever have not honored thee,
And registered the annals of thy name,
And with my dearest blood confirmd the same,
Never respect these tears distild from me,
Nor of thy worth let me accepted be.
But if I have been faithful, thinke't no shame
To fix thy love on me that faithful am,
For sooner shall the sun surcease to shine,
Then I surcease to reverence thy shrine.
See in what divine rites, what sacred hests,
I was distracted, to enjoy your love,
For sincere love, delays in love detests,
Enforced the fruits (which he desires) to prove,
O let me prove them, so shall griefs remove,
Their pensive stations, and afford sweet rest
Unto my restless soul, by thee made blessed:
I was brought up (dear sweet) in Idas grove,
Hatchd in an Aerie, sprung from bowers above,
Those ^owrs, those flowrs, those showrs wc did descend
From Jove's pure throne, thy beauty shall defend.
Those bowers which lovely Adon did frequent,
Those flowers to which Narcissus was transformd
Those liquid showers where Dande reapt content,
All in one symptom with one wreath adornd,
To lovers unity sweet strain conformd,
(For purer strains nere had earths continent,
Then such as descant lovers complement)
Where limpe-halt Vulcan too* too long soiornd,
With loves contempt portr^ide, displaied and hornd,
But lovers cannot put abuse, nor wrong
Those faithful vows which they professed long.
See but this incense how it lost her smell,
See but this censor how it lost her fire,
Which intimates, naught can express so well
The fervent passions of our minds desire,
As beautie^ presence, which does still aspire,
To aerie mansions from the vault to shell,
For perfect love all vapors can expel,
And give the lover due reward, due hire,
Scorning with coward pace to make retire,
Love is a captain which obtaines the prise,
Scorning the worst and basest enterprise.
But like victorious cheiftaines which enclose
The strongest bull warks with continued labor,
Despising rest, minds quiet, nights repose,
By their renoumed acts to purchase favor,
(Whose resolutions know not how to waver
Nor the pale harbor of distracted woes,
Know how to fear) even so affection goes,
Till memory (of Heroes acts engrauer)
Enobled by worths monuments shall have her,
Registring her pure vertures in their shrine,
For divine acts deserve a throne divine.
Noe steepie mount can be too peering high,
Noe craggie cliffe for love too intricate,
For such is love and lovers majesty,
As its secure in every dismal state,
Passing the judgment of impartial state,
Nearer the title of a deity,
Being the same which she does seem to be,
Hating the cause of times producing hate,
Open be her eyes (wide open) early and late,
Discoursing where or how her comforts be,
Taking no rest to gain eternity.
O be not self conceited ( dearest love)
See but thy image, how it does desire
Another image: aiming ever higher,
Till it enjoy what it intends to prove,
Much like the Turtle with the Turtle-doue
Or like the Phoenix, who in her own fire,
Portraies her self both mother, seed and sire:
Her ashie vrne her tomb, her flame the grove,
To life infusd by some effects above.
Be then the Phoenix, as in beauty rare,
So be thy actions far above compare.
What better suits which beauty then delight?
What better with delight then loves content?
What better with content then cheerful light?
What better suits with light then th'element,
That best concords with her? what is that? the extent
Of pure affection: which expels the night,
And makes us pleasant in our lovers sight,
For honest lovers show their minds intent,
By outward signs; an Incense redolent,
In sincere love, composd of sundry links,
Thinks what she speaks, and speaks what she thinks.
Then speak (dear love) let this same sacred place,
Where we be present, consecrate our love:
Let Pan himself confirm our Nuptial grace,
And all the powerful Queristers above
Sing cheerful lays: while our affections move
Their true Idaeas: that illustrate race,
From whence you were deriud, quickens my chase
And bids me hope: you cannot choose but love,
Their worth cannot be base whose births above,
Then as thou art erected, let me taste,
The fruits of love, when discontents be past.
For if a faithful shepherd can deserve,
Meede for his faith: my faith deserves as much.
How often have I thy name desired to carue
In every tree? and when I sought to touch
The tender bark, or rind, it nere thought much,
But willingly endurd my sculpture: thus pla^ts serve
Thy blessed attendance: that they may observe,
A module in thy fancy: that is such,
That if they should do all, yet not too much
can be done to thy shrine: if plants do this,
(If I should not do more) I did amiss.
Since time I knew thee (fairest of all faires,)
I could not go, as I was wont to do
Unto my pastures: for such heaps of cares
Possessed my crasie brains, surprised so
With thy affections, that whereso ere I go,
Sit, or lie down, naught of sweet joy appears,
But multitudes of my renewing fears,
Which make me sleeping wake, thinking of woe,
And then of joy: thus interposd twixt two,
A double form my single form partakes,
Now waking sleeps, and sleeping straight awakes.
For that sweet sleep which comfort yields to others,
Yeeldes a distaft to me: what can be sweet
Where hope is dead? hope is a loving mother,
Banishing sorrow with a silent sleep,
That feeds the shepherd, and reuiues his sheep,
Reducing them into one fould together,
But sheep nor shepherd there is no health to either,
If thou my shephardesse refuse to gather
My dispersed Flocks: and shall deny to keep
My watching eyes that do desire to sleep,
But cannot sleep, to double pains they are put,
Open by thy presence, by thy absence shut.
No day nor night can solace yield to me,
Both be unwelcome guests: and what is the cause?
To tell the truth: that day I see not thee
Seems far more dark then night: love has no clause,
No limit, nor no bond: love cannot be
Confinde in bonds, it hates captivity:
Meriting honor by diuinest laws,
As for her action it deserves applause,
O then (dear sweet) be not so soft to show,
So hard to love: receive these vows I owe.
Often have I walkd within the Idalian grove,
Calling each plant, each blossom to record
The spotless vows of my refined love:
And every plant did seemingly accord
Unto my vows: springs did their tears afford,
And every senseless rock did passions move:
Crying I love, the echo cried I love,
For every accent, accented my word,
A lovely concord in a loves discord.
If plants, rocks, rivers so remorsefull be,
Far more remorse I do expect from thee.
Thy substance is more heavenly, then disdain
Should soil a mansion of so pure delight:
Thou see me love, and thou will love again:
I know thou will, those vows which I have plight
Cannot but have respect in lovers sight:
Which if thou do, (believe me) i will remain
As I have been a poor well willing swain,
And with my pipe on every winter night
Play lays of love, to further thy delight.
Believe me sweet, and you may think it true,
My Flocks vnfollowed are to follow you.
The wanton lambkins frolic on the plain,
Skipping and leaping in their flower of youth,
While in a secret cave, I scarce contain
My self from tears, and so Melampus does,
Poor harmless curre, for he is very loath
To see me so dejected: howling amain,
Prickeard, bleare eyed, yields me a doleful strain*
Of doggrell music: thus perplexed both.
Repine to see each creature in their grouth,
And we dismayed, with woes immured so,
As others joys seem to augment our woe.
Last day but one Amicla came to me,
And askd the reason why I was so sad:
Thou vsd, quoth she, so full of mirth to be,
That with thy pipe thou made the pastures glad,
And was accounted still the cheerefulst lad
In all our plain: how coms it then quoth she,
Such sullen suds have so perplexed thee?
Come, come away and leave this pensive shade,
For piping, not for pining thou was made,
Come, come I say, and quickly follow me.
And ore this down lets dance it nimbly.
Alas Amicla, thus I answered her,
How can I pipe, my read is out of tune,
How can I dance, that can but hardly stir
My crasie ioints: O no, that time is done,
Nor will it hereafter (much I doubt it) come
To joy my doleful life, or ere appear,
To end my griefs that echo every where,
For griefs speak loudest when the speech is du^be
Engrosing daily still a greater sum.
Leave me Amicla, how can I recite,
My wonted measures that has broke my pipe*
Broken thy pipe? I Will mend it (sweet) quoth she,
And make it tune with more delightful measure
Then ere it did: lend but thy pipe to me:
I lent it her, that I in part might please her,
But it played tunelesse still: nor could it ease her,
Descanting discords: sadder harmony
Nere did I hear of sage Melpomene:
It knew his Masters strain, not all the treasure
Of Tagus golden oar, no time, no leisure,
Had either I or my poor pipe to play,
For thoughts of love had taken all joys away.
Amicla when she saw it would not be,
Threw down my pipe, for it was soon thowne down,
And with quick pace away departed she,
While I despised, of my self lay down
Under a shadie beech well over grown,
With broad*spred branches which did shadow me,
But not obscure the love I bare to thee;
Calling the heavens to witness, and mine own,
Mine own poor bleting flocks! my love was shown thee.
Not in assemblance, but so really,
That naught seemed sweet which did not taste of
Thy breath a perfume, and thy voice a tone,
Of perfect concords: thy bright eye a star,
Thy mouth an Hyblemount, thine arms a throne,
Thy teeth a pearly cordon, thy pure hair
Tramels of purest gould, where lodged are
Those three admired graces, all in one,
As if they meant there to reside alone:
Thy brows like Beacons, where we see afar
Adjoining places, mannagements of war,
Breefely, noe part thou have from top to toe,
But may be asked why nature made it so?
And straight it answers: Nature made me thus,
To be a mirror past all imitation,
Since choicest colors my proportion chufe,
A beauteous frame formd of the best creation,
That after times might make more full relation,
What they have seen proportioned in us
And leave records of it: that every muse,
If pregnant, may discourse to every Nation,
A perfect module made for recreation,
But for no humane creature; such as love us,
Must come from heaven, and pla^t their throne above us
O tell me then (dear love) if so it be,
Humane affections cannot worthy seem,
By their intentive minds to honor thee,
And therefore justly have condemned been,
To gase out that which should be rarely seen,
For such as thou art, often reserved be,
Not for Earths frame, but for aeternitie:
Tell me but this (and by this kiss) I mean
Nere to repair unto thy shrine again,
Or ere make suit (as here I do profess)
To be thy shepherd, thou my shepherdess.
When poor Berillus finished had his suit,
Looking for answer at Elizas hand,
Pans Priest came in, and put Berillus out,
Only thus much well might he understand,
That he was loved of her, but th'Priests command
(Ill f^ll such shauelings) ever went about,
Hearing their amorous stories to root out
Their pure affections: moving with his wand,
Or sacra virga, that they should descend,
And leave ^o^es passions to another place,
For in Pans Temple love can have no grace.
The forelorne Shepherd went same way he came,
Sad and dejected, yet with hope relieved,
Thinking by absence to quench out the flame,
Which daily made increase: being deprived
Of those blessed means, by which we are revived,
Hope the best Anchor which supports our flame,
Made this poor shepherd to pursue his game,
Hoping by such effects as he contrived,
To have his joys renewd: but was deceived,
For where he thought to find conte^tment most
In that same place he was the greatliest crossed.
For from that time nere could he see his dear,
Kept as it seemed for Pan, or for his Priest,
For this same shaueling ever would be there,
Desiring (lustful prelate) there to feast,
Where she remaind: for he has often confessed,
That he has wished himself transformed were
Into some slender creature, to appear
At all times to Eliza: who thought least
Of such a wanton votarie: heavens detest,
Such vow in fringing mass priests whose profession
Collects a reason out of each suspicion.
Farewell Eliza, if thou live so long,
As to repent thee of thy breach of faith,
I do not doubt but thou'l confess the wrong
Which thou have done me, and abjure that breath,
Which thou exhaled, adiudging me to death,
By that remorselesse heart, that Siren tongue,
Which (if thou live) will sing another song:
Take heed, the sword's drawn from the irefull sheath,
And inbred horror creeps underneath.
Whom thou affectest most, affects thee least,
Hating thy Swain to take thee to thy Priest.
But if god Pan knew how his swains were vsd,
By such as offer to him sacrifice,
I know full well he would redress the abuse,
And save our honor from such Priests as these,
Who fill his Temple with impieties,
Wronging the sincere thoughts of each of us,
Which cannot merit in the heavens excuse:
Small faults with Saints be great enormities,
Shrines that are pure become pure deities,
But i will surc^ase, griefs make my muse surcease:
Increase of lines give to my woes increase.
To Eliza. A sonnet.
IF fair Eliza thou that I have loved,
And vowed more sacred hests unto thy shrine
Then any love that ere professed him thine,
Have but my poems by thy self approved,
O to what blessed, unexpected clime
Am I transported by this muse of mine?
But if thou frown, contract thy brow and loure,
I Will never handle this rude pencile more.
I have not Zeuxes hand to paint thy shape,
But I could wish to grave within thy mound
Some quaint devise, where if I once were found,
I know no feature of his lively grape
Could me exceed: for I have learnd the ground
Of that deep art, albeit most profound.
Be thou the module of that curious frame,
That my impression may adorn the same.
Adorn? deforme thou say: poor poesy,
Cannot content Elizas Nuptials,
She Is of a lighter strain, her festiuals
Sound and resound with purer harmony:
She cannot brook the sullen Saturnals
That mix our inyes with gladness: Iuuenals,
Best like Eliza: and they would like me,
If I were Iuuenall to sing to thee.
Thy affectionate swain Pans poorest herdsman.

In Arui pascua distichon.
Pastor eram gelidis discumbeus montibus Arui,
In me tanguet amor mont is, amore tui.
To Dorinda. Elegy. 1.
THe soaring Eagle stouping to allure,
Too base a lure (god wot) for such a bird,
Was soon deprived of that he thought most sure,
At which strange hap the Eagle much admird,
To be debard of that he least desird,
Wherefore oppressed with fury there he swore,
Descend he would to such base lures no more.
Art thou not borne (quoth he) of royal race,
Hatching thy Aerie in the wilderness?
And will thou then that ancient house disgrace,
Soiling thy glory with such filthiness,
Which would eclipse thy pristine worthiness?
O fie for shame let such vnworthies be,
Whose worthles parts will shame thine house and thee.
Thy Father was a Prince, thou art his son,
For with thy pearcing eyes can thou behold
The glorious luster of the cheerful sun,
Fruitful as springtime, not to bondage sold,
Building thy neast in clymates far from cold,
Fly to the Cedar; let this mushrome be,
For higher plants will better nourish thee.
Those sparkling eyes of thine which shine so bright,
Clad with the flames of Phoebus regiment,
Cannot immantled be in pitchie night,
But aim at some more gracious element,
Sun seldom shines on such base excrement,
Then as thou soared by nature, so let art
In thine aspiring thoughts sustain a part.
Nomine pastor is m^llita poemata fundit
Aquila -- vt infra sequitur.
What pleasant poems have come from my bill,
Whose sweet resounding made the eccoes ring,
In fields and shades where silver streams distill,
Where Philomell her self was wont to sing,
Down by the current of Sabinas spring,
Shall then my breast which tund so plesantly,
Be matchd with such a tunelesse Harmony?
In poesem Encomion.
Should Hybles sacred art of poesy,
Leese her horizon in the throne of heaven,
Since it has been professed by deity,
Unto the muses in Pernassus given,
A place frequented on each Satyrs even,
Where Satyrs danced and Syluanos in their order,
With all the rites that Hymen could afford her.
Then thou thrice blessed profession, which remains
A solace to the mind, the earths content,
That doubles our night tasks with ^reble gains,
Affording use of lovers complement,
The load-starre which directs our regiment,
Neither shall pleasure profit or delight,
Deprive me the fruition of thy sight.
To Dorinda.
The bird Erodius for her lovely brood,
Sends out a shower of tears perpetually,
And she by natures prescript is allowed
To mourn for her dejected progeny,
Parents with children make one sympathy.
Why should not I do this for her and more,
Whose hallowed shrine my thoughts did ere adore?
Thou fairest Queen that sits on Idas mount,
Vouchsafe to take this poaem I present,
And this my muse shall be devoted still,
Unto thine heavenly statue which was sent
From Io^e above unto this continent,
Protect my silly labor and receive
Unto thy cell, this little that I have.
Alas what fortune crossed my birth day first,
When fates themselves denied me better means,
To gratify my love? whose quenchlesse thirst,
In midst of streams, for liquid streams complains,
That her poor travail can produce no gains,
Unto thy divine Altar; which shall smell,
With mirrhe and hymns the Nimphs themselves shall tell.
Amor vt odor.
-- redolentia semina mittit-quisquis amat.

Bring me some odors for my lovely queen,
And fragrant posies for my shepherdess:
A fairer springtime never shall be seen
For worth becomes Dorindas worthiness,
Pipe will I still for I can do no less,
And when my pipe is broken I will take
A shriller pipe for my Dorindas sake.
Pastor pasce boues, mea fistula cantet amores, etc.
Take out that reed, it does not please my love,
It is too slow a strain for her swift course,
She loves not that which will not quickly move,
And cut the air like to a foaming horse,
That runs his station with a vehement course,
Such steeds would well beseem my lady queen
That runs her courser with an easy reine.
Sic mea laxatis currit habenis
Hyppodame equis: quorum spumantia freuis
colla torquet.
-- et tu tibi Myrtile fatae
digna refers. -- ibid.
To Dorinda. Elegy. 2.
Disdainefull girl that hates thy lover most,
Playing the tyrant with thy beauteous face,
Seeming as won, when thou art nearest lost,
Clouding thy beauty with a foul disgrace,
Since black disdain enioyes the cheifest place,
Conceive remorse, lest thou remorselesse die
Thine acts the authors of thy misery.
How many times and often have I profesd
Unto thy beauty ceremonial love?
What vows, what hests have been by me expresd
Far more then Adon in Idalias grove,
More then the solemn hests of Turtle dove?
The very Pellicane is not more true
Unto her brood, then I would be to you.
Yet thou contemns my love, and in despite
Of me and of my love, fleeres in my face:
O will not heaven this cruelty requite,
And dispossess thee of an Angels place?
Graced with more beauty then with beauties grace,
Expect revenge for heavens revenged will be
Of such vow-breaking miscreants as thee.
Wast not enough to scorn me for my want,
But thou must cherish me with fained love;
And then triumph, and ore my ruins taunt?
In constant minion that do change and move
The ball of thy affection, to approve,
Some goulden Ass perchance that will admire
Not half so much thy self, as thy attire.
Some goulden calfe of Horeb will appear,
First of his house: decended from a bagg
Of rustie gould, and he will call thee dear
Respective Lady: then his head he will wagge,
And swear by ^^^c^ow pin of his summer-^^ng
He loves thee derely, thou must be his bride,
Since store of angels guard him on each side.
Thou must have waxen tapers wrought in gould,
Thy beads of purest Amber earth can yield,
Thou must not tread upon polluted mould,
Nor walk abroad into the open field,
Without thine estridge tail to be thy shield,
Thy drink must Nectar be, and thou must eat
Such meat, as for thy divine powers is meet.
Thy rusticke groom that talks of saluing sheep,
Of wether-gals, and of the next years dearth,
Will thee Dorinda like a Lady keep,
And feed thee with the dainties of the earth,
Replenished with pastures yielding mirth:
For every shepherd with his shepherds crook,
Will strive who may most on thy beauty look
Here will be Mopsus with his waineskot face,
There Damon with his trull will thee attend,
Then will old Acmon come with weary pace,
And Melibeus he is thy husbands friend,
Leaning upon his staff, will homeward send
For some mean gift, some cheese cake to divide
Amongst the bride-maid^ and their courtly bride.
Among the rest thy Vulcane will be there,
Smeered with seacole, comely ^or his color,
And will begin to tie thy glittering ^aire
In tresses of pure gould: which are made fowler
By his irreuerend hands: where some controler
Will curb his boldness: am I bold (quoth he)
To touch those hairs that do belong to me?
No minion, no, you must not now partake
The gaudie fashions of a giddie brain,
But you must leave them for your husbands sake,
And use those tender parts to rural pain,
To yield unto your spouse a double gain,
For rest assured Dorinda there be some,
Do marry you for after hopes to come.
And be resolved though such protest they love,
Calling the heavens to record: they will be
Such as perfidious Tereus: and will prove
The very ruin of your progeny,
And bring your state in time to misery:
Then will you wish (but wishes come too late)
You had but wist the end of your estate.
But why Dorinda should I mention thee?
Why should I name Dorinda, that is untrue,
A faith infringer, who affected me
And then forsook me; how should I renew,
the sad memorial which I had of you?
But with a pensive heart, a sigh, a groan,
To intimate how I am left alone.
Come all ye wood-gods and adorn my brow,
With a poor willow garland, to express
The lively colors of a tragic show,
The true proportion of my pensiveness,
Remote from comfort, frought with heaviness,
Where we will sing, though singing be unfit,
And every wood-nimph shall shed tears to it.
Come to my cell, and we will go together,
Unto Dorindas Nuptials, where will be
Great store of rural swains com'd flocking thither
A perfect relish of sweet ha^monie:
Where we may well Dorindas beauty see:
And see her dance laualto in that measure,
As needs must yield to all contented pleasure.
And I have Friends there that will help to place
Us, in a room contented, to s^ruiew,
The polishd colors of her curious face,
Which though they do my pensive woes renew
Yet am I blessed in that transparent show
Of glory and renown, which ioind together
Enforce all shepherds to come flocking thither.
Thus will we talk and prattle of her beauty,
With Epithetes well fitting her deserts,
And I will tender to her shrine my duty,
With offer of my love and of my heart,
Of which she does possess the chiefest part:
That she would daine for to accept that prise,
We consecrate to her transpercing eyes.
In laudem Dorindae: per Antiphrasen.
She is the mirror and the type of fame,
If that a blemish did not daze her light,
But that one blot does much empaire the same,
And has obscured the splendour of her sight:
The scope she aims at is not aimd aright,
If that one soil did not ecclips the rest,
She might be well reputed, worlds best.
-- Te Roma aligine caecam
efficit insequitur fugientem Roma Dorindam.
vid. Mant and Luc. in Fragment.
O what content have I conceau'd in thee
My sweet Dorinda? what a sugared smile,
A lip of comfort relished pleasantly,
An eye that would the prudent'st thoughts beguile?
O with what character, or in what style
Shall I describe thy feature glorious Saint,
Made of the most refined element?
The^ judge what wound it was surprised mine heart.
When thou proscribd me from thy cherefull court,
And with contracted brow bad me depart,
From that repose where comforts make resort:
The birds themselves that heard can make report:
For many time since I took leave of thee,
The birds themselves sung dirges over me.
Recall to mind the time, the place, the words,
For I have cause for to remember them,
And then conceive what sorrow they afford,
What cause I have for to surrender them
Into thy hands, that first did tender them,
O be not so hard-hearted, well I wot,
Thou can not answer that thou know the^ not.
O that so weak defective elements,
Vessels of frailty should insult ore strength,
That gould should be pressed down by excrements,
Or woman's power extended to that length,
That men (as clergy men) have but the tenth
Of their affections in you, and receive
Less comfort in your bed, then in your grave.
O what unhappy planet did attend,
The first arrival of mine hapless foot,
Or what discomforts did the furies send
To make me run a course so far about,
With no more thanks then if I ran it not?
O fruitless labor, for what labor lighter
The^ wash the Aethyope that is nere made whiter?
Much have I read of beauty, more of guile,
Which like a snake lies in the tender grass,
The baine whereof her glory does defile,
And lies interd, as that, which never was,
Or like a gliding stream whose course does pass,
And passing, cuts both hill and flowrie plain,
Scorning by nature to return again.
But thou condemn'st me for some careless words,
In that I was respectlesse of thy love:
O do not forge unkindness, that affords
More sorrow to my heart, then heavens above,
Or fatal Eris in her stigian grove,
What I have spoke I pray thee speak no more,
And I Will re^^nt what I have said before.
Inioyne me penance, I will undertake,
Alcydes labors to obtain your love,
Climing the Alps for my beloved sake,
So you distrust from your hard*heart remove,
And of my faith inuiolate approve:
For be assured I nere my love did show
To your estate, but love I bore to you,
But why run I astray so far remote
From that celestial scope I aimed at:
I love my love, and yet she knows not,
Or will not know my minds perplexed estate,
Those great distractions I conceived of late,
She will not love, she cannot like a swain,
Who once repulsed can make no suit again,
Well then surcease, and let this doleful Ode
Abridge the web of thy extracted grief,
Take up thy shepherds crook, make no abode,
This barraine pasture yields thee no relief,
But riuolets of teres whereof it is chief:
Then bid farewell to this disaster grove,
To Cupids arrows, and the queen of love.
Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo.
Yet when I talk of Cupid and his bow.
The queen of love that from mount Ida came,
Some more affecting passions I must show,
And paraphrase upon Dorindas name:
Where though I blush, for I am full of shame,
Yet in my blush, I seem to represent,
The beauty of my loves fair continent.
And when I look me in the dismal glass,
Where face redarts a face, me thinks I see,
The splendour of Dorindas comely face,
Where with her smile she does encounter me,
And drives my senses to that ecstasy:
That I in Lethe droun'd, as all forgotten,
Lets the glass fall, and so my glass is broken.
Then am I eased, deprived of that I loved,
Oppressed with sleep yet cannot sleep at all,
Till the remainders of my glass removed,
Which were dispersed by their untimely fall.
For they (an ecco like) do seem to call
And rouse me from my rest, surprised which care,
And rest of rest, declining to despair.
It may be (my Dorinda) if you wed,
Some splay-foot'd Vulcan you must make recourse,
Too too unwilling, to a loathed bed,
Whereas distastefull pleasure has no force.
But mixed with sorrow and with deep remore:
Hear me ( Dorinda) these few hymns shall tell
That though you loath me, yet I wish you well.
Diue to the very bottom of your heart,
And see the idiome of your lover there,
An indigested lump composed of art,
Where natures gifts did never yet appear,
Where folly first her banner seemed to rear,
An harsh distempred humor show^n in him,
A Brillus wit, and a Thersytes limme.
But he is religious: he can dirges say,
And has our ladies psalter all by heart:
He is modest, rich, and will each morning pray,
As if he had his prayers composd by art,
What you sustain he ever bears a part:
Nay more, to purchase your respective favor,
He Will take himself to any cotqueanes labor.
Indeed Alcydes for his Omphale,
Past many perils much degenerate
From former glory, pristine dignity,
Which ever made attendance on his state,
Too much obscured by infamy of hate,
For he to win a queen did then begin,
To tease his wool, to card and eke to spinne,
-- Et qui reges vicit, grandes labores egit.
victus amore cecidit:
Qui clauum, lanam exercet: ibid:
Nec nouit mentem comprimere,
qui tanta fecit. vid Senec.
Each morn would he his task imposed have,
Which in a woman's habit he performed,
And all to purchase her whom he did crave,
With curious roabes and precious gemmes adorned,
With whom in this disguise he long soiorn'd,
Till his long absence had his ruin wrought,
By Nessus blood, long time by Nessus sought.
-- Nessus hos struxit dolos:
cruore tincta est pallia semiferi (pater)
Nessusque nunc has exigit paenas sibi.
-- Et Oetaeum Nemus
suscipiat, ignis, Herculem accipiat rogus.
Senec: in Oetae: Hercul.
Believe me (fair Dorinda) if that love
Consist in orisons, I must confess,
Reason you have your fancy to remove,
Since heavens forgive, frequent I nothing less,
Nor can I love by solemn prayers express.
Hymns, pastorals, and pleasant lays beseem,
Rather then orisons so fair a Queen.
If Hero had Leanders form affected,
For rites or ceremonies consecrate
Unto the powers above: she had respected
The Temple more to Juno dedicate,
And had distempred lust in greater hate,
But she devoted was unto his shrine,
For carnal pleasures, not for hests divine.
What comfort can a beauteous maid conceive
In contemplation, since the practike part
Better accords with her, and she does crave
A sovereign salve to cure her wounded heart,
Which cannot be performed by men of art,
For learned Sophisters may reason well,
But what will please your sex they cannot tell.
Thus therefore praise I, and yet discommend,
This harsh, yet sober kind of speculation,
That frames her engine to a fruitless end,
About heavens motion and Sphaeres elevation,
Yet cannot make her use of recreation:
Wherefore it is fruitless, and a barraine seed
That loves to grow alone, and hates to breed.
Renoumed lady, least I wrong your ears
With the distasteful temper of my pen,
My muse her self from further course forbeares,
To shadow out your virtues to such men,
As live obscured in obliuions den.
This therefore I have writ to blase your name,
And not through hate for to ecclips the same.
Sooner shall Phoebus leave his iuorie carre,
And give his regiment to Phaeton:
Sooner shall Mars that powerful god of war
Retire in peace, and love to lie alone:
Sooner shall Sysiphus to roll his stone
Surcease, then I surcease to empall your days
With poets wreaths, the laurel and the baies.
To Dorinda, successiue Nuptials.
Et quis me retulit laurea dignum,
Qui nequeo digna laud Dorindam
euehere ad astra? etc. in eleg. lib. 3.

Purest Nymph that Hyble bred,
With Ambrosia nourished,
Beauties glory, natures mirror,
Heavens blessed Trophie, worlds terror,
Nature made thee and thy feature
As it seems to put down nature,
Most admit'd, when most dejected,
Humble most, when most erected.
Lady Flora with her beauty,
Tenders thee her vigin duty:
Hymen too, does chaplets carry
To adorn him thou do marry:
Gods of all sorts have descended,
And their bounties have extended,
Some with roses mixed full sweetly,
Some with spikenard came to greet thee.
Nere was marriage day so graced,
Since by Hymen all are placed,
As sweet flowers set in a border,
Gods and goddesses in order,
There sits Jove with Juno Queen,
Here Diana clad in green,
Here god Mars that hero stour,
Here crabd* Vulcanes limping foot.
Here sat Venus smouth as down
In a purple velvet goune:
There Minerua whose deserving
Had a laurel for her learning:
Here above their heads did fly,
With winged speed God Mercury:
Aeolus at last did come,
But for wind there was no room.
Neptune from his liquid cell,
Bad the seas and storms far^well:
Nereus no more would swim
In his streams, but followed him*
Thus all meeting, joy appeared,
Well with wine their hearts were cheered,
Till their wine to sleep resolved,
Made these Nuptials be dissolved.
Helicons poor inhabitant
Astraeas farewell to Dorinda.
Farewell Dorinda, we must now no more
Talk of our maiden pleasures we have had,
Nor sit along upon the silver shore,
Sighing and puling, calling on that lad,
That purblinde Cupid, that did wound us sore:
Which made us pensive, so perplexed and sad,
That we with solemn protestations swore
To be revenged: that he himself might know,
Though he could shoot, yet we could break his bow*
How often and many times have we two walked
In that same flourie Mede, which does adioine
Thy fathers house, and have securely talked?
Where having naught to do, we used to proine
The poppie branches, which did then exalt,
Their tops too high: where we would straight combine
Those blossoms we had cropped laying together,
Our heaps in one which had been lopt by either.
But now that vernant spring is past and gone,
And dismal winter with his hoarie brow
Sits on my cheek, that thus am left alone:
That Stem shows withred leaves, that ^rst did show,
Fruits that deserved to be looked upon,
Which barrennes was first procured by you,
But i will not blame you: you have lost your mate,
But you have changed for a better state.
Have me commended unto Hymen's bower,
Tell him I wish he would come visit me,
And if I do resist his sacred power
Let me of after joys excluded be:
Too long I fear I keep a mellow flower,
Which once thou had, but now is gone from thee,
Believe me sweet Dorinda, I divine,
Ere many days my state must answer thine.
Which if it do, our former thoughts of love,
So well repressed in so equal bounds,
We once shall make repair unto that grove
Where pensive passions first received their grounds,
And make a fool of that same Ape of love
By whom we once endured many wounds:
But now preserved, redeemed, enjoying either,
Admire our equal states, envied of neither.
To Eliza, a pastoral Hymn.
-- Et ortum refer iuuat:
Inclitae domus alta trophaea petit*
Non minus genere preripiens decus,
quam forma nitida lauds dispergens suas. ibid.

Mounseur de Tygres, man of great estate,
Had but one daughter, whom he did esteem:
Whose front confronting beauty, Vesus sat,
And all those graces which we gracious deem,
Then which a rarer sight was never seen,
Since beauty lost her beauty and decayed
^n Idas mount: as I have heard it said.
Her hair like Ph^ebus rays disparcling gould,
Sent such a luster where she passed by,
That some have thought as I have heard it told,
Fair Cytheraeas train approached nie:
Such was the virtue of her piercing ^ie,
And some that dwelt near to Elysa say,
The nights she walked on seemed as light as day.
Many poor swains would nosegaies sweet co^pose
Of eglantine, the dasie, and the dill,
Which they did consecrate: and she would choose
Some flower among the rest which she kept still
In her ambrosian bosom, where an hill
Of sweeter flowers and branches seemed to be,
Then any mount or grove in Hesperie.
Yet of this beauty nature had bestowed,
She was not proud, but of that humble strain,
As by her modest blush more fair she showed,
Then to be courted by a country swain,
Of ^arre more worth then pastures could contain:
For she was fair, so fair and full of favor,
As Pan the shephard-god made suit to have her.
But Pans tanned skin paued not with her smoth down*
She better seemed to be Apolloes Queen,
The seeds of virtue were so fully grown
Virtue her self might take her for her theme:
Derived sure from some celestial stream:
For such a stream distreamd from her pure mind
Of gracious gifts, that like it is hard to find.
This beauties mirror graced with such a feature,
Had a more luster, then that country swain,
Or any rural bogge or homebred creature,
Could hope by their deserts ere to attain,
Such precious Jewels must be got by pain,
Where every tripping Satyr can supply
A decent measure in loves symmetrie.
This gracious Queen framed for a higher court,
Was by a poet suited: but his pen
Seemed too too rude for her, whose spread report
Had driven an admiration in all men,
And sacred wood-gods that suruiued then,
Wherefore (as coy) this poet she did scorn,
And eke the wreath which did his head adorn.
Shall I (quoth she) a rithmer entertain,
A comicke iester to my Nuptial bed,
The harsh-discordant tunes of every swain,
To be with ends of poems nourished,
Or with a vain phantastique humor fed?
O no, I cannot brook the laurel wreath,
Or marry such as love to sell their breath.
I am not borne of that dejected stem,
Nor have I my beginning from that root,
That I should match my self with worthless men,
Or in a bed of poems set my foot,
Where love enuiron'd is with fear and doubt,
Prophets and poets they can write and sing,
But women they affect another thing.
It is not lays sung in Dianas grove,
Nor of Astraeas beauty can procure,
The height of our affection or our love:
No^ can our sweet respect with them endure,
Who live as if they were of love secure.
Maids are not pleased with fruitless contemplatio^
But leaves the knowledge, loves their recreation.
Th^s my position is, nor will I yield
Unto the ^ickle judgment of the vain,
Who seek to win me, yet must lose the field:
That labor's lost which does produce no gain:
Nere can I love a poets wanton strain,
For this I find, they that of love write best,
In actions of true love can do the least.
Mounseur de Tygres hearing what she said,
VV^s well content, for he no poet loved:
And therefore (as it seemed full of delaied
Th'effecting of their loves at first approved,
Which by some accident at last removed:
And therefore in all have took hold of time,
Belike for to extract his daughters line.
This thus resolved (for she was well resolved)
Mounseur de Tygres did a contract make
With young Gastylio: who inners inuolu'd
Part for himself, and partly for her sake,
In weal and woe his mistress state partakes:
As it was fit, for fitting it should be,
That man and wife have one community.
Both did adore one Idol, both repaired
Unto one Saint* set in a gorgeous shrine,
Which Roman pomp lest it should be impaired,
Talking of rites, they called them most divine:
Whose columns framed loosing wise did shine
With burning Tapers on their Altars hung:
Under the stairs whereof the Flamines sung*
And least I should defraud you of that state
Which so transparently appeared to all
In those solemnis'd rites, I Will explicate,
How, when, and where, these marriage hests befell:
Which thus in brief I do intend to tell:
That you may show in aftertimes to come,
No rites more solemn then the rites of Rome.
Si nec amare licet, licuit cantare Poteae:
Si non authorem diligis, acta legas.
Elizaes marriage day with all Roman celebritie solemnised: with the Muses
salutes, and Graces several gifts.
Sic mea Romano cecinisse camaena cothurno
Gaudeat, et Veneris pignora chara sisae.

ELizaes nuptials so long expected,
Now were approaching, where in solemn sort
Each thing was plast, as if th'aethereall court
Whose diamantine walls the Gods protected
Had been there present: for all was effected
With such respect, as same would come far short
In her relation: yet I mean to show
Th'Epitome of this great work to you*
A curious Table made of citre wood,
Spread ore with tissue, well imbrodered,
With store of dainty cates replenished,
Where on a row the sacred Muses stood
Singing a song of Hebe deifide,
Was there drawn forth. Next that there seemd a flood,
Of fair Sea-nimphs, for Nimphs they seemd to be
Bathing their milk white skins deliciously.
They sung a song of Neptune to the shore,
The shore resounding with a sweet consent:
The like whereof was sildome heard before,
That Nimphs, whose glory is most eminent,
Should deigne to grace with their diuiner power
The feasts of mortal men: base continent
For such blessed feet to walk on: yet they came
From sea to earth to spread Elizaes name.
Next those, admired graces took their place,
Richly enthroned as their worth deserved:
With ^ies reflected on Elizaes face,
As if love sick, for so the most observed:
Wishing (vain wish) she were their fellow grace
For now she was no fellow: for they served
In all subjection to her, and would take
Tasks ill befitting graces for her sake.
I Will give thee (quoth Thalia) utterance
A honey dropping tongue which shall dissolve
The marble hearts of men: sweet eloquence
Whose powerful virtue shall each doubt resolve
And match thy beauty with the excellence
Of divine beauty: what thou shall reuolue
In thy close breast shall be performd by thee,
Making thee honored for a deity.
I Will give thee (quoth Aglaeia) pure invention
To pass the spheres with apprehensiue wings
Crowning the issue of thy b^est intention
With wreaths more glorious then victorious kings
Or Heroes ere received, quick apprehension
Shall bless thy memory with the happiest things
Th'auspicious hand of Fortune can procure:
For whom the graces grace, must needs be sure.
And I will give (said grave Euphrosine)
The poise of nature judgment to approve
Or disaproue as it best likes thee,
To judge twixt hate and mind attractiue love:
The sagest brain deriues her wit from me,
Rapt with the infusion of the powers above:
Thus shall thou be adornd with graces feature,
To make thee heavenly of an earthly creature,
Thus made a goddess by the sacred powers,
Whose glorious scepters sway the ocean,
And this same massy frame this earth of yours,
With all the beauty of your little man:
Wherein at first virtues pure springs began
With pearly drops of soule-bedewing showers:
To rinse our Errors: so distained now
As he that made her, hardly can her know.
Thus, thus, eternisd (for eternity
Waits on the Graces) she with modest smile,
And shamefast blush, framed this short reply
As sweet as short couched in a comely style;
Much does Eliza thank your deity
That you would deigne times minutes to beguile
In such an homely cell: a cell indeed,
For such as you that spring from heavenly seed.
O you divine and glorious Quiristers,
That sing sweet Hymns in heavens high Hierarchy,
You who are made the Angels ministers,
Filling their hearts with gladsome harmony.
Of happy tidings blessed messengers,
Infused by the power of sacred Deity.
You sweet Organs that are consecrate
To heavens blessed Nuptials, bless my nuptial state.
You are the nectar rivers that diffuse
Their well distreaming currents ore the earth
So as no mount nor humble vale can choose
But to be fruitful. Your thrice glorious birth
Inspired pure knowledge in the Cadmian M^se,
Making her fill the earth and Sea with mirth.
Thrice blessed offspring of so blessed a sire
Whom plants, springs, groves, and all the gods desire.
If to the sea I turn, lo you are there,
Moving the Sirens with your warbling voice,
If to the mountains, likewise you appear,
Making the rocks re-eccho with your noise:
If to the fertile plains, I likewise hear
You pretty music in the shepherds voice.
Thus Sea, rock, mountain, and each flowery plain
If you begin will answer you again.
I^ Philomela with her woeful note
Weauing a pricking bramble to her breast,
Retire in secret to deplore her lot,
Crying on Progue whom she loved best
With trickling tears, not having yet forgot
Who gave revenge to that incestuous beast,
Adulterate Tereus: if that you come by
Will leave sad odes and chirpe more cheerfully*
And reason good your heavenly influence
Gives a sweet tutch unto the Amyclean lyte,
Makes her stay rivers by her eminence,
Divert the nature of aspiring fi^e,
Move shady woods to change their residence,
Mountains declining, vales ascending higher.
Showing far more then mortal powers could show
Drawing beginning and their end from you.
Then gracious Graces, shower such streams of grace
Upon the ensuing progress of my time,
That by the glorious luster of your face
Such rays of virtue and respect may shine
I^ me, my issue, and succeeding race,
That all may bless this happy state of mine.
Who to advance the honor of our house
Brought from one stem so many virtuous.
It is not eloquence, Eliza craves,
That smells of gain, and gain is stale to shame,
Such mellow gifts the better sort depraues,
Loosing for corrupt breath a glorious name:
Fie on attractiue breaths that still receive
Yet by receiving do augment their shame:
No, no, let virtue make me eloquent,
Unstained virtue is most eminent.
Nor is it in^ention does Eliza please,
I l^aue Archia that: our thoughts be pure,
To make our Fame renowned, when the least
Of our expired life's shall loose their power,
Getting that statue, after our decease
Which all devouring time can nere devour,
The glorious name of virtue, which fair tomb
Shall mention us in after times to come.
Ye graces three, how well would this white stole,
This precious Albe adorn Elizaes shrine?
Which no detraction nor reproach could soil,
But made eternal by the powers divine,
An happy end of times laborious toil,
A blessed period to these days of mine:
When for exchange of times mortality
Heavens were my due and heavens eternity.
Nor do I care for judgment, so I have
So much as may discern twixt carths delight
And those high ioies which ripest judgment crave
Twixt Titans torch, and Thetis p^tchie night:
So much as may my name from darkness save,
To make her heir of that supernall light
Which the judicious wish: that judgments best
Where she directs her scope at sacred rest.
O (quoth Aglaia) nuptials ill befit
Such virtuous spirit^: we must have you dance,
And leave discourse of virtue, which will get
Pensive distractions, though you talk perchance
Of virtue now, yet youl'e relinquish it:
Hymen who does your fortunes thus advance,
Will seem much grieved, if you should seem to be
Virtues defender in this Iubile.
What colors best befit a marriage day?
Not sable, that pertends too black event:
But brighter colors such as flowery May
Used to put on when Boreas seasons spent
And all the fields put on their rich array,
Each odorous flower and blossom redolent.
When the green mantle of the checkred earth
Seems to reuiew her fresh and cheerful birth.
Such should thy vestments be (fairespotlesse queen)
And as the birds which pratle on each spray,
Telling their tales unto the meadows green
Their loves, their likings by the break of day,
Discour^ing naught which might unpleasant seem
But as true makes impatient of delay:
They wish (poor birds) each moment to approve
The happy fruits of their conceived love.
Now by the flowery pastures they send out
Their warbling voices: where their lovely mates
With broad extended wing in hot pursuit
For their admired loves together wait,
Till by long search at last they find them out
Where they begin to enjoy that happy state,
Happy to them (good birds) which long before
They did expect, but now expect no more.
Thus, thus, Eliza, should thou solemnize
This glad arrival of thy nuptial state,
Since powers divine become to eternise
With happy presence thy succeeding fate
That all the glorious powers may memorise,
These festiue triumphs they have seen of late.
Come, come, forbear, put on Elizaes brow,
Ask but the Muses, they will tell thee how.
Even as we see when clouds are quite dispersed,
And glitri^g beams send out their splendour bright
Or as when storms be past, whose fragor perst
The tender branches with their thunder light,
Or as the earth once pining now reuerst
Bringing her long concealed ioies to light
So did Eliza change her sable hue,
As if the graces formd her all anew.
She Is for no strain of virtue, but delight
Plays on her pretty bosom: pensive thoughts
As Hymen's enemies be put to flight,
Fruits of more pleasure by this day are wrought
In the fair Tablet of her beauteous sight,
Then Jove to Swan-like Leda ever brought,
For that was stolen curbd by a jealous eye,
But this was such as claimd free liberty.
No dirges now she sings, but hymns of joy,
Moved with a private motive of content:
No sorrow now, no anguish, nor annoy
Have any power in her blessed continent:
She talks of Venus, and the waggish boy,
And blames Adonis asking what he meant
He did not honor Venus beauty more,
But leese a mine of treasure for a Bore?
^^t borish lad (quoth she) pity it is,
Such a good face should have so ill a wi^,
That when thou art blessed, do not conceive thy bliss
But see a gem and yet respectst not it.
Children are pleased with flowers: a fruitless kiss,
A smile, or so, such babies best befit:
Wherefore lest thou such flowrs should seem to stain,
In fruitless grouth a flower thou do remain.
Thus was Eliza turned: all on the flant,
Like Mirrhas daughter or Hermione,
Having in hope what really she wants,
Presaging comfort to posterity,
Concluding thus: mansions where Graces hant
Cannot dejected or surprised be
By times mutation: for no fatal hour
Can raze that fort, that is kept by divine power.
And as we often times see in summer time,
A shower of candide hailestones rattling down,
Which makes the tops of touring oaks decline,
The silver banks of rivers overflowed,
Proining the tendrells of the lofty Pine,
With branchy cedars that are highest grown:
Where suddenly the sun sends out his beams,
Which quite dissolues the hail and stills the streams
So this fair beam of Titan thus diffused,
Into the amber border of her heart,
Which was before (poor wench) by her refused,
Now yields relief unto her former smart,
Resuming sweet delights too long abused:
Each proper virtue flows to every part.
The tempest now is past, the sun appears,
Which stops the source of all ensuing fears.
Then fi^ it were since that Elizas mind,
I^ robed with nuptial thoughts: the solemn night,
Should be portraid, her t^uest ioies assignd,
To help her former hope with hopes delight:
Descend a little lower: you shall find
The model of chaste love decolord right:
Not sensual affects which relish lust,
For lust's not love: since love is pure and just.
The gloomy night, when labor takes his rest,
Birds take their perch and savage beasts their den,
The night when hoary cares cease to infest
With hot assault the silent sleeps of men:
That blessed night, these nuptials made it blessed
Confirmd her hopes by her approaching then.
For she addressed for pleasure does undress,
Her self to reap more perfect happiness.
Now every muse had sung their last good night,
And had ascended up Parnassus mount,
Wishing her as much joy and sweet delight,
As ere they ioied, while bathing in the fount
Hight pure Castalia in Dianaes sight
And her attendants: Delia would account
Them far more happy then the princely Jove,
For they were free but he was tossed in love.
The azure curtains of the silver heaven
Craving their absence: now the ioifull bride
Had of her bride cake to the Muses given,
To the three Graces and the Nimphs beside,
All which attended her: but now the even
Made them though willing longer to abide,
Dissolve their ranks Eliza left behind,
To find the intention of her husbands mind.
Annotations upon the last Canto.
WE read in the Roman Festiuals: when any marriage was to be solemnised, the
parents of the parties, or their friends were accustomed to bring forth a fair
Table of citre, curiously engraven: Vbi fercula optimis delicijs assluentia
^ocare assucrunt.

-- A song of Hebe deified.

Hebe (as the Poets feign) was Iu^oes daughter, and made Jupiters cuppebearer*
before he fell in love with Gannimedes: she is called most properly by the
Poets -- dea Iuuentutis the Goddess of youth -- Vide Ovid: in Metamorp.

Woere on a row the sacred Muses sat.
Clyo, Cally^pe, Melpomene, Euterpe, Polybymnia, Erato, Urania. -- of ^a^re
Soanimphs.

Nereides a Nereo appellatae. As the Naiades be derived from Nais -- a Nymph of
the Fountains. Which be distinguished into 3 sorts by the ancient Poets -- in
Nereides -- Naiades -- Et Pieri^es. Nereid^s circa maritimos locos, Na^ades
cir^a riuos and amaeniores sontes, Pierides circa montium sublimiores vertices
et spiracula versa^tur. And so Gerson (in his description of beasts) diuides
the several and distinct kinds of Satires into three sorts: Satyrs, waich
frequent woods, of a rude. savage and in^ractable Nature, which sometimes (more
properly in my opinion) are called Syluanes, quia i^ syluis and soli^udinibus
asperioribus vitam colen^es. Fa^^es, all which took their name from Faimus,
son to Picus, and father to Latinus: agrestem vi^am agunt, rapinis and
violentia little necessita^i subuenientes. And Dryades a Dryade Hyppolochi filio
ducta. But of these you may read more amply in the fragments of Lucilius* and
others, whose exacter wits have been craploied about affairs too impertinent:
bringing in the clouds speaking with Aristophanes, planting their inventions
upon aerie foundations.

They sang a song of Neptune to the shore.
-- resonantia littera reddunt
carmina carminibus. --
Vid: fabulam H^lis vnius de Herculis socijs, qui in Ascanium Flumen missus, vt
aquam ab eo hauriret, deflexo capite precepitius procidisse fertur, etc.

-- Next those admired Graces took their place.

Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosyne who had the power to bestow 3. several gi^ts:
^loquence, invention, and sound judgment, upon whom they pleased.

-- In heavens high Hierarchy.

Caeleste imperium in altissimum dignitatis cumulum prouectum; quo nihil
sublimius (ait orator) vt altius extendatur, aut clex gautius, vt maiorem in se
splendorem amplectatur etc.

-- You are the nectar ri^ers.

-- Nectar vt ingenium. Nectar and Ambrosia the food of the Gods.

-- The Cadmian muse.

Cadmus was son to Agenor, King of Phaenicia, who sent by his father to seek
Europa his sister whom Jupiter had stolen away, and no^ finding her, durst not
return, but planted himself in Baeo^ia, where he erected that most famous
City T^ebes: he was excellent in the composition of all measures, but most
addicted to prose: wherein he so exceeded, that his filed and elegant st^le was
made as a president to after ages; he was thought to be the first who ever
writ in prose, but I can hardly assent to that opinion: but rather I could
admit of their assertion, who affirm him to be the first that reduced the
Phenicians from their barbarous and impolished kind of discourse, instructing
them in a more exquisite form of speaking.

-- Moving the Sirens with the warbling voice.
Syrenum voces et Cyrcis po^ula nosti etc.
Horatius lib: 1o Epist: ad Coll: The three daughters of A helous and Calliope.

-- If Phylomel w^^h her woeful note.
Phylomela King Pandions daughter, whom Tereus ravished: deploring her own
calamity unto her sister Progne, who was wife to Tereus.

-- Unto the Amyclean lyre.
Aryon -- being born in Amycle a City of Laconia, takes his name of the place
of his birth by a Tropical clocutio^, Metonim.

Brought from one stem so many virtuous
The virtuous progessie of El^za, which is paralleld if not superior to the
best reputed families Septentrional.

-- Ask but the muses they will tell ye how?
Musa -- Quas varijs cecinisse modis -- iuuat.
Nor if invention ^oth Eliza please;
Invention which is the producer of things true, or such things as have a
resemblance of truth: giving a probable reason of whatsoever is spoken or
produced; -- When the young men of Fonia had haled out that golden T^^pode,
which was to be given to the wi^est man of all Greece* it was brought first
unto Th^les, then to S^lon, and so cursiuely unto all the wise Sages of Greece:
by which was employed the moderation of their desires, rather disesteeming
their own judgments, as unworthy of such an inestimable treasure, then
attributing any thing to themselves, to be thought wise in the eye of the
world. This by an Analogy is inferred by the modest and continent affections
of Eliza, who rather disparageth her own worth, that she may avoid the censure
of presump^ion, then by the pass of titularie praises, to vendicate the least
honor, as a dependence of her merits.

Vnde Senec: in Oedipod:

-- Nec pressae graui
spiritu antennae preman^: tuta me media vehat
vita decurrens via. --
Twixt Tytans torch and Thetis pitchy night
Tytan is used for the Sun: he was son to Caelum and Vesta.

Th^^s daughter to Nereus God of the Sea, she is taken for the night.

-- Mare pro cubili noctis. Allegor:
Virtues defendor in this Iubile.
This Iubile was continued in aunc^^nt time, and celebrated every 50. year
but this word signifi^s a private solemnity, (in this place) consecrating
their vows to Hymen the God of marriage, ^o paean: etc.

Aglai^ seems to reprehend Eliza for her too much modesty, moving her to suit
her thoughts to the present time, which Seneca shadows out in describing the
habites of both the conqueror and conquered in these words.

-- Noscere hoc primum decet quid facere victor
debet, victus pati.
E^h odorous flower, and blossom redolent.
Salutaria quaedam, citra tactum gustumne Odore proficiunt.
A brief epitomising of the cheerful springtime: illustrating the season by
her habit. But as true makes impatient of delay.
Vid: Horac: 1o lib: epist: epist: ia.
-- Vid: Catull: 1o. lib. Eleg. Eleg. 30.
Et Ovid: in Epist. ad Hippolit.
Whose fragor pierst the tender branches
-- Horat; Carm lib. 2o. oda xa. Or as the earth once pining now reuerst
-- Mutat terra vices and decrescentia ripa^
Flumina protere^t.
-- Then Jove to Swanlike L^da.
Jove who fell in love with Leda, wife to King Tindarus: she was transformed
into a Swan, bringing foo^th two eggs. of the one whereof came Poll^x and
Hellen, of the other Castor and Clytemnestra.

-- Jealousy.

Jealous of Tindarus her husband, who was prone enough to apprehend each
occasion of suspect. No dirges now. -- etc.
These verses have reference to Eliz^es profession-making dirges, Trentalls,
and Roman Anthem^s no less pernicious to her own purity (which if not
blasted with this soil, were most eminent) then commodious to her carnal or
Ghostly father. In fruitless growth a slower thou do remain.
At eruor in store mutabitur x. lib. Metamor.


Like Mirrahs daughter or Hermione. Venus was daughter to Myrrha: there were
two Hermiones the one daughter to Mars and Venus; The other daughter to
Menelaus and Helena, who being betrothed to Orestes, but married to Pirrhus,
Oresies to revenge his wrong, slew Pirrhus and took Hermione to wife. -- For
no fatal ^ower,
Can raze that fort that's kept by divine power.
Here she intimates the cause of her transmutation not subjected to any peril,
nor opposed by any power either external or internal.

The Rhe^ians thought them secure, because the tomb of Al^x was erected in
their region. Octa by the dispersed ashes of Hercules conceived no small
pleasure: being persuaded the increase of their commerce with foreign
countries proceeded from the happy possession of his monument.

The like we read of the vain conceits of the Romans after the transportance
of their Palladium into Italy, refer^ing the whole state, welfare and
preservation of their City, public and private affairs unto that poor
helpless monument; which is pretily shadowed by S Augustine in 1, de Ciuitate
Dei: where he vehemently seeks to demolish and recalcinate the whole Fabrique
of the Gentile Idolatry and that by humane and moral reasons* expostulating
the cause why they should repose such affiance in them, whom ^hey have found so
impotent even in their own affairs? For (says he) if they could have
performed any things* ^t is likely they would have done their endeavor, when
those inhabitants which adored them, that people which with such reverence
admired them, was not only quite extinguished, but their Temples polluted,
their ancient monuments defaced, and themselves contemptuously expulsed.

But this was the blindness of that age which could not discern of that inward
beauty and splendour of the mind bu^^^ed with a precipita^t judgment made them
their governors. their Tutelares Dij, their protectors, that needed supporters
to s^^taine themselves. But I have made my digression too amp^e: especially in
a tract which rather concerns pastoral Elegio^, then such heathen Prodigies.
For lust's not love since love is pure andiust.
A maine opposition betwixt love and lust: the one sensual, ever inclined to
that which yields temporary delight: the other plants her affections upon a
mo^e firm groundworke, a sincere and a spotless intention.

To read of those chost and honorable matrons of Rome, who have excelled in all
purity and integrity (as far as was possible for the pagans to attain unto in
perfection): as Co^eli^ the mother of Gracchus, Portia wife to Brutus, Cleobu^^
daughter to that wise and prudent lage Cliobalus: Sul^itiae wife to Calepus,
and that memorable Paula wife to Seneca* These knew the perfect form of love,
and were well read in the precepts of chaste imbracements, but far from the
l^ast conceit or apprehension of lightness: but who shall contrariwise read
of the insatiable disposition of Messalina, the licentious affections of
Oristilla, the incestuous desire of Phedra, and the impetuous fury of Medrea,
shall presently conceive a maine repugnance (or contrariety rather) betwixt
love and lust: since by the one, be commonweales in all unity and conjunction of
minds established, wholesome and beneficial laws enacted, the bounds of
kingdoms dilated, and as well private as public affairs with due order and
administration managed. For loves definition according to the opinion of
Aristotle (of all Philosophers most profound) and Plutarch (of all moralls most
elaborate) is this: Love is impartial, yet of reason forgetful, she grounds
her affection upon virtue, deeming that which is impious, unworthy of a mind
generous.

But lust the bane of flourishing Empires: the distasteful and unsavory fruits
whereof Troy* long since has experience of by a Helen, Spartae by a Scedesa,
may be thus defined: she is respectlesse of the means, so she may attain the
end: her aim is to satisfy her own exorbitant affection, which to gain she
is secure of her own ruin, countries desolation. The present discourse which
I have taken in hand puts me in mind of that pretty and pithy induction of
Lucian, bringing in Venus, demanding of Cupid for what cause he uses to wound
with his virulent dart of love Jupiter, Neptune, Apollo Juno, but exempteth
Pallas, Diana, and all the Muses from the chains of his servile affection: and
he answers her: when I come near Pallas she threatens me, and opposes my
pleasures which I am wont to instill into the minds of men: the Muses they are
employed insacred labors, continual exercises to the end they may attain to
the perfection of their endeavors: Diana she frequents the woods, and retired
solitudes, neither caring for love nor the instructions of love: she observes a
restraint in her self and in her followers: she is too skillful in shooting to
be shot by Cupid.

The invention of Lucian is pleasant: prosecuting his whole discourse with such
apt and accommodate words, that I could not choose but take a modest digression,
to describe the powerful effects of labor, the sovereign remedies of good
and virtuous studies against the objections of such, who rather repose in
security to inuert the violent assalts of carnal and inordinate desires: whose
opinions resemble those of Aristo, Pyrrho, and Herillus, whose mature censures,
have been thought unworthy of all phylosophicall conuents. We ^r^ the least
secure, when in our own judgment most secure: and no malady more incurable
then that which is insensible: the whole progress of this subject* as it may
confirm it self, by infallible reasons, grounded on the fortress of divine
and profane traditions: so the Poet seems (as one who had no little experience
in the school of vanity) to conclude the general assertions of all with this
Epiphonema: ^^ut^ing his institution up with a caution, his caution with a
medicine. Otia si ^ollas periere Cupidini^ arcus.
Contemplaeque iacent and s^ue luce faces.
Take away sloth, and Cupid cannot shoot.
Thou may contemn him for his fire's put out.
B^rds take their perch and savage beasts their den.
Nature has ordained that every creature she has made, should be refreshed
with some moderate rest. Labor is sweet after rest and rest is a confirmer of
labor, the one without the other would make us dissolute, the one without the
other would make us effeminate. Sleep is but an Image of death ^a^th the Poet:
Vergill calls sleep a near kinsman to death: having such consanguinity with
sleep, that some of the ancient Philosophers (have termed it in plain terms
a fle^^: this moned (without all question) Theodorus that mirror of
magnanimity, a philosopher of excellent discipline, to be so respectlesse of
death, as to despise the menaces of a cruel ty^ant and when he thought to add
this as a greater punishm^nt unto him, that none should bury him: what answered
Theodorus? quod ad sepultur^m pertinet o te in^ptum si putas intenesse supra
terram an infra putrescam; here was resol^cion in an Ethnicke, making his
expectance the gole, at which he aimed, his threats (tyrants ensigns) in which
he gloried to vanquish an implacable tigre at his own weapons* -- And had
ascended up Parnassus top.
Parnassus a mount whereto the mus^s used to resort* we have three mountains
renowned for Musical celebrities: being called by the Poets Musaea solennia
dutum. The solemn or Sacred recluses or habitations of the gods: for thereto
they used to descend to hear the alternate compositions (for such please^
ther^ best) of the muses.

Modern examples may be produced of most exquisite lyricks, who enstiled
themselves inhabitants in the Flowery mountain Pernassus, as Theano daughter to
Metapon^us; Zenobia the Queen of Palmyra: Argentaria Pollia wife to Lucane who
is said to have been a fellow helper in all his compositions: even in the
heroickst measures which he ever compiled.

Edesia of Alexandria Corimathea who is reported to have excelled Pindarus that
famous Poet in apt and consonant cade^ ces* yea contending with him five
several times for the coronet or ga^land, which by the censure of the most
approved Judicials was given (as of desert) unto ^^^imathea.

Theodosia daughter to Theodosius the younger, me^ited great commendation for
her laborious dimensions, no less excelling in her own inventions, then in
extractions from others: reducing the fragments of Homer into centons, with
many other works of no less memory bearing yet her title in their Frontispice.
etc. -- Hight pure Castalius in Dianaes sight.
Castalius a fountain issuing from Parnassus, the streams whereof tropically
be taken for the influence of poesy. The Muses be called Castalides per
Sy^cedochen. Et vos Castalis font sorow^s etc. -- Delia would account.
Delia or Diana, so called of Delos an I Will of the Cyclades, bossded in with the
Aegean sea, here the Poets saigne Apollo and Diana to be borne. -- Now the
joyful Bride
Had of her Bridec^ke to the Muses given.
Pliny relates of these solemn uses, observed in ancient time: as the Cakes or
Wafers consecrate to Hyme^, with many ceremonies, as the aspersion of salt, to
signify unto us, Nuptials should be seasoned with a relish of sobriety. The
bride to be carried into the house (after her marriage rites were solemnised) to
intimate how unwilling she is to leese the inestimable gem of her virginity,
with many other observations which be more fully recorded in Ludouic. Viues, in
his instruction of a christian woman. The like we read, in the Antiquities of
Egypt, whose Pagan customs deserve no less memory then admiration for their
exactnes in all moral celebrities tempered with incredible modes^y.

These Annotations may be no less fruitful to the vn^ipe Poetaster, then
^ocrates glass was to his Scholars, or Cleanthes Table to convey the proper
and peculiar inventions of poesy (by a plain method) to every docile and
apprehensiue wit. Let such as read these few collections approve of my
endeavors, who have ever bended my intentions, to waine this age from her
infancy, and with the Elephant to induce them to wade into the depths of
profounder mysteries, always making this my impressa. Stare est obstare
caeptis.

But since the brooks of Helicon were troubled with every obscene foot; This
admired Art has been much obscured, not because her profession is ill, but
for her profess^nts, which ^re either ignorant, (which sort is more parde^able)
or pe^ulant of all sorts must detestable, in making Pernassus a stew, and the
Muses harlots: arrogating to themselves the names of Pandars, by the scurrility
of their own inventions: but such pregnant wits are ill bestowed on such
petulant brains, whose imaginations neither produce profit to themselves, nor
to their country to be esteemed above themselves* but deprave many blooming
wits (who the sooner budded the sooner blasted) conceive more delight in their
lascivious subjects then in tracts of greater consequence. Which Iuuenall
handles more fully in his four and ^wentith Satyr, accommodating his
discourse wholly to the instruction of youth.

Three kinds of these there be which deserve reprehension: The first,
time-obseruing Poe (...) sooth vice, and bolster their patrons errors. Such was
Aristobulus, whose works when Alexander heard to be far above truth, though
Annalls of his own memorable Acts, yet he threw the book over into the river
Hydaspis, saying, he was almost moved to send Aristobulus after: a good caveat
for clawing parasites. The second sort I propound as opposite to the first,
inuectiue Satyrists sharptoothd Epigrammatists: Eupolus was such whom
Alciby^des threw into the Sea Aegeum, for representing him (and that with
intolerable bitterness) upon the public Theater: adding this to Eupolus
throwing him ouerboord. Thou have often drowned me upon the Stage, Eupolu^, I
will once drown thee in the Se^.

The third venereall lyricks, who descant on their mistress proportion, aptly
epitherising her symmetrie, with such immodesty, that if Ovid was exiled for
his licentious writing and that by a Heathen, Epicharmus for composing one
unseemly song, and presenting the same to the Queen of Sparta, was doomed to no
less punishment: much more deserve they to be excluded all flourishing
commonweales, writing that which confers no less detriment to a well governed
state, then effe^^^^cy to such whose minds should be exercised in more viril
actions. Wherefore when Plato understood that the manners and dispositions of
men were much corrupted by the Theatrall profession (or rather prostitution) of
Poets, he exp^lfe^ them all forth of his common weal, leaving it to be
governed by philosophers, the gravity of whose judgments discerning right from
wrong, might diiudicate according to their knowledge.

But the licentiousnes of the Poets in P^atoes time may be a reason, that his
censure was so universal; more modesty becomes these times: nothing (of what
subject soever) is commendable in prose, but may retain her luster in verse:
yea more exactness of measures draw attention, always shutting up our labors
with a modest accent: non expectamus ^hea tri applausum. Plaut. But I have
extended my bounds further then I purposed: supposing no discourse more suting
either with argument of instruction or poesy then that which is succinctly
contracted. I will therefore proceed.

A description of the Morn.
AVrora sending out his tresses fair,
Garnishd the earth with his resumed light,
Bedewed moist with her impearled hair,
Deposed horned Luna queen of night,
And all the twinkling stars which did appear
By Phoebus iuory coach are put to flight,
Thus does the Sun dethrone the watery Moon
As high estates the lower do put down.
Down to the water does the Moon descend,
There to repose till Sol had run his course,
Up from the sea to earth does Sol ascend
Seeming anew to renouate his force:
The Suns beginning gives the moon an end,
This leaves worse for good, that good for worse.
This sends her luster to th'Adriatique Seas,
That takes her place among th'Antipodes.
The pitchy vale of silent night thus drawn,
When labor rubs his eyes and shakes of sloth,
Being unto the lower regions gone,
Aurora represents these lovers both,
To a fair tree, broad branchd that fruit brings none
Yet makes a show of fruit as others does.
Which he awaking sees, applies the ends
Unto himself, whom thus he reprehends.
The pensive thoughts of Gastilio, in Sapphycks.
Rouse up thy spirit, (creature most inhumane)
Fix thy contentment on Elizaes beauty,
To which the wood gods tied are in duty.
Shame fall a coward.
How many Hero'es have adored her Image,
Passing a torrent of approaching danger?
More then Alcides for a Deyanyra
Ere made adventure.
Let Hymenaeus who was ever present,
At thy solemnizd ^risons be graced,
With an eternal monument of glory,
Leave to be shame fast.
Shame may confound the shame to after ages,
To let a cheerful virgin lie beside thee,
And yet do nothing: worst of ills betide thee:
Learn to be wanton.
Nature has made the^ to her own dishonor,
To loath that subject which she first created,
To yield thee comfort shall her work be hated,
By thee rejected?
Art thou composed of an humane substance,
Flesh, blood and sinews, to refuse a pleasure,
Which far exceeds store of earthly treasure.
Fool be more hardy.
See but the fishes, how one love another,
Male with the female generates together,
What pure affection does appear in either,
Wonder of ages.
See the small Iuie, with her Iuy branches,
How she the poplar flowrishing imbraceth,
And as a spouse his spousall honors graceth,
So is she graced.
The savage tygre, who frequents the mountains,
Loves to be loved, is by love subdued,
And with his lovers presence is renewed.
Love is a loadstone.
For as the loadstone does attract his iron,
And with embraces shows his love unto it,
This fair resemblance shows as if he woed it.
Stones far exceed thee.
The liquid regions join their power together,
And those four divine elements adhering,
Seem as if all together were conspiring.
Equally moving.
The crauling serpents in their kind coiting,
Viper to viper in their generation,
Shows how dame nature in their propagation
Bred them for breeding
The birds that houer in the sky above us,
Will (if thou mark them) to affection move us,
Males love their females, so our femal^ love us.
Mates would be mated.
Observations upon two precedent verses, deduced out of Magyrus in his
Physickes.
-- For as the load stone does attract his iron:
Magyrus in his physickes calls Iton, Pabulum magnetis, the fuel of the
Magnete.

Ferri attractio impeditur presentia adamantis.
Occulta quadam antipathia: ibid.
Viper to viper.
Alcyatus in his Emblems: Pliny in his natural history: premorso capite maris
semen concipiens vipera: dum parit (proprio partu) vita priuatur.

Officiosa alijs exitiosa suis* Alcyat.
Quicquid parit, curam habet eorum, quae parit. Philos. axiom.
A Threnode occasioned upon the Authors discontent: in that he loves yet cannot
be respected: with a continued Hymn or Acrosticke sonnet best sorting with his
amorous passion.
Eternal anquish torment to my breast,
Languishing horror, ever scalding hot,
Imperious Queen that seeks thy loves unrest,
Shaken with tempest in a crasie boat.
Anchor of comfort let me lean on thee,
So shall it well go with my bark and me.
Beauties fair dasie, honor to thy maker,
Endu'd with natures fair admired treasure,
Throne of a goddess, chastities partaker,
Helm to my ship, the only port of pleasure.
Bles'd for thy feature and admired ever,
Always abiding fresh, defaced never.
Sapphicke.
Rest to the unrest, shadow of reposure,
To shade the weary from the parching sun shine,
O fair Eliza, blessed is that enclosure,
Nature has lent thee.
O dear remember but what solemn vows,
What vows, what protestations in that grove,
That grove, that grave which yields more pensive shows
Unto my tear swollen eyes, then ever love
Can make amends for: O remember me
And what pure hests I dedicate to thee.
Even in that garden clad with bitter sweets,
For what soere was sweet^ seemed sour to me,
With what fair words, what promises, entreates
Proceeded from my mouth to purchase thee.
Yet thou unkind: (unkindness is a sin)
To love that star-dazd Nymph, that loves not hm
Perhaps some words (as indiscreetly spoken,
As god ^ot simple souls do mean no harm)
Made your first bonds of fancy to be broken,
So as my folly might your wit forewarne,
Not to respect fond vows which do proceed,
As idle talk from some phantasticke head.
O let me call your self to record here,
Whether such semblance of my feigned love,
From time to time did ever yet appear,
That you should your affection thus remove?
O answer me dear love, O be so kind
Whom you will not love to satisfy his mind.
O thou will say I never fancied thee,
I cared not for the place where thou abode,
I took no pleasure, no felicity
In thy discourse: love where it is is showed:
O argue not so roughly, for you know,
Of love I never made external show.
But if your image be not in my breast,
Which I will carry still in spite of fate:
Then let me never reap that sacred rest,
That mansion of delight, that glorious slate.
O be more kind let that same love I bear,
Unto your self, more ioifull tidings hear.
Alas how many weary toilesome nights,
^aue I tossed to and fro, withouten rest?
Affrighted with such sad disaster sights,
As these short lines can no way make expressed:
And what is the cause I cannot rest, nor sleep?
Because thy beauty does mine eie-lids keep.
For when they would be shut thou keeps them open,
Making them look upon thy image fair:
As if amazd to see that glorious cope
With which the Spheres of heaven may well compare
And therefore puts mine eyes to double pain,
In opening them, and shutting them again.
Often have I dreamd, I did possess my love,
Rapt with a passion of a fond conceit,
Close were my fences: none of all could move
Their senseless numnes: but like servants wait
In all obedience both with tooth and hand,
To hear what thou their mistres would command
This golden slumber, slumber of delight,
For more content such slumbers yielded me,
Th^n any food I tasted: or the sight
Of my object, save the sight of thee:
Which slumber past and looking all about me
I was perplexd to lie alone without thee.
And yet no wanton or lusciuious thought,
Did ever move me for to wantonise,
For though that shrine of thine was long time sought
It was that I thy shrine might eternise,
That so our loves eternisd both together,
What chanced unto the one might chance to either
But I am lavish in confounded loves,
And weaues a web for chaste Penelope,
But two for Lais: Venus milk white doves,
Transport my erring senses; and agree
So to obscure the palace of my soul,
That what was pure should now be passing foul.
Do not believe such vipers as infest
With poisoned breath the glory of my name,
I vow to God that I have loved thee best,
And have been ere respective of my shame.
Let heaven and earth my mansion both remove,
When I do soil thy bed with foreign love.
O what unfruitful members were those spraies,
That nourishd Serpents in their flowery shade,
And fed our rooted loves with long delays,
Undoing that which nature first had made:
For this I think (if prophecies be true)
Nature ordained me to marry you.
Not nature but the divine powers above,
Which manage our affections as they please,
Extracting out of hate the constant love
Their minds contracted in the bonds of peace.
Even that same power (I think) does so ordain,
That though you hate, you once will love again.
The plants, the birds, the beasts, the fishes small,
Are made to love: see how the Iuy twines
Upon the ruins of a skaled wall,
Or twist's about the wastes of fruitful vines:
Embracing them with branches spreading broad,
Supporting them when grapes their science load*
The loving Turtle loves her faithful make,
Whom if she miss, she pines away and dies,
Abiuring mirth and pleasure for his sake
Filling the crispling air with doleful cries:
The stork, the Starling, and the sweer tuned thrush
Will seek their makes through every brake and bush
The libbard, Tigre, Panther, beasts most wild,
Can be subdued by loves sweet harmony,
Transformd from savage beasts to creatures mild,
Oppres'd (as seems) with loves extremity.
The cliuy mountains, and the vales below,
By echoes shrill, their loves pursuit do show.
The skalie fishes in their watery clime,
Taste of the fruit of love, each in their kind,
Observing season, nature, course and time,
Such relish pleasures in loves passions find*
That languishing they fall away and die,
When they are deprived of loves society.
If every creature thus ordained be,
For to observe the solemn rites of love:
Do thou suppose she has exempted thee,
No pensive passions ere thy mind to move?
O be not so deluded: dear you know,
You had a father, let your son say so.
What is a jewel worth, if ever kept,
Closely confind within the chest of earth?
No more is beauty, when occasion's slipped,
Gracing her Image with no second birth:
O let this after age thine Image find,
By some record which thou shall leave behind.
And what record? a specious issue left,
(Thy second image) to adorn the stage
Of this terrestrial frame of worth, bereft
If thou should die, surpr^s'd in blooming age:
O then since beauty is both green and tender,
It needs some for rosse, to be her defender.
Let me that fortress be, and i will support
Those freeborne blossoms of thy tender prime,
With thousand sugared kisses, and resort
With mir^h, and spikenard, daily to thy shrine,
This will I do, more would I gladly do,
If thou my love would for pure love allow.
Take these few lines and keep them still with thee
And reading them think now and then of me.
The poets legacy to his admired Eliza: devoted and bequested to her chastest
thoughts.
THy once deer friend but now despised of thee,
Bequeaths unto thy shrine, what ere is his:
His wreath and laurel, which for poesy,
Was given by Clio: for that muse did wish,
Much good unto thy lover: even like bliss
Fall on thy sacred temples, beauteous queen,
In far more plenty then to fore was seen.
Next I bequeath, that little wit I had,
Sma^l though it be, I have entitled thine,
That in thy waiward dumps perplexed and sad,
Some sparkling beams in thy conceit may shine,
Which thou will laugh at: and will call them mine:
But I ^enounce them, writ they were by me,
But for no end save this: to pleasure thee.
Then do I give, and in my gift bequeath,
All those external Trophies which I had:
The motive aier of my perswasiue breath
And that small pipe which used to make swains glad,
And s^uage Tigres in their fury mad.
This strain of music Orpheus far surpast,
For mine by all the sisters nine was graced.
This I bequeath unto thy gentle t^tch,
Tutch it sweet queen, and it will answer thee,
With far more music, yea with full as much
As old Arion with his harmony,
By mine, sweet Nymph, Dolphins shall carry thee
Sirens themselves, and Satires at command,
Shall bring thee safe unto th'Elizi^n sand.
Some little gifts, as cheese cakes, chestnuts sweet,
With some oblations which I vowed to Jove,
Shall be devoted to thy tripping feet,
That used to walk within the shady grove
Of Helicon and Ida mount of love.
These little gifts did Mopsus offer me,
And with like will I offer them to thee.
Two pretty fragrant nosegaies did I send,
Made of sweet flowers, which twisted up together,
Were given thee (as I wished) from me thy friend,
That thought of one might make thee think of either
But thou too marble hearted mind^ng neither.
Despised me and my gifts: which though but small
Yet they were great to me; for I gave all.
Next I bequeath that earring which I had,
But now I have not, for I vow its thine,
And those short poems which my first age made,
That I may say something thou have of mine,
For which though furies seeming to repine,
At such a blessing as my works possessed,
Let them repine I care not I am blessed.
I had the shrine of Venus in my chamber,
Which I resolud for to bequeath to thee,
With rosy locks and hair as pure as amber,
But there were some objections hindered me,
Which was the cause I did not send it thee.
For though it was well colored, yet it had,
For some parts good so many parts as bad.
The tincture of her face congeald in blood,
Seemd too too ugly, for thy gracious eye,
Her lips too great: her face too shameless showd:
All which foul crimes, thy judgment would descry
(Thy piercing eyes can priuat'st errors spy.)
For Venus seems no Venus but a swain,
Some f^ub faced trull borne in the Thuscan plain.
Next I bequeath a picture unto thee,
Which though lascivious, yet believe me dear,
It is not half so wanton as was she,
Whose form this senseless form presented here,
As by her lively actions may appear.
It is that Myrrha beauties sacred mother,
Who being dead for beauty left another.
Here may you see within your entire thoughts,
The maze of love, and labyrinth of lust,
With what affecting means poor Mirrha sought
To void incestuous pleasure, which she must
She must perforce sustain: where she does trust
Her mellow youth; which thus incircled, rather
Then she will keep she will give it to her father.
He spouse and father, she both child and wife,
He nipt with age, she with an i^ie pleasure,
Thus he triumphs in his incestuous life
Loving to gaze upon forbidden treasure,
Locking her up least he perchance should leese her.
Glad would she take a time for liberty,
But she is kept in by fathers jealousy.
Thus in a spacious grove, an ample field,
May you (dear queen) cull flowers of every kind,
First how a Nymph enforcd god wot to yield
(A willing force) the affection of her mind,
Leaving the robe of chastity behind.
This picture I will send you, you may take,
This beauties statue for your beauties sake.
For had not Mirrha been, nor Mirrhaes youth
Youth had not flourisht in a Venus brow,
Nor had her beauty come to perfect growth,
Nor that sweet modest blush appears in you,
Could represent so eminent a show.
Venus from Mirrha took her first beginning
Mirrha from Cinyras incestuous sinning.
Thus have I made my final legacy,
And consecrated to your radiant beauty,
Though not consorting with your puriry,
Yet am I so devoted in all duty
That I could wish my poems so should suit thee.
That with such passions they in fine might move thee
As reading these, these might enforce thee love me.
Annotations upon the last Elegy.
This strain of music Orpheus far surpast.

Orpheus son to Apollo and Calliope was esteemed the skilfullest upon the
Harp of all others: he moved (as Poets record) mountains, tamed savage
beasts, infused life into senseless stones, trees, and forests, by his
admirable skill he brought his wife Euridyce out of hell, rauishing the
infernal fur^es with his music: upon whom our modern Epigramma^^sts
(wherein we may no less glory, then Rome of her Martial, Mantua of her Maro,
Corduba o^ her Se^eca, writes thus: Orpheus vxorem raptam repetiuit ab orco:
Duxit ab inferno femina nulla virum.


Englished.

Orph^us his woeful wife brought back from ^ell,
Few wives will use their husbands half so well.
Annexion.

They Will bring them back from heaven, and which is more,
Bring them to hell, they never knew before.
Thus far of Orpheus* some have supposed, he was the first who found our
plurality of Gods. which opinion was so generally embraced after by the
Thracians, entituling him in their own Temples (...) but I refer that to the
reading of the judicious who perchance may distinguish of Orpheus: there being
diverse of that name, of which the most illustrious he seemed to be, of whom we
now make mention, both for an harmonious touch upon the lyre, and those solemn
celebrities yearly observed by the Thracians in his memory.

-- As old Arion with his harmony.

Arion a famous harper of Greece, having got great store of gold and silver
among the latins, and desirous to resalute his native country, embarked
himself secretly in a Pirates ship: of whom and of whose wealth being made
acquainted, they conspired together to throw him of shipboord: to be partakers
of so infinite a mass of treasure, which they accordingly effected: where
Arion by the force of his melody, stilling the surges of the sea, drew by his
attractiue power, a Dolphin to carry him on his back to his long expected
harbor Laconia. He was also memorable for his skill in composing lyricke
verses, or songs aptly made for his Hatpe.

Some flub faced trull borne in the Thuscane plain.
Et solent campi^ Thurijs puell^
Solis aestiui radijs refer
Ora* quae primo specie decora.
Sol^ cremantur.
Inhabiting under the Torrid zone.
-- With what affecting means poor Mirrha sought.
Mirrha daughter to Cin^rus King of Cypres* who unnaturally was inflamed with
lust toward her father: by whom she had Adonis.

Whose end well sorted with such an incestuous birth.
Of her the Poet speaks thus.

Ann^it and renuit, modo vult, modo caepta parents
Repulit, ^aud licuit, dixit, at illa facit.
He spouse and father, she both child and wife.
Ovid in Metamorph. Tune eris and matris pellex and adultera patris?
Tune sorror nati, genitrixque voca^ere fratris?
Forsitan aetatis quoque nomine filia, dixit,
Dixit and illa pater sceleri ne nomina desint.
In Elizam Tetrastychon.
-- Mirtus amat Venerem, Laurus Elizam.
Lenta salix tumulum succingat, tempora laurus,
Mirtus amat Venerem, Laurus and ipsa meam.
In Elizam ob aquam corporis temperiem incredibilem fragrantiam mittentem.
Mit^i^ Eliza (...) and odoribus omnia fragrent,
Omnia quae manibus tractat Eliza suis.
In Elizam vt huius vitae initia vitae long melioris auspicijs augeantur.
Viuat and Elysios post vltima funera campos
Aspiciat, laeta est tempore, laeta fine.
No nuptials now, no lays, no Hymen's, pall
But ^ poor shrowde I crave, and that is all.
CANDIDAE ET EXIMIAE HERAE ET HEROI NOBILI STEMMATE ORTAE, NON MINORI ANIMI
QVAM CORPORIS PRAESTANTIA ORNATAE

Do, dico, dedico,
-- Opera omina, omnia.
FINIS.
Errata.
In the argument page 3. lin 18. for Syreus r. Sirens. ibid. for rain r. ruin.
p 16. lin. 16. for out r. on. p* 20. lin 4, r. joys with sadness. p. 29. l.
13. for aligine r. Caligine. p. 33. l. 7. for rest r. rest. ibid. lin. 12. for
remore r. remorse. p. 41. l. 1. for Vesus r. Vesta. page 42. l. 1. for paued r.
p and. p. 44. l. 15. for which r. with.


