A SPIRITVAL SPICERIE: Containing Sundry sweet Tractates of Devotion and Piety.

By RI. BRATHWAIT, Esquire.

Cant. c. 1. 12. c. 5. 13. My Welbeloved is as a bundle of Myrrh unto me: he
shall lie between my breasts.

His cheeks are as a bed of Spices.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for George Hutton at his shop within Turning style in
Holborne. 1638.

TO THE TRVLY ENNOBLED, THOMAS, LORD FAUCONBERGE, Baron of YAROM: Together With
his pious Progeny, those succeeding Branches of a prospering Family: R. B.
Zealously Dedicates this Spiritual Spicerie.

Upon the translation of his Divine Dialogue.
TO you (my Lord) who knows The Original,
This may seem fruitless; yet these sacred flowers,
Like a Bride-posie at a Nuptial,
May tender choice content to some of yours,
Which blessed effect would crown this Work of ours:
That we should be so happy as to give
Where we do love, RULES how to dye and live.
" Which for his Sake we ask that is our Savior,
" That we may live in's fear, dye in his favor.
A TITLE-TABLE; Or Short Summarie of all such Tractates, Meditations, Prayers,
Contemplations, and Motives to Piety, as are comprised within this SPIRITUAL
SPICERIE.
A Divine Dialogue; Gruytrodius.
or a comfortable Conference betwixt our Savior and a Sinner: with the Life of
GR^YTRODIUS, the Author: Professant of a strict disciplinary Order. Page 1. A
familiar Expostulation of the Flesh, Bonaventura.
to GOD the Father, touching CHRIST. page 53. An Answer of the Father to the
Flesh. p. 61. A pithy Meditation upon this Expostulation and Answer, Author.
to inflame the Soul with a devout fervor. p. 65. General Rules of living
well. Ibid.
p. 69. The Sorrowful Souls Solace. p. 82. A Meditation referring to the
former Ejaculation. p. 93. Mans-Mutability. p. 95. Minds-Tra^quillity. page
103. A Me^itation containing the praise of Peace, and her Beauty. p. 109.
Christian Philosophy. p. 113 The Souls Jubilee. Augustinus.
p. 121. The Christian Storehouse. p. 144. Man his own Foe. Author.
p. 153. Two devout Prayers, Granado.
or Meditations of F. Lewis of Granado. p. 164. and 167. A short and fruitful
Confession of a Sinner unto God, for obtaining Contrition. p. 179. A Confession
of Sins. Augustine.
p. 183. A Prayer before the holy Communion. p. 187. A Prayer after celebration
of the holy Communion. Aquinas.
p. 190. An other Prayer. Bonavent.
p. 193. A Prayer for all Judges, Author.
and Justiciaries. p. 196. A Prayer for peace or tranquillity of mind. p. 201.
Of the presence of the Conscience in every place. Bernard.
p. 206. A Pithy Consideration Author.
enforcing in us to the former Subject a more serious Meditation. p. 209. A
Closing Sonnet upon these Miscellane Meditations. Ibid.
p. 223. A Reply to a rigid Precisian, Ibid.
rendering him in a sententions Sapphicke of the Poet, all satisfaction. p. 226.
A Christian Dial; Lanspergius.
which may serve well to shadow out our hours, number our days, direct our
ways, contract our years, and regulate our desires. p. 228. The Life of
Ioannes Lanspergius, a Carthusian; Author of that Christian Dial. p. 230. A
brief institution, Ibid.
with an Exer^ise for an happy death: expressed in a familiar Conference
betwixt God and the Soul. Wholesome Admonitions, teaching a Christian how to
dye well. p. 252. An Exercise, whereby ^arely, or whenever thou willest, thou
may pour out thy heart unto God, for a good death. p. 257. An Oblation of
Christ and his meri^s to his Father. p. 261. The Dying man's Diary, Lanspergius.
or a Christians Memento mori; divided into a five days Exercise. p. 264.
Profitable Counsel for one approaching near the point of death. p. 265. An
Exercise, wherein the sick person with sighs and groans, may resign
himself unto God, and ^ervently desire, that he may deserve to be joined unto
him. p. 270. A Christians Last-will, Lanspergius.
or Testament; containing a Protestation or Testament, not unprofitable to be
repeated, or meditated of every Christian at the point of death. p. 281. An
Elegy of Saint Dionysius, Dionysius.
of the judgment of death. p. 288. An Epistle of Ludovious Blosius, Blosius.
written to an especial friend, upon the perfecting and publishing of his
Work entitled, The Parlour of the Soul. p. 290. Certain choice or Select
Sayings of D. Henricus Suso: Suso.
of the love of the World, and of the love of God. p. 304. Of the Passion of
our Lord. p. 309. Of the holy Eucharist. p. 313. Of resigning, denying, and
mortifying ones self. p. 316. The Passionate^ Pilgrim; Augustine.
Breathing a Contemplative Man's Exercise: off^ring a P^nitent Souls Sacrifice.
p. 325. Deaths Memorial. Damian.
p. 336. Deaths distinction. Bernard.
p. 343. Holy Memorialls; Author.
or Heavenly Memento's. p. 345. Of his Conception. Memorial I. ibid. Of his
Birth. Memorial II. p. 352. Of his Childhood. Memorial III. p. 360. Of his
Youth. Memorial IV. p. 367. Of his Manhood. Memorial V. p. 375. Of his Age.
Memorial VI. p. 383. His Pleasures. Memorial VII. p. 395. His Labors.
Memorial VIII. p. 406. His Life. Memorial IX. p. 417. His Death. Memorial.
X. p. 443.
THE LIFE Of JACOBUS GRUYTRODIUS, Author of this Divine Dialogue: Or Christian
Manual, faithfully rendered according to the Original.
IACOBUS GRUYTRODIUS, a German, a man singularly versed divine and humane
Learning: And opposite in constancy of opinion, and consonancie of doctrine, to
those surreptitious Errors of the Time; who, as he had commendably passed his
youth in the Liberal Sciences, so he consecrated and happily bestowed the
residue of his time to the honor of God, in a devout privacie: having his pen
ever versed in Works of devotion and piety: never in arguments of division or
controversy.

He lived in the year M.CCCC.LXXII.

A Divine Dialogue; Or A Comfortable Conference betwixt our SAVIOR, and a
SINNER.
Sinner. PArdon me (I beseech thee) my most gracious Lord Jesu CHRIST, thy
most unworthy and unhappy Servant, desirous to talk a while with thee, and of
thee.


Christ. Why, Who art thou?


Sinner. A sinful man, who unhappily and rashly have fallen into the misery,
and filthiness of sundry sins, and much more unhappily am ready to fall into
eternal misery, and calamity after the end of this life.


Christ. Thou need not fear this fearful fall, if thou will but do so
much as truly repent thee of thy sins committed, and henceforth abstain from
those sins whereof thou have repented. For I, most tender in my compassion
toward thee, out of mere love descended from the royal Throne of mine high
glory, to unmeasurable dolor and anxiety, all which I willingly suffered in my
flesh, in my mind, in my members, and senses, to the end that I might deliver
thee from the eternal torments of hell, and bestow on thee the joy of Heaven.
Doubt nothing therefore touching thine offenses: I will forget them all, so
thou forget thine evil affection, and depraved custom. I will forget, (I say)
and blot out thine iniquity, and as far distant as the East is from the West,
so far will I divide thee from thy sin: I will cleanse thee: Neither will I
cease till I fulfill thee throughout: that, Where sin has abounded, grace
likewise may superabound. Yet I would beloved, I would be trusted, I would with
sighs and tears be entreated, than which no sweeter melody can unto me be
tendered.


Sinner. O my crucified JESU, I know I am dearer to thee than I am to my self;
for to thee I am always dear, who (as it is written) Love all things that
are, and hate nothing of those which thou have made. But man is not always
equally dear to himself as he is unro thee: because he that loves iniquity,
hates his own^ soul.


Christ. This have I shown in the continual sorrows of my whole cru^ified
life. For I received the Cross of my Passion in the Womb of my mother, and
continually bore it in my heart, and confirmed it with much austerity in my
body. So as that I might purposely show the unmeasurablenesse of the sorrows
of my soul; my final passion then approaching, it was my will to sweat blood
through all my members, and that, (which lay hid as a secret of my crucifying,
from the womb of my Mother) with sensible signs, to reveal to my faithful
ones, which seemed fittest to be at my passage, and poin^ of death.


Sinner. I conceive (my good JESU) how in that bloody sweat, with which thou
were deep-died and engrained in all thy members, thy blessed soul wholly
suffered, because it is whole in every part of the body, yea and the very life
of the body. But tell me what thou requirest of me, for so great anguish
continually sustained for me?


Christ. Only to love me again. For to this end have I suffered my passion,
that I might purchase thy affection.


Sinner. Surely most worthy art thou to be loved, because thou art good in thy
self: and none good but God alone: And because thou art the Lord, delivering
from the power and slavery of the Devil: And because thou art God, forgiving
sins, which none forgiveth but God alone: And because thou love those that
love thee: Whence it is that thou say, I love those that love me: And
because thou hear those that beg of thee: whence one says, I have loved
the Lord, because he will hear me. Thou also, as the peace of charity,
coming into the world, to warm and inflame the cold and lukewarm, have said,
I came, that they might have life: to wit, the life of grace in this life, and
more abundantly, to wit, of glory in the life to come.


Christ. Surely there is nothing, which may so inflame the fire of Gods love in
thy heart, as a continual consideration and meditation of this speech of mine:
I came, that they might have life, and that more abundantly. And of that much
like unto this: So God loved the world, as he gave his only begotten Son.


Sinner. Truly wretched and miserable is he, in whose heart the fire of love
is not kindled, when he considers these things, wherein the Charity of God
has chiefly appeared. But, o thou only begotten of God, suffer not my heart to
be so frozen, or benumbed with this icy congelation, but rather through thy
mercy, in the remembrance of these thy Words, like Snow melting by the heat of
the Sun, let me say with that princely Prophet: My heart is become as melting
wax.


Christ. Humane impiety before the time of my passion, took occasion of being
unthankful: For man being created, but not as then redeemed, said, I am no
more bound to God, than other creatures be: For he spoke the word, and I was
made; he has bestowed no more labor on me than any other brute creature. But
now the mouth of these that speak wickedly is stopped, and no place now is left
for unthankfulness. For I have labored more in the sole redemption of man,
than in the whole frame and fabric of the World. For of a Master I became a
servant, of Rich poor, of Immortal mortal, of the Word flesh, of the Son
of God the son of man: I suffered reproaches of such as upbraided me, I
suffered underminers in my Works, contradicters in my Words, scorners in my
Woes, necessities of the flesh, horror of death, ignominy of the Cross.


Sinner. O how admirable was this love! What shall I render to my Lord, for all
his sorrows?


Christ. If thou recall to mind, how great things the Lord of Majesty, the
Son of God suffered for thee, though thou should^t dye a thousand deaths, yet
were thou not equally sufficient to answer me: for the estimate of so great a
benefit, exceeds all means of requital.


Sinner. As thou best know, how much I owe unto thee, the Lord of glory, who
subjectedst thy self to death for me, that I might enjoy that happiness, which
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard: recount unto me, I beseech thee,
the reasons which caused that most dolorous pain in thy most holy soul. For
thou said, right now, that in the womb of thy blessed Mother, thou
receivedst the Cross of thy Passion, and bore it continually to the hour of
thy dissolution.


Christ. To this end, that thou might by affection and compassion become an
acceptable sacrifice unto God, wholly inflamed with the fire of Charity, all
the rust and rubbish of sin being consumed, and wasted: Consider diligently
with a lively heart, how I suffered a double Martyrdom; one in my body, another
in my soul or Spirit. As touching the Martyrdom of my Body consider, that
there was never the suffering of any martyr so sharp, so painful, that it
might be compared with my suffering: which I will prove unto thee, by
authority, by sign, by reason. First, by authority. For I my self crying out
of the greatness of my sorrows, said, O all ye, who pass by this way,
consider and see, if ever there were sorrow like unto my sorrow! as if I should
have said, there was never any.

Secondly, by Sign; Forasmuch as there were never so many Signs seen in the
Martyrdom of any, as at my Passion, implying the sharpness and painfulnesse
of it: to wit, When the Sun was darkened, the Earth moved, etc. As if by the
dolorous clamours of my passion they had conceived a sense of devout
compassion, bemoning me the Son of God, hanging on the Cross. For it was not
in the creature to endure the injury done to the Creator. Wherein wicked and
obdurate hearts are justly reproved, who will not be wrought to compassion, nor
softened with a pious devotion, in the remembrance of my death.

Thirdly, I prove unto thee the bitterness of my passion by reason. Forasmuch
as my complexion was most excellent, both by reason of the incorruption of my
flesh, as also by reason ofthe most proportionable union or mixture of the
Elementary qualities. For I took corruptible flesh of the Virgin, for the
freeing of all Original sin, that is, of inordinate concupiscence. Now to
such a complexion, was required comeliness of beauty, and strength of body.
Because therefore, by how much more proportionable the union is of those
Elements and qualities, whereof man is composed and compacted: by so much more
difficulty, and violently is he dissolved: hence it appears, that the
separation of my body and soul was more painful, than the death of others.
Also my blessed flesh, by how much more it was freer from all spot or blemish
of sin: by so much also it became more In that he was inno^ent, he became more
sensible of torment.
sensible of torments. Now concerning my Spiritual martyrdom, which I
suffered in my Soul (as I said before unto thee) it began at such time as I
was first conceived in the womb of my mother, or that my Soul was infused
into my body: and continued without intermission 33. years and a half, till
such time as my Soul was separated from my body upon the Cross. So as, I
became a Martyr even in the Womb of my Mother. Wherefore I was not so much as
one moment, without the most bitter martyrdom of my Spirit: Because whatsoever
I suffered in the Night when I was taken, or the Day following when I was
slain, in mocking, reviling, spitting, nayling, and stretching upon the
Cross, etc. This thoroughly and wholly my most holy Soul long before suffered.
But thou art especially to consider, that those dolorous piercing darts of the
Virgin, my blessed mother, became the excessivest Object of my sorrows; who
having a tender and respective eye to all my dolours, in perfect Charity, as
became the condition of her motherly excellency, so much grieved for my
sorrows, as was sitting for such a woman to grieve. And all the sorrows of my
Mother, continually wounded my mind. So as, my Mothers Cross ministered unto
me a new Cross.

Another Object of my continual sorrow, was all those martyrdomes which were
at any time done, or to be done upon any of mine Elect for me. So as, in very
truth I say unto thee, that all those pains, griefs, tribulations,
persecutions, and miseries, which any man was to suffer, or should suffer
as well in body, as in soul, from Adam, even to the very last man, that shall
be borne to the end of the World: all these I suffered always in my Soul
must fully, and through my compassion they did more hurt me, and more sharply
grieve me, than any man's corporal pain, which he actually suffers, ever
personally did. And there are two causes which give sufficient testimony of the
truth hereof. One is, because I, in the glass or mirror of my Divinity did
behold all things created and to be created, things past, present, and to
come, which were to me present. And I, from the very first instant of the
infusion of my Soul into my Body, began always to observe, till such time as
I gave up my Ghost upon the Cross, all the pains which I was to endure, and
whatsoever all my Elect from the beginning of the world, had at any time
suffered, and such as being not yet borne, were to suffer, even to the end of
the world: all this I suffered in the inferior faculties of my Soul. And in
each of these was I more inwardly and grievously tormented in my Spirit, than
any one could be in his own proper body, at such time as he is to suffer
tortures or torments.

Another cause which procured so great pain in my Spirit, was abundant love.
For love begets grief and heaviness in the spirit: So as, by how much thy
love toward me was more intensive or greater, by so much more is thy soul
tormented with my Death and Passion. And because I have always and above
comparison loved thee, and every man, more than he can love himself,
therefore have I suffered greater pain than all that which any one has ever
suffered upon earth, or was to suffer, or shall suffer to the end of the world.
Thou know, that when Paul had consented to the death and stoning of Stephen,
and did persecute Christians, I said unto him, Saul, Why persecutest thou me?
And yet he persecuted not me in my own proper person, but in the persons of my
beloved friends; because what good or evil soever befalls my friends,
befalle^h me. And this proceeds from the great love which I bear unto men.
Thus therefore may thou consider, how and by what means my Passion exceeded
in pain the passions of all that ever suffered, or shall suffer, because I
suffered both in my Body and Soul, and that immaculate, and by nature
delicate, and for so long time, to wit, for thirty four years did I suffer
martyrdom in my Spirit, both for my self and all my Elect. Laurence in one
night was broyled on a gridiron; Bartholomew in one day was slain; Katherine
in one hour was broken on a Wheel, etc. All these tortures never hurt any one
of them so much in their own bodies, as they tormented me in my Soul, for
thirty four years. Whence Isay, Truly he has suffered for our infirmities,
and borne our sorrows. And therefore, I could never laugh, but often weep,
appearing as one of forty years, when I was scarce thirty. Which came to
pass, by reason of the continual Justice, which I incessantly bore for my
Passion that was to come, and the suffering of my Elect, which I always
clearly beheld, and painfully suffered by strength of imagination. Whereupon I
oftimes said unto my Father, Many are my groans: and my heart is sorrowful. To
thee likewise do I say, that thou may be moved with compassion and
affection toward me, that my life is waxen old with heaviness, and my years
with mourning.


Sinner. Surely, O my good Jesu, as I have heard and understood, no conceit can
sufficiently apprehend the depth of those anguishes and sorrows of thy most
holy Soul, nor griefs and passions of thy Body. But a very deep question
does trouble my mind, to wit, how heaviness, pain, or anguish could befall
thy blessed soul, seeing it was always in great joy through Contemplation of
thy Divinity, which was so amiable to behold, that if the damned in Hell could
but behold the amiable countenance of God, as the blessed Spirits do in the
Kingdom of Heaven; they could be tormented by no grief, nor heaviness,
either by the fire of hell, or sight of the Devils in hell.


Christ. It is true, that my pure and blessed soul was glorified, albeit my
Body was mortal. For my Soul, from the very instant of her conception, and
ever after, even when I was upon the Cross, was as O SacredSecret mystery,
requiring of us no curious discussion, but serious devotion!
glorious, and in as great joy and delight, in respect of her superior
faculties, as she is at this day in heaven, sitting at the right hand of God my
Father. But in respect of her inferior faculties, she was in a continual and
incessant heaviness, and sorrow for the causes aforesaid. Which could not be
by course or order of Nature, that in one and the selfsame soul together,
and at once, there should be so great joy, and so great heaviness, for this
was miraculous and supernatural. Because, according to the course of nature,
joy and delight do expel sorrow and grief, so as they cannot suffer together
in one and the selfsame soul. And to the end, thou may more clearly
understand these things, I would have thee to know, that the Source and
Fountain of all my sorrows, was that high and ineffable divine dispensation,
whereby it was forbid me, that the influence of my glory, and fruition
thereof, which were in the superior faculties of my Soul, should redound to
the inferior, for otherwise she had felt no sorrow. But because this
influence was by the divine dispensation prohibited me, therefore did I at
once perfectly enjoy all joy, according to the Superior faculties, and
perfectly suffer and become most vehemently afflicted, according to the
Inferior faculties. And thus miraculously has the power of my Father, joined
anguish with greatest sweetness, and highest power with lowest weakness.
Because that this influence prohibited me, was altogether repugnant to the
course of Nature. For natural it is, and according to the course of Nature,
that the Superior powers or faculties redound to the inferior, and the
Inferior have impression in the Superior. And by how much this Dispensation
was more wonderful, by so much was my sorrow more sharp and doleful. Thou
art to know also, that I kept my natural strength during my Passion, even to
the point of death. Whereby it follows, that my Passion was more dolorous.


Sinner. Surely, he is worthy of death, who refuses to live to thee, my LORD
JESU, who laidst down thy life for us. Yea, though alive, yet he is He is dead
in trespasses who lives not in the remembrance of Christ's Passion, by washing
his precious wounds with pious tears of holy compassion.
dead, who in the remembrance of thy most bitter continual Passion, and
representation of thy Crucifying, bears not thy pricks in his body, by
sharpness of repentance: and upon the altar of his heart, crucifieth not
himself for thee, by making a Cross for himself to repress carnal delights.


Christ. He that will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross daily, and follow me.


Sinner. O Jesu, the power of God, and the wisdom of God, give me the
understanding of these words.


Christ. In these my words, I have proposed three things to a reasonable man,
made to the Image of God; to wit, Three ^^ngular precepts of Christian
imitation.
Servitude, Lowliness, Sharpness. Servitude is employed in denying himself:
Lowliness, in bearing of my Cross: Sharpness, in imitation of me. That he,
who by disobedience fell from the state of a threefold felicity, might rise
again by Obedience, being humbled with the affliction of a threefold misery.
For he had fallen from himself, from society of the Angels, from the sight of
God, that is, from Dignity, Liberty, Felicity. Let him therefore hear my
counsel, that by denying himself, Christ's counsel.
that is, his own proper will, he may regaine his own Liberty; by taking up
his Cross, that is, by choosing to be contemned, and disvalued by others, he
may regaine the Angels society: By following me, that is, by imitating the
steps of my Passion, by chastising of his flesh, he may regaine the sight of my
glory.


Sinner. Truly, it is meet and right, yea necessary, that they suffer with
thee, who will reign with thee, that they imitate thee, who will enjoy thee.


Christ. Happy is this sentence of thine own mouth. Happy, yea three and
fourefold happy is he, who always considers how strait and narrow, how
bitter and sharp the way is, which leads to life, when it behooved me to
suffer, that I might enter into my glory. If I bought my own glory at so high
a rate: Who shall have it altogether freely, and for nothing? Therefore, there
is no other way, by which thou can come to the heavenly reward, but by
labors and afflictions. That Rich man, who chastised not himself with labors
of repentance in this world, is now in eternal pain in hell. But the Poor
man, with the dolor and labor of this miserable life, has purchased a crown
of eternal glory.


Sinner. Woe is me, that I am allured with the sweetness of carnal delights,
and deceived with the vanity of secular joys; when as I ought to imitate thee,
whom I read to have often sorrowed and lamented, but once in Spirit to have
rejoiced. Mary thy Virgin Mother once rejoiced in a So^g. O how often has the
sword of sorrow gone through her Soul! John, thy forerunner, Pattern and
Preacher of repentance, rejoiced once in his mothers womb, but how often may
we well believe that he lamented after his coming from her womb?


Christ. When I hung upon the Cross, I promised Paradise to none, but one that
was upon the Cross. Such are upon the Cross, who cruci^ie their flesh, with
the vices and concupiscences thereof. Upon the Cross also I prayed only for
such as sinned negligently, not for such as sinned wittingly. For so long as
they are such sinners, they are excluded from the embraces of me that was
crucified; who with hands spread upon the Cross, embraced all, for whom I
suffered. If thou will therefore ascend after me, and reign in heaven with
me, thou must follow me by the way of the The way by the Cross, is the way
to the Crown^^.
Cross, by which I have entered into my glory. Look for no easier way; in the
way which I have gone before thee, thou must follow. For if thou stray from my
steps, thou shall perish. Attend diligently, that thou may know, by what way
thou may ascend into Heaven. At such time as I came into the World, I
descended by a The Christians Ladder, conducting him to Christ his Savior.
Ladder that had three steps, to wit, of humility, whence it is read of me,
Thou shall find the Babe: of Poverty, whence it follows in the same place,
Wrapped in clothes: And of austerity, as ensues, laid in a manger. And by
these steps I afterward returned to heaven. These steps mine excellent Apostle
Paul intimates, writing thus of me; He emptied himself, behold the step of
Poverty! Taking upon him the form of a Servant: behold the step of Humility!
becoming obedient even unto death: behold the step of Austerity! But whither
has this Ladder of three steps brought me? Hear what follows. For this
cause therefore has the Lord exalted him, and given him a name which is above
all names. Fools therefore and madmen are they, who would ascend up into
heaven after me by a Ladder that has steps contrary to these; to wit, by
Richesse, Delights, and Honors. Surely, this Ladder leads to Hell, as the
first did to Heaven.


Sinner. It is a great shame for the servant to be feasting and idling, while
his Master is suffering and laboring.


Christ. Whosoever devoutly meditateth of this my Passion, cannot but be
ashamed to follow the pleasure of the flesh. The memory of my crucifying,
crucifie^h all vices. In the pains of my Passion, all the delights of the
flesh, and of the world are condemned: which, if thou would subdue without
difficulty, thou must devoutly remember my Passion, and sweetly delighting thy
self in it, sincerely cleave to my wounds; yea, if thou would foil and
resist the Devil, who especially pursues and persecuteth the religious, and
restrain him from annoying thee, thou ought daily and devoutly to remember
my Passion. But necessary it is, that they imprint the example and fimilitude
of my Crucifying in their manners, who imprint the sign of my Cross for their
defense in their foreheads; that by his Law they may be formed, by whose Faith
they are armed. For otherwise, he disloyally bears the stamp of his King,
whose will he does not observe. Neither does he rightly protect himself with
his sign, whose command he does not obey.


Sinner. O good Jesu, vouchsafe to bestow on my hearing a fuller joy, by
recounting to me thy most unworthy Sinner, the rest of those benefits and
fruits, arising from the daily remembrance of thy most holy Passion.


Christ. The memory of my death, by a daily ruminating thereof, ought to burn
upon the altar of thy mind, for many reasons.

First, because thou can do nothing more acceptable unto me, than to
exercise thine heart in my most holy Passion, with love, compassion, reverence,
and imitation. Whereof thou can not doubt, being assured thereof by many
authorities of holy Scripture. Wherefore I do advise thee to stamp my painful
love, and loving pain in thy soul, and to be thankful unto me, saying: The
Christians Signet with his Posie.
Set me, as a signet, upon thine heart: As if he should say, Love me, as I
love thee. Remember not only how great things I have done for thee, but how
sharp and unworthy things I have suffered for thee, and see if thou do not
give me an ill requital, if thou do not love me. For tell me, who loves
thee as I do? Who desires to be loved of thee, as I do? Set me, therefore,
as a signet upon thine heart, that thou may love me with all thy strength:
upon thine arm, that thou may perform those things which please me with
all thine affection: upon thine heart, that whatsoever is dear unto thee, thou
may set aside for me, and always prefer me, and always more and more love
me.

Secondly, thou oughtst continually to remember my Passion, because by it thou
art led by the hand to the love of God. For by my Passion, I have shown to
thee the quantity of my affection. And love deserves love again. Understand
what I say; I would not reedeme man with prayer, for so often times man freeth
man from captivity. Nor with the price of gold and silver: for so sheep and
Oxen are bought: but with the price of my blood, that by the price of the thing
bought, my love might be weighed. Do not therefore dis-esteeme thy worth:
consider often times thy price. If I had redeemed man with gold or silver, it
might have been thought, that the soul of man had been comparable ^ to
temporal riches. That which is redeemed, is more precious than that by which
it is redeemed: Therefore the soul of man is more precious than my blood.

Thirdly, ^or stirring of devotion; Whence it was that Sampson found an
Honeycombe in the mouth of a dead Li^n. I am the Lion of the Tribe of Iud^, in
whose death the honeycombe of devotion is found, wherewith the spirit of man is
refreshed. O that thou would seriously consider, how upon the Cross my mouth
appeared like one halfe-alive, open, and my tongue bloody; surely, if thou
had an heart of iron, it would have melted with compassion and devotion.

The fourth fruit arising from the memory of my Passion is, that in it is found
a guard of defense against all Enemies. Whereupon my Apostle Peter; Christ
suffered for you, arm your selves likewise with the same mind. And I say;
Enter into the rock. As a Soldier, who unable to withstand his enemy in the
field, flies to his Tents. Briefly, the Med^tation of Christ's Sacred Passion,
a sovereign receipt against Satan's temptation.
Enemy shall prevail nothing against him, whom the daily exercise of my
Passion does delight.

The fifth is, because with no exercise is man so much enriched as with my
merits, applied to him, and made his, by the hand of faith; for the foundation
of all grace, and the root of merit, (as it has sole relation to me, and
derived to man by Faith in me) consists in the sorrow of heart and body, for
my Cross. For this cause mine Elect Apostle said; I have esteemed my self to
know nothing, but JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. And that devout son of my
blessed mother, Bernard, A Christians Philosophy.
It is my highest philosophy (said he) to know CRIST JESUS, and him Crucified.
But thou oughtst to grieve, because there are many enemies of my Cross. For
the lovers of pleasures are my persecutours; they are guilty of my death, not
as authors or fautors, but as contemners (...) my death: These are they, who
make the merit of my Passion in them of no effect; who make themselves unworthy
of mine heavenly blessing, and unspeakable glory: who living in their delights,
laugh at the mystery of my Passion; who tread me the Son of God under their
feet, and lay reproach upon the Spirit of Grace. A carnal life is an injury
unto God, contempt of my Cross, and redoundeth to the contumely of all the
blessed Trinity.

The sixth is, the allaying of the labors and dolours encountering man in his
way of repentance, and life of Religion. For a devout faithful Soldier has
no feeling of his own wounds, when he sees the wounds of his loving
Captain. And to this end have I contemned all earthly goods, that I might show
how they were to be contemned: and sustained all adverse things, that I might
teach how they were to be sustained.

The seventh is, the extinguishing of carnal desires: for with the sight of my
Passion, whatsoever is carnal^ decreaseth.

The eighth is, the stirring of compunction and repentance for sinues. For who
is he that grieveth not highly, when he recals to mind how his sins were so
odious to God the Father, that for taking them away, he would have his beloved
Son crucified and put to death?

The ninth is, the begetting of good hope and considence: For in my Cross the
Sinner has his Sanctuary, as a murderer flying for refuge to the Churchyard.
Nothing is so bitter even unto death, which may not be cured by my death: I
have changed the sentence of thy eternal punishment, into the crucifying of my
Body, subject to a dolorous languishment. For I, in that sentence which Pilat
pronounced against me, taking upon me, the person of all Sinners, to purge
their sins wherein they had long labored, was adjudged to death for all
Sinners.


Sinner. I conceive and contemplate by this which thou (my good Jesu) have
said, that albeit this sentence was very unjust, and therefore execrable in
respect of thee, because man had no power over God, the wicked over the just:
yet in respect of us, it was manifold common modious and profitable: and the
reason hereof is amiable and venerable; because he wholly reversed that
sentence pronounced upon the first man, for sin. For the sentence of a
doleful exclusion was denounced against him. Whence it is written, The Lord
cast out man from the Paradise of pleasure, and set an Angel to keep the way
of the tree of life. But happy and honorable was thy sentence, because (...)
called back a banished man, for by this sentence the Son for the servant was
injuriously cast out of his inheritance, by the husbandmen of the Vineyard, the
Law of Moses. Therefore thy Apostle says, That Jesus might sanctify us, he
suffered without the gate. And well it was that he suffered without, that he
might bring us back again to within: for we have entrance by his blood. But I
beseech thee (most loving Jesu) from the very inward affection of mine heart,
by those pains, with which, as with most sharp arrows, thy most sweet heart
was pierced, and those of the Virgin thy blessed Mother, at the hearing of that
sentence of thycondemnation; that I may deserve through thy merits, to be
delivered in the hour of my death, and the last day of judgment, from
thatsharp and terrible word of the sentence of eternal damnation, which thou will thunder out against the reprobates: Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels.


Christ. Happy is he, from whose memory the last judgment never departs,
that by the fear thereof, he may preserve his life from naughtiness and
pleasure of the flesh. For surely, that judgment is highly to be feared,
wherein all things are made manifest without witnesses, where the Host of all
the Angels and Saints shall stand round about, The terror of the last judgment.
and every creature shall tremble with exceeding fear, before my Tribunal
seat. What will they say then, who in this short time have lived negligently
and carelessly? Mean time I expect you patiently, and invite you all to my
kingdom lovingly. Time will come, when I shall require an account of you, for
this your negligence, and shall say unto you, For you am I made crooked, for
you (I say) am I made crooked upon the earth, for you am I scourged, for you
with spittings defiled, for you is my face buffeted, for you am I unjustly
condemned, for you am I crucified, for you upon wood am I hanged, with gall am
I fed, and with vinegar quenched, that I might make you all Saints eternally
crowned. I have called you all my Brethren, I have offered you to my Father, I
have sent you my holy Spirit, I have promised sed to you Paradise. What should
I have done more, and I have not done it, that ye might be saved? Tell me ye
Sinners: What have ye suffered for me your governor, who when I was just,
suffered so great things for your sakes? These truly shall be demands proper
for that day of judgment.


Sinner. Alas, miserable wretch that I am, what shall I say, or what shall I
do, when I shall not be able to show ought that is good before so great a
Judge?


Christ. Amend thy life, while time is: change thy manners, overcome evil
temptations by resisting, punish sins committed by lamenting. Let thy sin
find thee here a punisher, that thou may find me there no Judge but a Savior.

If thou do these things faithfully and with constant affiance, A most
comfortable Conclusion.
thou shall be secure in the terrible day of vengeance. Neither let the
greatness of thy sins terrify thee: for I am much more merciful, than thou
art finfull. Surely great is thy misery, but infinite is my mercy. If thou be
asinfull man, I am the Lamb of GOD, that takes away the sins of the world: who
came not to call the just, but sinners. In a word, more mercy and love shall
thou find in me, than thou dare either hope for, or wish for.


A FAMILIAR Expostulation of the Flesh, to GOD the Father, ^ouching CHRIST. By
(...) Book en^^^led Stimulus Amoris. Cap. XIV.
GIve ear, how the Flesh lifts up the Soul against the Spirit,
contemplatively raised, yea even against Christ. For, says the Flesh: I
prefer my complaint to thee God the Father, just and of infinite mercy,
touching thy Son; beseeching thee, that thy justice would consider the injury
done me, and that thy mercy would condescend to my misery. This thy Son full
of knowledge and power, has circumvented me by his wisdom, and (...) violence
by his power. This thy Son by his wisdom clothing himself with flesh,
became like unto me, and by his too much humility and ineffable benignity,
craftily entered in upon me: He became more humble than all, he became
despicable to all, he took upon him the necessities of all, he bore the
infirmities of all, he vouchsafed to be most cruelly crucified for all, to be
afflicted as well with compassion, as in his most grievous passion, through
mere affection to all, to express the love of his heart, by the opening of
his side, and from thence to derive those Sacraments which gave remedy to all
mankind. What should I say more? He has ordained his flesh for meat, Mat. 26.
his blood for drink, and promised himself for a reward, inasmuch as he girded
himself, and being to depart thence, ministered to such as eat at thy table.
Luke 12.
By all these means, and many others, which I neither know, nor am able to
declare, has he not only wondrously allured my Soul, deputed to the support
and comfort of me, but by entering in unto her, has so highly drawn her by
his power, and so joynd her unto him by his delights, as now she cares not at
all for me, but rather afflicts, dejects, treads down, and vilifies me; and
that which seems grievouser than all things else, she loves those that lay
this disgrace on me, remembering him or them more especially in her prayer, who
infer these injuries on me; and if none as yet be done me, she desires that
hereafter they may be done me. Thus am I mortified, and she cares not; Thus
lie I grovelling in mud, and she rejoices: Yea, it is the very highest pitch
of her desire, to see my sorrow with new sorrow multiplied, that my sorrow
might be more sensibly conceived. This seems to be her glory to bring
injuries, contumelies, and whatsoever is worst upon me. Thus leaves she me
desolate and afflicted; mean time, it is her desire to remain still with thy
Son, still to be fed with his flesh, made drunk with his blood, and
wheresoever he is, to be ever with him. Now she appears like a small tender
infant with him in the manger; now she embraces him in the arms of the
blessed Virgin; now is she nourished with him, with the milk of the Virgin.
Now she hungers with him, now she thirsts with him, now is she spit upon with
him, now is she wounded with him, now is she sorrowful upon the Cross with
him, now with thee in heaven rejoices she with him, she is comforted with
him; wheresoever he go, she goes with him, she cannot endure to be from
him, she can intend herself to naught without him: What shall I say to thee,
O Father, touching thy Son, who has made my soul given unto me, so drunk
with his love, and thus estranged her from me? If he has robbed me, thou
may command restitution to be made me. Neither seems it to me a small
injury, thus to deprive me of this precious and inestimable jewel of my mind.
For why does my soul appointed for me, only love thy Son; why does she thus
hate me, why relinquisheth she all things concerning me? Behold, how she
swallowed up with the incomparable love of thy Son, walks as one without
sense; now there is naught else she hears, naught else she thinks, or
tastes, naught else she smells, being always desirous to rest in his
arms. There is she joyed, there is she cheered, there abundantly delighted,
there, made drunk with too much love, is she lodged. Neither is it to be
wondered at, if this my Soul cleave so constantly to thy Son: Because,
unless she were harder than stone, and more insensible than iron, seeing thy
Son has done such great things for her, she can do no less than this for
him. Yea, where is that stone so hard which would not rend with the heat of so
great love, yea melt like wax, if all these aforesaid benefits should be done
it? I do not then complain to thee, O most benign Father of my Soul, for
that she has done no more than she ought: but of thy Son, who has so
forcibly allured her with the benefits of his mercy, and by that means left
me in so great misery.

An Answer of the Father to the Flesh. Cap. XV.
ATtend and hearken, what answer this most gracious Father makes to the Flesh.
Forasmuch as thou art my creature, I will show thee Justice with Mercy.
Whereas then thou were ordained to be the Souls Handmaid, yet had ever a
desire to play the Mistress, and demeaning thy self always inordinatly, have
caused her to serve thee and not me, by making her prone unto all evil, and
which is worse, have subjected her, who was made after my image, to the bondage
of Satan. Thou, I say, who have made her worse than any brute beast, being by
thee defiled and ab^ominably polluted, yea, above all darkness blackned, and
so much altered, as I cannot know that noble creature stamped and formed to so
glorious a feature: Needful it was then, because I loved her so much that was
enclosed in thy Flesh, that my Son should take Flesh upon him, that so he
might allure her to his and my love. And because the Soul by cleaving to thee,
her Flesh was become dead, it was my will that my Son who became Flesh should
be slain for her, that she might be quickened. Neither was this in my Son any
circumvention or deceiving, but mine and his ineffable vouchsafing. And because
thou, O Flesh, have done evilly ever from thy first infusion, but my Son has
been inflamed toward thy Soul with exceeding affection, and has wholly
given himself up for her redemption, therefore my justice exacteth many
things, especially, that I wholly and totally resign her unto him, and that
she abhor thee more than dung, and that she desire that thou may be
abhorred of all. But forasmuch as thou have be sought not only my Justice but
Mercy; it is my will that thou in some measure be refreshed with that present
sweetness which thy Soul feels in my Son; yea more than all this, I will
hereafter endow thee most nobly and most perfectly: and if thou be truly
obedient to thy Soul, from henceforth deliver thee from eternal punishment,
and bring thee to an inheritance gloriously permanent, where I live eternally
resident.

A pithy Meditation upon this Expostulation and Answer, to inflame the Soul
with a devout fervor.
IS it so, O my Soul, that she, whom thou have so daintily cockred, with whom
thou have so familiarly conversed, and to whom thou have so easily consented,
is thy domestic Enemy, and by so much more fearful because domestical?
Chastise her who^ thou have cherished, estrange thee from her, with whom thou
have so freely consorted, incline not to her, to whose advice thou have so
freely condescended. It is Ismael that plays with thee; who, whilst she
plays with thee, plays upon thee. Look upon that gracious Shepherd, who has
sought thee; fix thine eye upon that precious price, with which he bought thee.
The worth of the whole world comes far short of the worth of that price; be
it then thine highest honor to advance his praise. Let no sin soil that
image which is so richly beautified: Let no cloud obscure that light which was
so freely bestowed. He that took on him Flesh for thee, he that in his Flesh
suffered so much for thee, he that gave himself to gain thee, and showed
himself so truly thine to retain thee: Let him solely and wholly have thee.
Suffer not thy Flesh to converse with thee, till she become a true Convert in
the practice of piety. Better is it for thee by contempt of thy Flesh to
augment thine own honor, than by obedience to thy Flesh to procure thy
dishonor. Short is the Fight, but great is the Conquest. Recoile not; for thou
have him for thy Imperator noster Christus eum hostem vicit, qui adhuc omnes
Imperatores stravit. Miscell. Theor. Itin.
Chiefetaine, who has vanquished that foe, who, to this hour, has given all
Chiefetaines the foil. Fight valiantly then under his banner; embrace all
contempts for his honor. Erect the eye of thy Faith to Heaven, while thou
directest thy feet on Earth, that after thy well-past pilgrimage on Earth, thou
may be rewarded with a lasting inheritance in Heaven.

Amen.
GENERAL Rules of living well.
The highest pitch of Wisdome's pie^y,
By which man's taugh^ both how to live and die.

EVery day drawest thou nearer than other to Death, Judgment, and Eternity.
Bethink then with thy self every day, how thou may stand in the severe
discussion of death and judgment, and how thou may eternally live. Thou art
to take an exact account of all thy thoughts, words and deeds, because an exact
account is to be given of all thy thoughts, words and deeds. Think every
evening, that death is that night approaching: Think every morning, that death
is that day accoasting. Defer not thy conversion, nor the performance of any
good action till to morrow, because to morrow is uncertain, but death is ever
certainly waiting. There is nothing that hinders piety more than delay. If thou
contemn the inward calling of the holy Spirit, thou shall never come to true
conversion. Do not defer thy conversion, nor the practice of any religious
action to thy old age; but offer unto God the flower of thy youth: Uncertain
is old age to the young, but certain destruction attends him that dies
impenitently young. There is no Age more fit for the service of God, than
youth, flourishing in abilities both of body and mind. For no man's sake oughtst
thou to take in hand an evil action; for not that man which thou so respectedst,
but God in whose breast all the treasures of wisdom are stored, shall in the
end judge thy life: Do not then prefer any man's favor before the honor of
thy Maker. In the way of the Lord we either increase or decrease: Take
examination then of thy life every day, whether in the practice of piety thou
increasest or decreasest. To stand in the way of the Lord is to go back. Let
it not then delight thee to stand in the course of piety, but endeavor always
to walk in the way of the Lord. In thy conversation be cheerful to all,
distastefull to none, familiar to few: Live to Godward devoutly, to thy self
chastely, to thy Neighbor justly. Use thy friend as a pledge of affection,
thine enemy for a trial of thy patience, all men to a well-disposed
benevolence, and wherein thou may more effectually work to beneficence.
While thou live, dye daily to thy self and to thy vices; So in thy death
may thou live to God. Let meekness appear in thy affection, mildness in
thy countenance, humility in thy habit, modesty in thy habitation, patience in
tribulation. Let facility be in thine access, decency in thy dress, humility
in thy presence, affability in thy discourse, benignity in thy ways, charity
in thy works. Let constancy be in thine eye, content in thy chest, temperance
in thy cup. Observe moderation in thy desires, discretion in thy delights.
Think always of those 3. things past, Evil committed, Good omitted, Time
mis-spe^ded. Think always of these 3. things present: ^he shortness of this
present life, the difficulty of being saved, the fewness of those that are to
be saved. Think always of these three things to come, Death, than which nothing
is more horrible; Judgment, than which nothing is more terrible; the pain of
Hell, than which nothing more intolerable. Let thine Evening Prayers redeem
the sins of the forepast day; let the last day of the week reform the
offenses of the days gone before. Think in the Evening, how many souls are
that same day thrown headlong into Hell; and give thanks unto God, for that
he has given thee time to repent in. There be three things above thee, which
ought never to depart from thy memory: That Eye which sees all things, that
Ear which hears all things, and those books wherein all things are
recorded. Wholly has God communicated himself to thee; communicate thy self
likewise wholly to thy neighbor. That is the best life, which is wholly
employed to the behoof and benefit of others. Render to thy superior
obedience and reverence, to thy equal counsel and assistance, to thy
inferior succor and supportance. Let thy body be subjected to thy mind, and
thy mind to God. Bewail thy evils past, disesteeme thy goods present, covet
with all the desire of thine heart those goods to come. Remember thy sin, that
thou may grieve: Remember thy death, that thou may cease from sin:
Remember Gods justice, that thou may fear: Remember Gods mercy, lest thou
despair. Withdraw thy self as much as thou can, from the World, and devote
thy self wholly to the service of God: Think always, how chastity is
endangerd by delicacy, humility by prosperity, and piety by employments
transitory. Desire to please none but Christ: fear to displease none but
Christ. Beseech God always, that as he bids what he would, so he would do
what he bids: that he would protect what is done, and direct in what is to
be done: Endeavor thy self to be what thou would have thy self thought to
be; for God judges not according to the outward semblance, but according to
the inward substance. In thy discourse beware of much speech, because account
shall be required of every vain word. Whatsoever thy works be, they pass not
away, but as certain seeds of eternity, are they bestowed: if thou sow
according to the flesh, from the flesh shall thou reap corruption: if thou sow
after the Spirit, from the Spirit shall thou reap the reward of eternal
retribution. After death, neither shall the honors of this World follow thee,
nor heaps of riches favor thee, nor pleasures enjoy thee, nor the vanities of
this World possess thee, but after the fatal and full period of this life all
thy works shall follow thee. As then thou desire to appear in the day of
judgment, appear such in the sight of God at this present. Think not with
thy self what thou have, but rather what thou wantst: Pride not thy self for
that which is given thee, but rather become humbled for that which is denied
thee. Learn to live now while thou may live. In this time is eternal life
either got or lost. After death there remains no time for working, for then
begins the time of rewarding: In the life to come is not expected any work,
but payment for the work. Holy Meditation may beget in thee knowledge,
knowledge compunction, compunction devotion, devotion may produce prayer. Great
good for peace of the heart, is the silence of the mouth: By how much more as
thou art divided from the World, so much more acceptable art thou unto God.
Whatsoever thou desire to have, ask it of God; whatsoever thou already have,
attribute it to God: He is not worthy to receive more, who is not thankful for
what he has received: Then stops the course or current of Gods grace to man,
when man makes no recourse by thankfulness to God: Whatsoever befalls thee,
turn it to good; so often as prosperity comes upon thee, think how occasion
of blessing and praising God is ministered unto thee; again so often as
adversity a^^ayles thee, think how these are admonitions for the repentance
and conversion of thee. Show the force of thy power in helping, the force of
thy wisdom in instructing, the force of thy wealth in releeving. Neither let
Adversity bruise thee, nor Prosperity raise thee: Let Christ be thy scope of
thy life, whom thou art to follow here in the way, that thou may come to him
there in thy country. Amongst all other things, let profound humility, and
ardent Charity be thy greatest care. Let charity raise thine heart unto God,
that thou may cleave unto him: Let humility depresse thine heart, les^ thou
become proud and so leave him. Esteem God a Father for his clemency, a Lord for
his discipline; a Father for his sweet power, a Lord for his severe power; Love
him as a Father devoutly, fear him as a Lord necessarily: Love him because he
will have mercy: Fear him, because he will not suffer sin. Fear the Lord, and
trust in him; acknowledge thy misery, and declare his mercy. O God, thou who
have given us to will, give us likewise to perform.

THE SORROWFUL Souls solace, Gathered from Saint Augustine in his Tract Upon
the 62. Psalm, Upon these words.
My Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh also longs after thee.
BEhold here how the Soul thirsts; and see how good it is for the Soul that
thirsts; to wit, because she thirsts after thee. There are who thirst, but
not after God. Every one that would in his own behalf have ought performed,
is in heat of desire, till he have it effected; and this desire is the thirst
of the Soul. Now see what various desires are in the hearts of men: One
desires gold, another silver, one desires possessions, another inheritances,
one store of money, another stock of cattle* one a fair house, another a wife,
one honors, another children. You see these desires, how they are in the
hearts of men. All men thirst after one desire or other, yet can there scarce
one be found, who may say, My Soul has thirsted after thee. For men thirst
after this World, and they understand not how they are in the wilderness of
Idumaea, where their soul ought to thirst after God. Let us therefore say, My
Soul has thi^sted afther thee; Let us all say, (for we are all but one Soul
in our fellowship with (Christ:) Let this our soul thirst in Idumaea: My Soul
(says he) has thirsted after thee, and my Flesh has longed sore for thee. He
held it too little for the Soul only to thirst, but that his Flesh should
thirst. Now I would know, seeing the Soul thirsts after God, how the Flesh
may be said to thirst after God: For when the Flesh thirsts, it thirsts
after water; when the Soul thirsts, she thirsts after the fountain of
Wisdom; of which fountain our Souls shall be made drunk, as is said in
another Psalm, They shall be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thy house:
Psalm. 36.
and thou shall give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of thy river.

We are then to thrist after wisdom, to thirst after righteousness. Nor shall
we be satisfied with this, nor filled with that, till this our frail life
shall be ended, and we come to that which God has promised. For God has
promised to make us equal with the Angels. Now the Angels thirst not as we
do, nor hunger as we do, but partake of the food of truth, the food of light
of immortal wisdom. Therefore are they blessed: And in so great blessedness
(being in that heavenly City of Jerusalem, from which we are here as Aliens)
they take care of us poor pilgrims, they commiserate us, and by Gods
appointment they assist us, that at last we may return to our common Country,
and there at last with them be satisfied with that divine fountain of truth
and eternity. Wherefore let our Soul now thirst, and let our flesh also thirst
eagerly. Yea My flesh (says he) longs after thee: because to our flesh, is
resurrection promised by thee. Even as blessedness is promised to our soul:
so also is resurrection promised to our flesh. Such is the Resurrection of the
flesh which is promised unto us. Hear, learn, and understand what may be the
hope of Christians. For what end are we Christians? Not to this end are we
Christians, that we should seek earthly happiness, which even Thieves and
malefactors ofttimes enjoy. No, we are Christians for another kind of
happiness, which shall be then by us received, when this our transitory life
shall be ended. For this then is the Ressurection of flesh promised to us. And
such is the resurrection of flesh to us promised, that this same flesh which
we now carry about us, may rise in the end, and retain her incorruptible
glory without end. Neither let this seem incredible unto you, because you see
the dead falling to corruption, and returning to dust and ashes. Suppose that
any dead corpse should be burnt to ashes, or that dogs should tear it, do you
therefore think that it shall not rise again? All these parts which you see
peecemeale divided, and into small grains of dust resolved, remain all whole
with GOD; for into them do the Elements of the world pass, from whence they
first came, when we were made: These we do not see, yet will God, when he
knows his own time, produce them; who before we were made, when his sacred
will was, produeed us from them. Such Resurrection of the flesh is promised to
us, that, albeit this flesh which we now carry, be the same which shall rise
again, yet must it not have that corruption, which it now has. For now through
the corruption of our frailty, if we eat not, we faint and hunger; if we
drink not, we faint and thirst sor water; if we wake long, we faint and fall
a sleep; if we sleep long, we faint and so awake; if we eat and drink long,
albeit we eat and drink for nourishment, yet does this long refection become a
defection; if we stand long, we are weary, and therefore we fit; and if we
fit long, we become wearied, and therefore we rise. Then consider, how there is
no constant state in our flesh: because our infancy flies away into childhood,
and then if thou seek infancy, there is no infancy, because it is now
childhood, which was even now infancy. Again, that childhood passes into
youth, and then if thou seek childhood, thou can not find it. This youth
becomes a man; and then if thou seek that youth, he is not to be found. This
man becomes old: thou seekst a strong man, and he is not to be found. And this
old man dies: thou seek an old man, and he is not to be found. Our age
then stands not, every where there is weariness, every where tediousness,
every where corruption. Considering therefore, what hope of resurrection God
promises unto us; in these our manifold defects, we thirst after that
incorruption, and so our flesh longs much after God. In this Idumaea, in this
wilderness, by how much she labors, by so much more eagerly she thirsts;
by how much she is wearied, by so much she thirsts after that infatigable
incorruption, for which she was created. Albeit, my Brethren, the flesh of
every good and faithful Christian in this World, thirsts after God. Because
if his flesh need bread, if it need water, if it need wine, if it need money,
or what relief soever it need, he ought to beg for these at the hands of God,
not from Devils and Idols, or what other Powers of this World, I know not.
There are who when they suffer hunger in this World, leave God, and call on
Mercury, or Jupiter, or their heavenly Pan, as they call him, ^r some other
such like De^ils, that they would releeve them: these men's flesh thirst ^ot
after their God. For ^hey that thirst after God, every where ought to thirst
both ^n soul and flesh; because God both gives his bread (...) the Soul,
that is, the Word of truth; and God gives to the flesh also, whatsoever are
necessary, because God made both the soul and the flesh. For thy flesh, thou
calst upon Devils: tell me, has God made thy soul, and the Devils made thy
flesh? He who made thy soul, he likewise made thy flesh. He who made them
both, he likewise feeds them both. Let both these in us thirst after God, and
out of much labor be moderately refreshed, that in him, to whom we are solely
devoted, we may be wholly fixed.

Meditation.
O My Soul, recollect thy self! have thou thirsted after thy Savior? Have
thou followed him in the sweet smell of his savor? Have thou left thy thirst
after gold, possessions, honors, beauty? Have thou tenderd to him thy sole and
sovereign duty? Have thou only relied on his providence? Rested in his
goodness? Fear not, so thou fail not: Thou shall be ranked, where the Saints
are only numbered, by an happy arrival in the land of righteousness; which
he give thee, who gave himself for thee.


In terris;
Vita nostra,
Dies una.


In coelis;
Dies una,
Lux aeterna.

Man's Mutability. A Meditation extracted out of S. Augustine, in his Tract Upon
the 121. Psalm. Upon these words,
Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together in it self. Verse.
11.
NOw, my Brethren, whosoever erecteth the light of his mind, whosoever lays
aside the darkness of his flesh, whosoever clears the eye of his heart, let
him lift up and see what this It selse is. How shall I call it self, but it
self? O my Brethren, if you can, understand what is this it self. For even I
my self, if I should speak any thing else but it self, do not speak it
self; Yet do we labor by some near affinities of words and significant
proprieties to bring the infirmity of the mind, to meditate of this It self.
What is this it self? That which is always one and in the same manner, and
not now one thing, and then another. What is then it self but that which is?
And what is this which is? That which eternally is. For whatsoever is always
altering from one to another, is not, because what it is abides not: Yet not so
as locally it is not, but summarily it is not. And what is this which is, but
he, who when he sent Moses, said unto him, Exodus 3.
I AM THAT I AM? And who also said, Thus shall thou say unto the children of
Israel, I AM has sent me unto you. Behold it self, I AM THAT I AM; He who IS,
has sent me to you! But thou can not conceive it, it is far from thee to
understand it, far from thee to apprehend it. Retain therefore that which he
was made for thee, since to conceive him it is far from thee. Retain the
flesh of CHRIST, by which raised being sick thou may be relieved, and left
halfe-dead by Thieves wounded, thou may be to an Inn conducted, and cured.
Let us then run to the house of the Lord, and come to the City, where our
feet may stand in the gates; that City which is builded as a City, that is
compact together in it self. It self is this whereof it is said, Psalm. 101.
Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. Behold it self, Whose
years shall not fail! Brethren, do not our years daily fail and fade in
the year? For those years which are come are not now, and those which are to
come are not yet. Now are these failed which are come, and those shall fail
which are to come. Hours past be already gone, and hours to pass are not
yet come, and when they are come they likewise shall pass, and fail. What be
those years which do not fail, but those which stand? If years then do
there stand, those years which stand is one year; and that one year which
stands, is one day: because that one day has neither rising nor setting,
neither begun from yesterday, nor excluded from to morrow, but stands always
the same day. And whatsoever thou will, thou may call this day; if thou will,
they are years; if thou will, it is a day: think what thou will, yet it
stands. For this City partakes of stability, being compact together in it
self. Worthily then, because it becomes partaker of this stability, does he
say who runs thither; Our feet were standing in thy Courts, O Jerusalem. For
all things do there stand, where nothing passes: Will thou then stand there,
and not pass? Run thither. None has It self of himself. Attend Brethren:
He has a body, but this is not it self, because it stands not in it self.
It is changed by ages, it is changed by removes of places and times, it is
changed by corporal diseases and defects; therefore it stands not in itself.
Heavenly bodies do not stand in themselves, for they have their certain
changes, though secret: certainly are these changed from place to place, they
ascend from East to West, and again they go about to the East. These then do
not stand, these are not It self. Neither does Man's Soul stand itself. For
with how many alterations and cogitations is she varied, with what pleasures is
she changed and from her self estranged, with what desires infected and
infested? The very mind of man which is said to be reasonable, is likewise
mutable, it is not it self. Now it will, now it will not: Now it knows, now
it knows not: now it remembers, now it forgets. None then has It self of
himself. He who would have had it self of himself, that he might be it
self to himself, is fallen. He is fallen from an Angel, and become a Devil.
He drunk a health to man in pride, he threw himself down by envying him who
stood. He would be it self to themselves, have principality to themselves,
dominion in themselves. They would not have the ^rue LORD, who truly is It
self, to whom it is said, Thou shall change them, Psalm. 102.
and ^hey shall be changed, but thou art the same. Now therefore, after ^o long
affliction, after so many diseases, difficulties, labors, let the humbled
soul return to it self, and be in that City, that is compact together in it
self.


Vera copia,
Cupiditatis inopia.

Vera inopia,
Cupiditatis copia.

Minds tranquillity. A Meditation gathered out of Saint Angustine in his Tract,
upon the 147. Psalm. upon these words:
Who has set peace in thy borders. Ver. 14.
WHo has set peace in thy borders. How much have ye all rejoiced? Love this,
my Brethren. We are much delighted, when this love of Peace cries from your
hearts. How much has it delighted us? Having as yet said nothing, expounded
nothing, but only pronounced this verse, ye have even cried out. And what is
it that has cried from you? the love of peace: what does it present unto your
eyes? Whence do ye cry, if ye do not love? Whence do ye love, it ye do
not see? Peace is invisible. Where is that Eye, by which it is seen, that it
may be loved? Neither would it be cried upon, unless it were loved. These are
those representments of invisible things, which God exhibits unto us. With what
beauty has the conceit of Peace seized on your hearts? What then shall I now
speak of Peace, or of the praise of peace? Your affection preventeth all my
words: I shall not perform it, I am not able to undergo it, I am too weak to
do it. Let us defer all our praises of peace to that Country of peace.
There shall we more fully praise it, where we shall more fully possess it.
If we thus love peace begun in us, how much shall we praise it when perfected
in us? Behold, this I say, my beloved Children, Children of the Kingdom,
Citizens of Jerusalem, because in Jerusalem is the Vision of peace, and all
those who enjoy and love peace are made blessed in it. This, which ye so much
love and affect to hear named, pursue it, desire it, love it in your House,
love it in your Business, love it in your Wives, love it in your Children,
love it in your Servants, love it in your Friends, love it in your Enemies.
This is that peace which Heretics have not. Now what does peace here amidst
the uncertainties of this Region, in this Pilgrimage of our mortality; where,
as yet, no one is transparent to another, none sees the heart of another, what
does peace? It judges not of things uncertain, it confirms not things
unknown. It is apter to conceit well of man, than evilly to suspect him. It
grieves her not much to have erred, in conceiving a good opinion of him that
was ill-affected. But dangerous it is, to conceit ill of him who (perchance) is
good, not knowing how he is disposed whom we so rashly judged. What do I
lose, if I believe such an one is good? If it be uncertain whether he be
evil, (albeit you are to be cautelous whether this be so,) yet are you not to
condemn him as if it were so. this Peace commands, Psalm. 33.
Seek peace, and ensue it. Heresy, what does it teach? It condemns those it
knows not, it condemns the whole World. We do now desire that peace which we
have here in hope. For as yet, what peace is there in us? Galat. 5.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. Where
is there full peace in any one man? when shall it be full in any one man? Even
then, when it shall be full in all the citizens of Jerusalem. When shall there
be full peace? I Cor. 15.
When this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on
immortality, then shall there be full peace, then firm peace. Nothing then
contesteth against the soul in man, she is not against her self, nor in any
part wounded; there is no frailty of the flesh, no corporal want, no hunger,
no thirst, no heat, no cold, no weariness, no want, no provoking to wrath, nor
surely any cautelous care of avoiding a foe, or affecting a friend. All these
things, my Brethren, fight against us, we have not yet full and perfect peace.
In that ye have cried, (who even now hearing the name of peace out of your
desire to peace have cried) this cry of yours proceeded from thirst, not from
fullness.

THe same Father Augustine, a glorious Light of the Church, a constant Champion
for the truth, and a powerful evincer of all such Errors as opposed the Truth,
in his love to peace, composed likewise this sweet Meditation, to beget in
every devout heart the like affection: Gathered out of his Tract upon the 36.
Psalm. Upon these words: Meek men shall possess the Earth, and shall have
their delight in the multitude of peace. Ver. 23.

Upon which, with a passionate devotion, an affectionate passion, he analiseth
thus: This Earth, whereof we have so often spoken, is holy Jerusalem. The
Meek shall be delivered from this their pilgrimage, and shall live for ever
with God, and of God. Therefore shall they possess the Earth for an
inheritance. And what shall their riches be? They shall be delighted in the
multitude of peace. For the wicked, he may be delighted in the multitude of
Gold, in the multitude of Silver, in the multitude of Servants, lastly in the
multitude and store of Wealth, of delicious Wines, sumptuous and luxurious
Feasts. But admit, he should be always stored, always in these suited, were
not his case to be lamented? But what shall be thy riches, what shall be thy
dainties? Multitude of peace: Thy Gold shall be peace, thy Silver peace, thy
Farms peace, thy Life peace, thy God peace. Whatsoever thou desire shall be
to thee peace. That which is here Gold, cannot be unto thee Silver: That which
is Wine, cannot be unto thee Bread: That which is unto thee Light, cannot be
drink: whereas thy God shall be to thee all things. Thou shall eat him, and
never hunger: Drink him, and never thirst: Be enlightened by him, and never
become blind: Be supported by him, and never fail: He wholly shall possess
thee wholly and entirely. Thou shall suffer there no extremities for another:
have him, with whom thou shall possess all: enjoy all, and he enjoy thee all,
who is all in all: because thou, and he, who is joined in society with thee
shall be one: Which one, God himself shall wholly enjoy in you, Psalm. 36.
who shall possess you. This is the end of a man that loves peace.


Summa ^hilosophia,
Crucis Scientia.


Christi vita,
Christiani Philosophia.

Christian Philosophy. A Meditation culled out of S. Augustine, in his Tract
upon the 148. Psalm, upon these words:

His praise is above the earth and the heavens: for he has exalted the horn
of his people. Ver. 13.
WHat is his Praise in Heaven and in Earth? Is it because he praises? No, But
because all things praise him, all things cry unto to him: the beauty of all
things is in some sort the voice of those which praise the Lord. The Heaven
cries to the Lord; Thou have made me, not I my self. The Earth cries, Thou
have fashioned me, not I my self. How then do these cry? When thou
consid^rest these and find this in these, out of thy consideration they cry,
out of thy voice they cry, His praise is in Heaven and in Earth: Consider the
Heaven, it is beautiful: consider the Earth, it is beautiful: both of them
are together very beautiful. It is he that made them, he that guides them: it
is his command that governs them: It is he that alters times, supplies
moments. Even He of himself supplies them. All things therefore do praise
him, whether they be in station, or motion, whether they be from Earth below,
or from Heaven above, whether they be in declining or renewing. When thou see
these, and rejoycest in these, and art lifted up in Contemplation to Him that
made these, and considerest how these invisible things of his are understood by
these which are made, then is His praise in Heaven and in Earth, that is, thou
praisest him for things earthly, thou praisest him for things heavenly. And
because He made all things, and that there is nothing better than Him;
whatsoever He made is below Him, and whatsoever seems pleasing in these, is
less pleasing than He is. Let nothing then so much please thee in these which
he has made, as He himself, by whom they were made. But if so thou love this
which He has made, thou art much more to love Him, by whom they were made. If
these be so beautiful which He has made, much more beautiful is He by whom
they were made. His praise is in Heaven and in Earth, and he shall exalt the
horn of his people. Now (in this Vale of tears, and field of tares) is the
Horn of his people humbled in threshings, tribulations, temptations, beating
of breasts. When shall the Horn of his people be exalted? When the Lord
himself shall come, and our Sun shall arise, not this which is seen with our
eyes, and arises on the good and evil, but even that Sun whereof it is
said, Mat. 5.
unto you that fear the Lord, Malac. 4.
shall the Sun of righteousness arise, and health shall be under his wings;
and whereof the proud and wicked shall say, Wisd. 5.
The light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the Sun of
understanding rose not upon us. He shall be our Summer. Now, fruits in Winter
time appear not in the root. Thou observest how dry Trees are in winter. He
that knows not the observation of these things, prunes the dry Vine before the
fruit come, and, perchance, next Spring it becomes so dry, as it brings forth
neither flower nor fruit, when it should come. Both these are alike in winter,
this lives, that is dead: But the life of this, and the death of that, are
both in secret. The Summer approaches; life appears in this, death is
discovered in that. Beauty of leaves precedeth, plenty of fruit succeeds: the
Vine is attired with that beauty in her leaf, which she retains in her root.
Therefore, my Brethren, we are now while we are here, in our condition like
other men. Like as they are borne, eat, drink, live, and are clothed, and so
pass over their life; even so the Saints. Sometimes do these things deceive
men, whence it is they say, Behold, since this man became a Christian, did his
head never ache? Or now being a Christian, enjoyes he more than I do? O dry
Vine! Thou observest the Vine planted near thee how naked it is in winter, but
never how dry it is by heat of summer. The Lord our beauty will come, who lay
hid in the root; and then will He exalt the horn of his people, after this our
captivity wherein we mortally live. Whence it is that the Apostle says, Judge
nothing before the time, I Cor. 4.
until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and
then shall every man have praise of God. But thou will say, where is any root?
where is any fruit? If thou beleevest, thou know where thy root is. For
there it is, where thy Faith is, where thy Hope and Charity is. Colos. 3.
Hear the Apostle, for ye are dead: They appeared as it were dead in winter.
Hear how they live, And your life is hid (says he) with Christ in God.
Behold, where thou have thy root! When then shall thou be adorned with beauty?
When shall thou be multiplied in fruit? Hear what follows, When Christ which
is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

THE Souls Jubilee, Gathered from Saint Augustine, in his Tract Upon the 85.
Psalm, Upon these words:
Rejoice the Soul of thy servant: for unto thee, o Lord, do I lift up my
Soul.

For thou, Lord, art good and merciful, and of great kindness unto all them
that call upon thee.


Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant. Rejoice her, because unto thee do I raise
her. She was in earth, and in earth she felt bitterness: Now, lest she should
pine away through bitterness, and so lose all thy gracious sweetness, I have
raised her up unto thee, Rejoice her with thee. For thou only art joyfulnesse:
the World is full of bitterness. Surely, very rightly does he exhort his
members, that they have their hearts on high. Let them then hear it and do
it: let them lift that up unto heaven, which is in an evil state while it is
upon Earth. For there the heart does not corrupt, if it be lifted up unto God.
If you have corn in low places, lest it should corrupt, you remove it higher:
do you then seek to prepare a place for your corn, and will you suffer your
heart to corrupt on Earth? you remove your corn to an higher room, lift up
your heart unto heaven. But how may I do this, will you say? What Cords, what
Pulleis, what Ladders are needful? These stairs, are thy affections: thy way,
is thy will. By loving thou ascendest, by neglecting thou descendest. Standing
on Earth thou art in Heaven, if thou love God. For the heart is not lifted, as
the body is raised. The body, that it may be raised, changes her place, but
the heart, that it may be roused, changes her will, For unto thee, O Lord, do
I lift up my soul: for thou, Lord, art good and merciful, therefore rejoice
her. As one wearied and tediously affected with the bitterness of earthly
things, she desires to be sweetened, and has sought the fountain of
sweetness, but could not find it on earth. For what way soever she turned
herself, she found scandals, tribulations, fears, tentations: In what man
living safe security? Of whom certain joy? And if not of himself, how much
less from another? For either men are evil, and of necessity we must suffer
them, yet hoping withal that they may be changed: or they are good, and so we
ought to love them, yet fearing withal lest they become evil, because they
may be changed. There, the wickedness of those begets bitterness of soul:
here, care and fear equally surprise us, lest he fall away from us, who
walked sometime uprightly among us. What way soever then the heart shall turn
her, she finds bitterness in earthly things: she has not wherewithal to
sweeten her, unless she lift her self up unto God her Maker. For thou, Lord,
art good and merciful. What is this merciful? Thou supportest me till thou
perfectest me. For truly, my Brethren, I will speak as a man unto men and of
men. Let every one bring hither his heart, and behold himself without
flattering and without glozing. Nothing is foolisher, than flattering and
seducing ones self. Let every one then consider and see what and how many
things are acted in man's heart; and how, for most part, our very prayers are
hindered by various thoughts, so as our hearts will scarcely stand firm before
God. It desires so to enjoy it self that it may stand, and in some sort it
flies from it self, yet for all this it finds no lettices by which it may
confine her thoughts, or bars by which it may restrain her distractions, and
wandering motions, and stand joyfully before her God. Rare it is, that a prayer
should occur devoutly fixed, amongst so many prayers. Now every one would say,
that, what befalls him, befalls not another, unless we found in the Sacred
Scripture of God, that David in one place prayed and said: 2 Reg. 7.
O Lord, I have found my heart, that I may pray unto thee. He said, he had
found his heart, as if it used sometimes to fly from him, and he to pursue it
as a fugitive, and could not lay hold on it, and to cry unto the Lord, My heart
has forsaken me. Psalm. 39.
Therefore, Brethren, considering what he here says, Thou art good and
merciful, I conceive that for this cause he calls him a merciful God, for that
he suffers these things in us, and yet expects prayer from us, that he
might perfect his good work in us. And when we have given it him, by offering
our oblation of prayer unto him, he receives it freely, and hears it
friendly, neither remembers he those prayers of ours, which we so unseasonably
presented, but receives this one which we scarcely found, yet found we humbly
offered. For tell me, Brethren, what man is he, with whom if his friend shall
begin to talk, and he will not answer him, but observes him to decline from
him, and to direct his discourse unto another, as if he were wholly aliened
from him, who, I say, could endure this? Or suppose thou should intercede a
Judge, and address thy self to him in such a place as he may hear thee, and
suddenly, when thou should speak unto him, thou leavest him, or
entertainest some trifling discourse with thy friend, how could he endure
this? Yet does God suffer so many hearts of such as pray, and think of many
wandering thoughts while they pray, I forbear to speak of thoughts hurtful, I
forbear to speak of things depraved and offensive unto God: for to think
even of superfluous thoughts, is an injury unto him, with whom thou speak.
Thy Prayer is a speech unto God. When thou read. GOD speaks unto thee: When
thou praiest, thou speak with God.

But what? Are we to despair of mankind, and now conclude, that every man is
damned, when any wandering thought shall creep in upon him, and interrupt his
prayer? If we should conclude thus, Brethren, I do not see what hope might
remain in us. But forasmuch as we have hope in God, for great is his mercy,
let us say unto him; Rejoice the soul of thy servant: For unto thee, O Lord,
do I lift up my soul. And how have I lifted it up? As much as I could, as
much as thou gave me strength, as soon as I was able to lay hold on my
fugitive soul. So long as thou stoodst before me (suppose him to speak in the
person of God) thou entertainedst such vain and superfluous thoughts, as thou
scarcely pouredst forth one fixed or stable prayer unto me. What more can thou
answer unto this, but, that thou Lord art good and merciful? merciful thou
art in suffering me. I fall away through sickness, heal me, and I shall
stand: strengthen me, and I shall be strong. Mean time, till thou do this,
thou suffer me: for thou Lord, art gracious and very merciful. Not only
merciful, but very merciful. For our iniquity abounds, and thy mercy
abounds Yea full of mercy art thou to all such as call upon thee. What is it
then that the Scripture says in so many places, Prove. 1*
They shall call upon me, but I will not answer. (Certainly he is merciful to
all such as call upon him) unless it be for that some calling upon him, do
not call upon him, of whom it is said, Psalm. 13.
They have not called upon God? They call, but not upon God. Thou call for
what thou love: Thou call for what thou wishest in thee; thou call for
what thou would have come to thee. Wherefore, if for this end thou call upon
God, that money may come to thee, that an inheritance may descend to thee, that
temporal dignity may befall thee, thou call upon him for those things which
thou desire that they may come unto thee: But thou make God here a
furtherer of thy lusts, not a favourer of thy desires. Is God good, if he give
thee what thou would have? What if thou would have what is ill? were he
not more merciful unto thee in not giving thee what thou would have? Yet,
for all this, if he do not give it thee, God is as nothing unto thee: For
thou say, How long have I sought, how often have I sought, and yet am not
heard? But what have thou sought? Perchance, the death of thy Enemy: what if he
also besought thine? He who created thee, he likewise created him: Thou art a
man, he likewise is a man: But God is the Judge, he hearkneth both, but he
hears not both. Thou art sad, for that thou art not heard in thy prayer
against him: be glad, that he is not heard in his prayer against thee. But
thou will say, I did not seek this, I sought not the death of mine enemy; but
I besought the life of my child: What evil sought I in this? Thou soughtst no
evil, as thou think; but tell me, what if he were taken from thee, lest
Sin should change his understanding? But thou will say, he was sinful, and
therefore I desired that he might live, that he might reform his life. Thou
desiredst that he might live better: but what if God saw that he by living
longer, would become worse? How know thou then whether might more redound to
his profit, to dye or live? Seeing then thou know not, return into thy
heart, leave this to the secret counsel of God. But what shall I then do,
will thou say? How may I pray? How may thou pray? As thy Lord has taught
thee, as thine Heavenly Master has taught thee. Call upon God, as God;. Love
God, as God. Nothing is better than he, desire him, covet him. See how this
princely Prophet calls upon the Lord in another other Psalm, One thing have
I desired of the Lord, Psalm. 26.
that I will require. And what is this he desires? Even that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life: And to what end? To behold the
beauty of the Lord. If then thou desire to be the Lover of God, with thy
sinc^rest affections, and chastest sighs love him, like him, long for him,
languish for him, than whom thou can find nothing more joyful, nothing more
graceful, nothing more cheerful, nothing more diuturnall. For what more
diuturnall, than what is sempiternall? Do not fear that he at any time will
fall from thee, who has made thee, that thou should not fall from him. If
then thou call upon God as God, be secure, thou art heard; thy portion has
relation to that verse, He is very merciful to all such as call upon him. Do
not then say, He has not given me this. Return unto thy heart, and discharge
thy conscience, examine it, do not spare it. If thou have at any time called
upon God for temporal benefits, assure thy self that therefore he did not
give them thee, because they would not profit thee. In this, Brethren, let your
hearts be edified, your Christian hearts, your faithful hearts; lest ye fall
into murmuring against God, by being discontented, when frustrated of your
desires: and in vain it is to kick against the prick. Make recourse to the
Scriptures. The Devil is heard, Matthew. 8.
and the Apostle is not heard. How seems this unto you? How are the Devils
heard? They besought him that they might go into the heard of Swine, and it
was granted them. How is the Devil heard? He besought him, that he might tempt
Job, Job 1.
and it was suffered him. How is the Apostle not heard? Lest I should be
exalted out of measure, 2 Cor. 12.
through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the
flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet me. For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, my grace is
sufficient for thee: for my power is made perfect through weakness. He heard
him, whom he had disposed to damnation: and heard not him whom he prepared to
salvation. The sick patient asks many things of his Physician: yet the
Physician gives them not, he hears him not after his will, but for his
health. Make God then thy Physician: ask of him health, and he will be thy
health: not only as outward health, but as he himself is all health. Love not
then any health beside him, but as thou have it in the Psalm, Psalm. 34.
Say unto my Soul I am thy Salvation. What is it unto thee what he give thee,
so he give himself unto to thee? Now would thou that he give himself unto
thee? What if that thou would have he will not give thee, that he may give
himself unto thee? He removes impediments from thee, that he may enter in
unto thee. Brethren, observe and consider what God gives here unto Sinners, and
hence gather what he keeps in store for his Servants. To Sinners that
blaspheme him, he gives daily the benefits of Heaven and Earth, he gives
fountains, fruits, health, children, wealth, abundance. All these goods things
none gives but God. He that gives such things to the sinful, what think
thou stores he up for his faithful? Do thou think this of him, that he
who gives such things to the evil, reserves nothing in store for the good? yes
truly, he reserves not only earth but heaven. Nay perchance, I speak of
something too low when I speak of heaven: he reserves himself who made
Heaven. Beautiful is heaven, but more beautiful is the Maker of Heaven. But
(say thou) I see Heaven, but I see not him. Thou have eyes to see Heaven: But
thou have not as yet an heart to see the Maker of Heaven. To that end came he
from Heaven to Earth, that he might cleanse thine heart, whereby he might be
seen who made Heaven and Earth. But freely with patience expect salvation. He
knows best with what medicines to cure thee: He knows best how to cut thee,
how to seere thee. Thou art become sick through sin, he comes not only to
cheer, but to cut and seere. Do thou not see what pain men suffer under
the hands of their Physicians, who promise unto them an uncertain hope of
life? Thou shall be cured, says the Physician, thou shall be cured if I cut
thee. And this is but the promise of man, and promised to man. Neither is he
certain who speaks it, nor he who hears it: because he speaks it unto
man, who made not man, nor perfectly knows what may become of man: yet gives
man credit to these words of man, who knows not what becomes of man: he
submits his members unto him, he suffers himself to be bound, or sometimes
unbound he is cut and seer'd: and perchance he recovers health for a few
days, yet after this short recovery of health, he knows not when he must
dye; and perchance he dies while he is in cure, or perhaps he cannot be
cured. But to whom has God at any time promised, and deceived?

I^ius Horreo
Su^^ma affluentia,
Cujus cordi^ Scrinio
Sana Conscientia.

THE Christian Storehouse,
Rendered from Saint Augustine in his Tract upon the 64. Psalm, upon these
words:
We shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine House, even of thine holy
Temple.
WHat are those good things of the house of God? Brethren, let us suppose to
our selves some rich House, imagining it to be stored with all good things,
how plenteous it may be, what store of vessels of gold and silver there may
be, how numerous a family, what abundance of stock and store, in a word how
the House it self may delight us with pictures and structures of marble,
arched Roofes, curious Columns, specious Spaces, sumptuous Rooms: behold, such
things are desired, but as yet out of the confusion of Babylon. Prune all these
desires, O Citizen of Jerusalem, prune all these: if thou will return to
thine heavenly City, let not captivity delight thee. But if thou have already
begun to go out of Babylon, do not look behind thee, do not loyter in the
way. There want not yet Enemies to persuade thee to stay still in thy captivity
and exile. Let not then the speeches of the wicked prevail with thee. Desire
the House of God, and desire the good things of that house: but not such, as
thou usest to desire either in thine own House, or in thy Neighbors or
Patrons House. There is goodness of another nature in this House. What need
we to declare what those good things be of that House? Let him exp^esse them
who sings in his going out of Babylon: We shall be satisfied with the
pleasures of thine House. What are those pleasures? Sometimes, perchance, we
erected our hearts to gold, to silver, and other precious things: do not seek
such, these oppress, they do not refresh. Let us here then meditate of those
pleasures of Jerusalem, those pleasures of the House of the Lord, those
pleasures of the Temple of the Lord: because those pleasures which are of the
House of the Lord, those are pleasures of the Temple of the Lord. We shall be
satisfied with the pleasures of thine House: Holy is thy Temple, wonderful in
righteousness. These are the pleasures of that House. He says not, thy holy
Temple wonderful in Pillars, wonderful in Pictures, wonderful in Marbles,
wonderful in gilded buildings, but wonderful in righteousness. Thou have
outward eyes, wherewith thou may see marble structures, golden statues: but
within is the eye wherewith thou may view the beauty of Righteousness:
within, I say, is the eye wherewith thou may view the beauty of
Righteousness. If there be no beauty in Righteousness, whence is it that the
Righteous old man is loved? What may his body present to delight the sight? He
presents crooked lims, a rugged forehead, an head whitened with hoary hairs,
weakness in all parts, full of aches and complaints. But, perchance, though
this decrepit old man delight not thine eyes, he may delight thine ears. With
what voice? with what song? For though, perchance, while he was young, he
sung well, all those airs are decayed with age. For can the sound of his words
possibly delight thine ears, seeing he can scarcely pronounce his words
through the dropping decay of his teeth? Yet if he be just, if he covet not
that which is another, if he out of his own distribute to the necessity of
others, if he admonish discreetly, and understand rightly, if he believe
sincerely, if he be ready for the profession of truth to bestow even his
decayed lims (for many have been Martyrs when they were old) we are moved to
love him. But whence is it that we love him? What good thing do we see in
him with these eyes of our flesh? Nothing. There is then a certain beauty of
righteousness, which we see with the eyes of our heart, and which we love,
and wherewith we burn. What was it that begot so much love in men to these
Martyrs, when their lims were piecemeal^ torn by beasts? When their blood
wherewith their Corpse were embathed, distained all things, when their bowels
were rent and shed abroad with the teeth of beasts, had the eyes any objects
but spectacles of horrou^? What was there in them that could be loved: but
that in such a Shambles of torn members, there appeared an unblemished beauty
of righteousness? These are the pleasures of the House of God; with these
prepare thy self to be satisfied: but that thou may be herewith satisfied
when thou come thither, it behooves thee to hunger and thirst after it, while
thou art a stranger: Thirst after this, huger after this, for these shall be
the pleasures of God. Hear that King to who^ these things are spoken, who came
to recall thee, and through himself has made a way for thee, what says he?
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, Mat. ^.
for they shall be satisfied. Holy is thy Temple, wonderful in
righteousness. And do not think, Brethren, that this same Temple is without
you. Love righteousness, and ye are the Temple of God.

MAN His own Foe.
WHat an Enemy is Man to himself? He sees above him, Heaven, offering it
self unto him; below him, Hell, threatening perdition to him; On Earth, he
sees nothing worthy his affecting. Friends he observes, and he finds them
Shadows of time: the best of their constancy clothes it self with a seeming
mourning, and closes all those glorious protests of Devotion and Service, with
a teare-sacrifice to his Urne.

All those fair Monuments of his discerning providence are razed; those
undeserving Palms, which afforded him applause, now closed. Those Annals of
his care, to an unknown posterity recommended. Those precious vading hours,
which well expended, might have gained him eternity, are so many Heralds to
deblazon his vanity. Time he had enough to estate him in immortality; but
pleasure, honor, or earthly profit appeared such precious pearls in his
bleered eye, as he could reserve few or no minutes for so inestimable a
purchase, as the permanent possession of a future happiness. He eyed that
least, which would have cleared his eyesight most: making that his Supreme
Object, which should in Wisdom have been his lowest Subject. He could not
possibly affect ought more, than what conduced least to his spiritual
improvement. Were he in company; those he made choice for his consorts, whose
debauched course had sprinkled a deep tincture on their fame: and had made
them only exemplary in that which deserved imitation least. Did he walk
abroad; he made no use of those various objects, which might have diverted his
eye from admiring the excellence of the creature, to fix and inspheare it in
the sole satisfying Contemplation of his Creator. Not the least sprig, seed, or
grassepile, but retained in it a mysterious impression of so exquisite an
Artist: yet with what an easy contempt and per^unctory reflex, he looks on
these, as if they dictated nothing to him but a vading vanity? Yet see, poor
groundling! if some flourishing Meadow, fair Pasture, fruitful Farm, or any
other attractive object of sensual profit present their sight and site unto
him; with what a passionate interbreath he salutes these earthly objects, with
a servile irregular wish; Oh that these were mine! Mean time, he h'as more
than he enjoyes; and enjoyes less peace, by engaging his rough rubbish
desires to every place. What an angling he makes to catch that, which catches
him most? He makes the Day his Purveyor for the world; the Night his
Remembrancer of his cares: So as, that very time which was allotted Man for
rest, becomes his disquiet.

If he aim at Honor, he makes it his flame; and never leaves it, till his
ayry wings be singed by it. Secure he was before he sought; but as one
wearied in the haven, he commits his unstear'd vessel to the dangers of the
Maine; where his Competitors be those Pilots which plash him; who never leave
him, till they cause his Top and Top-galant to yield with dishonor; which, his
unbounded spirit unable to brook, becomes his secret Pioner.

When Pleasure seazeth his Fort; how long and tedious are those slow-running
hours, which divide him from idolatrizing his light-affected Mistress? What
numerous fancies his deluded imagination suggests to him; presenting to his
intranced Conceit, more moving Objects of imaginary delight, than the loosest
Sibarite ever* yet enjoyed? He reteines a constant model of her favor,
feature, posture; but how light she weighs in the Scale of honor, he never
dreams. He flatters himself with the conceit of her reply, upon the delivery
of a set speech; farced with far more complement, than ornament of art. Poor
fool! How much a scattred or ravished favor transports him! Mean time, she
works on his fortune, while she guls his gilded person with a seeming
affection. Thus splitted in his fortune, he becomes cashiered of his temporary
favorite. And now Time comes, and must needs draw his feature.

Heavens bless me; how like a fleshlesse Starveling, this amorous Skeleton
looks! He, who once fed on fancy, longs after a more substantial food to
refresh his appetite.

Our two late Prophets talked of Droughts and Plagues; and his incessant desire
is by a petitionary way (for otherwise his exhausted fortunes cannot work, nor
project him a course to subsist) that they would intercede (if their phanatick
illumination would give leave) that the Drought of his seered liver might be
quenched, and the Plague of his purse cured.

We have now Epitomized Man to his full; and discovered him to be the only
occasion of his own fall. Oh that he would recollect himself! and consider
from whence he came, what he is, and whereto he must go.

First, let him reflect upon the state of his earthly being; that weak
contexture whereof he is molded; Next, what weak and infirm supports he
stands on; and how soon those shaking Bases shall decline, when necessitated
Fate shall undermine them; Lastly, those miseries one misspent hour shall make
him liable to: when with ^ighes, and tears, and what not; he shall petition
for redemption of time, which want of time will not afford him; nor all his
powerfulst Advocates on Earth procure him; nor all his prayers and tears, be
they never so plentifully effused, assure him.

O Man! Seeing then, Earthly Honor becomes acorroding Competitor to the Owner;
aim at that, which shall without corrivalship highly improve, and securely
confirm the injoyer.

Seeing, Worldly wealth sates not the desire, but ministers fresh fuel to the
possessor; address thy more erected thoughts to that solec-sufficing and
entirely-enriching treasure, which shall cloze thy safely-confined desires for
ever.

Lastly, Seeing thou art so much transported with the vading shadow of Worldly
Pleasure; fix thy sole content on that absolute good, which transcends all
extent: So shall thou, who before were a Foe to thy self, become a Friend to
Him, who to redeem thee, engaged himself.

TWO Devout Prayers, Or Meditations of F. Lewis of Granado, gathered forth of
his Meditations in Spanish, and heereto annexed.
God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14.
To Christ Crucified.
We adore thee, O Lord Jesu Christ, and bless thy holy Name, for that thou
have redeemed the world by this thy Cross. We give thanks to thee, most
gracious Savior, for that thou have so highly loved us, and cleansed us by thy
blood from our sins: as likewise, for that thou have offered thy self upon
the Cross for us, that with the most sweet smell of this thy most noble
Sacrifice, inflamed with the fire of thy love, thou might reconcile GOD to
us, and procure our peace with him. Blessed be thou for ever, O Savior of the
World, O Reconciler of men, repairer of Angels, Restorer of Heaven, Triumpher
over Hell, Conqueror of the Devil, Author of life, Destroyer of Death, and
Redeemer of them, who sat in darkness, and shadow of Death.

To the sacred mystery of the Cross, by JESUS Sanctified: And to JESUS, who
was on it crucified.
O Cross, No fire gives quicker heat to heath, than Christ's Cross to man's
heart. No fire works more upon combustible matter, than the wood of the Cross
on a pliable nature.
thou drawest hearts more powerfully unto thee, than the Adamant does Iron^:
Thou more clearly enlightnest our minds, than the Sun does men's eyes: Thou
more vehemently inflamest our souls, than fire does coals. Wherefore, O most
holy Cross, Meaning by this Material wood of the Cross of Christ, tha^
Spi^ituall Wo^d of Life, Christ Jesus ^hanging on the wood of the Cross.
draw me unto thee powerfully: enlighten me continually: inflame me
vehemently and vigorously, that my mind and cogitation may never depart from
thee: Thou also, my good JESU, illuminate the eyes of my soul, that in this
Cross I may understand how to behold thee: to wit, that I may not only
contemplate those extreme sorrows which thou sufferedst for my sake, and take
compassion of them: but that I may also know, that the examples of those many
and excellent Virtues, which thou here exhibitedst, were to me recommended,
that they might by me be imitated.

Wherefore, O thou Teacher of the World, O thou Physician of our souls, here
do I come to the foot of thy Cross, she wing my wounds and sores unto thee:
heal me, O my God, and prescribe me what I should do. I acknowledge, and
confess, O Lord, that I am vehemently addicted to sensual affections, and too
great a Lover of my self, which self-love I perceive hinders much my
spiritual profit and proficience. So as, being oft-times ensnared either with
my pleasures and delights, or deterred with the labor of fasting, I lose the
benefit of pious and devout exercises: with the loss whereof my salvation
likewise is endangered. This sensuality of mine is to me very tedious, very
grievous: for truly it desires at set hours to feast Delicacy the Devils
darling.
daintily and delicatly, it desires after dinners and suppers, to solace it
self in discourses and delights; likewise, to take the air, walk in gardens
and arbours, always affecting one recreation or other: but teach thou me, O
Lord, by thy example what I ought to do. O with what confusion, with what
shame do I conceive my self to be clothed, so often as I behold, after what
sort thou entertainedst that most delicate, and most tender body of thine? In
the midst of those anguishes and dolours of thy most bitter death, thou
ministredst to it no other repast nor receipt, than that which was Christ's
confection.
confectioned of gall, and vinegar, by those cruel and hateful Apothecaries.
And at that time, whose tongue, I pray thee, durst complain of thy Christ's
refection.
meat, that it was either cold or raw, and ill dressed, or too quickly, or
slowly dished, upon sight of that Table spread, O Lord, for thee, in that thy
so great necessity? In stead of delights and discourses, which I seek in my
Suppers, and banquets, thou had the voices of them, who with moving, and
mowing, and wagging their heads, derided and blasphemed thee, saying, Christ's
Music.
Hey, thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days. This was
the music, this the harmony of thy banquet. Likewise, when thou stuckst nailed
hand and foot upon the Cross, this was thy Christ's Perambulation.
walking into the Garden. For albeit, thou had another garden, whereto thou
retiredst after supper, yet was it not to walk in, but to pray in; not to
refresh thee, but to shed thy blood: not to delight thee, but to grieve,
sorrow, and be in the agony of death. What shall I say more of the rest of
those refreshments of thy blessed flesh? My flesh requires a soft bed, a
precious weed, spacious and specious houses, but tell thou me, O my holy Love,
what an one might be thy chamber? What thy house? What thy garment? Thy garment
is nakedness, and thy purple the Christ's habit.
habit of derision. Thy Christ's house.
house is to be conversant in public assemblies, exposed to the
distemperatures of Sun, and air; and if I seek for any house of thine
besides this, it is a stable for beasts. Foxes have their holes, and the
Sparrowes of heaven their nests: But thou the Creator and Maker of all things,
have not whereon to Christ's repose.
lay thine head. O ye curiosities and superfluities, how comes it to pass,
that there is any place left for you among Christians? Either let us cease to
be Christians, or let us cast from us all these delights and superfluities:
seeing our Lord and Christ's conversation, our imitation.
Master has not only cast from him those things which were superfluous, but
even those things also which were necessary.

Now it remains, Lord, that I see what a Chamber thou have. Tell me, O sweet
Lord, where it is that thou lie, where thou sleep at noone? I lay me
down here at thy feet: teach me, what I ought to do. For this my sensuality
will not well relish a Sermon of thy Cross. I desire a bed soft and sweet, and
if I awake at Prayer time, yet do I suffer my self easily to be overcome by
sloth: I expect likewise a morning slumber, that I may get rest for my head.
But tell me, O Lord, what rest thou had upon that Christ's bed.
bed of thy Cross. When as leaning on the one side, thou were wearied, how
could thou rest thee on the other side, that thou might be eased?

May not thine heart here burst? May not all thy sensuality here dye? O solace
to the poor! O, shame to the rich! O strength to the penitent! O condemnation
to the soft and delicate! Neither is JESUS CHRIST'S bed for you, nor his glory
for you.

O Lord, give me grace, that after thy example I may subdue and kill my
sensuality; but if not, I beseech thee, that even this very moment thou would
take my life from me. For it is not reasonable nor tolerable, that thou
should be fed upon the Cross, both with Gall and Vinegar, and I seek after
delights, and most exquisite dainties: Nor that thou should ^ee so poor and
naked, and I with such earnestnes hunt after worldly riches, and so wretchedly
love and affect them: Nor that thou should have a Christ's c^adle a Cr^bbe,
his couch a Cross.
Cross for thy couch, and I seek a soft bed, a pleasant chamber, and delight
of the flesh.

Be ashamed therefore, O my soul, when thou beholdest thy Lord, hanging upon
the Cross: Where imagine him to be Christ's Sermon upon the Cross.
preaching unto thee, and rebuking thee after this manner. I took for thee (O
man) a Crown of Thorns: Thou in contempt of me, wearest a garland made of
Flowers. I for thee, stretched out my hands upon the Cross: will thou reach
thine forth to pleasures and dalliance? I dying, could not quench my thirst so
much as with water: will thou seek after precious Wines and Viands? I, both on
the Cross, as likewise all my life long, was full of reproaches, and sorrows:
will thou bestow thy time upon honors and pleasures? I suffered my side to be
opened, that I might make thee even partaker of my heart: will thou have thine
exposed and opened to vain and perilous loves?

A Short and fruitful Confession of a Sinner unto God, for obtaining
Contrition.
O God of inestimable and eternal mercy, God of unmeasurable piety, God the
Creator and Redeemer of mankind, who purifiest the hearts of such as confess
their sins unto thee; who releasest all such from the bond of iniquity, as
accuse themselves before the sight of thy divine majesty: I beseech the power
and depth of thy goodness with inward groans: that according to the multitude
of thy mercies, thou would grant me to make a pure and sincere confession
before thee of all my sins, whereof my guilty conscience does accuse me. And
that thou would give me true repentance for all such things as I have
committed, in naughty thoughts, depraved cogitations, wicked consent, unjust
counsel, in concupiscence and unclean delights, in evil and hateful words,
in malicious works, in my seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and touching. I
truly even in all my members do conceive my self guilty above measure:
because, as the stars of heaven, and sands of the Sea; so do I know my
sins to be innumerable. But to thee, Lord, who know all secrets, and who
have said, Thou desire the repentance of a Sinner, do I reveal all the
secrets of my heart, accusing my naughtiness, and my many and very great
sins, which I have committed before the eyes of thy fearful Majesty, all my
wretched life long, especially these ( here for the better increase of thy
devotion and spiritual compunction, may thou particularize some of thy
grievouser Sins) with all those my evils, which are open and manifest, O God
of mercy, in thy sight. And now, O most gracious LORD, look upon me and have
mercy on me, and give unto me a fountain of tears and remission of all my
sins, through thy free mercy, and that with inward confession of heart, and
affection of desiring remission, seconded with so sincere a Confession.
Rectify and reform in me, O most loving Father, whatsoever is depraved in
me, either in word, deed, thought, through my own impiety, or the Devils
subtlety; and by joining me a member to the unity of the Church, make me
partaker of thy Redemption; and admit me to the Sacrament of blessed
reconciliation, as one who has no confidence but in thy mercy and compassion.

A Confession of Sins; by Blessed Augustine.
O Merciful, pitiful, great and terrible God: I confess unto thee my sins;
to thee, to thee, do I discover my wounds: for thine ineffable goodness
bestow a Salve on me. Thou, O most mild Lord, vouchsafedst to say: I desire
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness,
and live. I confess, that my life is in thy sight wicked and crooked, that my
life is falling into the lake of misery, and my Soul perishing in my
iniquities. Lust, sinful delight, naughty works, wrath, prid^, impatience,
malice, envy, gluttony, ebriety, theft, rapine, lying, perjury, scurrility,
foolish speaking, murmuring, detraction, ignorance, infidelity, distruct,
negligence of Gods Commandments, as contagious glagues have slain my Soul.
Mine heart and lips are polluted. My seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and
touching have enfeebled my Soul with sins, and I am wholly lost as well in
my cogitation, as action. I beseech thee, O my Lord God, whose mercy has no
end, draw me unto thee, as thou drewest that sinful woman. As thou gave
grace unto her, not to cease from kissing thy feet, washing them with her
tears, and wiping them with her hairs: so graciously vouchsafe to grant unto
me, that according to the greatness of mine iniquities, thy great love may
be in me, that for thine unmeasurable piety, thou may forgive me all my
sins. Bestow on me pardon for evils past, continence for evils present, and
cautelous prudence for evils to come: Grant me, I beseech thee, before I dye,
most fully to obtain thy mercy: and suffer not my days to be ended, till my
sins be pardoned, but as thou willest and know, have mercy on me, Amen.

A PRAYER before the holy Communion.
Hail, O most holy flesh and blood of Christ, wherereof I am made partaker in
these visible Elements. Hail O thou highest sweetness, who know no losing,
take away all loathing, destroyest death, restorest life. Hail thou blessed
food, which leadest thine Elect from the exile of this World to their Country.
Hail thou happy Sacrifice, which art offered upon the Altar of the Cross, to
God ^he Father, for the whole burden of our sins. Hail thou Manna more white
than snow, more sweet than honey, more precious than all gold. Take from me, I
beseech thee, O good Shepherd, mine iniquities: that with a purified heart and
spirit, I may deserve to taste these Holy of holiest. Let this venerable
Sacrament be an impregnable Safeguard to me against the deceits of the enemy:
that fed with this wholesome Viand, I may pass the slippery ways of this
life, in a blameless conversation, and come unto thee, the Bread of life, and
the true Lord of Angels, without any hinderance of the Devils subtilty or
malice. O Lord hear me, be pacified with me, attend me, and tarry not from
me, O my God, for thy goodness sake. For none can be worthy of so great a
mystery, unless thou, o Omnipotent God, make him worthy, Amen.

A PRAYER OF Th. Aquinas, to be said after celebration of the holy Communion.
I Give thanks to thee, O holy Lord, Omnipote^t Father, Eternal God, who have
vouchsafed to refresh me thy grievous sinner, and unworthy servant, for no
deserts of mine, but for thy sole mercy sake, with the precious Body and Blood
of thy Son our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And I beseech thee, that this holy
Communion may not be of guilt to me unto condemnation, but a soule-saving
intercession of remission and consolation. Let it be unto me the armor of
faith, and the shield of good will. Let it be unto me a removing of my vices,
a rooting out of lust and licentiousness, an increasing of Charity and
Patience, Humility and Obedience, and of all Virtues. Let it be a strong
defense against all mine Enemies, as well visible, as invisible; a perfect
quieting and composing of my motions, as well carnal as spiritual: a constant
cleaving in thee, the one and true God: and a happy consummation of mine end.
And I beseech thee, that thou would vouchsafe to bring me thy most unworthy
^inner, to thatineffable Banquet, where thou with thy Son and holy Spirit,
art true light, full satiety, sempiternall joy, consummate gladness, and
perfect felicity to thy Saints: Through the same Christ our Lord, Amen.

Another Prayer of S. Bonaventure.
O Most sweet Lord JESU, transpierce the marrow and bowels of my soul, with
the most sweet and wholesome wound of thy love; with clear, sincere, and most
holy Apostolical Charity, that my soul may languish, and melt always with
the only love and desire of thee; Let her long and faint after thy Courts; Let
her desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee. Grant, that my soul may
hunger after thee, the bread of Angels, the repast of holy souls, our daily
bread, super-substantiall, having all pleasantness of taste, and all delight
of sweetness: May mine heart always hunger and feed on thee, on whom the
Angels desire to look, and with the sweetness of thy taste, let the bowels of
my soul be filled: May she always thirst after thee, the fountain of life,
the fountain of Wisdom and Knowledge, the fountain of eternal Light, the
stream of pleasure, the fullness of the house of God: May she always look
about for thee, seek thee, find thee, draw toward thee, come to thee,
meditate of thee, converse with thee, and do all things to the praise and
glory of thy name, with humility and discretion, with love and delectation,
with facility and affection, with perseverance to my dissolution: And be thou
always my only hope, my whole trust, my riches, my delight, my joy, my
gladness, my quiet and tranquillity, my peace, my sweetness, my perfume, my
solace, my meat, my repast, my refuge, my succor, my wisdom, my portion, my
possession, my treasure, wherein my mind and mine heart may be always fixed,
grounded, and unmoveably rooted. Amen.

A PRAYER for all Judges, and Justiciaries.
O Almighty God, who judge iniquity in equity, and do inscrutable things:
Thou, who weighest the mountains in a balance, and wilt bring the Judges of
the Earth to judgment: Direct their understandings to discern what is right,
give them courage and resolution to do what is right. Give them wisdom in
their ways, In ore gratiam, in more ^aga^iam^, in (...) solatiu^^.
faithfulness in their works, uprightness in their walks. Remove from them
covetousness; and let it be their ambition to advance thy glory. Let neither
rewards be in their hands, nor revenge in their hearts. Take from them all
drowsiness and dullness, all security and remissness. Imprint in their hearts
a fear of thy name, a reverence to thy throne, and in all their judgments a
sweet attemprature of me^cy and judgment. Make them tremble when they call to
mind whom they personate; and imitate thee in being compassionate. Let not the
Orphans prayers, nor the Widows tears be unremembred: seeing these are
bottled up by thee, let them not be despised by them that represent thee. O
let righteousness drop upon the Earth, that as dew falls upon the grass, so
every flowery border of this thine enclosed garden, may be watered by the dew of
thy grace. Suffer not this Island to mourn, nor her People to groan, because of
injustice, oppression, and wrong. Put an hook in the nostrils of all such
imperious Judges, who take thy Law into their mouth, and hate to be reformed.
As for those, who turn Judgment to wormwood, Amos 4. 7.
and leave of righteousness in the Earth. These, who buy the poor for silver,
Ibid. 8. 6.
and the needy for shoes. These* that put far away the evil day, Ibid. 6. 3.
and approach to the se^te of iniquity: The Lord will be avenged of them: He
will mite the great house with breaches, 11.
and the little house with clefts. But remove these judgments from thine
Israel, O God: May no corruption reign in her Palaces, nor iniquity in her
paths. May a Zeal of thine house, a fear of thy name, a love of piety, an
hate to partiality, seize upon the hearts of all Judges and Iusticiaries in
this Kingdom, that they may execute their places without respect of persons,
and afterward reign with those three individuate Persons, GOD the Father, GOD
the Son, and GOD the holy Ghost, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, to
whom be all Glory,

Amen.
A Prayer for Peace or tranquillity of Mind.
GRacious God, who art a God of peace, and have pronounced a blessing upon
those who make peace, give me that which thou blessest, that I may enjoy what
thou love, embrace that which thou approvest, affect that which thou
commendest, possess that wherein thou delightest. Thou know that debates,
variance, and contention do distract our devotion, distemper the affection,
disquiet every good motion, disturb every pious intention. Grant therefore, I
beseech thee, that these differences to which I am engaged, or may hereafter
be entangled or inthralled, be to the glory of thy great name, the
preservation of mine honest repute and fame, and quiet of my affairs,
peaceably composed. Cut out of me toward my family all severity, toward my
familiars all disloyalty, toward my Neighbors all extremity. Grant me peace
of mind in my living, peace of conscience at my dying, and after death that
peace which passes all understanding. Cause all tumults of the flesh to cease
in me, all immoderate affections to decrease in me, all inordinate motions to
dye in me. Sanctify my heart, purify my mind, direct my spirit, erect my
faith, correct my life. Remove from me all occasions of difference, that I may
find quietness of conscience. Grant that I may sow the seed of righteousness,
walk in the ways of holiness, make profession of my faith with all
singleness, that I may come to the possession of happiness. Let me seeks
peace and ensue it, Love thy Law and pursue it, reform thine Image and renew
it. Suffer not the tempests of this world to dismay me, the errors of this
life to perplex me, or the terrors of death to appall me. I know, O Lord,
affliction to be bitter to him that suffers it impatiently; but sweet to him
that suffers it constantly. Thou provest those thou love, and afflictest
those thou affectest. Affliction then cannot be bitter, when it makes us
better. What though disgrace obscure me, wrongs inure me, reproach impeach
me, injuries press thick upon me? I am made strong through him to bear
them, who bore the Cross for me, suffered all dishonor for me, shed his
blood for me, lost himself to find me, became sold to redeem me, racked
upon the Cross to reach me a Crown, climing Mount Calvarie, to mount me to
glory. O make me then ready in my suffering to imitate thee my Savior! Though
war assail me without, give me peace within. Humble my Spirit, that I may
be of that temper, as I may still reflect upon the Image of my Savior, that
living in his fear, I may dye in his favor, Amen.

Of the presence of the Conscience in every place: Gathered out of Saint
Bernards Meditations. Cap. XIII.
I Cannot conceal my sins: because whither soever I go, my Conscience is
with me: carrying with her whatsoever I have laid up in her, be it good or
evil. She keeps for me living, she renders to me dying, whatsoever she
has received from me, to be laid up in her, or kept by her. If I do well,
she is present, or if I seem to do well, and thence become proud, she is
present likewise. She is present with me living, she follows me dying,
every where is there inseparable confusion for me, according to the quality of
that which is laid up in my Conscience by me. Thus, thus, in mine own house,
and from mine own family have I accusers, witnesses, Judges, and tormentors.
My Conscience does accuse me, my memory is a witness against me, Reason is
my Judge, Will my Prison, Fear my Tormentor, delight my torment.

For so many as there have been of evil delights, so many there shall be of
sharp and painful torments: for thence are we punished, whence we are
delighted.

A consideration right pithy, profitable, and proper, to enforce in us a more
serious Meditation of the former.
WHither then will thou fly, O miserable soul, or where will thou make thy
retire? Neither to the East, nor to the West, nor to the desert Mountains. Fly
thou may, but escape thou can not. Woe is me, what a day of terror will
that be, when thou shall find no place to secure thee, no friend to speak
for thee, no means to reprive thee, all to reprove thee, none to relieve thee.
When Adam must be brought from his bushes, and Sarah from behind the door,
and man shall say to his Conscience, ^s Ahab said to Elias, Have thou found
me, O mine Enemy^ Poor guilty soul, though ^hou should fly from the Field
to the City, August. in Enar. s^p. 45. Psalm.
from the ^ity to thy House, from thy House to thy Chamber, yet would thou
find no rest. For there, even there, where ^he walls enclose thee, privacie
seems to secure thee, the Curtains of the Night to obscure thee, yet there
will thy surcharged Conscience accuse thee, thy Memory witness against thee,
the rule of Reason judge thee, thy Will imprison thee, Fear torture thee,
Delight torment thee. Miserable Creature, where pleasure becomes a torture,
delight a torment! Alas! if thou had none without thee to hunt thee, thou
have one within thee will haunt thee, afflict thee, affright thee, though none
should pursue thee: Prove. 28. 1.
The wicked flee when none pursues. O cast thine eye upon thy self, and see
if thou be not one of this number. What have thou done during thy way^aring in
this vale of misery, that might deserve the least drop of Gods mercy? What
sinful motion have thou not admitted? what sensual action not committed,
what spiritual direction not omitted? Behold thy state in sin conceived, by
sin deceived, and into Satan's family received! Thou have sur^eted in the
delights of sin, and estranged thy thoughts from the joys of Sion. Thou
had rather enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and to the slavery of
sense subject the Principality of reason, than by contempt of Earth lay thee a
sure foundation in heaven. Miserable soul, what will become of thee, when
these earthly joys shall be taken from thee, when these time-suting friends
which seem to love thee, shall leave thee, and by reason of that corrupt shell
wherein thou sojournest, shall loath thee? When left to thy self, and through
anguish of spirit well near bereft thy self, thou sh^lt call for comfort, but
none will come near thee; for one of thy many fri^nds, but none will hear
thee; for one minutes rest, but none will ease thee; for the least hope of
comfort, but none will cheer thee. Where can thou look, and not find new
objects of grie^e? If to Heaven, see how thy sins have incensed it; if to
Earth, see how thy example has defiled it; if to Hell, see how thy sins
purchase has deserved it! What have thou to plead for thee? What succor, what
shelter to secure thee? Alas! now thou art to be presented before a Judge, who
is upright, and will not be bribed; who is all-seeing, and will not be
blinded; who is equally minded, and will not be bended. Forged oaths cannot
delude him, personal respect deprave him, hireling Advocates by persuasion
draw him, or powerful Potentates by countenance oreawe him. The Judges of the
Earth shall be judged by him; and the Kings of the Earth shall tremble before
him. O what will become of thee (sinne-soiled soul) in these straits of
extremity, these intricate mazes of misery! Poor thou art, and who will enrich
thee? naked of good works, and who will cloth thee? Hungring after this
world, which cannot feed thee; thirsting after honors, which cannot fill thee.
O how long have thou preferred the prodigals husks of vanity, before the
delitious viands of eternity? How long have thou turned in thy bed, like a
door on the hinges, promising thy self security, when nothing was farther
from thee? O reflect upon thy misery, and implore gods mercy! Even that God, in
whose sight the very Heavens are unclean, such is his purity. That God, which
came not to call the righteous, but the sinner to repentance, such is his
piety. Art thou sick? Yea sin-sick, soule-sick. Electrum l^chry^arum,
Electuarium animarum.
Tears are the best Electuary to cure this desperate malady. The Lachrymae
peccatorum, sun^ vinum Angelo^um. Bern sup. Cant. My^ rham oculoru^ dici^^us me
ru^ Angelorum.
penitents brine is the Ange^s wine. When Sinners weep, Angels rejoice: for
right well they know, that they which Sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Be a
Turtle then in thine heart, passionatly throbbing; a Pelicane in thy breast,
compassionately piercing; an Heart in thine eyes, incessantly weeping; a Swan in
thy voice, deaths Elegy singing, a Philomel in thy note, for thy lost chastity
^ighing* a Crane in thy life, circumspectly watching. O shut, yea speedily
shut, I say, thine eyes from vanity, that the Objects of Heaven may only
delight thee; shut thine ears from levity, that the subject of virtue may
invite thee; shut all thy senses from the deluding motives of sensuality, that
reason may be thy guide, the love of God thy goad, Heaven thy goal, peace of
conscience thy crown of glory. Shut the door of thine inner Chamber, and
there pour out thine heart to Gods honor: where reposing, and from the world
retyring, thou may thus invoke him, thus invite him. Let nothing be unto me
(I beseech thee) pleasant without thee, nothing sweet, nothing specious,
nothing appear unto me without thee precious. Let all things appear vile
unto me without thee. Whatsoever is contrary to thee, let it be displeasing
to me: and let thy good will and pleasure, be my indeficient desire and
endeavor. Let it irke me to rejoice without thee, let it delight me to
rejoice with thee, and weep with thee. Anselm.
O good JESU, if it be so sweet to weep for thee, how sweet is it to rejoice
for thee? Thus to meditate, is to recrea^e thy wearied soul in the green
pastures of spiritual comfort; to bath thy panting soul in the pure
chrystalline streams of eternal solace; to refresh thine hungry spirit with
Heavenly Manna; to tune thy voice to an holy Hosanna. Oh then, leave to love
the world before thou leave the world. Redeem the time, because the days are
evil. Avoid the occasion, lest thou become void of reason. Examine thy ways,
thy words, thy works. Subtract an hour from thy sleeping, to add to thy
praying. Man's security is the Devils opportunity. Watch therefore, for thou
know not when the Thief will come. The holy Hermit S. Ant^onie, who became
first professor of an Eremiticall or solitary life, Damas. in Hi^t. Barlaam.
when he had read that divine sentence of holy Scripture, -- Go and sell all
that thou ^^st, presently conceiving it to be meant by him, he did so. Luke
10. 37.
Go and do thou likewise. Follow thy sweet Savior in a devout contempt of
the world, from the Cribbe to the Cross, from mount Olivet to mount Calvary,
and from the tree of his Cross, he will reach thee a Crown of glory. Follow,
I say, with fervor, the steps of thy Savior. Say with holy Hierom, Licot
sparso ^^ine, s^is^ is vestibus, uber^ quibus ^e nutrierat, m^ter oste^da^,
li^^t in limine pa^er jaceat, per contemptam matrem, per calcatum patrem, perge
siccis ^culis, and ad vexillum Crucis ev^la.
It my mother should hang about me, my father lie in my way to stop me, my
wife and children weep about me, I would throw off my mother, neglect my
father, contemn the lamentation of my wife and children, to meet my Savior,
Christ Jesus. My heart is ready, my heart is ready, do what thou bidd^st, and
bid what thou will. But above all things, that thou may be at peace with thy
Maker, and more gracious in the sight of thy Savior, make the Evening the
days Calendar: Say to thy self; O my soul, what have thou done to day?
Hieroh.
What sin have thou healed in thee? wherein was God honored by thee? How
have thou increased or decreased, profited or failed? Doing thus, thy
Conscience shall not accuse thee, but defend thee; thy Memory shall not
witness against thee, but for thee; thy Reason shall be a Judge to acquit
thee, not condemn thee; thy Will shall not restrain thee, but free thee; no
Fear shall affright or come nigh thee; no Delight shall torment thee; but as
thy delight was in the Law of the Lord, ^o thy delight shall be in the House
of the Lord for ever. Rev. 22. 20.
Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Upon these Miscellane Meditations, with other mixed Subjects, contained in this
precedent Tract; A clozing Sonnet.
Moral mixtures or Divine,
Aptly culled and couc^^d in order,
Are like colors in a shrine,
Or choice flowers set in a border,
Or like dishes at a Feast,
Each attended with his sallet,
To delight the curious Guest,
And give relish to his palate.
Store of colors, they are meet,
When we should ones picture take,
One choice flower be it near so sweet,
Would no pleasing posie make,
One Dish be it near so precious
To the Sent or to the Taste,
Though at first it seem delicious,
It will cloy the Sense at last.
Here are Colors permanent,
Objects which will cheer the eye,
Here are Flowers redolent,
Which will bloome and never dye,
Here are Dishes of delight,
(Such delights can never cloy)
To renew the appetite,
And to new-revive your joy.
Muse not then, if here you see
In this various Work of mine,
Such a mixed variety,
Sorting with this hum'rous time:
Though the Sun shine in our Sphere,
Cloud or Night invelop it,
But the Sun shines ever here,
Darting forth pure rays of wit.
Now the fr^uit I wish to gain,
Is your profit for my pain.
FINIS.
A reply to a rigid Precisian, objecting, that flowers from Romish Authors
extracted, became less wholesome and divinely redolent.
SIr, it was your pleasure positively to conclude touching Flowers of this
nature, that they lost much of their native beauty, vigor and verdure, because
called from a Roman border: wherein I refer you to that sententious Poet, to
return you answer.

Flores qui lambunt terrae vapores,
Non magis tetros referunt odores,
Nec minus suaves redole^e Flores,
TIBRIDIS oris.
Which I have thus rendered in true current English, fearing lest that Latin
metal might disrelish your more queasy palate.

Flowers which do lick up from the Earth a vapor,
Yield to the nosthrils never the w rser savor,
Nor be those Soo^s less redolent in odor
Which gro^ by TIBER
A Christian Dial; By which he is directed, how to dispose of his hours
while he is living, how to address himself for the hour of his dying, and
how to close his days with a comfortable ending.

Faithfully rendered according to the Original.

To the Generous, Ingenious, and Judicious, Sir WALTER VAVASOR Knight and
Baronet; together with his Vettuously accomplished Lady: R. B. Zealously
consecrates this Christian Dial.
To your Grandfather have I welcome bin,
Receive this Gage in memory of him;
Whilst no Sun-Diall may more truly give
The hour oth' day, than this the way to live.
THE LIFE of JOHANNES JUSTUS LANSPERGIUS, a Carihusian; Author of these
Meditations entitled, A Christian Dial.
JOHANNES JUSTUS LANSPERGIUS, borne of honest parents at Lansperge a Town in
Bavaria, after such time as he had finished his course in the study of
Philosophy at Cullen, he gave there the name to the Order of the Carthusians,
wherein being grown Famous for the space of 30. years, both by example of
manners and piety, as also by writing Books of Devotion and Sanctity, he slept
in the Lord the 4. of the Ides of August, in the year of Christ's Nativity,
M.D.XXXIX.

A Christian Dial; By which he is directed how to dispose of his hours while
he is living, how to address himself for the hour of his dying, and how to
close his days with a comfortable end^ng.
Faithfully rendered ^cording to the Original.
A brief Institution, with an Exercise for an happy death: expressed in a
familiar Conference betwixt God and the Soul.
AS there is nothing, O Soul, which may make the love of the world more
distasteful unto thee, or that may bring thee to so great contempt of it, and
of all creatures in it, as the consideration of the shortness of this life,
and certainty of death, whereby all thy endeavors, all thine honors, all thy
pleasures, thoughts, desires, and all thy joys shall perish: So is there
nothing that may solace or refresh the loving Soul with greater joy, than the
belief and hope she has to become associated to me, united to me, and
swallowed up in me: where there is hereafter no offense, no sin, no
separation, no danger, no fear, no sorrow. Where the Soul full of charity may
always praise me, always magnify me, become most perfectly obedient, most
perfectly pleasant unto me, and that she may be with me, where she may
desire nothing, love nothing, feel nothing else beside me, where she may
wholly possess me, and be wholly possessed by me. These things, forasmuch as
they cannot firmly nor ^ully befall thee in this life, but then only, when
thou shall be with me in my Kingdom, to wit, when all thy desires shall be
satisfied, both in praising and loving me, and when I shall be all i^ all.
Therefore it is, that ^hou justly cravest, and justly with thy whole heart
de^irest in that Prayer which I gave ^hee, Let thy Kingdom come. Wherefore, O
daughter, if thou love me rightly, ^aithfully, fervently: thou will desire
with all thine heart, this Kingdom, that is, this state or condition; for this
with sighs thou will pray, to wit, that my Kingdom may come, wherein thou
may with most sweet love be to me united, wholly in me melted and molded.

And because (as I said before) this cannot come to pass but by death, The
love of God is the faithful soulesguide.
therefore this Death, which is the gate and passage to life, is to my Saints
in desire, and life in patience. Hence thou see, how a soul perfectly loving
me, fears not death. For whath has such a Soul to lose by exchange of this
miserable-unhappy life, but the sta^e of sinning, snares of offending,
occasions of ruin, deceits of enemies, self-frailty, fears, with other
innumerable Occurrents, which straiten the Soul, either ignor^^t, or weak, or
lukewarm, (not to speak here of the dangers of the body) and therefore
always fainting and falling. Manythings here would the soul have which she
ought not, or which she even knows nor though she would have them. Many things
would she which she cannot. In many things is the soul ignorant, blind, and
walking among Snares, or in darkness, whence she knows not how to free her
self. How then may she not worthily wish, how not rejoice, that she is
delivered from these sorrows, and dangers? Why therefore, O Soul, do tho^
fear, why do thou not desire death? For tell me what evil shall death
bring unto thee? If thou fear nothing in this world, death can take nothing
from thee. If thou love any thing in this world, it is with danger, yea thou
love thine own danger. Cease therefore to love the world before death, that
thou may nothing at all fear death. Furthermore, if thou love me only in
this life, joy for that thou shall dye, for that thou shall never enjoy what
thou love, before thou dye. But I know what thou fear: Truly, thou love
nothing in this world, thou possessest nothing which thou would not lose, or
grievest to lose; yet fear and terror surprise thee, because thou know not
whether thou be worthy of love or hate; thou know not how thou art to be
entertained by me, whether to rest or punishment.

O daughter, thou oughtst not to be too curious after the knowledge of these
things, yea it is not expedient for thee to know them. Stand constantly,
although thou fear; in hope and affiance, both living and dying, set thy rest
upon me. Thou can not live well of thy self, neither can thou dye well of
thy self. Thou have both from me. What, if I shall give thee grace to live
holily, shall I not also give thee grace to die happily? Seeing thou have all
things from me, exp^ct^^ all things of me, how can^^ thou expect the one, and
despair of the other? Of thy self thou can neither live well, nor dye well.
Put thy trust th^re^ore in m^, cast thy thought upon me, ground all thy fear
and care upon me. As thou can resist no tentation, avoid no sin living, so
neither dying. If I forsake thee no^ living, if I faithfully prevent tentation,
and moderate it in thy life, that thou may bear it: I am ready to do the
very same unto thee at thy death, that thou may vanquish it. Never go to
fight with thine own weapons, but rely on me. If thou rely on me, I will
fight for thee. And if thou have me fighting with thee and for thee, what have
thou to fear, who art nothing of thy self? And as concerning the condition or
quality of death, fear nothing. There is no kind of death that can hurt the
just: for the just man, with what death soever he shall be surprised, shall
be at rest. Wherefore, let it trouble thee nothing, whether thou die at home
or abroad, in thy bed or in thy field: neither art thou to fear, whether the
death be natural or violent, which takes thee away. For if one kind of death
were more unhappy than another, all my Saints (surely) were most unhappy, the
most part whereof in times past, in the judgment of the world, and eye of
flesh, most unhappily ended this life. Which of mine holy Martyrs dyed a
natural and timely death? Whom has not the violence of the Nec locus
sufficeret cruc^^us, ^ec cruees corporibus. Joseph. lib. 5. de Bell^ Iud. cap.
28.
Cross, rack, fire, or sword extinguished? Nothing therefore shall it hurt
thee, whether thou dyest of the plague, or an apoplexy, or any other kind of
death, in the bed, or in the field. Only watch, that thou may be found in
faith, hope and charity: and no death or kind of Burial shall harm thee. But
forasmuch as speaking to thee, I likewise speak to them, who are as yet
imperfect in my love; I advise you all in this, that ye love innocence, and
hate iniquity. If thou have at any time sinned, what Soul soever thou be,
cease, grieve, repent, that thou have sinned, so long as thou live. Yet so
repent, if thou wishest to thy self a fruitful repentance, that thou return
not again to thy sins, or to thy former state of sinning. Always expect
death, and prepare thy self for it, as if thou were at this very present to
dye. But lest some devout institution should be wanting to the weak in spirit,
by which supported, they may learn in some sort how to dye, I will add
something more to these. First therefore, Exce^lent Motives for the weak i^
Spirit, preparing them how to die.
thou ought to remember what mine Apostle says, and what Truth it self
speaks, Ye have not here an abiding City, but ye se^ke for one that is to
come; unto which here in this world, no otherwise than in a journey ye walk
as Pilgrims. Now your Pilgrimage is ended, when your life is clozed. Death
therefore is the very last line, running betwixt this exile wherein ye are,
and the Country whereto ye go; so as, there is no other gate, by which ye
may pass from this valley of your Pilgrimage, and enter your Country, your
heavenly inheritage, but by death. Death then most certainly does wait for you,
like as a most certain end is limited to your life. But this difference there
is betwixt the good and evil, that here in your Pilgrimage ye all travail
mixtly, all, I say, albeit not all in a right way; ye long after your blessed
Country: all ye, so long as ye are in your journey, although ye wander, may
return unto the true way. But when ye shall come to the end of your journey,
in the gate it self, that is, at the point of death, ye are discerned, that
Some of you may pass from exile unto life, others to misery and eternal
death. It is not then lightly to be considered, nor negligently observed, how
every one is to be prepared before death come. For there ye leave all things
after you, in which ye trusted. Be they riches, honors, friends, or any
other vain thing whatsoever, they shall avail you nothing at the hour of
death, but leaving these behind you, ye shall go naked unto the Tribunal of
God, to receive according to your works. What blindness, nay what madness is it
then, to rejoice here in your journey, to love frail things, which profit
nothing; to neglect the time and occasion of living well, and as if without all
sense of God, through drowsiness and dryness of mind, to relish those things
only which are of the flesh, to have in pursuit those things only which are
outward, and not at all to consider the dangerous state of the inward man, and
so to come unto death? Alas; how innumerable are those miserably wretched ones
who are here deceived, with the love of the world ensnared, and ^y drawing
after them the yoke of the Devil, how unhappily slaved? And thus unexpectedly
they come unto death, with hearts both hardened and blinded. Alas; how unhappy
is the end of their life, with whom there was never Meditation of death, nor
preparation for health?

Such things therefore are to be rejected, as hinder the spirit, delight the
flesh; Such things to be relinquished as are not expedient; In such sort is
every one to live every hour, A divine Memorial.
as if that were his very last, wherein he should dye and go to judgment.
This is the most fruitful, profitable, and sovereign counsel, O Daughter,
that thou may live after this manner, and that death may be to thee no
terror. Now then, if not continually, yet frequently, should that hour be
presented before thee, as if it were before thine eyes, wherein thy soul going
out of thy body shall be judged for all thy works, words, and thoughts. This
therefore oughtst thou even at this present to enjoin thy self, that thou
may live so even now, to the end thou may be found so prepared, is thou
would thy self to be prepared, whenever death shall undoubtedly come. It
is the property of a most sottish and senseless heart, to defer amendment of
life to that time, when time expireth, when thou can live no longer, when now
thou art not to amend thy life, but to appear before God as thou art already
amended. Surely, not sins only, but even all things do leave thee going out
of this life. Thou art not then properly said to leave thy sins, when thou
can now sin no more: But if whilst thou have ability to sin, thou cease from
sin; true repentance is never to be called late: but this which is deferred to
the end of thy life, it is to be feared that it is seldom true. For if through
fear of damnation only, being even now to die, thou sorrowest, and art ready
for the avoiding of punishment to perform any task, be it never so extreme,
to obtain pardon: Thou sorrowest not out of charity, in that thou have
offended God, but out of self-love, for that thou wishest to thy self good
and not evil. For thou sorrowest, because thou have brought to thy self
eternal damnation by thy sins: Whereas, if thou rightly sorrowest, for this
only would thou sorrow, in that thou, so disobedient unto me, so unthankful
to me, so reproachful to me, have not exhibited due honor and reverence unto
me: whom thou ought with all affection to have honored, whatsoever should
befall thee. Whereas now, forasmuch as thou only sorrowest for thy self, if
danger were avoided, or no revenge on sin inflicted, thou would never
lament, though thou had offended me a thousand years together. No true
Repentance without Charity.
True Repentance, which reconcileth the soul unto me, springs from Charity,
and bewaileth this especially, that she has so greatly and grievously
contemned and offended me her best, greatest, gracioust, and most faithful
LORD GOD, her Creator and Redeemer. Hence, I say, is his heart wounded, for as
much as so unthankfully, so disobediently, and so proudly, being bu^ dust and
nothing; he has lifted up his head against me Whosoever therefore desires to
dye happily, let him (as mine A postle admonishes him) live soberly, justly,
and holily. An evil death follows not a good and just life but precious in
my sight is the death of my Saints; yea, after what sort of death soever they
die, that is, whether they dye by water, or fire, or in bed. But to prepare
thee all the better for death, Meditation of death, the wis^ man's life.
the Meditation whereof is the life of every wise man; take here along with
thee this short exercise, by which every one may instruct and address
himself, that he may take a course to be found in that state, in which he may
not fear to dye.

Wholesome Admonitions, teaching a Christian how to dye well,
WHATSOEVER dying thou would wish that thou had done, do the same even
now. Whatsoever thou would have done, do not commit this unto others to be
done after thy death, but do thou it thy self, for if thou thy self be
negligent of thine own salvation, and a traitor to thy self, how shall
strangers tender thy happiness? Do not repose trust in uncertain and vain
promises: neither commit thy self to doubtful events. So live and so do,
that thou may be safe in thy conscience, and as if thou were this day to
dye. Never go to sleep, till such time as thou have examined the expense of
the day, with the conditions and actions of thy life. Discuss and call to
judgment thine heart, and examine all thy senses, and whether thou art become
better or worse this day. Never go with that conscience to sleep, with which
thou dare not dye. If thou find thy self in that state, wherein thou
fear to dye, search out the cause of this fear. For (peradventure) some
sins are in thee, Motives of fearing Death.
whereof thou have not as yet repented, or refusest to confess; or else thou
forbearest to abstain from sin, and occasions of sin, or thou take upon
thee some profession, office, or vocation, which I admit not of; or thou
continuest in hatred, or in the unjust possession of others goods, or too much
affected to the desire or delight of temporal affairs, or taken with the
inordinate love of some creature, or drowned with the delight of earthly and
visible things (as of honor and riches) thou can not turn thy self to me,
tasting nothing of those things, which are of the Spirit, but only let loose
to outward things, and loathing those which are divine, therefore it is that
thou fear death: Because thy soul guilty of evil in her-selfe,
foretells what torments shall befall her after death. Spiritual Physic
against this fe^rfull distemper.
If any of these shall be in thee, thou ought to abhor, pursue, and with
all thine endeavor to free thee of them. For which purpose, and the better
effecting of so glorious a design, it may help thee much to imitate my steps,
embrace my cross, and with rigor of mind, and with holy hatred commenced
against thy self, to denounce war upon all thy vices, to have a purpose to
sin no more, frequently and infatigably to renew the same, with no infirmity
or pusillanimity to be dejected, to contemplate the examples of me and my
Saints, to commend thy self to the prayers and exhortations of good men, to
give way to my inward and divine inspirations, to exercise prayer and holy
reading, never to admit of idleness, to love silence and retiredness. These
and such like do change the naughtiness of the mind, and chase away the fear
of death. When thou shall come in the end of every day, say thus to thy self:
Now is my life become shorter by one day. Christian Memorials.
Early when thou risest, say thus to thy self: O Gracious God, now am I
nearer to death by one Night. An Exercise, whereby early, or whenever thou
willest, thou may pour out thy heart unto God, for a good death.
O Omnipotent, eternal God, my Creator and Lover, I praise, laud, adore, and
bless thee, for that thou so mercifully and patiently have suffered me,
grovelling in my sins and my unthankfulnes, even unto this hour, to which thou
of thy goodness have brought me, enriching me with thy benefits, conferring
this life with things necessary for this life upon me, with an angelical
guardian protecting me, and enlarging toward me thy mercy, who am injuriously
^nworthy, and a spectacle of misery. Ah gracious God, who knows whether the
term of my life shall be pro^ogued to the evening? O what death shall I
desire? O ^ost merciful Lord, God, and Father, give unto me contrition,
whereby with all mine heart I may bewail my sins, and my offending thee. And
do not suffer my soul to go forth from her body, till she be reconciled to
thee in mercy, adopted to thee by grace, adorned with thy merits and virtues,
inflamed with most perfect charity, and accepted according to thy
all-good-will and pleasure. O most gracious Lord Jesu Christ, if this I desire
of thee do please thee, grant it unto me, although I be most unworthy to be
heard of thee; grant unto me, I beseech thee, for thine infinite mercies, and
the merits of thy passion, that I may be purged in this life from all my sins,
that dying, and through vehement and true contrition pricked, and in most
ardent charity to thee united, I may go out unto thee, my most sweet
Redeemer, being forthwith freed and secured from all damnation, and future
affliction. Notwithstanding, O most loving Jesu, I do offer and resign my
self unto thee, whether it be to poverty, penury, or any other extremity, for
thy glories sake, according to thy good will and pleasure: beseeching thee only
this, that thou would be mindful of my frailty, vileness, weakness, and
misery, as also of thy goodness and charity, that thou would never forsake
me, nor depart from me, but that thou would always wholly govern and
possess me, according to thy good pleasure. Amen.

An oblation of Christ and his merits to his Father.
O Omnipotent most gracious Father, I do offer unto thee all those pains,
dolours, reproaches, stripes, and rebukes, all adversities, extremities, and
labors of thine only begotten Jesu Christ, the Lamb immaculate, which he
suffered in his body for me; likewise all his actions, and every of his members
afflicted for me, his blood shed for me, and with profane feet trampled; also
his most noble and devout Soul, separated from his lovely Body for me, his
merits likewise and infinite virtues. Likewise the powers or faculties of his
Soul and body, and all those vital parts in him, given up unto death for me,
albeit inseparably united to his Divinity: yea, the whole Christ, thy blessed
Son, God and man, omnipotent and infirm, despicable and glorious, doing
wonders and hanging upon the Cross, these (I say) do I offer unto thy sacred
Majesty, to the expiation and satisfaction of all my sins, and of all the
world, and to the mortification and extinction of all mine evil passions,
affections, and vices, to the supply of all my negligences, and to thy praise,
and thanksgiving for all thy benefits. O God be merciful unto me a miserable
sinner, for his sake. Have mercy on me for the love of Jesu Christ, thy
beloved Son.

THE DYING man's Diary, Or A Christians Memento mori; Divided into a five days
Exercise.
THere are, who all the year long present the figure and feature of Death
before them by some certain Exercise, and prepare themselves no otherwise for
death, than if they were even then to dye, and that for the space of five days
continually. The first day, they meditated of the griefs and infirmities which
go before death, and horror of death: unto all which they resign themselves.
The next day, they think of their ^ins, confessing them with so great
diligence and intention, as if they were to dye presently after their
confession. Therefore they spend this day in sighs and tears. The third day,
they come unto the blessed Eucharist with all the fervor they may, receiving
it as their Viaticum in their passage from this their exile. The fourth day,
they make continual supplications unto God, for the unction of the Holy
Spirit, whereby they might be illuminated, and the hardness of their hearts
mollified: And this they do, Jam. v. 14.
as it were, for extreme unction. Mar. 6. 13.
The fifth day, they become most fervent Supplicants unto God for a spiritual
death: whereby they may perfectly dye to the world and to themselves, and live
with God. And to every of these days may be applied proper Psalms and
Prayers, as also divine invocations, and giving of thanks, for all benefits
conferred by God upon them all their life long.

Profitable Counsel for one approaching near the point of death.
O Daughter, seeing thy self in this extremity, prepare thy soul for God; so
order and dispose here in thy life time of thy goods temporal, that after thy
death no difference nor debate may arise. It is most profitable for thee to
dispose of thy goods in thy life time, and to redeem thy sins, whilst thou
live, with works of mercy. Whatsoever thou would recommend to others to
do for thee, labor to do it of thy self. For if after death thou go to
eternal torment, the Provision of a Will, a pompous Funeral, Alms and Doales
after death, what will these avail thee, when thou art damned? Offer these
Oblations to me now whilst thou art living, that thou may not only be
delivered from thy sins, but by increasing in my grace, never fall into
damnation, but by my preventing grace preserving thee from sin, persevere in
good works even to the end. When death draws near, see that thou wholly free
thy self then from all unnecessarie cares and employments, strive to meet me
immaculately, affectionately, faithfully, promising nor presuming nothing of
thy works, but through my assured mercy to obtain Salvation: And in this
faith committing and commending thy self, and all thou have in this world, to
my providence and good pleasure, receive the Sacraments humbly and devoutly.
Those peculiar privileges and graces also, which have power in them through my
merits, and are given by me as a treasure unto the Church (albeit many
ofttimes abuse them, as they do other most holy things) if thou can have
them, cause them to be applied unto thee. For even this, very holy persons of
both sexes, and famous for their miracles, have formerly done.

An Exercise, wherein the sick person with sighs and groans (because otherwise
it can scarcely be done) may resign himself unto God, and fervently desire,
that he may deserve to be joined unto him.
O Most faithful Lover, most merciful Lord Jesu Christ, grant unto me, that
with heart and mind I may feel, what I say: As the Heart brayeth for the rivers
of water, so pants my Soul after thee, o my God. I have chosen to be an
Abject in the house of the Lord, rather than to dwell in the Tabernacle of
sinners. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, o Lord, for ever and ever
shall they praise thee. My Soul has thirsted after thee, o God, when shall I
come and appear before thy face? Why art thou sorrowful, o my Soul, and why
art thou so disquieted within me? Trust in the Lord; therefore will I now
confess my self unto him, the Salvation of my countenance, and my God. Show
the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, o Lord, save me for thy mercies
sake. Let me not be confounded for ever, for I have called upon thee. Be not
far from me, o my God. Look down upon me and help me, o my God. The poor
is left unto thee, Thou will be the Orphans helper. Thou art my refuge in my
tribulation, which has compassed me: O my joy deliver me from these that
encompasse me. Make have to help me, o Lord God of my Salvation. For thou
art my strength, and my refuge, my helper and my protector. Do not then leave
me, nor despise me, o God of my salvation. Behold I come unto thee, o my God,
whom I have despised and offended: for the whole earth is full of thy mercy.
Therefore do I fly unto thee, my most merciful Father. Receive me according
to thy word, when thou say; (I WILL NOT THE DEATH OF A SINNER) and let me
live, and confound me not in my hope. O my God, I do not pray unto thee, for
a life temporal, but I call upon thee for the Salvation of my Soul, who art
life eternal. O my sweet Lover, O my Lord God, for as much as I have offended
thee; for that I have neglected thine inspirations and admonitions, for that I
have at any time loved ought be^ide thee, or without thee, for this, O my Lord
God, for this do I grieve: And I beseech thee, that thou would give unto
me so much grace, as I may with all mine heart grieve and lament during every
moment of my life. Would to God that I might pour out and offer unto thee
every drop of my blood with tears, for grief and love, into thy most sweet
heart. O sweet Jesu, I neither desire nor expect of thee life nor death, but
thy good will and pleasure: may it be done unto me according to thy will. If
it be thy will, O my sweet Jesu, that I shall dye, receive my spirit: And
although I come in the Evening, as the very last of all, grant unto me, that
I may receive eternal rest with thee, and in thee. But if it be thy will that
I shall live longer, O sweet Jesu, I purpose this, and I crave the assistance
of thy grace for this, to amend the rest of my life, and to offer my self
wholly as a burnt Sacrifice unto thee, to thy glory, and according to thy good
will and pleasure. O most desired Jesu, for as much as I have consumed my life
in sin, to the reproach of thy glorious name, nor to this day have begun to
serve thee: grant unto me, that I may now at last perfectly begin, and employ
all the powers of my Soul an^ Body, and all the remainder of my time given me
by thee, to thy glory, and according to thy best and most perfect will.

O most merciful Jesu, be thou near me in these my pains and miseries, with
which I am straitened, and i^ any more grievous than these shall come upon me,
for that I have deserved not only more grievous, but most grievous by reason
of my sins: grant that I may patiently bear them. O sweet Jesu, if I had never
at any time sinned, nor at thine hand evilly deserved, notwithstanding to thy
glory, and for thy love, good will, and pleasure, I offer and resign my self
unto thee, either in these or any other punishments, to deal with me
according to thy will, not my worth, but in the multitude of thy mercies, on
which I rely, and on which I call, that by thy power thou would raise and
rouse up the frailty of my flesh, and strengthen with longanimitie, and
confirm with patience the pusillanimitie and instabilitie of my Spirit: that I
may not ^all down, as one either vanquished with tentation, or faint through
pusillanimitie: but swallowed up with the most burning heat of thy love, I may
only sigh after thee, only desire thee, and leave, loath, and contemn the
world, with all that is in it: giving thee thanks with all mine heart, for all
things, whether ministering unto me occasion of joy or sorrow.

O most loving Jesu, I choose thee, I wish thee, I desire thee, I meet thee, and
I renounce whatsoever thou art not in me: what thou willest, I will: what thou
nillest, I nill: whatsoever thou abhorrest, I abjure. And though sometimes,
that (...) is contrary to this will in me, may be incident unto me, I
beseech thee, O my God, that thou would not impute it unto me, nor judge me
according to that depravednesse of Will in me, but according to this Election
of my mind, by thy grace wrought in me. Because I contradict all those things
which I ought not to will: yea, though (which for thy mercy sake avert) I
hereafter vanquished, should consent unto, yet now do I accurse and abjure
them.

O most loving Jesu, if it please thee, and redound to thy glory, grant unto
me that I may be pre^erved in this life from all sins and punishments, into
which after death I ought otherwi^^ to come, to which I am subject, or may
possibly come, and that thou would receive my Soul by the hand of thy
mercy, immediately from this life to eternal joys.

O Lord Jesus Christ receive my Spirit, etc.

A CHRISTIANS LAST-WILL, OR TESTAMENT. Containing A PROTESTATION or Testament,
not unprofitable to be repeated, or meditated of every Christian at the point
of death.

Composed, as may be probably gathered, by JOANNES LANSPER GENSIS, and
faithfully rendered according to the Original.

A CHRISTIANS LAST-WILL, OR TESTAMENT.
Containing A Protestation or Testament, not unprofitable to be repeated, or
meditated of every Christian at the point of death.
Composed, as may be probably gathered, by JOANNES LANSPER GENSIS, and
faithfully rendered according to the Original.
IN the name of the Father, and the Son, and Holy Ghost. I. M. an unhappie
Sinner, redeemed with the most precious blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that for his great love toward me, no merit of mine, do confess and
acknowledge publicly, or by this handwriting, or in these words, before the
Omnipotent God, and before the whole host of Heaven, and before you, so many
as stand here as witnesses about me, (if necessity shall so require) that I
am, and desire so to dye, a son truly obedient to the holy Catholic Church,
with that ^inceritie as becomes a Christian. And I believe and confess
generally, all and every part, particle, portion, or article of the Christian
faith, to the belief whereof every Christian stands bound: especially all
those particular points whether plainly expressed, or necessarily employed in
the twelve articles of Christian faith, for as much as they were delivered unto
us, from the holy Spirit, by the twelve Apostles, and recommended to us for
Evangelicall truth. And I farther believe and adhere to their inter pretations,
or expositions, yet not to all or every one, but to those only, which were
published by the holy Fathers, received, admitted, ^pproved and confirmed by
the most sacred Counsels, and tried by the truest touchstone of infallible
Scripture. And to be brief, I believe whatsoever a Christian ought truly to
believe. In which faith so immovable and firm, I rejoice with all mine heart
to dye, holding and offering this writing in mine hand, as a most impregnable
and invincible shield against all the insults, assaults, deceits, and
subtilties of the Devil. And if it so come to pass (which God forbid) that by
instigation of the Devil, or violence of sickness, I should think, speak,
or do any thing contrary to mine Attestation aforesaid, or should fall into
any apostacy, diffidence, or desperation: I wholly revoke and reverse that,
whatsoever or howsoever it shall be, here in the presence of you all, and make
it as void and of no effect, as if I were distraught of my wits when I did it.
Wherefore I appeal unto you all that are here present, and to thee, O holy
Angel, to whose guard I am committed, that ye bear witness of this my
Protestation before the Omnipotent Judge. Now, for as much as concerns my
self, I do pardon and forgive all injuries of what nature, quality, or
condition soever, as have been done me, desiring heartily that the like may
be done to me by those, whom I have at any time offended, either in word or
deed. I do likewise crave and desire with all mine heart, that I may be made
partaker of all good works, which either are already done, or shall be
hereafter done by holy men through the whole Church: whenever, or
whereinsoever their office or ministry may be useful to me: but principally
of the most bitter Passion, and most innocent death of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And may this my natural, voluntary, and desired approach of death, stand
through his merits and mercies, Christ's mercies, my merits.
for all my sins. And I wish to God that I had never at any time sinned,
either against God, or his Laws, or my Superiors, or my Neighbors, or my
self.

Lastly, I give thanks to mine Omnipotent God, for all his benefits bestowed
upon me, and I commend my body and soul into his hands, and to the bitterness
of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise, and honor, and
dignity for evermore, Amen.

AN ELEGY OF St. Dionysius, a Carthusian, of the judgment of death, and the
sundry casualties thereof.
TO Earth returns, whats'ere from Earth had birth;
Flower fades, shade vades, what is bred is brought to Earth.
Naught judge I long that doubtful bound can stay,
To morrow day may be my only day.
Short is that day to day: which well may be
My day, my doom, a fearful day to me.
A fearful horrid day, when all my store
Is closed in clay, and I can earne no more.
Who thinks his days long ('las) he thinks amiss,
Nor long nor safe is one whole day of his.
In vain speak I of days, days not expressed,
When not one day nor hour can promise rest.
Thy long liv' d hopes (if so thou like) extend,
Yet naught of naught, shall come to naught i'th'end.
Thou^ands, ten thousands, thousand thousands were
On Earth, now Earth, whose names lie buried here:
This only rests, that each receive his hire,
Good works deserve good gifts, ungodly fire.
Behold the fearful judge, thy final doom!
Prepare thy self, this dreadful day will come.
Fear then and quake, compose, direct thy mind,
Live to dye now, and suffer what is assigned.
An Epistle of Ludovicus Blosius, written to an especial friend, upon the
perfecting and publishing of his work entitled, The Parlour of the Soul.
BEhold thou have, my dearly beloved in Christ, Conclave animae.
The Parlour of the Soul, which thou have so long time desired. Having now
lately written The spiritual Glass, both for thy self and me, I had
purposed to have added nothing thereto: howbeit afterward, I could by no
means satisfy thy desire, unless I annexed unto it, The spiritual Jewel,
Crown, and Casket, all which this our Parlour contains. Which truly came
later to the Press than thou wished: but take it in good part, being done by
the p^rpose and ordinance of God. Now if thou setting aside sometimes thy more
weighty cares and employments, become delighted with the reading of such
simple books as are published by me (as thou seem to be delighted) I do
advise thee that first thou enter into this Parlour, and diligently consider
and discuss those things which are therein: And afterward that thou take into
thy hand that Psychagogia, which I have collected some years ago, out of
Augustine and Gregory. For the doctrine of the Fathers set down in these two
Books, shall mightily comfort and confirm thee being of so good disposition,
and inflame thee to the love of God and thy heavenly Country. Let it not be
tedious to thee ofttimes to read over these and such like devout works, yea,
though thy reading afford small or no sweet relish to the palate of thine
heart. For too delicate is he, who casts aside all such holy and wholesome
directions as he had once read, or heard, and will not read nor hear them any
more. I give thanks unto my Lord Jesus, for that thy Brother, after such time
as he had read over that Tract of mine entitled, Comfort for the weak hearted,
and now by me published, he becomes now less afflicted with inordinate
fear, than before. Let him ascribe that relief, as received solely from God
and his holy Doctors, who speak unto him in that Tract of comfort. He does
well surely, to grieve and sorrow for that he has offended God without
measure or number all the bypast time of his life: nevertheless he is to
have his affiance and confidence in the boundless sweetness of Gods mercy.
Let him think how most of those who had slain Christ, afterward received
pardon by believing in Christ: to the end truly, that all men should learn,
that no crimes or offenses are so grievous, which God most gracious and full of
the fatness of mercy, will not forgive to such as are faithful Converts and
true Penitents before him. For it is an especial property ^est becoming our
most holy God, to have mercy and spare these, who humble themselves before
him, and heartily ^eg pardon of him. Rightly does thy Brother confess that at
all times he is very imperfect: yet let let him remember, that the imperfect
cost Christ as dear as the most perfect. That inconstancy or instability of
mind, wherewith he says, that he is afflicted in his prayer, is common to
innumerable servants of God. There is no cause then that he should be hereby
so much amated. For if he suffer this distraction against his will, and strive
wirh his best endeavor to become attentive, his prayer humbly poured forth in
this distraction, is ofttimes more useful and fruitful, than if it were
performed with great attention of heart. For God approves his desire,
affection, and devout endeavor, and purges the soul with such like griefs as
these, or else conserveth and adorneth it being purged and purified from these
distractions. Exhort him always, that he be of good courage. If with a
patient and resigned heart, he suffer for the love of God his afflictions, and
want of health, whereof almost he daily labors, he need not doubt, but so
soon as he shall lay off this grievous, onerous, and bitter load of
corruptible flesh, he shall enjoy eternal joy and health. Go to then, my
Beloved, let us observe our selves, I pray thee, vigilantly, and so endeavor to
live circumspectly, as becomes true Christians, who bear both the style and
state of Christianity. Let us pass over all the residue of our present life
profitably. In all things that we do, let us wirh sing^enesse of heart
principally respect the praise and glory of God. Let us love Jesus, who loves
us with a most ardent and unmeasurable love. For his honor let us mortify in
us as much as we may, our own proper and depraved wills and vices. Let us
subject and conform us in all things to Gods will. Let us bear a mind humble
and resigned: continually desiring and studying to please God. For by this
means we shall at last come to that chief and most joyful good: which that
we might possess, we were created to the image of God, and redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ. We shall come, I say, unto God, who is the amiable
abyss and fountain of all light, life, beauty, excellency, sweetness and
abundance. Then shall we be truly blessed, seeing the vision of all beauty
infinitely exceeding and excelling all the sense-attracting objects of this
whole world: for we shall behold in the light of glory the mellifluous
countenance of God, and in him, by a most sweet fruition of him, shall we
rest, and obtain imperturbable peace. Then shall we abound with unspeakable
joy, and shall be fully satisfied, and shall perfectly love, and praise God for
evermore. O how great felicity is it to attain to the clear vision of God;
and again, how great infelicitie, to be deprived of it, and to be drenched in
hell, and there horribly to be tormented without end! Farewell in the Lord, and
pray for me.

That excellent part of the Dialogue composed by D. Henricus Suso, wherein the
praises and profits of afflictions are expressed, and many other precepts
usefully delivered, some few days since I inserted in my Comfort for the weak
hearted, that I might gratify thy brother. He shall easily procure it, so
soon as it shall be reprinted. As touching the sayings of the aforesaid Suso,
which thou desire should be sent unto thee, here receive them, as I have
compiled them for thee, and addressed them to thee.

CERTAIN choice or select sayings of D. Henricus Suso.
Of the love of the world, And Of the love of God.
THat most holy and beloved man of God, Henricus Suso, lamenting the
infelicitie of such, as entangled in vain love, and wholly given over to this
present world, do neglect God and their own salvation, exhibiteth his
complaint before God after this manner. Truly, O Lord, it is a thing much to
be lamented, that so many hearts fit for holy love, so many excellent and
beautiful souls stamped with Gods image, which by a spiritual wedlock with
thee contracted, might become Q^eenes and Empresses, and have dominion over
heaven and earth, should so foolishly and imprudently estrange themselves from
thee, deject themselves so basely, and perish so wittingly. Surely I am
persuaded, that if the inward eyes of all men should so see thee, as I see
thee, all transitory love would be forthwith extinguished in them. I cannot
sufficiently admire, O Lord, (albeit I stood sometimes far otherwise affected)
that any ones soul should possibly rest in any thing but in thee, the most
vast and unbounded depth. O incomprehensible good, and inwardly to be embraced!
O most sweet Lord, how well is it with that soul which only loves thee, and
which thou with the divine streams and beams of thy grace, excellently
enlightenest, and to to thy self more nearely joynest and couplest! What
heavenly and mellifluous consolation does such a soul draw from thee, what
secret delights of sacred love does she conceive in thee? Thou art the
boundless Sea of most pure and inestimable pleasures. What amiablenesse,
comeliness, beauty soever can by any means be conceived, all that above all
measure, is to be found in thee plenteously stored. Nothing that is pleasant,
grateful, or plausible, can be found in any creature, which is not in a most
pure and exquisite manner infinitely more abundant and excellent in thee. So
often as I behold the forms of beautiful objects, when I take a view by
inward contemplation of heaven, earth, woods, and fields, and of the whole
world, all these things seem to convent, and summon my heart in these words:
Consider how amiable and beautiful he is, who has made us, who is the
fountain of all beauty. O Lord Jesus what joy do I receive from thee?
Surely, while I do think, how I am beloved of thee, the most high God;
whatsoever is within me, melts through the joy which I conceive of thee. For
this therefore do I rejoice in my mind, for as much as thou art so good, as
thou vouchsafe^t to be my friend, as I constantly hope, and confidently trust.

Of the Passion of our Lord.
THe same Suso in a Dialogue brings in the eternal wisdom, that is Christ
Jesus, talking with his Minister of his Passion, after this manner: The heart
of man is much more grateful unto me, if it be freed of earthly love, and by
perpetual diligence intentive to imitate the excellent example of my life,
than if he should follow me with continual laments, and should shed so many
tears as there be drops of rain which fall from the air. For in the
suffering of my most bitter death, this especially have I intended and aimed,
that men should imitate me: albeit pious and devout tears be likewise very
acceptable unto me. If thou can not remember my most bitter Passion with
watrie eyes, do it notwithstanding, with a cheerful mind, for these
unmeasurable good things which thou derivest from it. But if neither joyfully
nor dolefully thou can meditate of it, yet with a dry heart to my praise
trace cursorily over it. For so shall thou perform an office of observance, no
less grateful to me, than if with tears of compassion and sweetness of
affection, thou should wholly melt into a flood of devotion. For by this
means should thou effect a work through love, without respect unto thy self.
But to the end that this my Passion may pierce nearer thine heart, and thou
become more affected to it, hear what I shall speak unto thee.

The soul which has bound her self in many sins, may with the treasure of my
Passion so much enrich her, and apply it to her, that though she deserved a
thousand years to be punished, and with a thousand kinds of exquisite tortures
to be afflicted, in a short time both the sin and punishment due for the same
may sue release, and in her passage hence comfortably depart in peace, and be
translated to heaven as her true resting place. But this must be done by this
means; by weighing and discussing with a contrite heart frequently and
fervently the greatness and multitude of those odious sins, wherewith so
irreverently she ^a^h offended the eyes of her heavenly Father; afterward for
works of Satisfaction, as he is not to omit them, so is he to disvalue them,
as such, that if compared with his sins, they are no more than one drop of
water in comparison of the maine sea; but he is to advance and extol
wonderfully the greatness of my Satisfaction, seeing the very least drop of
my precious blood, which every where streamed from my whole body, had been
sufficient for taking away the sins of a thousand worlds: of which Satisfaction
of mine, nevertheless so much every one applies to himself, as he
conformeth himself to me in suffering with me, and as he humbly and
seriously crowns the smalnesse of his satisfaction, in the infiniteness of
my Expiation.

Of the holy Eucharist.
IN that selfsame Dialogue of Suso, the wisdom incarnate discoursing of the
holy Eucharist, says to his Minister; The least gift that proceeds from me
in the venerable Sacrament, shines and beameth much more gloriously unto all
eternity, than any splendor of this visible Sun, and is much more brighter
and clearer than the very bright Day Star it self. Briefly, it adorneth thee
much more excellently, by a certain eternal comeliness and beauty, than at
any time any Summer, be it never so pleasant, beautifieth the earth. But do
thou not (perhaps) doubt whether this most illustrious Divinity of mine be
more bright than any Sun, and my most excellent soul more sparkling than any
Star, and my glorious body more delightful than the pleasantness of any
Summer? All which in very truth thou conceivest in the Eucharist. Where I am
the Bread of life to the devout and well-prepared: but to the unworthy, who
continue by affection or action in mortal sins, I am a temporary Plague here,
and an eternal curse hereafter: for on these waits certain damnation,
unless they be reconciled to me by true repentance. Surely, if any one were
endued with the natural purity of all the Angels, and renowned with the the
integrity and sanctity of all the Saints, and adorned with the good works of
all mortal men; yet, though thus accomplished, were not he worthy to receive
me in the Sacrament. But when man does all that he can, nothing more is
required at his hands, seeing wha^soever is wanting through him, I supply in
him. But far better it is to come to this venerable Sacrament in love, than to
abstain from it through fear.

Of resigning, denying, and mortifying himself.
SVso likewise wrote these singular sentences touching resigning and denying
ones self. A perfect life consists not especially in this, that thou abound in
comfort, but that thou submit and resign thy will to the divine will. That
thou humbly obey his will in the bitter sop of affliction, and the sweet syrup
of consolation; and that thou place and debase thy self under the feet of all
men. For nothing is more pleasing to the supreme Angelical spirit himself,
than in all things to satisfy the divine will: In so much, as if he knew that
it would redound to the praise of God, to pull up nettles, or other weeds by
the root, he would most desiredly perform this task before all others. There
is no Resignation more perfect or excellent, than to be resigned wholly in the
forsaking of himself: neither ought any one to be too much grieved in mind,
if he have small experience of spiritual sweetness: Let him rather think how
he is unworthy of it. A true Resignation of himself to the will of God, both
in affairs certain and uncertain, without all doubt freeth and secureth man
from all perils and occurrents, causing him to rejoice with true peace in all
things. So great is the piety and benignity of God, that he can by no means
at any time forsake him, who with a confident heart relyeth on his goodness,
and recommendeth and resigneth himself wholly to his Divine Providence. True
submission, depression, and abnegation of ones self, is the root of all
ver^ues, of all health and happiness. It grieveth one surely to be wise and
eloquent, and notwithstanding to be enjoined silence: to be by others
disesteemed, derided, iujuried, to hear himself calumniated and traduced, and
not to defend and revenge his cause: or for a wise and honorable man to give
place to a naughty wretch, and one of no reckoning, and not to withstand it:
and yet all this is nothing else surely than by denial of himself, to become
conformable to the excellent pattern of Christ. Now albeit, in suffering
affliction we be not always of a mind equally resigned, yet are we not to
conclude therefore, that ^ope of salvation is taken away, or the grace of God
lost: so that we do not kick and rebel against God with a stubborn mind.
Works, exercises, and instructions, whether performed with our own proper
will, or affection derived from it, although they may seem joys, yet are they
of small consequence, so long as denying and resigning of our selves be not
joined with them. It becomes a man that is partaker of reason, to do these
works not out of a natural propension, or appetite, like bruit beasts
following the instinct of nature, but with reason, to the praise of God, and
for the love of God, so as he in no place seek his own private gain,
delight, praise, reward, but only God. So to deny, mor^ifie, and relinquish
our selves ought we, that we may in no case refuse to be disvalued, or
suffer adversity for God, that we may diligently refrain both our tongue*
and senses, suffering no inordinate delight to possess us, or the desire
thereof to surprise us. As a Plate or Lamell of gold set unto our eyes, does no
less hinder our sight, than a plate of iron: so it behooves us to renounce,
and remove from our minds all instable mortal creatures, be they never so
noble, if we will enjoy that most excellent Good, which is God. In true
denial, the whole Sum of Perfection consists: without which none shall
profit, what way soever he turn him. Almighty God grant us grace, that with
incessant endeavor we may perpetually strive to deny, mortify, relinquish,
resign, go forth of our selves, and dis-esteeme our selves. Amen.

TO HIS MOST Dear and affectionate Sisters, their faithful Brother dedicates
THIS Passionate Pilgrim; AS A living Memorial of his unfeigned love never dying.
MY tears, my joys; my widdow-weed, my Bride;
My prize, heavens praise; my love, Christ crucifide.
THE PASSIONATE PILGRIM; Breathing A Contemplative Man's Exercise: Offering A
Penitent Souls Sacrifice.

THE Contemplative Man's Exercise: Or Penitent Souls Sacrifice.
The wise man's heart is ever fixed on God,
And with a filial kiss receives his rod.
Go to now, miserable man, fly a little thine occupations, retire thy self
for a space from thy tumultuous cogitations. Lay aside now thine onerous cares,
and set apart thy laborious distentions. Reserve thy self a while for God, and
rest thy self a little in him. Enter into the chamber of thy mind, shut out
all things besides God, and those things which help thee to seek him, and
having shut thy gate, seek him. Say now, O my heart, say now; O my Lord, I
seek thy countenance, thy countenance, O Lord, do I seek. Go to therefore
now my Lord God, teach mine heart, where and how it may seek thee, where and
how it may find thee. O Lord, if thou be not here, where may I seek thee
being absent? But being every where, why do I not see thee present? But
surely thou inhabitest a light inaccessible. But where is that light
inaccessible? Or how shall I come to that light inaccessible? Or who will guide
me, and bring me to it, that I may see thee in it? Then, with what signs,
with what face shall I seek thee? I have not seen thee, O Lord my God, I have
not known thy face. What shall he do, O most high Lord, what shall this thy
foreign banished one do? What shall thy servant do, doubtful of thy love,
and far casten off from thy face? He longs to see thee, and thy face is far
from him. He desires to come unto thee, and thine habitation is inaccessible.
He desires to find thee, and knows not thy place. He affects to seek
thee, and knows not thy countenance. O Lord, thou art my God, and thou art my
Lord, and I never saw thee. Thou have made me, and re-made me: and all those
good things which I have, have thou bestowed on me, and I have not yet known
thee. Finally, to see thee was I made, yet have not I done that for which I was
made. O miserable condition of man, to lose that for which he was made! O hard
and harsh chance is this! Out alas, what has he lost, and what has he
found? What is gone, and what abides? He has lost happiness, for which he
was made, and he has found unhappiness, for which he was not made. That is
gone, without which nothing is happy, and that abides which of it self is
nothing but unhappie. Man did eat the bread of Angels, which now he tastes
not: now he eats the bread of sorrows, which then he knew not. O the
public lamentation of men, the universal mourning of the children of Adam!
He flowed in all plenteous manner, we sigh for hunger. He abounded, we
fast. He happily possessed, and miserably lost: we unhappily need, and
miserably beg: and alas, we remain empty. Why did he not keep for us when
he easily might, what we so grievously want? Why h'as he thu^ shut the light
from us, and brought darkness upon us? Wretched men, whence are we expulsed,
and whereto are we forced? Yea, whither are we headlong thrown, where
overwhelmed? From our Country to exile: from the sight of God to our
blindness: From the joy of immortality, into the bitterness and horror of
death. Miserable exchange! from how great good, to how great evil? Great
loss, great grief, nothing but griefs. But out alas for me unhappy wretch,
one amongst the rest of the miserable children of Eve, divided from God, what
have I done, what have I begun? Whither did I go, whereto am I come? to what
did I aspire, in what do I now sigh? I sought for good, and behold trouble. I
went toward God, and behold I became an offender against my self. I sought
for rest in my secret paths, and I found tribulation and sorrow in my inward
parts. I would have laughed through the joy of my mind, and I was enforced to
rore through the grief of mine heart. Joy was expected, and behold how sighs
were increased! How long, Lord, will thou forget us? How long will thou turn
thy face from us? When will thou look upon us, and hear us? When will thou
enlighten our eyes, and show thy face to us? When wilt ^hou restore thy self
to us? O Lord look upon us, hear us, enlighten us. Show thy self to us, that
it may be well with us, without whom it is so ill with us. Have mercy on our
labors and endevors directed to thee, who are able to do nothing without
thee. Enlighten us, help us. I beseech thee, O Lord, let me not despair
through fainting, but respire by hoping. I beseech thee, O Lord, mine heart is
made bitter with her desolation, Sweeten it with thy consolation. I beseech
thee, O Lord, I hungry have begun to seek thee, let me not depart fasting from
thee; I hunger-starved have come unto thee, let me not depart unfed from thee.
I poor come to thee rich, I miserable to thee merciful, let me not depart
empty and contemned: and if before I eat I sigh, grant that after my sighs I
may eat. O Lord, I am become crooked, and cannot but look downward, raise me
that I may look upward: mine iniquities are gone over mine head, they
overwhelme me, and as an heavy burden press me. Free and disburden me, lest
the ditch stop her mouth upon me. Let me look upon thy light, though a far
off, though from the deep. Teach me to seek thee, and show thee to me
seeking thee: because neither can I seek thee, unless thou teach me: nor
find thee, unless thou show thee. Let me seek thee by desiring, desire thee
by seeking, find thee by loving, love thee by finding. I confess, O Lord, and
I give thanks: because thou have created in me this thine Image, that being
mindful of thee, I might think of thee, and love thee. But so abolished is
this image with the blemishes of vice, and so darkened with the smoke of sin,
as it cannot do that for which it was made, unless thou renew, and reform
it. I presume not, O Lord, to pierce thine height, for I can by no means nor
measure compare mine understanding to it, yet I desire in some sort to
understand thy truth, which mine heart believes and loves. Neither do I
believe to understand that I may believe, but I believe that I may understand.
For this, likewise, I believe, that unless I believe, I shall not understand.
Therefore, O Lord, thou who give understanding to faith, give unto me that I
may understand so much, as thou know to be expedient for me; for thou art
as we believe, and this thou art which we believe, true God, who live and
reignest world without end.

DEAHTS Memorial.
The Child of God thinks willingly of death,
To rest with Him, who after death gives breath.
NOw to shut up all, with that which closes all, by imposing a Period upon
all; We are to consider, now when the sinful soul begins to be loosened
from these bonds of flesh, Pet. Damian. de Hor^ ^ort^^.
with what bitter terror she is afflicted, with what stings of a biting
conscience she is distracted. She remembers the things forbidden her, which
she has committed; She considers the things commanded her, which she has
negligently contemned; she bemoanes those opportunate times of repentance
offered her, and which she so fruitlesly apprehended; she bewailes that
immovable article of strict revenge, inevitably approaching her. She h'as had
sufficient time of sojourning here; she is now compelled to go hence. She
would regaine that which she h'as lost, but she is not heard. Behind her, she
beholds the whole course of her forepast life, all which she accounts as one
short pace. She casts her eyes upon her self, and collects the space of an
infinite perpetuity. She laments therefore, in that she h'as lost, what in so
short a space she might have got, the joy of all ages. She bemoanes her self,
in that for so short a pleasure of fleshly delight, she h'as lost the
unspeakable sweetness of perpetual solace. She blusheth, in that for this
substance which is subject to worms, she h'as neglected that which was to
have been ranked amongst Quires of Angels. Now she lifts up the beams of
her mind, and no sooner beholds the glory of immortal riches, than she
becomes confounded, for that she h'as lost them for the poverty of this life.
Again, when she casts her eyes under her in a despicable reflex upon the
valley of this world, and eying it to be nothing but darkness, but above her
wonders at the beauty of that eternal light, she clearly sees, that it was
night, and darkness which she loved. O that she might but purchase some
small remainder of time for repentance, what a sharp course of conversation
would she take upon her? what and how great things would she promise? with
what vows of devotio^ would she enwreath her? In the mean time, while her
divine eyes grow dark, while her heart beats, while her hoarse throat gaspes,
her teeth grow by little and little black, and draw, as it were, unto them a
certain rust, her countenance becomes pale, and all her members stiff. While
these, then, and such like as forerunning offices of approaching death attend
her, all her works and words present themselves before her; nay, not her very
thoughts are absent, and all these bring in bitter testimony against their
author. All these are heaped together before the eyes of her viewing them, so
as, even those things which she shunneth to behold, she is enforced, though
against her will, to take notice of. Besides all this, there is here an horrid
troop of Devils, and there a glorious train of Angels. By that which appears
betwixt them, may be clearly perceived, which of them h'as most property in
her. For if tokens of piety be discovered in her, she is cheared with the
delights of an angelick invitation, and allured with the sweetness of an
harmonious melody, to go forth. But if the blackness of her merits, and the
impurity of her foul and filthy life adjudge her to the left hand, presently
with an intolerable terror she becomes surprised, with the violence of a
sudden force she is disturbed, dejected, invaded, and from the prison of
miserable flesh violently haled, that to eternal torments with bitterness
she may be tugged. Now, after her departure from the body, who can utter what
armed troops or Squadrons of wicked Spirits lie in ambush for her; what
treacherous trains furnished with cruel tortures besiege the way that
receives her? And lest the soul should escape the^, legions of furies, as it
were, in military ranks or battalions enclose her. This and ^u^h like
frequently to meditate of in thine heart, what else is it than to shun
delightful blandishments, to be divorced from the world, and to shake off
unlawful motions of the flesh, and constantly to retain the sole purpose of
attaining perfection; Which that we may do, God for his mercy grant us. Amen.

Sedeo, Sileo, Signo. Deaths distinction.
O My soul, Bern.
good is the death of the just, in respect of tranquillity, better in respect
of novelty, best in respect of security. Contrariwise, the death of sinners is
the worst, and rightly the worst, evil in losing the world, worse in parting
from the flesh, but worst in that twofold an^ guish of a worm never dying, and
a fire ever burning, and which is worst of all, in being deprived of divine
contemplation.

HOLY MEMORIALS; Or Heavenly Memento's. Memor fui Domini, and Delectatus sum.
A bono die bonum opus suscipiamus; and ab illo die, in quo veluti, Christus
ascenderit, piis desideriis ascendamus.
Of his Conception.
MEMORIAL I.
I Was not, and thou did make me; I had no being, and thou gave it me. I
was conceived in sin, before I conceived what was Sin. Nature laid on me a
stain, before she brought me to a visible state. My blood was corrupted,
before ever I entered. Tainted it was, when Eve was tempted and weakly
consented. Thus did my parents make me forlorn, before ever I was borne. Even
then, when the second skin was my coat, was Sin my Cognizance. Seeds of sin
sprung in me, before the Light took notice of me: And these had their
rooting from those that bred me. Long before I had ability to sin, were all
my members made instruments of sin. Before I had the use of any sense, sin
had made a slave of every sense. For mine eyes, while they were as yet sealed,
sights of sin had entered the^. For mine ears, though they were as then
closed, airs of sin had pierced them. For my taste, before I enjoyed it, an
Apple had poisoned it. For my Touch, before I employed it, had Eves pulse*
soiled it. For my Smell, before I knew how to use it, had the steames of earth
choked it. I was shut up as one in darkness: and dark I was within as well
as without, by means of mine original uncleanenesse. I conversed with none,
none with me: my mothers womb was that living tomb which enclosed me. Thus
before ever I saw the Sun, became I a growing lump of sin Unable was I to
commit it, yet apt enough to be conceived in it. Nothing I had about me, but
what did stain me. The Materials whereof I was made, I am ashamed to name. Ah!
poor shell of corruption! impure shrine, or new-form'd piece of pollution! I
as then knew not by whom I was made, how I was made, when or where I was made,
or for what end I was made. Miserable ignorance! I knew her not in whose womb
I was conceived, nor that sin wherein I was conceived. I was as a stranger to my
fathers house, yet was I daily in it. An Alien was I to my Brethren, yet lived
I amongst them. And as a thing not known, Sojourned I amongst my Kinsmen.
Capable abilities had I both inward and outward, yet enjoyed I the benefit of
neither. Without all sensible compassion, a daily pain was I to my sickly
mother. I lived as one dead, for many months together; and was fed, without
seeking food, by course of Nature. I was as one closed up, and might have no
passage till the time appointed. I increased daily, yet knew I not the means
of my growth. He only who made and fashioned me, knew me; long before I came
out of the womb, did he know what would become of me. Paths had he prepared
for me, before I had knowledge how to walk in them. He had determined mine
end, before I received birth. Long time did I wrestle with my enforced
restraint, laboring still to be freed; yet became I more miserable by my
freedom than restraint. I wished, and yet I knew not what, I was the very least
of a child; what less then, could be my knowledge? I was weary of my bed, yet
going out of it I was fit for nothing. By this I foretold how far I would be
from being content with my estate on earth; when my weak infancy could not
be content with her condition before my birth. In a better case was I when so
incased, than when to the miseries of earth inthralled. A right worldling was
I, before I came into it, for I grew no sooner a little strong, than I grew to
be weary of my former estate. Any one that had seen me, would have thought
there had been no sin in me. But I became so naturalized a ^inner as it was a
task no less hard for me to put off sin than nature. But as one kept in
too long, like a new-fledg'd bird, I begun to flicker a little with my tender
unset wings, and to leave my first nest. But sharply was she that bred me
pained with me before she could be discharged of me. So unnatural was I to
mine own before I entered the world. Gather hence what may be expected from
me, after my entry into the world.

Of his Birth.
MEMORIAL II.
I Thought I had got out of the Iayle: but I found one worser than that which I
left. For having changed a Lesser world for a Greater, I found my miseries so
much more numerous, as the place I came to was larger than the former. In the
very beginning I showed my self to my friends unthankful; yet must they hold
me excused; for those salutes were natural. They entertained me with smiles,
and I gratified them with tears.

Lachrymae were the only musical aires that ushered me to this vale of woes.
My very first voice employed a prophecy: my tears forerunners of my following
misery. I came into the world naked; whereas all other creatures come clothed
and armed. With what joy was I received, while those that saw me, cried, How
like is he to his Father? And they said well, if they pointed at Adam, for his
blood made me his son, and like himself a sinner.

What a foolish part it was (had I well considered it) to see wise men
rejoicing at the sight of one who was entering the Tyring-house of mourning! The
Thracians, though Pagans, showed themselves in this more Christians. These
lamented their Babes birth, but rejoiced at their death. What great delight
could any take in me, when I came so bare into the world, as I brought not
with me one poor ragge to shroud my shame: and all the regreets I returned
them, tears and shrikes? These deserved no great entertainment of joy. To see
such a feeble thing, as could afford it self no succor. An Infant Pilgrim,
who could not find a tongue to beg him harbor! One, who wanted all things, yet
could not tell it is own ^ants. This might rather move compassion than joy. And
such a poor one was I. Nothing did I see that could please me. Still were my
late-unsealed eyes flowing, my seeble voice shriking; naught but notes of
misery every where resounding. And deserved these such pleasing
entertainment? By my birth, I got nothing to my self, but tears; to my
friends, nothing but cares and fears. To feed me was their care; lest I
should be better fed than taught was their fear. Sleep, Food, and Shrikes,
all which begot my parents trouble, were the best things I rendered them; and
the whole expense of those hours, which I bestowed on them. Silly infancy!
when that pleases the Parent best, and batteneth the Infant most, which
profits the world least, Sleep. Small cause had my Parents to have joyed in
my birth, had they considered how my entry led me into a maze of misery, a
vale of vanity. How that small portion of flesh, which I brought along with
me, would in time prove my professed enemy. My first tears told the world that
I had something in me, which annoyed me. My original guilt struck tears
into mine eyes, fears into my heart. Naked came I, as one stripped of his coat.
And this nakedness came by the loss of my garment of innocence. My Grandfire
never found himself naked, till he had transgressed. Then, and never till
then, flew he to the bushes. But what availed it him to fly from his sight,
whose eyes were in every place? Small doubt but I would have taken the same
course, could I either have considered my guilt, or found feet to hasten mine
escape. But I found an ignorance in the one; and a weakness in the other. Thus
was I borne in sin, before I could bear up my self. Yet for all this did my
Parents account of me as a rich prize. Dandled must I be till I sleep; wrapped
in warm clothes; carefully nursed; tenderly used: and if my too dear Parents
got but one poor smile from their Babe, they held their care and cost highly
recompensed. Thus begun I my life in tears, and continued it with fears,
hopes, and griefs. Which made me many times with hearty sighs in the privy
chamber of mine heart, to conclude: Better was the day of ones death, than the
day of his birth. And that the best thing that could be unto man, was not to
be borne at all: and the next, to dye soon. For what brought I into the world
with me, but pulleyes which haled me along to misery? And what bestowed the
world on me, when she had received me, but clouts and bands. The one to
proclaim my poverty, the other my captivity. So as, all the entertainment I
had from this goodly Storehouse of worldly happiness, was want, and restraint.

Thus scarce able to creep, (yet distinguished by reason from all other
creeping things) I at last got crawled from the state of infancy to childhood.
Where, as I increased in years (though insensible, and therein more miserable)
I increased still in the measure of my wants and woes.

Of his Childhood.
MEMORIAL III.
NOw was I weaned from my Nurses milk, but not from my Grandhams sin. I begun
with Christ's Cross, but soon was I tired with learning it; which showed how
quickly I would be afterward wearied with bearing it. I held the condition of
any creature more happy than that of a Scholar. So as it was my desire (so
soon did the heat of goodness, the hopes of towardliness expire) to learn
in jest, but play in earnest. I found in my self a conceit apt enough for any
sports; in these I could lesson others: But in the School of Virtue, I was
ever slowest in reading, or taking out any such lesson to my self. How long
seemed that day, when learning was enjoined me for a task? How speedy that
hour, wherein liberty was given me to play? Thus like a Bear to the stake,
was I haled to my book, wherein I found afterward the happiest state.
Wandering, albeit not much harmfull fancies, begun now to seize on me. I was
seldom contented, by being seated in that place where I was: nor with that
sport I last affected. When I was in my fathers house, my desire was to be in
the field; when I was in the field, I longed to be at home. My childish
ambition (indeed) was not high. My delights, as they required no great cost; so
were they purchased with less care. Easy and narrow were my desires; they
aspired no higher than to points, pins, or cherrystones. Trifles had so taken
up my imagination, as it could reach no further. Yet in these weak vanities,
my desire was to be a conqueror. Now when I found my self grown from my
coat, my Parents found no such thing in my conditions. Those were childish
still, and held both their first shape and size. None ever breathed, that was
longer time a child: or that longed less after the state and style of Man. My
thoughts were so fitted to that age, as if that age were ever to be master of
my thoughts. I measured every one by mine own Last, and mused how any one
could be serious. I knew not what they meant by a dear Summer, or an
unseasonable Harvest. These were the least and lightest of my cares: while I
found plenty, I dreamed little of others scarcity. Mine highest outrage was
the breach of an Orchard. Yet such inbred seeds were sown in me by his grace
that made me, as I thought this was not well done of me. But whatsoever I did
in my self correct; others were as apt quickly to corrupt. If other children
approved it, I gave way unto it. I shaped my affection by their liking: my
election by their loving. Thus went I on a proficient in nothing so much as
folly. I wished for time after time to please my childish fancy: but never
weighed the preciousnesse of time, nor how all things slav'd to time were
vanity. Few and weak were my desires; nor did they much differ from those of
an inferior creatures, being altogether for the present. How easily might any
one have deceived me with shadows for substance; Esau in preferring a mess
of pottage before his inheritance, was never more foolish, than I was in the
estimate of my vanities. What a brave youth held I my self with mine Eldern
Gun, Hobbie-horse, and Rattle? A poor pride, and yet rich enough for that
time. What was only before me, seemed dear unto me. Yesterday was too long
for me to remember: and to morrow too long for me to expect. I held the
present day, the only date of my pleasure. No day was to me ominous, but if
any were, none so much, as after a long Breaking up, to return to School. I
found in my self a natural fear; but this proceeded rather from sight of the
rod, than any propensitie to what was good. This fear taught me first how to
flatter; and this I began first to practice on my Master. What fair promises
would I make him, in hope of one hours reprive from him! All things should be
amended; mean time, nothing less intended. Thus went I on in my childish
ways; wise enough to be a Wag; too light, to be truly wise. So as, I might be
well compared to that Top, I so much used; which always ran round, and never
went forward, unless it were whipped. A true Truant, but a weak Proficient.
Liberty I still desired, yet made no use of it. Books I loved only for their
Cover; Flowers and indented Letters I preferred before the matter. Thus was my
childhood bestowed; though some glowing hopes raked up in the embers appeared;
which did not a little glad their longing hearts which gave me nurture: but how
these hopes ripened, you may hereafter gather.

Of his Youth.
MEMORIAL IV.
BY this time I had served two Apprentiships in the world. And was grown
higher in stature, but for my dis^retion, it kept still the same measure. Yet
turning over a new leaf, and recalling to mind my former life; I never looked
on what my childhood did, without a glowing blush. Yet for all this, might my
childhood, if I ^ad fallen back into it, been as much ashamed of what was done
in my youth, as my youth was of what was done in my childhood. Now had I left
my Scraple, Scourge, and Top with my Coat. For then in my heat of y^uth, did I
hunt after pleasures of more height. Heavy hunting, when I made mi^e own
darling a prey to my foe! I could walk in no place, but snares were laid ready
for me, to entrap me; yet would not I so much as eye them, lest by taking
notice of them, I should avoid them, and so lose the pleasure I took in them.
Thus were my delights mounted to a fuller height; and quickened with more
youthful heat; both which beget in my now relenting soul a late, but hearty
hate. Not a day passed over my head, without some spiritual hurt. The easiest
of my vanities were light amorous Poems. I held those, employments for my best
hours. O what a prize, what a booty, held I a favor snatched from a light
piece of beauty? My fortunes were not great, which enjoined me to a spa^er
expense. But if my small credit could supply what my fortunes wanted; I stickt
not much on the me^nest commodities to make up that want. My melancholy ever
proceeded from want of money. While Roaring was in request, I held it a complete
fashion. For Civility, I held it for such a rag of unbeseeming Gentry, as I
scorned to take acquaintance of it. I had long before this, aspired to a pipe
of rich Smoke with a Tinder-box, and these gave light to my lighter
discourses. I held my pockets sufficiently stored, if they could but bring me
off for mine Ordinary, and after dinner purchase me a stool on the stage. I
had cares enough besides hoording; so as, I held it fit to disburden my self
of that, and resign it over to the worldling. A long winter night seemed but a
Midsummer nights dream, being merrily past in a Catch of four parts, a deep
health to a light Mistress, and a knot of brave blades to make up the Consort.
I could jeere Him to his face, who^ I needed most, Ten at hundred, I mean; and
he would not stick to pay me in mine own coin. I might beg a courtesy at
his hands, but to starve for it never prevail; for herein I found this
instrument of us^rie and the Devil to be of one Society* and that they craved
nothing of any one, save only S^ouritie. A weak blast of light fame, was a
great part of that portion I aimed at. And herein was my madness! I held
nothing so likely to make me known to the world, or admired in it, as to be
debauched, and to purchase a Parasites praise by my riot. It is not in me; no,
it is far from me and my memory, to recall to mind what miriads of hours
that time mis-spended. Scarcely one poor minute can I bethink me on, wherein
I did ought, or expressed my self in ought, that might redound to his honor,
whom now in mine age I have only sought. How truly might I say in those days,
in those many evil days, I had been secure, if Society had not made me
impure? And yet must I be enforced to retract this too, if I desire freely to
lie open my self, and speak what is true. For of all those Consorts, whose
company I used, I found no Consort worse than my self. Yea, I confess (and
may this my confession be never without hearty contrition) that it is
impossible for me to remember, how many poor simple souls, who when they
scarce knew how to sin, I taught them; when they were willing to sin, I
persuaded them; when they withstood sin, I constrained them; when they inclined
to sin, I consented to them. Yea, to how many I lay snares in the way where
they walked, for how many I made pit-fals in the way when they sought it: And
to the end I might not be afraid to commit, I feared nothing at all to forget.
( Aug. Med. c. 3.) O how often have I returned, after such time as I had
mourned, to that v^mit which I seemingly loathed, and to that clay wherein I
formerly wallowed? How strong were my promises; how weak my performance? What
less then can I do, than resolve my self into tears; that my bespotted
soul may be rinsed; my many, innumerably many sins may be rinsed; my too
secure soul from the grave of sin raised? With anguish of heart, and
bitterness of spirit will I therefore conclude, calling on him who is my
trust: Lord forgive me the sins of my youth.

Of his Manhood.
MEMORIAL V.
WHen I was a Child, I loved childishness: when a Youth, delicacie and
wantonness. But being now come to Man, what can be less expected than fruits
of obedience? Fruits! Few, God knows, and those bitter fruits. Never did man
read man more, and express man less. A long time had I been a stranger to my
fathers house; Many years had I sojourned with the unwary Prodigal in a
strange country. I had spent my portion, that fair portion of many rich
graces, which my heavenly Father had bestowed on me; I was driven to such want,
as I was like to starve; yet would I not acknowledge my poor estate. Return I
would not to my father; nor crave any succor; though I was become a most
miserable creature, a foul unclean Leper, one utterly lost for ever, had not
some kind-hearted Samaritan relieved me in such time of danger. But Necessity
brings ever along with her some remedy. I suffered my sore to be opened, that
it might be cured. I found my self sick, and I besought my Physician, my
heavenly Physician, that he would look upon me with the eyes of his
compassion. And he came unto me, and healed me: yet, with this condition, that
I should sin no more. But I found the custom of sin too hard, and the
continuance thereof too sweet to be left so soon. No sooner had I recovered
strength, than I returned to my former state. I found the abilities of nature
too strong in me, to leave sin so speedily. No sentence in all the Scripture
was so fresh nor frequent in my memory, as, At what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin, etc. Ezekiel. c. 18. but I abused the Text, and by it
promised to my self more liberty. I held it Security enough to sin
secretly. As one retired from the sight both of God and man, to promise more
impunitie to sin, I stickt not to say, Who sees me? But woe is me! what
was worst of all, and what without grief of heart I shall never remember:
Though I saw many eyes upon me, and that my example might have done good to
many; for that in the opinion of others, I was ranked both for knowledge and
condition before many others; those whom I might by my uprightness have
improved, by my looseness of life I depraved. Which made me call to mind with
much heaviness of heart, what I had sometimes read: Of so many deaths is every
one worthy, as he has given evil examples to those that live with him, or
left evil examples to those that shall succeed him. O my God (thus would I
many times commune with mine own heart) how many deaths have I deserved, who
held it not enough to undo my self, by taking upon me a liberty of sinning;
but to undo others too, by chalking them out a way by my unhappie example for
the like freedom of tra^sgressing! This, I confess, could not choose but make
me to others most hateful; my self to my self most distasteful. And yet for
all this, swum I still in the same stream. Truth it is, that from my youth up,
when as yet no early soft down had clothed my chin, I had taken a full
perusal of my own estate. I found in me, what of necessity might be either
corrected by me; or naught could I look for less than misery. Some bosom
sins likewise I found in me after I came to man's estate which ill became the
condition of man, and I sought for cure of them. Amongst these, one I culled
forth more dear to me than the rest, and which neither day nor night would
afford me any rest. And I found means to remove it, or to weane me from it;
and I applied them, but got no help by them, because I mis-applyed them. for I
well remember, after such time as I had been advised, what directions to use,
to allay, if not take away, the poison of that darling sin wherewith I was
infected; I took great care for a while, to observe whatsoever was enjoined
me: and to neglect no means to procure my safety. First, I shut my windows;
I admitted no treaties; I abstained from dainties. Secondly, I suffered not my
thoughts to converse with lightness. Thirdly, I presented my suit to that High
Court of Requests, for more assistance. Fourthly, I subjected my flesh to holy
Discipline and obedience. Fifthly, I meditated of Death; and how this dainty
pampered flesh would in that time turn to deformity and rottenness. Sixthly,
I imparted my griefs to my Superiors, to receive the benefit of their godly
counsel and holy prayers. But flesh and blood became soon weary of this
Task. Which I no sooner neglected, than I made relapse into that malady, which
during all the time of my spiritual exercise, was well assuaged. Thus in my
entry to the state of man, after such time as I was gone down to the Grave,
and that the Pit had nearely received me; had not my good God taken pity of
me, and shown the light of his Countenance upon me: even then, I say, was I
no sooner set again on my feet, then I returned to my accustomed filth. And
though Manhood had swallowed up my ^outh; yet did my Manhood taste less of Man
than my Youth.

Of his Age.
MEMORIAL VI.
BEhold! how he who would not remember his Creator in the days of his Youth;
nor remember that he was a man; is now come to that feeble estate, as he can
scarce remember himself. Now are those Evil days come on me, wherein I may
say, I have no pleasure in them. Now, and never till now, feel I the keepers
of my house to tremble, and the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders
cease, because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be
darkened: Now I feel the silver coard loosed, the golden bowl broken, the
pitcher broken at the fountain, the wheel broken at the Cisterne. ( Eccles.
12.) And yet is there none so old, but he hopes to live one year longer;
though the longer he lives, his miseries increase in number. But what am I now,
who have seen so many evil days; and learn^d so much by others follies; and
read man over and over in every volume? Sure, either now or never there is some
appearance of grace, when there is so near approach to my Grave. To be old in
years, and young in hours, is an unchristian piece of Arithmetic. Neither
can there be any sight more unseemely, than to see an old man, gray in hairs,
and grave in years, to have no other argument to prove his years, but his
hairs. I am now gathering my vessels in the haven: Neither do I find ought
without me, that may so much cheer me, as to hold me one minute longer from
my Country. I have passed the Maine, and am come a Shore. And yet I must put
forth a little further, before I can reach my wished Harbor. I have already
entered the Suburbs; my weak Age tells me I draw near the Walls. And yet I
feel many things wanting in me, that tell me, I am not so well furnished as I
should be. I find, indeed, in me no great ability to sin, but what of all
that? Did my will to sin die, while I had ability to sin? If it did not; all
this is nothing, nor shall advantage me ought at my ending. For he who cease
from sin when he can sin no more, cannot be said to leave sin, but sin
to leave him. There is not one servant in all my Meniey that is able to do any
service for me; not one living power or faculty that can discharge that
peculiar office they owe me. It is high time for me then to shut up shop, and
to leave my Trade; my too long trading in sinning, wherein I have spent so many
hours (never to be recalled) of precious time. I am now esteemed of, but as
some old moath-eaten Calendar without date. If I talk like to one of my years;
unseasoned youth jeeres such gravity; if I speak ought below my self,
straight am I taxed of levity. If I do ought youthfully, it ill becomes me;
and if I do like my self, gravely, that distastes me, because it dislikes
them whose company delights me. I have green thoughts shrouded under gray
locks. So as, it seems I differ in nothing from what I was at first, but only
in hair, and unable limbs. For I have a will to do what I did, if I had
ability to do what I would. Never was decrepit thing more strong in will,
more weak in power. I am now made use of, like as of some aged sullied Record;
only brought forth to look upon, and then laid aside. Would I but know what a
small portion of worldly means might suffice me; seeing Nature has now
drawn out my thread of life to the full length; I could not but confess that
my small remainder of days now left me, had a competencie to serve me: yet,
while I have one foot in the Grave, my desires are more deep than the Grave;
more thirsty than the Earth, to which I am every moment drawing nearer, though
in my earthly affections daily stronger. There is nothing in all my house of
lesser use than my self; neither is my body half so weak as my mind. My
life is but at best, a dying sleep. Nor be my cares ever at better rest, than
when I am asleep. The most that can be now said of me, is this; He was a man
in his time. But that time is done; for now I turn Child again; and cannot for
a world help my self, so near am I to the brinke: yet see what light thoughts
sparkle out of this dead Turffe! My eyes darken; my teeth blacken; my heart
heateth; my hoarse throat ruttleth; my countenance has lost her color; all my
powers and motions their vigor: yet can those dark eyes look and long after
another Farm; those teeth grate and grind themselves for revenge; that poor
beating throbbing heart wish for a longer life; that seere and sallow
countenance desire to look young; those decayed powers wish to be strong. My
friends put me in mind of my Will: and my sick soul answers them with a sigh:
Friends, advise him to forget his Will: for it was that only which undid me
and him. But my outward house must not be yet disposed of; I love it too well
to leave it. Yet a little; and yet a little. Spare me but a very little; I
find not my self altogether so weak, as my weakness should yet stand in
need of a Will. Thus do I love to deceive my self; while that strong man
stands at the door, ready to arrest me. I daily see how those who are every
way stronger, are enjoined to pay their debt to Nature. But this I apply not to
my self; I look still for some days to be added to my life. None so weak,
but he is fit for some work. Though I can neither dig, nor delve, nor
fashion my self to any hand-labour; I can devise how to make my Barnes larger:
But what is all this to setting of my house in Order? Alas! How long have I
wearied my self with these wayward cares? How long have I been in preparing,
and am still unprepared? What a stir I made for a state, and still neglected
my inward state? yea, what got I for all my cares, but an unhappie inheritance
of hopes and fears? And what were my hopes, but from those things, from whence
I could not expect for either hope or help? And thus I keep my Couch; no less
fearful to lose what I already have; than I was sometimes careful to get,
what I now have. Woe is me! shall I therefore neglect Heaven, because Heaven
h'as dealt so bountifully with me? Shall that which I now scarcely enjoy (for I
enjoy it without joy) deprive me of my chiefest joy? Here I feel all the
infirmities of Nature; there I shall partake a Lasting youth, and with it
abundance of pleasure. Yet these work weakly on me. I would feign build my
Tabernacle here. And yet I find no great comfort here. For what may I be said
to enjoy, that I possess? Attendants indeed, of Old age I have many, and such
as cleave near me. But for ought else without me, I cannot challenge them
properly; because a very short time shall impropriate these to my posterity.
Those things then that grieve me, I have; nor will they leave me till I go
to my Grave: But those things that should cheer me, I have not: for they must
shortly leave me, or I them; when Corruption shall be my Mother, and Worms
my Brethren and Sisters. Thus has my life been as a Tale that is told:
Sphinxes riddle is now made good in me: my second childhood records mine aged
infancy. My age h'as made time change my Tence; I WAS, and that is all can be
said of me.

His Pleasures.
MEMORIAL VII.
SOme will think it strange, that Age should be a forerunner to Pleasure; and
will dislike me for ranking them in this manner. But if they knew my aim,
they would quickly rectify their censure, and approve of mine order. For I do
not here treat of Pleasure, as a subject fore Age, to delight in: for rare were
that delight (unless it receive life from above) that could suit well with it.
No; my meaning is to take a Survey (not without tears) of all those Pleasures
which my vain youth affected; with those which my riper age frequented: with
these which my declining time (these few and evil days of mine) have pursued.
And in the review of these, I find those Pleasures of my youth, full of
vanity; yet not enthralling me to so much misery, as those of my riper
growth; nor those so dangerous, as these of mine age. Every time brought with
it a new tide. In the first prime of my youth; I made choice of such delights
as sorted best with my fancy; wherein I showed such agility, as few in the
exercise of them surpassed me. But in these I found much vanity: for they
either wearied me, or they were weary of me. The beasts of the field became
my prey; while I became a prey to those beasts within. In these an easy
Ambition took me; contending with those who were given to like sports, for
the masterie. This, I must confess, was neither greatly harmfull nor useful.
Those poor Creatures which I had in chase abroad, could have done me little
harm; had not my passions wrought me disquiet at home. Which, though they
assailed and assaulted me, yet did they not wholly surprise me. And yet did I
many things, which beget in me now a glowing shame. My youth was not so well
seasoned, as to use pleasure as it should be used. I was too hot in the quest
and pursuit of it, to show any discretion in the exercise of it. And too
strongly was I fixed on those poor Objects, wherewith my unstayed eyes were
fed, to make use of what mine eyes beheld, for mine inward good. But long did I
not bestow my self on these: for when I came to more years, I abandoned those
pleasures I pursued at first; I betook me to those that seemed more manly;
but I found by bitter experience, that they only seemed so: for these are they
who now sting me like Adders, and afflict my troubled soul with a thousand
terrors. For in those times I well remember, with what security I used to sit
in my Summer-Arbour. How my thoughts were only laid to satisfy my loose
desires. Let us take our fill of pleasure; thus I talked with my wandering
senses. And quickly opened they their windows to let sin in; but no passage
found I by them to let sin out. They cried with the Horse-leach, more, more. I
found them as insatiable as Hell, or the Grave. Yea, when strength of nature
failed, and the powers of sin became weakened, my wanton Will supplied,
wherinsoever my ability wanted. Thus in my strength, was I led away captive;
nor could I redeem my liberty for many years. This caused me many times in
the chamber of my heart to peruse the story of Sampson: who, when he was
strongest, showed himself weakest, in disclosing his strength to a Dalilah.
And this, me thought, came near me; I could never read it, but I was stinged
with it. For at that time was I in my full strength; and conceivingst state. I
had improved my helps by discourse, and behavior of my self, by reading
books and men. In the one I read what should be done; in the other, I beheld
whatsoever was either praiseworthy, or otherwise done. None could disguise
himself from the world more; or seemingly impeach his honor less. But what
was the issue of all this? A double sin could receive no less than a double
scourge. Halt with man, I might; with God, I could not. The longer he
deferred; the more he inferred. In that sin, wherein any one is most
delighted; shall he be punished. Sweet meat must have sour sauce. I considered
(but too short time did those thoughts lodge with me) that these pleasures
were but for a moment, but no less space than Eternity ended the torment. I
considered too, how that Eternity depended on this Moment. Yet, for all this
did I enlarge mine heart unto pleasures. The day seemed long, wherein I did not
enjoy them: the night long, wherein I thought not of them. I knew what sin it
was to solicit a Maid unto lightness; or to be drunken with wine, wherein was
excess: or to suffer mine heart to be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness: yet, for all this, run I on still in mine evil ways; and so
continued till my evil days came upon me; which fitted themselves for
pleasures too, but of another degree, and in an higher strain of vanity.

Alas, poor decrepit age! what pleasure can the whole world find for such a
Cripple? Thine eyes are too dim to discern beauty; thy lame legs can find no
feet, to walk to the house of the strange woman. Thy May-flowers no sooner
withered, than thy May-games ended. Useless years, Hawthorne hairs,
fruitless cares stick close to thee; all things else (saving only these
constant companions, the infirmities of age) have long since left thee. The
least distemper begets in thee a surfeit. Young men, when they see thee merry,
laugh at thee; because thy mirth so ill becomes thee. Old men wag their heads
at thee, seeing thee do what so ill-beseems thee. Thou have had already enough
of the pleasures of sin: let the younger brood now enjoy what thou have tasted.
And yet this must not be. That man were too too old, for whom the world could
not find one pleasure to fit his age. This to my grief, I found in my self.
Old sores are ever hardest to be cured; and vices in old age most desperate.
Hear then my distemper; and to cure it, afford me your prayers and tears to
my Savior. The less I need, the more needful am I in my desires. I have more
than a competence to maintain me during this short remainder of my
pilgrimage, lent me. And yet this will not serve my turn: my mouth is half
filled with gravel; and yet are not my desires filled with what they enjoy.
And though my very nails might serve for a spade to dig my grave; they had
rather be molded and be rusted with telling of coin. Though I can scarcely
see it when I account it: this suffices me, without hope of enjoying to hoord
it. My whole Library is brought into one volume: and that penned with no great
art. My cash-keeper looks to it, and I to him, lest he corrupt it. This vast
volume bears this title, Creditor and Debtor. But for my Debts, I owe few;
save only to Him, to whom I owe my self. Mean time, I am so far from
discharging it, as I scarcely vouchsafe to acknowledge it.

O lessen in me these unhappie cares; that it may be henceforth my whole care,
to apply to this old sore a speedy cure. Let me not only speak it, but
think it: Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity, save only to please
God, and to serve him.

His Labors.
MEMORIAL VIII.
MY breeding was such, as it never acquainted me with any Hand-labour. Neither
was my constitution so strong as to endure it: nor my disposition so low as to
brook it. Free-bred were my Studies: so as, Lapwing-like, with shell on head,
I begun to write, before my years could well make me an Author. But hence my
tears! The Subjects I made choice of, were of Love; to close with my fancy,
which was very light. I was proud in bearing the title of a Writer; which, I
must confess, together with the instancie of such as either truly applauded
me, or deluded me, made me ambitious after the name of an Author. And what
were those light Poems I then penned; but such as are now pensive Odes to my
dolorous soul, grieving to peruse what my youth so dearly loved? O how
familiar was I with Parnassus, Helicon, Hippocrene, and all the Muses! Mean
time, I seldom or never thought of that heavenly Olympus, which crowns all
virtuous Labors with true happiness. It was the saying of an holy Father;
Aug. Med. 4.
Those studies which I once loved, now condemn me; those which I sometimes
praised, now disparage me. Far more cause have I to say, how, Those Labors
which I once fancied, now afflict me: those which sometimes delighted me, now
perplex me. I am many times in company, where I hear some of my youthful
verses repeated: and though I do neither own them, nor praise them: yet must
I in another place answer for them, if he, on whom I depend, shall not in
these tears which I shed, drown the memory of them. For alas! how many chaste
ears have I offended; how many light ears have I corrupted with those
unhappie works which I have published? What wanton measures have I writ for
the nonc't, to move a light Curtezan to hug my conceit; and next her Venus
and Adonis, or some other immodest toy, to lodge me in her bosom? Light
stuff, to be entertained in so flourishing a state! O how the reremembrance of
these do grieve me! When that Talent, which might have been employed to Gods
glory; became a Forge of lightness and vanity! O how much better had it been
for me to bury it, than to use it to his dishonor, who gave me it! Was this
the trial of wits, to make choice of no other Theme, than what corrupts best
wits? Was Learning made to no other end, than to make lines, so many lures; to
take a mod^st eye; or work on an easy mind; or to lead a poor deluded Soul
to Hell? Was wit given to be exercised in wantonness; or to prostitute it
self, only to please it self, with lightness? Unhappie Wit, that is so
employed! Ill-goven'd Learning, that is so bestowed ^ We cry out of the Devil
(and good cause have we to do so) for tempting our Grandam Eve, and deceiving
her with his subtlety; tell me then, what age, sex or degree may not justly
cry out of such as me, who have tempted our Grandams children so often with
our ribaldry? Well might that devout Father call Poetry, the Devils Wine; to
make men and women drunk with their profaneness; abuse them with their
lightness: But woe is me! it was not all kinds of Poetry that he condemned.
For what sweet and heavenly wits have been employed in Poesy? What devout
tears have their divine works begot? What holy motions, heavenly fancies have
these bred? Poesy then is a divine influence; and the choice of the Subject
makes the difference. This I speak not in defense of my self, but in defense
of it which I have so much abused. For many sweet Poems have I read, which
could not choose but beget in an attentive Reader many good thoughts: and whose
Inventions, whether they were couched in prose or verse, deserrved of all
clear judgments, their applause; and these live to posterity; because they
enlivened virtue: and set up such a Light upon the Altar of devotion, as shall
never go out. But these I followed not. Let my tears therefore be many;
because the fruits which others reaped by my Labors, were but few. Neither was
I only versed in these. For being put on by my Superiors, at whose dispose I
was, I addressed my pen to Labors Historical, Moral and Divine. Neither was
I in these less blameworthy: for even Those, wherein I should only have aimed
at Gods glory, had ever in them some sprinklings of vainglory: Nay, what was
more; (for enough I cannot speak to my own shame;) Those Cardinal virtues
whereof I treated; and which to the imitation of others I commended; found ever
the worst example in my self. Which could not choose but redound to my great
dishonor; to see me the least observer of that, which I commended to another.
Likewise, those Theological virtues, which in those my Diviner Works, I so
highly honored; with those seven Beatitudes, the practice whereof I so much
pressed; where found they my imitation in them, to confirm my admiration of
them? Now tell me, was this all that might be required of me? Was it
sufficient for me to commend to others, what I meant not to amend in my self?
Was this the duty of an Author? Whether be our lives to be shown in our
pens, or our pens in our lives? Truth is, for one Active man, we have ^en
Contemplative. Amongst which, none ever professed more, and expressed less,
than my self. I could sometimes say, and confirm it with a vow; That I could
never dictate with tongue, nor relate with pen, what I conceived not first in
heart. But none could find this in me, that did read me; or by conversing
with me, found me. So as, withdrawing my self a little aside from ^he world,
and considering my own fearful estate, whom even ripeness of time, calls out
of the world: I go on many times in this Appeal to my self. Look, I pray
thee, look, a little on thy self: and let no strange eye see thee, nor ear
hear thee, nor tongue judge thee but thy self. What have thou writ; or of
what have thou writ? Of love; of Love! but did thou not corrupt that style,
and make it Lust? Yes; heavens know, thou did. Again, did thou choose a
better subject? how did thou handle it? well enough in thy line; but too too
ill in thy Life. O then, let it be thy Labor, in this thy small remainder, to
beg forgiveness of Him, whom thou did so much dishonor: and if ever there
be spent by thee more Lampe-light on those Studies, let Him only have the
praise, who rewards ^^ery faithful Labourer in the Evening, and gives to his
Labor success.

His Life.
MEMORIAL IX.
LIfe is a Race, or progress to Death. The House I sojourne in, a Tent or
Tabernacle. The People I converse and consort with, as I am, and all our
Fathers before us, Pilgrims. Every day h'as his date; yesterday was nor as to
day, nor to day as to morrow. Two things there are, which makes me ever to
wonder, the more I think of them. The one is, to hear a Stranger (as we are
all) to breathe out so many longing wishes, languishing desires: O that I were
at home! O that I were in mine own Country! And what home is this he means?
Is it his own home? his own native Country? No; It is his earthly
Tabernacle. Perchance he lives (if a Pilgrimage may be properly called a
Living) far in the North, and upon occasion he is called up to the South; O
how tedious are his hours till he return! yet was he as near his Country,
before as now. The Latter is, to see a poor wayfaring man (as we are all)
when he is in his journey, and wearied with Travail, overload himself, as if
he purposely meant to fore-slow his speed to his Country: Or set himself on
building in the way, as if he had quite forgot the place whereto he was to go.
This I am sure, is my estate. Albeit, I have found even in those who would have
highly rejoiced in enjoying that light which I am called to; and no doubt,
would have made far better use of it, than I do; excellent resolves touching
their contempt of earth: although their understandings were so darkened, as
their mis-guided thoughts could mount no higher. These could conclude;
Wheresoever we be, we are in our Country, and our Country with us, so it be
well with us. But well it cannot be with us, so long as Passions of the mind
disquiet us within, and Infirmities enfeeble us without. I hear some call this
Life a Prison; but yet these who call it so, live not like Prisoners. Delights
and Delicacies become not Fotters. Nay, if we truly held it a prison; we
would desire our liberty: but we either know not, or acknowledge not our
misery. Others can call it a Banishment; others a Punishment; others a Death.
But if a Banishment, why wish we not to be restored? if a Punishment, why
seek we not to be released? And if a Death, why sleep we in it, and desire
not to be raised? No; no; these are but words in the air. Like such as commend
Abstinence, in their Surfets; or discourse of Mortification in their Cups. Not
one of these, who compare themselves to prisoners, would be, if they might be,
freed; Nor one of these Exiles, infranchised; Nor one of these who hold
themselves thus punished, delivered; nor one of these who hold themselves
Deadalive, revived. This I am sure, is my case: Though I find all things in
the World to be nothing but Vanity; and of those, Man the greatest Vanity;
and of all men, my self th^^^^lest of Vanity. For I have rejoiced all my
days, in a thing of naught. And I thought still in mine heart to put far
away the evil day, by approaching to the Seat of iniquity: but I found that
the eyes of the Almighty were upon me, and that I groped but in Darkness, to
wound my self. Wretched man! How long have I been in a miserable state, and
knew it not? How long have I been a Stranger to my Fathers house, and returned
not? I have read it, Dear Lord, in thy Book; and I have found it by experience
in that public Register of man's mortality: how this Life is truly compared to
a Course, to a Roast; and what swifter? To a Weavers shuttle; and what ^^icker?
To a Tale that is told; what shorter? To a Shadow; what sooner vanishing? To
Grass; what sooner withering? To the Tracke of a Ship; what less appearing?
To the Flight of a Bird; what more speedily gliding? Yet for all this have I
loaded my self with thick clay; as if I were too fleet in my course to
heaven, and needed trashing. But would you know in what places, I have been
most versed; and with what persons, most conversed? I shall render you a just
Account; mean time, what Account I shall make for my misspent hours, heaven
knows.

After such time, as my Parents had brought me up at School; to get me an
inheritance in that, wherewith no earthly providence could endow me; I was sent
to the University; where (still with an humble acknowledgement of others
favors and seasonable endeavors) I became such a Proficient, as Time called
me, and Examination approved me for a Graduate. And in these Studies I
continued, till by universal Voice and vote, I was put upon a Task, whose
Style I have, and shall ever retain, the Son of Earth; Terrae Filius. From
the performance of which exercise, whether it were the extraordinary favor
which the University pleased to grace me withal, or that she found some
tokens in me of such future proficience as might answer the hopes of so tender
a Mother, I know not: but, sure I am, I received no small encouragement both in
my studies and free tender of ample preferment. And too apt was I, to apply
this the worse way. For this extraordinary grace begot in me a self-conceit
of my own worth: ever thinking, that if this had not proceeded from some more
deserving parts in me: that rich Seminary of all Learning would not have
shown so graceful a Countenance toward me. Notwithstanding, I labored by
that Grace which was given me, to suppress this Opinion in me; and humbly to
acknowledge my wants and weakness in all; my ability in nothing. But applause
is a dangerous Eare-ring: which I found by giving too easy ear to my own
praise; which, as it deluded my judgment, so it exposed me to censure. True, too
true I found it, that in the sight of our own Parts, we need no borrowed
lights. This it was, and only this that induced me to put my self forward in
Public Exercises with much confidence: wherein (such happiness it is to be
possessed of opinion) I seldom or never came off with disgrace.

Having for sundry years together thus remained in the bounteous bosom of
this my Nursing-Mother; all which time, in the freedom of those Studies, I
reap't no less private comfort, than I received from others encouragement; I
resolved to set my rest upon this, to bestow the most of my time in that place,
if it stood with my Parents liking. But soon was I crossed by them in these
resolves: being enjoined by them to turn the course of my Studies from those
sweet Academick Exercises, wherein I tasted such infinite content: and to
betake my self to a profession, which I must confess sui^ed not well with my
disposition: for the fresh fragrant flowers of Divine Poesy and Moral
Philosophy could not like well to be removed, nor transported to those thorny
places and plashes of the Law. But no remedy; with an unwilling farewell I
took my leave of Philosophy; to address my Studies to that Knowledge, which
at first seemed so far different from my element; as if I had been now to be
molded to some new Dialect; for though I was known to most tongues, I became
a mere Novice in this. Here I long remained, but lightly profited: being there
seated, where I studied more for acquaintance than knowledge. Nor was I the
only one (though a principal one) who run deeply in areeres with time; and
gulled the eyes of opinion with a Law-gowne. For I found many in my case, who
could not recompense their Parents many years charge with one Book-case.

Yet amidst these dis-relishing studies, whereto I was rather enforced than
inclined: I bestowed much precious time (better spent then in Tavernes and
Brothells) in reviving in me the long-languishing spirit of Poetry, with
other Moral Assayes; which so highly delighted me, as they kept me from
affecting that loose kind of liberty, which through fullness of means, and
licentiousness of the age, I saw so much followed and eagerly pursued by many.
This moved me sometimes to fit my buskined Muse for the Stage; with other
occasional Presentiments or Poems; which being freeborn, and not mercenarie,
received graceful acceptance of all such as understood my rank and quality.
For so happily had I crept into Opinion (but weak is that Happiness that is
grounded on Opinion) by closing so well with the temper and humor of the time,
as nothing was either presented by me (at the instancie of the noblest and
most generous wits and spirits of that time) to the Stage; or committed by me
to the Press; which past not with good approvement in the estimate of the
world. Neither did I use these private Solaces of my pen, otherwise than as a
play only to the imagination: rather to allay and season more serious studies;
than accoun^ them any fixed employment. Nor did I only bestow my time on these;
for I addressed my self to Subjects of stronger digestion; being such as
required more maturitie of judgment, though less pregnancie of invention:
relishing more of the Lamp, than those Lighter measures which I had formerly
penned: wherein I grew as strong in the opinion and reputation of others as
before. This I must confess, begot in me a glowing heat and conceit of my
self: but this I held an easy error, and the more dispensable, because
arising from the infirmity of nature. Howsoever, I can very well remember (and
what other Followers can be to such a Remembrancer but penitent tears and
incessant fears) that I held it in those days an incomparable grace to be
styled one of the Wits. Where, if at any time invited to a public feast, or
some other meeting of the Muses, we hated nothing more than losing time;
reserving ever some Select hours of that Solemnity, to make proof of our
conceits in a present provision of Epigrams, Anagrams, with other expressive
(and many times offensive) fancies.

But Wits so ill employed, were like weapons put into mad men's hands. They hurt
much, benefitted little: distating more than they pleased; for they liked only
such men's palats, as were Malcontents, and Critically affected. By this time
I had got an eye in the world; and a finger in the street. There goes an
Author! One of the Wits! Which could not choose, but make me look big, as if
I had been casten in a new mold. O how in privacie, when nothing but the close
Evening, and dark walls accompany me, does the remembrance of these lightest
vanities perplex me! How gladly would I shun the memory of them! How willingly
forgo that sweetness which many conceive to be in them! But let me go on;
for I am yet but entering that high bet-path of my younger follies. Having thus,
for diverse years together, continued at Inns of Court; where that opinion the
world had of my Works, gained me more friends; than the opinion men had of my
Law, got me fees. For such as affected Scenes more than Suits were my Clients.
I thought with my self to take a turn or two in Paul's; and to peruse a whol^
Gazetta in one walk. This I conceived might improve me; first, by indearing
and ingratiating my self with that Society: which, I must confess, were
richly endowed with two excellent parts, Invention, and Memory. Secondly, by
screwing some Subject from their Relations, which might set my pen a work upon
occasion.

But I found not there what I expected, which made me leave that walk, and
turn Peripateticke; a civil Exchange-man; where in short time I got
acquaintance of the best; being such gentle Merchants, as their wealth could
not so darken their worth, but they would willingly enter lists in a combat of
wit. These, I grant, took great felicity in my company: nor did it repent me
of bestowing some hours with these: whose discourse of foreign News
strengthened by such able Intelligence, did infinitely please. And these,
without so much as the least loss to themselves (I may safely vow) would not
stick upon occasion to accommodate me: which winged my desires for the Court;
the better to accomplish me. Where I found graceful acceptance with choycest
acquaintance. But Cynthia could not be still in her full orb. I begun to
withdraw my thoughts from the pursuit of these, and recount with my self what
I had seen: store of wealth in the one, and a beseeming state in the other.
Yet for all this I found my self but a Planet in both. Fixed I could not be,
till some constant Calling admitted me. I resolved then, seeing I found
nothing either in Court or City, but cares: Cares in the one, of getting to
hoord and gather; cares in the other, of getting to spend and scatter: in the
one, more rind than pith; in the other, more pith than rind. This partaking
more of Complement, that of Substance: yet a natural strain of Insinuation in
both: but their Objects different. The one making a cringe for fashion; the
other for gain. While the former makes his vows too familiar with his
protests, to be believed; the other sees too deep a gloss of his commodities,
with shopoaths to be liked. The one, with a low dook of your Servants Servant,
proclaims him the Servant of time, and no ones servant. This I wholly
dislik't, for I found the title of Servant otherwise applied by that Divine
Vessel of Election, that devout Sanctuary of Sanctification, that pure
Mirror of Supreme Contemplation. His title was, as it was likewise of others
of his Fellow Laborers: Paul a servant of Jesus Christ; James a servant of
Jesus Christ; Jude a servant of Jesus Christ. With this Complement These began
their Epistles: A Sain^-like Preamble! an heavenly Cour^^hip! Such as all
Christians are to imitate.

The other, with his subtle weights and measures (reserving ever my best
thoughts for the best) made me suspect him, that he sold his commodities by
retaile, and his conscience by whole sale. Upon review of these, (I say) I
resolved to leave those Cinnamon Trees of the Court with their sweet rindes;
and those Palmato's of the City with their broad shades: and to turn honest
Countryman: where my Parents providence had settled a competent estate upon
me. Here I looked to find nothing but plain dealing; where I found in very
deed, nothing less. For upon a more serious perusal of that life, with the
benefits that rose from it, and conditions of those who were borne and bred in
it; I found a cunning Colt wrapped up in a russet coat. Men as apt to catch, as
if they had been hatched in the Harpies nest. Such as would not stick to hazard
their part and portion in the Tabernacle for a Symoniacall Contract. And still
I went on to dive into the quality of those Ilanders. Where I found some
pining through want, others repining at their neighbors wealth, few or none
content with their estate: yet none so poor in estate, as he would not, though
he spared it from his belly, have a fee in store to maintain a suit. Long I
had not remained in this fashion, till it pleased the Prince to put me in
Commission for administration of Justice: a virtue, and a choice one too, yet
such an one, as by the abuse of man, not of time, may be compared to the
Celedony stone, which retains her virtue no longer than it is rubbed with
gold. For my carriage therein, I appeal to such as knew me: many
imperfections and failings (Heaven knows) accompanied me, which by an humble
acknowledgement of mine own wants, and an earnest desire of supply by Gods
grace, became so rectified in me; as what before seemed crooked, was by that
golden Rule of his divine Will in me straightened.

Thus have I passed my days; traced many ways; where the longer I lived, the
more I sinned; which caused me to wash my couch with tears, and to remember
the follies of my Youth, Manhood, and Age, with anguish of heart. O how much it
now grieves me, to have grieved so much at the sight or thought of gray
hairs; and to have grieved so little at the thought or sight of my sins! May
it then be my care to call for grace, lest I bring my gray hairs with lasting
sorrow to their grave. O may the remainder of my days teach me to number my
days, that I may go to him, and live with him, who is the length of days!

His Death.
MEMORIAL X.
WElcome, thou unwelcommest to man, because I have in part pu^ off man, through
his grace by whom I am; and who for me became man, to free me from the curse
of the Law, due to man. O Death, how terrible had thou been unto me, if he
who dyed for me, had not conquered thee! And yet many things present
themselves before me, which highly perplex me. Sins, nothing but sins
muster themselves before me, to affright me. Yea, sins which I never
thought of till now, appear foul and ugly unto me. But I know my Redeemer
lives, and that with these eyes I shall see him. Though the Furies of Sin
and Satan enter their pleas against me; though my secret Sins tell me that
I am the child of disobedience, that I have justly incurred Gods heavy wrath
and displeasure; and that my strange sins have deservedly made me a Stranger
and Alien to the house of my Father. Though my whole course has been a
continued curse, by transgressing his Law, who satisfied the Law for me: Though
I have made every Creature mine Enemy, by offending that heavenly Maker, who
made them and me: Though I find no good thing in me; not one Witness within
me, to speak for me; Not one day, nay not one hour of my life without Sin
to accuse me; Not one poor work of Charity so pure, and without Vainglory,
as to plead for me; Not one Friend, amongst all those many, who professed
themselves mine, to appear for me. Yet have I One, who h'as vanquished Death,
Sin, and Satan. One, who will Cure my Wounds, because I have opened them; and
Cover my Sins, because I have discovered them. One, who will bring me home
to my Fathers house, bring forth his best roabe to adorn me, put a ring on
mine hand to enrich me, and bring me to his Great marriage Feast, which shall
for ever refresh me. One, who will turn his Curse into a Blessing; and with the
sight of his Dearest Self satisfy my longing. One, who as he made his
Angels, Ministers for me on Earth; will make them my Companions in Heaven.
One, who though he could see no good thing in me, will of his own free
goodness supply me. One, who will send his holy Spirit to witness for me:
and will show to his Father those Prints of his Love, those Skars of his Wounds
to speak for me. One, who will evince the testimony of Sin, so as though it
accuse me, it shall never impeach me. One, who is all charity, and with the
eyes of mercy will look on my misery; and in this hour of my necessity will
plead for me. One, who when all my friends shall leave me, will cleave near
me: and at the hour of my death will so defend me, that mine Enemy may have
no power over me.

Yet for all this; old Acquaintance cannot be so easily parted; I feel a
trembling in my flesh: it is death to her to be divided from her Soul.
Therefore she desires still to be a Cottage, (though a crazie one) for the
entertainment of such a Guest. And though every pusse, every blast threaten her
fall; yet hopes she with a little repairing to hold out still. Foolish flesh!
if thou love that Guest, as thou professest, why do thou lodge her under
such rotten tarrases? For whilst thou keep'st her in that crazie Cottage, thou
hold'st her from a princely Palace. Alas! she came to thee, not to be a
Dweller, but a Sojourner. Give her leave then to go home again: for in a
strange Land is she, while she lodges with thee. O; but I hear thee answer:
This Stranger (if you please to style him so) is as loath to part with me, as I
with her. Is it so, poor Soul, have thou wallowed so long in mire; or
encamped so long in these shades or shrouds of clay; as thou beginnest to be
enamoured of them, and never remove from them? Is it so, that thou have been
such a long stranger in thy own Country, as thou have quite forgot it, or
car^st not much if thou never see it? H'as the life of a Soldier so taken
thee; or the straying liberty of a Pilgrim so seaz'd upon thee, as thou
preferrest a wandering life, before a settled being in thy Country? Woe is me
for thee! But, 'pray thee tell me, what is it that has so wooed and won
thee from thy first Love? O I hear thee; or that false Idumite which holds
thee, cry out: O; must I leave my Friends, Honors, Pleasures and Possessions?
Yes; thou must leave and lose all: Thy Friends and Honors may, perchance,
accompany thee to ^hy Grave; but there they will leave thee: and for thy
Pleasures and Possessions, they will not do thee that gra^e, to attend thee to
thy grave, ^^r before thou come there, ^hey have vowed to leave thee. These are
strong stays ^o depend on! fair props to rely on! firm foundations to build
on! I see then, (Languishing Soul) what it is that holds thee. Thou either
griev'st to lose what thou here love: or fears to feel there what thou for
thy sin deservest. O my Soul, by this may any one gather, that thou have
been a constant worldling! For if thou had possessed the things of this life
without loving of them; thou would easily lose them without grieving for
them: Seeing, whatsoever without love we enjoy, without grief we forgo. But
stay a little! stay a very little! and with pati^nce hear me. Be not, O be
not so fast glued to Earth, that thy thoughts become loosened from Heaven! I
know well, it is thy Flesh, which thus disquiets thee. It is she who
suggesteth these things to thee. Wrestle then with her, and give her the foil;
it is better that she fail, than thou fall. Tell her; oh tell her: For this
will charm her. Those worldly Friends, on whom she so much relyes; can
neither deliver themselves nor her from Death. They may profess much; and vow
to intercede for her to any Prince or Potentate breathing, while she is living
flesh: but dying, they will leave her for a prey to her Brothers and Sisters.
And all their friendly tears will be then dried up. Sorrow takes quickly a
Surfeit in the Funeral of her dearest Friend. His poor corpse is with earth no
sooner covered, than their Time-love becomes discovered. These be the shadows,
wherewith our Flesh-flyes are deluded. They may remember us sometimes while we
live on earth, but they soon forget us when we are laid in earth. Ask her
then; will she be stayed by these friends, of which Time makes shadows, or
injury professed foes? Secondly, if Friends have not in them such firm
dependence, as to promise any assurance: hopes she from Honors to receive any
sure footing or continuance? No; tell her, these are of all temporary blessings
most various and dangerous. Various, in respect of the Object from whence she
receives them, being man: and consequently, apt enough upon the least occasion,
to change his mind. And dangerous, in respect of those corrivals and privy
underminers, whose highest task it is to bring these Favorites into disgrace.
O how happy had many been, had they never known what Honor meant! For as it
encumbered them living, so it distracted them dying: exposing them to many
dangers both living and dying. Ask her then; will she be staid by these
Honors, which can neither privilege her from death, nor comfort her at the
hour of death, nor secure her after death? Thirdly, if she be thus forsaken
of all her Honors, what can she expect from Pleasures? La^! These long since
left her, when Age seaz'd on her: and thrice happy she, had she left them,
before they left her. If there be pleasure in cramps and aches: her weak
decrepit limbs retain stil^ a memory of them. These she h'as constantly to
attend her; nor vow they to leave her, till the cold Earth receive her. For now
those Ivory-beds, Carpets and Laces, are but as so many racks and tortures to
her, when she remembers them. All these have left her in pain: and if she
taste pleasure in that, may she long enjoy it. But thou^h those more active
pleasures have wholly left her: she sees her Buildings, and to leave them, and
to whom she knows not, it deeply grieves her. Those pleasant walks, which
with the helps both of Art and Nature she so carefully contrived; those
shadie delightful Arbours, wherein she so retiredly and contentedly reposed;
Those silent Groves, crystal Springs, dainty Refectories, wherein she so
delightfully sported, bathed and banquetted: must she lose all these; and for a
cover of mouldred earth, wherein all her beauty lies buried? It must be so;
there is no remedy; the cold earth must receive her perished beauty. Nor
should the loss of all these grieve her; seeing these were so confined to
time, as they could promise no constancy to her. Yea; they deserved rather to
be loathed than loved; seeing the Sight of them too often estranged her
thoughts from Him that made them. Ask her then, where be all those who
sometimes enjoyed these pleasures to the full! Where those Objects, wherein
they delighted? Look! Read! Their Memories are as Letters written in dust.
Their glorious Buildings have lost the Names of their founders. They sleep in
their earth: but that Account sleeps not, which they mnst render for their
vanities on earth.

Fourthly, seeing her forepast pleasures have wholly left her; but the bitter
remembrance of the abuse of them stays with her: the sweetness of the one
being spent: but the bitterness of the other left: what content may she find
in her Possessions; the Worldlings Minions? Alas, nothing! these are taken from
her, and bestowed on another. She is now to goes to her long home; and another
is to possess her dwellings. Though here, she held passing of time a mere
pastime; and a large possession the Sole Solace of a Worldling; now she finds
enough of Earth in a very small portion of it. No matter now whether her Granars
be enlarged; her Revenues increased; her Treasures slored. These be none of
hers; The very Wind h'as as great a share in them as she h'as. Nor did they
deserve so much loving, when they were in their very height of enjoying. Being
such as were got with Care, kept with Fear, and lost with Grief: proper
things to dote on! The fullness of them could not stay, one poor Fit of an
Ague: nor get a reprive at Deaths hand for a minute. Besides, that long
unwilling Adieu of the unhappie possessour at his heavy departure: O Death,
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions!

Seeing then, no outward thing should so much delight man, as to withdraw his
thoughts from the Maker of man: Or so trouble him in his passage or translation
from Earth, as to divert his affections from heaven in his remove from Earth.
Seeing, all things are not only vanity, but affliction: where such as are
highliest possessed of them, are most ensnared and deluded by them: Seeing, the
beauty, riches, pleasures, and contentments of earth, are no sooner appearing
than vanishing: no sooner found than lost. Why do thou tremble, O my flesh!
why are thou so troubled, O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me! put thy trust in the Lord, and he will deliver thee. Yea, but I hear
thee, in a silent secrecy, framing this reply! These worldly respects are not
the things that make Death appear so terrible unto me. Noe; I can freely bid
farewell to the world; there is nothing in it, that makes me enamored of it.
I see naught at all in it, but sin, or occasions of sin: Neither did I ever
possess ought, which did not afflict me more in the forgoing, than it
delighted me in the enjoying. Tell me then (poor fearful soul) what is it
that so much troubles thee in this thy passage? What is it that makes thee so
shake and shudder in this thy dissolution? O my sins! my sins! it is the
remembrance of my sins, which makes me unwilling to depart from this place
where I committed them: or to fix mine eyes on that place, which is so pure as
it cannot abide them. I cannot think of that place wherein I have not sinned;
nor of that hour wherein I have not highly transgressed. And can one minutes
repentance discharge such long arrerages? O my perplexed soul, remember to thy
comfort that divine Cordial: At what time soever a Sinner repents, etc. As I
live, I would not the death of a sinner, etc. My mercy I will not take from
him: There is mercy with the Lord, and therefore is he feared. He shall call
upon me, and I will dedeliver him in the time of his necessity. Draw yet
nearer, and think of the saying of that sweet Father: S. Bern.
O humble tear, thine is the Kingdom, thine is the Power: thou art not
afraid to enter in and appear before the presence of the Judge: thou, though
thou enter alone, shall never return alone: whatsoever thou ask, thou shall
have; thou overcommest the invincible, and bindest the Omnipotent. This
Angelical Wine will bring thee to the society of the Angels. Doubt not;
stagger not. Raise and rouse up thy self with the wings of faith. Whence comes
it, that the Soul dies? because Faith is not in it. Whence that the body
dies? Because a Soul is not in it. Therefore the Soul of thy Soul is Faith.
No evil then can befall thee, so thy faith do not fail thee. Where watery
eyes make faith their Anchor, they promise a calm Sea, and a safe arrival to
the Christian passenger. And though late repentance be seldom true, yet true
repentance never comes too late. That devout and well-prepared Father, when he
was ready to die; with much sweet assurance, and Christian confidence, spoke
thus to Stillico and others about his bed; S. Ambrose.
I have not lived so among you, that I am ashamed to live longer to please God:
and yet again, I am not afraid to dye, because we have a good LORD. Though
thou can not in thine own approvement so truly say this; crown thy passage
with a devout wish; Desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; Present
him with a pious devotion to thy inward'st thoughts: Imagining him even now
bowing his precious head to kiss thee; spreading his gracious arms to embrace
thee: his Angels coming forth to meet thee; the whole Host of Heaven to
conduct thee to the Palace of Eternity, after this thy approaching dissolution
from this vale of misery. Let nothing divide thee from that love which is in
thee to Christ Jesus. One Hour in his Courts is better than a thousand in the
Courts of Princes. Humbly commend thy self to his protection who made thee; to
his affection, who redeemed thee; to his direction, who sanctified thee. Fear
it not, timorous soul, but thy Fathers power will defend thee; his Sons
Wisdom will enrich thee; the Holy Spirits goodness will comfort thee: even
in these pangs of death which assail thee.

Oh how sweet is the remembrance of these things to me! There is nothing now
that may divide me from Him, to whom I am spiritually espoused. There is no
Friend so dear to me, as He who gave his life for me. No Honor so highly
valued of me, as his, who became a reproach for me, that by his own
dishonor he might honor me. No pleasure so delightful as his presence,
whose sight shall ever cheer me. No possession like his fruition, who is my
portion in the Land of the Living; to whom to be joined shall ever joy me.
Every minute then seems grievous, every moment tedious, till I be dissolved;
that I may see him after whom I have so longed; to whom to be united, I have
so thirsted; in whose sweet presence to remain, in whose Courts to abide, I
have so desired. These pangs I feel, are to me cheerful; these Messengers
of my approaching dissolution, to me grateful; these humane wrastlings, which
I now endure, to me delightful. I know well, I am such metal as I must be
tried before I be fined. O! as I draw by little and little nearer my end; so
may I in true love draw nearer to thee. To thee, my Redeemer, in whom my trust
is placed; my confidence planted; my hopes crowned; my Pilgrim-dayes happily
closed; my heritage, after these days of my Pilgrimage possessed. I feel now
my longing Soul fleeting from this dark Cell, this noisome shell of
corruption; every gasp now promises a dissolution. My breath is corrupt: my
days are cut off, and the Grave is ready for me. I entered this world with a
Shrique, and I leave it with a Sigh. Nor do I sigh for that I love it, or am
unwilling to leave it; but for that I have been too long divided by living in
it, from Him, in whom my desires are here fixed, there filled: The hour is
come, and it is welcome; the hour of my translation to glory. Come LORD JESUS,
come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata's.
PAge 102. line 7. for He, read They. p. 116. l. 8. for this, r. these. p.
151. l. 16. for huger, r. hunger. p. 184. l vlt. for glagues, r. plagues. p.
336. in Tit. for DEAHTS, r. DEATHS. p. 339. l. 21. for divine, r. dim. p.
395. l. 13. fore fore, r. for.

REqui^e the Authors pains with thy pen, in correcting these literal errors:
and remember him in thy private prayers, who will render the like to thee in
his Christian vows and tears.

Both Hand and Heart are jointly given,
My Hand subscribes, My Heart's for Heaven.
A SPIRITUAL SPICERIE Containing Sundry Sweet Tractats of Devotion and
Piety. ^^ndon. Printed by I. H. for Goo^ Huton* at (...) in Hol^^




