^^^^^SOR THE LEARNED AND VICTORIOVS King that conquered Spain.

His Life and Death published By ROBERT ASHLEY Out of the Library of the
University of OXFORD

Seneca. Otium tuum non emineat: sed appareat.

LONDON Printed for John Parker. 1627.

TO OUR GRACIOUS SOVEREIGNE King CHARLES.
THis brief History of the life and death of Jacob Almansor: the Victorious,
was intended to the now deceassed; yet ever renowned for Learning, and worthily
styled Iacobus Pacificus, your Royal Father. The death of some who had
undertaken the Printing; and the general Visitation of this your Realm with
sickness, has delayed the publishing, and altered the design of the
Dedication.

The Wandering Ghost of this Learned, Virtuous and Victorious Almansor who
never suffered repulse, being now come into England, and clad with an English
garment presses into your Kingly presence, and expects condign
entertainment. Though the Story be ancient, and your Time and Religion also
from his much different* yet he hops that Virtue and Valor are never out of
season: Nor the Wisdom and Industry of any, be he Heathen, Mohammedan, or
Christian, to be disesteemed.

As Alexander was enflamed with the example of Achilles, who lived long before
him: Caesar by that of Alexander of a different time and Nation; the one being
a Grecian King of Macedon: the other but a private Gentleman of Rome: and
Scipio a young Roman that triumphed over Afric, was animated by the History
of Cyrus the great King of Persia described by Xenophon. So if at this day
among Christians, they that have any heart, are enkindled in their courage,
when they read of the Clemency of Caesar, the Magnanimity of Alexander, the
Integrity of Aristides, the Constancy of Cato, or the Iusti^e and Goodness
of Traian, being but Heathens of former Ages, that knew not Christ, nor
Christian Piety: with more reason Almansor of much later Age, though a
misbeleeuing Mohammedan may well expect, even in these times, among the
professors of perfect Piety, his Virtues should not be unregarded; nor his
well ordered life and death be buried in oblivion.

I leave them that list to dispute the truth of his History; or whether it be
not a pattern of Perfection devised: as many have supposed the like of Cyrus,
described by Xenophon. Howsoever the Truth be; I hold the one and the other of
better use, being thus published, then to be buried in silence.

I doubt not but your Royal Fathers Instruction, and your own worthy
disposition has figured in your noble breast many worthier Christian patterns
for Imitation: Yet by comparing our selves with Heathens, with Infidels, with
Mahometans, and other Misbeleeuers; we attain the better and cleerer knowledge
of our advantages and defects. Hereof your aduenturous Travails in your
younger years have given you good experience* He that knows no Country but
his own, knows not the worth or wants of his own: Commendandus ante omnes
qui sapientiam toto orb requirit says Marsilius: which opportunity of
personal Travail being not always permitted; it must be supplied by Books
and Histories. The advertisement following will inform the particulars how
this brief History came to the Presenters hands, who remains

In all humility, your Majesty's devoted Subject, Robert Ashley.

An Advertisement.
Having during my younger years had some trayning in the Arts, and Learned
Languages in the famous University of Oxford: and by advice of experienced
friends having after seriously sought to attain the knowledge of the Laws
under which we live, in the place where they are professed: and having been
long since engaged and denominated among the Professors thereof: yet finding
the practice to have ebbes and tides; (as have for the most part all other
humane employments) I have stolen and snatched at vacant times some
oportunities; what by Travail, Books, and Conference; to get some knowledge
of foreign Countries, and vulgar Languages: especially those of our
Neighbors (I mean the French and Dutch, the Spanish and Italian) that by the
perusing of their Writings, I might also be made partaker of the Wisdom of
those Nations: having been long of this opinion. That as no one soil or
territory, yields all fruits alike, so no one Climate or Region affords
all kind of knowledge in full measure.

With this resolution, being not let by other occasions, J spent the best
hours of some few Weeks, not many years sithence in a superficial survey of
the famous Library of that flourishing University, where I had been trained:
which I found richly replenished with Books of all Sciences and Faculties: not
only in the Learned Languages, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew: (besides the vulgar
Tongues of our Neighbor Nations) but even with some furniture as well of
Manuscripts as of printed Copies in the Arabian, Ethiopian, and Armenian
Languages; with the Egyptian Wisdom and Characters (not speaking of the
Chaldaick, and Syriak; because they are accounted by many but as
Hebrew-dialects). There are also some Turkish and Persian Manuscripts; Indian,
Malayan, and Mexican Characters and Writings. Yea, China it self (being
thought by many to be inaccessible to Strangers) though by sundry Seas and
Lands it be far separated from us, has vouchsafed to enrich this great
Magazin, or Storehouse of Learning, with diverse and sundry parcels of her
Wisdom imprinted in her strange Characters.

Amongst the rest I happened on an Arabian History concerning the loss of
Spain by Roderigo King of the Goths, which by commandment of King Philip the
Second, was translated into Spanish out of the Arabian Copy remaining in the
Escurial: where I my self have seen a glorious golden Library of Arabian
Books. In the midst of that History, I found a Summarie Collection, or
obsernation of the life and death of a Learned Arabian King Jacob Almansor the
Conqueror of Spain. Of the excellency of this great King, some having heard
and read that among other his virtues, he was an infinite lover of Learning,
having assembled together in his Library fifty five thousand Books in an
ignorant Age: when long before the Invention of Printing, all Monuments of
Learning, were only preserved by the laborious industry of the Writers hand
and Pen. Weighing also his wise distribution of his time with his exact
Justice, Wisdom of Government, his Temperance of Diet, Fortitude, and Prudence
in his Military affairs; with the Prosperity of his Conquests; and success
of all his enterprises: they became desirous to be acquainted, with the
particulars of his life; and longed to have it communicated unto them, in a
Tongue which they better understood. To their honest desire, having opportunity
in my hand, I thought it convenient to give satisfaction by translating it out
of the Spanish Copy which was printed at Saragoza 1603. remaining in that
unparalleled rare Library of the University of Oxford, and therehence out of
the larger History of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors, (being then the
Subjects of this Almansor) by me excerpted and published. I present it to
public view, that Christians finding their virtuous Industry to be equalled
or ouermatched by Mahometans may the rather be excited to a disdainful
emulation of their worthiest endeavors.

The Letter written by King Abencirix to the Alcayde Ali Abenzufian Viceroy and
Governor of the Provinces of Deuque in Arabia, by which he commands him to
write the life of King Jacob Almansor.
Praise be given to God alone, Amen. The high and highly honored King
Governor of the Moors, of noble descent, defender of Mahometisme, who
shieldeth himself under the protection of the most high God, Ali Abencirix: To
the Virtuous, Noble, Wise, Discreet, Learned, and Generous Gentleman the
Alcayde Ali Abenzufian our Viceroy and Governor of the Provinces of Deuque:
we send greeting. And after our salutation, we say that considering the great
wisdom with which the King Abilgualit Miramamolin Jacob Almansor, our great
Grandfather and Lord governed his Kingdoms in peace; and the fortitude with
which he preserved his Subjects, and rooted out their Enemies; and the Justice
with which he conserved his Estates; and the Temperance, used by him in all his
actions and deeds, which of all the World are admired; and all the Books
replenished with his Sayings and Sentences in all Sciences; and his notable
Deeds of Arms, with his great virtues and good customs to be such as all the
Princes of the World may take an example and pattern thereby to rule and
govern their Commonweals, and to live in tranquillity. We have thought meet
and convenient that the Discourse of his Life should be gathered together, and
orderly compiled and written in one Book, (and not be left as it is now
scattered in many parts:) as well for our own consolation, as for the
Imitation of this great King in his customs and manner of living: to make our
profit and use of them in matters that concern our Government and our
Commonweals; and to this effect having that regard which we have of your
person, ability, and learning, together with your trayning and continual
attendance and service in his Royal Palace from your childhood, being always
inward with him, in such sort that no other how learned soever can better set
forth and write his life and manners then you. We charge and command you that
with convenient brevity avoiding prolixitie, and writing the Truth with that
obligation which is due to the fidelity of an History: (whereof by reason of
your good zeal and punctual manner of writing observed by you, we rest
assured) you write a Book of his life and customs, together with the manner
and order how this good King ruled and governed his Kingdoms till his life
ended by death: which you shall entitle the bright Mirror of Princes; whereby
you shall do us acceptable service. In this Book you shall also do well to
set down what especial things a good King is to observe, to make himself
beloved of his Subjects, and feared of his enemies. All which may serve us in
steed of a Guide or a Light with the favor and help of our Sovereign God for
the ruling and governing of our Kingdoms and Commonweals, that they may
enjoy Peace and tranquillity; and our selves quietness of mind and
clearness of Conscience. Whereof through that confidence we have in your
worthiness we make no doubt. God have you in his keeping.

From our Royal Palace of Zarbal; the fourth day of the Moon of Mobarram, The
date is answerable to the year An. Christi 731.
the hundred and tenth year of the Hixera.
The Letter of the Alcayde Ali Abenzusian in answer of the former by which he
dedicateth the Work to King Ali Abencirix.
Praise be given to our Sovereign God. Amen. To the much renowned and that
with reason for hu great skill in Governing, Wisdom in conseruing, and
Fortitude in mayntayning his Subjects in Peace, the valiant Warrior, strong and
courageous defender of Morisme, of high and famous Progeny and Race, the great
Calipha, the rooter out of his Enemies, the King highly honored and of
complete power, Ali Abeneirix; the highest God continue his good desires. And
in answer to his Letter dated in the Palace of Zarbal, the fourth day of the
Moon of Moharram this present year; by which I was commanded to write a Book
of the customs, conditions and manner of life of his Predecessor King
Abilgualit Jacob Almansor, and therewith also to set down and declare what
other Rules a good Prince ought to observe: for the fulfilling whereof I have
stolen from other my great business, some parts of the night bereauing my
self of that sleep which for my weak and wearied body had bean requisite;
and in these twelve brief and compendious Chapters which accompany this my
Letter I have rehearsed and registered the life and customs, and the manner of
Ruling and Governing with this great King and Governor used in the time of his
prosperous Reign: and I am also of this opinion that without any farther
addition of those Learnings which are written by the Philosophers and other
grave and learned Authors, one may gather out of this as much fruit as he
desires. I am an eye witness of all that I write, having served him in his
Chamber and other Offices in his Royal Palace, of no small importance, more
then twenty years (as is well known to those that frequented the Court in
his time) and have seen and known his customs and conditions, uprightness
and simplicity, Government and manner of administering justice both in Peace
and War. Now in this manner of writing I work two effects, the accomplishing
of a Royal commandment; and the registring of the virtuous and laudable
moral customs of so good a King. Vouchsafe to accept my good will and pardon
my faults and ouersights if there be any in this Treatise (whereof I doubt not
there may be many) attributing them rather to my forgetfulness, then to any
wilful imperfection, carelessness or negligence, either against the fidelity
of an History, or the loyalty which is due to his Royal Service; whom our
Sovereign God, continue in his Protection.

From the City of Deuque the fifteenth day of the Moon of Rabeh the first,
This date agrees with the month of Angust of the year of Christ, 731.
the one hundred and tenth year of the Hixera.
THE LIFE AND Death of JACOB ALMANSOR, an Arabian Mohammedan King, written in
the Arabicke TONGVE.
CHAP. I.
Of the Descendence and Genealogy of the King Abilgualit Miramamolin Jacob
Almansor, and of some of his memorable deeds.

ABilgualit Miramamolin Jacob Almansor was the son of the great Caliph, the
sustayner of Morisme Abihabdi Allahi Abilgualit Abinque Abni Malique; and
nephew of the great Caliph Abni Abel Hasen. Motaleb of famous and high Lineage,
Solar:
the renowned race and house of the Gentile Kings of Arabia. He was borne in
the eleventh year of the Higera, on the second day of the Moon of I^buel;
having attained with sound and perfect health to fifteen years of Age, he
began to show so great courage and Inclination to Arms and Learning, that he
caused admiration in his Masters, who had the charge and government of him. For
he was at this age so skillful in the seven Liberal Sciences, that they who
were the most learned in them, spoke of them in his presence With much fear
and bashfulnesse, for at every other word he corrected the Imperfections which
proceeded out of their Ignorance. And at the eighteenth year of his age he
wrote the three books of Mathematickes and Astrology, which are so renowned
at this day amongst the Arabians. He wrote also the abridgement of Histories,
the great Art of Algebra; and the book of the exercise of the military Art,
and that which he entitled The Mirror of Princes. At the one and twentieth
year of his age he wrote the three Books of Philosophy upon the Texts of
Aristotle, in form of a Comment. Notwithstanding, that which was most to be
admired, was, that at the five and twentieth year of his age, he spoke eleven
Languages, reading and writing them as perfectly as the very Naturals
themselves. The King Abilgualit his father being himself a wise man, yet
undertook no enterprise without his counsel and advice, because he found
that in so doing his affairs ever succeeded according to his hearts desire.
This valorous Prince having lived after this manner a certain season, and
having ordained a Iurgo di canas, and other disports, called unto them the
great Alcaydes, who were Governors of his Kingdoms, one of which at his
coming presented to the King Abilgualit his father an Alfange, which is a
Sword or Cimiter of inestimable value: for the handle was of the finest
Emerald: the pommell of a stone called a Balais: Tabeli.
the scabberd and chape hilt of fine gold wrought with the hammer: with sundry
sorts of precious stones enchaced; H^ia.
and the blade most excellently damasked. Some of the Alcaydes having seen and
handled it from hand to hand, they all concluded in saying, that were it but
half a hands breadth longer, it would then be the best weapon in the world:
whereat the King Abilgualit was much distasted because he had taken a great
liking thereof; and therefore caused the Prince Jacob Almansor to be called that
he might see it, and give his judgment thereon: admonishing the Alcaydes,
that none should advertise him of the fault they found; who being come to his
presence, he commanded that the Alfange should be shown him, who was so well
pleased with the sight of it, that he presently spoke these words: This Weapon
is worth a City. The King his father replied, that he should look well
thereon, and consider what fault there was to be found therein: but he said he
found none, the thing being as well framed and wrought as he could desire. Then
his father the King Abilgualit acquainted him how the Alcaydes did say, that
the Blade was too short. Whereat the Prince taking the Alfange in his hand,
said with a smiling countenance these words. To the hardy and courageous
caualiers, no weapon no weapon is too short, and then stepping with his right
foot one step forwards with the Alfange in his hand, prosecuting his reason,
he said; because with one pace forward it will be made as long as one would
desire. This his speech was so pleasing to his father Abilgualit that he
presently cast his arms about his neck and embraced him, saying; Certainly my
Son thou may well seek out other Kingdoms to conquer, for those which I
shall leave thee are too few, for that wisdom and valor which the Sovereign
God has given thee: and girding the Alfange about him, he said, that it could
not belong to any but to him, since he found no fault with it. This being thus
ended, the Prince went down with all the Alcaydes that were present, to play
at the Canes, and at other devices in such sort that all admired his dexterity
in devising and guiding such delightful disports. The next day with many
gracious favors he dispatched those Alcaydes. Which done, he said it were not
reasonable to show himself gracious only to the Alcaydes of his Kingdoms, and
to leave his poor Subjects comfortless and unrewarded. With which resolution,
he commanded all the poor about his Court to be called, that they might also
be partakers of his bounty; and when they were come, he placed himself at
the Gate of his Treasury, and as they passed by him, he gave to every one of
them a handful of gold coin untold which having done, he understood after by
his tellers, that he had that day distributed two and twenty Arrobas; Arrobas.
and thirteen pounds of gold. This being reported to his father Abilgualit,
he was reprehended by him, as being too free, and advised him to stay his
hand, lest otherwise he might become poor, saying, that a King without his
Treasure is like a dead man among the living. But the Prince answered, that he
might rather be said to be dead, that is close fisted toward his followers,
because he could not expect any comfort of them in his necessity, and in the
day of his distress: and that he was not borne but to do good, in imitation
of his Creator, who used so much clemency toward his creatures; whose second
cause or Instrument he esteemed himself here on earth; and that none might
justly reprehend him in that behalf, seeing he considered that nothing was
more certain then death, and that he could carry nothing out of this life but
(...) poor shroud or Winding sheet, Mortaia.
and those good or evil deeds which he had done in this life, to give account
of them to that high most omnipotent God, as to a just Judge at the day of that
fearful final Judgment. These reasons were so agrecable to his father
Abilgualit, that considering well the great worth of the Prince, he or dayned
eft-soones in his life and Kingdoms such order and course as the next Chapter
declares.

CHAP. II.
How the King Abilgualit resigned his Kingdom to his Son Jacob Almansor, and
retired to a solitary life.

THe King Abilgualit perceiving the great valor of his Son the Prince, Jacob
Almansor, and that he himself was old, being above seventy years of Age, he
resolved to resign his Kingdom into his hands, and to retire to his rest: and
resigned the same accordingly, with the agreement and consent of the great
Alcaydes of his Kingdom, in such sort, that the Prince Jacob Almansor was
crowned and sworn for King the tenth day of the Moon of Moharram, three and
thirty years of the Higera being then fully complete, Aune Chr. 654. Ian.
which Coronation was confirmed the third day of the Moon of Rabeh, being the
second of that year.

Having began his Reign and Government, he took also a new habit in his
conditions, kind, and manner of Living, which because they are worth the
remembering, I will not forbear to rehearse at large in this brief Treatise.
For, contrary to that gallantry and bravery which he used whiles he was Prince
he clothed himself in the plainest sort that he could devise. He put on
such a modest settled countenance, that none of those that served him could
know by his outward carriage whether he were sorrowful or joyful. In good and
ill success his visage was always alike; and he carried himself in such
sort to wards those of his house, that the balance was even between Love and
Fear; for neither for great service done, nor for neglect or omission of
duty, could they know whether they were in favor or disgrace.

He divided the days of the week after this manner. The Friday for matters
of his Religion, in which he was very devout. The Saturday for matters of
Justice. The Sunday for matters of War. The Monday for the government of his
Kingdoms. The Tuesday and Wednesday for his Recreation: and his private
affairs, and the Thursday for matters of Learning.

The Friday as we have said, he meddled with no affairs or business, but
went in solemnity to the great Mesquita, Eala.
being his Church, in this manner. He set forth from his Palace attended with
five hundred footmen, with their Alfanges; two of which on each side of their
Captain, carried their naked Alsanges upright, the points upward; and their
Captain having his Alfange girt about him, as all the rest, thereby signifying
the fortitude and justice by which he maintained his Kingdoms in peace. Next
before those of his Guard went two hundred horsemen very well appointed, with
their Captain and Standard Royal, armed with their Curiasses, Alfanges,
Lances and Targets. Near unto his Person went the Alguazil Mayor or
Camp-master, after whom the Council of War, then his Council of State or
Government of his Kingdoms, and the Cadi or his chief Justice. In each of
these Counsels he had four Counselors, the ancient of which was President.
The Alcayde that was Captain General or Admiral of the Sea, if he were in
Court was before all, next about his Person. The Alfaqui Mayor of the Mesquita
being the great Prelate or Churchman, went on his left hand; his eldest Son
on his right, and the rest of his Sons before him. Being come to the
Mesquita, they went in all to their prayers; which being ended, they returned
in the same order to the Palace; where was placed a Seat for the King near
unto a Fountain, where being sat, he received the Petitions and
Supplications of all suitors, whether Courtiers or strangers. Then he arose,
and an Huissier of his Chamber with a loud voice that all might hear, said in
this manner. All they that have given any Memorialls or Bills this day to the
King Miramamolin Almansor our Lord (whom the Sovereign God make victorious)
are to repair to morrow to his Royal Audience, where he will render them
Justice. Then he arose and went to his repast, and a Mayordomo being as a
Master of his household, said after this manner alowd that all might hear. All
Suitors rich and poor that sue unto the King, are to stay and receive their
refection in the Royal Palace, as has been accustomed. Presently were
prepared three Tables of such length and capacity that two hundred persons
might sit at every of them. The first for the Alcaydes and principal persons.
The second for those of the middle sort. The third was for the poorer, and for
the servants of the Alcaydes, which Tables were all furnished with such
abundance of Provision, as became the house of so mighty a King. And if there
were much people, they took each of them his turn, and were all filled and
satisfied. He took his repast always in private, and never in public,
though he were in camp. Neither in time of Peace or of War did he use to
eat or drink in vessel of gold or silver, albeit he had many, neither had
he any Physician to direct his Diet, much less any Alcayde to take the essay,
neither more then two servants to serve him at the Table: neither did he eat
more then of two kinds of meat. For he said, that if any meant to poison him,
the taking of many essays would not prevent his death; and that two were
sufficient to serve anyone man; that in time of Health he had no need of the
Physician; and that the man that could not tell how to preserve himself from
being sick by surfeit of meat or superfluity of drink, was rather to be
ranked among beasts then reasonable men. After meat his exercise was always
moderate; and about four hours after he went to the Bath, wherein he stayed
an hour, and then walked until it was time to retire to his rest. Then came
his Magordomo and gave him a brief account of that which was under his charge,
and what he had done that day, aduertising if there were any notable thing
deserving chastisement or reward in any of his household, that he might therein
take such order as was most convenient, which he did accordingly with great
wisdom and celeritie. Then he betook himself to his rest. It was a thing
worthy to be observed, that during all his life he ever went to bed before
the third part of the night were spent, and always arose before the Sun
peeped out of the East: except it were in that last sickness, whereof he
died. He slept not by day, neither in Winter nor Summer; nor ate any more then
once. He had a Proverb written on his Royal Seat, where he usually sat to
do Justice, which was writ ten in Letters of Gold in the lesser Arabicke
verse, which said after this manner.

Six Excellencies are found in a man worthy to be noted.
THe first is Justice which chiefly appertains to Kings.
The second is Charity, belonging especially to the rich.
The third is Patience, whereof the poor have most use.
The fourth is Chastity, whereof young men have most need.
The fifth is Contempt of the World, which is principally seen in the wise.
The sixth is shamefastness, which is most commended in women.
Somewhat lower the verse said after this manner.

THe King that observes not Justice is compared to the Cloud that yields no
rain.

The rich man having no charity is like the Tree that bears no fruit.

The poor which is without Patience resembles the River which is without
Water:

The young man that has no chastity is as a Torch that lends no light.

The wise man that despises not the world is compared to the barren and
fruitless ground.

The woman that has no shame fastness is resembled to meat without Salt.

Another Proverb he had written over his Bed in like verse, which says.

The man which consumes the day in eating and drinking, and in other delights
and pleasures, and all the whole night in sleeping: by doing only that which
belongs to beasts, becomes like unto them. Praised be God for ever and
ever. Amen.

CHAP. III.
Of the manner observed by the King Jacob Almanfor, in administering Justice.

THis King Abilgualit Jacob Almansor was such a Lover of Truth, that it was not
observed in him, either whiles he was a Child, a Prince, or a crowned King,
that ever he told any lie or spoke any untruth. He loved always to speak the
Truth himself, expecting the like in them that negotiated with him; for he
said, that a greater misery could not befall a man in this life then to be a
liar, who with more reason might be called the Devils disciple, then accounted
a reasonable man: because there are found in a liar all the mischiefs in the
world, being ever unjust, a false witness bearer, a very traitor to the Truth,
and such as was not fit to treat with any man, or to look him in the face.
With this zeal did he chasten so rigorusly whomsoever he found with a^^e, that
it cost many little less then their (...), for according to the quality of
the offense; some he caused cruelly to be whipped, others to have the tip of
their tongue cut off, condemning them for infamous; and that their Testimony
might not be received, in any suite or controversy. And if it were to the
prejudice of a third person he condemned them to death. For he said that all
quarrels and debates, wounding and killing, with all other their appurtenances,
were occasioned only of this, that men spoke not the Truth one to another. All
his Subjects knowing in what detestation he held falsehood, durst not make any
unjust demand before him, or any of his Alcaydes, who had the Government; which
foundation being laid, each Saturday he sat in his Seat, in the Royal
Audience, and his Cadi or chief Justice ^i^ing one degreee lower at his feet,
with those Memorials, Petitions, and Bills which he had received on the Friday;
Having perused and placed them in order as he received them, he called the
parties, and they proposing the Justice of their causes, in such sort, that
every one was heard for himself, in his several pretentions and allegations.
The Cadi gave Judgment, giving to every one his right: and because they durst
not lie by reason of the cruel chastisement in that behalf, besides that
there were the fewer causes and complaints, they were also dispatched with much
speed, and very summarily, in regard that there needed no proofs but only the
Confession of the parties, unless they were matters concerning the value of
goods or of a higher nature, in which cases he referred them to his Council,
for auerring the Truth; and when such kind of pleas were in his Court, they
received an end at the second Audience, which was the next week: and if they
were out of the Court in some other City they were to be determined within a
fortnight or fifteen days after they began, reserving the definitive sentence
to himself, if the parties did not conform themselves, or the Judges were
doubtful therein. In criminal causes he never detayned any prisoner above
three days; and for heinous crimes above nine; and if any that was poor were
in prison for debt, he paid it out of his own treasure, so that by oath or
(...) were auerred that he had no g^^^s to make payment. And being so strict
an obseruer of Truth, there were very few Suits in Law, and those also very
necessary and compulsorie, for he was so feared of his Subjects, that rather
then to appear before him for matter of Justice, they agreed among themselves
without suit or debate, by which means they were so careful to deal uprightly
one with another, that they lived in great peace. He chastised theoues so
severely, that none durst take any thing from other, neither in City nor
Country, as well in desert as in peopled places. And in so great awe they were
of him, that if any one had lost ought in the street or market place, none
durst meddle therewith, otherwise then to leave it at the next shop, and cause
it to be cried til the owner were found to whom it was to be restored. This
King was so feared in all his Kingdoms, This custom was used among the Moors
of Granada even to our days; and seems in a manner natural to them.
and his Subjects lived in such security, that one accident which befell in
his time I hold worthy to be here related. Which is, that after he had
conquered and won the Kingdom of Spain from the King Rodrigo a Christian by
Profession, and had peopled and bordered it as he thought convenient, he sent
an Alcayde a great favorite of his, called Abraham Maanya to visit the same,
who being arrived there, and going about in visitation, passed through a great
plain which lies between two Cities, where meeting with a woman that was
alone unaccompanied, yet not unhandsome, nor evil favored, he maruailed much,
asking her how she durst adventure to go alone through that unpeopled place,
reproving and reprehending her boldness: who answered him in this manner;
While our good King Jacob Almansor lives (whom I pray the Sovereign God to
grant a long life and victory over his enemies.) We may all travail securely
through his Kingdoms, and as safely in the wild fields, as in Towns and
Cities. The Alcayde maruailing much at her words; when he was returned into the
presence of his Lord Miramamolin Almansor, to give him account of such things
as he had recommended to his care in his Visitation of Spain, amongst other
memorable things, related unto him, how he met with the woman on that
uninhabited plain, and how he reprehending her boldness in aduenturing alone
in a place where some outrage might easily be done her, she had answered him
in that confident manner before rehearsed; and Miramamolin Almansor enquiring
what he had replied unto her, he said that he had told her that she was a
fool to imagine any such security, because if any were disposed to do her
any wrong or damage, Miramamolin Almansor could yield her little help or
succor being then in Arabia, so far remote from Spain. The King Almansor
was so much offended with those words, that he forthwith commanded him to
prepare himself to return eft-soones for Spain, for he had great use of his
Service there for administration of his Royal Justice, and with great
dissimulation he wrote presently a letter to the Governor of Spain, called
Abulcacim Abdiluar, enclosing therein the Alcaydes own Confession, commanding,
that as soon as he came he should empale him in that very place where he met
with the woman, proclaiming his offense in this manner. That King Almansor
commanded this Justice to be executed on that Alcayde, for his bold attempt of
speaking with the woman in that desert place, and especially for putting her in
doubt of the security of her person, and saying that the King Jacob Almansor
could not help or succor her, living in Arabia so far remote from Spain.
This Alcayde forth with departed, not knowing that he carried his death
enclosed in that letter; and as soon as he came to the Alcayde Abdiluar, then
Governor of Spain, having read it, he caused him to be taken; and execute on
him that sentence of the King Miramamolin his Lord. This case was much noted of
all the Alcaydes, Governors, and Inhabitants of those Kingdoms, as well
Moors as Christians. And this deed may serve for an example of many like,
which he commanded to be done in his Kingdoms worthy of memory, which, to
avoid prolixitie, I forbear to rehearse in this brief treatise,

CHAP. IIII.
Of the manner and order which he held in his Council of War and military
Affairs, and how he made his Conquests by Sea and by Land.

ON the Sunday (as we have mentioned already) the King Jacob Almansor meddled
with no other affairs but military; for which he had four Alcaydes, named
and chosen his Counselors for the wars, of which the most ancient was the
President, to whom it belonged to receive all the Letters and aduertisements
which were sent by the Alcaydes that were Governors of the Kingdoms, where
the garrisons and Sooldiers resided, and he perused them and prepared them
against this day. Then the King Almansor entered into Counsel with them, and
for answer to them being but ordinary affairs, it was endorsed on the
letters, by which the ancient Alcayde had his direction what answer he should
return them. But when he intended any wars or pretended any conquest, he
called no Counsel, but wherein the General of his forces by Land, and the
Alcayde who as chief Admiral was General by Sea, were also present. For he
said, it was not reasonable to prefer the vote or voice of any his
Counselors, or his own, before that of these great Captains, who were to
execute whatsoever he and his Counsel should ordain; therefore being called,
they entered into Council: and the King Jacob Almansor proposing and signifying
unto them what he intended; the youngest Alcayde of the Counsel had the charge
to oppose what Incoueniences he found in that which the King had propounded;
and the rest conferred presently concerning the conclusion. There was nothing
resolved on at the first or second sitting, but at the third it was always
resolutely concluded what was to be done: so that if any Conquest were
determined, letters were written to the Alcaydes of the men of war, directing
them with such companies of horse and foot, as were under their command to
repair to such place and quarter as was to them appointed. And other letters
were sent to the Alcaydes who were Governors of the Kingdoms, to prepare for
them all kind of necessary Provision, as well by Sea as by Land. Touching the
pay of these men of war, he had allotted out of his Rents being the Tenths of
Bread and other particular revenues pertaining to his Royal Crown, a
sufficient portion for the pay of every Regiment of his men of war; which
went out with their Mayordomo Pagador, Treasurer or Paymaster, by which means
he assembled great Armies, taking out of his Treasury only the Provision for
his Army by Sea and the pay of (...) in his service. And in the In^^^^ whiles
the Army was gathering together, the Alcayde who was Admiral of the Sea was
bound to assemble his Navy, to furnish it wi^h victuals and other necessaries,
and to have it ready rigged and prepared to embarke the men of war at the
day appointed. And the Alcayde who was Captain General of the Army by Land
was bound to cause the uneven and ill passages of the ways and Provinces which
the Regiments of Soldiers were to pass, to be made even and passable for
their ma^^h, to assemble the Army, and to see it furnished with victuals and
all necessaries. And as soon as the Army was assembled and embanked, the
General of the Army by Land was bound to obey the Alcayde that was General
by Sea, being on the Sea; and the General of the Sea in like manner was to be
obedient to the General of the Army by Land, when he was on the Land, by
which means he prevented all dissension and debate betwixt them. Heneuergaue
them order which they were precisely to follow in prosecution of the war, but
left all to their discretion; saying, that the proceeding of the wars could
not in the house be directed, in such sort as they might in the Army. And
because he ever chose such Generals as were of great wisdom and experience in
the art military, he never undertook any conquest against any King, whether
he were a Moore, a Christian, or Gentile, but he prevailed against him.

This King Jacob Almansor had this quality that he never bestowed any place of
an Alcayde or Captain on any that sued for it, how well soever he were
qualified and fitted for the place: neither would he place him in any other
office, if once he had made fute for any. He made choice of men experienced,
who had served him long both in peace and war, done some remarkable services,
by which they had approved their wisdom and valor and the love and loyalty
with which they served him. He had no respect of blood or of high Lineage, but
if he were a private man of poor estate, and had valor to rule and govern,
he would give him the best and highest place amongst his Counselors. And if he
were of great parentage, and had no valor he (...), nor would any way use his
service. By ^^^ason of his good choice when his Armies (...) from their
conquests, his Generals used to make him Relations of the notable things which
every of his Captains, Alcaydes, or any private Soldiers had done, which he
read, and (with out forgetting any) rewarded them and preferred them to such
places and offices as he found convenient. And as none durst make a lie unto
him; so had none any advantage by favor without merino in such so^^ that all
endeavored to serve him with g^ alacrity, being well assured that their
travail should be rewarded according to the service they had done him. And
this was the chief cause for which he was so well served and feared by all
the Nations of the World.

CHAP. V.
Of the manner and order which he held in the Government of his Kingdoms.

THis King Almansor used to spend the Monday on the care and Government of his
Kingdoms in such sort, that after the first hour of the day he entered into
his Council of Government with his four Counselors of State, where they made
him account of the affairs and notable accidents which the Alcaydes of
Government had written and certified, which if they were but ordinary, were
answered and decreed as was convenient, it being the charge of the ancient
Councellor to return the answers, and make dispatches, as it was also in the
Council of War. But if they were matters of Importance they gave him a
Memorial or Bill thereof, that he might take such order as was fitting: for
as concerning the Provisions of offices of Alcaydes, and Governments, and other
charges and ministrations, he distributed them himself, without advice of
Counselors. Then going out of his Council, they placed a seat for him in
public, on which he sat, and gave audience to such as came to complain of
any Injustice done by any of his Governors, receiving their Complaints and
Petitions, that he might confider and redress their grieuances, which he did
very speedily, uprightly, and with great severity. Albeit such accidents
seldom happened, by reason that his Justice was so feared, that no Alcayde or
Governor durst do any Injustice, that none might have cause to complain.

Concerning Elections and choice of his officers and Ministers, he carried
himself after this manner. Of all his Alcaydes and Captains that had served
in his wars, he had particular notice and remembrance of the valor of their
persons, and the notable services they had done, by the true Relations which
his Generals had made him, as before is rehearsed, which he kept registered
summarily in a little book, together with the place of their Birth, their Age,
and how long they had served. And when he saw they were grown old and wearied
in his service, he licensed them to take rest, and honored them with places
and offices of Viceroyes of Kingdoms, Alcaydes, or Commanderies and
Captainships of Castles and fortresses: Some also with Governments of Provinces
and Cities, giving them good and honorable solaries, receiving still their pay
which they had in the wars. He observed also this order, that he gave them
always these places of Preferment amongst their friends and kindred in the same
Country where they were borne; never taking their offices from them nor
changing them to other places, unless they had done some Injustice, or
committed some other fault: and then he used first to take from them their
offices; and then to chastise them according to the quality of their offense,
saying that he that once did any Injustice for his particular Interest, no
longer deserved to be a Judge, not so much as a moment. The principal reason
on which this King grounded for this election and distribution of his offices,
was this. He said that none could ever know the valor of men, and that
natural talent with which the Sovereign God and Nature had endowed them,
except it were in the military Art; for therein the valiant are tried, and
their courage and wisdom for Gouenment of Commonweales in Peace and war is
discerned. There men discover their good fortune in their deeds of Arms, in
ouercomming great armies, in winning of rich spoils, in preserving that place
and Command which they have gotten with so much travail and labor, enduring
so many evil days and worse nights, putting their life and honor in hazard,
and in danger to lose all in a moment. There men come acquainted with hunger
and thirst, nakedness and want, sleeping on the ground, sickness, cold and
heat, yea, with intolerable travail: with all which manifold experience they
become in their Age full of knowledge and skill how to rule and govern
Commonweales: for with that valor and courage with which they won their Honor
and their wealth, with the same they preserve the common wealth in Peace,
governing it with uprightness observing Justice: and with those necessities
and miseries which they have passed through in the course of their life they
condole those that are poor and miserable, apt to relieve their misery and
necessity: and above all they which are courageous, valiant zealous of their
Law and Religion, lovers of their King and country; and who with such care and
vigilancie won that Reward in the war, that they deserved to be Governors
of Kingdoms; with the same mind also would they govern the Commonwealth, not
being able to endure any Injustice or evil to be done.

He never gave any of their offices to any other private men, how wise and
valiant soever, if they had not won Honor and Reputation by long service in
the wars, and were also of ripe years and counsel, and had done some
notable acts to restifie their wisdom, courage, valor, and ability,
deserving offices, Administrations, and Governments of Commonweals, Kingdoms
and Provinces; for he said that men brought up in obscurity, and living in
corners, had not the courage to adventure and try their fortune, but being
cowardly and pusillanimous were ever unfortunate; and that Fortune her selse
never favored them in any thing, but always despised and disesteemed them,
and that therefore he made no reckoning of such for any employment, as having
in them no valor, no natural ability.

This King Jacob Almansor was so vigilant in the Government of his Kingdoms,
that many times he went out by night, disguised in the habit of a countryman or
common-downe and toperson, and visited the public places, romes, and offices
in his court, and sometimes in the habit of a merchant, he would travail two
or three days journey: otherwhiles he put on the habit of a Soldier, with
two or three disguises, when he would inform himself of any notable thing;
and how his Governors administered Justice; and how his Captains and Generals
carried themselves in Peace and War, and so came to the verifying of what he
sought, with much dissimulation; and many times chastised the delinquents when
they were most secure. And this he did so often, and so warily, that his Subjects
took a Proverb or common speech amongst them, which they often used in their
assemblies and meetings, when any one spoke of ought that was unlawful, the
rest would presently reprehend him, It is to be noted that in those days the
Arabians used to wear a veil over their face.
saying, take heed lest the King Jacob Almansor hear you. For they thought he
was in every place, because he used in such manner to go up and down* and to
do such notable deeds as caused admiration; with which he held all his
Subjects in great sear and awe: and all the Alcaydes of Government thought he
was ever looking on them; so that they durst not do any Injustice, or neglect
ought that was under their charge, knowing him to be of so sharp and severe
disposition, that if once they fell into ^^sgrace, they should never hold up
their heads again whiles they lived. This was the main cause that he governed
all his Kingdoms in peace, and that none of his Alcaydes or Viceroyes durst
any ways attempt the least thing in the World.

CHAP. VI.
Of the virtuous exercises, in which the King Jacob Almansor spent the
Tuesdayes, and Wensdayes.

THis King (as we have rehearsed in the Distribution, which he made of the
days of the week) chose the Tuesdayes and Wensdayes for his particular
Exercises, which he divided in this manner* The Tuesday morning his Huntsmen,
Mountaynmen Bowmen, and other Servants and Officers of that kind being
assembled, he went out to the Mountains, and there delighted and exercised
himself in chasing and hunting all kind of game, both of Bird and Beasts, of
which he had great store and variety in the Woods, Groves, and Gardens of
Hillan and Albasatim, kept and ordered in the best manner that might be; where
he recreated himself with his followers; and to those of them that had
performed any notable exploit that day (wherein he much delighted) he rewarded
with ten pieces of Gold. This Exercise he followed until noone; and then
dined in the midst of a great house of pleasure which he had there; where all
that followed him did eat, and many poor folks were refreshed; for he used
that day and place, especially for matters of Alms and relief of the poor,
and would not by express order be encombred therewith eslewhere. When he had
dined, a Mayordomo put into a purse a thousand pieces of Gold, called
Mi^e^ales, and then he sitting down in a square Court, there came the poor
before him, as well those of his Court, as of other Towns and Cities, which
brought every one his Certificate from his Alcayde or Governor of the estate
of his necessities. And if it were for Marriage of poor Orphans or other such
occasions, he gave direction for their relief. And it they were some smaller
wants, he supplied them presently out of that purse which his Mayordomo had
filled. But if the matters were of more importance, he subscribed his answer
to those Relations or Certificates of his Governors: giving direction how
every one should be relieved, and out of what receipt or revenue, in such good
sort, that all went away contented and satisfied, He said to his followers,
that he esteemed that the best day of his life, in which he relieved all
those poor folks for the love of the sovereign God. It was remarkable in
him, that it could never be noted, that ever any sought for alms or succor at
his hands, whether he were Moore, Christian, or Jew, that went away vnrelieued.
He held opinion that there was never any King poor, and that if he were so,
he should be very miserable and unfortunate: and that Kings should be as
large in giving as they are in demanding and receiving of their Subjects,
without which they have neither power, Empire, nor command in the World, more
then a private person. He was so ready to relieve the needy, and to succor
the succourlesse, that going one day on hunting, he lost himself, being
severed from his Servants; and holding on his course through the Wood, he
found a poor trauayling man, who being taken with some sudden sickness, was
fallen on the ground unable to go any farther: he therefore alighting, laid
him on his own horse, and having tied him fast in his Saddle, he took the
reins of the bridle in his hands, and so walked on foot himself more then
two leagues before he met with his train: who albeit they offered to ease him
of the care of the sick, and to mount him on another horse, yet he would by no
means yield unto it, but conducted him with his own hands, until he had
brought him to his house in the Wood; and there caused him to be cured, till
he was thoroughly recovered: and when being become sound, he kissed his hand
at parting with many thanks as was fitting for so great a auour, he answered,
that there belonged no thanks unto him, but that all was due to the Sovereign
God, who had sent him that day to succoun him; for he assured him by his Royal
Crown, that he had lost his company, wandering he knew not where, nor which
way he went, until he lighted happily on him in that place where he found him
sick: and that it could not possibly be, but that he was guided by God, seeing
he wandered in that country in which he was borne and bred, and yet never had
the like befallen him. And when he that was healed would have taken his leave
to depart, he commanded a good sum of money to be given him out of his
Treasury, that he might live in good sort, and so did dismiss him. These and
other like things did the King Almansor, that those about him might learn and
take good and laudable examples out of his manners and customs.

The day following, being Wensday, he gave no Audience, neither treated with
any; but shut himself into his Chamber, reposing himself after his Hunting
and violent exerercising which he had used the Tuesday before. And there being
alone, he wrought Astrolabes of Asrologie and other Instruments of great worth
and high estimation amongst the wise of his time. Otherwhiles he made of
inlayd warke such delicate things, and of such great account, that the
skilfullest Masters and professors of that Art took example and pattern of
those pieces which he had wrought: for in all these things he had a singular
dexterity, subtlety, and excel encie of hand. He made Crosse-bowes also,
and other kind of Weapons and Arms, especially, Coats of Maile, of such
excellency, that I can witness that I saw one of them (which he had given to
an Ale aid, being his Favorite) sold for the weight thereof in Silver. In
these Exercises he used to spend these days, and not in any other sort.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Exercises which he used on the Thursday, and how he exercised the
Sciences among the Learned.

THis King Jacob Almansor was so learned in all Sciences, and such a lover of
learned men of what faculty soever they were, that there never came any to his
knowledge and acquaintance, but he honored and loved him exceedingly: and on
the contrary, he no less hated and eschewed the foolish and ignorant. For he
said, that there was no greater misery in the World then Ignorance, neither
any Monster how fierce, foul, or abominable soever that was comparable
thereto. He proclaimed over all his Kingdoms, that whosoever should bring him
any Book that were not in his Library already, of what faculty soever it
was, should receive double the value, according to the just estimation thereof:
and performed it accordingly. And if they were exquisite Books and good, he
paid much more to them that brought them, giving great rewards. By this means
he gathered such a multitude of Books, that when he numbered them in his
Library, he found there fifty five thousand, seven hundred twenty and two
bodies of all kind of Sciences, in their several Languages; and weighing them
in a weight, they weighed twelve hundred and nineteen Quintalls of Paper. And
for verifying of this Truth, A Quintall is taken for a hundred weight.
the greatest part of them is yet at this present, remaining in the Library of
the Royal Palace, which your Highness at this day possesses: and if any of
the Books be wanting (whereof I make no doubt) the number and names of the
Authors will be found in the Catalogue, which this learned King caused to be
made. When Thursday was come, he went into a Royal Hall or large room
adjoining to his Library, which was adorned with rich hangings, and the floor
covered with Carpets of great price, and the room replenished with costly
Seats, where by he honored those learned men with whom he had treated and
conferred about matters of Learning; for he would never permit any of them to
stand nor hear him a word at those times appointed for conference, until they
were all set down on their Seats; Saying, that seeing Learning ought to be
honored; so ought also the men that were learned, being the Sons of so
honorable a Mother. Being thus assembled, one of them declared the
Propositions which he mayntayned in his faculty; the rest arguing on the
contrary. And if any doubt arose on the allegation of Authors, there stood
always ready at the door of the Library, a learned man that had the
custody thereof; who brought presently the Book which the King called for,
whereby the doubt was resolved. This course he commonly continued till noone,
and then he went to his dinner, and caused all those learned men to dine in
the same room, and to be served as himself. Dinner being ended, the King
Jacob Almansor went unto them with many thanks for that good which he
acknowledged of them, commending their learning and knowledge, appointing them
also what points they should study against the next meeting, that they might
be the better prepared to yield him a good resolution; and named which of them
should maintain the Conclusion. Having dismissed them from his presence: he
entered his Library, and spent there the rest of that day, studied in what
faculty he most desired; for he was so great a Lover of Learning that whiles
I served him I heard him often say; That he had no greater grief in the
world, then that the necessary care of the Government of his house and
Kingdoms would allow him no more time but one day of the week for the getting
of Learning; and that if it were lawful for him to do it without being noted
of negligence, he would never meddle of any other thing all the days of his
life; and that he never did any thing that grieved him more then the aceepting
of the office of King, and taking on him the Rule and Government of the Royal
Scepter of his Kingdoms, in the life of his father Abilgualit, whereby he had
lost much time which he might freely have employed in Learning, without being
troubled with the care of the Rule and Government of the Commonwealth; and
therefore often wished that his Son wore of ripe age, of Mature Judgment,
and Counsel, that he might leave him his Royal Scepter, and rest from that
great care which he had of the common good of his Subjects.

CHAP. VIII.
In what manner he commanded the Sciences to be read in his Kingdoms, and of
the Vniuer sities and Colleges which he caused to be built, and endowed with
the Hospitalls for the sick and the poor.

SO friendly was this King Jacob Almansor to Learning and to Learned men, and
so desirous that the exercise of Learning, and the number of those that were
Learned might increase in his Kingdoms, that he commanded the building of the
famous Collegiate Hospital, which at this day is adjoining to his Royal
Palace, and was by him endowed with a large and ample revenue: wherein he also
constituted Learned Professors and Masters in all Faculties, to read and teach
the Sciences with good Salaries: allowing also therein Provision of Diet,
Apparel, and Books for all the poor Students, without putting their Fathers
and Friends to any charge, until they were Graduates: and there graciously gave
them the Titles of their Degrees. This was done in the one side of this
Hospital: where he established seven Academies. In the other side he
appointed a place for the poor diseased where they were cured, as they are at
this present, with such service, regard, care, and diligence, as they are also
at this day, which because it is notorious, I will speak no more of it in this
brief Treatise of his life. And th^^ King Almansor entered sometimes into this
Hospital by a false door out of his Palace and passed his time visiting the
sick, and comforting of them, observing how they were used, and whether there
were any negligence in the Officers thereof. And then he went into the
Academies, to see the Students how they studied, and commanded the Masters
there, that some of the best able should rehearse some notable things of those
which there they had learned, and rejoiced exceedingly therein, and caused
gifts to be given to them which contented him best, saying that those poor
diseased, and those Students were his Sons, and that he that cherished and
comforted them, ought to account that he cherished and comforted his own
Royal person. He commanded also that other Hospitalls should be builded in
all the Principal Cities at his charge through out all his Kingdoms, for the
like purpose, and gave order to his Alcaydes who were Governors that they
should visit them with the like care and diligence as he visited those of his
Court. He gave direction also that these Hospitalls should receive all
Pilgrims and Passengers of all Nations whatsoever, whether they were poor or
rich, giving them entertaynment both for Diet and Lodging in convenient sort
for themselves, their Servants, and the Beasts which they rode on by the space
of six days: and that if they were poor, they should give them at their
departure, wherewith to defray their first days Journey. There was every year
given him a Bill containing the Examination of the Students that were brought
up in the Hospital of his Court, and of the others through out his Kingdoms,
and of the ability and Talent of every one; and for what employment he was
fittest. As also there was yearly given him a Note of the Offices that were
void, either of the Alfaquies of the Mesquitas, being his Churchmen, or of the
Cadies or Judges of the Cities: and at Easter he supplied them, bestowing them
all himself on whom he thought good. And so the Offices which became void in
those Hospitalls, as well of the Masters, Professors, as of other Ministers
which held there any charge or place of esteem, he always preferred the
Students which had been bred and brought up there; and commanded the like to
be done by the Governors of his other Kingdoms. By this good work he cured
many of their Infirmities, augmented much the Sciences, and help many poor
Students to study, free from care, by his good providing to relieve their
necessities: which made them all pray to God for his health and long life.

CHAP. IX.
Of his great Deeds and Battayles won by himself personally present; and by
his Captains; and how he came to be called Almansor.

ALL the Exercises and the division of the Week, whereof we have hitherto
entreated were done by the King Jacob Almansor, when he was in his Royal
Palace, and in his Court in Peace. But when he had any necessary occasion to
travel, or any war in hand which required his personal Presence, he left the
former charge and care to be supplied by one of his faucured Alcaydes, being a
man of such Learning, Experience, and ability as was requisite: in such sort
that there was no default, were his absence never so long. And albeit he never
embarkt himself to make war by Sea on any King, but did all by his Generals
and Alcaydes of his men of War: yet when he intended to win and conquer any
kingdom or Province by land, he delighted exceedingly to be present in person
with his Army. For he said, that the vigor of his spirit alone, and the
only imagining of his Alcaydes, Captains, and Soldiers that he was
personally present, and that he adventured his life as well as they, was
sufficient to overcome many Enemies, and made them with redoubled courage to
do their endeavor. In this manner, he won thirteen set Battles in the
field, and took five Kings of the Gentiles, without being defeated in any of
them, or his Army routed: and even with a few Soldiers, in regard of those
that came against him, he performed great Exploits. The most notable was, that
when he had overcome one of the Kings of the Gentiles in the Country of
Deuque, called Abni Raquib, and an Army of seventy thousand foot, and four
thousand horse, which King escaped by flight, and met with a Son in Law of
his named Abenyusael Salami, who came to succor him, whereupon receiving new
courage, he turned again to see whether he could recover what he had lost,
and be revenged of his enemy. And albeit he came against him with fresh
Soldiers that were not wearied, which were no fewer then forty thousand foot,
and two thousand horse: and the Army of the King Almansor was now wearied and
enfeebled, many having been hurt and slain in the former battle, and he
being much perplexed: yet seeing he could not now retire, but with great loss
and disadvantage, nor without some imputation of cowardice, he resolved to
abide his enemies encounter anew: and to re-enforce his Army, he went every
where himself, putting them in order, and encouraging of them, saying alowde
after this manner; Good Soldiers and valiant Warriors, let us dye with Honor
like Conquerors and victorious, as we are at this present; and let us not fly
dishonourably; for J will be the first that shall set upon the enemy; and be
ye not afraid since Abilgualit. Almansor is with you, whom the Sovereign God
has never yet suffered to be euercome; no more shall be at that time. With
these words he began the Battle without farther speech; and he fought
valiantly himself in his Royal person, killed many, and took the King Abni
Raquib: and his Son in Law dyed fighting in that Battle bravely. And when
they had taken the spoil of his Camp, all his Soldiers said that the highest
God had made Abilgualit victorious, and that with great reason he might be
called Almansor. And from that day forward, they named him Almansor Abenforoh,
whereas before he was called Abilgualit Jacob Abninacer; albeit in all these
Chapters which I have written of his life, I have always named him Almansor,
that I might not alter his name which was best known: and he might well be so
called, because he was never overcome in any battle, nor any of his Generals
in any wars or battles, which they fought or made by his direction, either
by Sea or by Land, which are all registered in the Book which is written of his
life and wars of his time, and of his great Exploits, and those of his
Alcaydes and Governors of his Armies: with which I intend not to cloy the
Readers. But will only rehearse the number of them, which were seventy and
three Battles, or foughten Fields by Land, and thirteen fights by Sea.
Touching the dividing of the Spoils which his Soldiers had when the Battles
were ended, he commanded all to be gathered and laid together in such sort,
that none durst take any thing without his leave. And the distributio^ of them
was made according to his Statutes and Ordinances for the wars; which was, that
every Soldier which was slain in the War should have his part and portion
as far forth as they that were living: and such parts and portions were
accordingly delivered to the companions and friends of the dead who undertook
the delivering of them to the Children, Wives, and Heirs of them to: whom they
belonged. For he said it was not just nor reasonable, that he who dyed
fighting should lose his part, seeing they that were his had loss enough in
losing of him without losing the goods, which were gotten with the price of his
life. When he had made this distribution, he used to give audience to any that
was grieved therewith, giving order briefly, and summarily in what manner he
should be righted, in such sort that they were all satisfied and well
contented. And this was the chief cause that when he intended any war he
was so sought to, and served by his followers, who were ready to hazard their
lives for him without fear.

This King Jacob Alnansor as he was very loving to the Learned, and friendly
to the valiant and virtuous, so was he as adverse an enemy to Liars, Pratlers,
and Gamesters, and abhorred and loathed the Loytering Unthrifts and Idlers: for
he said that all sueh persons were unprofitable to the Commonweals; like the
Droues in the Bee-hiues, that are no ways helpful to the Bees, neither in
gathering nor preserving the Honey or the Wax; but only to fill up the rooms
in their houses; and to eat and consume what they had provided for their
sustenance: and these he used to chasten according to their desert. He would
never be idle so much as a moment; but was ever busied in good and virtuous
Exercises. He caused also a Law to be made, that what person soever he were
that had no Office, Trade, or course of life wherein to employ his time, should
be held infamous and of no reputation, of what estate or degree soever he
were: which was the cause that in imitation of him all his Subjects shunned
idleness, and bestowed their time in virtuous Exercises: by means whereof
they escaped many vices and diseases, and lived without want, except it were
here and there one, as it is in all Kingdoms.

CHAP. X.
How the resigned his Royal Scepter to his eldest Son; and of his
retiredness which he chose, and of a Letter written to his Son of
Admonitions, for his good Government whereunto he was bound.

THe King Abilgualit Jacob Almansor, seeing him self waxen old and weary of
his Government, and considering that his Son Abilgualis Abninace was of
sufficient age, wit and ability to rule and govern, resigned unto him his
Royal Scepter, his Crown and Kingdoms, with the consent of his wisest
Counselors and the Alcaydes that were Governors: retyring himself to a
solitary life in that Country house in the Mountains of Albasatim and
Alhillan which has been before mentioned: where on the top of a high Rock
near adjoining, he had caused to be built a sumptuous Mezquita or Temple,
with a College or Monastery, wherein might live an Heremite or Abbot, with
forty Disciples or Monks, appointing to be chief Governor therein, a man
of much Learning named Mahomet el Gazeli. In this man he had such confidence
that he consulted with him concerning his weightiest affairs and matters of
most importance, as with a man of Learning and Wisdom, who gave him sound
advice, and of whom he had learned much. To that house therefore among those
woodie Mountains, he withdrew himself, there hence often repayring to that
Mezquita, and Monastery, to recreate himself in conference and couersation
with Mahomet el Gazeli: not permitting any to visit him but his Servants and
his ancient Alcaydes, neither them for their pleasure or pastime; for if they
came not on some business of importance or earnest occasion, he admitted them
not to his presence, neither suffered them to visit him. In this manner he
passed his life with great quietness and freedom from cares.

He very cunningly and subtly used to examine such of his ancient Servants
and Alcaydes as came unto him, every of them apart by himself, and that very
particularly, in what manner his Son Abilgualit Abninace governed his
Kingdoms; whether his Subjects spoke well of him, and whether they complained
or misliked him on just cause or otherwise: with such diligence he learned out
of all of them what faults they found and observed in him. And this King
Almansor being zealous of the common good of his Kingdoms, and desirous that
his Son should rule well, intending to reprehend him of some things, and
instruct him how he should govern without reciting or mentioning any one
particular case of any that had complained to him, wrote this Letter unto him,
which for the good admonitions therein contained, I have thought fit here to
set down.

The Letter of King Almansor.
Praise be given to the Sovereign God, to whom Sacrifice and Prayer
belongs. Amen. And his plenteous blessing and Grace come upon you my Son;
for without it no creature of his can do any good thing, be it never so
little, seeing all that is good comes of his hand. This being thus premised,
I have thought good by this Letter to aduertize you of some things which you
are to observe co^^erning the Government of your Kingdoms, that your Subjects
may enjoy much peace with safety and tranquillity; and that also you may be
duly reverenced, loved and feared of them, as is convenient.

The first that you are to take care of is, that you be not proud, high-minded,
nor presumptuous, imagining diverse imaginatio^s, because you see your self
made Lord of so many and so great Kingdoms and Armies by Sea and by Land, so
many valorous Alcaydes and Captains humbled in your Royal presence, obedient
to all your commands, and ready to execute whatsoever you shall appoint. To
free your self from this great Temptation, you are to consider the infinite
power and everlasting Kingdom of God, having no beginning, middle, nor end,
being of incomprehensible power and wisdom. And therewithal you are to
consider that your Kingdom is not infinite, but has his limits and bounds;
and is to finish, and to have an end; as also the very memory of it among men.
With this consideration you shall be in such sort humbled, as is requisite you
should.

Secondly, you ought to consider that the Sovereign God created you in this
World, and gave you power as a second cause of his to fulfill his most holy
will in the Government of his creatures here on earth, by mayntayning Justice
and using Mercy and Clemency, imitating your Creator: and not to err in the
administration of this Office, you ought to behold and contemplate the Book of
this fair Theater, called the World; this subordination of natural Causes;
this regular and continual moving of the Heavens, Signs, and Planets: so many
Generations and corruptions in reasonable men; and in all other things created
in the Earth, in the Water, and in the Air: the Night and the Day, the Rain,
Hail and Wind, the changes of Times; Heat and Cold, and other alterations
innumerable, being all created in such orderly disposition, with such Wisdom,
perfection and Providence, as the wisest and skilfullest could never attain to
know: and how from the time in which he created this goodly Frame to this
present, and to the last instant in which it shall please him that it cease and
have end, it neither has been nor shall be needful to add or take any thing
to it or from it: for that were to suppose some imperfection in his Works,
which cannot be because he is the God of highest perfection. Moreover to
consider how he sustayneth it, governing and maintayning all things with
Judgment and Mercy, with great and wonderful Prouiden^^; such a one he is.
You ought therefore to perceive that your Government is Disorder; your Justice
Jniustice; your Mercy is want of Clemency, your Charity Covetousness, your
careful Diligence is Slothfulness; and to conclude, that all your Knowledge
is but Ignorance. And I can assure you, that if you would be merciful to his
Creatures; yet you cannot pardon their sins; If you be a good Iusticer, you
can only chasten their bodies, not their Souls. If never so charitable, you
cannot give a blessing to their goods: If you be large and loving, yet you
cannot make them live forever: If you incline to give them case and rest, yet
you cannot give them glory: If you desire to add comfort to them, yet you can
give them no true and perfect consolation of Spirit. Behold, therefore what I
say unto, you that you may know how great is the misery of man: Seeing that
with all your power and Kingdoms you cannot make one drop of water to fall out
of the Region of the Clouds; nor make one lease of a Palmotree; nor yet
deliver and free your self from the least tribulation of the World.

The third thing which you are to call to mind, is that you must die, and must
be judged by our Sovereign God with a strict account of the good and evil you
have done in this life; like a sinful miserable man; and that over and above
this account which is to be given by all men in general. Kings are to yield
another particular to the Almighty God, which is, whether they have well
administered and governed their Commonweals. If only in regard of their Kingly
power they have dealt hardly with their Subjects without any just cause or
offense of theirs: If they have imposed great payments, or exacted unnecessary
Tributes; If they have done wrong or unjustly for their particular interest; if
they did not condole with the poor, and relieve and ease the oppressed, having
power to remedy their distress, and to redress their grieuances: and to
conclude, if they have been careless of the good of their Commonweales; Woe
be to the Souls of such; for they shall be condemned to perpetual torments.
By this you may clearly see that you and your Kingdoms are nothing, and have
no being whereof to make any reckoning. I assure you therefore, that if you had
duly considered the charge and duty whereunto you bound your self that day
on which I resigned the Government into your hands, that you had more cause to
mourn and to be sorrowful then to ordain Feasts and Triumphs with Music
and Disports, which in effect were used according as is usually accustomed. Let
these things but pass through your memory and clearer understanding, and then
Pride and Ambition will fall under your feet and you shall easily, subdue them.
For I assure you, that one dram of Pride will weigh heavier then one hundred
Quintals of good understanding in the wisest man in the World: and see; it is
the very gate by which the Devil the accursed of God enters to tempt men;
and overcomes, captiuateth and overthrows them into the fearful,
horrible, everlasting Hell: from which the Sovereign God for his great Mercy
free us and deliver us. Amen.

The fourth thing of which I admonish you is, that you yield Justice,
administering it indifferently to all that shall ask it; for I assure you, that
the King which shall not so administer it will soon be dispossessed of his
Kingdom as a man unworthy to reign: For God permits unbelieving in this
World, reserving the chastisement thereof for the day of his final Judgment,
and maintains the World, and all his creatures with Justice and Mercy;
albeit some are without the true knowledge of him; but he readily chastises
with rigor, even in this life, injustice and wickedness, when malice
increases, and men are obstinate therein like a Just Judge as he is. Be no
teller of Lies, for it is the basest thing in the World, and the Lier is the
Devils Disciple, a man without Virtue a Traitor to the Truth and an enemy
thereof, and one to whom no credit is to be given; and the least punishment that
men allot him is, that although he speak the truth yet he is not believed. Let
your Speech be moderate, that men may not note you for a Pratler; which would
make you unregarded, and held for a man of little discretion. All these good
aduertisements in my Letter have their contraries, and therefore our Sovereign
God gave you freedom of will, and liberty of choice that you might follow the
good and of chew the evil; and without his help you can do nothing. This
only I will warn you, that you set God before you in all your ways, doing
Justice with charity, simplicity, and uprightness, and you shall not err,
whatsoever you take in hand. And although I might write much more in this
Letter; Yet this may suffice, for there is included in it whatsoever can be
required of him that will well consider of it to put it in practice, as I
intend it, to his entire satisfaction which I doubt not but you will perform
with the help of our Sovereign God his blessing and grace; whom I humbly pray
and beseech to grant it you as I give you mine; and have you in his keeping.
Amen.

From this house of Albasatin, the twentieth day of Rageb in the ninety and
fixth year.

This Letter being received by the King Abilgualit, made him rejoice
exceedingly, and he took so earnestly to heart this his Fathers reprehension,
and put his Rules in practice in such sort, that he caused them that served him
to admire; for he endeavored with great care and diligence to amend the
faults and negligences which he had committed, especially in administering
Justice, and began to follow the footsteps: of the King Almansor his Father in
his manner of Government, and in all the rest that he used whiles he reigned,
in so much that in very short time he made them see the amendment he had made
of his Life and Government, in such sort that all his Alcaydes were much
contented therewith, though in some particular distasted: for in all other
things he could imitate his Father, saving only in his Liberality and
Charity; sodim these the King Almansor did much exceed him. And this I believe
was the chief cause that he never got so good a name as his Father. For
certainly, Liberality is a great virtue in Kings, wherewith they draw the
minds of men to love and serve them unfeignedly with claritie: who on the
contrary when they feel not their own interest coming, let fall the wings of
their courage and cheerfulness, loving and serving more coldly and faintly:
because the irascible faculty having her residence as she has in the heart,
and loving to be honored and esteemed, and desirous to have her travails
gratified with self proper interest, when that ceasseth, the working of the
will does cease. Especially in men of the Sword, which of all others are most
necessary for Kings, as well for preserving their Estates, as for the
conquering of new Kingdoms and Signiories. Which was the chief cause that
this King Abilgualit could never get any new Provinces, but with much
difficulty preserved that Kingdom which he had inherited from his Father, and
was at the point to have lost all for want of being free and generous toward
his men of war as was requisite for their encouragement; for they being
accustomed (...) such gratification and largess, as the King Jacob Almansor
used toward them, grew soon distasted with the contrary in his Son
Abilgualit: which was the cause that he could never raise any Army by Land or
by Sea worth the speaking of, to do any service of account, which merited the
remembrance of Histories. This may suffice for this particular; seeing my
purpose is only to write the life of the King Jacob Almansor.

CHAP. XI.
How King Jacob Almansor became sick to to Death; and how he assembled his
wisemen and the rest of the Alcaydes; Of his prudent speech he made them; and
the Pardon he demanded of them.

THe King Almansor spending his time quietly in that house of Albazatin and
Albillan in company of Mahomet Algazeli and his Disciples, after some time fell
sick of an infirmity of long continuance: and seeing himself to wear away,
and that all the remedies which his Physicians applied profited little: one day
when they were about him in consultation concerning his Disease, and the
difficulty of the Cure, by reason of the manifold Syntomes, his great age and
debilitie of Nature considered; he said thus unto them; Ye, my Physicians,
endeavor and labor to restore my health, but if Gods pleasure be otherwise;
your purpose is but vain. For I assure you, that when God has determined to
end a man's life, the Medicines ministered by the Physicians do little avail
him; but serve rather to the hastening his end. And so do I conceive, of those
which ye have hitherto applied unto me, I lay no blame on you, but commend
your Learning and Knowledge; and that good affection wherewith you have
endeavored to recover my health: for which I thank you, and esteem as much
of your service as if you had prevailed. But I will not suffer you to be any
longer deceived; for the first day that I fell into this infirmity, I assured
my self, it would be my death knowing the same to be a lingering extraordinary
Disease, differing from the rest which I have endured in the course of my life.
And especially seeing in the periods thereof I find it rigorous, it seems to
me to be but loss of time to treat of recovery. Hence-forward therefore let no
more pains be taken in that behalf. For I am very conformable to the will of
our Sovereign God; and do give him infinite thanks for this great favor
which he vouchsafes me, in taking me out of the troubles and calamities of
this miserable life.

Then he caused the King Abilgualit, and the Infant Abraham Alamzari to be
called; who being come before him on their knees, and half prostrate on the
ground; kissed his hand; and he giving them his blessing, said thus unto them.
My dear and well-beloved Sons, the last period of my life is now at hand; the
Sovereign God being pleased to take me out of this World. That which I
admonish you is, that ye love like true Brethren, holding good conformity in
your minds, and confirming it with good deeds; for so shall ye live in Peace,
and no enemy shall be able to hurt you. And if ye continue not in Peace and
good conformity, ye shall soon see your Kingdoms overthrown. And turning
his eyes to the Infant Abraham, he said thus; And you Son Abraham on pain of
my curse I command you that you be always obedient to the King Abilgualit your
brother, and hold him hence-forward in my place for your true Father and Lord;
for I am confident in his wisdom and virtue, that he will hold and use, and
regard you as his Son. Then directing his eyes to his Son Abilgualit he
said, And so I command and charge you Son Abilgualit on like pain. And they
lamenting and weeping in such sort that they could scarce speak, answered,
that they would obey him.

Then he called in his Alcaydes, the Governors of his Kingdoms; those of his
highest Councels, and the men of wisdom and learning, who attended in the
utter chamber; and the rest of his kinsmen and friends, who when they had
saluted him and kissed his hand, he commanded his Morabito Mahomet Algazeli
(who being his favorite, sat at his beds head with the help of other
attendants to lift him out of his bed: and sitting, spoke thus unto them, My
beloved Sons and true Friend in our Sovereign God, The time is now come, in
which my Soul is to pass out of this miserable world, to yield account of the
good and evil which I have done in this life. I have been King and Governor
of these Kingdoms, and have bred you, taught you, cherished, and loved you as
a Father; and have also chastened your excesses, and ouer-bold attempts with
zeal and desire to do that which was requisite. But being a man I know that
in all things I have erred as a man; for we are all weak and miserable
Sinners. I therefore earnestly entreat and beseech you with all humility,
that if I be any way indebted to any of you, that ye presently declare it: and
that I may cause him to be recompensed. And if there be none; I ask pardon of
you all in general of that which is past: for I, for my part, do pardon and
forgive whatsoever in word or deed is by me to be, pardoned of any errors or
neglects of yours, which you have committed against me. And this only I lay
before you, that he which uses not Mercy toward his Neighbor, must expect
none at Gods hands at the last judgment. Which when they had heard, so great
was the grief they all conceived, and such plenty of tears in their eyes,
that they could not answer a word for a good space, considering that by losing
their King Jacob Almansor, they lost their chiefest good, so great was the love
which they bore him. Yet after awhile they answered, that they all did pardon
him, and if need were, would give all their goods, and adventure their lives
for him: If he were so pleased to command, as readily as they or any of their
Ancestors had formerly done for his service, and that he should no way doubt
of their pardon and promise, since they were there present to fulfill it. Then
the King Almansor could not refrain weeping, yet rendered great thanks for
their loving offer, and blessed them: worning them also, that neither they nor
any other Friends of his should fail to be present at his burial, for in
their love he received great consolation. Which they all promised, and
departed from his presesence so afflicted and sorrowful that they shut up
themselves; in such sort that in three days there was no Council held, nor
any business dispatched in Court until he somewhat amended: and then they
sell to negotiating and dispatching affairs; yet with grief and sorrow for
their good King, as they had great reason.

CHAP. XII.
How the King Jacob Almansor dyed: Of his sumptuous Enterment; his Tomb and
Monument; and of the Epitaphes engraven on his Sepulcher.

THe amendment of the King Jacob Almansor was not such, as out of which any
certain sign of Recovery could be had: but it was rather a space for the
Indication of the last Parocisme of Death during this Interpolation. So that
albeit his Servants were in some hope, the good King being well assured of his
death, neglected no moment nor minute for the disposing of all things as he
held himself bound. He willed all his moveable goods and moneys to be given
to the poor for Gods sake: which were forthwith distributed accordingly Then
he gave liberty to all his Slaves and Bondmen. He reserved nothing but only
his Library, charging the King Abilgualit he should keep it for himself; and
esteem it as it deserved: and that in lieu thereof he should place in
marriage a thousand poor Orphans, gining to every of them a thousand Miticales
in marriage.

On the fifth day after he died naturally; leaving this present life on
Thursday, in the last watch of the night, on the third day of the Moon Rageb;
in the hundred and second year of the Hixera. On the day following, This year
in about the year of our Redemption 723.
the King Abilgualit wrote unto all the Alcaydes of his Kingdoms a Letter to
this effect, that they all should mourn and solemnize his Funeral, Praise be
given to the Sovereign God. Amen. Hereupon they gave order for his Enterment,
for which the King Jacob Almansor had prepared and framed on the top of a high
Hill, on the Southside of that House called Albazatin that sumptuous Hermitage
which is there seen at this present, and adjoining to it his Sepulcher, being
a Vault made of a rich kind of Jasper of such largeness, as would contain
forty persons, and upon it caused a solid stone to be erected on four Pillars
of Alablaster, and on the sides four smooth stones with his Epitaphs written
in them in the greater Arabicke verses, with a very fair Character. This
Sepulcher is about a mile distant from the House of Albazatin. There were
assembled at his Funeral fifteen hundred Alfaqui or principal Priests with
the Alfaqui Mayor of the Mezquita of his Court, and the Morabito Mahometo
Algazeli with all his Monks or Disciples, and the King Abilgualit and the
Infant Abraham, his Brother with all their Servants; the Alcaydes that were
Governors and those of the Supreme Councels with their Presidents, and all the
other Alcaydes of the Court, whether of Peace or of War, which were twelve
hundred in number: The common people being there innumerable, for there was
almost none but would be present at this Solemnity. All these Courtiers and
Alfaqui were clad in mourning garments trayling their Royal Ensigns and
Standards on the ground. That which was most to be noted, was the abundance of
tears flowing from them, and the great mourning and lamentation they all made
that day, especially when they saw their good King laid in his Sepulcher, and
the entrance thereof closed, and fast mured up with stone, having no farther
hope to see him any more. Praised be God. Amen. For the good which comes to
us by his hand. And thus ended this good King, leaning an eternal memory of
himself among those that should come after.

The Epitaphs on his Sepulcher were composed by Mahomet Algazeli: and are these
that follow.

The first Epitaph.
Here lies buried the high and highly reverenced King of most Noble Birth,
famous Race and Lineage, descended of eighty and two Kings, Abilgualit
Miramamolin Jacob Almanfor: who was worthily called the Conqueror, being never
overcome; the famousest of the Sons of Nasts Abu Malique: Seeing he won
eighty and six Battles by Sea and by Land; and took five Kings; subdued
three parts of the World, Asia, Afric, and Europe; and gave Peace and
Tranquillity to his Subjects: observing Justice with benignity, and mercy.
This is he that used Charity, and augmented his Religion: having at his own
cost builded in his Kingdoms five hundred and six principal Mezquitas;
eighty and two Hospitals; with as many Royal Colleges; and endowed them with
large and sumptuous revenues. This is he that married every year at his
charge a thousand Orphans, he that banished Jgnorance and embraced Learning.
He that gave to all the World examples of life in his Sayings and Sentences and
notable Deeds of Arms. He who was an example of good and laudable customs.
He that killed the hunger, and thirst, and nakedness of his Subjects with his
large and liberal hands. Let immortal fame ever (...) on this Sepulcher, and
acknowledge him that^l yet (...) therein for her King and Lord, seeing by him
she is made triumphant, and victorious over (...). This great (...) dyed (...)
in his Invocation of the Name of the merciful God the Creator of Heaven and
Earth without ceasing so much at a moment until his last gasp imploring his
incomprehensible mercy, and fearing his high justice the third day of the
Moon of Rageb, the night before Friday, This agrees with the said year of
723.
after the last watch in the hundred and second year of the Hixera. Praised
be God and blessed be his most holy Name for ever. Amen.

The second Epitaph.
O How great is the Misery of men which has brought a King of so great Power,
Empire and Command to the estate wherein he is at this present, who as
yesterday was honored, reverenced, and beloved of his people; and is now
forgotten and forsaken of them all: and remains solitary in the dark Caves
of the earth. He which was wont to be clad in Silk and Cloth of Gold and
Silver, and to sleep in the softest and sweetest beds, curiously and richly
decked and adorned; lies here buried in the hard earth. He which used to go
persumed with Musk and Amber, and other excellent odours, now yields in his
base estate a noisome and stinking smell. He that as yesterday did eat the
choicest meats, and drank the most delicate drinks; is here become himself
to be the meat of wretched and loath some Worms. O mortal men, let none put
confidence in the delights of this life; Take example of him that lies here
buried: who having possessed them, observe how little while they continued.
There is no confidence to be placed in any but in God and in things eternal:
Let these terrene transitory worldly things be forgotten for his love and
reverence. Let us follow good and holy works which endure for ever, that with
them through his Grace and Mercy, we may obtain that eternal Life which
endures for ever, and ever. Amen.

The third Epitaph.
Here lies buried the terror and fear of the Moors, Christians, and
Gentiles, that ploughed up the Sea, and made the Land even and plain. He that
subdued the Nations of the World. The example and pattern of benignity and
mercy; and the right Rule of executing Justice severely, for the chastisement
of those which do not live virtuously: as the Sovereign God commands. Here
rests that liberal hand, that was never shut or closed to any that sought
relief thereof. The Protector of the poor* the Father of the Orphans; the
refuge of the Widows; the Zeal of Chastity; The Mirror of Honesty and
Shamefastness accompanied with Modesty; The Pattern of Princes, the Model
of Government; the Picture of p^ritie and cleanness; the. Type of Nobility;
the preserver of truth in his Tongue; the Banisher of Lies; the true Lover of
Learning; he that has lest a living fame of himself for the future ages; and
a worthy example of such lasting memory as Time cannot consume: which has
consumed the great deeds and exployts of Kings, Princes and Emperors, burying
their memory in Oblivion. O ye Mortal Men, let us pray to our Sovereign God,
that he vouchsafe to prosper and augment his memory for example of the Kings to
come: that by imitation of him they may govern their Commonweals in Peace;
directing us also to his holy Service; and filling us with his Grace. Amen.

The fourth Epitaph.
EVen as Gold is refined and purified in the Crusible placed on the fire, which
discovers the finenes thereof among the flames: So a sinful man who
preserves his patience in the persecution of this life, does purify and
perfect himself thereby.

A man ought to consider that he was borne to suffer and her ^^ay, comfort
himself in this that all the travails of this life, shall have an and with
him at his death: and that only the good and holy works; are they which remain
for ever being accepted and regarded of our Sovereign God.

O man consider that he created thee for his service: and that thou
ungratefully have departed from him; without recompense of amends.

Behold how luke warm thy love is toward him: and that of thy Creator
toward thee is constant and true: having given thee thy being and
accomplishment for his Mercy.

Consider with how high a price he hough: thee; and gave thee means to save
thy self by using well thy liberty and freedom: as he has commanded thee.

And therefore do I admonish thee that thou lose not the much for the little;
the certain for the uncertain: for if so thou do, thou will find thy self
deceived.

Consider how Misery and Poverty consists not in the wanting of Parents, or
Kindred, or of temporal goods: but in want of the favor of God and of his
Benediction.

(...)
