Twelve general Arguments, Proving that the Ceremonies imposed upon the
Ministers of the Gospel in England, by our Prelates, are unlawful; And
therefore that the Ministers of the Gospel, for the bare and sole omission of
them in Church Service, for conscience sake, are most unjustlie charged of
disloyalty to his Majesty.

(...) Math. 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil:
But if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me?
1605.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, We come not as voluntaries into this field of Contention, but
draug'd into it by the very hairs of our head: If our cause be ^ighteous and
good, Thou will easily grant ^in so great Imputations and Extremities
^nflicted upon us for the same) that we can ^oe no less, Then give reasons for
our selves and it. All the favor I require of thee, (...), That thou would
look into our cause (...) not by the flashing lightninges, that come ^ut of
the mouths of our Adversaries the Prelates) but by the light of our own
Reasons, by which if thou shall see the goodness of our cause, and innocence of
our persons, the^ embrace it with us. And in pity pray for us, (that without
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience) we may endure patientli^ and
meekely, what so ever God shall suffer to be inflicted upon us for the same;
in these wicked and licentious times.

The first Argument.
All Will Worship is sin. To use these Ceremonies in Church Service in manner
and form prescribed, is a Will Worship. Ergo To use them is sin.
The Proposition can not be denied, for the Apostle Paul plainly condemns
Will Worship.

The Assumption may thus be proved: All parts of Divine Service and Worship,
imposed only by the will and pleasure of Man, upon the Ministers of Divine
Service, and that of necessity, to be done, is Will Worship. But to use these
Ceremonies in manner and form prescribed, is to use such Ceremonies as are 1.
parts of Divine Service and Worship, 2. imposed only by the pleasure and will
of Men, upon the Ministers of Divine Service, 3. 9 necessity to be done
therein, Ergo, To use these Ceremonies in manner an^ form prescribed, is a
Will Worship.


The Proposition is as clear as the Sun at noonday.

The Assumption has three parts, 1. That they are parts of Divine Worship and
Service.

This is proved evidently by this Argument: All Mystical and Ecclesiastical
Rites and forms of Divine Service, institut^d by Ecclesiastical authority,
to be^ Ministerial actions in the solemn Worship of God, and performed in
that manner, and having that use in Divine Service, that if God should but
ratify and confirm the same use, they should then be parts of his true
Worship, (I say) all such Ceremonies are used as parts of Divine Worship But
these Ceremonies in controversy, are either all, or the greatest part of them
such. Ergo, ^hey are parts of Divine Worship and Service.


The Proposition cannot with any modest face be denied; For else how ^ould a
sole Divine ratification of the present use of them, make them parts of his
true Worship? if they were not used as parts of his Worship before.

The Assumption is as manifest, For if Christ should by some Revelation from
heaven signify, That it is his will that a Minister in Divine Service should
wear a white linen garment, In Baptism make the sign of a Cross, To these
ends and purposes that are expressed in the Service book, then certainly they
should be essential parts of his Divine Worship, else the Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies and our Sacraments are no parts thereof.

The second part of the Assumption^ the 1. Syllogism.

That they are imposed only upon t^ pleasure and will of man. This is evident.
For those things th^^ God leaves as indifferent to the wi^ and discretion of
man to do or leav^ undone, being imposed by man upon man, are imposed only
upon the wi^ and pleasure of man.

The 3. part of the Assumption is: That they are of Necessity to be done in
Divine Service.

Which is also out of all doubt, For^ Minister stands bound to do them upon
pain of suspension and deprivation: and God must have no solemn Worship in
England, except it be administered in the same.

Upon all this it follows, That to use these Ceremonies in manner and form
proscribed, is to use such Ceremonies, as are parts of Divine worship imposed
only by the will of Man, etc.

The 2. Argument.
It is a sin against God for him that is by way of Excellency a servaunt of
JESUS Christ, (without a precise and direct warrant from him) at any time,
(especially in the Solemn Worship of God) to give special Honor to
Antichrist and his members, But to use these Ceremonies, is in that manner
aforesaid, to give special Honor to Antichrist and his members, Ergo It is a
sin against God to use them.
The Proposition is manifest and clear to any that have an eye of Reason and
any light of Divinity shyning in it. For what is a sin if this be not: That
a Servaunt of Jesus Christ, even then when he is in the Service of Christ,
should perform special Honor and Service to Antichrist, or any of his limbs.

The Assumption is prooved (If our adversaries will grant it, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and that all the visible members of his Church, acknowledging him
their supreme head, are members of him) by this reason.

Such a Conformity to Antichrist and his Members in the Ceremonies of Religion
and Form of Divine worship, as is not only besides the word of God, but in a
special manner derogatorie to all reformed Churches that have departed from
the Synagogue of Rome, is a special honor to Antichrist and his members. But
to use these Ceremonies in Divine Worship, is such a Conformity to Antichrist
and his members, Ergo, To use these Ceremonies, in that manner aforesaid, is to
give special honor to Antichrist and his members.
The Proposition is without exception: For if it should be a special honor to
the Bishops of England and their conformed Clergy: For the Churches of
Scotland, voluntarily to leave conformity to the Churches of the low
Countries, France, and Germany, and to conform them selves in Ceremonies, and
Form of Divine worship to the Prelaticall Clergy of England: It must needs
be a special honor to Antichrist and his members, for any to do the like
to them.

The Assumption is thus proved: For a Minister of Jesus Christ to conform him
self in such peculiar Rites, Ceremonies and forms of Divine Service to
Antichrist and his members, as all other reformed Churches have rejected for
vain, foolish, and superstitious, is in a special manner derogatorie to all
other reformed Churches. But to use these Ceremonies in Controversy, is in
that manner to Conform him self. Ergo, It is in a special manner derogatorie
to all other Reformed Churches.


Both parts of the Syllogism are such as may easily be prooved, if they be
denied.

The 3. Argument.
All worship more then Civil, performed to any besides God, is a sin. To use
these Ceremonies in manner and form prescribed, is to perform a more then
civil honor (even a Religious) only to a humane Power and Authority, Ergo,
To use these Ceremonies, is to sin.
The Proposition needs no proof, For there is no middle Honor between Civil
and Divine, and therefore that which is more then Civil, is Divine. Now Divine
Honor is to be give^ only to God, who will not have his Glory given unto
another.

The Assumption is thus proved: If these Ceremonies be Religious Ceremonies,
and all Religious Ceremonies be a part of Divine worship, performed to that
authority that instituteth and commands them. If also the authority that
instituteth and commands them, is but merely humane, Then the Assumption is
true. But the first is true: Ergo, The latter is true also.


The Proposition can not be denied of any reasonable creature.

The Assumption has three parts:

I. That these Ceremonies are Religious Ceremonies. This needs no proof: For
what shall we make to be Religious Ceremonies, If those Ceremonies be not, That
are prescribed by the Church, to the Church only, tied to Religion only, and
Religious functions, offices, and persons: To be acted and performed only in
exercises of Religion and Divine Worship, and are mystical shadows and types
of Religious Doctrine.

II. That all Religious Ceremonies are parts of Divine Worship. This neither
should need any proof, If those that are adversaries unto us in this cause,
did not to much presume of the weakness of our discourse, and the strength of
their own wit. For there being an external Divine Worshipp which properly
co^sists in the outward Rites and Ceremonies of Religion: What Ceremonies can
be called parts thereof, if such Religious Ceremonies as these, be not? For if
bowing the knee, etc. in Divine Worship (though it be used also in Civil
Worship) be a part of Divine Worship, much more are those Ceremonies that are
peculiarly appropriated to Divine Service and Worship, and wherein part of the
form thereof is made to consist. But it may (for further satisfying of men) be
thus proved: All mere and immediate Actions of Religion are parts of Divine
Worship. All Religious Ceremonies, are mere and immediate Actions of Religion.
Ergo, They are parts of Divine Worship.


Further, how can a man imagine that a mere Religious and Ecclesiastical Act,
done by a Servant of God in the solemn Service and Worship of God, by precise
Canon of the Church should be no part of Divine Worship, Since all the solemn
Rites and Ceremonies that are used in the solemn Services of Civil States,
(especially such as are done in their presence) have been ever reputed parts
of Civil Honor and Worship.

Lastly, considering that God in his Divine Worship, does require the whole
heart, and all the powers of the Soul during the act of his Worship, It were
great presumption for any mortal Creature, to prescribe any Action to man
during the same Act that is no part thereof: Considering that every Action so
prescribed must of necessity pull a part of the heart from Divine Worshipp.

III. That authority that instituted them is but merely Humane. This is most
certain, for if they were ^nstituted by Divine authority, They could not be
esteemed Matters indifferent: and should not be in the power and discretion of
the Magistrate to disannull them.

The 4. Argument.
If it be lawful for a Minister of the Gospel without sin to use these
Ceremonies in Divine Worship: It is lawful for him upon the same occasion to
use any Jewish, Turkish, Paganish or Popish Ceremony whatsoever. But it is not
lawful for the Minister of the Gospel to use in Divine Worship, upon the same
occasion, any Jewish, Popish, Paganish or Turkish Ceremony. Ergo, He cannot
without sin use these.
The Assumption cannot for shame be denied, We prove the consequent of the
Proposition.

If any Jewish, Turkish, Paganish, or Popish Ceremonies and Rite be a thing in
it own Nature as indifferent as these Ceremonies are and either have, or may
have by such like institution as good use, then the consequent of the
Proposition is true. But the first is true. Ergo, The latter is true also.
The Proposition, as I think, cannot be denied nor the Assumption, but by
bringing some contrary instance in some of their Ceremonies: When any such shall
be given, this Argument shall be ^urther prosecuted.

The 5. Argument.
Every scismaticall action done by a Minister of the Gospel is a Sin. To
use these Ceremonies in controversy are scismaticall actions. Ergo, To use
these Ceremonies is Sin.
The Proposition will be granted. I must prove the Assumption.

All Actions of irregularitie and n^^ co^formitie to the Catholic church
wherein we live, are scismaticall Actions. To use these Ceremonies in
controversy, are actions of irregularitie, and non conformity to the
Catholic church wherei^ we live. Ergo, The use of these Ceremonies in
controversy are scismaticall Actions.
The Proposition cannot be denie^ for if we be branded with the cole (...)
scisme justly, for denying co^formitie in some Ceremonies, but to some of our
own particular Churches wherein we live, though we be content, to join with
them that use the^ in Divine worship: much more scismatiks are they that are
not conformable in Rites and Ceremonies to the Catholic Church wherein they
live.

I prove the Assumption.

If all the Protestants, Pastors, Ministers and Governors living this day in
Europe, and all the painful resident Pastors of our own country (except
some Nonresidents, Idol shepherds, some that depend upon the prelacie, and
some other that are forced and constreyned to use them against their will) do
not only refuse to use these Ceremonies, but esteem them vain, foolish and
superstitious: Then the use of these Ceremonies are actions of irregularitie
and non Conformity to the Catholic Church. But the first will be prooved true,
Ergo, The latter is true also.
The Proposition is evident, by their own principles: For an irregularitie and
non-Conformitie to the Pastors and Governors of Churches, is an irregularitie
and non-Conformitie to the Church, for they are reputed the CHVRCH
REPRESENTATIVE: and if they be to be anathematized, and excommunicated that
deny The Bishops and other Ministers assembled in the Co^vocation, to be the
Church of England representative, then surely are all the Pastors of the
visible Churches in Europe, the Catholic Church representative, and those
particular Ministers in this Realm, that shall use not only different
Ceremonies; but such as they have renounced and forsaken, are scismatikes and
irregular persons.

The Assumption is evident in it self.

The 6. Argument.
All spiritual Communion with those Idolatours amongst whom we live in the
mysteries of their Idolatry and Superstition, is sin. To use these
Ceremonies in Divine worship, is a spiritual Communion with the Idolatrous
Papists (That do not only border round about us, but are tolerated in
infinite numbers to live amongst us) in the mysteries of their Idolat. and
Superstition. Ergo, To use these Ceremonies is to sin.
The Proposition is his M. own, if Master B. have made a true report of the
Conference at Hampt. Court, for therein his Ma. confesses, That if we lived
amongst Idolators, we ought not then to communicate with them in their Rites
and Ceremonies.

The Assumption is thus prooved.

If Papists be Idolators, if we be not only in league with whole kingdoms of
Papists bordering upon us and near unto us, but have many Thousand professed
ones living amongst us: if these Ceremonies be special mysteries of their
Superstition if to use the same Rites that they do in theirs in our spiritual
and Divine Service, he spiritually to communicate with them in the same: Then
is the Sentence of the Assumption true. But we shall be able to prove, as soon as any shall deny, that the first and every part and parcel thereof is true.
Ergo, The later is true also.
The 7. Argument.
To mingle Profane things with Divine, is to sin. To use these Ceremonies in
Divine Worship is to mingle Profane things with Divine. Ergo, To use these
Ceremonies in Divine Worship, is to sin.
The Proposition shines in the eyes of the very Heathen, who have esteemed it
a dishonor to their Religion and worship, that any profane persons should be
Actors in it, much more that any profane Actions should be mingled with it.

The Assumption is thus proved.

All peculiar Actions done in Divine Worship, that are neither Civil nor holy,
are profane. These Ceremonies are peculiar actions done in Divine Worship, that
are neither civil nor holy. Ergo, They are Profane.
The Proposition cannot with any show of reason be denied, there being no mean
between these in such actions as are prescribed to be done in Divine Service
by Canon and Law: For though spitting, coughing, hemming, etc. if they be used
for necessity, be neither civil, holy, nor profane Actions: Yet if there
should be an Ecclesiastical Canon that should require the Minister to spit at
every full period; or the people to hem, and hawk at every tra^sition in a
Sermon, they must needs then be referred to one of these three heads, as shall
easily be proved if it be denied.

The Assumption is as clear.

For first his Ma. (with words of great disgrace and contempt of those, that
hold the contrary): has lately protested that they are not urged as holy and
Religious matters: And that they are not Civil Actions, has been proved
before, for there being an opposition in Reason between things Civil and
Ecclesiastical, though they have some things common to both (as all opposites
have) yet it is ridiculous to affirm that those things are Civil, that are
merely Ecclesiastical, and are Actions peculiarly appropriated and tied to
Divine Worship: For Civil Actions, are performed in Civil affairs, and
though there is a common Civilitie also to be observed even in Divine matters:
Yet those Actions cannot be called Civil, that are used only in Divine
Offices and duties, no more then those can be called Ecclesiastical and Divine
that are used only in Civil affairs. For it may be affirmed by as good
reason, that an Ecclesiastical Officer employed only in Ecclesiastical
matters, is a Civil Officer only. Or a Civil Officer employed only in Civil
matters is an Ecclesiastical Officer only; as that a mere Ecclesiastical
action, done in and by the Church only, should be a Civil Action.

The 8. Argument.
If it be lawful to use these Ceremonies in Divine worship, it is therefore
lawful because they are either lawful in themselves; or being things in their
own Nature indifferent, are made lawful by the commaundment of the Magistrate
to be used in Divine Service. But they are neither lawful in themselves to be
used, nor therefore lawful because the Magistrate commaundes them so to be
used, though they be Matters in their own Nature indifferent. Ergo, They are
unlawful to be used in Divine Worship.
The Proposition I think can not be denied, when it is, I hope it may be
prooved.

The first part of the Assumption is clear: For if they were in themselves
lawful, to be used, then might a Minister of the Gospel being left to his own
discretion, by the Magistrate, invent, institute, and use the like Ceremonies,
in the same manner without sin. For any man left to him self, may lawfully
do that which of it self is lawful and indifferent. But a Minister should
sin against God, if he should of his own head institute, and use the like
Ceremonies to these, though permitted by the Magistrate; Except we should
hold, that it is lawful, for a Minister to do any indifferent thing in Gods
Service, for a man may of any indifferent thing, make a Ceremony like unto one
of these.

The second part of the Assumption is thus proved.

If they be therefore lawful, because being things in their own Nature
indifferent, the Magistrate commands them to be done in Divine Service, Then
whatsoever thing (being in it own Nature indifferent) is or shall be commanded
by the Magistrate is lawful to be done in Divine Service. But all things that
are in them selves matters indifferent, are not lawful to be done in Divine
Service, though the Magistrate should command them. Ergo, They are not
therefore lawful to be used in Divine service, because the Magistrate
commandes them, though they be things in their own nature indifferent.
The Proposition cannot be denied, For if some things indifferent in their own
Nature being commanded by the Magistrate, are unlawful: It can be no good
Argument to say, These things being indifferent are commanded by the
Magistrate. Ergo,

They may lawfully be done. Much-lesse therefore they ought to be done. Or as
the Doctors of Oxef. affirm that they bind the conscience.

The Assumption is more clear then the Proposition. If it be considered either
what things are indifferent indeed, or go under the name and title of
indifferent things. Eating and drincking; the avoiding the superfluities of
Nature; due benevolence between man and wife; spinning and carding; killing of
Oxen and sheep, etc. which of themselves have in them neither virtue nor vice,
are therefore indifferent Actions; and yet I think none except professed
Atheistes, but will hold it a foul sin to do some of these Actions in any
Assembly, much more in the solemn worship of God, though the Magistrate should
command the same even upon pain of death. But if it be further considered,
That Carding and Dicing, Masking and Dauncinge; for Men to put on Woomens
apparel, and women men's: Drincking to healthes; Ribald, Stage Plays, etc. are
things indifferent to be done even upon the Lords own day: May a Minister of
the Gospel upon the Magistrates commandment do any of these in Divine
Worship. And yet there is none of these, but may have applied unto them by the
Wit of Man, a Mystical and Religious Sense; and then by this Bish. of
Canterburies Rule, They must needs be good and lawful Ceremonies: for his
principal Argument to prove them lawful at his last Co^vention of London
Ministers before him, was this.

They are Ceremonies that teach good Doctrine, Ergo They are good Ceremonies.
Whereas the filthiest actions and things that are may teach good doctrine.
The holy Ghost resembles the soul polluted with sin, to a menstrous cloth:
A man fallen again into sin, to a Sow wallowing in the mire: might therefore
a filthy sow and such uncelane clothes be brought into the Church, to be
visible shadows, and representations of such things? Nay, what may not by
this means be brought into Gods worship, and yet by this reason be defended
to be a good Ceremony if the Magistrates and Bishops should decree the same?
A fools coat and a beggars, worn in Divine Service, may fitly teach this
doctrine Not many Wise, not many Noble: A Minister clothed in such apparel as
those that act the Devils part in a play may teach this, That by Nature we are
lymmes of Satan and firebrands of hell, Men might wear Women's apparel, and
Women's Men, The one to teach, That the Church is Christ's Wife; The other to
teach, That Women in Christ are equal to Men. Beare-bayting may teach us,
How Christ was bayted before the Tribunals of the Pharisees, or the combat
between the flesh and the spirit. But the grossenes of these Assertions will
appear in our Special Reasons against the Ceremonies in particular.

The 9. Argument.
To Administer unto the Church of God, Sacraments that are not of Divine
institution, is to sin. To use diverse of these Ceremonies, viz. The Cross in
Baptism, the Ring in Mariadge, the Surplice, etc. is to administer unto the
Church of God Sacraments that are not of Divine institution: Ergo, To use these
Ceremonies, is to sin.
The Proposition is granted of all, both Papist and Protestant.

The Assumption is thus prooved.

All mystical bodily Rites and Signs of spiritual grace, administered to the
Church of God in his solemn service, to confirm grace, and that by him that
representes the person of Christ, are Sacraments. The greatest part of these
Ceremonies in controversy are such, and not of any Divine Institution. Ergo,
To use them, is to administer Sacraments that are not of Divine Institution.
The Proposition is most evident, and can not be denied of any that bears the
face of a Divine.

The Assumption is as evident, only this one clause may be doubted of: Whether
these Ceremonies be administered to confirm Grace, which is thus proved.

Those Ceremonies that are administered to edify the soul and consciences, are
administered to confirm grace. These Ceremonies are administered to edify the
soul and conscience. Ergo, They are administered to confirm Grace.
The Proposition can not with any color be excepted against. For to edify
the soul, to confirm grace in the soul, and to feed the soul, are
equivalent.

The Sacrament of the Supper therefore being for this only cause a Sacrament,
because it is a Mystical Rite, whereby the soul spiritually feeds upon
Christ. i. is edified in Christ: These being Mystical Rites also, whereby the
soul is edified, which it cannot be but also by feeding upon Christ, It must
needs follow, That these Ceremonies are Sacraments.

The Assumption is their own, for when they are urged with this, That all
things must be done to edification, They hold all with one consent, That they
do edify.

The 10. Argument.
It is a Sin against Christ the sole Head of the Church, For any one of his
Ministers, (especially in the Administration of Divine things) either by Word
or Signs, solemnly to profess and acknowledge a spiritual Homage, to a
usurped spiritual authority in the Church. But to use these controverted
Ceremonies in manner and form prescribed, is even in the solemn Service of
Christ, by solemn Signs, to acknowledge a spiritual Homage, to the
spiritual authority of Lord Archbishops and Bishops, which is usurped. Ergo,
It is a sin to use these Ceremonies.
The Proposition may not be gainesaid: For all spiritual power usurped over
the Churches of God, is an Antichristian authority, and to profess spiritual
homage thereunto, is to profess spiritual homage unto Antichrist, which must
needs be a sin.

The Assumption has two parts.

I. That these Ceremonies are an acknowledging by solemn signs, a spiritual
Homage to the spiritual authority of Archbishops and Bishops. Which is most
evident; for it having been proved before, that they are mere Ecclesiastical,
Religious and spiritual Actions, enjoined by an Ecclesiastical and spiritual
authority, They must needs be Signs of spiritual homage to the same
authority. For either the doing of a Religious and spiritual Action, in
obedience to a spiritual authority, is a Sign of spiritual homage, or no
Actions can be a Sign thereof. As therefore a serving man being a civil
person, upon the Bishops pleasure, wearing a Tawnie Cote, and a Chain of
Gold, holding up his Train, Going bare-headed before him; holding a Trencher
at his Table: lighting him to the house of office: dressing his meat, rubbing
his Horses, etc. does by these Actions, as it were by solemn Signs
acknowledge Civil homage to him, being a Civil Lord and Master: So a
Minister of the Gospel and a Pastor of a particular Congregation, being by
his office a mere spiritual man; being commanded by the Bishop, as he is a
spiritual Lord and Master over the Church of God, To wear a Tippet, a square
cap, a Priests Gown and Cloak, a Surplice: to make Crosses upon childs
faces; To put Rings on Brides fingers, etc. and all this in their Divine
Service. I say a Minister does thereby give solemn Signs and Tokens of
spiritual homage to their spiritual Lordships, even as by preaching the Word
and Administration of Sacraments and prayer, he professes by solemn Signs a
spiritual homage to the spiritual authority of Christ.

If they shall peremptorily affirm, That they are only Civil matters (as
some in high place have done to my self) Then this will follow of it; Whereas
the Bishops command now Ministers To wear a Surplice, a Priests Cloak, etc.
he may command them to wear Tawnie Cotes, and livry clokes; and in their
courses to wait and attend upon him, as serving Creatures: For there is no
more civil authority showed in requiring the one, the^ the other, If the one
as well as the other be civil matters. Neither will it help their cause,
That the Magistrate requires these things to be done. For the Magistrate
com^aunding Ecclesiastical matters to be done, his commandment does no more
make them civil, the^ his commanding the Sacraments and other parts of Divine
worship to be administered, duly does make them, civil matters. For the
ratificatio^ by civil authority the Constitutions of Ecclesiastical
authority, does no more make them civil matters the^ the ratification and
confirmation of civil matters, by Ecclesiastical authority does make them
Ecclesiastical or spiritual matters. Though therefore there is none of us
that stand out in these matters, but have ever been content to yield unto
their Lordships all civil honor, such as is given to Barons, Earls, Dukes,
and Princes, yet except they were Gods and Christ's, we have no reason, to
give spiritual homage unto them; which is it that in very deed they require
in these things: And therefore hence it comes to pass, That as they turn out
of their Palaces, Those servauntes that refuse their liveries, and to do
their civil Services, So as though they were Lords and Masters in the Church,
They turn the Ministers out of their offices, and shut them out of the Church,
if they refuse to wear their spiritual Liveries, and to do them spiritual
and Religious Service. But I come to the second part of the Assumption.

II. That the authority of our Lord Archbishops and Bishops, is a usurped
authority. This is sufficiently proved of late by May. Jacob in his I.
Assertion by many reasons, Only because the weight of the Argument leans
upon it, I will use one Reason.

Those Officers and Rulers in the Church that make claim to be of Divine
institution, challenge to them selves Apostolical authority and Jurisdiction
as the only Successors of the Apostles; to sit only in Moses chair; To
have sole power of the Keys; To cut from the visible Church, and receive
again: To have power of creating and displacing all other Ecclesiastical
Officers; To be the Universal Pastors of whole Dukedomes and Kingdoms, under
whom all other Pastors are as Curates, etc. And yet for all this, are such as
stand and are supported only by humane Traditions and Ceremonies, such as a
civil Magistrate may without sin, put out of the Church, And such as the
true Churches of God may renounce (and yet continue the true Church) as
Antichristian Usurpers and spiritual Tyrants. (I say) all such Officers and
Rulers exercise a usurped authority in the Church: But our Archbishops and
Bishops are such Rulers and Officers as are aforesaid. Ergo, They execute a
Usurped power over the Church.
The Proposition may easily be justified. For it inferior officers, viz.
Pastors of particular Congregations, have had and may have firm continuance in
the Church, without these humane devises and inventions; If the Magistrate
cannot without sin put them out of the Church; And if those can be no true
Churches that renounce to have particular Pastors and Ministers over them, It
must much more hold in such Church Officers and Rulers as these are, if their
authority be lawful and good: For whilst the Apostles lived, They needed not
any humane Traditions and divises to support their authority: The Magistrates
that sought to putt them down sinned with a high hand: And that was no
Church, that renounced and disclaimed their Office, Authority and Jurisdiction.

The Assumptio^ is as easily justified. For 1. They make claim and Title to
all those Prerogatives before rehearsed in the first part of the Proposition,
and unto more then that, as shall be proved if it be denied, 2. It is an Emblem
of their own, NO CEREMONY, NO BISHOP. Ergo, No humane Tradition and Invention,
no Bishop, Ergo, The office of a Bishop is supported by them either only or
specially. 3. Their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is derived from the King, else
it is a flat denial of his Supremacy. Also them selves grant in their last
Tables of Discipline, That the King has power to increase or diminish the
Circuit of a Bishopric: That he may make two or more Bishoprics of one, and
one Bishopric to be two or more: Yea what should hinder but that he may divide
the Bishoprike of London into 800. For where God has not defined the number of
Parishes that a Bishop is to reign over, it must needs be a thing
indifferent: in which by their own Doctrines the King has authority without
sin, to dispose. If therefore the King may as well (notwithstanding any thing
in the Law of God) Give the Keys of the Church to every particular Pastor of
a Congregation, over his own Congregation, as to a Bishop over a Diocese,
which takes away the very Essence of an English Bishop, He may without sin
take away the very Office of the Bishop, which co^sistes in having Jurisdiction
over many Co^gregations. Also it being not defined by the word of God, but left
free what attire Bishops shall wear, as also what maintenance they shall have,
The K. having absolute power in things indifferent, according to their own
Doctrine, he may turn them out of their Rochetts and Parliament Robes. Thrust
them out of their Palaces, and put them to their stipendes, to live upon
voluntary devotions of poor Christian people, and then a man may easily
imagine what the office of a Bishop would be worth: For he that has
authority to prescribe to a Bishop and other Ministers, the Forms, Rites and
Ceremonies of their Divine Service, has also power much more, To prescribe,
moderate and appointe their Apparel, Diet, and manner of maintenance. So that
it is clear, That the King may without sin disanull the authorities,
dignities and prerogatives of Bishops. Any of which shall be (if it be denied)
prooved to be matters of greater indifferency, and therefore more appertayning
to his Supremacte, then the prescribing of Forms of Divine Service and
mystical Rites of Religion. For let the King take from the Bishop all
indifferent things (which he may do by their own doctrine) and a Bishop will
be no Bishop, as shall be prooved, if it be denied. 4. There is no true and sober
Christians but will say that the Churches of Scotland, France, the low
Countries, and other places (that renounce such Archbishops and Bishops (as
ours are) as Antichristian and usurping Prelates) are true Churches of God:
which they could not be, if the authorities and prerogatives they claim to
them selves, were of Christ, and not usurped. For if it were the ordinance of
Christ Jesus, That in every Kingdom, that receaveth the Gospel, There should
be one Archbishop over the whole Kingdom: One Bishop over many hundred
Pastors in a kingdom, and all they invested with that authority and
jurisdiction Apostolical which they claim iure Divino, to be due unto them,
and to reside in them, by the ordinance of Christ, certainly that church that
should renounce and disclaim such an authority, ordained in the Church,
cannot be a true Church but a Synagogue of Satan. For they that should
renounce and deny such, must needs therein renounce and deny Christ him
self. Thus the Assumption, is cleared.

The 11. Argument.
All humane Traditions and Rites enjoined to be performed in Gods Worship, as
necessary to Salvation, are unlawful. These Ceremonies in controversy,
being but Humane Traditions, are enjoined to be performed in Gods worship, as
necessary to Salvation. Ergo, These Ceremonies are unlawful.
The Proposition is freely granted of all our Adversaries hitherto. If any
hereafter bv reason of some difficulties, the cause may be thrust into by
granting the same, shall be desperate as to deny the same: we shall be ready to
make it good at any time.

The Assumption is thus prooved.

What soever, Humane Tradition, Ceremony, or Action, That may without sin,
or inconvenience to any part of the Worship of God, be omitted in the same,
and yet notwithstanding are enjoined and urged as more necessary, then those
Actions that are by the word of God necessary to Salvation: I say, such
humane Ceremonies and Traditions, are enjoined as necessary to Salvation. But
these Ceremonies are such, as may without any sin, or any inconvenience to
any part of the Worship of God, be omitted in the same, and yet
notwithstanding are enjoined as more necessary for Christians to do, then
those Actions that are necessary to Salvation by the Word of God. Ergo, These
Ceremonies in controversy are enjoined, etc. as necessary to salvation.
He has no blood of shame running in his veins, that will deny the
Proposition.

The Assumption has two parts:

The first is this.

That these Ceremonies are such as may without sin or any inconvenience to
any part of the worship of God, be omitted. This is evident: For 1. if they
could not be omitted without sin in Divine Worship, they were Divine and not
Humane Ordinances. For example: Though to go clothed to the Congregation be a
Civil action, yet because it is a sin, for any to go naked to the
Congregation, It is a Divine Ordinance, That men should go clothed thither.
And in this case (as in any other case of sin) a man ought rather never
Worship God publicly, then to go naked to the Congregation. For the omission
of a Good action is no sin, when it can not be done, but by committing of a
sin? 2. Divine Worship consisting in Prayer, the Sacraments, and the Word, no
wit of man can show wherein the bare omission of any one of these Ceremonies
is inconvenient to any one of these parts. For what inconvenience can a man
(that is not drunk with the dreggs and lees of popish superstition) find it to
public prayer, to be said in the Congregation without a Priests Surplice?
The omission of ordinary Pawses and Accentes points and stoppes, the
suppressing of the voice, or a loud whopping and hollowing out of the words, or
an undistinct soundinge of them, were such Actions as common reason will teach
are inconvenient, for prayer, and so inconvenient that a man ought never to
pray publikelie in the Congregation, as the voice thereof, that should by
Canon be tied thereto: And the Magistrate (though there were no Canon to the
contrary) ought to turn such out of the Ministry that should omit such
matters in prayer. But for a Minister to pray without a Surplice, can be in
reason no more inconvenient, then for him to pray without book, without a
pair of Spectacles upon his nose. And there may be as good reason given to
prove it convenient, for a man that says a thing without book, to putt on a
pair of Spectacles, as there can be to prove it convenient for him that is to
pray in the Church, to putt upon him self a white linen garment.

The second part of the Assumption is this:

That they are enjoined as more necessary for Christians to do, then those
actions that by the word of God are necessary to Salvation. Which I prove by
this collection of Reasons;

1. If the whole Solemn Worship and Mystery of Jesus must stoop and yield
to these; And these must not stoop or yield to them.

2. If those that will yield to these are dispensed with for omissio^ of some
duties that God requires of the Minister to be performed as necessary to
Salvation, and those that are willing to do all necessary Services tending to
the Salvation of Man, can not be dispensed with for the Omission of these, but
must be turned out of Christ's Service.

3. If those that refuse only Conformity to these are worse then Idolatrous
Papists.

4. If the bare omission of these, though upon tenderness of Cosscience, be
Sedition, Scisme, Disloyalty, Rebellion, a denial of the Kings Supremacy,
Anabaptistrie, Frenzy, Worthy imprisonment, Banishment, loss of Goods and
living.

5. If all that profess these to be unlawful, are to be delivered up to
Satan, and anathematized as men holding wicked and damnable errors.

6. If a man being in that Church, ought not to be of it where these
Ceremonies are omitted.

7. If the bare omission of these, make a Minister by our law: more subject to
deprivation and suspension, then the commission of the foulest Crimes, even
Drunkenness, Blasphemy, gross Ignorance, Uncleanness.

8. If her late Excellent Ma. Religion consisted in these: I say, If all these
Assertions be true, then are they enjoined as more necessary to be done,
then those Actions that by the word of God are necessary to Salvation.

But all these 8. points are to be justified. Ergo, These Ceremonies are
enjoined as more necessary to be done, then some Actions that are necessary
to Salvation.
The Proposition can not be gainesayed. It being a Topic Axiom. Cuius privatio
est deterior, illud ipsum est melius: to wit, The worse the Privation of a
thing is, the better the thing is. For example: If blindness be worse the^
deafness: Then is the positive habit of seeing better then that of hearing.
So, if Non-Conformitie be worse then dru^kennes, blasphemy, Idolatry,
Filthiness of body, etc. It must needs follow, that Conformity is a more
excellent thing in it self, then Sobriety; the true worship of God; the
glorifying of the name of God, then a chaste and honest life: But all these are
urged by the word of God, as necessary means to Salvation. For the holy
Ghost says: No Murderer, Adulterer, Unclean person, Idolator, etc. shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven. If therefore Conformity be more urged by
our laws, then these, and the Privation more punished. If this be more
strictly required of Christians, yea of principal Christians, even the
Ministers of the word, then the other, They must needs be urged more
necessary to Salvation, then the other. For of the more excellency a
Christian virtue is, the more necessary to Salvation it is.

The Assumption in every part and parcel thereof may be justified by the
practice and Assertions of our Adversaries, not only privately but in
public. For the 1. God must not by Canon be Worshipped solemnly in England,
except these be mingled with it, Though without them he might be never so well
worshipped. For the 2. Those that yield to these, need not preach at all in
our church except they will, No nor to do any other part of Divine Service in
their own person, if they will maintain a Curate, that will keep the
Ceremonial Law, and fairly Read or Sing the Kings Service, as they call it:
And yet if preaching were not necessary to Salvation, Paul that was above an
Archbishop, should not have been under a woe, if he had not done it. For no
Minister of the Gospel is under a woe That performs all services to the
Churches of God, that are necessary to Salvation. Neither was Paul's
preaching, A reading of Homilies, or of a Service book. For the 3. Nothing is
more notorious then for us that make scruple of these things to be reputed
worse then Papists: One that is a great Judge in these causes Ecclesiastical,
affirmed it unto my self. Another openly at Paul's Cross in mine own
hearing, made no doubt but the Papists were in the Church, but he made great
doubt whether the Puritanes were. And yet we are Puritanes for nothing else but
for refusinge Co^formitie to their Ceremonies: For howsoever they sclaunder us
with many other gross imputations, yet they can not lay any thing to our
charge but our Conscience in this. For all other matters concerning their own
estats, and dignityes, considering how desperate they are, and unreformable we
can be content to leave them to the Judgment of God, who (as it seems)
intends to gloryfie himself by some other means, then by then conversion.
For the 4. Read Scottish. Genevat. The Survey, Remonstraunce etc. And yea shall
find all this laid to their charge. Also their practice sufficiently proves
it, for the ministers that are of late susspended and deprived, only refusing
to use these Ceremonies, bear their condemnation under these names and Titles.

The 5 and 6 is proved by their own late Canons, ffor if they be to be
excommunicated ipso sacto as houlding damnable and wicked errors, that shall
Profess any of these Ceremonies to be unlawful, a man ought not to
acknowledge himself a member of any such Church, as does affectedly cast them
out of gods worship: ffor for what error a particular person is not to be
reputed a member of the Church but as a heathen and publican, ffor the same a
whole church is not to be reputed a church but a Sinagoge of Satan.

The 7 may be justified by many instances of many vile and impious persons of
those kinds tolerated in the ministry.

The 8 is proved by him that answers the Plea of the Innocent. Who Says that
they that call in question the lawfulnes of these Ceremonies, call in question
her late Majesty's Religion, which they could not do, except (at the least)
part of her religion consisted in them.

Further if this does not sufficiently prove the maine assumption, let these
reasons following be wayed.

1 If the Church be necessary to salvation, and if the pillars of the church be
necessary to the Church, and if the lord Bishops be the Pillars of the Church,
and these or such like Ceremonies be the maine Supporters of L. Bishops: then
are these Ceremonies in the judgment of the prelates, necessary to Salvation.
For no Church no Salvation, no pillor of the church no Church, no L. Bishop no
pillar of the Church, No ceremony no Lord Bishop. Ergo no Ceremony of this
kind, no Salvation.

2 All divine constitutions binding conscience are necessary to Salvation: But
by the late doctrine of the Prelates and others, these Ceremonies (being not
unlawful) when they are commanded by the Church, are said not to be humane but
divine Constitutions, binding conscience; therefore they (as they are urged) are
necessary to Salvation. For all divine constitutions binding conscience, are
necessary to Salvation, or ^ls nothing on our part can be said in any sense to
be necessary thereunto.

3 It is necessary to Salvation, that men should not only worship God, but
worship him in a comely decent and orderly manner, it being a matter of
damnation to worship God in a confused unseemly and disordered manner, but by
the doctrine of our Prelates, comelines, decency, and order consists, in the
use of these Ceremonies, Ergo in their Judgment, they are necessary to
Salvation.

Ob. The Church does not intend to urge these things as necessary to
Salvation. Ergo, They are not urged, ^s necessary to Salvation.

Ans. 1 The Church urges not these things at all, but only 3 or 4 Bishops in
the Church, which (if their own doctrine be true (are Usurpers over our
Churches, and not so much as any true members of a Church.

2 what if the Synod should decree that the King should hold the arch bishop
stirrup, and the Prnce and Nobles kiss his Toe, once or twice a year and
withal they should protest, that they do not require this as a worship or
honor to the Archbishop but only for Comelines Order and Edification were not
this a shameful shift as bad, as the thing it self.

The 12 Argument
All actions, not required by the word of God (though commanded by humane
authority) that are apparent means of the Damnation of the Souls of infinite
numbers of men, are directly against the Law of charity, and therefore Sin.
But these Ceremonies are such Actions Ergo
The Proposition is without question. For if without commandiment from God, I
may upon the sole will and pleasure of the Magistrate, or governors of the
Church, do that by which I shall be a means of the damnation of my brothers
Soul, which is the greatest breach of the law of charity that can be. Then
may I do any sin at their Commandment without sin, for what greater sin
can there be against the 2 Table then this, to be a witting instrument of my
Neighbors Damnation. Which though it be but a matter of Jest to our great
Doctors that have many Cures, and no care of Souls, yet to them which know the
price of a soul it is more then if upon the more will of the Magistrates they
should be forced to kill their own Children and d^^rest b^loveds, with their
own hand.

OB. The Ma^^^^are having authorit^e given him by God to command things
Indifferent, he commanding th^^ are to be done notwithstanding (...) ^candall
of our Nighbour. Answ. 1 Though the Subject ought to obey his Magistrate in all
Indifrent actions imposed upon him what soever, yet I desire that it may be
proved, that God in his word has given to any Power or Potentate upon Earth,
any such absolute authority. The Magistrate is Gods Leifetenau^t, and the
glory of the Magistrate consists in this, in that under God he bears a
sword, to punish those that transgress his Laws, but he is by Gods
Ordinance to be the procurer and protector of the christian liberty, of his
subjects, That therefore he has power granted him of God (upon his own
pleasure) to take away the same, especially insuch a case requires proof out of
the word of God.

2. If he have such a power, yet those things that God leaves to his will to
command, or not to command, he cannot command under a greater penalty then
bodily death; for his sword can cut no deeper, and then in the case of
Scandal a christian subject ought rather to suffer the Magistrate to take away
his life, then to do that which shall procure the Damnation of his Brothers
Soul. And in thus doing, he is noe contem nor of the Magistrates Law, but a^
fulfiller of the Law of Charity, in not distroying his brothers Soul upon
the mere^ pleasure of a mortal man.

OB. But the commaundiment of the Magistrate takes away the scandal. When the
thing is done in obedience to him. An. This is a another desperate shift As
though the conscience of the weak brother that judges a thing indifferent to
be a Sin will be ever the more satisfied and releeved in the matter by the
authority of the Magistrate, nothing but the authority of God either can or
ought to satisfy a doubting conscience. And as for them that put superstition
in things Indiffrent, and are that way scandalized the authority of the
Magistrate or church commanding them, their scandal is increased, and not
removed by the same.

OB: But we must more respect Obedience to the Magistrate, then the scandal
of inferior persons, the thing commanded being indifferent, and not evell.
Ans. 1 The thing commanded is not Indiffrent, then when it is a scandal, and
stumbling block to our brother. 2: We must obey the Magistrate only in the
Lord, but this is not to obey him in the Lord, only upon his pleasur to
destroy a soul for who^ Christ died. 3. An obedience to the Magistrate so far
as to the condemnation of our brothers soul, must be a special obedience, in
some special good and just commandiment which cannot be verified of a
commaundiment that requires only a thing indifferent, much les such an
indifferent, as is a scandal and means of destruction to men's souls

4 Such a forbeareing of obedience only in love to the salvation of our
brothers Soul, being without apparent contempt of the Magistrate, and having
adioined with it, a meek submission to the mercy of the Magistrat^, cannot be
called a dissobedience. but is in deed a better obedienc then theirs, that do
contrary, who in their obedience bring the blood of the souls they destroy,
both upon their own heads and the Magistrate which is a sin in the eyes of
God wors then rebellion.

OB. But by obedience to these Ceremonies many souls by means of preaching
are saved, which shall want the means in the refusal. Ans. 1 We must not
distroy the souls of some, that we may save the souls of other, we must do
that which is just, though the world go to wreck for it.

2. The greatest good that a man can do, cannot counteervaile the least evil,
much les so great an evell as to be a witting instrument of the damnation of a
brothers soul.

3 He that preaches cannot assure himself of the salvation of one soul by
the same, for that is wrought by the work of the spirit of God And he has
little cause to hope for a blessing upon that preaching, which he purchases
with the price of blood, yea of the blood of souls.

OB: But the K. the Magistrates and state are scandalized also at the omission
of them, and their scandal is more to be respected then the scandal of
inferior parsons, for the vseing of them. Ans. 1. For his Majesty, we doubt
not but (if the prelates would) he would easily yeald to the removal of them,
and therefore he cannot be scandalized at the refusal, when it is of mere
conscience, though of conscience deceived. 2 The States and Inferior
Magistrates of the kingdom, have in all Parliaments showed them selves
willing, and ready, to set their hands to the removal of them. 3 If the King
and State will be scandalized, because upon their mere will and pleasure, I will
not do that which I am persuaded will be a means of the destruction of their
souls for whom Christ died. They will be much more scandalized at me if I do
it, For such an obeydience as this, must needs be a means of begetting or
confirming straing sins in their souls, for as it is a kind of deifiyng of
themselves, To require (even in the case of scandal) a thing indifferent to be
done; so they that shall in such a case obey, cannot but nurish exceedingly
that corruption from which such a co^maudement shall proceed. 4 The soul of
the meanest and poorest in a kingdom cost as great a price, and is as dear to
Christ, as the soul of the Noblest, and in the matter of scandal as great
heed is to be taken to them, as to any other: And it shows of what spirit
these men are of, that think they may betray the souls of Christ's little
ones. rather then displease a mortal man.

Ob. What? Must the Magistrates laws be changed, for every humor that will
pretend scandal? Aunsw. Yea, such laws as commau^d only things indifferent,
in cases of general scandal are to be changed, of particular scandal, are
(at the least) to be dispensed withal; For if laws that command things
necessary are some times to be dispensed with, and if of them it is said.
Extreme right, is Extreme wrong. Much more then such laws as require only
such things as are indifferent. 1 Such things that (but for the co^maunders
pleasure) makes noe matter whether they be done or not. Which are indeed
unworthy to be commanded of worthies. 2 A pretended scandal in humor is
easily discerned by those that are wise and not malicious, for they that are
ready to perform all obedience to the Magistrate in all other heavier and
greater things, are ready in his service to spend their goods and lives, that
think nothing to dear for the redee^yng of his safety, that are in all other
things as obedient, and more obedient then any other of his subjects: It is not
to be supposed of any, (that are not possessed with the malicious spirit of
Antichrist.) That such should refuse to obey the Kings pleasure in a toye, and
a trifle, (such as are all things indifferent) except that in obeying him, they
were persuaded that they should sin against their own conscience, which next
unto God, they have cause to please, far above all the Kings of the earth, for
it has greater power to torment them, then they have.

But I prove the Assumption.

All apparent means of confirmyng me^ in Scisme, Superstition, and Idolatry,
by means whereof many have profesedly lived, and dyed therein, without
repentance: are apparent means of the damnation, and destruction of many
souls amongst us: But These Ceremonies are such. Ergo.
The proposition cannot be denied, for what action of man can be said to be a
means of the damnation and destruction of another soul: If these actions be
not that confirm men in such foul Sins: So that either a man can do
nothing that shall destroy his brothers soul (which is dyrectly against the
express words of St. Paul,) Or else such a conformity, in such actions as
Confirm men in such Damnable Sins, does destroy his soul.

The Assumption is as evident as any such matter can be. For

1. The Papists not only amongst us (which are innumerable) but others also
do profess, that by our use of these Ceremonies) which are consecrated
mysteryes of their own Religion) they are confirmed in the truth of their
Religion, and the falsehood of ours. And good reason they have so to judge: For
if the broth be good that the Divill is sod in, sure the Divill himself must
needs be good also. 2 Those christians of the Separation that are called
Brownists being many hundreds, professing the same faith that we do, are by
the retayning of Relics, confirmed in their Scisme, and Separation from us;
And live and dye in this opinion: That our Churches are noe true Churches, and
that a man cannot without sin communicate with them. And the maine ground of
this is, for that we mingle with Divine worship these base and vile inventions
of men, Yea, of the accurssed Antichrist. What? Is a linen ragg, and a
christ's cross etc. to be reputed of so great value and price, that the
fellowship and spiritual communion of so many christians, (as sound in
religion as any prelate in the Realm) should be conte^ned and rejected for
them?

3 Common experience teaches us, that there are infinite numbers in this
realm, ignorant and superstitious folk, that place as much, or more holiness in
these things, then in the holy Ordinances of God; And how can it be
otherwise, when they shall see the Rulers of the Church, mingle Heaven, Earth,
and Hell together in this manner about them. Cursing and anathematizing all
that shall not embrace them. How can they but imagine, that the sight of a
surplice upon a priests back shall bring them to heaven, when they shall see
those that keep Heaven Keys, send a man, for want of such a wedding garment,
ipso facto, to Hell?

4 If it be but considered, that all other Protestant Churches have rejected
them as menstrous clothes, that more then the greatest number of Pastors in our
own Land, that desires the name of faithful and painful Teachers, either
count them impious, or at least the burdens, or reproaches of our Churches: that
the first appoynters of them, (after our separation from Rome) intended only a
toleration of them, that the most scandalous and lewd persons in our
congregations, are the hottest for them, that every Parliament since her
Majesty's reign has been forward in the removing of them, that the defense of
them has driven men to run into the broching of many gross and popish
e^^o^^^ And that so many ministers, (a catalogue of whose names and states, I
could wish were published to all posterity, that it may see the wonderful
mild and moderate government of prelates) have endured and expected daily to
endure the greatest extremityes for the same: I say, if these things be duly
considered, a man shall easily see, that these ceremonies are stumbling blocks,
laid by the Devil and his Agents in the ways of all the people of this
Realm, to hinder the progress of the Gospel, and to make all men stumble in
the ways of Salvation.

How long Lord Jesus.
AN ADDITION.
NOt only our Conformers unto Rome, but they also that abhor the same, can
hardly endure to hear, that these ceremonies are parts of divine worship, for
whose further satisfaction I ad this one Argument.

Whatsoever being used in dyuine worshipe is directly contrary to the.2.
Commandment, is a part of dyuine w rshipe. The^ Ceremonies are used in Dyuine
Worship and are directly contrary to the 2. commandment. Ergo
The Proposition is evident, for all outward Idolatry is Dyuine worshipp and
nothing but Outward Idolatry is directly forbidden in the.2. Commandment.

The.2. part of the Assumptio^ is thus proved,

All inventions and devises of man, grounded only upon the will of man, and not
upon any necessity of nature, or civility, set a part (...) God outward
wo^ship are contrary to the s^c^^d^ c^mmaund^m^nt. These c^^^m^nye are such,
Ergo.
The proposition we prove thus.

Either all such devises and inventions are contrary unto the second
commandment, ^r el^ their is no A trope or figure o^ s^each wherein under o e
k^nde of Idola^^^ a^^^ts dden.
Synechdoche theirin, But there is a Synechdoche in the 2 commaunddement. Ergo.
The Assumption or latter part of this Syllogysme cannot be denied of any, but
such as shall desperately set themselves, against the truth of God. For if
their were no figure or Trope in the commandment, then to bow down unto,
and to worship the Sunn, Moon and Stars, or any other of Gods creatures, yea,
or any image made by any other, should be no breach of this commandment, much
les to offer Jewish Sacrifices of sheep and Oxen, to circumcise, to go a
pilgrimage to Sai^ts, to kiss the Paxe, to sprinckle with holy water, to
Baptize Bells, or to use any other Popish rites, in which if a man sin not
against the second commandment, he sins not against any. Again, it would
be demanded, against what commandment, Nadab and Abihu sinned, when they
offered strange fire. The Israelits when they abused Gideons Ephod, Judge. 8 27.
The Corinthians in eating meat offered to Idols in the Idols temples, 1 Cor. 9.
Either they sinned not against this commandment, and by consequent against
none, or else there must needs be, a wonderful large Trope in the same, which I
think never any divine Jew or Christian, Protestant or Papist ever denied
before now.

The proposition is as evident if it be considered, that in the 2
commandment, literally a (...) o^ speech, nothing is forbidd^n (...) o^
im^ge^ ^or worship, (...) unto them, and wors^^^ (...) the^, now i^ there be a
Synechdoche (...) co^^^^ndement, there must of nec^^^^^ (...) not only other
kinds of false out^^ and wor^^^p of Id^latry, different in form from making,
and bowing down unto Images and Ido^^, but their mu^t be also some common ca^^
or ground, upon which making and bo^^^^ unto Images is ^^^^^dden, which must
(...) Argument, and reason by which (...) outward worship are (...) images, and
con^e^^^^ (...) at, else ^t were senseless to make a^y thing that attempt a
bowinge down unto ^^^ges t^ (...) ^der that name and (...) is condemned vnd^^
another, it is ^^c^^e that thing does ^ate with i^ i^ the same cause for (...)
it is c^^^^mned ^tor example i^ un^^^ (...) unto Images* Iew^^h C^^ (...) for
a^ (...) an^ ^^n^e be called (...) some (...) f^r^^ (...) unto t^^m (...) which
mu^^ be as it (...) unto it ^n^ them. Now let all the wits in the world lay
their heads together and they shall never be able to devise any such common
g^nu^ that shall be the commen cause why not only b^ w^ down t^ ma^^s, but why
un^er it an other ^^nde or Idolatry and false worships is condemned, but this.
for that they were ^^mane devices, and inventions, and therefore under the most
u^uall and general received invention of man, God condemns all other (...)
v^ed to the same end. If this be not the reason then there are and may be
infinite, Out^ar^e Idolatries and Superstitions that cannot with any reason be
referred to this commandment. Therefore it must needs follow that either there
is no tr^^e in the commandment or that all such inv^ntions of man are
forbid^en in the same.

An advertis^ment.
I had thought (good re^^er) to have fortified some other points in the
Arguments, which to the^ that do not consider may seem weak, but I forbear
^or some special reasons, I am ^nly to admon^^h thee of one de^e^t amongst
others that (...) me. viz. The mi^ta^^ng of the A^c^^^^^ps Argument thoug^ I
(...) it better t^^^ was, ^or thus it is, and (...) been pour^ed.

(...) good, are lawful and good ceremonies. The doctrine of these ceremonies
is sound and good, Ergo.
Which is subject to the very same absurdityes that the other and more also.
For 1 the doctrine of them is unsound and false, for the doctrine of them is
this, that they are matters indifferent, of order decency, and edification, no
parts of Divine worship, that they are Scismatickes that will not conform unto
them, enimyes to the Supremacy and State, that it is a wicked error to hold
them unlawful and superstitious that they are to be excommunicated that
affirm the^ to be so. etc. All which is unsound doctrine concerning them. 2
Grant the doctrine sound, yet it follows not that the Ceremonies are good,
for the thing may be wicked, and yet the doctrine of it sound. For, There is a
sound doctrine of all Vices. 3 In what respect does he affirm the doctrine to
be sound and good? Is it not from the use and end that is assigned unto them by
himself? Because they are appointed for such and such ends? Hence will follow
the very same absurdities, that I have observed in the former. For then any
ridiculous or base Ceremony, may be instituted, so it be under pretense of a
good end.


