PASQVILS Mistress: Or THE WORTHY AND unworthy woman. With his description
and passion of that Fury, Jealousy.

Imprinted at London, for Thomas Fisher, and are to be soulde at his shop, at
the Sign of the White Heart, in Fleetestreete. 1600.

THE BEST MERIriest wit in true honest kindness, not king Humfrey, but Humfrey
King, God and a good wife make a happy man in this world.
LVstie Humfrey, honest wagge, hearing, of late, of your determination, to
enter into the honorable course of kindness (which, after many mad Roundes,
will be the best dance to continue with) hopeing that you are old enough to
know what is good for your self, and yet not so wilful in conceit, but you
will take aduisement of your good friends; for the better instruction of your
judgment in this loves lawe-case, I have thought good to set you down such
notes worthy memory, as may give you great light, in the best way to your
comfort: where, finding the true description of the worthy, and unworthy woman,
you may, by gods help, make a choice worth the choosing. Pasquill sent them to
me, and I to you; hoping, that if they be not as they should be, you will blame
him, and not me. So, wishing thine honest heart as good fortune as my self,
and as much better as shall please God; if you light well, to be glad, but not
proud of it; if otherwise, to be as patient as your poor friends (hoping,
that you will find a jewel worth the keeping, and dross but worth the
discarding) I commit my book to your kind reading, and my love to your like
keeping: and so rest

Your affectionate friend, Salohcin Treboun.

To the Reader.
PASQVILL, as you have heard, having had many mad humors in his head, could
never be at quiet in his heart, till he had eased his mind of his mela^choly:
now of late, leaving boys play to go to coytes, to put toys out of his
head, fell to study of love: which, finding out a Mistress for his humor,
put his wits to many good services, scarce worthy the reciting. But, in
brief, he was so graueled in the admiration of her perfections, that he looked
so far into her mind, as made him have mind almost of nothing else; till,
finding the variety of her inclination, he grew out of love with love: his
mistress was but a dream, and women were strange creatures: if they were as
they should be, they were to hard to come by: if, as too many be, they were
better lost than found. And in this quandarie of quimeddledy, how now
(according to the old country Round, Take the best, and leave the worst, and
break none of the pale) he has written his mind of all that came to his
thought, hoping the best will be quiet, and the rest will mende. And so, wishing
every man to take his fortune, as patiently as he may, and to speak as well
of him, as he list, he rests, after his old fashion,

Pasquill.

Pasquill, in general, to women.
YE that are worthy of honor, I willingly give it ye: ye that deserve ill,
I will pray for ye, that God will amend ye: but ye that are gracious, be not
proud, least ye fallere ye be aware: and ye that are too blame, be not
desperate; God is merciful: among ye all, let none be more pieuish than
another, to take ill to her self. What is good take it, ye that deserve it:
what is ill, I bequeath it to none at all: for, I know not her, whom
particularly I will touch with imperfections. Some kind of shadows I dreamed
of, that were like women: which when I awooke, I found nothing such. And
therefore, hoping all women will deserve some good thought, or other, I will
honor the best, and pray for the worst, and so rest.

Pasquill.

PASQVILS MISTRESS.
NOt she, that braues a picture for a face,
Nor she whose waste is little as a wand:
Nor she whose eye can glance it with a grace,
Nor she that has a Spider fingred hand,
Nor she that does upon her Tiptoes stand:
Nor she that is with beauties dross bedight,
Is she, of whom my Muse does mean to write.
For Beauty fades like a Morning flower,
And sickness winds the body soon awry:
And Pride is but the shadow of a power,
Nor in a finger, does all fairness lie.
For when foot, hand, head, heart, and al must die,
And death has made a Carcass of a Creature,
What good do then the Ornaments of Nature?
No, no: there is an other kind of thing,
Which in the heart does grow, as some do guess,
That secretly does through the spirit spring,
And heavenly powers especially do bless:
Which as it grows, by measure, more or less:
Does beautify the body where it grows,
As wit and reason, all in wonder shows.
Which some do call the Quintessence of Nature:
Other set down for reasons government:
And some do call the form of honors feature:
And other some the spirits Instrument,
That gives each limme, and sense, their ornament:
But all and some agree on this, I find,
It is the wonder in a woman's mind.
It is the Mind that gives the Majesty:
The purest beauty, is within the Mind.
It is the Mind that makes the dignity,
It is the Mind that makes the Nature kind,
And keeps the eye, that never can be blind:
It is the Mind that guids both heart and head:
For kill the Mind, the body is but dead.
And this same mind, that monarcheth the thought
Wherein it does by inspiration dwell,
By whom, the ground of every grace is sought,
The eye to see, ear hear, the tongue to tell,
How every sense may in it self excel,
This mind I say, the majesty of Nature,
Is only it, that makes the perfect Creature.
This mind, the gift of the Supernall grace,
Descending from the life of Mercies love,
Which in true music skorns to touch the Base,
But (in the height of honors best behooue)
Does the true consort of contentments prove:
This mind is it, that in true happiness,
Does only make a woman's worthiness.
For, let her be as fair as Curds and Cream,
Yet if her mind be made of Milk and Cheese,
Her water is but like a common stream,
That in a puddle does her honor leese.
A Waspish mind is not for honey Bees:
While the true mind, where honor has her height,
Can not descend into a base conceit.
And let her be a bag of gold for wealth,
Yet, if withal she bear a beggar mind:
The gracious eye, that sees the spirits health,
Knows that the heart that is to hell enclinde,
In virtues heaven can never honor find:
While the true mind, where virtue has her place,
Makes gold but dross, to purchase honors grace.
And let her be a very Ape for wit,
Yet, if she be enclinde to Monkies toys:
Virtue, that does the heart to honor fit,
Finds it too full of follies foul annoyes,
To seek the Jewel of true Graces joys:
While wisdom shows, that in the soul does sit,
There is no honor in an Apishe wit.
And let her be a Lady for her honor,
Yet if she be of an ungentle mind,
What heart of worth that will attend upon her?
That can not grace true virtue in her kind:
But like a Buzzard, let her beat the wind,
While the true mind that has true honor proved,
Makes gracious kindness worthily beloved.
Thus, let her be, fair, wealthy, noble, wise:
Yet if these be not inly in the mind,
In the clear judgment of true wisdoms eyes,
She is no Creature of an Angels kind:
While shadows do but Indiscretion blind.
No, it is the mind, that the true worth retains:
That all by virtue, endless honor gains.
For, if I may describe a worthy woman,
Worthy of honor in the highest kind
(Such, as but such one, known to few, or no man)
But by the module of a heavenly mind,
If that mine eye be not conceited blind,
I will set down how gracious thoughts bring forth
The perfect wonder of a woman's worth.
If she be fair without, gracious within,
Noble of birth, and in demeanor kind:
Welthie in purse, yet will with bounty win
The worthy honor of a Noble mind:
Such a rare Phoenix in the world to find,
And to be matched in her worth by no man,
May well describe the wonder of a woman.
But if her beauty be a common blaze,
To fire the heart of every foolish head:
Or like a glass, be every woodcockes gaze,
By fond affectes to bring a fool to bed:
If such ill humors have the spirit fed,
Where wisdom wants to give the mind a grace,
It makes a picture of a painted face.
And if she be of Noble Parentage,
Yet turn her mind unto a meaner string:
And by the want of honors carriage,
Will grace a beggar, and disgrace a King,
And leave a Lark to hear a Cuckoe sing:
Unfitly was that honors title given her,
When a base mind has to such beggary driven her.
And if she be as rich as Croesus was,
Yet if her mind be given to greediness:
And does for wealth more than for honor pass:
And thinks no honor but in wealthinesse:
In the true Rules of honors worthiness,
She is as far from true Nobility,
As an old Churl from true Gentilitie.
And if she be as wise as wit can make her,
Yet if that wisdom do not guide her mind,
Such Apish humors will so overtake her,
That oftentimes she will be wilful blind,
And loose the worth that better wit might find:
And then the wit that has but folly proved,
Will make her little worthy to be loved.
Oh then, let virtue govern beauties eye,
And honors love, a noble spirit Nurse:
Let wisdom, wit, to cares discretion tie,
And Bounty keep the wealthy Ladies Purse:
So in the bliss where never fell a curse,
Perfections grace the spirit of that kind,
That so can make a body of a mind.
For such a body of a mind so framed,
Contains more worth then passion can express.
Which wonder, being in a woman named,
In honors title can deserve no less
Then Reasons grace in Natures worthiness:
Which on the earth in any one well known,
Might make her only, by her self, alone.
The Noble mind regards true Nobleness,
And bends no eye upon a base aspect:
Rejects pride, rewards thankfulness;
And unto virtue has a chief affect:
And is not of the subtle humored sect:
But plainly sees and marks, and loves the heart,
That only seeks for honor by desert.
It loves no creeping that does sinell of craft,
Where fair before does hide the foul behind:
Nor is it pleased in a sugared draft,
That fills the stomach only but with wind:
Nor loves a Falcon of a Buzzards kind:
But like a Phoenix soaring in the Sun,
Begins to live when that her life is done.
It makes patience kill each discontent,
And reason comforts in their kinds to measure:
It breeds the humor of the best intent,
And tells the heart, what should be her chief treasure:
And but in heaven does place the spirits pleasure:
It lives on earth, but has not here her living,
While heavenly love has al her essence giving.
What worth has won the fairest wome^s fame?
But that which honor in the mind has wrought:
And what has wrought the truest honors frame?
But that which virtue in the mind has taught:
To which the body is a thing of naught:
For in the mind the gracious spirit dwells,
That gives the ground, wherein each sense excels.
The gracious glorious Queen of womankinde,
The virgin Marie, mother of all Bliss,
What won her honor, but an humble mind?
That shows the vain where truest virtue is:
Leading the soul it cannot go amiss:
But in perfection plainly has approved,
The only life that is of God beloved.
Venus was fair, but to Diana, foul:
Minerua wise, till Pallas came in place:
But oh, to match an Eagle with an Owl,
A baggage spirit with an Angels face:
Honor can never yield to such disgrace.
No: virtues hand, that gives honors crown,
Will strike the thought of al dishonor down.
Oh, the true noble beauty of the mind,
The hearts chief riches, and the spirits treasure,
That does the soul to sacred service bind,
That only seeks in Paradise her pleasure,
Has even of heaven already made a seizure,
And shows where virtue does the wit refine,
It makes the creature to be known Divine.
It makes the eye of beauty bless true honor,
And honor grace the heart of humbleness,
And wisdom make best wits to wait upon her,
While wealth rewards service thankfulness:
And fills the mind so full of worthiness,
As where such true perfections are approved,
Can not but be of heaven and earth beloved.
Penelope was constant in her love:
Which to her beauty gave a glorious grace:
Did not Lucretia as great honor prove,
Against Tarquinius, in a woeful case?
Oh, modest beauty has a blessed face:
But fair and noble, constant, wise, and kind
Do show an Angel in a woman's mind.
Oh this same mind, a spirit of that power,
That joys in nothing but in doing good:
And will omit no mean, no place, nor hour,
That may bring in the height of honors slood,
Caries no falsehood, in too fair a hoode,
But, only grieves at an ungracious Nature,
Does in a woman make a worthy Creature.
Oh that same mind of true humility,
Does gain more grace, then mountain mines of gold:
Where the true badge of true Nobility:
Does show the honor that will ever hold,
While baggage humors will be bought and sold:
Where beggars pride, the Tower of Babylon,
Will quickly fall unto confusion.
To show examples of our former times,
In true recording of those worthy minds,
That would but fill my paper up with Rimes
Of commendations, in deserved kinds,
Which wisdoms judgment in perfection finds,
It were too tedious: let thus much suffice,
To show the mind wherein true honor lies.
But, as in all things, contrariety
Does show the difference twixt the good and bad:
And in all humors, the variety
Shows which deserves chiefest to be had:
Which makes the mind most grievous or most sad:
So let me show the truth of every token,
That makes a woman, in her fame forespoken.
If that her eyes do trowle like tennis balls,
Her tongue be always licking of her lips:
Her heels be so upon the slippery falls,
They scarce have power to carry up her hips:
If that she tread awry among her trips:
Although her face be like an Angel painted,
Ho there alas, her credit will be tainted.
If that her tongue be like an Aspen leaf,
Her hair vnkembed like a Cart-horse tail:
Her fingers ends like to a threshed sheafe,
Her gate be like unto a garden snaile:
While winter dust hangs knotted at her sail,
And have a mind to answer every part,
She is a darling for the devils dart.
If she be basely borne, and vilely bred,
Dogged in Nature, sottish in conceit:
A Camels visage and a beetle head,
And hold her nose up to a steeples height,
And yet can scarcely on a trencher wait:
Though she be nointed with the Curriersoyle,
She will be counted but a filthy royle.
If she make curtzy like Maid Marian,
And wear her linen never so well slickt:
And be the flower of all the frying pan,
And have her bosom with a Nosegaie stickt:
And in her tire be never so betrickt:
And shall be married to the Bailifes son:
She shall be but the wench, when all is done.
If she can ask, what lack you Gentleman,
And with good words make profit of her ware:
If she can turn the Kirrling in the pan,
And knows both how to spend and how to spare,
And how to shift, to make a private share:
She may do well, for one of her vocation:
But there is the top of all her commendation.
If she can flaunt it bravely at her door,
And have her Ruffes, clear starched and well set,
Her Stomacher bear out a yard before,
Her Motley cheeks with pure Vermilion wet,
And for a skoffe be found in no man's debt:
Yet, he that sees her cloth, and knows the woll,
Finds her a Gugin but to hang a Gull.
If she can play upon an Instrument,
And sing, and turn the white up of the eye.
And tell a tale of wantons merriment,
And fleere and flatter, laugh, and look awry,
And make a show for very love to die:
Yet may her mind be of so vile a making,
That scarce her body may be worth the taking.
But, if she have the gift to brawle and skolde,
To skowle, and frown, to lowre, and hang the lip:
And be not past a hundredth winters old,
And like a flower, that a frost does nip:
And goes no further than a flea can skippe:
How ever wicked wealth has ouergon her,
He needs no other plague that lights upon her.
And, if she know not how to make her ready,
Nor what to wear, nor how to speak, nor look:
But in her humors will be proud and heddy:
And never read, but in a golden book,
And will be caught but with the golden hook:
Surely, I fear, her gold is all but dross,
And he that buies her, will but live by loss.
And if she be in her conceit so muddy,
She has no mind, but of her home made cloth:
Or in her wicked humors be so bloody,
She cares not how she fills the devils froath,
Nor how she swear, nor how she coin an oath:
Oh such an egg so full of hellish evil,
Is cuen a morsel fit to feed the devil.
And she that is into a beast transformed,
By all the humors of unhuman Nature:
And by good counsel, will not be reformed,
But is resolved to be a wicked creature
(How ever like a woman be her feature)
Who ever has to do with her, shall find
She is a woman of a wicked kind.
And she that credits every tale she heeres,
And tells her mind to every idle ear:
And every idle fiddling gossippe cheeres,
That can but flatter, prate, and lie, and swear:
And now and then, let fall a fained tear:
Such a good gossippe with her huswifery,
Will quickly bring a man to beggary.
If she be foul, ilfauor'd, and worse faced,
Wry mouthed, crook legd, lame handed, and squint eyde:
And every way so thoroughly disgraced,
As for a monster might be made a bride:
Whose ugly face does no ill feature hide:
If such a creature may be worth the wooing,
Woe be to him that has the deed in doing.
But if she be but breasted like a Cow,
Neckt like a wild goose, toothed like a dog:
Lipt like a horse, and snowted like a Sow,
Breathed like a Fox, and sprited like a logge,
And in effect, half sister to a hog:
Yet think her penny is good current money,
Hard is his hap that takes her gall for honey.
But if that she can simper like a Mare,
And like a Hobby horse can hold her head,
Prate like a Parrat, like an Owlet stare,
And sleep and snort before she go to bed,
And in her pocket have a crust of bread,
And play the wanton on a wodden bench,
Who would not cast his gorge for such a we^ch?
But if she can say yea, and no forsoothe,
And fie, and tushe, and how now, pray away:
And blow her nose, and pick a rotten tooth,
And wear her best clothes on a holiday,
And skim the cream pot when her dam's away,
And make her spindle twist without a whirle,
Who would not spend his groat for such a girl?
But if she get the garland on the green,
By truly treading of a Morris dance:
Or in a wheat Cart, as she sits unseen,
Unto her lubber can convey a glaunce,
To bring a poor man in a pittious traunse:
Who would not dance until he could not stand,
That had so sweet a pigeon by the hand.
If she be sluttish, pieuish, and untoward,
Wilful, and wanton, lazy, cursed, and sullen,
Frantic, and foolish, whincling, and froward,
And scarce can make a thread of russet woollen,
But must be taught how to put up her pullen:
To have a wench well followed with such fits,
Would make a poor man halle beside his wits.
If that her eyes be bleer'd, and run a water,
Her nose hang dropping all the Summer long,
Her mouth do slauer, and her teeth do chatter,
Her breath be for the swinish nose too strong,
And ban, and cursing be her howrely song,
With such a Beldame who is forced to dwell,
Needs in this world to have no other hell.
But, if she do but love the nappy Ale,
And lie a bed until eleven a clock,
And secretly can set her ware to sale,
For a red Petticoat or a Canuas Smock,
Diue in a pocket, or can pick a lock,
And call her husband Rascal, Fool, and Scab,
Never seek further for a filthy Drabbe.
But if she have a filthy brazen face,
That will not blush, what ever weather fall,
Swear, and speak baudie, think of no disgrace,
Play with all comers, cogge, and throw at all,
And toss her kindness like a Tennis ball:
In the true course of vices declaration,
She is the Nurse of all abomination.
If she can smooth it with a Card of ten,
And speak no word, but truly, and indeed,
And seem as though she could abide no men,
And had no joy, but holy books to reed,
Look like a flower, and be a wicked weed,
And for her gain can play the Parasite,
She were a fit wife for an Hypocrite.
If she be neither honest, fair, nor kind,
Well faced, well bodied, handed, legged, nor footed,
Good heart, good thought, good nature nor good mind:
But in the poison of all rancour rooted,
And in the mire up to the knees be booted:
Such a strange monster, fit to match with no man,
I think twere pity should be called a woman.
But, if she can use cunning words of Art,
To make her copper seem good current coin:
And weep, and swear her love is from the heart,
And with an humor iumpe, and Issue join,
And finely so can give a fool the foine:
Though she her matters carry nere so clean,
She shall be but a conny-catching queen.
But, if she be a fool that can not speak,
But only blush, and look the the other way:
And will alone into a corner sneake,
Because, alas, she knows not what to say,
But loves with children, and with fools to play:
Such a sweet Parnell, if a man were mad,
Might think himself half happy if he had.
But, if she can but pick her fingers ends,
And pare her nails, and wash, and wipe her hands:
Run to the Fair, be merry with her friends,
And tell her mother how the market stands,
And pick the sheaues, who ever make the bands:
Such an odd Mawkin were a mistress fit,
To make a rich man with the beggar sit.
But, if she can both seawe, and knit and spinne,
Seawe slight, knit false, and spin a rau'led threede,
And cunningly can play Ioane Silver pin,
With idle humors, how a fool to feed,
If such a lesson she can kindly reed,
She and a Tinker, in a market town,
Would help to cosen many a silly clown.
But, if she can be quiet, and content,
Speak fair, make curtsie, fear for to offend:
And look as sober as a Jack of Lent,
What is amiss, be careful to amend,
And bring distempers to a quiet end:
Oh such a wench would be a member fit,
To cosen twenty thousand with her wit.
But, if she have no patience in her passions,
No settled humor, but all in self will,
No pleasing fancy, but in proouing fashions,
Nor for her meal, go further than the Mill,
And cares not whether it be good or ill:
Such a vile baggage, were a purgatory,
To sink a very soul in misery.
She that is given but to all wickedness,
And loves to live but all in wantonness,
And will be led but all by wilfulness,
And spend her years but all in wretchedness,
Not caring how to end in woefulness:
Such a foul fiend is fit in filthiness,
To match the devil in his hellishnesse.
She that can look a head, and stroke a beard,
And pick a moath, and finely set a ruff,
And make her self of every fly afeard,
And seem to take all idle words in snuff,
And wear no cloth but of the purest stuff,
And make her Coll a Nightcap for the cough,
God help the man: for she is well enough.
She that can have her breakefast in her bed,
And sit at dinner like a maiden Bride,
And all the morning learn to dress her head,
And after dinner, how her eye to guide,
To show her self to be the child of pride,
God, in his mercy, may do much to save her:
But what a case were he in that should have her!
She that will ride but on an ambling Nagge,
And travel not above a mile an hour,
Will not be pleased but with the golden bag,
And have her coin come raining like a shower,
And give an Angel for a Gilliflowre:
That is a wench, that if she had a spring,
Would make a beggar, that were half a King.
She that can walk the by-lanes and the Allies,
And make close matches twixt yo^g lads and we^ches
And from the mountains can survey the valleys,
And lay such Ambuscadoes in her trenches,
That she will make her profit of her benches:
Such an odd whiffler swears that shewil thrive,
As long as she can find one man alive.
But if she will be cosened with fair speech,
And think all gold that makes a glistring show,
And does mistake a black thorn for a Beech,
Because she does no better timber know,
If heedelesse will do feel a helpelesse woe,
What says the wag that got the we^ch with child?
Had she been wise, she had not been beguilde.
She that can neither boil, nor bake, nor brue,
Nor rarely well conceited for her wit:
Nor scarcely honest, nor was ever true,
But every way, an idle headed Tit,
Yet thinks her self for a good husband fit:
Oh, how accursed was that creature borne,
That took that wench, to dub him with a horn!
But, hoping there is no such kind of woman,
But it was a dream of some mistaken creatures,
That women will be cursed, nor false to no man,
But of good humors, and of better Natures,
And have their fancies fitting to their features,
I will describe those gracious women's lives,
That make good husbands happy, in their wives.
She that is fair, and wise, courteous and kind:
Patient to bear the crosses of conceit,
Of Nature mild, and of an humble mind,
Constant in love, and free from all deceit,
And will the time of her content awaite:
Such a true virgin, to become a wise,
Will make a man to know a happy life.
She that is careful over that she has,
Painful in that she wisely undertakes,
And will not tread out of discretions path,
But all fond idle thriftlesse ways forsakes,
That to the least of her dishonor makes,
She, that is known to have this kind of carriage,
Will make a man half happy in her marriage.
She that does love to keep within her house,
And to the door can have a watchful eye:
She in her head that will not leave a louse,
Nor in her heart a thought to go awry,
From the true course of virtues constancy,
And keeps the honor of her husbands bedding,
Does make a man twice happy in her wedding.
She that does go to Church but for devotion,
And fears God, and loves his word in deed,
And in her heart will harbor no ill motion,
That may her fancy with corruption feed,
And in her garden will abide no weed:
She, to that man, that on her virtue stays,
Gives a prolonging of his happy days.
She that forbeares to talk with every Tit,
And will not bend her ear to every tale,
And will employ the spirit of her wit,
In keeping passions in true patience pale,
And for a Nut will not mistake a shale:
But shun all sly conceits that may beset her,
Will make his life thrice happy that can get her.
She that can truly judge twixt good and ill,
And paints her face, but with a Maiden blush,
And to the best does ever bend her will,
And cramp all thoughts that would true honor crush,
And make her soul unto her mind a brush,
And loves entirely, where she takes affection,
Makes man's life happy in his loves direction.
She that is Nobly borne, and Princely bredde,
Heavenly inclined, and holily disposed,
A Sarahs spirit, and a Indiths head,
And have her comforts in that care enclosed,
That have their rest in virtue all reposed:
Such an Angelical Creature in a wife,
Might make a king to know a happy life.
She that does rather love to hear than speak,
And rather strives to understand than teach,
And never will the bands of honor break,
Nor ever seek to clime above her reach,
Nor in her thoughts let folly make a breach:
Such a wise wench, in true wits wealthinesse,
Will make a man find his life's happiness.
She that will rather a defect amend,
Then to defend, or any way excuse,
Nor coin a lie, nor an untruth defend,
Nor from a friend a good advise refuse,
Nor the true honor of her love abuse,
Nor has that blame, that worthily may blot her
Makes the man happy, for a wife has got her.
She that will wear according to her calling,
Such decent garments as she may maintain,
And will not in her busbands ear be bawling,
To feed her humor with an idle vain,
And make his purse beyond his penny strain:
Such a kind wench, that so her will does carry,
Does make him happy that does live to marry.
She that can go to market for her meat,
And not stay twatling there with good wife Twat,
Come home and dress it, and can kindly eat
That which God sendes, and be content with that,
And take the lean together with the fat,
Know when to be a spender, when a sauer,
Will make a poor man happy that could have her.
She that does wear but her own proper hear,
And has no beauty, but of Natures bliss,
Can not command a kind of fained tear,
But when just cause of hearty sorrow is,
And rich, or poor, will never run amiss:
Such a true wench, to make a happy wife,
Would make a man to lead a blessed life.
She, that does bear the eye of modesty,
The face of grace, mind of humility,
The tongue of truth, the heart of honesty,
The parentage of true Gentilitie,
In the true notes of true Nobility,
In my conceit, would surely prove a wife,
To make a Lord, to lead a happy life.
She that is full of liberality,
And to the beggar never shuts her door,
And loves to keep good hospitality,
And has delight for to relieve the poor,
Yet has a care for to enrich her store,
Does make a man a very happy Creature,
That marries with a wench of such a Nature.
She that does hate to brabble, brawle and scolde,
To swear, and lie, and talk of Robin Hood:
And will no longer any question hold,
Then while she well may make her judgment good
To prove that she her self has understood:
Such a rare wench, for a well gouernd wit,
Would make him happy that were matched with it.
She that is free from infamies deface,
Wealthy in lands, her Cophers full of gold,
Her mind of virtue, and her heart of grace,
And does no honor but in virtue hold,
That true sweet Lady be she young or old,
Will make that man to lead a happy life,
That knows what makes man happy in a wife.
She that is mistress of her own affection,
And unto reason has subdued her will,
And will not harken unto imperfection,
To leave the good to entertain the ill:
In the true rules of my experience skill,
I think that woman where she is a wife,
Does make a man to know a happy life.
She that in wealth and woe, sickness, and health,
Is all alike unto her settled love,
And in the world does count her chiefest wealth,
But in the life but of her turtle dove,
And seeks on earth no other heavens to prove:
In my conceit, who had her to a wife,
Had no small means to make a happy life.
She that is wholly given to godliness,
And hates to lead the life of wantonness,
And has true patience in unhappiness,
And only seeks the spirits wealthinesse,
In the true weight of honors worthiness:
If that a man were in hearts heaviness,
With such a wife might live in blessedness.
Now, hoping that (although the bird be rare)
The Phoenix in a woman may be found,
And doubting not, but many women are
Of their good husbands happiness the ground,
I wish the wise a woman's worth to sound,
And dearly love her for that worthiness,
That makes a man to live in happiness.
But, if that Youth for wealth will match with Age,
And witless age, will dote on wanton Youth,
If discontent do grow to rancors rage,
When hollow hearts do hammer with untruth,
If ruin then be subject unto ruthe,
What shall I say? but sobbe for such a woing,
Where kindness has no comfort in the doing.
Make then thy choice, not all alone by chance,
Let reason guide thine eye, honor thy mind,
Virtue thy heart, and so thy thought advance,
That wisdoms care may happy comfort find:
That if that fortune fall to be unkind,
Yet heavenly love, that does the life rejoice,
Will make thee happy in a heavenly choice.
If thou can get thee wealth, then do not want:
But chiefly take good heed thou want not grace.
For gracious spirits in the world are skant:
And conscience lives in such a pittious case,
That faith on earth can hardly show her face:
And simple love alas, without some living,
Is like a present hardly worth the giving.
And therefore leaving each one to their lot,
To like, to love, and live as likes them best,
To keep their choice, or if it like them not,
When as they feel their spirits most oppressed,
To use their best discretion for their Rest,
I wish good husbands all to have good wives,
And all good loving wenches all good lives.
So hoping that the best will be content
To know the worst must have a time to mend:
Who have bin ill may have a good intent,
To bring bad humors to a better end,
Unto your kindness kindly I commend
Pasquils mad humor, to describe a woman,
Fit to be loved of all, or liked of no man.
FINIS.
PASQVILS DESCRIPTION OF HIS Mistress, with a passion upon the Jealousy of her
match.
MY sweet Muse behold a creature,
Of the world the sweetest feature,
Garnisht with those inward graces,
That adorn the fairest faces:
Which described in their essence,
Show the earth a heavenly presence.
Hairs, no hairs, but golden wires,
Binding life in loves desires:
Eyes no eyes, but starry glories,
Reasons states, and honors stories:
Cheeks enchaining hearts beholding,
Lips maintaining loves unfolding.
Neck, no neck, but alablaster,
Natures mistress, Reasons master:
Breasts, not breasts, but beauties mou^tains,
Of Mine^uas milk the fountains:
Arms embracing loves deserving:
Hands unlacing loves preserving.
Belly, no, but Venus bedding,
All too fair for Vulcans wedding,
Navel, not, but Natures signet,
All the graces grau'n within it:
For the secret sweet of reason,
Careful thoughts must speak no treason.
Thighs, no thighs, but beauties pillars,
Made for beauties best welwillers:
Knees, not knees, but Pallaes bending,
While Diana was commending:
Legs, no legs, but honors passage,
To the life of lovers message.
Feet, no feet, but favors staying,
Where no favors are decaying:
Toes, not toes, but each a token
Of more truth, then may be spoken:
That in all, for much perfection,
Natures draught by loves direction.
This fair creature* wonder-woman,
Scene to few, and known to no man,
By those heavenly powers created,
That have hellish humors hated,
While the Angels all were sleeping,
Fell to cursed creatures keeping.
Cursed creatures, carnal devils,
Hates of good, and grounds of evils,
Wronging virtue, killing reason,
Vowing truth, but working treason:
These, oh these, by loves illusion,
Wrought the course of my confusion.
Hateful course in heart concealed:
But, by hell to be revealed:
In which briefly is contained,
Never eased, ever pained:
In which cruel cares termented,
Lives my comfort discontented.
Pity weeps to see this wonder,
Love and virtue live asunder,
Honor sigheth without ceasing
To behold this hell increasing,
And the heart of love is dying,
While he hears his darling crying.
Oh how is the soul agrieued,
Where no sorrows are relieved,
And where crosses are so many,
Nor the comforts can be any!
Think if this be hell mistaken,
So of heavenly hopes forsaken.
But, oh wicked wretched fre^nzy,
That have so corrupted fancy,
Helpless, hopeless, matchless shameless,
Do thou think thou shall be namelesse?
No: the world shall know thine evil:
Ielouzie, thou art the devil.
This is that same inward treason,
That has so confounded reason:
This is that same hellish humor,
Fills the world so full of rumor:
This is it that kills the lover,
That he never can recover.
This is that same hellish fiende,
That was never virtues friend:
This is that same foolish blindness,
That confounds lovers kindness:
This is it, by proof of many,
Never yet did good to any.
Then, on thee, and thy possessor,
Wilful follies plain professor,
(That have so my mistress wronged,
And her helpless woes prolonged)
Fall the curse of loves confusion,
By the death of loves illusion.
A description of Jealousy.
Within the heart there breeds a kind of thought
Begotten (as some guess it) by the eye:
But, I do rather think it to be wrought,
By a blind sight that ever looks awry,
And only feeds but of a Lunacy:
Which being gotten kindly in the head,
Works a weak wit, to bring a fool to bed.
It thinks it knows not what, nor how, nor why:
But once persuaded, twill not beremooued,
Cares for no truth, belieueth every lie,
That has appearance, though it be not proved,
Loves but in fear, and fears it is not loved,
Frets, chafes, and grieves, and never is at rest:
Because the worst does ever doubt the best.
It works, and watches, pries, and peers about,
Takes counsel, stays; yet goes on with intent,
Bringes in one humor, puts another out,
And finds out nothing but all discontent,
And keeps the spirit still so passion-rent,
That in the world, if that there be a hell,
Ask, but in love, what jealousy can tell.
It would have more then all it does possess,
And turns content unto a cross conceit,
It brings discretion but into distress,
Where fear does only but on folly wait,
While doubts do only dwell upon deceit:
It does abuse the wit, distract the mind,
And knows not what to seek, nor how to find.
It does amaze the eye, enchaunt the ear,
And wholly kills the stomachs appetite.
With spightfull thoughts it does the spirit tear,
And keeps poor patience in a pitious plight,
While dark suspicion makes the day a night:
It is, in sum, a very hellish fiende,
That never yet was love, nor beauties friend.
It is a plague, that Nature was ordained,
In beauties eye, to wound the heart of love,
An inward poison, that has thoroughly vain'd
The hapless wit, that works for wills behoue,
To make a Jack Dawe of a turtle Dove,
Where best, contentme^ts are too much abused,
While wilful follies can not be excused.
It is the death of joy, twixt man and wife,
Where love is too much laden with mistrust:
It makes the maid to fear the married life,
Least firmest faith should fall to be unjust:
It beats the brain and grindes the wit to dust,
It makes the wise a fool, the wealthy poor,
And her that would keep house, to open the door.
Oh, it is a child of an unhappy choice,
Nursed by the milk of an ilfauour'd beast:
Which never suffers reason to rejoice,
But keeps the heart within an Hornets neast,
Which naught but venom bring into the breast:
It is, in sum, a kind of secret ill,
That never yet did good, nor ever will.
How it has handled many a hapless heart,
Let them describe it, that do better know it:
But how it works the sowles continual smart,
He that is able, let him truly show it,
Or seek by all means how he may forgo it:
But for my self, I say no more but this,
God bless me from it, and my misteris.
And such as will be mad, let them be so.
Who cannot judge of good, conceive it ill.
He, that will take a finger for a toe,
Must either blame his wit, or else his will,
That knows his folly, and will be so still.
Who will be led but only by illusion,
Must be content to fall upon confusion.
And thus my friend, what so thou be that read
These few inuectiue lines of Jealousy
(Hoping that thou thy fancy better feedest,
Then with the aspen leaves of Lunacy,
Whose juice gives nothing, but inconstancy)
I wish thy love more kindly to be borne,
Or for thy jealous head, a huge great horn.
What? art thou angry? are thy ribs so gaid,
They cannot bide the chinking of a spur?
Be still a while: and be not so appald:
A thousand gowns are surd with Cony furre:
Every one's not dead, that has the Murre:
Loue^s may look, and laugh, and happ'ly like:
But many a one may frown, that will not strike.
Because her eye is fair, shall thine be foul?
Because that she is wise, will thou be fond?
Because that thee does smile, must thou needs scoule?
Because that she is free, will thou be bod?
Oh make not to a puddle of a pond:
Be ple^sd to think of every thing the best.
F^r, Jealousy is but an idle jest.
Mistrust does argue but a misconceit:
Suspi^ion, s^^ewhat in thy self amiss:
Doubt, but a dreaming only on deceit:
Fear, but a curse, where never fell a bliss,
Tush, smile, and laugh, em^^ace, and coll and kiss,
And thou shall live as merry as a cricket,
While Jealousy shall stand without the wicket.
FINIS.

